The WAY To HEALTH, LONG Life and Happiness: Or, A Discourse of TEMPERANCE, And
the Particular Nature of all Things requisite for the Life of Man; As, All
sorts of Meats, Drinks, Air, Exercise, etc. with special Directions how to use
each of them to the best Advantage of the BODY and MIND.

Showing from the true ground of Nature, whence most Diseases proceed, and how
to prevent them.

To which is Added, A Treatise of most sorts of ENGLISH HERBS, With several
other remarkable and most useful Observations, very necessary for all Families.
The whole Treatise displaying the most hidden secrets of Philosophy, and made
easy and familiar to the meanest Capacities, by various Examples and
Demonstrances.

The like never before Published.

Communicated to the World for a general Good, By THOMAS TRYON, Student in
PHYSIC.

The Second Edition, with Amendments.

LONDON: Printed by H. C. for R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
1691.

TO THE READER.
THat mighty Tyrant Custom has made it fashionable (and consequently to some
People seemingly necessary) to dedicate Books, when published, to some great
Names, whom Authors are wont to load with Flatteries, and then beg their
Protection. A Course in my Opinion no less impertinent than base: For if the
Writer be Conscious to himself, that he needs Pardon and such Supporters, why
does he trouble the World with his Papers? If his Intentions are good and
candid, what need of such fawning Addresses? Truth is too noble to truckle to
those little Artifices, and carries in the Majesty of her unclouded Brow, both
sufficient Passport and Patronage; since those that oppose her, do it at their
own Peril, and at Long-run she is sure to be Victorious.

I therefore decline that vulgar Method, as one that am no ways fond of running
the broad Way of the Multitude. To thee, (O Reader) whoever thou art, is this
Book entirely dedicated; and yet I shall not so much as be speak thee to be
kind and courteous; only for thy own sake, desire thee to be just and
considerate; to weigh impartially what I offer (I mean the Matter, not the
Words or Style) and if still thou will with the deaf Adder stop thy Ears
against the Voice of the Charmer, the fault and the danger will be Thine: I
have discharged my Duty.

The main design of this Treatise is to bring Men acquainted with themselves,
and recommend Temperance, the most excellent (though most neglected) Virtue in
the World, to their Practice: In a word, to persuade them to be kind to their
own Healths, their own Lives, their own Souls.

Nor will it be needful here to give you a Bill of Fare of the several Dishes,
which this Banquet presents you with; that is done in the Contents of the
several Chapters. All I shall say, is, that here are variety of Truths plainly
delivered, which I do not know are elsewhere (in Books) to be met with; for I
have not consulted Authors in composing this Tract, to pay you, like a Banker
with other Peoples Coin, or entertain you with a Rapsody of stolen Notions, as
disagreeing and trivial as the Pyebald Shreds of a Tailors Cushion.

One grand Objection I fore see, viz. that I am guilty of Tautology, or have
too often repeated the same things. To this I Answer:

1. I hope you will rarely find bare Repetitions; but although the same, or
like Expressions may occur, yet still they are either attended with some
Addition and Illustration, or else are improved to the explaining some other
Notion.

2. Needful Truths are never too often repeated, till they are once well
learnt. Many Men are slow of Apprehension, and cannot reach ones meaning
without a large expense of Words: By these reiterated Strokes, I would
willingly make Impression, first on thy Understanding, and next on thy
refractory Will, to practice what is so necessary to thy Well-doing, that is,
thy Well-being.

3. This saying of one thing over and over, when we treat of Nature, is
necessary and unavoidable; for it is her own Dialect and Method. All the various
Substances, Forms, Complexions, Constitutions and Properties, both in the
Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, have the same Basis or Ground: There
being but Seven grand Forms of Nature, whence all do proceed.

An Example we have in Music: Seven perfect Notes or Sounds produce all that
admirable variety of Harmony which the World admires: And though a Man should
compose as many Songs as Solomon, and frame an hundred Thousand Tunes and
Divisions, yet these seven Notes still are the Foundation on which he builds;
so that to every Lesson, Song or Division, they must be repeated.

So in the Mathematics (that Demonstrative Science, whereby so many rare
things are effected) the Number Ten is the extent of all natural Numeration,
and Eleven is but a beginning again. And the very same Figures must afterward
continually be repeated in all Arithmetical Operations, to bring greater
Mysteries to manifestation.

In that most delightful Art of Representation, there are but Seven perfect
Colors, and yet by these a skilful Master can paint and imitate all the
Appearances in the Univese.

There are but Seven Metals, and yet how many Wonders are wrought by and out of
them?

In Seven Days the unbounded Jehovah created all Beings, by the power and
virtue of his holy Word, which Word of Power does still both conserve and
generate; for there is no standing still of Gods power in Nature; all things
being continually repeated by the Revolutions and Configurations of the
Coelestilas; and thence it was that the Wiseman said, there was no new thing
under the Sun. There are but seven Days in a Week, which are repeated fifty two
times in a year; and so from one Generation to another.

Therefore, whoever will treat aright, either of divine or natural things, and
their occult Virtues or Vices, must make the seven Primogenial Forms or
Constellations his Basis or Groundwork, and in all cases have recourse to
them, or else he shall never truly display Natures Operations.

There is yet another Prejudice may be taken, because in some particulars I
have spoken what may seem too free and satirical: But if any, with unbyassed
Minds please to consider the Fopperishness of those things I speak against, and
withal how destructive they are to Mankind, they will be satisfied, that such a
subject deserved no other Treatment. It Is neither out of Ill Will or
Self-Interest I have handled them at that rate; but as I conceived they ought
justly to be exposed to the Contempt of that part of the World, which so long
they have Ass-ridden and seduced.

That you may come to the right Understanding of Gods Law in Nature, and govern
your selves accordingly, to the Obtaining Health, both of the Body and Mind,
and be happy here and hereafter, is the Endeavor as well as Desire of

Your Well-wishing Friend, Thomas Tryon.

THE CONTENTS Of the Ensuing TREATISE.
Chap. I.
A Description of the four grand Qualities, whence the four Complexions
proceed. How every Man may know his own Complexion; also of Beasts and Herbs,
and to what Virtues, Vices and Diseases each of them are most subject; and what
food is most agreeable to Persons of every Constitution page 1. Of the Bitter
Quality, p. 3. Of the Sweet Quality, p. 6. Of the Sour Quality, p. 7. Of the
Astringent or Saltish Quality, p. 8. Of the Choleric Complexion, p. 11. Of the
Phlegmatic Complexion, p. 15. Of the Sanguine Complexion, p. 19. Of the
Melancholy Complexion, p. 24.
Chap. II.
Of the excellency of Temperance, the Knowledge of a Man's self, and the mighty
Benefits of Abstinence and Sobriety, p. 33. which prepare the Body to be the
Temple of the Lord, 36, 37. Of the Prophet Daniel's refusing the dainties that
came from the King's Table, p. 38. The Abstemious lives of the Rechabites a
reproach to the Israelites. Also of Sampson's drinking Wine, etc. p. 39. The
cause of Leprous and Maingy Diseases, etc. p. 52. The cause of catching Cold,
p. 54. Of Fevers, p. 56.
Chap. III.
A Discourse of the several sorts of Flesh, viz. Of the Nature and Complexion
of Oxen and Cows, p. 59, 60. Of their Flesh, p. 63. The excellency of Butter,
Cheese and Milk-Pottage, p. 62. Of Sheep, their Complexions and Nature, and of
their Flesh, p. 64. How to know whether the Mutton be perfectly good, or not,
p. 68. Of Lamb. p. 69. Of the Flesh of Calves or Veal, p. 71, 72. Of the Flesh
of Swine, and their Nature and Complexion, p. 72. Of the Flesh of Fowls, p. 75.
Chap. IV.
The Proper and most Natural way of preparing, viz Boiling, Roasting, Baking,
Stewing, Frying and Broyling of Flesh and other Food, from p. 78. to 89.
Chap. V.
The seasons of the year in which most People are liable to Diseases and
Mortality; and the Reasons why so many are sick and die more at one time than
another. Also, what Food is best to preserve health at that time; showing also
the Seasons of the year in which most sorts of Flesh are unclean and aptest to
contract Diseases; and what times Men may eat Flesh with least danger to their
Health. And of the Nature of Summer Fruits, how they are good, and the
contrary, from p. 94. to 106.
Chap. VI.
Of Waters, Ale, Beer and Tobacco. To which is added the consideration of
Clothing, Houses and Beds, and what great benefits arise from Moderation and
Temperance in those things, p. 106. Of Water in general, both internal and
external, p. 108, 109. Of Rainwater, and its Nature, p. 110. Of River-Water;
and the Reasons why Valleys are so fruitful, and Hills so barren. p. 112. Of
Spring or Fountain Water, p. 113. Of Pump or Well-Water, p. 114. Of Ponds or
standing Waters, p. 115. Of Ale, and its nature and operation; as also of Beer
and the most proper and natural way to Brew, p. 116, 117. How to extract the
virtue of Hops, p. 122. Of Tobacco, its nature and operation, p. 124, 125. Of
Clothing, Bedding, etc. p. 133, 134. Of particular Trades, as Carpenters,
Joyners, and particularly of Seamen, etc. p. 142. The evil effects of the
Liquor called Punch, p. 144.
Chap. VII.
Of Grains, Herbs and Fruits, viz. Of Wheat, p. 145. Of Barley, p. 149. Of Rye,
p. 150. Of Pease and Beans, p. 151. Of Kidney or French Beans, p. 153. Of
Herbs, raw and boiled, p. ibid Of Colworts, Cabbage and Collyflowers, p. 156.
Of Turnips, p. 158. Of Carrots and Parsnips p. 159. That the Fruits, Herbs and
Grains which our own Climate produces, are more natural and proper to maintain
Strength and preserve Health, than those that come from other Countries, p.
160. The Nature and Property of Spices, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon,
Pepper, Ginger, etc. p. 162. The ill consequence of their being mixed among
Childrens Food, p. 164. Of Fish, p. 168.
Chap. VIII.
The Mischief of Variety of Meats and Drinks, and the inconveniences of
improper Mixtures; and on the other side, what Foods are fit to be compounded
p. 169. A Digitation of the seven perfect Colors, showing how there being
mixed two, three or four of them together, produce their several Complexions,
contrary to their own Colors, p. 170, etc. Of Plum-cakes, which are composed
of about ten disagreeing Ingredients, p. 173. Of Bread-Puddings, p. 174. Of
Broth or Pottages that are heat a second time, p. 175. The Reasons why boiled
Water will not keep so well as Water newly taken from the Spring, p. 177. Of
Syrups, p. 178. The fatal consequence sick People are confined to, p. 179. Of
Mince-Pyes, etc. p. 180. Several sorts of Food that are proper to be
compounded, as bearing a simile with each other, p. 182.
Chap. IX.
The Reasons in Nature why Cities and great Towns are subject to the Pestilence
and other Diseases, more than Country Villages. The excellency of Solitude, and
Advantages of a retired Country-Life, p. 184. That Men's Actions awaken the like
Property in the Celestial Bodies, whether they be good or evil. Showing also
what Violences they be that cause Wars, Famine, Pestilential Poisons, Botches,
Byles, Veneral Diseases, Fevers, Plagues, Scabs, Leprosies, Spots in the Flesh,
Tumults, Burning of Towns and Cities, etc. p. 186, etc. The excellency of a
retired Country Life, p. 190.
Chap. X.
Of Infection or Catching-Diseases, and how they are transferred from one to
another, p. 193.
Chap. XI.
Of Women, their Natures, Complexions and Intemperances, etc. p. 200. The
original cause of Vapors or Wind, and Agues, p. 201. The Evils that attend
Wantonness in Women, p. 202. The ill consequences of putting Women to hard
robustick Labores and Cares, p. 205. Particular Directions for Meats and
Drinks, that are proper and natural for Women, p. 206, 207. What causes the
Scurvy, p. 209. The cause of Fevers and Convulsions, p. 211. What makes Travail
in Child bearing burdensome, p. 212. The Inconveniences of Men and Women lying
always together, p. 215, 216. The Evils of hard swathing and binding their
Children, p. 217. 218. Food proper for Children, p. 219. To prevent Convulsions
and griping pains in the Stomachs of Children. Also, of Water-Pap, p. 220. Of
Melted-Butter, p. 221. Of the Quantity of Childrens Food, p. 222.
Chap. XII.
The cause of Surfeits, and how to prevent them, and keep the Body in Health,
p. 226. The danger of Drinking after superfluous Meals, p. 229. Of Suppers, and
what sort of People may use them without prejudice to their health, p. 233,
Chap. XIII.
Of Windy Diseases, the Reasons thereof in Nature, and why English People,
especially Women, are so much troubled therewith, etc. p. 237. The Evils of
eating and drinking Food too hot, p. 238. The Mischief of eating and drinking
between Meals, p. 241. Of Fatness, and what sort of People are subject thereto,
as also how to prevent Fatness, p. 246.
Chap. XIV.
Of FLESH, and its operation on the Body and Mind: That the common eating
thereof does awaken the wrathful Nature in Mankind, etc. p. 249. Of the
Children of Isreal's eating flesh in the Wilderness, p. 251. A Paraphrase on the
Apostle Peter's Vision, Arise Peter, kill and eat, p. 273. The true Rise and
Ground of Nobility, as to Birth and Blood, p. 284, etc Who are truly Noble and
Honorable, p. 288. Why Flesh and Blood is so much desired, p. 291, etc. A
short Comment on Genesis 4. concerning Cain and Abel, p. 301, etc. The cause of
Wars, p. 311. Of Abraham's eating flesh with the Angels, p. 315. Concerning the
Resurrection, p. 328. The grand Objection answered, viz. If all People should
live on Herbs, etc. what should we do with the Beasts? They would overrun us,
etc. p. 331.
Chap. XV.
The Voice of the Dumb, or the Complaints of the Creatures, expostulating with
Man, touching the cruel Usages they suffer from him, very naturally expressed
in a pleasant and useful Allegory, p. 367.
Chap. XVI.
A Treatise of most sorts of English Herbs, either Physical or fit for common
use; showing, 1st. the apt times to gather them Astrologically, when the Planet
that governs them is strong and well aspected, the same being here calculated
for Nineteen Years: 2dly. How to preserve and keep them without losing their
Virtues: And, 3dly. The best way of using them in Posset-Drinks, Decoctions and
Cordials, so as not to destroy the pure spirituous parts of them, p. 382, etc.
The Ignorance, Blindness and Deceitfulness of the Doctors made manifest, p.
396. A Copy of a learned Doctors confused Latin Bill to an Apothecary; and some
Observations thereon, p. 404. The most natural and proper way of making of
Cordials with any kind of Herbs, Seeds, Flowers, Spices and Drugs, either
simple or compound, p. 411. The proper and natural way of making Physical
Decoctions, Posset-Drinks, etc. with Herbs, Seeds and Drugs, p. 414. How Men
came first to know the Virtues of several Herbs, p. 417. Who were the great
Masters of Physic, which our modern Doctors make the foundation of their
skill; and the Reasons why their Rules ought not to be ours, p. 421.
Chap. XVII.
Of Bugs, and from what Matter and Aliment they do proceed, and how to prevent
their Generation. Of the excellency of clean sweet Beds, and perniciousness of
old stinking Feather-beds. Also, several Receipts how to kill Bugs and Fleas,
p. 434.
Chap. XVIII.
A short Discourse of the Pain in the Teeth, showing from what cause it does
chiefly proceed, and how to prevent it, p. 447.
Chap. XIX.
Of Marriage, and the Inconveniences of unequal Matches, p. 452.
Chap. XX.
How to cure Wounds, Cuts, Pricks of Thorns, and other Accidents, without
Salves, Ointments or Plasters. Also, if any part of the Body or Flesh be
poisoned, it is a certain Remedy, p. 474.
Chap. XXI.
Of Harmony, and the Power thereof; the several sorts of Musical Instruments,
and under what Planet and Sign each of them is, p. 479. A Dialogue between an
East-Indian-Brackmanny, or Heathen Philosopher, and a French Gentleman,
concerning the present Affiairs in Europe, p. 1.
THE INTRODUCTION To the Whole TREATISE.
CHAPTER I.
A Description of the four Grand Qualities, whence the four Complexions
proceed. How every Man may know his own Complexion.

KNOW THY SELF, was one of the first Precepts which the Ancients dictated to
the Students of Wisdom; nor is there a greater Happiness attainable upon Earth,
than to have in a Sound Body, a Sound Mind. To direct my Fellow-Mortals toward
this great Point of Felicity, is the Scope and Intendment of our Pains in this
Book: The Foundation-Principle of Wisdom being to understand Nature, (which is
the Art of God) and thereby our own Frame, Powers, Faculties and Constitution,
so as to embrace what is good, wholesome and agreeable, and to eschew all that is
evil and harmful; and the End and Consummation thereof, is to know the Supreme
Being, Author of created Nature, and to love, obey, and enjoy him for ever.

In Order hereunto, Temperance and Sobriety are sublime Gifts, and to be
regarded with the highest esteem, not only for the delight and pleasure they
afford the Body and Mind, but as they fortify those that observe them against
many Vices and Temptations, as well as preserve them from a thousand racking
Pains and torturing Diseases, and so furnish them with the best Treasures of
this World, viz. Health, not only of the Body, but also of the Mind; for it is
that Health that sweetens all God's Blessings, and is the prime good of this
Life: What advantage or pleasure is there in the highest prepared Food, or
choice compounded Dishes of the rarest Dainties, in the richest or most Cordial
Drinks, the gayest Apparel, or the most flattering Addresses of Honor, to a
Person rackt with the Stone, or tortured with an Iliaca passio, or half-drown'd
with an overflowing Dropsy, or burning within, like Mount AEtna, with the
raging violence of a Fever? What are Riches and Fame to a Body full of Pain? Or
who would accept of a Crown, upon condition that his Head should thenceforth
perpetually Ache?

Now if the Body be distempered through disorder and superfluity, the Mind and
all the Senses are presently afflicted; if the Harmony of the one be
interrupted or destroyed, the other cannot continue: For the Spirit is the
original whence the Body proceeded, and is the Life of every visible Substance;
and as the Properties or Qualities are in their degrees in the Spirit either
strong or weak, so also they are in the Elements of the Body: That quality that
does predominate in the Spirit at the Incarnation and Birth, that very same
property does carry the upper Dominion in the Body, which is manifested by the
Inclination, Shape and Form, Behavior, Words and Works; and this is called a
Man's COMPLEXION, of which there are commonly reckoned four kinds, viz. the
Choleric, the Phlegmatic, the Sanguine, and the Melancholy; and since the
true understanding of each of these, does mainly conduce to a man's knowing and
right regulating of himself, we shall therefore treat of them severally.

But in the first place, we will lay down a short Description of the four grand
Qualities, viz. the Bitter, Sweet, Sour, Astringent or Saltish, from whence the
four Complexions proceed.

Of the Bitter Quality.
1. Those that are dignified with this Quality, are for the most part of strong
Bodies, thick, well set, of middle Stature, of hard fierce Countenances, Visage
rather round than Oval, big Bones, Hair curling, of quick piercing Eyes, bold
Behaviors, ready of Speech and Apprehension, of strong powerful Spirits, able
to go through much Labor and Action, if Intemperance do not impede, which many
of this sort of People are subject to; quickly moved to Passion, but their
Fires burn too fierce to hold long; of strong natural Heats, great Appetites,
therefore they are apt to be Gluttons; the Diseases they are most subject to,
are Acute Fevers, Gout, Pox, both small and great; Food good for this sort of
People, are all sorts of Gruels, Herbs, Fruit, small Drinks, and all Food made
of Milk, and every other sort that is Simple and Natural; and the contrary they
are to avoid on peril of their Healths.

2. It is to be noted, when the Sweet Quality is strong, and incorporateth with
the Bitter, and has an equal share in the government of the Life, then the
fierceness of this Quality is allayed by the friendly Influences of the Sweet;
so that such Persons are of more human meek Dispositions and Inclinations, though
they have Fire enough, and sometimes too much, because such are apt to be
troubled for their Passions more than the former, and are generally of better,
evener Tempers, and at times apt to be persuaded against their own Reason and
Understanding, more temperate Livers, of excellent Apprehensions, both in the
doing and learning of any thing; of healthy strong Constitutions, as free from
Diseases as any sort of People; but they cannot endure Intemperances so well as
the former; also, all sorts of strong Drinks compounded, sugared, spiced, hot
Food, are injurious unto them: But on the contrary, all sorts of Food of a
middle or mild Nature, are very agreeable to them, and make healthy, strong,
brisk and airy, fit both for the action of the Body and Mind: This sort of
People are of the Choleric and Sanguin Complexion, which is a commendable
Temperature.

3. But when it shall fall out that the Sour Quality is joined in government
with the Bitter, and the Sweet Quality weak, or underneath, then such People
are of harsh, four, envious Tempers, being inclined to all kinds of rude
robustick Exercises, unmerciful to Men and Beasts, of cruel fierce
Inclinations, being of quick Apprehensions; but in general, they are
ill-governed People, caring for nothing so much as Drinking, Gluttony, and vain
Company, very passionate in their love, and hate; great part of the rude
Multitude are made up with this sort of People; the Diseases they are subject
to, are Fevers, Gout, stoppage of the Breast, Stone, Convulsions, Dropsies, and
the like, according to what sort of Intemperances they give themselves unto,
being great lovers of their Bellies; it being their chief Study and Philosophy,
how they may have wherewith to gratify their Paunches, often cutting off their
Lives by heady Disorders and Superfluities; this sort of People are of the
Choleric Phlegmatic Complexion: But if they shall incline to fear the Lord,
and understand the principles of their own Nature, being guided by the divine
Voice of Wisdom, which continually cries out against, and condemns all the
forementioned Inordinances; this divine Wisdom is sufficient to abate all
kinds of Intemperances.

4. But if the Astringent or Saltish Quality, be joined in the government of
the Life with the Bitter, and the Sweet impotent, then all is poisoned; such
People being for the most part of hotheaded, harsh, cruel, violent, envious
Dispositions; their Looks are fierce, angry and poisonous; they often hurt and
wound the Healths of such who are under their dominion, by their Looks, Wishes
and Words; great Swearers, Liars, Back-biters, Deflowrers of Women, Gluttons
and Drunkards, being often cut off by violent Deaths, and by the sentence of
the Judge, if they do not adhere to the counsel of the love of God, which being
obeyed, will regulate all the forementioned Intemperances.

5. All Beasts and Cattle, as Horses, Cows, and the like, if they shall be
dignified with the Bitter Quality, are strong, well-set, big boned, hardy, of
great Spirits, and fierce, quick of motion, but not very handsome, fit for
labor: But if Cows happen to have this Quality predominant, then they are
dogged and mischievous, not very free of Milk, neither will they give much
Milk: But when this Quality does predominate in any Herb or Vegetation, then
the Body is rather short than tall, strong, and full of knots, and brushy; the
Leaves harsh, cut or dented, of an unpleasant Taste, but hot, and of a warming
Quality; good Herbs in Physical operations, if the Physician has skill to
correct the Poisons of Mars and Saturn, they being great openers and movers of
Obstructions: For the chief motion of Nature does arise and proceed from the
bitter Quality, and if it be not too violent in a thing, then it is the
pleasure of every Life; for when this Quality does move with a gentle motion,
it shakes and makes the whole Body to tremble, whence proceeds Laughter and all
Mirth: It is a most pleasant quality when the sweet quality does incorporate it
self with it, and has an equal share in the government of the Life. But on the
contrary, when it does predominate in any Creature, it is a fierce, furious,
raging Quality, as is mentioned before, viz. a proud lofty Spirit and Power,
endeavoring to bring all in subjection unto its self.

Of the Sweet Quality.
1. In what Person soever this Quality does predominate, it indues them with a
meek friendly Life and Disposition, of a handsome, tall slender Body, of a
smooth soft Skin, the Complexion White and Red, the Body not very strong, Hair
soft and fine, of kind courteous Words and Behavior; their Fire burns but
gently; their Spirits will not endure much labor, care nor trouble; all kinds
of Intemperances are apt to inflame them: The Diseases they are subject to, are
Acute Fevers, Quinsies, fumes and vapors flying into the Head on every
occasion of trouble or little Intemperance; also several Distempers are caused
through superfluity of Blood, which is apt to abound in this sort of People;
also Boyls, Scabby, Pocky and Leperous Diseases, which do proceed from the
inflammation of the Sweet Quality; This sort of People ought to observe the
Rules of Temperance, and Order in Meats, Drinks, Cares and Exercises; their
Food ought to be neither hot nor cold, but of a middle Nature, so also their
Drink ought to be such as will suit the temperature of this sort of People,
which I shall say somewhat of in the Description of the Sanguine Complexion,
page 26, 27, etc.

2. But when the Bitter Quality is in equal strength, then it does (as is
mentioned before) abate somewhat of the friendly Dispositions and Inclinations
of this quality; and such People are of stronger and harder Natures, and of
sharper Understandings.

3. When this Sweet Quality does predominate in any Beast, then they are of a
gentle, mild Dispositition, of a friendly Temper, of a handsome, well shaped
Body, not very strong: But when it does predominate in any Herb or Tree, then
the Body or Stalk is tall, slender, smooth and handsome, of white, yellow, ruddy
Colors, of a fragrant smell, and full of Virtue; such Herbs and Fruit may be
eaten without further preparation; and also they may be used Physically without
any correction, if gathered under their proper Constellations, and ordered
according to our directions in the Chapter of the preserving of Herbs.

Of the Sour Quality.
1. Those that have this Quality predominant in them, are of middle Stature,
rather short then tall, large Visages, fleshy and corpulent, slow in motion, of
dull heavy Spirits, not apt to learn, great drinkers, subject to gross
phlegmatic Humors and dropsical Diseases, not very strong nor healthy; their
Fire and natural heat burns but dully.

2. But if the Sweet Quality be joined with this, and has an equal share of
government, then such People are of pleasant merry tempers, apt to laugh, of
easy Faith, and a small occasion will move them, out of one thing into another,
not fixed, nor of any depth, search or understanding, apt to speak much, but
not wise, being like Children, laugh and cry all in a breath, very good to
carry Tales and Stories from one to another.

3. But if the Bitter Quality does predominate equally with this, and the Sweet
weak or underneath, then such People are bestial, hard-hearted, cruel, inhuman,
Swearers, Liars, and the like, fit for all robustick, dirty, killing
Employments; but they are of stronger Constitutions than the former, and
healthier, and also of better and quicker Apprehensions, but of very ill
Tempers.

4. But if the saltish or astringent quality does predominate, and have an
equal share in government, and the Sweet Quality weak, then this sort of People
are not so corpulent nor fleshy, but taller and more slender of Stature, of
sour Countenances and Dispositions, cunning in Words and Deeds, apt to
Dissemble and Lie, they are also apt to bear Malice, having two Faces; the
Diseases they are subject to, are the Stone, Wind-Colick, Consumptions, and
many windy Diseases and Infirmities; if Temperance be wanting, many of this
sort of People are also great drinkers.

5. When this Sour Quality does predominate in any Beast, then such are of a
dull, heavy Disposition and Spirit, apt to have great bellies and slow in
motion: If in Horses, they are neither handsome nor free, dull Eyes and great
Heads: If in Cows, their Milk is not so good as others, being thin: If in Herbs
or Fruit, then their taste is somewhat unpleasant, harsh and sour, and their
Color is of a dark Green.

Of the Astringent or Saltish Quality.
1. When this Quality does predominate in any Person, they are of a tall
Stature, and for the most part slender, but of a swarthy, pale or muddy
Complexion, rather Lean than Fat, generally of hardy strong Constitutions, and
also of good Apprehensions; when this sort of People do apply themselves to the
learning of any Art, they attain to an excellent Understanding therein, being
fixed in those things they resolve on.

2. But if the Bitter Quality does equally govern in the Body and Senses, and
the Sweet Quality weak, then such People are very sordid, Liars, Swearers,
Gluttons, Drunkards, inclined to all kind of robustick Plays and Games, as
Ringing, Bullbaitings, Bear-baitings, to follow Drums and Fencers, and the like
evil Communications, having strong Bodies, and fierce savage bestial Spirits,
and abusers of Women.

3. But if the Sweet Quality does interpose, and the Bitter and Astringent
weak, then such Persons are more moderate in Words and Works, ingenious, apt to
learn, of good Understandings, and of handsome healthy Bodies.

4. But if the Sour be joined in government with the Astringent, then such
People are more gross and Phlegmatic, and not so quick of Apprehension, slow
of Motion, and of sordid Dispositions.

5. Also, it is to be noted, when this Astringent quality does predominate in
any Beast, then they are large, big boned, strong and heady, but not free of
motion, but cunning and sullen: When in Herbs and Fruit, they are tall, but not
handsome; their taste is harsh, hard and unpleasing; they are good against the
Diseases of the Phlegmatic and Sanguin Complexions, if the Saturnine Venoms
thereof be corrected.

This is a short Description of the four grand Qualities, and their natural
Operations: But this I would have every one consider, and be sensible that
their Influences are not compelling on Men as they are on Beasts, except Men
live as Beasts, viz. in the power and operation of the bestial Nature, as many
Thousands do, and far worse, whence proceed those violent and cruel disorders
in the World: But those who do turn the Eye of their Mind inward, and search
and find themselves, and come to distinguish the secret workings of God and
Nature, and hearken unto the Voice of the Divine Principle, which is the holy
Oracle that will teach every one, (in all particulars, what is right in the
sight of the Lord, and the contrary) the fear of the Lord, and the true
knowledge of God in a man's self, and thereby furnish every one with virtue,
strength and power to resist every evil Influence, though it proceed from the
most harsh and worst of Complexions; it will also teach him to tune and bring
all the four Qualities into an equal accord, even as a skilful Musicianer
composeth a harmonious consort in the variety of parts, or as he by skill tunes
his Instrument; for the most skilful Musicianer in the World can make no
harmony, if his Instrument be not in tune; all the various Notes and Tones of
an Instrument most incorporate in each other, or else no Harmony can be made;
even so it is with the Qualities in a Man, it is as possible for him that has
learned himself to tune himself, and compose all the properties of Nature, and
to play on them as a Musicianer does on his Instrument; so great is the power
of Man, if he cast his Will and Desire into the divine Principle and Love of
God, which is able to tincture and change the worst Complexion and convert it
into its own Nature; therefore let no man dare to say, and complain, that the
Lord has dealt hardly by him, that he has made him of the harsh wild Nature:
And though it be true, that many men, as their Natural Qualities, are sordid
and wild; yet nevertheless they have the true Tincture that can transmute and
change all sorts of Metals into the finest Gold, even that very Word of the
Lord that made and formed all things, which does enlighten every man that
comes into the World, and blessed are all those that are obedient, and follow
its Counsel; of what Complexion soever they are, the Blessing of the Lord is
with them.

Thus having treated of the four grand Qualilies, I shall now proceed to
discover the four Complexions, which proceed there from, and to what Virtues,
Vices and Diseases each of them are most subject.

Of the Choleric Complexion.
The Choleric Complexion answers to Fire, and that sort of People which are
dignified with it, are of a strong Body, and lively active Spirit, quick both
in doing and apprehending of any thing, free in Speech and of all other action,
apt to Wrath and Passion, quickly affronted; but because the Fire in them burns
fierce, their Passions are quickly over, not subject to retain Anger, nor
premeditate Revenge; they are of a hardy strong Nature, generally of good
Apprehensions, and Witty, but more or less so, according to the strength or
weakness of the predominant Constellation at their Birth.

If People of this Complexion do observe the rules of Temperance, and keep
themselves within the bounds of Sobriety, then they are some of the Healthiest
of men: But many of them are much addicted to Superfluity and Inordinate
living, by reason of the strength of Nature, and their strong Heats, which do
in many of them increase the desire to eat and drink beyond the power of the
digestive faculty of the Stomach; For in most People, in whom the Fire does
predominate, their attractive faculty and desire of eating and drinking is so
very strong, that it prolongs the pleasure of eating and drinking many degrees
beyond the Necessity of the Stomach, which does not only cause an heavy, drowsy
Indisposition to follow, but sows Seed for many Diseases. Therefore as this
sort of People are generally the greatest Eaters by Inclination, so ought they
as much as in them lies, restrain the Extravagancies of their Appetite, and eat
but sparingly, especially of rich, hot compounded spicy Food and strong Drinks,
as Wine, Brandy, Tobacco, etc. For they are all Enemies to this Complexion, and
very dangerous too, if Temperance be wanting; for every sort of Food has its
operation in the Body, and on the Spirits by way of Simile: Therefore all such
Meats and Drinks in this sort of People, if not sparingly taken, do too
powerfully awaken the Central Heat, which ought not to be felt; but when it is
stirred up, does sometimes cause either a Suffocation or Evaporation of the
vital Spirits, which will make all the external parts of the Body to burn like
Fire, whilst the Center becomes as it were chill and cold; For when the pure
Spirits are wounded by any violence done to them, the Radical moisture
consumed, the Oil of Life set on Fire, which are Moderators and Qualifiers of
the harsh Fires and Poisons in the Body, what can be expected but Destruction?
For when the pure Spirits of Oil are any way wounded by Intemperance, then
presently are awakened the fierce dark Fires in the Body (the original of every
Life) which ought not to have been stirred; for this Fire is of a churlish,
angry, consuming Nature, whence those terrible Fevers do proceed.

This Heat when it is kindled, which is never done but when some great violence
is offered to the pure Spirit and Oil, then the natural Life does presently
burn, and is in danger to be destroyed; for the heat of this Original Fire is
like the heat of Charcoal, whose pleasant Water and Moderator is destroyed in
the making of it, whence that pleasant gleam of Light, and refreshing Quality
in the Wood does proceed; so that in the Charcoal there does only remain the
dark, fierce Sulphurous Fire, which does, when burning, send forth pernicious
stupifying Fumes and Vapors, of an ill scent, burdensome to Nature; for these
Scents or Vapors do powerfully penetrate the Body by way of Simile, and search
out their likeness, and incorporate therewith, whence disorders arise,
especially in People of weak Nature, and that have but few Spirits: Even so it
is in the Body, if the pure Spirits and Radical Moisture be through
superfluity, or any other way disordered or weakened, then presently the dark
original Fire is kindled, and manifests it self in its own form, and burns
fierce like Charcoal, and then the Body falls into Distemperatures. Not but
this dark fierce Fire that does so violently burn, and discompose the Body and
Mind, did possess the body before, for indeed it is the center of every Life:
but so long as the pure Spirits and Balsamic Body were strong, and the
Qualities of Nature had their operation in equality, this fierce sulphurous
fire lay hid, or was captivated in the sweet Embraces of the Radical Moisture
and pure Spirits, and restrained by their virtue and power, even as the pure
Oil and Balsamic Body in Wood does moderate and qualify the sulphurous
Charcoal-heat, so long as the Wood remains entire, and no violence done to the
sweet Oil, which is the true Life of the Wood; but so soon as this sweet Oil is
wounded, and becomes suffocated, as is done in making of Charcoal, then the
fieree, poisonous, dark Fire of Saturn and Mars is awakened, being of a furious
devilish Nature and Operation.

The same is to be understood in every Vegetable, Mineral, and Animal, be it
what it will; If the pure Radical Spirits and Oil of Life be any ways hurt,
then the dark Wrath of Nature appears; and if it be in the Human Nature, then
the Body falls into terrible distempers, and cannot any way be recovered but by
a powerful Medicine, able to incorporate it self with the fading Oil and pure
Spirits, and so reinforcing them with these foreign Auxiliaries, enables them
to withstand and qualify the fierce poisonous operation of the awakened dark
Fire, and compel it to retreat to its designed central obscurity.

This Choleric Complexion ought in a most special manner to observe the Rules
of Equality and Temperance; for the Original Fire which we have been speaking
of, is very strong in them, and most apt on any disorders to be kindled, whence
do proceed so many Violences done by this sort of People: Also, they generally
love Arms and the Field, and a little exercise and custom will make fighting
and killing of Men as familiar to them, as the killing of Sheep or Oxen is to
Butchers: Therefore they ought to be sober, and accustom themselves to a mean
in all things, as Meats, Drinks, Exercises, and especially in Communication, or
in their outward Converse in the World. All sorts of Food and Drinks, that are
rather inclined to Coolness than Heat, are most profitable to People of this
Complexion; and as in quality, so also ought they to be careful that they do
not exceed in quantity, which they are apt to do more than any other
Complexion, as aforesaid.

Certainly Man being an Image of God, and Nature in him containing the true
nature of all things (which the Ancients significantly called a Microcosm, or
little World) it is no absurdity to affirm, that he has power to change and
alter his natural Complexion, if he once come to know the Principles of
himself, and can but distinguish the Principles of his own Nature, then may he
preserve the pure essential Spirit from suffering violence; and he can also by
the same Eye of understanding, preserve the essential Virtues of all other
things, according to that measure of Knowledge he has of himself.

Likewise, People that are dignified with this Choleric Complexion are subject
to acute Fevers, their central Heat being great, whence do proceed a powerful
Life and abundance of Spirits: For in all Creatures that have their central
Heat strong, the Balsamic Body and Radical Moisture is also powerful;
therefore such People can endure Labor beyond others: The same is to be
understood in Vegetables, and other things, according to their Natures;
wherever the central Heat is powerful, there also the Radical Moisture* and
sweet Oil is strongest, wherein the natural Life does burn and shine: An
example we have in Wine, and in all sweet Fruits, especially in Sugar, in which
things the sweet Balsamic Body and pure Spirits are potent, lively and brisk,
and they do not only afford a greater quantity of Spirits when separated, but
much stronger and fiercer than any other Vegetables that are of a lean Hungry
Nature: Therefore People of this Complexion, though they are strong and brisk,
yet if they commit Intemperances, that are beyond the power of the natural heat
to throw off, then they are in far greater danger than those that are of a much
weaker Nature and Complexion, for the Reason before assigned, which daily
Examples do confirm; as when such healthy People fall into Diseases, what
terrible sharp Fevers do attend most of them, which destroy the Life in a few
days? Therefore the strongest natured People ought to be sober, and not lay
heavier Burdens than Nature can bear; for he that has the healthiest and
strongest Constitution may easily oppress it; neither is it safe to put too
much Confidence in their strength, nor to boast of it, or commit such outrages
against their own Natures, as many young People do in the way of Pride, to
outdo their Fellows, and then glory in it: For the strongest Castle will
quickly yield by continual Batteries.

Of the Phlegmatic Complexion.
Those in whom this Complexion is predominant, are not so quick and active
either in the doing or apprehending of things as the Choleric, but more slow
and of a fofter Nature; their central Heats are but weak in comparison of the
former; and if they incline to inordinate living, either in Meats or Drinks, or
Idleness, they are apt to grow Fat, and their Bodies swell with gross
phlegmatic Humors, because their natural heat is but weak, and the digestive
faculty of the Stomach cannot make so perfect a Concoction as the Choleric
Complexion; so that great part of their Food is turned into gross Juices, which
fret the Body and make it heavy and dull: All sorts of strong spirituous Drinks
do agree better with this Complexion than with the Choleric, and if they do
not exceed in quantity, will not so soon precipitate them into Fevers; but if
they drink much, it will swell their Bodies and Members to a wonderful bigness,
as we see some, both Men and Women are; which great drinking does destroy the
edge of the Appetite, and increases their desire to drink; for their natural
Heats and Stomachs are not able to make any profitable Concoction, nor
separation of such quantities of Drink as they swallow down, whence are
generated abundance of raw Humors, that do not only swell the Body as
aforesaid, but load the Joints with windy and watery Diseases, and also obstruct
the passage of the Breast; for all fat People have narrower passages than those
that are lean and spare, and fetch their Breath with more difficulty, because
the Vessels of the Stomach and Breast are contracted through the drinking of too
much strong Drink, and eating too little Food; and what they do eat, too rich
in Quality.

Yet is it very easy for this Complexion, and all others, to prevent Fatness
and heavy Dropsical Humors, (which many of this sort of People are subject to)
if Order and Temperance be but observed, with regard to both quality and
quantity of Meats and Drinks, with proper exercise, especially in the open Air,
and walking by River-sides and running Waters, which do wonderfully open the
Passages, and beget and sharpen Appetite, and cause good Digestion: For though
one Complexion is more apt to grow Fat than others, yet Experience teaches,
that it is Idleness and Superfluity that is the grand cause thereof; look
amongst ordinary working-people in Country-Towns, and you shall very rarely see
any of the Husbandmen or Field-workers very Fat; though in such places are
People of all Complexions; but Cities and great Towns are the Nurseries of fat
Punchinello's, where there is good store of Strong Drink, and Wine, rich Food
with ease and idleness. I am not ignorant that fat People have an Apology for
themselves, viz. That they eat and drink less than many lean Folks: This is
true; but lean, spare, rawbon'd People have for the most part great Heats,
which do digest and throw off all superfluous matter; their Appetites are sharp
and piercing; also, they are generally of active Spirits, given to Labor and
Action, which destroys all matter for Fatness: But most that are inclinable to
the Phlegmatic Complexion are of contrary and colder Nature, as aforesaid,
their Appetite not so sharp, nor digestive faculty so strong; and if
discretion, care and order with proper exercise, be not observed, great part of
their Food and Drinks, for want of heat, is turned into gross raw Humors,
which cause an heaviness on the Spirit, the Oil from whence their Light of Life
does shine, becomes of a watrish Nature; therefore such People ought to have
understanding in the ordering of their Lives, for want whereof, many do by
various sorts of Intemperances destroy their Healths: Also, many will take and
follow the Paths and Examples of others, which they ought not to do; for what
may be good Food for one, may be the contrary for another; therefore every one
ought to learn the degrees and power of his own Nature: For the differences of
men's Constitutions are such, and their Natures so contrary, that it is
impossible to give any particular rule to fit every ones Convenience; so that
there isa necessity for every one to see with his own Eyes; and in this respect
the Proverb is punctual truth, Every man (to himself) is either a Fool or a
Physician. A man may speak somewhat that may be useful in a general way, and
helpful to many, if minded, but the power of doing is in a man's self; and if
one do but in any tolerable degree know his own composition and the power of
his own nature, he may very easily help himself, for man's Will is free; and if
he be well informed, and his Faith his own, and he do not make the ways of the
Multitude to be his Rule, and their Faith his, as many do, then he may, and
has power by wisdom to alter his Complexion for the better. One of the chief
causes why so many run themselves into Error and Diseases, and Death it self,
is because they never look into themselves, nor observe the operations of their
own Nature, but look what others do, that do they, and take the advice of every
fool (especially if he be a learned Fool) without any examination whether it be
proper or not.

Meats and Drinks good for this Complexion are all sorts of drying warming
things, as Bread eaten with Oil; let Butter be eaten sparingly; Cheese is good,
not new, but old; also, all Gruels and Pottage that are made with quick Fires,
and not too much boiled, but thin, brisk and lively; for such things are easy
to be concocted, and quick on the Stomach; likewise all spicy Herbs, both
boiled and raw in their Seasons, that is, betimes in the Spring, and again
after Michaelmas, viz. in October and November; but Flesh they ought to eat
sparingly, especially from June to the last of October; yet they may eat it
more freely, and with less danger from December to the end of May, because in
that time Cattle are generally fed with dry Food, which generates a firm Flesh,
and Fat freer from slimy matter: Besides, the season being then cold, the
natural heat is strong and more central, so that all Cattle do make a more
perfect digestion, and their Stomachs are able to throw off all superfluous
matter, which renders their Flesh far wholsomer than at any other time of the
Year. Then also all Peoples Heats and Stomachs are more powerful than in
Summer, which does in some degree cut off, even in the Bud, all superfluous
matter.

For Drinks, let the Person that is Phlegmatic use such as are of a warming
nature; good sound wellbrewed Beer is better than Ale, except the Ale be thin,
clear and free from that Yeasty quality that most Ale in Cities, especially in
London, is subject unto; Wine allayed with Water, and sometimes a glass of Wine
alone will do no hurt: also, moderate Exercises, and especially Field-Labours,
near Fountains and Rivers, are profitable; but over-long-lying a Bed is
Injurious to this sort of People, as also soft Beds do weaken and make their
Natures more tender; hard Beds, as Quilts, and the like, are very useful for
all Peoples Health, if they could be persuaded to it, but especially to the
Phlegmatic Complexion; nor should they (as is too commonly used) prevent the
free Influences of the Air by Window shutters, and Curtains to their Beds, for
the fresh clear Air is wonderful friendly and healthy to Persons of this
Constitution.

Of the Sanguine Complexion.
Those that have the happiness to be of the Sanguine Complexion, are generally
of affable sweet Temper, moderately quick in the doing and apprehending of any
thing, of good understandings, but somewhat inferior to the Choleric, apt to
take Affronts at small matters; for they being of good even Humors themselves,
expect the same treatment from others, hating all sordid Actions and
Oppressions, either of Man or Beast, it being contrary to their Natures to deny
the serving of their Neighbors, though it be against their own Interest; they
are quickly moved to Compassion; and many who are strongly dignified with this
Sanguine disposition, are of such yielding tempers, and so great haters of
Controversy, that they choose rather to lose their Right, than contend, being
great lovers of Unity and Friendship, and very rarely the first breakers
thereof; they love to retaliate Kindnesses, and hate any should think they are
of a churlish nature.

But for the most part this Complexion is mixed either with the Choleric,
Phlegmatic or Melancholic, whereby much of the goodness and virtue is abated;
and so on the contrary, when this Sanguine Complexion is mixed with any of the
other, it does much abate the evil harsh Inclinations thereof. People of this
Complexion have antipathy to all things that tend to inequality or discord; the
very thoughts of trouble will make some of them sick, they are so tender and
delicate; and for the same reason much Business is troublesome to them, and they
quickly grow weary of it, being naturally of a cheerful disposition. Blood is
apt to abound in them, and a little Intemperance either in Meats, Drinks or
Labor, will disorder them; therefore they ought above all People to observe
and keep themselves within the bounds of Sobriety, because their Natures cannot
bear overcharging so well as other Complexions. They are to forbear all sorts
of Meats and Drinks, in which is advanced too highly any quality either in
Virtue or Vice; for all Extremes endanger their Health, and do not only
over-heat their Blood, but generate too great a quantity of nourishment. The
frequent drinking of Wine, or other strong drinks, as Brandy, Spirits, and
stale strong Beer, and the common eating of Food compounded with store of Spice
and Sugars, and all fat Flesh, and the like, these People ought to refrain, or
use very sparingly; for the Elements either of their Bodies or Minds will not
admit of Inequality. Meats and Drinks that are good, not only to preserve
Health, but also to maintain Strength, are all things in which there is no
manifest Quality that does too violently predominate; for all such things being
frequently eaten or drank, do beget their own Complexion; that is, do awaken
their Simile, and cause an unequal Operation in both Body and Spirits, which is
the undoubted Root of most Diseases: This ought to be considered by all sorts
of Complexions; and if care were taken in this particular; it would cut off
many Distempers; for Health is only maintained and continued by those things
that are Equal in their parts, because every particular thing has a secret
Power, (when either eaten or drunk) to incorporate its self with its Likeness
in the Body, and to awaken and strengthen it, whence does arise both Harmony
and Discord, according to the Equality or Inequality of the Meats and Drinks
received.

This our daily Experience does testify, and no Wise Man can deny; for all
Meats or Drinks in which any particular Quality is too highly advanced, whether
it be in Virtue or Vice, if frequently taken, prove prejudicial to the Health;
most People being in this particular mistaken, thinking, That if it does exceed
in Virtue, so much the better; but that Opinion arises from want of
understanding the Elements and Principles of their own Nature; for as to be too
much in the Sun, or too much in the Shade does beget Complexions, so most
Diseases are generated by the common eating and drinking those things that do
contain too much Virtue, causing not only a surplusage of Nourishment, but
setting Nature into an unequal Operation, which People of all Complexions
ought, as much as in them lies, to prevent, but more especially the Sanguine.

Food good for this sort of People, are all things of a simple Nature, wherein
Bread has the first place; Milk, and various Dishes made thereof, sundry sorts
of Herbs in their seasons, being well and naturally prepared; also, Gruels and
Pottage made of Oatmeal, being made thin, and quick boiled, are of an excellent
Nature, cleansing and opening the Passages, they beget Appetite and help
Concoction: For Oatmeal, is to be accounted the best of all Flour, by reason of
its preparation, the body of the Grain being opened and the inward Spirit as it
were set at Liberty, and made more Volatile, as is done also in Malt, but more
artificially, for the body of the Barley is opened to an higher degree, and
therefore will give forth its spirit or Balsamic Body, when committed to
Water, sooner than Oatmeal, which is done but by halfs in comparison of the
other. There are likewise various sorts of Flesh and Fish that are of clean
Nature, easy of Concoction, if well ordered, and free from Surfeits and other
Uncleanness (which most Beasts are subject to, but few there be that consider
it) which are proper enough for Sanguine People to eat moderately of, provided
the same be well prepared: For of all sorts of Food, People ought to have the
greatest care of FLESH, not only in the well ordering it before it be killed,
but also in seasoning of it with Salt, and in the preparing or dressing; Flesh
being more unclean in its own Nature than either Herbs, Fruits or Grains, which
I suppose most People will confess, and that they are far more agreeable and
friendly to Nature, and not so dangerous to Health; nay, give me leave to add,
that they are also more pleasant; for its chiefly the continual custom of
eating Flesh, and the conceit of the great Nourishment it contains beyond other
things that makes men so much desire it; which Opinion is false: most sorts of
Flesh indeed are endued with much matter, but great part thereof is of a gross
Phlegmy nature, which quickly will cause the whole to fall into Putrefaction,
if the strong sharp fierce power of the Salt be wanting: And when it is salted,
the matter for Putrefaction is so great, that the Salt cannot continue it long
sweet, but so soon as the pure Radical Spirits in the Flesh, through time are
either evaporated or suffocated, then the Salt has no longer power to preserve
it from Corruption. A man may as well say, that green Corn or Grass breeds
better nourishment in Cattle, than either Hay or dry Corn, for indeed it
generateth and fills the body fuller of gross Phlegmatic matter, and makes
such Cattle heavy and dull, and great Bellies, apt to faintyness and Diseases;
but Hay and dry Corn generate a firmer Flesh, and more brisker spirits, makes
them drink well, appear with moderate Bellies, but clean, strong Limbs, able to
endure hard Labor without prejudice to their Health: The very same is to be
understood of Flesh, if compared with Fruits, Herbs and Grains, and Food made
of them, which do as far transcend Flesh in virtue and good sound clean
Nourishment, and to preserve Health and Strength, as Hay and dry Corn do exceed
either green Corn or Grass in the preservation of Strength and Health in
working Cattle.

All sorts of Food, either for Man or Beast, from which the Sun and Elements
have exhaled or dried away the gross phlegmatic Body, are not only cleanner,
but fuller of Spirit and Life, not subject to Corruptions, but breed a firmer
Nourishment, as all Husbandmen and Shep-herds will tell you: Therefore Bread,
Butter, Cheese, and all sorts of Food made of Flour and dried Fruits, are
strong healthy Diet.

Of the Melancholy Complexion.
People of this Complexion, that have their Significator in their Radix weak,
are slow, and of dull heavy Dispositions, subject to be surprised with fear and
suspicions, apt to be froward, full of mental Reserves, seldom forgetting
Injuries, hollow hearted, giving fair Words, when their Thoughts are quite
contrary, addicted to Witchcraft, or fore-speaking of things, which sometimes
do take place, when they have low poor Spirits to deal with, whose predominant
Quality in Nature is weaker, and under the Dominion of their Spirits, otherwise
not. For the awakened Evil and dark Wrath in this sort of People, viz. their
vehement wishes or evilwords do carry the power of that Principle, whence they
were conceived, and enter the same Principle in those to whom they are
directed. And if those wrathful Spirits be not either through the strength of
the predominant Quality in the Complexion, or through the power and virtue of
the Holy Spirit and Faith in God, withstood and overcome (which often is done)
then these Evil Rapes, viz. such Wishes and Words will take place, whether it
be in Man or Beast; for this evil, revengeful, dark Spirit not being so
withstood, enters into the dark Center and Poisons in the Body, and by simile
incorporates therewith, awakening and strengthening them, and then the Body
and all the Senses fall into Distress, and most terrible Diseases, according to
what Poisons and Salts were kindled: This is called Witchcraft, and indeed is
one sort of it (there is another, which is not fit for this place) and this
sort of People are called Unlucky-Tongued.

But on the contrary, if those People of the Melancholy Complexion be well
dignified in their Radixes, then the forementioned evil significations are
abated; nevertheless they are ponderous, and slow in learning and conceiving of
any thing, but when once obtained, they make it their own, and improve it; they
are capable of great Learning, but they must have Time; for this cause, all You
ths born under such Constellations, are very dull in the beginning of their
Studies, but if continued under good Masters, will in time exceed either
Mercurial or Venerial Boys; for they have greater and stronger Spirits, both to
retain whatever they learn, and to endure more Pains and Labor to obtain any
Science; besides, they are not so apt to run out of one thing into another,
being more fixed in the Root of their Natures: They are generally slow of Speech
and Action; naturally pensive and covetous, by reason that the Sanguine Nature
(which proceeds from Venus, Sol and Mercury) is in this Complexion, as it were
hid, or locked up under the harsh Forms of Saturn and Mars, under whom such as
are born, are apt to be Hard-hearted, full of Revenge, Covetous, etc. not but
that they are endued with the Sanguine Nature, as well as those born under
Venus, Mercury, or the Sun; but the same is Captivated, as aforesaid, under the
harsh Forms, which is the chief cause People do so much differ in their
Tempers. But if you can unlock this Saturnine Cabinet, and set the Spirit at
Liberty, as the Maulster does in his Saturnine Grain, viz. Barley,
enfranchizing the pure Balsamic Spirits that sweeten the whole Body, you will
find it debonair and jovial, and of a very agreeable Conversation: The Truth
is, Strong Beer, Ale, Wine, or any spirituous Drinks freely taken, will melt
down this sullen Saturnine Gravity into Mirth and Gaity; for we daily see how
free and merry such People will be, if at any time they have tipled a little
extraordinarily, during the time of the Operation of their Liquor. For strong
Drinks make all sorts of People more free, and to forget sorrow, because they
open the gross Body, and cause the Spirits to have their free Operation; the
said Drinks being Spirituous, incorporate with its simile, viz. with the
spirit, and makes it for the present more powerful; but when the Operation of
such spirituous Liquors are over, then both the Saturnine and other People
return to their Natural Dispositions, but with fewer Spirits, which causes a
dull heaviness to attend most, after such Drinkings, because the Internal heat
and spirits are too violently awakened, and stirred up, which caused them to
evaporate; and thence proceed Indispositions and Disorder. Great Drinkings are
injurious to the Health of most that use that Trade, only this Saturnine People
may sometimes drink a Cherping Glass or two, without any danger to their
Health, especially when they come to forty years of Age; for before, all sorts
of strong Drink ought to be drank sparingly by such as regard their Health.

It is also to be noted, that not only strong Drinks, but all other things,
have an Operation on the Spirits and Bodies of Men, whether Meats, Drinks, Air,
Exercise, or Communication; were it not so, Man could not be altered within for
better or worse: But what a sensible change do we find in our selves many
times, between a dull heavy Day, and a brisk, clear Sunshiny Morning? Every
thing, be it what it will, has a power of influencing and varying us; which the
Apostle seems to take notice of, when he says, Evil Communication corrupts
good manners; and the Psalmist, where he affirms, With the Froward thou shall
learn Frowardness: The Original of all good or evil Tempers, and natural
Inclinations, are according to the Nature of that form and property that did
predominate at the Conception and Birth, and are made either better or worse,
according to the good or ill Custom of the Place, and People they communicate
with, or the Employments they are put to, and the Meats, Drinks, Exercises, and
Air they are used to.

Take two Youths, one of the Sanguine Complexion, the other of the Choleric,
put the first to a Butcher, Car-man, Waterman, or any such robustick Trade; the
second to a Shopkeeper, Merchant, or some such neat Profession, and in a
little time the Sanguine Lad will become more Cholorick, and the Choleric more
Sanguine.

But note; there is a twofold possibility of altering and changing either for
the better or the worse: First, Natural; as the free Will shall consent to
either Evil or Good, one being as near to man as the other, who being a
complete Image or Epitome of all things, their true Natures being contained in
him, therefore he is both capable and liable to be influenced and wrought upon
by every thing it meddles or communicates with, as is seen in Soldiers, most of
them, when raw, and at t^ first Fight, are timorous, and very apprehensive
o(...)ger; but after they are once flesht in Blood and Slaughter, they become
unconcerned and remorsless, and can kill men with as little trouble or regret
of Mind, as a Butcher does Sheep and Oxen, without having any particular
Quarrel or Enmity, but even in cold Blood; so great is the Power of Employment:
For as Fighting and Killing of men is the work of the fierce Wrath of God in
men, and so soon as you consent with your Will to enter upon this wrathful
Employment, the center of the dark strong Wrath is awakened, and by a little
custom and use, it becomes ten-fold stronger than at first; then all doing as
one would be done unto, and Tenderness and Compassion are laid aside, as if
never any such Notion or Principle had been planted in Man. The very same
happens in other Employments, that Quality which therein predominates, awakens
and strengthens its Simile; for which reason, in former Ages, some that have
written Romances and Love-stories in a passionate and pleasing Style, and
lively Representation, have been banished for their labor, their Works proving
of very evil and fatal Consequence to Young and Amorous Minds; for all Books,
be they what they will, do bear the Image and Figure of the Spirit of him that
wrote them, and so much the more, as the Imagination of the Author is more
strong, which in this sort of Writers and Poets, etc. use to exceed; and if
such Books be read with attention and inclination, then they awaken and
strengthen such a like Propensity in the Reader as was in the Writer, be it
either good or evil.

Therefore the perusal of all Play-Books, Romances and Love-stories, have, and
do prove very injurious to such as mis-spend their time therein; it is like
playing with Edge-Tools, at first they are innocent, and think no harm, that
look into them, but after a while, if it take with their Affections, the case
is altered, they make a real change in the whole Bod^^ and Mind; the Thoughts
are all taken up with tho^ (...)itching Idea's, and they prove leading Cards to
many real Evils and Temptations: The Son must needs fall in Love with, and
Marry the Chambermaid, and the young Lady run away with the Coachman; or the
more impertinent Chaplain, only to act over some of those fine Intrigues which
they admired with such delight in Sidney's Arcadia, or the grand Cyrus.

It Is sottish Ignorance that makes some say, What hurt can these external
things or Food, Communication, etc. do unto us? For they never consider, that
every thing has power to open its own Principle; the understanding of which
ground, was the Original cause of Moses's Law of Cleanness and Separation, and
the occasion of the Abstinence of all the wise Men in former Ages from this or
the other sort of Food, Drinks, Habits and Communications, for they saw the
inward Power and Sympathetick Drawings of every thing; and therefore wise
Pythagoras, the better to draw the wild barbarous Nations to the practice of
this profound Philosophy, insinuated into them the belief of a Transmigration,
or shifting of the Souls of Men, when they dyed, into other Creatures, as Cows,
Horses, or the like; with which Opinion being once possessed, they would neither
oppress, nor kill any sort of Beasts or living Creatures; for then they
believed they should do Violence to their departed Friends, viz. Fathers,
Mothers, Children, etc. Through which Conceit and Custom they were not only
much brought off from their former Cruelty and Barbarity, but betook themselves
to the more wholesome eating of Fruits, Herbs and Grains, so that this wild
savage People became Merciful and full of Humanity: And some of this sort of
People do continue this Custom and Law unviolated to this day in some parts of
the East Indies.

2dly, The Grace, holy Light and Love of God, of which the Lord has given a
measure or portion to every individual Person; as St. John says, The Word of
God which made all things, and without it nothing was made; this same Word is
the LIGHT OF MEN, and does enlighten every man that comes into the World; This
pure Spirit of Life has power to tincture and change all evil Inclinations and
harsh Tempers, which do arise from the malignant Configurations of the
predominant Constellations and Complexions, if man gives up his Will, and is
guided by its Counsel: This holy Light and Word is the Essential Life and
Living Power of all things, the Eye of the Mind, by which man is able to
distinguish the Good from the Evil in himself, and also in all other things,
according to the measure he has thereof, and the knowledge he has of himself:
It is also the true Balsamic Virtue, from whence all Friendlyness does
proceed, not only in Man, but in all other things according to their respective
Degrees and Natures; is likewise the Moderator and Qualifier of the fierce,
fiery, harsh Brimstone Spirit; and in what Complexion soever this pure Life and
Power does predominate, that Person, by virtue thereof becomes of an equal
friendly Temperament, both in Body and Mind (notwithstanding his Complexion may
incline him to the contrary) it being the sweet pleasant Life in all Creatures:
And the pure Balsamic Virtue and healing Quality in all Vegetables and
Minerals has its Birth and Original from this good Principle; nor can there be
any central Rest, or true Satisfaction in man, if this Principle of divine
Light be not in some degree predominant; for by its pleasant and sweet
Influences all the fiery dark fierce Inclinations (which often do arise from
the Complexion) are qualified, made more Friendly and Sanguine, if its counsel
be regarded. All true Religion, doing as one would be done unto, Offices of
Love and Acts of self-denial, all Friendly and Courteous Deportment, and
whatsoever has the Name and Nature of Virtue, do universally spring up from
this holy Principle of divine Love: All men seek it, because no man can have
satisfaction without it, some in a right Way, others in a wrong; and whosoever
have wasted or suffocated the sweet Influences of this pure Spirit and Love of
God, become thereby a Charcoal Spirit, whose sweet Water is destroyed, viz.
Twice dead, and plucked up, as it were, by the Roots, as the Apostle phraseth
it, they growing of a fierce, terrible, fiery Nature, seared up in the harsh,
dark original, as Lot's Wife was, because she looked back, viz. into the
Original and salt Spirit, the Pillar of Salt signifying the great strength and
power of God's Wrath, which was then kindled by reason of Transgression.

The very same is to be understood of all Beasts of the Field, and other
things; not so indeed as it is in man, but according to the Nature of each. For
those Creatures that did in the Creation arise from, and were chiefly
compounded of the fierce harsh forms of Nature, whose predominant Quality
stands in the Saturnine and Martial Fire, have but small portions of the Virtue
and Light of this World; for the pleasant Virtue and friendly Qualities, which
the Principle of this visible World gives unto all her Children, do all proceed
from the Internal Spiritual World, and this outward Principle is an Image and
Likeness of the Internal; the Invisible Spirit and Powers, are the Root of the
Visible; and whatsoever is manifested in this World in Figures, Shapes and
Forms, the very same has the Internal Spiritual Principle in Power and Virtue.
And according to the degrees of the Spirit, and what property of Nature was
predominant in the Radix of each Creature, such a Shape, Form, Inclination,
Complexion and Disposition the Creature is endued with, be it either Animal or
Vegetable; for the Body was formed by the virtue and power of the Spirit, and
there is both the nearest Affinity and Resemblance between them, as is manifest
by all Creatures, in whom the dark Wrath of Saturn and Mars was predominant in
their Radixes; they are not only of an unclean, fierce terrible Spirit, but
their Figures and Shapes are unpleasant and fierce, as Lions, Tygars, Wolves,
Swine, and many others, both in the Elements of Earth, Air and Water, that are
unclean Devourers, and Creatures of prey, killing and feeding upon their fellow
Creatures; and as such Creatures are unclean in their Radixes, whence their
Inclinations and Desires to unclean Food do proceed, as bearing the nearest
Affinity with their Natures; so their Figures, Shapes and Forms, with their
suitable Inclinatious, do clearly manifest what matter they proceeded from in
their Creation.

This Root, the great and illuminated Prophet Moses understood by a divine
manifestation, whence his Law proceeded, wherein he prohibits his People the
Jews from eating of unclean Food, both Flesh and Fish, with many other
Circumstances tending to Cleanness; for that great Prophet saw by a divine and
natural understanding, into the Essences and Original Qualities of every
Creature, and that each thing has a secret Power to incorporate with its
Likeness, and to make that Quality strong, which in the Radix was weak, and lay
as it were hid: And on the contrary, to hide and make that property weak, which
in the Radix was strong; so great is the power of Nature; and this is not only
done in the Evil, but also in the Good: Therefore all men have power, more or
less, to alter and change their Inclinations and Complexions, either for the
better or the worse, as they give their Wills up to practice either Good or
Evil. But if People abandon themselves to their natural Inclinations, and live
under the power and dominion of their Complexions, and by degrees give way to
Intemperance and Evil Communications, such do oftentimes become of far worse
Inclinations and Dispositions than their Complexions naturally tended unto: And
on the contrary, some there are, who by the power of their Wills rigorously
pursuing the Paths of Virtue and Understanding, become more Friendly, and of
better Tempers than their Complexions promise: For the natural Inclinations and
Influences of the Stars, have not power to captivate the Soul in Evils, if the
Will gives it self up to be guided by the Holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, which
will lead a man into all Virtue, and all Truth.

CHAP. II.
Of the Excellency of Temperance, the Knowledge of a Man's self, and the mighty
Benefits of Abstinence and Sobriety.

TEmperance is a divine Gift, and whosoever obtains the perfect Government
and Knowledge of himself, is endued with the springhead of all Virtues: The fear
of the Lord being the first step to all true Wisdom, both Spiritual and
Natural. The Root of all Knowledge that man is capable of, is in himself:
Therefore if any will understand any thing truly, he must first turn the Eye of
his Mind inward, not outward, as the custom of most is; for Man is an Image and
Likeness of all things, both Spiritual and Natural; in him is contained the
true Nature of all things, and he that does know and understand himself, and
the Principles and Operations of his own Nature both in Body and Mind, and what
Properties in the sevenfold Nature of this World are predominant in him, and to
what his Inclinations are most naturally propensive, both as to Virtue and
Vice, he may thereby not only shun many Inconveniences, but also so much as he
knows of himself, he also knows of his Creator, and of all other things. And so
on the contrary, he that does not know and distinguish the Principles of God
and Nature in himself, does neither see nor know any other thing as he ought:
Therefore all such who are ignorant of themselves, are subject to be changed
and altered out of one Opinion into another, always leaning hard on the
Shoulders of Custom, supporting their Ignorance with the truth of Tradition,
having one of their Eyes, if not both, amongst the Multitude. But all true
sight in divine and natural things does arise and proceed from the unalterable
divine Principle or Gift of God; for the natural man, as he is wholly blind as
to things divine, so neither does he see even into Natural things any otherwise
than a Beast, beholding the outward Substance, but knowing nothing of the
inward Power of the Spirit; or if such do understand any thing further or more
than Beasts, it is either by Chance or Custom: But when the Eye of a man's
understanding is opened in the true Spirit, he then sees into his own Essence
and Properties, and by the same sight has a prospect into the Nature of all
other things, more especially if he be one that is born with a Nature adapted
for the comprehension of such things.

For this reason it is said -- The spiritual man discerns all things, even
the deep things of God; but nothing hurts and hinders man more from obtaining
the true Knowledge of God and Nature in himself, than his looking abroad out of
himself, imagining that Wisdom and Understanding is to be found and learned in
and from some other thing; neither do many consider that worthy saying of the
Apostle, avouching, That whatsoever may be known of God is manifest in man; not
without Man, but within himself: Man is that City the Wise man speaks of, In
whose Gates Wisdom cries; but if man will be gazing abroad, and not regard the
inward Voice in the Heart, (as most do not) then he can never come to any true
Judgment either in things Divine or Natural, because the Foundation of all
Wisdom and Right-knowledg is within a man's self.

Let us appeal to common Reason: How is it possible, if a man do not observe
the particular principles and Operations of his own Nature, that he should
observe and understand those of other things, whose Motions and various
Operations he is more remote from, and does not feel? Therefore if a man would
know how to rule, govern and preserve any Creature, or thing, this Wisdom and
Knowledge must be first Essential in himself, and to understand in particular
what things are Extreme in him, and the contrary, which will much help in the
way of Temperance and Moderation, with a due consideration had to the nature of
the Food, the Age, Air, Employments, etc. And also the Quantities of all those
things ought to be regarded, and not to heap together too much; this being a
sure Rule of Health, if a man finds himself as lightsom and brisk after Meats
and Drinks, or rather more than he was before: For the intention of Food is to
Refresh Nature, and not to dull, oppress, and incommode her, as most in this
particular do, especially those whose natural Heats are great, and Appetites
strong.

But full Meals, and too frequent use of rich Food and strong Drinks do breed
too much Nourishment, which is the Original of many Diseases; it furs and stops
the Passages, generates too much Blood, and thick dull Spirits, which makes the
Body heavy and lumpish, and by awakening the central Heat, causes the external
parts of the Body to glow with an unnatural Flame, which obstructs the powers,
so that the pure thin sweet Vapors of the Air (which are the Refreshing
Zephiri of Nature) cannot penetrate them as they are wont to do, when the
Elements of the Body are free from disorder, for then they suck them in like
Spunges, which renders the Body full of Spirits, brisk, vigorous and sprightly
as Virgins at a Wedding, or Boys at a Festival.

But this pleasant Condition is never felt when the Body is over-fraight with
Nourishment, and like a Lamp ready to be extinguished by superfluity of Oil;
therefore solemn Feasts, and set times for Meals, and eating and drinking
whether they have Appetites or no, and other Circumstances that attend them,
are Friends to Gluttony, but mortal Enemies both to Temperance and Health, when
People deluge down various sorts of rich Food and Cordial Drinks in a formal
Method, sitting perhaps two Hours, enticing one another to Gormandize and
Guzle, not only beyond Necessity, but even above the Power of Nature: And yet
not content, after they have already exceeded all bounds of Temperance with
strong Foods, then with Wine, various sorts of Fruits, Tarts, Sweetmeats, and
a thousand Kickshaws enricht with the East and West Indies Ingredients, of
themselves more than sufficient for a sober and temperate Meal; in the mean
time few do consider the Injuries hereby done both to Body and Mind; for this
variety has power to prolong the pleasure of the wanton Palate, beyond the
need of Nature, or ability of the Digestive faculty. For every particular thing
opening by Simile its like property in the Stomach, it comes to pass when a
Person has eaten to the full, and to the satisfaction of the Palate of one
thing; nevertheless when another of a contrary nature and taste comes, the
Appetite is awakened, and he can with pleasure fall too again, and so of
several Varieties, the Invention whereof at one Meal was merely to gratify
Luxury, by prolonging the pleasure of the Palate, which could not be done with
simple Meats and Drinks: Not but that a man may eat several sorts of Food and
Drinks at one Meal, without injury to Health, but then they must be Homogenial,
that is, agreeable to each other; and also he that so eats, must as the Wise
man advises -- Put a Knife to his Throat, which very few in this Age do
observe: But of this we shall speak more hereafter.

As Abstinence and Sobriety does always fortify the Observers thereof against
many Evils, so they make the Body pleasant, healthful, and fit to discharge all
its Functions, and prepare the mind to be the Temple of the Lord, as St. Paul
calls it. Those that take Meats and Drinks only for the necessity of Nature,
and observe that the Food be not stronger than she, but on the contrary, she
stronger than it, such have for the most part great Spirits, and but little
Flesh; whereas Gluttons have much Flesh and little Spirits. Have not all the
holy Prophets and renowned Lawgivers from the beginning, been Persons of a
wondrous Sobriety and Temperance, as Moses and Elias, who fasted forty days,
and yet the Face of Moses shined, and he could guide his Body as if it had been
a Spirit? And several other (indeed all) holy men endued with divine
understandings, have been remarkable for their Temperance: For the Spirits of
men are not Earthly things, to receive their Nourishment through the Organs by
the concoction of Meats and Drinks only, but derive their purer Aliment like
Spunges through the whole Body, from the clear thin Vapors of the Air, which
do powerfully penetrate the Body on all sides, but are hindered through
superfluity of Meats and Drinks; and so the Spirits in the Body, for want of
being found with these refreshing Gales, become thick, and as it were
suffocated.

For this cause most that abandon themselves up to Gluttony and Epicurism
seldom attain to Old Age, or if by means of an extraordinary tough Constitution
they do rub out, it is with Tortures and Misery, their Bodies being as full of
Diseases as an Hospital. But on the contrary, many of the Sober and Temperate
men have lived to great Ages, and yet very free from Distempers, with mean and
spare Food, whence does proceed a cool airy Pleasantness, the sweet Influences
of all the Elements freely courting the Body, which renders the Spirits many in
Quantity, and fine in Quality, and thence arises lightsomness to the Body, and
vigor to the Mind.

The truth of this men may experience, if they will but give themselves the
leisure to reflect, and consider, whether or no they do not before Meals,
ordinarily find themselves pleasant and lightsom in Body and Spirits, but after
they have indulged their Appetites with an overplenteous feeding, the one is
heavy, and the other dull; whereas had they but eaten temperately of simple
Food, it would not only have continued their strength, but also refreshed their
Spirits; for the pure Spirit is the true Life, Pleasure, Delight, and Beauty of
every Creature according to the Nature of each, and causes the sweet Oil to
burn friendly, and shine with a comfortable Ray, if it be not wounded by
disorders: This Spirit being so Volatile, and surpassing pure, that it will not
endure the least Violence; for when any Injury is offered to it, it either
becomes evaporated or suffocated, and then presently the Vigor and Beauty of
that thing fails, be it either Animal or Vegetable.

Therefore those that do regard the Health of the Body and Mind, ought to
preserve the Spirit free and potent, which must be done by Sobriety, Gentleness
and Temperance in Meats, Drinks and Exercises. The Prophet Daniel and his
Companions were sensible of this, when they were courted, and also threatened
with the displeasure of the King and his Servants, if they would not eat of the
various sorts of Flesh and Fish that came from the King's Table; but Daniel
entreated leave to continue that clean simple Food they had accustomed
themselves unto, viz. Herbs, Grains and Fruits, and pure Water for Drink.
Should not we in this Age be ready to count a man a Fool, and out of his
Senses, that should refuse Royal Delicates from the King's Table, and choose to
live upon such mean course Fare? But Daniel did with a Divine Eye see into the
Radix of all such things, and understood their sympathetical Operations, and
therefore chose the most simple harmless Commons; for by compounding many rich
things together, especially such as contain the Animal and Bestial Nature, all
such things lose their Simplicity, and the true Life and pure Spirits of each
become adulterated and changed, and being destitute of its proper Virtues,
becomes of another operation, which has an evil Influence on our Bodies and
Spirits, whence proceed those frequent Infirmities in most that live in the
height of Dainties, the same being neither well-pleasing to God nor Nature. But
on the contrary, was not the sober, clean and abstemious Livers of the
Rechabites well-pleasing to the Lord? And did not the Prophet Jeremiah call
them up into the House of the Lord as a Reproach to the Children of Israel, for
that they had faithfully kept the Commandments of their Father, and observed
the Rule of Moderation, and contented themselves with pure Water for drink, and
with mean and simple Food, and therefore he promises them, That the Sons
Jonadab should never want a man to stand before the Lord: It Is most certain the
Lord has been and is near all those that live in Temperance and Simplicity.
Therefore the Apostle says, Let your Moderation be known unto all men, the
Lord is at hand. The Prophet John contented himself with Locusts and wild
Honey, of whom our Savior Christ says, That there was not a greater Prophet
born of a Woman: Also, James the Brother of our Lord, was eminent for his
Abstinence (as Eusebius reports) insomuch that he eat no Flesh, drank no Wine
nor strong Drink, and wore no Woollen Garment, but Linen, which is of a
cleaner Radix than the other; for Woollens do retain the Bestial Nature, as you
may more manifestly perceive by the smell, if you burn them, no washing or
other cleansings will purge them from that fulsom Quality which they send forth
when burnt. Now this stinking Nature, so long as it continued entire, was
hidden or captived, but the fire opens the gross body, and manifests the Root;
for this cause the Prophets and holy men have so often said, That the Saints
and People of the Lord should be clothed in white Linen; and the Priests of
the Lord were to ware a Linen Ephod; for all Vegetives are endued with a
simple innocent Nature and Operation, and therefore they have been compared to
the divine Nature, because they bear some affinity unto it.

Those that would have their Spirits pure and potent must use clean Food, which
will extenuate the gross superfluous humors, by which the Body becomes easily
penetrable; and he that does not preserve his body clean, the pure Spirit
becomes, as it were, suffocated, whence proceeds an heavy Dullness that is not
only burdensome, but hinders all Meditations, and makes the Soul incapable of
every good Work; but Abstinence and Temperance do dignifie a man, and render
him fit for the Exercise of Virtue and Piety, and is the Root of strength and
fortitude. As the Mother of Sampson was commanded by the Angel of the Lord, To
abstain from Wine and strong Drink, during the time of her being with Child, so
was Sampson her Son, whom the Lord endued with wonderful strength; but when he
gave himself up to Wine and strong Drink, and other Intemperances, he lost all
Power and Virtue, and became weak both in Body and Mind, and a prey to his
Enemies. And is it not so in our days? Of most of the Miseries and Troubles man
ensuares himself, is not Superfluity a main cause? Wherever we see Vice,
there is also Intemperance; and where we see Temperance and Abstinency, we may
justly expect other Virtues, because no superfluous matter is bred that may
dull or indispose the Fancy, the Soul being watchful in Words and Works, and
also keeping the Body under, which by the Power and Virtue of Temperance is
subjected to the Influences of the Light and Love of God.

Temperance, Cleanliness and Abstinence have greater power over the Soul and
Body than most in our days imagine. Did not our Forefathers live to wonderful
Ages in perfect Health, their Food in those days being chiefly Herbs, Fruits
and Grains, and pure Wattr their Drink? They did not make their Stomachs the
Barial-places of dead Bodies, but their Meat and Drink was innocent and simple,
by which they were able to check and regulate the extravagant motions of the
Mind and insurrections of the Flesh: Hence some of the Ancients have delivered
it as a Maxim, That none could understand God and his Works, and enjoy perfect
Health and long Life, but those that abstain from Flesh, Wine and Vices,
bounding their Desires according to the Ends and Necessities of Nature. For
where Uncleanness and Intemperance reigns, the Soul is subjected with the Body
that it cannot discern things Celestial; but Sobriety and Purity of body and
mind renders it the Temple of God, wherein his blessed Spirit delights to
dwell, and communicate its Gifts and Graces.

Most men will in words confess, that there is no blessing this World affords
comparable to Health, yet rarely do any of them value it as they ought to do,
till they feel the want of it. To him that has obtained this goodly Gift, the
meanest Food, even Bread and Water is most pleasant, and all sorts of Labor
and Exercise delightful; but the contrary makes all things nauseous and
distasteful: What are full-spread Tables, Riches and Honors to him that is
tormented with Distempers? In such a condition men do desire nothing so much as
Health; but no sooner is that obtained, but their thoughts are changed,
forgetting those solemn Promises and Resolutions they made to God and their own
Souls, going on in the old road of Gluttony, taking little or no care to
continue that which they so much desired when they were deprived of it. Happy
it were if men did but use the tenth part of that Care and Diligence to
preserve their minds and bodies in Health, as they do to procure Money and
Riches, which many never obtain, and those that do, it serves them chiefly to
procure those Dainties and Superfluities, which do generate Diseases, and is
the cause of committing many other Evils, there being but few men that do know
how to use Riches as they ought: For there are not many of our wealthy Dons
that ever consider, that as little and mean Food and Drink will suffice and
maintain a Lord in perfect Health as the poorest Peasant, and render him more
capable to enjoy the benefit of the Mind, and pleasures of the Body, far beyond
all Dainties and Superfluities. But alas! the momentary Pleasures of the
Throat- Custom Vanity, etc. do ensnare and entice most People to exceed the
Bounds of Necessity or Convenience; and many fail through a false Opinion or
Misunderstanding of Nature, childishly imagining that the richer the Food is,
and the more they can cram into their Bellies, the more they shall be
sterngthened thereby; but experience shows to the contrary, for are not such
People as accustom themselves to the richest compounded Foods, and most cordial
Drinks, generally the most Infirm and Diseased? For all such things contain
great store of Virtue, and ought to be eaten between whiles, according to
Reason and Experience; for when the Mouth of the Stomach is open, the pleasant
relish of such dainty Food does so entice and increase the desire of eating and
drinking beyond what is needful, that a man may eat too much, and yet give off
with some little Appetite, of which we may be sensible by that general dullness
and Indisposition which we find in our selves for two or three Hours afterward.

People are much mistaken in thinking, That so long as the Appetite desires,
and the pleasure of eating continues strong, they may eat on without damage to
their Health. But the truth is, this is one of the chief Reasons why men are
Gluttons, and there is but little difficulty in Temperance save only in this
particular, it being somewhat hard for an healthy good stomach'd man to give
off eating in the midst of the Pleasure he receives by it, especially when
Meats by Art are made on purpose, not only to prolong the Palate, but also to
delight it. But to him that uses himself to simple Meats and Drinks, the snare
of provoking the Palate, beyond the necessity of Nature, is removed, for such
cannot entice Nature out of her way, nor awaken any other Properties or
Appetites in the Stomach but its own Likeness; whereas varieties of Food do
stir up as many various Qualities in the Stomach; so that there is still a
fresh desire to each thing, till Nature is over-cloy'd. And therefore Varieties
are always dangerous, if great Care and Temperance be not observed. But he that
limits his Desire by Wisdom, and has the understanding both of the Quality and
Quantity, may eat of sundry sorts of Food at one time, but the ignorant and
unwise very rarely do it without prejudice to their Health.

As the pleasure of Temperance, and the many benefits that follow Sobriety
cannot be imagined by those that live Riotous Lives, so neither can the sweet
influence thereof (especially the first) be enjoyed without some Trouble to Old
Adam. There must be Self-Denial in the case, and a man must live in this World
as if he were Alone; for there is but little Company in the ways of Sobriety:
When a man comes once to espouse them in earnest, presently most of his Friends
and Acquaintance will suspect and condemn him as a Conceited, Whimsical
Capricious Fellow, or a kind of Madman, because he will not run with them to
the same Excess and Riot. For the Flesh and Spirit of this World have no
Affinity with Sobriety and Temporance, proceeding from Fountains, whose Waters
are of quite contrary Nature to others; the one being clear and pure, which
purges and cleanses, preserving both the Body and Spirit in perfect Health;
the other being defiled with many Superfluities, destroys the Health of both.
Therefore he that would enjoy the true Pleasures, and flourish in the Virtues
that attend Sobriety, ought to be as strong as Sampson was in his innocent
Life, that he may be able to cut off all superfluity in the Bud; For it is not
that which goes into a man (as our Savior Christ says) but that which
proceeds out of him. For all kinds of Intemperance are first conceived in the
Heart, and if such Imaginations are not cut off or overcome by Wisdom and
Temperance, then they grow strong, and become as it were essential; and when
the Spirit and Understanding of a man is captivated, then a man becomes a
Tyrant to himself, and a perfect Slave to Gluttony, being defiled by every
thing, Meats, Drinks, Words and Works, as the Wise man says, Even the plowing
of the Land is Evil to the Wicked; for all Uncleanness and Defilements that
happen either to the Body or Soul, do arise and proceed from Within: And if
such lewd Desires, Opinions and Customs were cut off in the bud, then neither
Body nor Soul would be hurt by supurfluity of Meats, Drinks, or any other
thing; for every man that commits any Intemperance, be it what it will, acts it
first Within, and makes it substantial in the Spirit, and then it becomes
Corporeal; for the Body is forced to obey the dictates of the Spirit, whether
good or evil; for this cause Christ says, That nothing that went into a man
defiled him; for he pointed, and had an Eye to the Root, whence all Evils and
Intemperances arise: His Words are Spiritual, and not otherwise to be
understood; for he makes no exception, but says, NOTHING that goes into a
man, defiles him. Which words, should they be taken in a Carnal ense, then our
daily Experience shows the contrary; for many thousands are destroyed both by
Quantity and Quality of Meats and Drinks; but they are first defiled in the
Root of their Spirits.

But on the contrary, no Meats or Drinks have power to hurt or defile that man
whose Heart and Desires are governed and moderated by Wisdom; and therefore
says the Apostle, From whence proceed Wars and Fightings, all Lusts, false
Imaginations and Intemperances? Do they not all proceed from within? For if a
man be ignorant of the true Nature of things, his Understanding and Soul
darkened, then he is subject to be defiled by every thing; for if the Nature of
things be not discerned nor distinguished by the Spirit, such are always liable
to be defiled by every sort of Food or Drink, either in Quantity or Quality;
For where Ignorance governs, the extravagant Desires are not bounded. For,
first, Every man is defiled by his desires and imaginations, as our Savior
Christ says in another case, He that looks on a Woman, and lusts, is
defiled thereby; the very same is to be understood of all other Uncleanness,
both of Body and Mind, only the Evils and Defilements are greater when a man
proceeds to put in practice those things which he first conceived within by
Imaginations; for no outward Uncleanness could ever hurt any man, if the inside
were kept clean. If Understanding, and the pure Spirit govern within, then all
unclean Desires and Imaginations are, as it were, cut off in the bud, and not
suffered to proceed to a substance, and then a man is not desiled either by
that which goes out, nor by any sorts of Meats, Drinks, or other things that
gointo the Body. And so on the contrary, when the evil corrupt Nature is
awakened, and has gotten the inward Government, then all the Desires and
Imaginations are formed, and do proceed from the evil Principle, which first
defiles the Soul, and then afterward the Body.

This is the very Root and Foundation of all Uncleanness, Superfluity and
Intemperance; for every property in Nature must be supported and fed on its own
Food: Hence all sorts of Animals, whose predominant Quality and Ascendent
chiefly proceeds from the wrathful and unclean Nature, do desire a
proportionable Food, viz. raw flesh and Sordities: But on the contrary, those
Animals whose Dignifications and chief Quality stands in and proceeds from the
clean Nature, such Creatures also do desire clean Food: The same is to be
understood in the humane Nature, according to the Principle or Property that is
awakened and most predominant, so is the man either clean or unclean, good or
evil, from thence are all his Desires and Imaginations framed.

Thus we see that Cleanness and Sobriety in Meats, Drinks, Exercises, etc. have
a greater Virtue and Excellency in them, than People think; for their power
proceeds from an inward Principle, and they endow their Observers with the
Riches both of Time and Eternity; for Temperance makes all her Lovers truly
sensible of God's blessings; How sweet is every mean thing to the sober mind?
And how ready are such men to give the Lord Thanks and humble Acknowledgments
for his Mercies? They see, feel and taste the most pleasant operation of the
divine Hand in all things, their Bodies are delighted with the meanest of Food,
their Minds satisfied, their Beds easy, and their sleep sound; they are not
subject to indispositions, nor molested with Fevers; their Heads are not dulled
with Fumes, nor their Stomachs oppressed with fainting Fits or windy griping
Humors; they rise as fresh as the Morning Sun, and are fit for all Exercises
both of the Body and Mind; their Radical Moisture flows freely throw every
part, like a pleasant gale of Wind, which moderates the central Fires, that
they burn not too violently.

But this excellent state it not obtainable without Self-denial, and suffering
now and then a little gentle Hunger, which cleanses the Stomach and Passages
from all superfluous Matter, frees the Spirits from all Imperfections, prevents
all Obstructions, and preserves Health far better than any Physical
Evacuations: It has a certain Occult Quality, for the digestive Faculty and
natural Heat is never idle; therefore when the Stomach is not filled with
superfluity of Food and often eating, it draws away all the superfluous matter
that furs and stops the Passages, and which were apt to cause shortness of
Breath, send troublesome Fumes and Vapors to the Crown, hinder the free
Circulation of the Blood, and make the spirits impure. These Evils, and many
others, Temperance and moderate Fastings do prevent; the Stomach naturally
drawing this phlegmy Substance out of all the Vessels and Passages, when Meats
and Drinks come not too quick, and casts the lighter part thereof upwards, and
the more gross heavier parts downwarns into the Bowels; for this reason when a
man does fast a little longer than ordinary, he will feel a kind of a gnawing
or disorder in his Stomach for a little time, and then it will cease, and after
some space do so again; the occasion of which is this, the natural Heat does
very powerfully draw matter unto it self for Sustenance, but finding no proper
Nourishment, makes a separation of the gross phlegmy substance that lodges in
the Vessels of the Stomach, and casts it forth, both upwards and downwards, and
having done this, craves afresh for more work, and more proper matter of
Aliment.

Nor should a little Trouble (thwarting our Humors, debaucht with ill Customs
and Wantonness) or some small Inconveniences divert us from getting our selves
possessed of this Jewel Temperance, the true Philosophers-Stone, which turns all
into the Golden Elixir of Health, Content and Serenity, since we see none of
the little perishing Goods of this World are to be obtained without trouble and
difficulty; do not Youths serve seven years, enduring hard Labor and many
other Inconveniences for a Trade, whereby to get an outward Livelihood? Do not
Men Travel by Sea and Land through a thousand Miseries, even to the hazarding
of their Lives and Liberties for Meat, Drink and a little Raiment? And those
few that do obtain their desired ends, if Temperanee be wanting, the enjoyment
of them proves not only burdensome, but so full of Snares, that they had better
been without them; for Plenty has destroyed more than Necessity (some say, than
the Sword) the one having wherewithal to gratify his superfluous desires, and
so destroy himself, which the other has not. What a deal of pains and charge
are People at to please their Liquorish Pallates? The Indies must be sent to
for Rarities, and the utmost parts of the Earth for Dainties; such abundance,
such variety provided, as if all the Beasts and Fowls in Noah's Ark, with an
addition of all the Fishes in the Waters, and Vegetables of Earth, were scarce
enough to furnish one Luxurious Board! And then what Curiosity in Sawces? What
fantastic Humors for Dressing? The more extravagant and unnatural, the more
genteel, and acceptable forsooth! Whereas those things that are necessary to
support and preserve the Body in perfect Health, are easily procurable, of
small Charge, soon made ready, and with very little Trouble; they are in most
places ready and familiar, to be obtained with ease and pleasure, without
violating Justice, or hazarding either your Conscience or your Liberty.

Furthermore, Temperance is a strong Bullwark against that pernicious Enemy of
Mankind, viz. Despair or suspicion of the divine Hand of Providence, against
the Frowns and Causalties of this World; What cares that man if he have not
Money to buy Wine, who by use finds Water no less pleasant, and more wholesome?
Why should one bemoan not having half a score Dishes, when one will serve him
not only as well, but better? Sobriety makes a man Superior to those vain
fearful repining Imaginations, whereunto most, or indeed all, superfluous
intemperate People are subject, and when Poverty comes upon them, they are
doubly miserable, because they had inured themselves to Unnecessaries before,
the absence of which more torments them than any real Wants that they lie
under. But he that gives the government of himself to Wisdom, and has the true
knowledge of Gods Love and the eternal Principle of Light in himself, and admits
it to have its Operation in the Soul and Body, and who sees with an inward Eye
the great Virtue and Fortitude there is in every simple Grain, Fruit, and Herb,
and who has also bounded his desires to the necessities of Nature, there is no
such great reason that such a man should trouble his head with care and
suspicion, and tire his Body with over-labouring; for Fruits, Herbs, Milk,
Bread and Water are easily procured: And what sober man in the World is reduced
to that extremity, as to want such things, except in universal Calamities?

Every man ought to understand, that heavyness, oppression of Nature and
dullness proceed from the abundance of thick putrid Humors, which stop up the
Passages and cloy the Joints, filling them with gross moisture, so that the
course of the Spirits is hindered, and they as it were suffocated, which causes
various Distempers in the Body, that men would give all the World, if they had
it, to be cured of, but no Physic can help them, unless the excellent Lady
Sobriety be their Doctress; for it must be a clean simple well-ordered Diet
only that can fine the Blood by degrees, out of which pure Spirits are
generated, in the goodnss of which, all Health, and the whole prosperity of the
Body and Mind does consist; whereas surplusage of Nourishment destroys the
Spirits and damnifies all the Senses, as that of Seeing is hurt by gross
Humors that obstruct the Optic Nerves. And therefore those that are subject
to weak Eyes ought to abstain from all such things as replenish the Head with
Fumes, such are all sorts of fat Meat, Butter, and the like taken in too great
a quantity, as also strong thick Drinks, especially such wherein Wormwood, or
any strong bitter Herbs are infused; for all such things are very hurtful to
the Eyes, as experience shows. Likewise, such superfluous matter offends the
organs of Hearing, and marrs the sense of Tasting, by breeding Choleric salt
Humors; so that those who accustom themselves to Excess, generally have their
Palates debaucht, and cannot give a true judgment of the state of things.

Now the sorts of Food and Drinks that breed the best Blood and finest Spirits
are Herbs, Fruits, and various kinds of Grains; also Bread, and sundry sorts of
excellent Food made by different preparations of Milk, and all dry Food, out of
which the Sun has exhaled the gross Humidity, by which all sorts of Pulses and
Grains become of a firmer substance; so likewise Oil is an excellent thing, in
Nature more sublime and pure than Butter: And if you do eat fat flesh, let it
be sparingly, and not without good store of Bread and Herbs.

There are two things in the practice of Temperance chiefly to be regarded,
viz. QUANTITY and QUALITY; the later ought to be considered by every one that
is desirous to preserve Nature, but Eror in the former does generally the most
mischief: For if Meats and Drinks be of a raw gross Nature, and not so well
prepared as they ought to be, yet if a man eat and drink but sparingly with a
perfect Appetite, the Stomach (Nature's Laboratory) will make better
Nourishment thereof, than it can of the best Food when too great Quantities are
crammed into the Belly; for the natural Heat of the Stomach is of a wonderful
Nature, when free from these burdensome, gross Humors, it can as it were digest
and kill the poisonous Juices of unclean Food, and by an innate power cast off
the malignancy thereof, if the Quantity be not too great: In this case
Abstinence has been found by experience to cure most Diseases that have
proceeded from Superfluity, if not gone too far; Therefore Quantity is more
dangerous to destroy Health, than Quality, though they are both very bad, and
often meet together, and then Health is destroyed with a winged speed, which is
the chief cause that there are so few, either Men, Women, or Children in
perfect Health: Where can you find a Man or Woman among such as are
Intemperate, who have attained to the Age of forty Years, that are in perfect
Health? The best of them being afflicted with windy and scorbutic Diseases,
which are bred by eating too much in quantity, and of an evil unclean quality:
These windy Diseases are also much increased by the continual eating of their
Food too hot, that is, before the sulpherous moist Vapors, which are of a
fierce and sharp Nature are evaporated; for this sulpherous Heat which goes
away in the moist steem or vapors, does contain the Spirits of the Fire, as
also two Qualities, viz. A windy moist dulling Nature, and a fierce sharp fiery
one; the first of these is the cause of most windy Diseases, and the second
does generate in the Blood a hot sharp Humor, which causes an itching and
breaking out in the flesh with spots of various colors, as also a weariness
and indisposedness through the whole Body; this likewise is the grand cause of
many Leprous and Mangy Diseases, especially when the Food is gross and not well
prepared, and too much in Quantity, which Maladies do often happen altogether.
All Food that is prepared by fire should not be eaten till those thick
sulpherous and moist steems be evaporated; herein many are mistaken, and even
Nature it self is little understood; for the generality of People account hot
Food best, and most profitable for Health, and the good Dame will be angry if
her Servants delay to eat their Food whilst Hot.

But the continual eating of Hot Food from the Womb has depraved their Stomachs
and natural Heat, so that if they eat their Food cold, it will not give them
satisfaction, although hot Food is contrary to the pure simple Nature, and the
health of the Body; nevertheless the continual use of such things have awakened
their Similes in the Stomach, and that requires their continuation; and if a
man does leave them, at the first Nature seems to want them; the like effect is
produced by other unnatural Customs, as in taking Tobacco, it being a strong
Martial and Saturnine Herb, of a loathsome poisonous Nature and Operation, whose
predominant Quality is of a contrary Nature to the Stomach and natural Heat;
therefore the first taking of it in Pipes is both difficult and troublesome to
Nature, and there is no Preparations known that will make this Herb friendly or
familiar to Nature, but only the continual Custom of taking it, which does
awaken and strengthen its own Quality in the Stomach, which in the beginning
was weak, but by custom is become strong, so great is the power of every thing
in increasing its likeness, and it becomes as though it were natural; and there
is as much difficulty to leave the use of such things (if not more) as there
was at first to make them familiar; the like is true in Brandy, etc. for the
more unnatural and greater the extreme is, the more troublesome it is to leave
it.

As for those who are used to eat hot Food, and are not satisfied to eat cold,
a little custom will bring them to a liking of it; for man being a complete
Image of the whole Nature of this World, and being endued with the true nature
of all Elemental things, therefore Custom will make every thing, whether good
or evil, familiar to his Nature. As for my own part, I have not been troubled
with windy Diseases since I left eating of hot Food, which formerly I was
afflicted with; likewise the same Quantity of any sort of Food eaten Cold, when
a man is a little used to it, will be much easier and pleasanter to the Stomach
than Hot: for this swells the Body, sends Fumes into the head, and causes a
heavy indisposedness through the whole Body; but there is such a sottishness
and ignorance possesses most People, that they will not go out of their old
Path, following their false Prophets, Custom and Tradition, esteeming
themselves to be sufficient Judges in these things.

Now these windy Diseases, and fiery thin salt Humors that are occasioned by
the before mentioned Intemperances, are very rarely or seldom ever cured; for
what Medicines have power to cure, when the same Superfluities are continued,
which were the Original of the Diseases? Pray where is the Medicine that will
cure the French Disease, if the Person infected goes on in his old way of
Wantonness? The very same is to be understood in all other Distempers;
therefore Temperance and Sobriety are Virtues that are absolutely necessary,
not only to help and cure Diseases when they have invaded the Body, but also to
prevent the Generation of them; for most Distempers, with a little help of
Physic, might be mitigated, if a sober temperate Life were observed, so that
by degrees little or no inconveniency would be felt; but what hopes are there,
so long as People prefer Supersluity and the pleasure of the Taste beyond
Health, eating and drinking of various sorts of rich Food and cordial Drinks,
to the full satisfaction of their Appetites, which break the bounds of
Temperance, the Stomach not being able to make a perfect Concoctiion, so that
every such Meal sows the seeds of some gross Matter and evil Juice, which by
degrees stops the Passages, obstructs the Veins, corrupts the Blood, and from
thence flows various indispositions, according to the nature of each man's
Constitution and the degree of matter: There are but few that think that those
Oppressions and Diseases proceed from a disordered Life, and a too great
Quantity of Nourishment, but most will be apt to believe themselves, alleging,
That they got Cold by leaving off a Coat, or by Accidental Sweating, or some
other act of carelessness: Which must be a mistake; for such things have little
or no power to hurt the Health, if there be not matter beforehand; for you may
be sure, if leaving off a Coat do occasion a Cold or any kind of stoppage,
there was some part obstructed before, and the radical Spirits of that part
were weakened by some disorder, or else outward Colds would not have had any
power to seize, that part of the Body: You may also observe, that if any Member
or part of the Body be weakened by any accident, that part will first complain,
when either Cold seizes it, or when there is any change of Weather; from whence
you may conclude, that the Root of all or most Diseases, is, first, some inward
Contraction of matter, caused by Superfluity, or other Disorder, which have
weakened the pure essential Spirits, and the Balsamic Oil and Virtues in that
part become, as it were, sower or sharp, which infects the Blood, and then
presently arises a loathing, and the Palate cannot distinguish the pure
Relish, nor taste the goodness of any Food; the Attractive Quality, and also
the Natural Heat of the Stomach lose their strength and power, then also the
Re^^ntive and Digestive Faculties do cease from their natural Operations; for
when there does happen any Violence to the pure Volatile Spirit and Balsamic
Body, then presently the action of the Stomach ceases, and there begins a
loathing, and the original Poisons and central Heats are awakened, which set
the whole Body into a flame, which poisonous Fire lay, as it were hid so long
as the pure Spirit and Balsamic Body were strong, and this continual fiery or
brimstony Spirit was only a cause of motion, giving strength and vigor to the
Oil of Life, which Oil does mix and incorporate with this sulpherous fierce
Fire, and makes it more gentle and friendly; for this Oil is generated from
this sulpherous poisonous Spirit, and is, as it were, its Sun, and shines back
thereinto, and does cause it to burn more gently; but if this pure Spirit and
Oil be by any kind of Intemperance wounded or suffocated, by overcharging
Nature, then the Original Poisons and sulpherous Fires do manifest themselves
in their own Forms, which were captivated and moderated so long as the pure
Spirits and essential Oil were strong; for this essential Oil is the true Life
of Nature, and the Moderator of the original Fire, even as it is in the Fire of
Wood, so long as the Wood remains entire, and no Violence done to the pure
Spirits and essential Oil, this Fire gives a most pleasant and friendly
refreshing heat and light, it sends forth a bright shine and wholesome smell,
very ageeable to the Pure Spirits of those that are near it; but you will find
the contrary, if you offer any violence to the Pure Spirits and essential Oil,
whence the bright shine and friendly nature of Wood Fire does proceed, as is
done in making of Wood Fire into Charcoal; for these pure Spirits and sweet
Water or Oil are suffocated in all Charcoal.

For this cause the Fire of Chorcoal is not only stronger than the Fire of
Wood, but it sends forth Sulpherous Fumes, which will stupifie and suffocate
the pure Spirits, and dull all the Senses, and send dark Fumes into the Head;
the truth of this all People are sensible of, and it is for no other Reason but
because the pure Spirits and sweet Water or Oil in the Wood is totally
suffocated in making it into Charcoal, and then the Original Poisons and fierce
Fire is no longer moderated, but does burn and manifest it self in its own
Nature and Form; this makes the difference between the Fire of Wood and
Charcoal, the one being pleasant and wholesome, the other the contrary, and yet
they have but one Foundation; the very same is to be understood in the Humane
Nature, and in all other Creatures, and in every thing according to its Nature:
For this cause, when a man has through any kind of Intemperance or Superfluity
overcharged Nature, by which the pure essential Spirits are either evaporated
or suffocated, and the Oil (whence the natural Life has its true being)
becomes as it were sower'd and made keen and sharp, then immediately follow
Fevers; for all Fevers do proceed from the awakened Poisons (which is the
Original of every Life) which should not be stirred or awakened: For this cause
most People, when sick, are afflicted either with Internal or External Fevers,
some greater, others less, according to the Age or Strength of each man's
Nature, and when men dye in the strength of their Lives, and especially such as
have strong Fires, what terrible Fevers will such have, which burn and consume
Nature in a moments time? But those that dye or are sick in Age, and are of
weaker Heats, their Fevers are more gentle; if People understood this, they
would not be so guilty of Intemperance, and so over-charge Nature; for the meek
friendly Life will not endure any Violence or Inequality without prejudice to
the Health; for as soon as the pure Spirits are wounded or evaporated, Nature
falls into an unequal motion, and then the wrathful fierce Fires are stirred
up, and then Nature is in danger. Take what Creature or thing you will, if you
wound the pure Spirits, the Balsamic Body presently turns sower; for one
cannot subsist without the other; and when this is done, then in a moments time
the poisonous fierce Fire does of its own accord manifest it self, which it
could not do so long as the pure Spirits and Balsamic Body were strong, and
did predominate, which does moderate and cause this Fire to burn more gentle;
For this cause all wise and seeing men have advised to Temperance, and have
commended all simple and mean Food and Drinks, especially those things in which
the Qualities of Nature stand nearest Equality; for all such Food and Drinks do
distribute and administer due and moist Nourishment to both Body and Spirits in
an Harmonial way, which is very agreeable to Nature; for all things desire
Concord and Unity, it being the highest degree that Nature can attain to; also
all sorts of Food and Drinks that do chiefly consist of Equality, do powerfully
beget and maintain its Likeness in the Body and also in the Mind: And so on the
contrary, high rich Foods, which consist of many Ingredients, and of
disagreeing Natures, and Drinks, in which the Fire burns too fierce, do often
prove dangerous to Health, because such things are unequal in themselves, and
except they be taken very sparingly, they awaken their Likenesses in the Body,
causing Nature to be unequal in her Operations: Therefore after eating and
drinking such things there follows Indispositions, the Veins glowing with Heat,
Fumes, and Vapors flying up into the Head, with a dull Heaviness, which is
caused by the Inequality of the Food, and the greatness of the Qantity, which
do for a time (until the natural Heat has overcome the Food, and made
separation) suffocate the pure Spirits and the Oil of Life, by its gross
Juices, and affording too much Nourishment; and if such Food and Drinks be
continued, there are but few Constitutions that can withstand the
Inconveniences that attend such a Life; but Abstinency and a sober Diet, with
Exercise, are the only means to abate all superfluous matter, and indeed it
hinders the Generation of all offensive Humors; ABSTINENCY is the only
Physician that a man can make use of, for it secretly does digest all kind of
Obstructions, and that with great ease and pleasure to the Patient, far beyond
the common and gross Drugs which Physicians administer: Also, ABSTINENCY is the
most skilful Cook, giving a most pleasant taste to every mean thing, by which a
simple Person becomes skilful; for he can distinguish the Taste and the inward
Sweetness of each thing, and he is thereby stirred up with an inward
inclination to praise and admire God in the use of all his Blessings:
ABSTINENCY does weaken and abate the Fury of the most Choleric complexioned
People, that they become more Sanguine; it opens the Gate of Humility, and is
a Friend to Charity; it encourages Hope, and is the only Enemy of that base
and cruel Spirit Suspicion, the universal Fomentor of mankind: ABSTINENCY is a
sure Counselor and a Conductor of all the observers thereof in the way of
Truth, increasing Faith, and causes them to eye and follow the divine Hand of
Providence, giving Peace and Tranquillity to the Mind, and Health to the Body:
many are the Virtues and Benefits thereof; it also gives the advantage of Time
and Opportunity, and is the forerunner of Wisdom; it opens the hidden and
secret Doors of Nature in a man's self, and renders him capable of all
Discipline, and is the only Enemy to all Evil, and a Friend to all Virtue; The
Wise and Prudent in all Ages have accounted her their chief Friend and Guide;
by her Virtues they have overcome the inward Enemies of their Members:
ABSTINENCY also preventeth the Generation of all superfluous matter, whence
Diseases in the Body do proceed; she abateth the desires, because a small
matter will suffice a regular Appetite, resisting Pride, and cares not for
Estimation; she conquereth all her Enemies, and makes no noise; she beats ^o
Drums, nor discharges no Guns; she punishes ^ot the Body with Labor, nor
burdeneth the Mind with Care; she wearieth not the Life by Sea nor by Land, to
obtain that which will not stand her in stead; she will not admit of any
Controversies nor Lawsuits; she will not contend for much, because a little
supplies her Wants; she stands still, and is silent, and yet obtains all
things.

CHAP. III.
A Discourse of the several sorts of Flesh commonly Eaten.

THough I have before shown the inconveniences of the feeding upon Flesh (so
commonly and in such excess as is nowadays practiced) and rather recommended
the Lovers of Wisdom and Health to the more innocent use of Grains, Fruits and
Herbs, yet since there is no stemming the Tide of Popular Opinion and Custom,
and People will still gorge themselves with the Flesh of their Fellow-Animals,
I have thought fit here to give a particular account of each sort of Flesh,
that at least you may choose that which is most proper for your Constitution,
and least prejudicial to your Health.

Of Oxen and Cows, their Nature and Complexion.
Oxen and Cows are dignified with a Sanguine Melancholy Nature, a little
inclinable to the Phlegmatic; therefore much moisture is an Enemy to these
Creatures, in whom the four Humors are pretty well mixed, yet the Sanguine does
predominate. As they are of an indifferent equal Tem^erature, so they are
endued with harmless Properti^^ and innocent Inclinations: They are clean in
their Radixes, and therefore refuse all filthy Food, and the same is likewise
manifest by their sweet breathings, and the Dung that proceeds from them;
whereas on the contrary those Beasts and Creatures that are unclean in their
Root, do always desire and most rapinously feed on a proportionable unclean
Food, as Swine, Bears, Dogs, etc. which is further demonstrated by their
Shapes, Tones or Cries, (frightful and displeasing) as also in the fierceness
of their Spirits and cruel wrathful Natures, all such Creatures are highly
gratified with unclean Food, viz. Flesh, Blood, and the like.

But Cows and Oxen do afford many excellent sorts of Food, no Creature being
more useful or profitable unto Mankind, not only in laboring and dressing the
Earth, by which it becomes fruitful, but how many sorts of most excellent Food
are made of Milk? And so natural and proper, no Fruit that proceeds from any
Creature is of so great use. Milk in its own nature being so simple and
innocent, and having no manifest Quality that does too violently predominate,
but is endued with equality and concord, easy of Concoction, especially Raw,
as it comes from the Cow, it gently cleanses and frees the Passages from
Obstructions, which strong Fat Food does generate; it has a sympathetical Union
with the Stomach and natural Heat; it silently, and without making any
disturbance insinuates its Virtues and Nourishment into all parts of the Body.
Milk also being mixed with Flour; does make some of the most healthy and
wholsomest Food that can be eaten for all sorts of People and Ages, especially
Children, it being heretofore their almost only Food, boiled with some Flour
and a little Water, without any other Ingredients, which then in the Country
was called Pap, but of late Years, in and about the City, they call that Pap
which is made of Bread and Water, which is nothing near so good; and since the
frequent use of Spanish Fruits and Spices, the aforesaid simple wholesome Food
has much been laid aside, which is one cause why our Children in this Age are
so much troubled with Distempers in the Joints, viz. Rickets, and the like,
hardly known in former times.

Milk likewise altered and Manufactur'd (if I may call it so) by the good
House-Wives Art and Industry, yields many other sorts of good Food, as Cheese
and Butter, and many more innocent, as Milk-Pottage (which I especially
recommend) there being such an agreement in the Ingredients, viz. Milk, Water
and Oatmeal, being boiled together briskly, and not too long, as it not only
affords a good Nourishment, but opens the Passages, and is of a cleansing
healing Nature; and therefore those that do frequently use it, do seldom want a
good Appetite.

Cheese is a wholesome healthy Food, a great strengthener of the Stomach,
affording a strong firm Nourishment; and such People as eat much Bread and
Cheese, and do not want good Beer or Ale, are generally the strongest of men,
abler to endure Labor and Travel, than those that feed on Flesh; there is as
much difference between the one and the other, as there is between Horses that
are fed with Corn and Hay, and those that are fed with Grass: Most men being
mistaken in Nature, do believe that Flesh of all other sorts of Food affords
the greatest and strongest Nourishment, because it is full of matter and Juices;
the very same may be supposed of Grass, compared with Hay: But the Husbandman
will tell you, that those Cattle that feed on Grass are weak and faintish in
comparison of those that are fed with Hay and Corn; for the Grass contains too
much gross Moisture, which causes the Nourishment to be unfirm, whence does
proceed dull heavy Spirits, the Flesh and Fat being soft and greazy, which in
case of Labor, will waste, and such Cattle are apt to tire: But those that are
fed with dry Food, (whereby the gross Humidity and Phlegm is dried away, or
exhaled by the Sun and Elements) are strong and lively, of great Spirits, quick
and active, little Bellies and clean Limbs. The very same is to be understood
of the Food of Men, and if men could be as well satisfied as to their Minds
with eating Bread, Cheese, Butter, flour'd Milk, Gruels, Pottages, Herbs in
their Seasons, and the like, they would find by Experience how wonderfully such
things support Nature, beyond all the Flesh in the World; for most of that
matter which People suppose to be Nourishment in Flesh, is a gross Juice, which
turns to Putrefaction, as the gross phlegmy part of Grass does in Cattle.

Butter does afford a good Nourishment, but it ought not to be eaten in too
great quantity, for then it generates Choler, oils and furs the Passages, dulls
the edg of Appetite; but moderately taken, is of good use and healthy,
especially to such as are accustomed to it.

Of the Flesh of Oxen and Cows.
The Flesh of Oxen is to be preferred before that of Cows, it being naturally
clean and wholesome, if such Cattle be free from Diseases and Surfeits; it
generates a strong firm Nourishment, having a greater affinity with man's Nature
than with any other, and therefore more People love it, and will be longer
before they are cloyed therewith, than with any one particular sort whatsoever;
yet it is somewhat hard of Concoction, therefore ought to be eaten sparingly,
except by strong working People; it fills the Stomach, and for the most part
gives better satisfaction than any other: It ought not to be eaten until it be
well seasoned with Salt, or if eaten fresh, there ought to be good store of
Salt eaten with it, and boiled in plenty of Water, which will sweeten and
cleanse it from its grossness; it likewise ought to be salted as soon as it is
thoroughly cold, after it is killed; for the longer the Flesh is kept, the harder
it is to take Salt, because by keeping, the pure spirituous parts evaporate, and
then the Salt cannot incorporate it self with the Flesh; for it is with the pure
Spirits that it delights to join it self, and thereby preserves them from
Evaporation, and consequently keeps the Meat sweet and sound; and therefore
Meat so salted will eat much sweeter, and keep longer, and generate better
Blood and Nourishment, and is easier of Concoction.

If Cattle of any kind receive damage by driving, or any kind of Sickness
attend them, and they be killed before they have time to recover such Injuries,
all such Flesh is not only unwholsom, but it will not take Salt to keep as
others will; the Reason is this, because if the pure Spirits and Radical
Moisture be by any disorders, hurt or wounded, whether it be before they are
killed, or after, the Salt cannot incorporate therewith, as aforesaid, nor
purge out and destroy the humid gross parts in the Flesh, whence all
Putrefaction arises; whereas when the strong powerful and sweet Spirits in Salt
(which are the inward Life thereof) do join with and embrace the essential
spirituous parts, it does tie or hold the corruptive parts of the Flesh
captive, that they cannot proceed to Putrefaction, and for a season it will
remain as a fixed Body, till by length of time those pure Essential spirituous
parts, both in the Flesh and Salt, become either suffocated or evaporated
through the great store of gross humidity which Flesh does contain, tending
always to Putrefaction; and when any Flesh does begin to putrify or stink, a
second salting, nor any other Art, cannot recover it to its first state of
Sweetness; but if the second Salting be whilst the Putrefaction is but yet in
the Bud, and not too far gone, then such Flesh may continue a little longer --
In a word, If this sort of Flesh be free from the aforementioned Disorders,
and their natural Uncleanness, being seasonably seasoned with Salt, not keept
too long, and well prepared by the House-wife, and moderately eaten, it is as
sound and healthy Food for strong and working People, as any Flesh whatsoever,
none excepted.

Of Sheep their Complexions and Nature, and of their Flesh.
Sheep are Creatures of great use and benefit to the Sons of men; their Nature
and Complexion is Sanguine and Phlegmatic, with a little mixture of
Melancholy; but the Sanguine Nature does predominate over all the other
Qualities: They are dignified with a meek humble Nature, mild and friendly, and
wherein all the Properties and Elements do seem to stand in equal accord,
whence does proceed those harmless innocent Inclinations, hardly any Creature
in the World to be compared to them; they have as it were a glance of the
divine Light shining in them; for if Equality and Concord had not abounded in
them, our Savior Jesus Christ would not so often have compared good and holy
men unto them; but it was, no doubt, to show their Meekness, Innocence, and
desires of doing good: For this Creature is not only to be esteemed for their
Natural Virtues, but also for the manifold Benefits which they afford unto
mankind both living and dead.

The Flesh of Sheep, viz. Mutton, is of a clean simple Nature, of easier
Concoction than the Flesh of Oxen; it generates a good clean nourishment; their
Fat is the whitest of all Flesh, which proceeds from the equal temperament of
their Body and Spirits, and the predominancy of the sweet Quality, and because
the Spirits are pure and undefiled. For the white clear bright Gleam in every
Creature (be they what they will) does arise and proceed from the divine
Principle, which made all things, and is the essential Virtue and Power that
does sustain and radically dwell in every Creature, and all things in this
World, in each according to its Nature; and also according to what degree it is
in each Creature, they become of a more friendly gentle Nature, or the
contrary. For in what Creature soever this Virtue or Gleam of Light is
predominant, that Creature is of a most sweet Composition or Nature, be it
either Animal, Vegetable or Mineral, for of the pure white Color in all
things, the Root is the divine Principle, its Radix is clean: Therefore in
former Ages, when any would declare their Innocence, they clothed themselve in
white Garments, because it proceeded from the innocence in Nature: Also the
Saints and Prophets in several places of the Scriptures by way of Simile,
compare Whiteness with the divine Power and Virtue, being that the Saints and
Angels are said to be clothed in White, which was not spoken without a divine
understanding of the Nature of things, which I shall forbear to speak further
of in this place, though to the intelligent Reader it would be no unuseful
Digression. But to return to the present subject.

The Flesh of Sheep is made better or worse, according to the Accidents that do
attend them; no Flesh to be preferred before this, if they are free from
Surfeits and Diseases, which this Creature is much subject to, by reason of
their tender Nature; for all Creatures in whom the four Humors and Elements of
their Bodies and Spirits stand nearest Equality, are soonest wounded, if any
Violence be offered. For this Creature cannot endure any violent motion without
manifest prejudice; and little over-driving will put them into such Heats as
they cannot recover under a considerable time, and at last they will break out
with a Mainge or Scab; if they are folded a little too close, it will fret and
corrupt their Blood, give them the Scab, and hinder them from growing; over-wet
Weather will corrupt them, and cause them to Rot in moist low Grounds, and in
the best and highest Pasturage hinder them from proving so well as they would
otherwise; the very driving of Sheep and Lambs from the Market to the
Slaughter-Houses, especially in London, where they are much hurried by their
unmerciful drivers, and other Accidents that they meet with in the Streets,
will give them the Mainge or the Scab, were they to be turned back to their
Pastures.

Therefore there is required the greatest understanding and care to preserve
this Creature sound and free from these Disorders and Accidents which nothing
can do, but a tender gentle usage and government, which suits their Tempers,
and has unity with their Natures: Their Flesh is far better, and more healthy
in the Winter season than in the Summer, especially when the Summer proves Wet;
for as nothing more destroys and corrupts their Flesh more than wet Weather, so
in great Heats their tender Spirits on every Accident are apt to be Evaporated;
also they are apt to sweat much, whence proceeds a fainty Indisposition,
especially when the Sun and Year declines, the Grass being then more gross and
full of Phlegmatic Juices; therefore the Flesh of Sheep and Lambs ought to be
sparingly eaten all the Summer, especially the latter part thereof; for this
(and indeed most other sorts of) Flesh is best in the Winter and Spring, viz.
from December to June, or thereabouts; for cold Weather causes the natural
Heat to be much stronger, and also more Central, sharpens the Appetites of both
Men and Beasts, causes a good Digestion, because then Nature is able to make a
perfect separation of the Food, whence is generated good Blood and pure
Spirits, which renders the Flesh hard and firm; besides, the Food of most sorts
of Cattle is then dry, viz. Hay, which does always breed a better and firmer
nourishment than Grass or any green Food.

If Sheep be killed with any of the beforementioned Inconveniences upon them,
then their flesh thereby loses its pure sweetness and good Relish, becomes of
a gross dull heavy Nature and Operation, generates abundance of unfirm
Nourishment and bad Blood; for it too hastily slips out of the Stomach into the
Bowels, and has many evil Consequences, causing Gripings, and grievous Pains in
the Bowels: Few do imagine the Mischiefs that do arise from the frequent eating
of bad Flesh.

The Marks to know whether Flesh be good after its killed, are first, That the
Flesh look with a brisk white color, and the lean of it with a lively bright
Red, not with a fading fainty whiteness, nor with a dull dusky red; for these
last colors show that the Creature was hurt and the Spirits wounded before it
was killed, or the flesh kept too long after 'twas killed. Another Mark to know
whether the Mutton be perfectly good in every degree, is when its prepared,
either boiled or roasted, viz. if when prepared it does retain its perfect
brisk lively color both White and Red, being plump or swelled, and of a pure
sweet delightful Taste, as also by its sending forth a fragrant and inviting
scent or smell, which of all Flesh, good Mutton yields the best. These are
essential Rules to know the goodness or badness of Flesh, if the House-wife do
perform her part in observing such Order as is both natural and proper, to be
used in the preparation of Flesh, which I have sufficiently declared from the
Root, in another place.

Mutton is also made better or worse by the goodness or badness of the Ground
it feeds on; the best and sweetest is that of the smaller Sheep that are fed on
high Hills and Pastures, where the Grass is sweeter and freer from gross Juices
than lower grounds; and as Sheep delight most in dry places, as best suiting to
their Natures, so they are there forced to labor, viz. to continue feeding
longer, which motion does free the Body and pure Spirits from that gross
matter, which such as feed in low Pastures, where Grass is more plentiful, are
subject to; and also they are the longer before they be fat. For these and the
like Reasons, those small Sheep (if free from other disorders, which they are
not so subject to as great fat Sheep are) do always eat much sweeter and
pleasanter than great Mutton bred on low rich Grounds: And therefore there is
no reason why Citizens and the rich People should so much desire large great
Mutton, but only for Pride and State, counting it a kind of Dishonor to have
small Meat seen at their Table, though the same is not only sweeter to the
Palate, but more wholesome, as being easier digested, and generating better
Blood, and is far more healthy to all sorts of People, especially for Children,
and People that live soft lives, which for the most part eat the fattest and
largest Mutton, and other rich Food and cordial Drinks, and for that very cause
are more unhealthy than the meaner sort of People.

Of LAMB.
The Flesh of Lamb is much of the same Nature with Mutton, being an Excellent
Food, generating a wholesome clean Nourishment, as being easy of Concoction,
friendly to all Constitutions and Ages, and much better than Veal, if they be
not killed too young; 1st. Because they are clean in their own Natures; 2dly,
They have the advantage of sucking and running with their Dams, not being
altogether fed with Milk, but also on Grass and Hay, according to the season of
the year, which Calves for the most part are hindered from, which renders their
Flesh the more unwholsom. There is no flesh either more healthy or grateful
than Lamb, if free from Surfeits and other disorders, but their natures and
spirits are so tender, that they cannot endure driving, or the like; therefore
Lambs that come from remote parts to great Cities, are most of them in one
degree or other surfeited, or if they come thither free, yet such is their bad
usage between the Market and the Butchers Shop, that it is enough to spoil them,
and make their Flesh unwholsom. Also, when this sort of flesh is eaten, the
weather is for the most part Hot, which does quickly wound their tender
Spirits, and cause a general faintness, which renders their flesh soft and
greasy, generating a very unfirm Nourishment, and filling the whole Body full
of Venomous Juices, that give a further occasion for Fluxes and Fevers to reign
in August, September and October, in which time Lamb is much eaten.

But if these Creatures are killed off the Common without being prejudiced by
driving, or otherwise hurried, it is not only the sweetest, but may be eaten
with as little danger as any. Therefore there ought to be care and
understanding used in managing them; for if the Spirit in any thing be wounded
or suffocated, the Body presently becomes heavy, dull, flat, and like a lump of
Earth, having neither its true natural sweetness, smell nor taste, but is dull
on the Palate, heavy on the Stomach, affording no proper Nourishment, neither
to the Body nor Spirits; its venoms do by simile beget and awaken their
Likenesses, from whence proceeds Inequality and Discord, which is the Root of
most Diseases, and even Death it self; for every sort of Meat and Drink, be it
clean or unclean, does by a natural and simpathetical operation incorporate its
self with its likeness in the Body, and powerfully strengthen it, whence arise
both concord and discord, sickness and health; as we see in Wine, in which the
Spirit is predominant, does not the drinking of it presently awaken our
Spirits, and make them predominate over all other Qualities, and changes the
Inclinations, Dispositions and Intentions, during the time of its operation?
but afterward it leaves a man with sowrer Spirits than it found him, both
because the Spirits of the Wine are not only evaporated, but have caused the
natural Spirits to evaporate also by its simpathetical awakening of them, and
as it were calling of them out of their several Centers; the very same is to be
understood in all sorts of Food, of whatsoever Nature or Quality it is: All
which is worthy the consideration of all Understanding People.

Of the Flesh of Calves or Veal.
The Flesh of Veal is of a clean Nature, easy of Concoction, affording good
Nourishment, fit both for healthy and sick People, if such may be allowed to
eat flesh, which to me seems somewhat improper, especially when in their time
of Health they made flesh their chief Food, it being probable that the original
of the Disease was occasioned by the eating of much flesh, which is one reason
why so many People in England, when sick, their Stomachs loath Flesh more than
any other food; for that food which a man does eat most of when in health, that
very same, when sick he will loath, especially when he feeds most on Flesh.

But if this sort of flesh be eaten too young, as too many do, at twelve or
eighteen days old, then it is not so wholesome; for it being of a soft, slimy and
phlegmatic Nature, it generates an unfirm Nourishment, and it quickly slips
out of the Stomach into the Bowels, and too often violently loosens the Belly,
and causes Griping Pains, especially in fat and phlegmatic People, and
likewise in young Children. That Veal is best, that is five or six Weeks old,
and which sucks its own Dam, and does run with her two or three days in a Week;
for no flesh is so good and free from gross phlegmatic matter as those
Creatures that have the benefit of Motion in the open Air: Indeed such will not
fat so soon as others that are kept up close, yet the one is much firmer and
harder than the other, and affords a firmer and harder nourishment; for that
which is penned up and kept from the benefit of Motion and Air, great part of
the food turns into a kind of phlegmy substance, especially in Calves, whose
Food is all of a moist Nature. What is the reason that most Veal is so unfirm
and like a Jelly, and dissolves and melts away like Grease? It is because this
is a tender Creature, and will not admit of driving, their Spirits being so
weak and Flesh so soft, by reason (as is abovesaid) of their moist food, that
they quickly tire, and their Flesh will alter from a white to a red color,
which all Veal naturally inclines to, though Milk is a cleanly and wholesome Food,
nevertheless all Creatures that live wholly on it, without the mixture of other
things of a firmer substance, as the flower of Corn, or the like, their flesh
and spirits are but weak, especially when such Creatures shall be hindered from
motion, then their flesh becomes of a gross soft and phlegmatic nature and
operation, and the frequent eating of such flesh proves too often of a bad
consequence, especially to all cold, phleg matick, gross People, who have
weaker heats; but to others, who have strong and hot Constitutions, this sort
of flesh, if not eaten to excess, agrees well with them, and is wholesome. Indeed
every one ought to know their own Constitutions, by which they shall be able to
distinguish between those things that are proper for them, and their
contraries; and he that is ignorant of this, is always subject to err, and to
lay heavier burdens on Nature than she can bear, whence does proceed so many
Diseases and Disorders, which afflicts some almost all their days.

Of the Flesh of Swine, and their Nature and Complexion.
Swine are under the dominion of Saturn and Mars, and are of Complexion
Melancholy and Choleric; their predominant Quality stands in the fierce,
savage and unclean Nature, as their shapes, forms, cries and inclinations do
abundantly manifest, by reason of which they would be frightful to behold, if
they were not made familiar to us.

The Ancient Wise Men accounted them Unclean Creatures of Prey, destructive to
the Creation, neither profitable living nor dead, and did also esteem their
Flesh to be of a gross fulsom and unclean Nature, subject to Putrefaction,
their Fat is of a soft greasy nature: The Uncleanness of this Creature does
further appear, if you burn their Fat, it does send forth a gross fulsome
smell; also its flame is not clear and bright, as the flame of other Flesh, but
of a dimmish Brimstone color, which does arise from the dark Poisons in
nature, as is further manifest in Charcoal, and also in Brandy, and other
distilled Liquours, when the sweet Oil or Balsamic Body, with the pure subtle
Spirits, are by any violence suffocated and destroyed, then the dark original
Forms of Nature appear; such things being burned, the flame is not bright and
clear, but of a duskish dim and Brimstone color, as I have particularly shown
in another place, where I treat of the nature of Brandy.

But in England the Flesh of Swine is of great use, but not wholesome to be eaten
fresh, especially in August, September or October, nor indeed in any hot
Season; this Flesh, where it is frequently eaten, does generate a gross
Nourishment; but the way that English People use for ordering it, makes it much
better than otherwise it would be. That Bacon and Pork which is fed with Corn
and Acorns, and have their liberty to run, is much sweeter and wholsomer,
easier of digestion, and breeds better Blood than that which is shut up in the
Hog-sties, such Bacon for want of Motion becomes of a more gross phlegmatic
Nature, insomuch that the House-wife is put to all her shifts to make it take
Salt; for where in any thing the Phlegm does predominate, the pure Spirits are
weak, and as it were, fainty and dull; and when this does happen in flesh, as
often it does, such flesh will not take Salt, but by halves; where the Spirit
is weak, the Salt cannot penetrate nor incorporate; for Salt cannot make the
dead body living; but such Bacon as is fed with Corn, and not over-fat,
especially if they have egress and regress, such will take Salt greedily,
because it is lively, brisk and full of spirits, which are a pleasant
habitation for the spirit of the Salt to incorporate its self: This sort is to
be preferred before all others. Also, all Swine ought to be killed in cold
weather; and after it is well salted, it ought to be rusted a convenient time
with the smoke of Woodfire or Straw, which will make it look of a brisk lively
Red Color, which does much correct that gross Quality that is contained in
their flesh: And although Swine naturally are the uncleannest of all Creatures
that are so much eaten, nevertheless if they be fed with Corn, and are singed,
and killed in the pro perest Season, then well Salted, and rusted a
considerable time, they are made thereby a firmer and wholsomer food than
several other sorts of clean flesh that is killed in hot seasons, and eaten
fresh; and many People in Summer time had better eat Bacon that is killed in
Winter and well ordered, than to eat fresh Meat, especially those that live in
Cities, by reason most Cattle receive prejudice by long driving, and other
accidents. But small Bacon, or Pork killed in Summer, or in a hot season, is of
ill consequence, as to Health; for then the fat is so gross and full of phlegmy
matter, that it will not take salt as it ought; besides, it obstructs Nature,
and causes Fluxes, and an internal Fever: Those that do accustom themselves to
the frequent eating of Bacon, it does generate a gross strong Nourishment, and
dull and heavy Spirits; therefore such People are not so brisk and airy, but
duller of Apprehension than others that eat more airy and thinner food; for
every sort of Food does by a simpathetical Operation strengthen and awaken its
Likeness: Therefore it was that the most illuminated Prophet Moses did prohibit
the Children of Israel from eating this sort of flesh, because the humane
Nature should not be made more Bestial, Man being the Image and Likeness of all
things, a little World out of the great in all particulars, which was in all
Ages the chief reason why the Wise Men and Prophets made distinctions and
separations in Meats, Drinks, Exercises and Communication, for they saw the
inconveniences and dangers that all such things brought on man; but in this
Dark, Gluttonous and Drunken Age there is no regard had to such things, every
man does imagine himself to have greater Understanding than the Ancients and
Prophets; so that there is little or no distinction made, accounting all things
(as it were) of a like nature and operation, whence does proceed innumerable
Disorders and Diseases; for the total Preservation of man's Health, both of Body
and Mind, does consist in the Quantity and Qality of Meats, Drinks, Exercises,
Communications, Customs, and the good or ill Properties of Food; all things
have a secret Power in themselves to alter and change Nature, either for better
or worse, or to Virtue or Vice, according to the Natures and Degrees either of
Evil or Good in each thing.

Of the Flesh of Fowls.
There are various sorts of Fowls, most of which men eat, some Wild, others
Tame, of the two the Wild are the wholsomest for Food, their Nature is more
airy and cleaner, and of a dryer substance, affording a better and firmer
Nourishment, better Blood and purer Spirits than the Tame; the cause of this is
the Cleanness of their Food, great Motion, and their continual being in the
open pure Air; next, in Goodness to these, are those Fowls that have free
Egress and Regress, and are chiefly fed with Corn, such do also afford a good
clean Nourishment: But all such Fowls that are kept up and fatted, and crambed
in Coops, being hindered both from Action and Motion, their Flesh is of a
grosser substance than the former, not so wholesome, hard of Concoction, of a
stronger Taste and Smell, generates a thick gross Nourishment, as indeed all
other Creatures that are fed or made fat after that manner, are much the
Unwholsomer, not being so Healthy, if frequently eaten, as those Creatures that
are at their own Liberty; for Motion and Action are absolutely necessary for to
preserve Nature from Diseases, and other evils, not only in Men, but also in
all other things; for it Purges and cleanses the Body from all such superfluous
matter which is contracted by Meats and Drinks, and other Accidents that happen
to most Creatures; it causes the Blood to have its free Circulation, and
generates pure brisk lively Spirits, as daily Experience does teach: Therefore
all such unnatural ways and inventions of fatting any Creature after such a
manner ought not to be, if People have regard to their Health: For all sorts of
Flesh is in its own nature not only more Unclean, but it is of a grosser
substance, affording more matter for the generation of Diseases, than either
Herbs, Fruits or Grains; neither is there any Art found whereby to exhale or
destroy the gross Phlegmatic part of Flesh, as there is in Fruits and Grains:
Therefore Flesh will sooner fall into Putrefaction than other things, whose
Humidity is exhaled by the virtue and power of the Sun and Elements. It being a
general mistake, for to imagine that those Fowls, and other Creatures, that are
hastily fatted by being penned up close, and having superfluity of Food, should
have the best and most Nourishment: Indeed they are fuller of gross Juices and
Matter, but good Nonrishment and pure Spirits and Blood, do not proceed from
the gross Phlegmatic body in any Creature, but from the lively spirituous
Parts; and the more gross and phlegmy any Body is, the fewer and duller are the
Spirits of that thing; if this were not so, then Horses fed with Grass would be
stronger and livelier than those that are fed with Hay and Corn. Are not all
Creatures, when their Bodies are fraighted with much matter, disabled thereby
to go through with their Labor or Exercise, their Spirits quickly evaporated
or spent, and soon out of Breath, faint and weak? Which comes to pass through
the super-abounding phlegmy matter, which suffocates the Spirits and stops the
Passages, weakening the natural Heat and Action of the Stomach. Therefore both
Men, and all other Creatures, that do feed on Food that is of a dry Nature and
Substance, the gross Phlegm being destroyed, as in Corn, Hay, Fruits, and many
other things, and are inclined rather to Leanness than fullness, are not only
stronger, and abler to endure Labor, but they have far greater and more Lively
Spirits, are of quicker Apprehensions, and fitter for Exercises both of the
Body and Mind, which does also further appear in all such Flesh that is so
fatted, it is not so sweet, nor will it so readily take Salt, nor keep so long
without falling into Putrefaction: Likewise, the fat of all such flesh, when
salted, will in a little time waste and consume the phlegmy gross part, which
is so strong, that the pure essential spirituous parts thereof are destroyed;
whereas the very same Creatures being fed with Corn or dry Food, having their
Egress and Regress in the open Air, being killed in their season and Salted,
will continue much longer than the former, being much wholsomer and more
pleasant, breeding good N^urishment, better Blood and Spirits.

CHAP. IV.
The Proper and most Natural way of Boiling, Roasting, Frying, Baking, etc. of
Flesh and other Food.

THE proper and natural way to Boil Flesh and other Food, that the Spirits and
Life of it may be preserved, is, fiirst, To put your Flesh into a Pot or Vessel
that is large, and can hold good store of Water: For this Element of Water
being of it self sweet and pleasant, does cleanse and sweeten all things,
especially Flesh, which is full of gross matter; but you are to note, that your
Flesh is not to be put into your Pot or Vessel unless it first Boil; for if it
lie in the Water and receives Heat but Gradually, it dulls and makes flat the
spirituous part thereof: Likewise when your Flesh is put into your Vessel, let
your fire be increased that it may not lie long in the Water before it boil,
and as soon as it boyls, you are to uncover your Vessel, and to keep it boiling
quick without intermission till it is ready for eating: The Pot or Vessel is
not to be Covered any time of the boiling, for thereby the sweet and refreshing
Influences of the Air are hindered that they cannot have their free Egress and
Regress, which does as it were suffocate and destroy the pure and Volatile
Spirits in the food: for the Air is the Life and preserver of the Spirit, and
the Spirit is also the Life and preserver of the Balsamic Body in every thing;
and in what thing soever the Spirits suffer violence, the sweet Body and Oil
turns Sower, as is most manifest in all fermented Liquors, if such Liquors be
exposed to the open Air, the Spirits will evaporate, and then the sweet Body
turns Sower, and becomes of a heavy dull Nature and Operation; but in the
preparation of all gross phlegmy Bodies, the free Influences of the Air keep
the Spirit Living till such Bodies are digested and the Spirits set at Liberty,
then if such Preparations or Digestions be continued, the spirituous parts will
also either become suffocated or evaporated, according to the Nature of the
thing, as in making and preparing of Hay, the gross phlegmatic Body in Grass
could not be digested or exhibited but by virtue and power of the Sun and Air;
but when they have destroyed the gross Humidity and Phlegm, if the preparation
and making of it be continued, that is, the Hay continued in the Sun and Air,
it will exhale, and cause the spirituous part to evaporate also. The very same
or like is to be understood in the preparations of Food; for these fiery
sulpherous Fumes and Vapors which proceed out of these Vessels all the time of
the Boiling, being forced back and kept in, because gradually more intense and
raging, and because of the want of the free Influences of the Air, the pure
Spirits and Balsamic Body are wounded, which does destroy the true Natural
Color with the pure Smell and Taste; also, it makes it lumpish, close, heavy,
dull and gross on the Palate; this kind of preparation is likewise heavy, and
hard of digestion in the Stomach, and generates thick Blood and gross
Nourishment, from whence proceeds dull indispositions, with Fumes flying into
the Head: For the digestive Faculty and true Virtue of all sorts of Food, does
consist in the Spirituous parts, and if any Violence be done to them in the
Preparation, then such Food becomes dull and half dead; for those Fumes and
Vapors that Pots and Vessels send forth, are of a sulpherous and poisonous
Nature, as you may perceive if you take up any sort of Food, when boiled, and
presently whilst it is hot cover it close, which will force those fiery Fumes
back, insomuch that the re-entring the Food, destroys and suffocates the pure
Spirits; therefore all such Food will not only be heavy, but it will have a
dull gross Taste and Smell, very unpleasant both to the Palate, and strong of
Concoction; the truth of this every one knows, if they would be so wise as to
take notice of it; for those sulpherous fumes that Food sends forth, as also
the Vessels, is altogether of a contrary nature to the Heat and genuine Virtue
of the Food, as you also may perceive so soon as the Food is prepared and taken
from the Fire, this fiery Heat will of its own accord evaporate and separate it
self from the Food; it dwells no longer therewith than it is forced by the
continuation of the Fire; it has no natural Simile with the Food; therefore it
will not incorporate its self with it, and nothing is more unnatural than to
eat and drink any kind of Food whilst those fiery Steems and Fumes be in it;
for it swells the Body and generates Wind, sends Fumes and Vapors into the
Head; it also infects the Blood with a hot sharp Humor; but this unnatural
Heat is made by custom the more friendly, as you may perceive, if you give Dogs
or any other Creature Pottage, or the like, whilst they are Hot, will cause a
Mange in their Blood: The very same operation it has in men, but not so
violent, because of the continual use of such things. In this particular I
shall be blamed by many; For say they, I have found by Experience that cold
Food will not agree with my Stomach, neither will it satisfy my Appetite. This
may be true; yet nevertheless this does not make it Healthful nor Wholesome; for
if you use your self and Stomach to the frequent eating and drinking of
Physical things, your Stomach will long after them, and will not be satisfied
without them. One Example we have amongst others in taking of Tobacco, which at
first is most unpleasant and loathsome, but through Custom, and by degrees, it
has awakened its Simile in the Elements of the Body, and made that Quality
strong, which at the first taking of it was weak, or lay as it were hid under
the Qualities that did predominate; therefore at the first taking of such
poisonous or physical things, they generally disorder People, but when (as it
is mentioned before) the continual use has made this weak Quality strong, then
it oft-times proves as great a difficulty to Refrain it, as it was to make it
Friendly at the first taking, or rather more. For in Men is contained the true
Nature of all things, only one Property does predominate and is stronger than
the other, which Quality has the chief dominion in the government of Life:
Therefore there is a possibility in the Humane Nature to alter or change
himself for the better or worse, that is, through Use and Custom of Meats,
Drinks, Exercises, and Communications, viz. to make that Quality that in the
Radix was weak to become strong, and on the contrary, that which was strong,
weak, so great is the power of Custom, and the continual use of things; for
every thing, be it what it will, has a secret power in its self to awaken its
Simile, both in the Evil and also in the Good. Likewise there ought to be a
great care taken that the Food be not over nor under prepared, of the two, it
had better be a little under; for as soon as the gross Phlegmatic Body in the
Food is digested, the pure spirituous parts become Volatile; and then if the
Preparations be continued, they evaporate, and go backward toward the Center
of Saturn, and so loses its pure Color, Smell and Taste, and becomes of a
heavy dull Quality, and especially if the Vessel be close covered; for so soon
as the Egress and Regress of the Air is hindered, immediately the Spirits suffer
Violence. For the pure essential Spirits, which dwell in the sweet Oil, whence
the Fire has its bright, shining, pleasant and friendly Quality, will not
endure those violent raging Fumes and Vapors, their Nature being understood by
their furious Motion; and if those fiery Fumes be by the force of covering the
Vessel kept in, then they become ten-fold more Terrible and Fierce, as you may
perceive when any Vessel is boiling, if you uncover it, the Steems fly out like
a clap of Thunder; indeed all such Fumes and Vapors are of a dark fiery Nature
and Operation; for being kept in by force, they seek out their Center, and do
by way of Simile incorporate themselves with their like spirits in the Food, or
whatever else it be; so that those fiery sulpherous dark Spirits and Fumes
become stronger and more powerful in their operation; for they being of a
Saturnine and Martial Nature, the nature of Saturn is to contract, and very
vigorously draw and enclose the Spirit, which Mars cannot endure, and the more
Saturn contracteth, the more furious and raging Mars becomes, (as you may
perceive by the fiery quick furious Motion such sulpherous Fumes have, when you
open such Vessels that do boil) which do wound the pure spirituous parts, and
the Balsamic Body becomes wounded and sick, more especially if the preparation
of such Food be continued too long; For so soon as the gross Body or phlegmy
Matter in Food is in part digested, then presently the spirituous parts appear
externally, which did not only lie hid, but also the Body of the Phlegm, before
the preparation, did keep the Spirits from Evaporation, which all Corporeal
Bodies do; for the Body is the House of the Spirits. Therefore great Care ought
to be taken in all preparation of Food, both for Man and Beast; and this is to
be understood, that the pure Spirituous Parts and Balsamic Body cannot be
preserved in the preparation of any Food, neither for Man or Beast, except that
most friendly Element the Air has its free Influences, because it is the Life,
and gives the Power and Virtue to the Spirit: Also, this is to be minded, that
when your gross Body in the Food is by your preparation digested, whether it be
by the heat of the Sun, or by the common Fire, then ought you to proceed no
further, nor continue your Preparation no longer; for when the pure Spirituous
Part becomes Volatile, the same Air which did keep and preserve the Spirit from
Suffocation in the Preparation, will now cause it to evaporate, which every
Country Husbandman knows in the making and preparing of his Hay, which neither
the House-wife does understand nor consider in her Preparations of her Food,
nor the Physicians in the Preparations of their Physic; these things are of
greater Consequence as to Health, than most do imagine. I do not desire any to
give Credit to me, but I would have them so Noble as to Try whether it be so or
not, Health being the best Treasure in this World, and all those that want it,
do esteem and desire it more than any other thing; though few do take Right
Measures, when they enjoy it, to continue it.

Thus much for the Right and most Natural Way of preparing Food by Boiling; and
whosoever shall observe the before mentioned Rules and Observations, shall find
great Benefit and Pleasure; The very same Rules ought to be observed in the
Preparation of All Pottages, green Herbs and Pulses, except dry-Pulses which
will admit of a slower and more gentle Fire than the Green.

Of Roasting of Flesh.
The Roasting of flesh is a good commendable way of Preparation, and is rather
sweeter than Boiling, it affords a good dry firm Nourishment, but it is
somewhat harder of Concoction, but very sweet and pleasant by reason that the
friendly influences of the Air has its Free Egress and regress, not being any
ways enclosed, so that the pure spirituous parts are kept living, which do
render it brisk and lively.

There are two things to be observed in the flesh you Roast: 1st. That you have
your flesh (if Beef) as soon as it is thoroughly cold, and then to give it some
Salt, and to keep it in a cool place a day or two; for if you salt it much, the
Salt being of a fiery hot nature, when the flesh comes to the fire, it does (as
it were) scorch or burn it, destroys the Spirits and sweet Oil, insomuch that
it becomes in its nature and operation hot and unpleasant, causing great thirst
in the Eater: In Roasting it is also to be considered, that you have a good
clear strong and equal fire, and that your flesh be placed at a convenient
distance, not too near, because it will burn or scorch, and so harden the
outside, that the Heat shall not be able to penetrate into the middle thereof,
so that the outside will be too much, and the in side too little; neither is
your flesh to be too far off; for then it flattens the Spirits, such flesh
loses its pure sweetness, with its color and fragrant smell, being dull on
the Palate and heavy on the Stomach, in comparison of that which is placed at
a convenient distance, having a continued brisk fire.

The next thing that you ought to observe, is, That it be neither over nor
under done, but of the two, it is better that it be under-done; the point of
time when the Preparation is at the hight, is difficult, and it can be no other
way known but by its color, smell and taste, which by a little Custom every
House-Wife may understand; for that Palate that is used to eat and drink
things well and properly prepared, can presently distinguish the contrary; and
so on the other side, those that do accustom themselves to either Foods of
Drinks ill prepared, cannot distinguish the good from the evil, or the right
from the wrong: The same is in the sense of smelling, as all such that do use
to kill Beasts, and to be much in Slaughter-Houses amongst the dead Carcasses,
the terrible Fumes and stupefied Stinks are hardly smelled or perceived by
them; the same is to be understood of Tallow-Chandlers and other stinking
Trades; for every particular thing has power to strengthen and awaken its
simile; therefore there are but few that have their perfect Taste or Smell,
only those that do accustom themselves to the eating and drinking such things
as are well prepared, their Pallates are made the more perfect thereby: But of
all the ways of Preparing Flesh, boiling is the easiest, if the Rules be
followed set down in the foregoing Paragraph.

Of the Baking of Flesh
This Preparation is neither so wholesome nor healthful as either Boiling or
Roasting, for these following Reasons:

First, Most sorts of Food that are baked, are deprived both of the Element of
Water, and also of the Air, which are not only the Purgers and Cleansers of all
Food, but the support and life of the Spirit; 2dly. The Air in Ovens becomes
sulpherous and deadly, by reason of the stopping of it, that the reviving and
refreshing Influences of this Element, has not its free egress and regress, so
that the pure spirituous parts become, as it were suffocated. Nor can such
flesh be supplied with convenient quantities of Water, which in all
preparations of flesh is a great cleanser and upholder of the Spirits, so that
it boyls in its own gross Humidity, which all flesh does plentifully afford.
Also, the heat of Ovens is fiercer and more sulpherous than the heat of other
Fires, where the Air has its Influences; the Air also being confined, is of a
deadly poisonous nature and operation; it also destroys the natural Color.
Therefore flesh baked does no ways look like that which is boiled or roasted;
besides, it is of a strong fulsom Taste in comparison of the former, and a less
quantity will cloy and fill the Stomach, more especially if such flesh shall be
eaten hot, which renders it much more wholesome than cold; for those sulpherous
Fumes and Vapors that do proceed from baked Food are much more hurtful to the
Health than that which is either boiled or roasted; for there are but few
Vessels in which Food is boiled that are or can be kept so close as Ovens. This
way of Preparation is chiefly followed in Summer, especially in August,
September, and October, the Air in this season being sulpherous and fainty, and
the Weather hot, the making of fire in their houses is troublesome, therefore
baking saves them the labor. Now at these seasons of the year flesh is
unwholesom, and very apt to burden Nature, and to bring Diseases, as I have
discoursed in another place, the frequent use of baked flesh in this season,
with other evil circumstances which do then concur, does beget diverse
Obstructions, and generates an unfirm Nourishment, because most sorts of flesh
at this time are more subject to Putrefaction than any other, whence so many
Fevers, Fluxes, Gripings of the Bowels, and other Diseases do very frequently
reign; for Flesh in its best Condition is full of gross Juices and matter for
Putrefaction, by reason of the great store of Phlegm and Humidity; therefore it
ought to be helped as much as can be in the Preparation, which never can be well
done, except there be plenty of the Element of Water, and the free egress and
regress of the Air; for those Elements have a living Power in them, by which
they do qualify and mix with it, purging and cleanfing that raw phlegmy Juice
or matter, which all Flesh does afford. Also, where these two Elements have
their free operation in the preparation of all sorts of Food, they preserve not
only the pure Spirits, but also the sweet Balsamic Body from being suffocated
or destroyed, maintaining the natural Color, with the Smell and Taste, which
makes all such Food lively and brisk, easy of Concoction, generating a far
better Nourishment than any kind of baked Meat.

Of Stewing of Flesh.
This kind of Preparation of Flesh is much of the same nature with the former;
for it has neither benefit of the Air, nor a convenient quantity of Water; in
this and all other Preparations of Food, where these two Elements are hindered
from having their free influences and operation, (as is mentioned before)
neither Fesh nor any other Food can be well prepared; for the radical and pure
Spirits (where these two Elements are penned up from having their influences)
cannot subsist, neither will the fire burn, but presently the pure Spirits and
Oil in the Wood, or other things, becomes suffocated; for the Water and Air are
the true Life and Power of every Being; whence it comes to pass in all
Preparations, both of Food and Physic, where these two Elements have not their
free influences and operations, the pure Spirits become suffocated, and the
sweet Oil is turned sower, and becomes of a stinking Quality, which is the
cause all sorts of Food so prepared become strong in scent and also in Taste,
and it loses its natural Color; if (as I have said) the pure Spirits and
Balsamic Body be hurt, then there follows presently an alteration, and the
original Quality of the dark Brimstone Spirit of Saturn and Mars gets the
dominion, which was, as it were, hid before; but so soon as the true Life is
wounded, this Crude Fire becomes many degrees stronger than before, as is seen
in Charcoal, and in many other things; for these pure Spirits and Oily Body,
whence the true Light has its bright shining Quality, are the Qualifiers or
Moderators of this dark fierce fire, as I have elsewhere largely discoursed of,
touching the Nature of Brandy; of this all House-Wives ought to take notice;
for if the pure Spirits and sweet Body be not preserved in the Preparations of
Food, such Food is rather a Death to the Body, and also to the Spirits, than
Life: The greatest Wisdom in all Preparations is to preserve the pure Spirits
and sweet Body from being either suffocated or evaporated, and yet at the same
time to digest and open the Body; for the Crude matter in all Food must be
digested, or else the pure Spirits cannot be set at Liberty, or freed from the
phlegmy matter; which pure Spirits and sweet Body does tincture the Food, as we
see when any Food is properly prepared, which comes to pass through the
Preparation, it digests the gross Crude parts, and then presently the true
Spirits appear in their friendly forms, which before the Preparation were
captivated or hid by the gross Phlegmy Body, the same is done in Malt, but in a
higher degree.

Most certain it is, that the pure Spirits and Balsamic Body cannot be
supported and continued without the help of the Air and Water; therefore it is
a gross Mistake and Error amongst most House-Wives, to think that by Covering
the Vessels, wherein Food is prepared, to preserve the Spirituous parts;
thereby imagining, that if such Vessels be open, that the Spirits will
evaporate, which never happens till the gross Body in the Food be digested, and
the Food be sufficiently Prepared, which does (as is said before) set the
Spirituous parts at Liberty, that they become Volatile; and then if the
Preparation be continued, they will evaporate, but not before; for in the
Preparation, the Elements of Air and Water having their free Influences, keep
the Spirits and Oily Body living; and if these two Elements be Prevented, then
the fiery sulpherous Fumes become so Raging that they seek out their Center,
and incorporate themseves with the gross humid part of the Food, so that they
greedily devour and suffocate the pure Life and sweet Oil; the very same is to
be understood in all Physical Preparations.

The Observation and true Knowledge of these things are very material, as to the
preserving of Health; but first they must be understood in a man's self; for
before a man can essentially know any thing, the Cognoscible, and the knowledge
thereof must be manifested in himself, or else it is impossible for any one to
know any thing Truly. Whatsoever may be known or understood of God and Nature,
is essentially in man, or else he could not be called the Image of his Creator:
Therefore every one ought to turn the Eye of their Understanding inward, and
diligently search themselves; which Study is Preferrable to all other things.

Of Fried Flesh.
The Frying of Flesh and other Food in Pans, is a Preparation much in use in
England, but not so good or wholesome as either Boiling, Roasting or Broyling:
The goodness of all Food does arise and proceed from the Essential Spirits and
Balsamic Body, which is the true Life and Virtue of every thing; and if these
essential Virtues do not suffer violence in the Preparation, then such Food
will have a most pleasant Smell, a brisk lively Taste, very delightful to the
Palate; also, it retains its natural Color, according to that color that
was predominant in the Radix of that thing, be it either White, Green, or
whatsoever else, which can no way be maintained in the Food, but by the benefit
and help of the Water, and the pure influences of the Air: Where the operation
and influences of these two Elements are hindered, the pure Spirits do suffer
Violence, which alters and changes both the color, smell and taste, then it
has a strong and odious scent, and its taste is also more unpleasing than the
former, and the Stomach does not so eagerly desire it: Likewise, its true
Color is lost, or in some degree destroyed, as is most manifest by all Fried
Flesh, it does send forth a strong fulsom smell in comparison of either Boiled
or Roasted; its Taste is stronger, and its natural Color is changed by reason
the pure Spirits and sweet Body are (as it were) suffocated by that fiery harsh
heat the Pan does contain; this Heat is more poisonous than the common heat of
fire, which is caused by the Metal, whether it be Brass or Iron; for the Fire
does not only awaken the poisonous Nature that such Metal does contain, but the
present Quality or oily Body in the Fire (whence it has its bright shining
friendly Quality) is suffocated; therefore all such Heat that proceeds from
Pans is of a harsh fierce nature and operation: The truth of this is further
manifested by those that shall be Burned or scalded by such Pans, which is more
poisonous, and the Flesh is harder to be Cured than what is burned by common
Fire, and often proves more dangerous; the very same matter does cause any kind
of Food to have such a strong smell; for in all Preparations that cause the
smell to become strong, it is a sure sign that some Violence is done to the
pure Spirits and Balsamic Body, which does awaken the Center of the dark
wrathful Nature: The very same is to be understood in all other things; and
that is the reason why Fried, Baked and Stewed Food does send forth a stronger
and fulsomer scent than other Preparations; and all such Food will sooner cloy
and dull both Palate and Stomach, except in some few, whose Natures and
Stomachs have a Simile with such Food: It is also to be noted, that the Fat
which is used in Frying, that lies or runs between the thing Fried and the Pan,
is by this sulpherous Heat, and the want of the free Influences of Air, and the
benefit of a convenient quantity of Water, turned into a stinking Oil, which
does neither retain its Color, Smell nor Taste, but is of a contrary Nature to
what it was when it was put into the Pan. For these Reasons all Fried Food is
of a stronger fulsomer Nature than either Boiled, Roasted or Broyled Meat,
harder of Concoction, and does cloy the Stomach: Therefore all House-Wives and
others that do prepare Food, if they regard the Health of the Body, and true
pleasure of the Palate, ought to understand the possibility of Nature in all
Preparations, that they may digest the raw gross Body of Food, without offering
any violence to the pure Spirits and balsamic Body, and then all such Food
would be of a most pleasant Smell, Color, and Taste; for if the pure Spirits
be kept free, and not suffocated in the Preparation, such Food becomes friendly
to Nature, affording good firm and wholesome Nourishment, easy of Concoction;
the frequent eating of such Food makes a man Airy, full of lively Spirits, and
of a good Complexion: So on the contrary, if they be suffocated, then presently
the sweet Oil is turned sower, or into a stinking Quality; then such Food so
Prepared will have (as is mentioned before) a strong Smell and Taste, not
retaining its natural Color; for in all sorts of Food, in which the Spirituous
Parts and Balsamic Body is strong, their Smell, Color and Taste is Pleasant
and Friendly. Also, it is to be noted, that most Preparations of Food, the
quicker they are performed (provided there be no violence done to the Spirit)
the better and more friendly such Food will prove; for slow and intermitting
Fires, in either Boiling or other Preparations, do flatten and dull the
Spirituous Parts: Therefore no Baker can preserve the pure white Color in his
fine small Bread, if he be not quick about it; for if any Preparation be
continued too long the volatile Spirits become in a degree suffocated, then
Venus, Sol and Jupiter grow weak, and according to the length of time and
degrees of heat, so the natural Colors do alter and change; for the Colors of
all sorts of Food (when Prepared) do arise by degrees one after another
gradually, and when the gross Body is digested, then the inward virtue (which
lay hid and captivated in the Body of Phlegm) appears in its own friendly Form,
with a most lively and pleasant Color, Smell and Taste; this is the point of
Time all Preparers of Food ought to understand; for if their Preparation be
continued any longer, the operation of Nature goes backward toward the center
of the Original Fire, then Saturn and Mars and their properties are presently
awakened, which do cause the Color, Smell and Taste of such Food to change:
The first degree the Color alters to, is a dusky Yellow, and if the
Preparation be continued, by degrees it turns blackish, till at last it will
become Black or deep Red, or of a mixed streaked Color, all according to the
Property which does predominate in the Original or dark Fire; also, all such
Food is of a gross and fulsom Smell and Taste, unpleasant both to the Palate
and Stomach.

Preparing of Food is a greater Art and Mystery than many House-wives and
others do think; and if it be well and properly performed, it adds much to the
preservation of the Health both of Body and Mind; for every thing has Power to
awaken its Simile in the Body. Therefore every one ought to use that care and
understanding in the Preparations of all sorts of Food, that the meek and most
friendly Life be preserved from suffering violence.

Of Broyled Flesh.
Broyled Flesh was much used in former Ages, but now it is little in Fashion,
in comparison of the aforementioned Preparations; Flesh dressed this way is
much sweeter and fuller of Life and Spirit than Baked or Fried, by reason it
does not boil in its own fat, as the other two do; also, it is quickly
Prepared, and the gross Humidity in the flesh does freely purge and run into
the Fire; it has likewise the free Egress and Regress of the Air, the Fire
being full of lively brisk Spirits, which in Ovens and Frying-Pans are
destroyed, by which means the heat becomes more gross and sulpherous, like the
heat of Charcoal, which does suffocate the pure Spirits, and then the Fat
becomes of a heavy gross and Oily Quality, with a strong Taste and Smell; which
gross matter in Boiled Flesh is destroyed; therefore it does not only eat
sweeter, but breeds better Nourishment, if the Fire be clear and done as it
ought; the Fire of Wood does prepare all sorts of Food sweeter and better than
Cole, and renders it much wholsomer; for in all Preparations in which the Food
does boil in its own Fat, or in Fat put to it, if it has not plenty of Water
and the free influences of the Air, the gross Humidity in the Fat does
suffocate the pure Spirits, and then the sweet Body (which all Fat does afford
great store of) becomes gross and fulsom in Smell, Taste and Operation, which
will quickly cloy the Stomach, and generates burdensome Humors in the Body,
because the pure Virtue and Friendly Quality in Food so Prepared, is in part
destroyed; if this was understood, People would not be in love with such
Preparations; for through frequent Use and continual Custom of eating Food
badly prepared, the Palate is adulterated; and although such be strong and
fulsom, (which always comes'to pass when the pure Spirits are wounded in the
Preparation) nevertheless the Palate is not capable to distinguish Tastes; for
the senses are easily made friendly (by use and custom) to the greatest part of
things: Do not all stinking Trades (which at first are unpleasant to the sense
of Smeling) become after a little use and custom easy to be endured, and such
cannot well distinguish the Air of Tallow-Chandlers and Butchers Shops from
sweet pleasant Airs: If this were not so, it would be impossible for Nature to
endure those Adulterations and unnatural Preparations of Food. Therefore we see
what a wonderful Power there is in every thing to awaken and strengthen its
Likeness in the human Nature; for this very cause the most illuminated Prophet
Moses commanded the People of Israel that they should not only abstain from
eating Unclean Creatures, but that they should also separate themselves from
every unclean thing; for he was sensible that Man was capable to be wrought on
by all things, because he has a Simile with all. There is more in this than
many imagine, which every one ought to consider, not only in Preparations of
Food, but in all other things.

CHAP. V.
The Seasons of the Year in which all sorts of Flesh are most unclean and
aptest to contract and breed Diseases, and also the danger of eating much green
Food: And the Reasons why so many are sick and die more at one time than
another.

THE Seasons of the Year which are most dangerous to contract Diseases in, are
from the middle of June to the last of October. For, 1st. This season is hot,
which opens the Pores, causes Sweating, and as it were a continual
Evaporation of the Spirits, which causes a kind of fainty Indisposition to
possess the whole Body; for all heat, which exceeds the Medium, whether it
proceeds from Seasons, Meats, Drinks or Exercises, does gradually waste and
consume the Spirits and natural Heat, and dulls the edge of the Attractive,
Digestive and Retentive Faculties of the Stomach; therefore in all hot
Countries and Seasons men's Appetites are not so vigorous and quick as in cold
Countries: For this reason all Superfluity and Intemperance are far more
dangerous, and men are apter to contract Distempers in the one than in the
other, as experience manifests; we see that the Natives in all hot Climates are
more temperate in Meats, Drinks and Exercises than they are in cold, which is
one main cause why English People and others that travel into the East and
West Indies are so unhealthy, and so many have died: Experience has taught
them, that the grand cause has been Intemperance, not only continuing the same
Disorders there, which they had been addicted to in their own Country, but
rather increasing them, saying, The hotter the Weather, the stronger and hotter
the Drink ought to be; this Custom has been practiced by some idle sottish
People that understood Nature no more than Swine; Whereas if such who travel
did take right measures in Meats, Drinks and Exercises, they would be as
healthy, as in their own Countries.

2dly, In this Season People make use of variety of green Food, as Beans,
Pease, Cabages, Colly-flowers, Artichoaks, etc. All which things do contain
great store of Phlegmy matter, especially in cold Countries, where the Sun
(which is the central Life of all things) has not that Power to prepare such
food as in hot: Also, the Bodies of most People being accustomed all the
remaining part of the year to strong hot Food and Drinks, and then on a sudden,
without gradual Progression, beginning such a kind of Diet as does beget
Crudities and Obstructions, is very prejudicial to them; for Experience does
show, that all such things are full of Phlegm, and have but few Spirits, and
they very impure, comparatively, to what they were in the Spring: Therefore
they ought to be eaten moderately, or else all such things do swell the Body,
and fill it with gross Phlegmatic Humors, whence does arise those heavy dull
Indispositions, which do generally attend People in this Season.

3dly, It is likewise to be observed, that a great part of that green Food
beforementioned, does often lie a considerable time before they are eaten,
viz. two or three days, or more, after such things are cut or gathered,
especially in great Cities and Towns, some of them lie heating together a day
or two before they are spent, as Beans and Pease, etc. by which means they lose
their pure brisk lively Taste and Smell, their natural Color is changed into a
dull Green, mixed with a dusky Black; they are dull on the Palate, lie heavy
on the Stomach, nothing so quick of Concoction as those that are boiled Fresh;
these things presently lose their fresh lively Spirits and Tinctures, whence
does proceed the pleasant Taste, with the most fragrant Smell and natural
Color; if your Palate be not too much adulterated, it will easily distinguish
the one from the other.

4thly, At this time of the year the Air (which is the Life of the Spirit in
all Cities and great Towns) is thick and sulpherous, full of gross Humidity,
which has its source from many Uncleanness such places do plentifully afford,
more especially in this season, which is inamicable to the pure Spirits of all
such Food; for all green Food is naturally subject to Putrefaction, by reason
of their Phlegmatic Body; this makes them more unhealthful and dangerous than
otherwise they would be, if fresh and lively.

These Summer Fruits, when they have been gathered long, and exposed to the
corrupt Air of the Cities and Towns, the pure spirituous Virtues and digestive
Faculty is in a manner destroyed; these Fruits, viz. Gooseberries, Currains,
Plums, Cherries, Pears, Apples, etc. are endued with a very tender Spirit and
Life, and being full of Phlegm and gross matter, they quickly corrupt and turn
to Putrefaction, which all the eaters thereof ought to consider: Likewise it
may be noted, that many of these Fruits are eaten on a full Stomach, both at
Meals and immediately after, which must needs be very pernicious to Health,
because they obstruct the Stomach and Passages, generating many crude Windy
Humors, whereby they suffocate the pure Spirits, and turn the sweet Oil of
Life sower, whence does proceed griping Pains in the Bowels, Fluxes, Fevers,
besides Pains in the Joints, causing Trembling Distempers, like Agues,
according to the Constitution of each Man, and the matter which is awakened in
the Root. But on the contrary, if such Fruits are ripe and fresh gathered, and
eaten in order when the Stomach is clean and free from being cloyed with other
Food, then they are very Profitable, being most of them of an opening and
cleansinn Nature; for they gently cleanse and purge the Passages and Bowels:
But all these Summer Fruits are best and safest Prepared, being mixed with
things of a drying and warming Quality, or rather made into Drinks, and when
such Juices have passed through Fermentation, the Phlegmy Body is digested, and
the spirituous Parts set at Liberty, which do tincture the gross Body, so, that
the Spirit and true Life is made thereby Predominant over the body of Phlegm;
such Drinks being drunk moderately, prove very friendly to Nature, especially
to such as are Aged People, which do most need spirituous Drinks.

Green Food is not capable either in Man or Beasts to generate so good
Nourishment, nor so firm as dry, neither are the Spirits so brisk and lively;
the gross Juices of such Food do as it were suffocate the pure Spirits, and
turn the Balsamic Body sower, as it farther appears by all sorts of Animals
that live on green Food in this season, are they not apt to faint, and to be
subject to many Diseases, their Flesh and Fat being soft and greasy? but those
that live on dry Food, their Bodies are freer from gross Phlegmatic matter,
their Fat and Flesh is of a firmer substance, and their Spirits stronger and
livelier, and more capable they are to endure Labor without Prejudice to their
Health; it is also manifested by all Grains, Seeds and other Fruits, that are
cut or gathered before the Sun and Elements have dried away or exhaled the
gross Phlegmy moisture, all such things will presently Putrify and Stink,
being loaded with so great store of Humidity; but if they be gathered the Sun
and Elements having dried away the Humid Parts, then all such things will keep
sound and good for several Years; for this cause all sorts of Food, in which
Phlegm does abound, are very dangerous in this season, if Temperance be
wanting, as our daily experience teaches.

5thly, In this Season the Sun also declines in strength and vigor, which
being the central Power and Life of all things, they likewise do proportionably
decline, as appears in Herbage; as for Example, If you cut Grass in September,
which is then the Food of most sorts of Cattle, the Hay made thereof is of a
weak fading Nature and Virtue, in comparison of that Hay which was made in June
or July, which is of a lively brik strong substance and virtue; for the Earth
(which is the Mother of all things in this Season) is weak and impotent,
because she has already put forth her strength, and manifested her lively
Virtues in the first spring or rising of the Sun; for the Winter is the Rest
and Sabbath of the Earth, in which time she recovers strength-and virtue,
because she does then, as it were, cease from all her Labors, and the
Vegetative Quality stands as it were still, and the more Frost and Snow, and
the drier the Winter is, the more strength and vigor the Earth obtains; such
dry Weather cloaseth up the Pores, by which the strength and virtue is
prevented from having any Evacuations, which is manifested by the goodness and
great Increase of all Herbs, Fruits and Grains, being all filled with a
Powerful Lively brisk Spirit and Virtue; therefore in the first spring and
rising of the Sun every thing rejoices, and becomes very fragrant by virtue of
the sweet Influences of this Celestial Body, and the Power of the Earth, so
that at this time all things seem to strive with a most lively motion to
manifest their most inward Virtues; this is the time for People to eat Herbs,
both Boiled and Raw, Sallets, and Pottages made thereof; such Food at the
Rising of the Sun are endued with a brisk lively Virtue and Strength, and of an
opening and cleansing Nature, Purging the Blood, and are good against all kind
of Obstructions: Also, all sorts of Diseases are by virtue of Sobriety and
Temperance, and the use of good Medicines then easier cured than at any other
of the Year; it is also the Briskest and Healthiest Season, and the same
Intemperances and Disorders which may be the occasion of generating Diseases in
the latter part of the Summer, in this time will hardly be felt; for now all
things rejoice, and seem to concur for the Preservation of Nature.

6thly, In this Season, viz. from the middle of June to the last of September,
most sorts of Cattle breed many Diseases; First, from the continual Heat and
gross humid Air, which in this season is more sulpherous; the Pleasant
Influences and Spirits of the Air are dull and thick, which causes a dull and
fainty Indisposition to possess the Bodies and Spirits of all Creatures; Men
themselves can witness the Truth of this. Moreover, all Creatures are more
subject to sweat, by which the Spirits do evaporate; likewise, the Food of most
Creatures is Grass, which is of a gross Phlegmatic Nature, and generates not
only an unfirm Nourishment, but also fills the Body full of evil Juices, the
Fat and Flesh being of a soft greasy Nature, having but few Spirits, and those
that are, very impure, the Blood of most Cattle being thick and gross, which is
the cause their Flesh will not take Salt as at other seasons; also, about this
time most sorts of Cattle, especially those that come from remote parts of
great Cities, are more or less Heated and Surfeited by Driving, and other
Accidents, they being not formerly used to Driving, the Weather being Hot and
Fainty, the Air thick and humid, and they being loaded with much gross Flesh
and Fat, all these things concurring, makes their Flesh unwholsom, and subject
to Corruption, especially Sheep and Lambs, whose Spirits and Lives are so
tender, that they cannot endure any kind of violent motion without manifest
danger to their Health: It is very rare that any Mutton or Lamb is good in this
Season, they not being free from the aforesaid Accidents; you may easily
distinguish by the Taste, Smell and Color of that which is killed off the
Common without driving and other Accidents, and that which is killed in London
with driving, the Bodies of all Creatures being in this season full of Phlegmy
matter, that every little Accident will wound the Spirit, then presently the
Body suffers many Inconveniences; and if such Cattle be killed before they
have time to recover such Injuries, their flesh is of a dull heavy Phlegmatic
Nature, the Spirits are few, and those that are are impure; for these reasons
it will not take salt nor eat sweet, as others will, which are free from such
Inconveniences; for salt has no Power to Preserve such Flesh from
Putrefaction, because (as is mentioned before) the Spirits are impure; for
those gross Bodies are Preserved by the Virtue and Power of the Spirit; and in
such flesh where the spirits are few and impure, and the Flesh gross and full
of Phlegmy matter, the salt cannot incorporate; therefore in this season use
what Art you can in salting your Flesh, it will not eat so sweet nor keep so
long without corrupting as at other times of the Year; but on the contrary, in
other seasons, and when the Flesh is free from the aforementioned
Inconveniences, their Blood being thin, and well tempered with brisk and lively
Spirits, such Flesh being salted as soon as it is cold, the Salt will greedily
Penetrate it, and incorporate it self with the welltempered Blood and pure
Supirits, so that it does hold the corrupt Phlegmy part of the Flesh captive,
that the humidity thereof cannot turn to Putrefaction, until those brisk
lively Spirits both in Flesh and Salt be, through length of time, wasted or
suffocated, which comes to pass in six, eight or twelve Months, more or less,
according to the goodness of it and well ordering, and other Accidents, and
then it will fall into corruption, and there is no recovery for it; but if the
Salt had cleansed and purged the Flesh from its gross humid parts, as some say
it does, then such Flesh would have kept a longer time, as all other gross
Bodies will, when the Sun and Elements have dried away and exhaled the Phlegmy
gross parts, and left remaining the more firm and Spirituous, which will
continue sound and good many Years, as many sorts of Corn, Fruits and Hay,
which are altogether as subject to Corruption as Flesh, when green and full of
Phlegmy Juices, but their Putrefaction is not so loathsome, nor so offensive to
Nature; neither will such things generate such pernicious Vermin as Flesh will,
the matter in Flesh being grosser.

It was not without great Reason and Wisdom that the Ancients commanded that
Flesh should be eaten sparingly, and that there should be a particular care not
only taken about the good state of the Bodies of such Cattle, but also in the
killing and preparing of it; the dressing and preparing of all other sorts of
Food being left to every ones discretion. But the learned Prophet Moses was
sensible that the common and frequent eating of Flesh was very dangerous, as to
the health of the Body, and also of the Mind, if care and understanding be not
used in the Preparation thereof; therefore he gave Laws and particular
Directions for the ordering and preparing of Flesh, but no mention made of
other Food; therefore Flesh in its best state, and otherwise well ordered, if
much eaten, is apt to load the Body with gross Humors and evil Juices, but
much more in the forementioned seasons.

7thly, In this season all men do find themselves more subject to
Indispositions, the Spirits dull and heavy, apt to faintness, and sooner
wearied with Labor than at any other time; the Appetite not so quick and
lively; therefore all sorts of People ought to have double the care, as to
their Health, at this time, both in Meats, Drinks, and Labors, also in Quality
and Quantity; for Intemperances are not so dangerous in the Winter or Spring,
Nature being then strong and able to bear, with less Prejudice: This is the
time of the Year in which also most sorts of Cattle are subject to Sickness, as
Sheep to the Rot, and other Cattle to Murrains. And do not almost the double
Number of People sicken and die in this season? And is not the flesh of all
sorts of Fowls in hot weather lean and poor, although they have more plenty of
Food than in Winter? But it lies not in the Quantity of Food, but in the season
of the Year, and the Weather; for all Heat, when it does exceed the Medium,
evaporates and spends the Spirits, and then Nature does presently Languish, and
the sweet Oil in the Body turns (as it were) sower, so that there is a general
weakness and fainty Indisposition in all Creatures, and their Flesh is rendered
thereby the more unwholsom, and apt to breed Diseases in the Eaters thereof. If
Sobriety and Temperance were observed, and other Circumstances belonging to
Health, a little Physic would serve. But in this Age men may speak and write
of Temperance until they are weary; for there is not one of an hundred that is
willing to observe and conform to its safe and healthful Rules; though it
cannot be denied, but that It is one of the Principal things which puts a
delectable sweetness on all our other Enjoyments: But few in Health consider
these things, most being rather of an approving and admiring than a Practicing
Temper, especially of those things they are not in Possession of; many men also
slight and have no esteem for those things they do or may enjoy, letting go the
substance, and eagerly Pursuing after shadows. But seeing that in this
Intemperate Age most Persons do live irregular Lives, few or none being willing
to observe the Rules of Health in their Meats, Drinks and Exercises, therefore
it is convenient for the continuation of Health to take Proper Purgative
Medicines, both at Spring and Fall, tho they are not sensible of any manifest
Indisposition; by which means they may easily prevent the generation of matter;
for when Sickness and Distempers have invaded the Body, then it will be a
difficult point to get such Medicines as are suitable to the Disease, and can
by their Virtue cure them; when the Spirits are wounded, and the Distempers and
Obstructions in the Body have gotten great power over Nature, in such cases the
best Medicines do often fail, most Diseases being generated gradually, as the
Intemperances are committed; for Nature ever hides the Evil Matter (whence
Distempers do Proceed) as long as she is able; but when once the Diseases do
manifest* themselves with any kind of Violence, then there is danger at hand;
most People being mistaken in Nature, for they generally attribute the cause of
their Diseases to the least Intemperance or taking Cold, or the like; never
considering how many Disorders and Intemperances they have formerly committed;
every Act of Intemperance does in some degree obstruct Nature, and by degrees
sows the seeds of future Diseases; not but that outward Colds and the like do
hurt Nature, and oft-times awaken the matter which lies in the inward Parts,
and bring it to manifestation; but on the contrary, when the inside is clean
and free from Obstructions, and other Evils, the body does then very rarely
receive any injury by such outward Accidents; for Nature still endeavors to
overcome and withstand the evil matter in the Body, and makes several Essays to
throw such Disorders off, but if Irregularities in Meats, Drinks and Labors be
continued, the Evil at last grows so great, that then Nature must bow, and
Distempers take place. This is always to be noted, that if any Member or Part
of the Body be weakened either by inward Obstructions or outward Accidents, as
Falls, Bruises, broken Bones, etc. and the Person be guilty of any Intemperance
or disorderly Living, the weak or hurted part first feels it, according to the
old Proverb, The Weakest goes to the Wall. It will be convenient, if any upon
particular occasions be excessive in Meats and Drinks, to observe the following
Rules, which they will find to be very profitable.

First, After full Meals and excessive Draughts, see that they fast longer than
their usual time is; this gives great advantage to the natural Heat, by which
the digestive Faculty of the Stomach does by its secret attractive Power draw
unto it self all superfluity and evil Juices that have been bred through
Intemperance, digesting and throwing off all such matter, which might otherwise
occasion Diseases; for the action and natural heat of the Stomach is never
idle, but has always its continual motion, and secret attraction, and Hunger is
so powerful, that it will draw the very Flesh off the Bones: Therefore fasting
after immoderate eating and drinking, is a sure Remedy to prevent Diseases and
Surfeits; drinking good store of Water Gruel made thin and boiled quick the
following day, without any Ingredients in it, will cleanse the Stomach and help
to carry off the gross matter and evil Juices, which do proceed from Repletion.
If these Rules were observed by those that abound in Meats and Drinks, there
would not be so many afflicted with the Gout in the Joints and Pains in the
Limbs, Swelling and Breaking-out with so many Mangy and Leprous Diseases, which
are chiefly occasioned through Intemperance and want of Exercises: Likewise all
Rich compounded Foods, which are often of disagreeing Natures, do not only
destroy the Health, but do dull the edge of the Appetite, taking away the true
Taste and Pleasure, which good Stomachs and sharp Appetites enjoy: It may be
truly said, That the Intemperate Person is deprived of all true and natural
Pleasure; for those that are continually accustomed to rich Compounded Foods,
and strong Cordial Drinks, as Wine, etc. by the frequent use of them they
become rather burdensome than pleasant; the same is to be understood of those
that live an idle soft Life, their whole body is as it were indisposed, their
Members and Limbs often ache for want of Exercise, because they are weak; also,
their Passages are fur'd and stopped, so that the Blood becomes thick and
gross, and the natural Spirits impure; such People are on every occasion apt to
sweat, being also subject to internal Heats, which do much disorder the whole
Body; but the ordinary sort of People, who are constrained to live on mean
simple Food and small Drink, and to labor hard, do imagine that the greatest
happiness in this World is to live an idle Life, and to have their Tables daily
furnished with variety of rich Food and strong Drinks; few of them considering
that the true pleasure of eating and drinking is in having a perfect Appetite,
and that without Labor no man can be brisk and lively, either in Body or
Spirit, which Superfluity of rich Food, strong Drink and Idleness does destroy,
because most of such things are unequal in their parts, and so beget
Inequality; also they are endued with too great Virtue, whence does proceed too
much Nourishment, which is the Foundation of most Diseases; for this cause mean
and simple Meats and Drinks are not only most greateful to Nature, but do best
support the Body in perfect Health and Strength, far beyond all the richest
compounded Flesh, Fish and strong Drinks, though all such things are and may be
very useful now and then, being moderately used for ^he necessity of Nature, as
the Scripture says, all Gods Creatures are good, being received with
Thanksgiving: Most Meats and Drinks in their own Nature are simple and
innocent; it is generally Compositions that make Meats and Drinks not only too
Rich, but also Improper.

CHAP. VI.
Of Waters, Ale, Beer and Tobacco; to which is added the consideration of
Clothing, Houses and Beds, and what great Benefits arise from Moderation and
Temperance in those things.

THE Element of Water is not inferior to any other of the Elements, neither is
Nature wanting to work wonderfully thereby; there is so great a Necessity of
Water, that without it no Animal can live, nor any Herb or Plant bring forth;
for in it is the Seminary Virtue of all things, especially of Animals, whose
Seed is manifestly Watrish. The Seeds also of all Herbs and Plants, although
they are Earthy, must notwithstanding be rooted in moisture before they can be
fruitful. The great and illuminated Prophet Moses tells us, that before the
Creation, when the Earth was without Form, the Spirit of the Lord moved on the
Face of the Waters; and in another place, that the Plants did not grow, because
God had not caused it to Rain upon the Earth. Nay, so great is the Efficacy of
this cleansing Element, that the spiritual Regeneration cannot be performed
without it, as our Savior Christ himself testified to Nicomedus; and very
great have the Virtues of it been in Religious Worship in former Ages, among
the Prophets and Wise Men in Expiations and Purifications. Innumerable are the
Benefits, and so various the Uses thereof, both in the Generation, Nourishment
and Increase of things, that some of the Wise Men have concluded, that Water
was the beginning of all things, and first of all Elements, and the most
Potent, because it has the mastery over all the rest, for it swalloweth up the
Earth, extinguishes Flames, ascends on high, and by a most wonderful divine
Hand, and the stretching forth of the Clouds, challenges the Heavens for its
Throne, whence falling down in gentle Showers and refreshing Dews, as from
Natures choicest Limbeck, impregnated with Celestial Virtues, it becomes the
cause of all things that grow in the Earth.

Nor is there scarce any part of Nature more full of Wonders than these liquid
Regions. Josephus tells us of a River near Sina, which runs with a full
Channel all These abbath-Day, and then on a sudden it cease, as if the Spring
were stopped, and all the six days you may pass over it dry-shod; but again on
the seventh-day (no Man knowing the reason of it) the Waters return in
abundance as before; wherefore the Inhabitants therabouts call it the
Sabbath Days River. The Gospel testifies of a Sheep-Pool, into which whosoever
stepped first, after the Waters were troubled by the Angel, was made whole of
whatsoever Disease he had.

Many secret and admirable Virtues the Creator has endued this Element with,
as in all Ages has been manifested; for it being pure and clear in its own
Nature, it is the only and alone thing by which all external things are
purified, purged and cleansed: But if it be adulterated or incorporated with
any other Liquor or Juice, then it becomes less pure, and will not so well
perform its Office, yet it may make them better and more useful. Though it be a
vulgar Proverb -- As weak as Water: Yet I must tell you, Water is more strong
and sublime than most imagine, for it contains a most ravishing and excellent
Spirituous Balsamic Virtue, whence proceeds that pure sweet refreshing
Quality, whereby it has Power by its innate Virtue to digest and purify all
sorts of Food: Also, in all Preparations it is so Innocent and Friendly that it
dissipates the gross phlegmy Bodies, and preserves the more essential Parts and
Virtues, and keeps the Spirituous Parts living.

It is not only the most plentiful and truly pleasant of all Drinks, but it
supplies Nature with its friendly Moisture, and relieves Thirst beyond all
other Liquors or Juices: It is so Simple, and endued with such Equality, that
it insinuates its Virtue into all parts of the Body in an insensible way; it
makes no Noise, nor causes any Tumults in the Brain, nor awakens any in
equality in the Body, but imparts its meek Life as it were in silence.

And as Bread has the first place of all Food, and may justly be called
Concord, or a thing which God and his Hand made, Nature has befriended with
all the united good Virtues both of the Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms, and
therefore no sort of Food is comparable thereunto, nor will gratify Nature to
that degree as it ought, without the help and mixture of Bread; though yet it
is not the strongest of all Foods, nor has the greatest Nourishment, but it is
the most equal in its parts, and stands nearest the Unity, for which cause it
is so much desired, and justly esteemed the Staff of Life; and we are taught to
Pray for all outward Accommodations needful for our Bodies under that
significant denomination of Our daily Bread, it being, besides its own
nutritive faculty, a proper Ingredient to qualify the Inequality of most other
sorts of Food, and is the Foundation to all good Nourishment: The like is to be
understood of Water, that being the Radix of all moist Nourishment, which mixed
or incorporated with any kind of Juices, renders them fit and profitable for
Mankind.

Nay, (if we may fly our Contemplations to an higher pitch) there is a
Sympathetical agreement, or some Analogy between this External Water and that
Internal, of which our Savior Christ told the Woman of Samaria, that if she
did drink, she should never thirst: This Internal Super essential Water
sustaineth every Being, and is the Radix and Life of the outward Water, which
contains some Shadows of the secret Influences of the Water Internal; for which
reason the Prophets and good Men of old have frequently compared the one with
the other, and expressed the one by the other, and also have made use of Water
in Religious Mysteries as a sign of Cleansing and Purifying the Soul from Sins,
and for curing Diseases, etc. as the Scriptures do testify,

Thus much I thought fit to say of Water in general, to stir up men to praise
and admire the Goodness and Wisdom of the All-Creator, for the manifold Uses,
Virtues and Benefits wherewith he has endued this Element. But now let us
consider the several sorts of Water.

Of Rainwater and its Nature.
I name this Water first, because for several Reasons it is the best of all, if
not defiled by Accidents, as by Tiles of Houses, or the Vessels it is kept in.
For,

1st. It is a light pure thin Water.

2dly. It is drawn up into the Clouds by the power and virtue of the sweet
Influences of the Sun Beams.

3dly. Being carried to and fro with the Clouds by Gods divine power, it has
thereby had the greater benefit of Motion.

4thly. It Is endued with wonderful Virtue from the Element of Air, and the
sweet Influences of the Celestial Bodies, whereby it is made more Spirituous
than other Waters, and of a fat unctious Quality, of a light friendly mild
Nature and Operation: Thus it mollifies the harsh Earth, making it light and
tender, and causes all Plants to multiply and grow far better than any
Artificial Watrings can do; Rainwater being (among its other Virtues) like
Afferment or Leaven, that makes the hard compacted Earth more spirituous and
penetrable, giving Life and Motion to all the Vegetable Kingdom.

5thly. Rainwater is not only exhaled by the Beams of Heaven from the most
clear and subtle Fountains, and impregnated with the Celestial Influences, but
also is, as it were, strained with the Airy Motions and Winds, which fill it
with a Saline and Balsamic Virtue, when it descends (like the Tears of a
repenting Sinner) in gentle reviving Showers, that give Virtue and Power to all
Vegetables, and restore the gasping parched Earth and languishing Nature to the
briskness of the Spring and joys of Autumn.

6thly. This is the lightest of all Waters, it cools and heats quickly; it
oppresses not the Stomach, or any other part of the Body, but passes suddenly
into the Ureters, having neither in Color, Smell nor Taste any manifest
Quality; it binds not the Belly as some other Waters do, and is the best to
be used in all Physical Operations, if it be well received, and afterward kept
from defilement.

7thly. It is to be preferred before all other Waters in House-wifery, for it
Boyls all sorts of Meats better and sooner, and makes them easier of
Concoction; as likewise it Brews and Washes to greater advantage than others.

Of River Water.
This is next in Goodness, whose Original is Fountain or Spring Water, and yet
there is rarely any Spring Water so good for common and general use at the
Fountainhead as in the River. For,

1st. Rivers or running Waters have great advantages by passing through various
Soils and sorts of Earth, from whence it drains or sucks in a certain Unctious
Virtue or Saline Fatness, which the surface of the Earth does plentifully
contain, and from which Vegetation does chiefly proceed.

2dly. This sort of Water has the benefit of Motion, with the benevolent
Influences of the Sun, and the Element of the Air, which purge it from its
harsh earthy Qualities, and as it were open its Body, enduing it with a pure
Spirituous, Airy and Balsamic Virtue, of a warming friendly Nature and
Operation: This is the chief reason why River-Water is of a softer milder
Nature, and will perform all Preparations in House-wifery to more advantages
than Spring Water taken from the Fountain Head; for there most Waters retain a
Saturnine earthy Quality, which the Influences of the Sun and Air, with the
help of Motion do destroy.

3dly. The New-River that supplies London, is some of the best Water in England
(except Thumes Water) it being a cut or made River that runs on the Surface of
the Earth for above twenty Miles, and is not fed or increased by hungry
Springs, as many other Rivers are that run through Valleys, which is their own
Natural way, but Land-Floods sometimes fall into it, which augment its Virtue
and Goodness, for they are the richest of Waters, draining and sucking into
themselves the fat Saline Virtue of the Earth: For this reason most Valleys
that lie between the Hills are so fruitful; for the Waters that run off the
Hills do wash or carry away the Salintral Virtue into them, and there it
centers; and thus Hills come not to be so fruitful as Valleys or Plains, by
reason of such disadvantages: Whereas on the contray, do not Land-Floods, and
the overflowing of Rivers, make Meadows fruitful from the same causes? For when
the Waters retire and sink away, they leave behind them the Saline or Spiritual
Quality, that does Muck such Ground, as though it had been overspread with
substantial Dung. And indeed the very same is to be understood when a Man dungs
his Land, it is not altogether the gross substance or matter that enricheth the
Land, but it is the before mentioned fat Saline Quality, which the moisture of
the Earth receives, and the Rains wash out of the Dung; for if you lay a load
of Dung in a heap, and let it lie a Week, two or three, and then remove it
clean away from that place, and spread it thick in another place, yet that spot
which the Dung lay on two or three Weeks will be more enriched than where the
gross substance is spread; for the Earth, with the help of the Rains and Dews,
sucked into it self the Salintral Virtue of the Dung. Therefore in most Fields,
where such heaps of Dung do lie for a while before they are spread, both the
Grass and Corn is not only greener, but also much stronger, and more in
quantity than in other places of the Field.

4thly. River-Water, for the Reasons aforesaid, is better for Men and Beasts to
drink of, than Springs or Pump-Water; it boyls all sorts of Herbs, Fish and
Flesh better, and makes better and wholsomer Pottages; it brews Beer and Ale to
more Advantage, both in Quality and Quantity, and washes all sorts of Linen
and Woollen with less Pains, Charge and Damage to the things. This Water seems
to be pretty equal in its parts, having no manifest Taste, but a certain
friendly mild sweetness predominates; and there is as much difference between
the Nature and Operation of River-Water and Pump or Well-Water, as there is
between Beer and Ale; and the Excellency of the latter above the former, I
shall demonstrate in its proper place.

Of Spring or Fountain Water.
There are various sorts of this Water, some Better, some Worse, according to
the Nature of the Earth it passes through: If Springs or Fountains proceed from
a Chalky Earth, or some sorts of hot Sands, or run near the surface of the
Earth, they are thereby endued with a meek soft friendly nature and operation,
without any manifest harshness; but those that run in the deep Bowels of the
Earth, and through cold hungry stony places, are more hard and Saturnine,
neither so wholesome for Man or Beast to drink, nor to be used in Housewifery.
But though it be thus at the Fountainhead, yet if the same run long
afterward, through various soils in the open Air, etc. it may become very good
for all uses, as aforesaid.

And Note: Whereas some River-Water will look of a wheyish whitish Color,
caused either by its long running without being fed by plenty of Springs, or
else by Land-floods, yet in either case is not the worse to be liked, but
rather the better; for all such Water is of great virtue, of a very mild fat
opening Quality, caused by the saline virtue; which People not understanding do
often refuse either to drink or use in Housewifery, calling it dirty muddy
Water; whereas the whiter any Waters look, the better they are for most uses,
especially when Landfloods shall be the occasion of it, as appears by the
Instances of Valleys and Meadows thereby enricht, which I mentioned but now.

Of Pump or Well-Water.
These likewise are capable of several degrees, better or worse, according to
the nature of the Earth from whence they arise; but they are generally of a
cold hungry hard Nature, nothing so good as the former; and such Springs as lie
deepest in the Bowels of the Earth, are of a lean Saturnine Quality, in
comparison of that Water which runs near the surface, being deprived of that
saline nature which irritates Vegetation; for most Earths, after you come two
or three yards deep, are of a hard cold hungry Quality, and if a quantity of
such Earth be exposed to the open Elements, and laid two or three foot thick,
there will hardly any sort of Vegetable grow on it, until the Sun and
Celestial Influences have endued it with a Salnitral Virtue; and as the Earth
is, so is the Water, viz. of the same nature Cold and Hungry.

2. Such Waters want the Celestial Influences and Air, nor have the benefit of
Motion, or but in a very small degree; hence they are more unwholsom than the
others before treated of, and generally bind the Body, and are subject to
obstruct Nature, neither will they perform the like good Offices in Housewifery.

Of Ponds or Standing Waters.
Such standing-Waters as are in a kind of springy Grounds are the best, but
still much inferior to running-Waters, because they have not the benefit of
Motion, nor the like advantage of passing through various Soils. Such Pools or
Waters as are chiefly maintained by Rain or Land floods are better or worse,
according as the season is wet or dry; for in dry seasons they not only become
thick and slimy, but awaken a gross fulsome Saturnine Quality in the muddy
Earth, that suffocates the pure thin spirituous parts; so that such Waters
become of a strong gross Earthy taste and smell, which is altogether contrary
to the Nature of Water, and such Waters are not wholesome for Men nor Beasts.
Some Husbandmen do suppose these Waters to be very good for Cattle to drink,
having no other reason but that they will rather drink them than others; which
is no reason at all; for this came through Custom and Use, which makes any sort
of Water familiar to nature; and those Cattle that are used to drink
Pond-Water, will refuse better Water for that, for two Reasons; 1st. Because
their Stomachs and Pallates are adulterated, and made familiar to it, so that
they cannot distinguish the evil taste from the good; 2dly. Because such
Pond-Waters are of an hotter warmer Nature than others, and Cattle used to them
will for that very cause refuse others, just as men that accustom themselves to
warm Beer cannot drink cold without some trouble to the Mouth and Teeth, though
cold Beer and Ale is warmer in operation, and will more cheer the Stomach, and
make the Spirits more brisk than the hot, because no fermented Liquors, whether
they be Beer, Ale, Syder or Wine, will admit of the heat of fires, without
violence to the pure spirituous parts; they are so volatile, that they will
presently evaporate; therefore warm Beer or Ale will sooner become flat than
that which has not been warmed; for when the spirituous parts are evaporated or
suffocated, the sweet brisk Balsamic Virtue dies.

But this hot sulpherous Quality in Pond-Water, which through custom most
Cattle like, is of an evil nature and operation, because the spirituous vapors
of the Air cannot so easily penetrate through its gross thickness, whence it
dulls the edge of the Appetite and Stomach, breeds gross thick Blood, often is
the occasion of many Diseases, and very injurious to the Milk of Cows. Besides,
do not Pools and standing Waters generate various sorts of Vermin and Insects,
which is caused through the Contraction of gross thick fulsom Matter for want
of Motion, all which running Waters are not subject to.

But although Water be Natures common drink for Man as well as Beasts, yet
since now adays Men generally betake themselves to other Liquors, we shall
briefly treat of them likewise.

Of Ale, and its Nature and Operation, as also of Beer.
Ale has the first place of all Drinks made with Malt, and is of greatest
Antiquity: That Ale is best that is made after this manner:

1st. That the Liquor or Water that you put to your Malt be made boiling-hot,
but not boil, and then put it into your Mash-Tub or Vessel, and let it stand a
little while before you put your Malt to it, which will somewhat moderate the
fierce heat of the Water, thereby rendering it more capable to receive the
Virtues and sweet Quality of the Malt, which violent hot Water will not do so
well; for it does not only hurt the pure Spirituous Parts of the Malt, but will
six or harden the Malt, so that the Sweetness and good Virtues will not so
easily give it self forth into the Water; also, if you put the Malt into the
Water very hot, then it will Tinge, or cause the Wort to become of a red
Martial Color; but on the contrary, the cooler the Water is when you put in
the Malt, the Paler or more Venerial will the Color of your Wort be, which is
the best Color of the two; for all Ale that does look Clear and White is to be
preferred before that which has a high Martial Red Color: And in some parts
of England there is such Ale made, which is much liked; but this commendable
White Color depends also upon the well making of the Malt, viz. in the Fuel
and degrees of the Fire they dry or fix it with; for if the Heat be too strong
or fierce, or if the egress or regress of the Air be hindered, or any other
Accident happen of the like nature, then such Malt will make Ale and Beer to
look of a Reddish Martial Color, which is not to be commended, though some
ignorantly cry it up: For the predominant Quality in all sorts of Corn stands
in the White, and all the pure Water and sweet Body of it proceeds from the
predominant Quality of Venus; therefore the more gentle, mild and natural the
Preparation is from the beginning to the end, the more wholesome and Balsamic
will the Ale be: If the Malt be dried with too hot or fierce a Fire, whence the
Color happens to the Ale, it shows Violence done to the essential Spirits,
which also happens in Brewing when the Malt is put to the Water too hot, or by
overmuch boiling of the Wort, which is not commendable in Ale; for good Ale may
be made with little or no boiling; and indeed there is not much reason for the
much boiling of any sort of Drink made of Malt, except you design to keep it a
great while: For the boiling of Ale does cause a too great Evaporation of the
Volatile Spirit and Balsamic Virtues, which will not endure the harsh Fire;
for this cause strong Wort will wast and evaporate as much in quantity in one
Hour, as Small shall in three, and more. Besides, boiling these Liquors
destroys their mild gentle cleansing Qualities, and fixes them, making them
hotter and fiercer in Operation; for the more you evaporate or destroy the
sweet Body of any thing, the stronger and fiercer the Original Qualities
become, and appear more external; but so long as the pure Volatile Spirit and
sweet Balsamic Body predominates, the strong fiery Original Spirit of Saturn
and Mars lies as it were hid; and seeing all the friendly and wholesome Virtues
of Ale reside in the sweet Body, you ought not to destroy That by overmuch
boiling.

Nay, I will add, that the best and most wholesome Ale may be made, and not
boiled at all, as some in this Nation do, which does but wast it in Quantity,
and make it worse in Quality, so that it becomes hotter in Operation, and a
friend to the generation of the Stone. Every one knows, or may know by
experience, that Beer heats the Body more than Ale; the reason is, the
Balsamic Virtues in Beer are in part destroyed by boiling, so that it becomes
more like a Spirit, and therefore it will keep longer; and because of its
lasting, most People imagine it the best, which is a great mistake; for they
might as well say, that the best Sack drawn off by Distillation into a Spirit,
is better to drink than the Sack was; whereas I think the contrary is known to
every body of common sense: The nearer you bring any thing to its Original, by
destroying the balsamic Virtues and middle Qualities or vegetative Virtue, the
longer that thing will keep sound; this is manifest in all Spirits drawn from
any Wines or other balsamic Liquors; for this reason, Beer that is boiled most
will longest keep from turning sour or flat; but still, this is no Argument
that it is therefore the best and wholsomest; for the predominant Quality in
all strong Beer, especially if it be kept to be ^tale, is of a fierce harsh
Martial and Saturnine Heat, of a hard greedy Nature, which infects the blood
with fretting eating Humors, very prejudicial to Health; also, it generates
the Stone, not so much from the Hops (which many accuse as the chief cause) but
for that the pure sweet body is in so great a measure destroyed in the boiling
it to such an height that it might keep; not but that the Hops do help to heat
the body, and cause the Stone and other Diseases, but not purely and merely as
they are Hops; but this comes to pass from the Preparation. For Hops in their
own Nature have no such operation to cause the Stone, but altogether the
contrary; for Hops are of an opening cleansing Nature, and they powerfully
purge by Urine, and make excellent Medicines against the Stone and Dropsical
Diseases; but all their natural medicinal Virtues are destroyed in their being
boiled in the Beer, and then there remains in them chiefly the Martial harsh
fiery Property, which helps to preserve the Beer from growing flat or eager,
but it augments its heat, and makes it of a harsher operation: And as the
boiling of Ale destroys the sweet cleansing purging Quality, and causes it to
evaporate; just so it does by Hops, and so much the more, because in them the
volatile Spirit stands, as it were external; for the Sun and Elements have
exhaled the gross Phlegmy substance, and thereby sets the spirituous at
liberty, only being close stuffed into bags, preserves them from evaporating
whilst there they continue; but as soon as they come into the fierce boiling
Liquor or Wort, these essential Virtues and good Qualities are destroyed and
flee away; but still there remains the original strong bitter Quality, which
cannot be destroyed by boiling, except they be annhilated, for it is the Root
of its Life. Now this bitter Quality in Hops is of a harsh astringent Nature,
and very hot, as the original Spirit in all things is. For this cause all Beer
that is boiled much, and has store of Hops in it, will keep a long time; but
then it heats the body and causes the Stone, if it find matter to work upon,
and several other Infirmities; so that it is no ways to be accounted so good as
Ale.

For Ale is a very excellent sort of Drink, if well ordered; and as the
predominant Quality in Beer is Martial and Saturnine, Hot and Fierce, so on the
contrary, that in Ale is Solar and Venerial, viz. Sweet and Balsamic, endued
with a mild soft friendly Nature and gentle operation; it sweetens the blood,
opens the body and purges by Urine. Hops are very wholesome to be put into Ale
in a small Quantity, but they ought not to be boiled; but thus you may do it,
fill your Copper or Vessel you use for that purpose with your Wort, make it
boiling hot, then take what Quantity of Hops you please, and infuse them about
half an hour, and then strain them out, not letting it boil at all, and then
for certain you have all the Virtues of the Hops that are proper for the body;
for the Wort will extract and receive the pure spirituous Parts and balsamic
Virtues of the Hops in as little or less time than the hot Liquor did the sweet
Quality of the Malt in the Mash-Tub: There is the very same cause and reason
for the one as for the other.

Likewise, the Ale ought to be thoroughly wrought or fermented, that thereby it
may be cleansed from its Yeasty substance, which most Ale in London is clogged
with, which makes it grow sour in a few days; and besides, before it is sour it
fouls the body, and sends dull dark Fumes into the Head, palls and flattens the
edge of Appetite, and disorders the Stomach. But none of these Inconveniences
happen when Ale is well brewed, and has wrought as it should do, wherein
special care is to be taken, that it be not set to working whilst the Wort is
too hot, for that causes too violent a motion, which weakens the original Heat,
suffocates and wounds the pure Spirit, which some call fretting; and this does
in some degree destroy the balsamic or sweet Body; and whenever it happens, or
that your Drink works too much or too furiously, be it Ale or Beer, it will not
keep, but turn sour or eager sooner than the other that is put to work in such
a degree of heat as it will but just move or ferment gently and mildly; for if
your Wort be put a working before the fiery heat or sulphurous Vapors be
extinguished, which are of a contrary Nature to the genuine natural Heat of the
Wort, as containing the fierce Spirits of the Fire, then presently the
balsamic body is wounded, and turns sour sooner or later according to the
degree of the motion; for this fierce motion or working wastes the pure
spirituous Balsam, and awakens the original Qualities of Saturn and Mars, viz.
an astringent Eagerness, or sour hard Quality, that would not have been
manifested, if this irregular Motion had not excited it.

On the other side, the Wort ought not to be cold, for then the spirituous
Quality becomes (as it were) flat; for the Heat that proceeds from Fire, and
remains in such Liquor, is a great Quickener and Awakner of all the Properties,
and of good use in this respect, provided it be not too fierce. And further
note, That all stale hard Beer, whether strong or small, is more or less
injurious to most men's Health, especially those whose Natures are subject to
breed the Stone and Gravel.

Of Small-Beer.
There are generally great Errors committed in brewing Small-Beer, viz. most
House-Wives and some Brewers let their first Liquor stand too long in the
Mash-Tub with the Malt, that is to say, an hour and a half or two hours, which
stirs up and awakens a fulsom sour and keen Quality, which would be prevented,
if it stood but one hour: And this is not only injurious to the Ale, or best
drink, but hurts and spoils the Small-Beer that comes afterward; for if once
the original gross keen Qualities be awakened, there is no Charm to lay them
again, no Remedy or Art can help, but all such Small Beer will prove not only
ungrateful to the Palate and Stomach, but breeds bad Blood, causing sharp salt
Humors, which help to increase that general Disease called The Scurvy. And
except Beer and Ale be every way well prepared, Water is a far better Drink,
and more wholesome; for all Small Beer made after the virtue of the Malt is
washed out, is of a weak fainty sour Quality, and very injurious; for the first
and second Liquors having drained and carried away all the sweet friendly
virtues, what remains is a mere loathing to Nature, only many are used to such
Drinks, so that they cannot well distinguish the evil Natures and Tastes
thereof.

To mend the defect of this gross fulsom small Wort, many will boil it a long
time with those Dregs of Hops that have been once or twice boiled before in the
Ale or strong Beer, whereby there is not the least wholesome virtue left in them,
but only the strong gross astringent bitter Quality; so that in such Small Beer
(as if People studied to do their Bodies a mischief) there is a concurrence of
evil Juices, which if you set Custom aside, are an Abomination to Nature.

It is therefore to be noted, That those that will boil Hops in Beer or Ale,
ought not to boil them more than once, that is, in one Furnace of Liquor or
Wort, but infusing of Hops in boyling-hot Wort (but not actually boiling) half
an hour, or an hour at most, is far the better way, except you brew Beer for a
long Voyage at Sea. But as for those that have no such necessity, but may brew
when they please, there is no reason (if Health, and the true natural virtues
of Drinks be consulted) that Been should be kept purposely till it is stale, and
then drunk; for since the Custom of brewing Beer in England, which is not much
more than two hundred years, and keeping it till it be stale, Experience shows
us, that many Diseases have thereby been occasioned, which hardly had any being
before. For no Drinks or Liquors that are prepared by fire can be made to keep
a long time without hurt to the balsamic and sweet Body. Therefore all stale
hard Beer, be it strong or small, is neither so good to preserve Nature, nor
yet so pleasant, (except custom to a depraved Pallat render it so) as mild
Beer, especially as mild Ale, well brewed and wrought, that it become and is
free from that yeasty Quality (so loathsome, that even Nature spues it out,
which the Ale in London, and many other places in England is subject to) I say,
when mild Ale is thus well qualified, there is no Drink made of Malt so
wholesome, pleasant and proper to preserve Health as that.

It is a great Custom and general Fashion nowadays, to bottle Ale; but the
same was never invented by any true Naturalist that understood the inside of
things. For though Ale be never so well wrought or fermented in the Barrel, yet
the Botling of it puts it on a new motion and fermentation, which wounds the
pure Spirits and Balsamic Body; therefore such Ale out of Bottles will drink
more cold and brisk, but not so sweet and mild as the same Ale out of a Cask,
that is of a proper Age: Besides, the Bottle tinges or gives it a cold hard
Quality, which is the nature of Glass and Stone, and being the Quantity is so
small, the cold Saturnine Nature of the Bottle has the greater Power to
tincture the Liquor with its Quality. Furthermore, all such Bottle Drinks are
infected with a yeasty furious foaming matter, which no Barrel-Ale is guilty
of. This is chiefly caused by the second motion or fermentation; and this
yeasty substance being then excited, and finding no vent as it has in Barrels,
(which are always open at bungs when the Drink works) but here being confined,
and without any evacuation, it grows mad and furious, so that presently it
awakens the internal keen harsh Properties of Nature, which keep it (as it
were) in a continual motion and fermentation; and those cold keen original
Qualities do in some degree devour the sweet balsamic Body, and cause it to
become more cold, sharp and hungry, than the same Ale in Barrels, and also
indue it with a more flatuous Windy Nature; for which Reasons Bottle-Ale or
Beer is not so good nor wholesome as that drawn out of the Barrel or Hogshead;
and the chief thing that can be said for Bottle-Ale or Beer, is, that it will
keep longer than that in Barrels, which is caused by its being kept, as it
were, in continual motion or fermentation.

Of Tobacco.
Tobacco is an Herb of Mars and Saturn; from the first it derives its hot tart
Quality, and owes its strong fulsom poisonous Nature to the latter. It makes a
most excellent Ointment, and is much safer being applied outwardly, than
inwardly taken. It Is one of Nature's Extremes, and there is no way known or
Preparation found out that can destroy its poisonous Qualities, or reconcile
and make it friendly to man's Nature, but only the continual use and custom of
taking it; for this cause, at the first taking, it disagrees with all sorts of
Complexions, with some more, and others less, according to the degree of
Antipathy it bears to each man's peculiar Nature, having a nearer affinity to
some than others.

It being extreme hot in Operation, it is therefore good taken in Pipes, against
all cold windy and phlegmatic Humors, but the constant and common whiffling
it, does not only destroy and render invalid all its Physical Virtues, but
heats and drys up Nature, and powerfully consumes the Radical Moisture, causing
most that use it to spit up the moist matter, which ought not to be drawn out
of the Stomach by such forcible Attractions; it being a general mistake for
People to think that the more thin phlegmy matter they spit up, the better it is
for them, when in truth it is altogether the contrary; for if the healthiest and
soundest of men take Tobacco, it will cause as great Evacuations and spittings
in them, as in the most unhealthy; for this cause the much taking of it dulls
the Stomach, and takes away the edge of the Appetite; whatever matter is
superfluous in the Stomach, Nature will expel by virtue and power of the inward
Heat, if Temperance be observed; but the constant taking of Tobacco is nothing
else but the constuat taking of Physic, though through Custom and Use the same
(as likewise the highest Poisons) may be made familiar to Nature. For Man (as
we have already told you) is a little World, and in him are contained all the
Properties and Qualities of the great World, as well of Poisons as of Virtues.
The nature of Man has Affinity more or less with all things, else Custom could
never cause such poisonous things to become agreeable; yet ought not any to
imagine the common use of such extremes to be the more proper or profitable unto
their Health, because by violence to Nature at first, and continual practice
afterward, they can better endure them, and they seem more agreeable than they
did at first.

I doubt not but some may find benefit by taking Tobacco in Pipes, but then
there must not be a constant taking of it; for then the Physical Virtue will
not continue; for by habit and use such things become like common Food in the
Stomach. Most People that smoke Tobacco, in the beginning forced Nature, and
made her bow to their Inclinations, not for any Distemper, but of a vain wanton
Humor, because of late it is grown the fashion, and many Thousands have
strained and hurt their Health, and brought many Inconveniences upon
themselves, merely to follow this brutish Mode. Some others there are, who
first learnt to take it for some manifest Distemper, which have so far been
excusable (tho yet not one of an hundred of this sort have found it a Remedy;)
for tho Tobacco has been of so universal an use, yet it is no Universal
Medicine. Indeed it has and is endued with its particular Physical Virtues, as
all other Herbs are, and when it is properly applied, and meets with such
Diseases, then it proves effectual, otherwise not: there is as much reason that
any other Physical Herb should be made universal as this, but few men hearken
to Reason; for most (like Brutes) are carried away by Custom, and look on the
Multitude, and make their uncircumcised ways their Rules, childishly saying,
Sure if there were not many excellent Virtues and Benefits to be found in the
use of such things, as the common taking of Tobacco, (viz. five, six, ten or
twenty Pipes a day, and as much strong Drink in one day as might well sustain
five or six men a week) such abundance of Wise and Learned Men would never
practice the same; for (say they) we see our Physicians and Apothecaries, and
the best of our Gentry, such as have been bred in the Universities and Inns of
Court. [But it had been much better they had been of that most excellent.
Employment Jacob's Sons wereof, tho now despised.] Nay, some of our Reverend
Divines themseves will smoke as intemperately as any of the Vulgar. But all
this is still but a fools Argument, to do a thing because he sees others to do
it tho Reason and Experience tells him it is prejudicial.

It is not above sixty or seventy years ago since that only Gentlemen, and but
a few of those took Tobacco, and then so moderately, that one Pipe would serve
four or five, for they handed it from one to another (and it seems were then so
honest as not to fear infecting one another with any French Contagion) but now
every Plowman has his Pipe to himself. In former days Canary was chiefly sold
by the Apothecaries, and perhaps then when Adulteration was not so much in
fashion, might be the best Cordial in their Shop. The name and use of Brandy
was not known till of late; but now the excess of all these things is become
almost general amongst all sorts of People, even amongst those that count
themselves most sober and Religious, and who should set Examples of Temperance
to others it not being esteemed any sin to smoke two, three or four Pipes of
Tobacco at a sitting, and Carrouze strong Drink, Brandy, Wine, and the like, in
perfect Health, and when need or nature does not require such things; and yet
think all is well, if they can but follow their outward Occasions, and keep
themselves from being Drunk, they never regard it, tho one of them do destroy
of Gods good Creatures as much in one day, both in Value, Quantity and Quality
as would suffice five or six. Still, I say, all this is not reconed any sin
amongst many thousands of those counted sober People; the common custom and
frequent use of these Intemperances hides the Evil of them, which few consider,
or if they do, yet they are ashamed to follow the pure dictates of Wisdom, for
fear of displeasing or being hooted at by the frantic Rabble, who gaze, laugh
and rail at all that will not run with them to the same Excess of Riot. There
is scarce any thing in the World that has so much depraved and deprived man of
his understanding, and led him aside from the simple innocent ways of God and
Nature, since his original fall, as Custom and the Example of the Crowd. As in
the government and ordering of Families, if the good man of the House say to
his Wife, It will be best to order the Affairs of our House so and so -- Yes
(presently she answers) it is true; but then what will People say of us? How
strangely will they talk? And what a base Report we shall give occasion to be
raised of us? If we do only those things that are proper and necessary to
preserve the Health of our Bodies and Minds, How many stingy sneaking Names
will they call us, etc? And by this learned Lecture the silly man is
over-perswaded to continue on his old rode of Excess and Superfluity, to the
Displeasure of God, Injury of Nature, Prejudice of his Families Health, bad
Example to his Children, and imparing of his Estate; and all this merely to
avoid the Chat and censorious Tattle of a few Gossips, the wagging of whose
tongues is no more to be valued by any Wise Man, than the Chattering of
Mag-pies, or the buz of Flies in Autumn.

Nothing is more manifest than that there is not one of many Thousands that is
guided by his own Mind, Wisdom or Reason, but the common Custom carries the
day; few ever stand to dispute whether it be good or bad, Is it a Custom, the
Fashion, all the Mode? If it be, there is no scruple to be made. The unlawful
use of Tobacco, Brandy, Wine, etc. and the Intemperance therein is cloaked over
by the wicked Custom of the Multitude. Would not any indifferent body wot it a
sin and a high shame for a Man or a Woman to sit sotting and smoking ten or
twenty Pipes of Tobacco in a day, making the whole House stink an hundred fold
worse than the Saturnine Smoke of Chimnies, and spitting and spawling as though
he had taken a fluxing Potion, and continually spitting it up again, as if his
Chaps had found the perpetual Motion; Would not, I say, all this seem most
Abominable, and be counted a very great Evil and Intemperance, if it were not a
Custom? The very same is to be understood in many other things. Which evil
Customs and Habits all sober well-minded People ought to refrain and cast from
them, and look upon them no otherwise than as Inventions and Snares laid by
evil Angels to inthrall and ensnare mankind, that he may keep them in Darkness,
and that by such their following those evil Customs, they may be always rendered
incapable of understanding God or his own Nature.

How much precious time do Men spend in smoking Tobacco, dosing and stupifying
their Senses? And how many through such neglect of time, and the Expenses,
which this smoking generally draws with it, have half starved their poor
Families, and involved themselves in many Mischiefs and Inconveniences? But to
proceed to particulars.

Tobacco does generally disagree most with the Choleric and Sanguine
Complexion'd People, being an utter Enemy to their Nature; the taking of it in
Pipes does over-heat their Bodies, the Fumes and Smoke thereof do too violently
penetrate and awaken the Center, which always sets Nature into an unequal
motion; for the sulpherous Fumes penetrate too furiously, which does powerfully
stir up and awaken the Element of Water, the attractive and poisonous hot
Qualities of Saturn and Mars being so strong in Tobacco, that rarely any can
take it without much Spitting, which is Injurious to most sorts of People,
except some cold Melancholy or gross Phlegmatic Complexions, who through cold
windy Distempers and watery gross Humors want Evacuations; to such it oft-times
proves profitable, if not taken too frequently, but as it were in a Physical
way. But for others that are in perfect Health, and especially for the Sanguine
or Choleric Complexions it very rarely (if ever) proves beneficial; for it
dries up and exhales that most pleasant moist Liquor, and forcibly draws it
from all parts of the Body, and casts it forth by its poisonous Fumes; and so
the Body being deprived of what should keep it in Temperature, and cool all the
inward parts and Vessels, and sharpen the Appetite, becomes all over hot and
dry, the Appetite dull, the Stomach out of tone, and great drought or desire to
drink follows; and hence it is that the Pot and the Pipe are inseparable
Companions, and still the strongest Drinks are desired by all Smoakers, for
Small will not make Nature restitntion for her losses; for every Extreme begets
its Likeness, and after too great Evacuations there must be Supplies.

I dare from Reason and the Testimony of Experience affirm, that it is absurd
and against Nature, for either young People, or any others that are in perfect
Health, to practice the common smoking of Tobacco, it being an Herb endued
with extreme Qualities; and all such things ought to be cautiously taken into
the Body. I would have every one consider the possibility of Nature in all such
unequal things, especially those whose predominant Quality stands in the high
Poisons, and to observe the Nature and Operation of each thing, and then they
will certainly find the truth of what is mentioned before.

Let us take an Example in strong Drinks and Wine: The predominant Quality
there is a certain Spiritual Heat, and as soon as a Man has drunk them, he
presently feels his Internal Heat or Spirits to be raised or awakened above and
beyond its proper degree, if any quantity be drunk, during the time of its
operation, but afterward it leaves Nature with fewer Spirits than it found in
her; for all Meats and Drinks, and whatsoever else goes into the Body, that is
unequal in its parts, does too violently awaken or kindle the Central Heats,
and raise them from their several Centers, and brings Nature into an unequal
Operation, consumes the Radical Moisture, and as it were burns up the sweet
Oil, and evaporates the pure Spirits; for this cause, after the operation of
such unequal things, most People are possessed with an heavy Dullness and
Indisposition, Fumes and Vapors besieging the Crown, the Senses stupefied or
disordered, the Stomach and Appetite furred and dulled. By which effects all
Men may be sensible that Nature does perfectly hate all Extremes and
Inequality: But on the contrary, if Meats or Drinks be of a simple or middle
Nature, and there be in them no manifest Quality predominant, then they gently
insinuate their Virtues into all parts of the Body, administering both dry and
moist Nourishment, and with silence and concord support the Body in Health.

The Virtue of Tobacco taken in Pipes, is extracted from the Smoke thereof; now
Smoke is unusual to Nature, and a fulsom Steem or Vapor full of dark
Sulpherous Saturnal Excrements, which the Fire and Light casts forth as an
abomination, being void of all real Virtue; it contains a gross Humidity, and a
fierce keen Quality, very pernicious to the pure Spirits: For Smoke proceeds
from the poisonous Juices and Liquor, which the Fire and Air separates and
casts forth, it being a thing that all People endeavor to avoid; and how
inimical it is to Nature, is further manifested by that black sutty Substance
which it leaves behind it, and by its destroying Vegetation; for it contains
two poisonous Qualities, a strong Bitter one from Mars, and a fulsom Astringent
one from Saturn; its black Color shows that its predominant Quality is from
the venomous Center of Saturn, and hence when Tobacco is burned, it sends forth
a strong fulsom scent or smell; offensive to most that are not used to it; nay,
do not the very Breaths of those that take Tobacco perfectly stink? And does
not the smoking of it so defile the common Air, that a Man may know where one
has been that takes Tobacco, they leave such a fetid Vapor behind them? Do
not all or most of our English Herbs when burned, send forth a far better Scent
or Fume than Tobacco does? And I am sure many of them would not only be less
offensive, but produce better effects, as to the Cure of Diseases.

When any Herb, Wood or other thing is set on fire, you may presently perceive
by the scent what Quality was therein predominant, for the Fire powerfully
awakens all the hidden Qualities, which could not be perceived whilst the thing
remained entire. If the chief quality of the Herb or thing burnt, stand in the
friendly Nature, then it sends forth, and is manifested by two Qualities, viz.
a most pleasant sweet Smell or Vapor, chearing and delightful to the Senses,
and also it sends forth a burthensom Fume or Vapor, which incorporates it self
with the Air, and flies away in a Smoke or Steem, which is from the poisonous
Root, the Original of every Life: But on the contrary, if you burn any Herb or
other thing, the predominant Quality whereof stands in the Martial or Saturnine
Poisons, then all such things send forth also two Qualities, viz. a very
unpleasant Scent or Fume, offensive and burthensom to Nature, dulling the pure
Spirits, and as it were suffocating the pleasant thin Vapors of the Air; and
also it sends forth a gross humid poisonous matter, that incorporates it self
with the thickest part of the Air, and evaporates in a Saturnine Smoke; for if
there lie hid any Verrue or Vice in any thing, Fire will unlock all the Gates
and discover it; and if there be any Aromatic or Balsamic Virtue in the Herbs
of Vegetables so burnt, it will appear by sending forth odoriferous and
pleasant Smells: As on the contrary, ill Smells are an evident Testimony of
Saturnine and Martial Poisons being predominant, which is the very Nature of
Tobacco, and therefore not to be so wantonly used as commonly it is.

Lastly, I would not have People imagine that there is the more Virtue in
Tobacco, because the Fumes and Smoke of it will open the Body, and loosen the
Belly, for it is the nature of all Smoke to open, being of a fierce keen
penetrating quality that arises from the Original Poisons in Nature, whence it
has also a sharp fierce humid quality that is exceeding offensive to the Eyes,
like the Fumes that Onions send forth when cut. And we must likewise note, that
when Tobacco was first brought into England, it was ten-fold more offensive to
the Takers thereof than it is now, because their Forefathers were not
acquainted with the use of it, so that they could not entail any desire of it
on their Posterity: For the Children that are begot by Persons, that have
accustomed themselves to the common use of these unnatural things, contract a
kind of unsensible Affinity with such things, as proceeding from the like
matter and Essences, so that thereby there are Foundations laid for
Inclinations toward the use of them: The same is to be understood in other
things, as those whose Parents live much on Flesh or Fish, do lay such
Foundations for an Inclination thereunto in the very Radix of their Children,
that it would prove a very difficult thing for them to refrain therefrom.

So that every succeeding Age does more easily and familiarly, and with the
less difficulty receive these evil Customs and Habits, till in time they become
almost Natural, and thence humane Nature in general becomes weaker and decayed,
and Diseases come into the World with Children as part of their Essence, and
Scurveys and other Diseases grow almost Universal, and all this for want of
Temperance and Discretion in their Progenitors: A sad Inheritance to leave our
Offspring, when we bequeath them our Follies, and intail upon them Miseries
that are but the just Punishments and natural Consequences of them!

Of Clothing, Bedding, etc.
As Moderation, and a frugal Restraint, free from Superfluity or Delicacy in
Clothes, Bedding, etc. does much conduce to the Health of the Body, as well as
of the Mind (which is observed but by a few) so all over-warm Clothing, soft
Feather-Beds and close Houses render Nature so nicely tender, that upon every
small Accident, the Body is subject to various Injuries. First, such usage
makes all the external parts so obnoxious, that every little Cold penetrates
and seizes the Body, which being by these means obstructed, there follows
Coughs, Wheesings, Shortness of Breath, and innumerable other Inconveniences.

2dly, It opens the Pores, by which there is an evaporation of the heat and
spirits, causing a hot faintness to attend the whole Body; it hurts also the
digestive Faculty of the Stomach, dulls the edg and sharpness of the Appetite,
causes Sweating and a general weariness in the whole Body, and disables it to
perform all its Labors and Exercises. The cause of so great Inconveniences
proceeds from warm Clothes, etc. which hinder the most friendly Element of the
Air from penetrating the body, whereby the Spirits become weak and fainty: For
as nothing hurts the Body more than hot sulpherous Airs, so there can be
nothing that does more cheer and refresh the Spirits than cold pleasant Airs,
which is known by every man's Experience.

3dly, Warm and close Houses, etc. are attended with these evil Effects; the
Air, which is the Life of the Spirit, is hindered from having its free egress
and regress, by the close drawing of the Window-Shutters, Hangings and
Curtains, which suffocates the pure volatile spirit of the Air, benums and
stupifies the Senses, and causes an Indisposition from external heat to possess
the whole Body; besides, it is pernicious to the vital Spirits, dulls the
Appetite, weakens the Stomach, and depraves the senses of Tasting, and the
digestive Faculty.

4thly, Soft and Warm Beds, with Curtains drawn before the Windows and about
the Beds, produce these following bad Consequences, both to the body and mind;
the Air being, as it were, penned up, becomes hot and sulpherous, because the
pure thin vapors and spirits thereof are suffocated, and so consequently must
needs be very injurous to them that lie thus in their Beds: Moreover, the Air
cannot penetrate the Body; and so being destitute of Motion, the Stomach and
natural Heat is deprived of its free operation; and this is the Reason that
Suppers are not so well digested, but oftimes become Noxious, causing an
unnatural kind of Sleep, creating an Aptitude in the external parts to glow
with a burning and unnatural kind of Heat: this ill custom is too frequently
used by those who are sick, but especially those that lie in Childbed, to whom
often the consequence is more dangerous: The Chambers of most sick People are
kept so very close, that it will disorder a Healthy Person to continue there
three or four hours; and if so, what detriment then do you think must of
necessity attend the sick, by reason of such hot sulpherous Airs? And indeed,
considering how low and weak their Spirits are, nothing can be more hurtful to
them than this is, under these Circumstances. For these pure thin vapors and
spirits being destroyed by those sulpherous ones, the poisonous and deadly
Vapors are stirred up, which have a powerful influence upon the Body, by way
of simile, and wound the pure Spirits in the Body, causing an unnatural Heat in
all the external parts, with a fainty kind of weakness. This becomes as
offensive as the Heat and Air which proceeds from Charcoal, and is of the same
nature and operation; for in the making of Charcoal, the pure Spirits in the
Wood, which is its true Life, or that sweet Water or Oil, whence the Light has
its bright shining Quality, is suffocated, and in a manner destroyed; for the
Spirits are the Life of the Oil, and the Oil is the house and pleasant
habitation of the Spirits; and in all Preparations where the one is destroyed,
the other dies, as in this of making of Wood into Charcoal, where both the
pleasant Qualities are destroyed, the free Influences of the Air being
hindered, the Spirits and Oil, which are of a friendly nature and operation,
become thereby suffocated. The fire that Wood sends forth has a bright shining
Light, its heat is friendly and refreshing; but Charcoal, tho it has the same
Foundation, and is Wood in the original, yet these two friendly Qualities being
destroyed and suffocated in the making thereof, it comes to be of another
nature and operation, as if it had not been Wood. For these Reasons Charcoal
will not flame nor give a bright light, but its flames are of a sulpherous
Color; for having lost its Moderator or friendly Life, the original Poisons
take place, and its Fire becomes much stronger than that of Wood, and the heat
and fumes thereof burdensome to the pure Spirits of those that are near such
Fires; the dark wrathful Vapors do awaken their simile in the Body. If this
were rightly understood by a delicate sort of People in the World, I am
persuaded they would not fear every small blast of wind, neither would they
deprive themselves of the most pleasant and benign Influences of the Air, which
keeps the essential Spirits living in every Creature, and is indeed the
excellent support of the whole nature of all Beings, giving to them Life and
Vigor. And therefore you dainty Dames that are so nice, that you will not
endure this pleasant Element to blow upon you, unless it be in a hot and
sulpherous day, in which it has not half that power and virtue that it has in
cooler Weather; you, I say, who are so Curious, do but consider a little
seriously what is said, and your own experience may convince you, that there is
nothing better than pure and clear Airs to cheer and comfort Nature, and to
make the Spirits brisk and lively: Are there any more healthy than those whose
Employments and Exercises are in the open Air? Are there any who can endure.
Labor with less Prejudice? Are there any who are generally more Robust? Any
that have better and sharper Appetites than they? Likewise, those that use the
Country-Air much, enjoy, in a great measure, the abovementioned advantages; It
will be very convenient then to use a Medium in reference to Clothes, Houses
and Beds; and of the two, Coolness is much safer (from ones Birth to the Grave)
than Heat, both inwardly and outwardly. Pleasant and gentle Airs shut the
Pores, that the Radical Moisture and Spirits cannot evaporate; they strengthen
Nature, give an edg to the Appetite; the thinner and meaner a man's Clothes
are, the stronger and brisker he is, and his natural Heat and digestive faculty
is also the stronger; besides, thin Clothing (except in cold Weather) makes
People fitter for Labor, and less burdensome, preserves the natural Heat, and
keeps it more Central. Therefore it is that all Creatures that are born and
bred in cold Climates are stronger and better able to endure Hardship and
toilsom Labor than those that live in hot Climates, and are greater Eaters and
Drinkers of Strong Food and Drinks; for this cause most People in cold
Countries are inclined to the Intemperances of Gluttony and Drunkenness more
than in hot, so great is the power and operation of open cold Air; it does
wonderfully strengthen Nature, and nothing can be a greater injury to Health,
than for People to accustom themselves to Tenderness; the more they do wear,
the more they may, so that at last they may have need to carry their Beds on
their backs; for by degrees it weakens the Body, and causes so great a
tenderness, that they find it very troublesome to have the fresh cool Air to
blow upon them; the effects are not better which rich compounded Meats and
Drinks produce in those that are accustomed to them, they weaken the Stomach,
and by their heat contract the Vessels of the Stomach, insomuch that with a
kind of nauseating they both eat and drink, or rather they know not well what
to eat or drink. This is further manifest in those that use to drink Brandy and
other Spirits; for they do so consume the natural heat, that after eating they
feel their Food lie heavy in their Stomachs, and sometimes are apt to cast the
Food up again; thus it is in all sorts of Intemperances, and by the continuance
or abandoning of the use of such unwholesome Liquors, you may change and alter
Nature as you please, either for the better or worse.

But if you will be so habituated and wedded to your unhealthful Customs, that
you value not whether Nature be weak and impotent, tender and unhealthy, then
you may mix your Food with all the Varieties that the East and West Indies
produce, you may make your Drink as strong and Cordial as you list, you make
all your Preparations Ala-mode de France, you may Boil and Roast all your Food
to pieces, till there can be no more Nourishment; then you may wrap your selves
up in Furs, and wear a brace of Night-Caps, and bury your selves every night
over Head and Ears in a Down-Bed, barricado'd with a double Range of Curtains,
keep your House close, and be sure that you skreen your selves up by a lusty
Cole Fire, and fortify your Windows with those Shutters that you may see no
light, nor feel any Air; and when it is nine or ten a Clock in the Morning,
look that you have a good rousing Fire in your Chambers, and Breakfast ready,
and two or three hours after let a plentiful Dinner of varieties be made ready,
with strong and enflaming Liquors: This is the Trade that many Thousands of
this Nation use, as if they studied to bring Diseases upon themselves, and to
dig their Graves with their own Teeth; for in the midst of all their
Affluences, wherein they esteem themselves happy, they are yet most miserable.
But on the contrary, they who would have and preserve their Strength, and a
firm Health both of Body and Mind (which of all Terrestrial Pleasures is the
greatest) will observe these Rules:

First, Let your Meats and Drinks be simple, not compounded of Variety, and of
things disagreeing in their Natures; do not exceed the bounds of that necessary
Nourishment which Nature requires, lest the Natural Heat of the Stomach be
thereby destroyed; be sure that Nature be master, not the Food; use moderate
Exercise and Labor; for nothing does more strengthen the Body and make the
Spirits more brisk and lively than pains taking.

As to wearing of Clothes, use such as are neither too Warm nor too Thin, of
the two, the latter is the best; for it both hardens and strengthens Nature,
and has many other good effects before mentioned. It is also convenient that
the Head and Breast be kept cool, for that strengthens the Stomach, and all the
Vessels thereof; it helps Concoction, and does greatly prevent the generation
of Phlegms and other Crudities, which are apt to obstruct the Passages, from
whence proceed Coughs, Wheesings, Shortness of Breath, and other Distempers,
which Diseases do commonly invade those who accustom themselves to Delicacy and
Niceness: So on the contrary, they who often go into the clear and ferene Air,
whose Employments or Diversions are for the most part in the Fields, have not
only sharper Appetites, but also are not so subject to the Distempers and
Infirmities of the Breast, as the former are, though their Clothes are but poor,
mean, often wet, and their breasts bare; yet it is undeniable but that they are
more healthy than the other, notwithstanding the Intemperances they are guilty
of in Meats, Drinks and Exercises; for their business chiefly consisting of
Exercise, and lying much in motion, and having the free Influences of the Air,
a little Intemperance does not much hurt their Spirits: But such Disorders are
not so easily thrown off by such as are accustomed to fine Food and rich
Cordial Drinks, and their Spirits and heats are not to be compared to the
other; and yet though their Clothing be thin, their Houses and Beds cold, their
Coverings light, though they had not quilted Caps for their Heads, nor Curtains
for their Windows and Beds, nor it may be scarce any other Windows or Shutters
than the Trees that grow before their Houses; insomuch that the Fires, Beds and
Houses of such would kill a great many tender Gentlemen and Citizens; yet we
see they are far more healthy and strong, and nothing so liable to Diseases as
those others which are so nice and curious of themselves: And though their Food
be course and simple, yet it does support Nature more than all the
Superfluities of the other; for this course manner of living does propagate
Health and strengthens Nature, because all such things are equal in their
parts; therefore I would advise all Citizens, whose Affairs are most within
their Houses, to use themselves to wear thin Clothes, and to keep small Fires,
and to let their Houses be as open as may be to the Air; for where this Element
has not its free Influences, the Air in such places is thick, the pure Spirits
and thin Vapors thereof become, as it were, dull and suffocated, that it
cannot penetrate the Body by the way of the Pores; whereas the Radical Spirits
are in a manner supported, refreshed and kept alive by a continual sucking in,
or penetration of that Element, and if there were a total intermission but for
a small time, the Spirits could not subsist, but Death must needs follow; so
where the same is in part obstructed, the Spirits, by reason of hot sulpherous
Airs, grow fainty, and do in a manner die away, and nothing will recover them
but open clear Airs: For the Support, Life, Strength and Vigor of the Body is
the Spirit, and the support and life of the Spirit is the Air; therefore both
Body and Spirits in Man and all other Creatures are not only supported in
Health and Strength, by gross corporeal Meats and Drinks, but also by a pure
thin, spiritual substantial Life, which the Elements of the Body and Spirits in
man do continually suck in like Spunges, from all the four Elements, especially
from the Air, which if it be too close penned up, and has not its free
Influence, it becomes sulphurous, and awakens the dark poisonous fire in the
body, which is the original of every Life, and this it does by simile, as I
have already at large explained. -- Such is the pleasant and friendly Nature of
the Air, that it does (...) a sympathetical operation give life and vigor to
the Radical Moisture and Natural Heat; for this Element hurts nothing, but
preserves all, except those delicate tender Creatures who by a too great
Indulgence of their unreasonable Appetites, and foolish compliance with ill
Customs, willingly deprive themselves of its singular benefits; therefore those
that regard their Healths, ought not to make strong Bulwarks and Fences from
the free visits of so good a friend, but rather court its Familiarity by motion
in the open Fields, airy Houses, etc. I know it is a Custom in many places of
the Country to plant Trees before their Houses, but I am of opinion that they
are not convenient nor profitable, in respect of Health; for it hinders the
fresh breezing Gales of Wind to enter into and sweeten their Houses; also
Trees, Woody places and Valleys, do by simile attract the Clouds and moist
Vapors, which are injurious to some Constitutions of men. It is likewise
convenient that all sorts of People do not accustom themselves to sit by Fires,
especially those made of Cole, or any other of the like Nature, because they do
as it were by a natural simile dry up a Radical Moisture, exhale and suffocate
the Spirits, and with too great violence open the Pores of the whole Body, and
as it were, chill the whole-Body, making it thereby incapable to endure the
Air, without trouble and danger of taking cold; it also dulls the edge of the
Appetite, and sends dark thick Fumes into the Head, weakens the Eyes, and
causes a general indisposition through the whole body. Besides, that heat and
warmth which is procured by Fires, heavy Clothes, etc. is very troublesome, in
comparison of that pleasant natural Heat that is awakened by Motion and Action
in airy and open places; and there is as much difference both in the Appetite,
and the whole state of the Body and Spirits, between the one and the other, as
there is between Light and Darkness, the one being lightsom, airy pleasant,
strong and lively, with a sharp and perfect Appetite, the other being
unpleasant, cold on one side, and hot on the other, dull and heavy, of little
Appetite, and that not good; and so the body being feeble and tender, the man
knows not what to eat, nor what to drink, nor what to wear, he finds every Room
too cold for him, he is indisposed; therefore he must have this and the other
dainty Bit, and this and the other Cordial Drink, but all to little purpose, so
long as they drive their old Trade of Superfluities in the above mentioned
things: A Cup of cold Water or small Drink, and a piece of brown Bread to a
well-prepared Stomach, is above all Dainties. Therefore it is a very
uncomfortable thing for a man to be ignorant of himself; for such never use
things that are friendly to Nature, and the good Health both of Body and Mind;
but on the contrary are diligent to procure such things as are inimical and
hurtful to it. Wisdom, which is certainly great Riches, teaches a man to put an
high Estimation upon mean and simple Things, and to use them all with a
thankful Heart to the Glory of God.

Of particular Trades, and particularly of Seamen.
The last Consideration of the great Benefit of the open Air, leads us to
observe, what Callings and Employments may be esteemed the most wholesome or best
accommodated for the preservation of Health, touching which, we are in the
first place to note, that all sorts of Trades that work in Wood, as Carpenters,
Ioyners, and other Trades of the like Nature, are all of them wholesome
Employments, as well because their Labor consists of sundry motions of the
Body, as for that the various sorts of Woods they work in, send forth most
pleasant and fragrant Smells, which must needs be very refreshing to Nature;
and if those men were Temperate and Careful of themselves not to lift pieces of
Timber beyond their strength, etc. they might enjoy their Health and Strength
even to a good old Age. Also, those Trades and Employments that belong to the
Water, such as Seamen and Barge-men, Skullers, etc. are healthful Employments;
for the pleasant and wholesome Vapors which the Water always sends forth, being
mixed with the friendly and gentle Breezes of the sweet Air, does powerfully
penetrate all the parts of the Body, and cleanses all the passages of the
Breast, makes the Lungs sound, sharpens the Stomach, giving it a good Appetite,
and an easy Concoction; it makes men lively and hardy, and the Bones and
Nerves strong; for they being still in the fresh Air, it is no wonder that they
find such good Effects of it.

I know no Employment men could spend their time about with more Vigor, Health
and Pleasure than This, if the Rules of Sobriety were strictly observed: But
they are a fort of People whom no bounds of Sobriety can limit, such as use no
Medium or Equality in their Meats, Drinks and Exercises; for the greater part
they are excessive drinkers of strong Drinks, such as Brandy, and other
adulterated Spirits, which not only weaken the Natural Heat, but awaken the
Original Fires, and fierce Poisons in Nature, which does cause fiery Passions
and Headstrong Humors in the Mind; and indeed they living on salt Flesh and
Fish, can hardly be free from doing Violence to Nature, because the Spirituous
Parts and Balsamic Body is almost destroyed in that kind of Food, and the
Quality which is predominant, is of a hot, sharp and fierce Nature; and this
Nourishment being commonly taken, does heat and dry up the Radical Moisture,
and cools the refreshing Vapors which proceed from the Elements of Air and
Water, from whence also proceeds unnatural Droughts, and the Generation of the
Disease called the Scurvy, and innumerable other Distempers: But these friendly
Elements, the Water and the Air, give them often great Relief; for otherwise
they could not as they do eat and drink to such an Excess.

Many men of this employ ruin their Health by indulging too much their
Appetites; for they eating and drinking beyond measure, and without exception,
when they come into hot Climates, viz. the East and West Indies, where the
Beams of the Sun are so powerful, that their Pores are opened, and they sweat
continually, and their pure Spirits and Radical Moisture so much exhaled and
evaporated, that they presently feel an inward Weakness and a Decay in the
Natural Heat and in the Stomach, accompanied with cloudy Fumes in the Head;
causing an Indisposition and Weariness through the whole Body, and rendering
Nature incapable to bear such a burden of Intemperances as they lay upon her
without manifest Prejudice. Their eating, I say, of salt Flesh and Fish, and
their drinking of hot and inflaming Liquors, and observing of no fit Season,
nor due proportion of time for taking of Rest, which in hot Countries should be
from twelve of the Clock to three in the Afternoon: These and other
Extravagances bring upon them Fluxes, griping Pains of the Bowels, and Acute
Fevers; their drinking of that Liquor called Punch is also very Inimical to
Health; For the Lime-Iuice, which is one of the Ingredients they commonly use
in it, is in its Nature, fierce, sharp and Astringent, apt to create griping
Pains in the Belly: These and many other Diseases are the direful Effects of
their Intemperance in eating, drinking, etc. But still it is certain none would
be more Healthy than Seafaring men, if they keep within the bounds of
Moderation, and would be but content with the more simple and mean sorts of
Food and Drink, as Bread, Cheese, Butter, Gruels, various Grains and Fruits,
which are both mild and friendly, and would with little use and custom
sufficiently supply Nature with a Nourishment both dry and moist, and that much
better than the various sorts of Food which is generally allotted for Seamen;
salt Flesh and Fish may do well between whiles, if it be sparingly and seldom
eaten; but I would advise such People not to eat too freely of the various
Fruits such Countries afford, and to eat sparingly also of Flesh, Fish, etc.
For all sudden Alterations and Extremes prove very noxious and dangerous to
Nature, especially to such who have in their long Voyages accustomed themselves
to the forementioned things.

CHAP. VII.
Of Wheat and other Grains, Beans, Pease, Herbs, Colworts and Colly-Flowers;
and that the Fruits, Herbs and Grains of our own Country are better, and more
agreeable to our Bodies, than any brought from abroad: To which is added, some
Remarks on Fish.

OF all sorts of Bread, that made of Wheat is the finest and best; some
Astrologers think that this sort of Grain is under the Dominion of the Planets
Jupiter and Venus. As there are several kinds of Wheat, the best is that which
is hard, thick and heavy, clear, smooth, and of the color of Gold, and which
grows in fat and Limy Ground, and afterward has heat in the Mow three or four
Months, by which that raw kind of Quality that is in all Grains, may be fully
digested; the like usuage in Hay, etc. will not be inconvenient. This Grain is
not only the strongest, but of all sorts of Bread the Qualities and Properties
of its Nature stand in the best Equality, only the sweet and Balsamic Quality
does a little predominate, which gives it that pleasant Relish and kindly
Operation, far beyond all other sorts of Bread; there is scarcely to be found
any Grain, Herb or Fruit in the whole Creation so highly graduated in Nature as
Wheat, or where the Forms and Qualities of Nature stand in more exact and
perfect Equality; therefore it does justly challenge the first place and
pre-eminence of all sorts of Bread or Food; it is the Foundation of all good
Nourishment, called by the wise Man, The Staff of Life; and our Savior Christ
compares the Heavenly and Spiritual Food of the Soul to Bread, which does not a
little Illustrate the excellency thereof. Wheat ought not to be ground at Mill
above a day or two before it be made into Bread; for when the Body is broken,
the pure Volatile Spirituous Parts and oily Balsamic Body, will more or less
evaporate, according to the time it has lain ground, unless the Flour be packed
up hard and close in Casks, as Seamen and Merchants do when they carry it to
Sea, by which means the Spirituous and Oily Quality will be somewhat longer
preserved; but still when it comes to be used, they will find it to be much drier,
and the Bread made of that Flour is not to be compared in goodness to that made
of Wheat newly ground, it is neither so sweet nor so moist as the other: This
Grain is so sound and firm in its Nature, that if it be not ground, it will
endure to be kept for several Years, but if once broken, the Volatile Spirit,
which is the preserver of all things, will evaporate, and then the sweet
friendly oily Quality is quickly destroyed, and it loses its natural Smell,
Color and Taste, and generates Worms; but when the other lively and pleasant
Qualities are preserved, no Vermin will breed in it.

I confess it is very hard to hit the proper Season of Reaping this and other
Grains, the Medium between the time of standing too long, and cutting too soon,
is to be regarded; but of these Evils or Extremities, the lesser, which is the
later, is to be chosen; for if it be cut down three or four days before it
comes to its full Ripeness, it will gain what was wanting by lying in the
Sheaf, and heating in the Mow, by which means you shall not only preserve it in
its natural Color, but it will also be heavier and fuller, yielding more and
better Flour: If you let it stand too long until it be over-ripe, then it will
scarce recover its self; for when this or any other Grain comes to its full
strength and ripeness and it be not then cut down, the pure Volatile Spirit and
oily Body begins to evaporate, as the gross phlegmy matter in any Body is
exhaled and digested by the Influences of the Sun, so also the Spirituous Parts
and Oily Body will be exhaled and evaporated by virtue of the same Influences,
after the drying up of the former gross matter, by which the Balsamic Body is
as it were captivated; for the Sun works first in the phlegmy and gross Body,
which when it is exhaled, the pure Essential Spirits and Balsamic Virtues
being set at liberty, the Sun also will immediately work on them too, and dry
them up to that degree, as 'twill be beyond the Power and Efficacy both of
Nature and Art to retrive, an example we have often of this in Hay, etc. Your
Wheat by too long standing grows (as I have already said) not only lighter, and
loses its natural Color, and will not afford so good nor so much Bread, but it
also is harder of Concoction, and creates Obstructions in the Stomach; the wise
Man says there is a proper Season for all things under the Sun, which without
doubt is to be principally regarded in Reaping and Gathering of the Fruits of
the Earth.

If you set any value on Health, and have a mind to preserve Nature, you must
not separate the Finest from the Coursest Flour, because that which is Fine is
naturally of an obstructive and stopping Quality: But on the contrary, the
other which is Course is of a Cleansing and Opening Nature; therefore that
Bread is best which is made of both together; for in the inward Bran and Skin
of the Wheat is contained an oily Quality, which is of a sweet friendly Nature,
by reason whereof, the Bread which is made of fine and course together, will
not only be sweeter, and keep longer Moist, but is also more wholesome, easier of
Concoction, and does gently loosen the Belly, and if plentifully eaten, it will
cleanse and free the Passages from gross phlegmy Matter, it will strengthen
also more than the other Bread, made of the finest Flour, it will be harder,
and appear staler at three days old, than the other will be at six or seven. It
must be confessed that the Nutrimentive Quality is continued in the fine Flour,
yet in the branny part is contained the opening and digestive Quality, and
there is as great a necessity of the one, as the other, for the support of
Health; that which is accounted the worst, is as good and benefical to Nature
as the best; for when the finest Flour is separated from the coursest and
branny parts, neither the one nor the other, have the true Operations of the
Flour of Wheat. This may be illustrated by the Example of Milk, which of it
self is mild and nutritive; but when it is turned into a Curd or thick
Substance, there remains a thin and wheyey part, both which has not the true
Nature, Quality and Operation of Milk, the Curd being of a hard, tough and
obstructing Nature, and the Whey of a cleansing cold Nature, affording but a
little Nourishment.

By what has been said, we may gather that the eating of fine Bread is inimical
to Health, and contrary both to Nature and Reason, and was at first invented to
gratify Wanton and Luxurious Persons, who are ignorant both of themselves, and
the true Virtue and Efficacy of natural things.

But there is a great deal of Care and Skill to be observed in making of Bread;
that Bread which is Leavened, provided it be not too much, is the best; for the
sower Quality that is in it does much help Digestion, and sharpens the
Appetite, and is altogether as pleasant to those that are used to it as Bread
made with Yest; it is both Wholsomer, and of greater Antiquity, and more
agreeable to the Stomach; likewise, that Bread is best that is light, and full
of small Eyes, as they call it, being well kneaded and thoroughly baked; for the
good working of Bread does not only make it pleasant to the Pallat, but also
renders it easier of Concoction, smooth and free from crumbling; some make it
with warm, others with cold Water, it matters not which is used, for good Bread
may be made with either; but it is to be noted, that after you have wetted and
kneaded your Dough, you should let it lie an hour or two, then work it up into
Loaves; this way of doing it will make it more light and pleasant; but let not
your Loves be too big nor too little, for your Bread both bakes and eats best
when the Loaves are of a middle Size. In some Countries they make their Bread
with Leaven, and the mixture of the Lees of Wine, and this makes excellent
Bread, but care must be taken that your Oven be not too hot, nor your Fire too
quick, but it should be heated gradually; and if your Oven chance to be too
hot, let it stand a while until the fierceness of the Heat be gone, or else
your Bread will not only be scorched and burned on the outside, but will be
also unbaked in the inside; if it is not baked enough, then it is offensive to
the Stomach, heavy and unpleasant to the Pallat; if over-baked, then it is dry,
and does not afford good Nourishment; moreover, it is to be baked with a good
brisk Heat, and not to stand long in the Oven, for thereby it will lose that
brave Color, wherein it resembles that which it is made of, viz. Wheat.

Bread is one of the best sorts of Food, free from Corruption and other evil
qualities, yet it is made better and worse according to the Judgment of those
that make it, and according to the kneading and baking thereof; that which is
not well-wrought will neither bake so well, nor so soon as the other: Wheaten
Bread bakes sooner without, than with Rye or Barley.

Barley is of a Saturnine Grain, and of a courser and colder quality than
Wheat, and affords less Nourishment; if the branny parts be not separated from
the Flour thereof, then it makes excellent Bread, and is as well Physic as
Nourishment for those that are afflicted with Obstructions of the breast,
especially such as have proceeded from superfluous and frequent eating of Fat
Meats, and excessive drinking of strong Liquors: the Bread being of a drying
and apperitive operation, helps Concoction, and cleanses Nature, and is to be
preferred before fine Wheaten Bread. Our Citizens and others that live at ease,
and feed too plentifully on rich and fat Meats, have their Stomachs made so
slippery by the oily kind of quality of the things they eat, that the Retentive
faculty of the Stomach cannot long retain the Nourishment, but letting it slip
out of the Stomach, as it were, half Concocted, causes griping Pains in the
Bowels, and flatuous gouty Humors in the Joints: Barley Bread and other mean
Food, with drinking moderately, and using Field Labor and Exercises, are
excellent Antidotes against these and many other Diseases.

Rye also is an excellent Grain, of a cooling opening Quality, it makes some of
the best Bread, if it be mixed with Wheat; for it is not so apt to obstruct
Nature as Bread made of Wheat alone: It Is true, this Bread at first will not be
very toothsome and pleasant to those that are accustomed to eat and drink of
the best and richest things, neither will it appear to be so wholesome; for it is
apt to gripe a little; but this proceeds from the Nature of the Grain, which is
to open and cleanse. And I dare affirm, that they who use it will attribute
many good Virtues to it, such as these: It cools the Body, it opens and frees
the Passages from Obstructions, and prepares and sharpens the Appetite; but it
is to be supposed that the branny parts be used with the flour, otherwise it is
not so wholesome, yet the coursest of the Bran is to be separated from the other:
I have more than once told you, that the purest and finest of the Flour of most
Grains is of a glutinating, clamming and obstructing Nature. But on the
contrary, this Grain contains within it a certain slippery and moist Quality,
which helps Concoction and sharpens the Appetite; therefore they are not to be
separated; for as the one has a Nutrimentive Quality and Operation, so the
other has a Digestive and opening Quality, the Qualities of Nature standing, as
it were, in equal weight and measure, there can be no supervacuous and
unnecessary Property in this or any other sort of Bread; for when once the
sweet Harmony and Concord of the parts are broken, the Nature of the thing is
changed, and contrary operations must needs follow in one and the same body.
That the branny and husky part is good in any Grain, it will further appear by
this one familiar Example: If you give to Horses (that commonly eat Oats)
Wheat, Barley, etc. wherein is more flour and less brau than in the other, it
will heat the Blood and cause Diseases; for as the latter is stopping and
obstructive, and over-heats the body, so the other is cooling and cleansing;
but the better way of feeding this kind of Animals, is to give them the Corn in
the Straw, which upon trial will be found to be excellent strengthening and
nourishing Food, and that from the Straw and Chaffy part mixed with their
Oats, which opens, unstops and cleanses the Passages from all kind of
Obstructions: This is further confirmed, if we look into the Country, where the
Peasant, that has no better than course Bread, and other hard and mean fare, is
healthier, stronger, and more agile and sprightful than the City-Cormorant,
whose brutish Appetite cannot be satisfied with any other thing than the
costliest and richest Varieties that Nature can afford: These latter sort of
People accustoming themselves to the highest and finest Preparations of Food
and Cordial Drinks, are certainly the most unhealthful Men in the World;
because this sort of Food being in its own nature too Spirituous, does prey
upon the natural Heat, causing either a suffocation or evaporation of the
Spirits, and contracting the Vessels of the Stomach, whereby the whole body
seems to languish: Every sort of Food has its various operations upon the body
and spirit of a Man, and that by way of simile. Therefore all Meats and Drinks
ought to be equally compounded of a body and spirit, as most things are in
themselves before the Artist makes the separation; the Food as the Man should
be compounded both of body and spirit. And to conclude, I know of no separation
that should be made of the one from the other, but what is done inwardly by the
act of the Stomach and natural Heat.

Of Pease and Beans.
Beans and Pease are Mars's Grains, being drier and courser than the former:
Pease of the two are the finest and easiest of Concoction, they are both of a
Windy Quality, yet being eaten when they are dried, are not only wholsomer than
the Green, but also afford a better and finer Nourishment, not so apt to
generate Crudities in the Body when they are boiled in plenty of Water; the
Winter-season is the most proper time for eating of them; for then the natural
Heat being more central, the Stomach is much the stronger; they are a good Food
for young healthy People: But Green-Pease and Beans are endued with a gross
Phlegmatic Nature, and being frequently eaten generate many gross raw Humors
in the Body; but in the declining part of the year, when the Sun and Elements
have consumed and dried away the gross humid parts, they thereby become firmer
and wholsomer Food, and will continue good and sound for several years; but if
they be cut down before the Sun has acted its part in extracting the gross
Juices, they will presently corrupt. Therefore the frequent eating of such
green Pease is of evil Consequence, and detrimental to the Health; they afford
not only unfirm Nourishment, but also cause Obstructions, Fevers and Pains in
the Bowels, with Fluxes and a great many other Maladies. That this kind of
Nourishment is not good, will further appear by giving you an Example from
Cattle, which when they are fed with green Food, as Grass or the like, their
flesh and fat is soft, greasy, and full of phlegmy gross Matter, neither will
it take Salt, nor keep half the time as that which is fed with Hay, Corn, and
the like; nay, they are fainter and weaker, and more apt to tire in their
Labor, and to take Surfeits, than those that feed with Hay, etc. I do not say
but green Pease may be eaten now and then; for they are in their Nature opening
and slippery, which is caused by the great Quantity of Phlegmy Matter that is
in them: Yet these Rules should be observed in the dressing of them; boil them
in good store of River-Water, let your Fire be quick, and your Pot open all the
time of their boiling, and they are to be put in when the Water begins to
sees, and not before. By this way of Preparation they are made wholsomer than
otherwise they would be.

There is a sort of Bean called by the French, English Bean, but we commonly
call them Kidney or French Beans, they run upon sticks like Hops; these are
mostly eaten when Green; they are of an opening and cleansing Nature, purge by
Urine, and help Concoction; the usual way of dressing them is to boil them in
the Shells, and to eat them together. They far exceed and are much better than
other Pulses that are eaten green, being in their nature and operation more
mild and gentle.

Of Herbs, Raw and Boiled.
The best raw Sallets are made of Spinach, Parsley, Sorrel, Sage, Pepper-grass,
with a small quantity of the Tops of Pennyroyal and Mint; for all these have a
chearing and warming Quality, but Lettice and Onions should be sparingly put
in, because they are endowed with a gross thick Juice, and are of a poisonous
Nature, sending Fumes into the Head, whence proceeds a dull kind of Drowsiness,
and propensity to sleep, which is offensive to the Eyes and Brain. There are
other Herbs made use of in Raw Sallets, but the forementioned are the best and
most material Ingredients. The proper season for eating them is from the
beginning of February to the middle of June; the earlier in the Spring so much
the better, and the more frequently they are eaten at this season, so much the
wholsomer; for they are opening and cleansing powerfully, the Blood is
purified, the natural Heat is tempered and increased, the Spirits are made
brisk and lively, the Appetite is quickened, and Concoction facilitated. Raw
Herbs are a sublime kind of Food, and are to be preferred before that which is
boiled; for the pure Volatile Spirit in the Herbs, whence the Animals fragrancy
proceeds, cannot endure the violence of the fire; but in boiling, a great part
of it is evaporated; for this cause boiled Herbs lie heavier and colder in the
Stomach than Raw, which is scarcely credited by any; for they that love boiled
Herbs, do generally eat much Flesh with them, and so cannot discern the
operation they have: The strength and comforting Quality of every thing
consists principally in the spirituous parts, which are lost in the boiling,
and so they become just of another Nature; that lively Tincture and spirituous
part, which it had whilst raw can never be retriv'd by all the Ingredients
Nature or Ar(...) can afford: Do not all Creatures eat their Herbs raw, and are
they not sustained by them to admiration? They are powerful Preservers of Life
and Health, far beyond all the contrived Preparations of other Food. In most
Countries of this World, the Inhabitants thereof do eat (England excepted)
their Herbs Raw, both in hot and cold Climates: This kind of Food is
preferrable to the great Quantities of Flesh, Butter, Cheese, etc. which are
too often eaten among us, these latter not only affording too great store of
Nourishment, but being naturally hot, they overheat the Blood, and are heavy to
be digested, by reason of the oily fat matter all such things do plentifully
contain, they dull the Appetite, and obstruct, and as it were fur the Passages.

Besides the Virtues we have ascribed to Raw Herbs, God Almighty has created
them for the use of Man, and they were the first Food which was allotted him,
after the Fall, where he says, Every Green Herb shall be unto you for Food:
And in the first Age of the World, though their Food was scarcely any thing
else but Green Herbs and pure Water, yet when was there any Generation since
that time, who has lived in so perfect Health, and to so great and flourishing
an Age? The great and illuminated Prophet Moses did endeavor to wean (as it
were) the Children of Israel from eating of Flesh in their forty years Journey
in the Wilderness, and gave them Laws to distinguish between the Clean and
Unclean Creatures, but you could never read of any Laws forbidding the use of
green Herbs. Now the best Ingredients, to mix and eat with Raw Sallets, are
Oil, Salt, Vinegar, Verjuice, Oranges, etc. These make them warm in the
Stomach, and pleasant to the Taste; but you are not to use these Ingredients
when you eat at the same with them Flesh, Butter and Cheese; for so many
Mixtures are not agreeable to Nature: Some love Sugar in their Sallets, which
is better left out, if you eat Flesh, etc. with them; for Sugar does not well
agree with fat Meats, nor with Oil, except in way of Medicine.

As to Boiling of Herbs or Sallets, I shall give you an account of the best way
of their Preparation, and how they shall be most conduceable to Health, which
will appear by the Observation of these following things.

First, Your Herbs and Pulses must be fresh gathered; for if they be kept two
or three days before they are used, or if they lie too close together, the pure
Spirits which are very tender in them, will be destroyed and exceedingly
diminished, the evaporation of the Spirits make them dull and heavy, affording
little or no Nourishment, and that none of the best.

Secondly, The Vessel or Pot in which such things are boiled ought to be large,
that it may contain a good quantity of Water, for Water is an Element so
friendly and clean, that it helps to preserve the Spirituous Parts, and
Balsamic Body, and to digest the gross phlegmatic Substance; it is the
Sweetner, Preserver and Purifier of all things.

Thirdly, You should have a quick Fire, and are not to put in your Herbs into
the Pot until the Water boil, and then increase your Fire, not suffering it to
stand too long before your Pot boil again; when that is done, let there be no
Intermissions in the boiling; for there is nothing that does more deaden and
flat the Spirits, especially in green Herbs, than slack Fires and such
Intermissions.

Fourthly, So soon as your Pot or Vessel boyls, then you should presently
uncover it, that these Sulphurous Fumes and Vapors may evaporate, which are
awakned, and forced into the Food by the Fire, and also that the fresh and
friendly Influences of the Air may have its free egress and regress, for the
Air is the essential Life of the Spirit: No Food can be well prepared, if the
Vessel be covered.

Fifthly, Your Herbs and Pulse should not be over-boyled, for then the
spirituous parts and balsamic body will instantly evaporate, and your Food
will become flat and heavy, losing its pure natural Color, Smell and Taste,
and is nothing so pleasant and wholesome; it were better that it be under than
over done, because of the tenderness of the green Herbs.

If these forementioned Rules in boiling be not observed, then such Food will
lose its proper Virtue and lively Tincture, and will afford but a very dull,
thick and gross Nourishment, and begets bad Blood, and many other ill Effects;
but if they be thus prepared, you may the more boldly venture on eating of
Flesh with them, for they will purge and cleanse the Stomach, and help the
digestive faculty to concoct that Food, which appears more difficult to be
digested.

Of Colworts, Cabbage and Colly flowers.
Colworts are the best of the three, being of a more lively, opening and
cleansing Nature and Operation than the other two, because they grow open, so
that the Air, with the Sun, has its free Influences upon them, and this is also
the Reason that they look of a greener and fresher Color than many other
Vegetables; they are also more wholesome: If you boil green fresh. Colworts, and
keep them till next day, and do the like with a Cabbage, keeping it likewise
till the next day, your Cabbage shall smell more gross and fulsomer than your
Colworts: Also the Juice of green Colworts is of a thiner Substance, and more
penetrating than that of Cabbages; Cabbages are so close compacted, that the
Air cannot penetrate them, neither can the Sun have so free and powerful
Influences upon them as on Colworts, so that they become of a grosser thicker
Substance, fuller of Phlegm, and gross Juices, and more subject to
Putrefaction; for the Air is the true Life of the Spirit in all Vegetables: By
this and the Saline Quality in the Earth, they are preserved in their greeness
and freshness; but that which is earthed up and hid from the Air, cannot be so
wholesome, and is more fading; where the Saline Power is strong, the Vegetables
are also lively and strong: For Example, lay a heap of Dung in the Field, and
let it lie a Week in the Rain, and then move it, and leave no Dung on that
place, and you shall presently see that the Grass in that place where it did
lie, will be strong, and of a deep green fresh Color, far beyond the Grass in
the place where the Dung was spread, and the Reason is very apparent, for the
Rain did wash a salt oily kind of Liquor into the Earth: The same Reason will
hold in other things, as in your low Grounds, that lie between Hills and
River-sides, which are more fruitful than other Fields, because the Rain does
wash a certain Fat and Saline Quality from the Hills, which drains down to the
lower Grounds and Valleys; also the Rivers sometimes overflowing their Banks,
and reaching the adjacent Grounds, do leave (when the Water retires back) a
certain fat saline Quality behind, which makes it more fruitful than otherwise
it would be.

Colliflowers are somewhat of the Nature of Cabbage, only they are a little
sweeter, they afford but very gross Nourishment to the Body; they generate
abundance of windy and flatulent Humors, and send a great many Fumes up to the
Head; our Soil commonly is not Rich enough for them; they are more forced by
Art and Dung, than they grow naturally; they being a Phlegmatic kind of Food,
or rather more subject to Putrefaction than Cabbage, yet both the one and the
other should be eaten very sparingly: But as for fresh green Colworts, they may
be eaten liberally, especially by those that eat fat Flesh plentifully.

Of ROOTS.
Turnips are a Root of a very innocent and mild Nature; it has several good
Properties, it removes Obstructions which lie in the Passages, makes the Belly
soluble, and mightily helps Concoction by its moist and slippery kind of
Quality; one may eat plentifully of this with a great deal of safety; but of
Flesh sparingly, as most Nations do (England excepted;) In France, Spain and
Portugal, and other Countries, a pound of Flesh, with Herbs and Roots, will
make a Dinner for four or five People: But an English man will eat at one Meal
a Pound or two of fat Flesh, and scarcely a bit of Bread with it; there are but
too many in this Nation that follow this dangerous and noxious custom.

Turnips being a very good and wholesome Root, I recommend them to every Bodies
use, especially to those that eat Flesh plentifully: I confess when they are
eaten by themselves, they afford but weak Nourishment, and are a Phlegmatic
kind of Food; you must have a care what Ground you sow them in, for all sorts
of Ground will not bear good Turnips; Doctors say, that they are a Physical
Root, and an Antidote and Remedy against Consumptions, and several other
Diseases; but I know no such Virtue in them, yet they are good for weak
Stomachs, being easy of Concoction; for always weak heats should have a
proportionate quantity of Food. And I cannot think, as some imagine, that they
are so proper for languishing Diseases, because they are of a watery cold Nature
in themselves, and do breed but unfirm Nourishment; besides, they seldom come
to Maturity until the declining part of the Year, viz. September and October,
etc. at which time the central heat of the Earth being weak, all its
Productions are also weak, and endowed with gross phlegmy and cold Juices; for
the Sun being in its Declension, brings all things under the like Circumstance:
Therefore all things, viz. Herbs and Roots which are brought forth in this
Season, are of a sainty and weak Nature, neither are they so good for Food or
Physic; besides Roots are not so good in cold Countries, as Fruits and Herbs
are, being generally more cold and earthy, because they want the friendly
Influences of the Sun and Air: Therefore Roots have not that pleasant fragrant
Smell and Taste, which Herbs Fruits, etc. have. But Turnips, Potatoes, etc.
that grow almost in the top and surface of the Earth, are better than other
Roots, and more familiar to our Natures than such as grow deeper in the Ground,
because they participate more of the Influences both of the Air and Sun than
the other; when they are boiled in good Water, and eaten with Butter, Salt and
Bread, they are good food both for the Sick and the Healthy.

The Carrot is a Root next in Goodness and Virtue to this, the best sort of
them are those which are of the deepest Red Color; when they are eat in their
proper season, they are a pleasant wholesome Root, which is from the Month of
July to the Month of December, or thereabout; after that time they are not so
wholesome, especially those that are taken out of the Ground and kept all the
Winter and Spring. This Root being eaten presently after it is pulled up out of
the Ground, and when it is well ordered, is not much inferior to Turnips, they
being of an opening and cleansing Nature, easy of Concoction, and may with
safety be eaten plentifully, either without or with Flesh. The Color of
Carrots do declare that there is an excellent Virtue in them.

Next to this is a Parsnip, which is a good hearty Root, yet not so good a
Friend to Nature as the other two; for they are harder of Concoction, and being
eaten, are much apter to create Obstructions in the Stomach, and breed a
grosser kind of Nouris^ment, and consequently a thicker and grosser Blood: It
is not good to keep this Root above a day or two before it is used, for then
they will prove dull upon the Pallat, strong in their taste and smell, heavy and
hard of Digestion, and this proceeds from the evaporation of the spirituous
parts, as well before as in their preparation; for the Spirit is the Life of
the oily body, and the oily body is the House of the Spirit, and the one cannot
subsist without the other; the eating of them immediately after they are
plucked up out of the Ground, must then be the fittest time.

That the Fruits, Herbs and Grains which our own Climate produces, are more
Natural and Proper to maintain Strength and preserve Health than those that
come from other Countries, especially from hot.

Every Country and Climate does by God's Divine Appointment and good
Providence, bring forth such Herbs, Fruits and Grains, as are proper and most
agreeable to the Constitutions of the People born in that place, both for Food
and Physic, as the Lord in the beginning did tell Adam, That every green Herb
and Seed should be for Food. Do we not see that those that are born and bred in
Spain or Italy, and they that dwell in Turkey do differ much from us, both in
their Complexions, Manners, and also in their Customs, every Country differing
from another in their distinct Inclinations and Fashions, according to the
Nature of that place, and the Elevation of the Pole they are under? And as each
Country has distinct Languages, which cannot be understood by People born in
other Climates; so have they likewise different Constitutions, Inclinations and
Complexions, their Herbs, Fruits and Grains differing in their Quality and
Operation: These great differences both of Languages, and of all other things
that is between each Country, is not caused by the Sea, which divides each
Country from another, but from the differences of places; for every Hundred
Miles through the whole Universe the People differ, and their Speech; so that
if a man Travel five Hundred Miles, he shall not be capable to understand one
Word of an Hundred; Do we not see this in our own Country, where those that
live in the North, cannot understand those of the West, which is caused from
the differing Elevations of the Pole and Influences of the Sun, with concurring
Constellations, which also causes all other things to differ both in their
Nature and Operations; for this Reason one place is more famous than another,
in respect of diverse things; and if our own Country does vary and differ so
much in the compass of three or four hundred Miles, what do those remote parts
that are distant from us many thousand Miles, as the East and West Indies? The
People of those places in all particulars do much differ from us in their
Complexions, Constitutions, Religions, Inclinations, Governments, Shapes and
Languages; their Animals, such as their Beasts, Birds, Fishes, etc. are all of
them of a different Nature, Shape and Form from ours; so also are their Herbs,
Fruits and Grains, both those that are proper for Food, and also for Physic:
Do not the Northern cold Climates give all the beasts of the Field hardy
Constitutions and Natures, and warm Clothing? From whence come your brave
thick Furs? Do not the Creatures in cold Countries produce them? And do not the
Sheep in cold Climates afford abundance of strong Wool? Whereas the Sheep in
hot Countries produce but a little Wool, and that which is very fine; and many
of their Creatures have hardly any Wool or Hair on them. The wonderful and wise
Creator has endued every Country and Climate with such a permanent Nature,
even in the beginning, as brings forth Herbs, Fruits and Grains, which are
proper and most agreeable to the Natures and Constitutions of the People born
in that place. And as the cold Countries produce abundance of Cloth and Furs;
so on the contrary, hot Climates afford Silks and find Calicoes, and the like,
which are not proper nor useful for us, neither are ours for them: How contrary
to Reason and Nature it is for men in cold Countries to cloth themselves with
Silk and fine Calico? And so on the contrary, for those in hot Countries to
cloth themselves with our strong thick Woolen Cloth and Furs? But men's Health
is not so much endangered by outward Garments, as by too great an Indulgence of
Nature in the use of Meats and Drinks, the one being External, and the other
Internal.

It is known by Experience, that the mixing of the East and West-Indian and
Spanish Fruits, with our Food and Drinks, have increased Diseases, and made the
People more sickly than in former Ages, with many new Distempers, which had not
any existence among us; for most or all those things that are brought from
those Countries are not proper for Food, and are also endued with contrary
Natures to the Fruits and Grains our own Country produces, as all sorts of
Spices, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Pepper and Ginger, they are all
extreme hot and dry, and are not proper to be used, but in a Physical way; and
indeed we do not need them in that way neither; for we have Herbs and Roots
that grow in our own Climate more proper for that use, though the Physicians
have been as willing to deceive the People, as the Merchants, by telling them
the many excellent Virtues contained in them: Yet it cannot be denied but that
those Spices are Excellent in their Nature and Operation, though not proper for
our Constitutions, nor to be mixed among our Food and Drinks; for that Food in
which such things are mixed, does by degrees destroy the Natural Heat of the
Stomach, drying up the Radical Moisture, and those cool Vapors which would
otherwise refresh the whole Body, keeping of it pleasant, making the Spirits
brisk and full of Life; this pleasant Quality is destroyed by Eating and
Drinking such things in which Spices, Sugars and Spanish Fruits are mixed; it
makes the Blood also of a hot, sharp, keen quality, and causes thick hot Fumes
to ascend into the Head, making the Head, Hands and Feet, and all the external
parts to glow with an unnatural Heat; it deadens and dulls the Action of the
Stomach, and takes away the sharpness of the Appetite; this may be known to
every one, if they would observe the operation of such things; for they are
unequal in their parts, the heat bearing a predominacy in them, they do by
Similes cause all sorts of Foods and Drinks, with which the are mixed, to
become like themselves, viz. Unequal, if great care be not taken: And the worst
of all is, after our Stomachs are accustomed to such things, we cannot be well
satisfied without them, for they are in some degree like Wine, whereof if a man
drink frequently, he cannot without a great deal of Trouble, and some Hazard as
to his Health, refrain from it; the like is true in drinking of Brandy and
taking of Tobacco, which Customs are far more dangerous than the former: For
every sort of Food and Drink in which Nature is in its Properties Unequal, does
powerfully stir up and beget its likeness in the Stomach, and causes Nature to
be unequal in her Operations; for no sorts of Meats or Drinks do more destroy
the Health and Welfare of Nature, than those that contain too much Nourishment,
and whose predominant quality is too hot, which generally is the effects of all
such Foods and Drinks, in which the abovementioned Ingredients are mixed.

When I consider the strange and unnatural mixture, and the variety of Meats
and Drinks that are too commonly used, I cannot admire the Unhealthiness of our
Age: And certainly if this Nation do continue and increase their eating and
drinking the improper Fruits, Spices, Wines, and other things that are the
Products and Growths of other Countries, as has been done for these forty or
fifty years last past, we shall be corrupted in our Radixes, as too many are
already; all those things being now commonly used which have greatly encouraged
other Nations to make such quantities of them, as that they are become so
Cheap, that it is scarcely worth the Merchants while to bring them over; for
where there was one pound of Sugar spent forty or fity years ago, now there is
a Thousand; and where there was then one quart of Wine drunk, there is now Ten
Thousand.

The use of Tobacco and Brandy a hundred years since was hardly known; nay, the
use of our Ale and Beer has hardly been above two hundred years, which now we
account most Natural; there is somewhat may be said against Beer, but because
it is made of our own Grain, I shall not say any thing here of its Nature or
Operation, having treated of it in another place. Great has been the Increase
of those Foreign Ingredients of late years, insomuch that they are esteemed
good to be mixed among common Food and Drinks, as also to be taken Physically;
for you may hear many say, that Tobacco is good to prevent Fumes and Vapors
from flying into the Head, and so make it their constant practice to take it.
Now if this had any such operation as they say, the constant use of it would
destroy its Virtues; the same may be alleged of Brandy, Wine, Spices, etc. It
is to be noted and pitied that Aged People do not only eat and drink such
things as are hurtful, but they mix Spices, Sugars and Fruits among all their
Childrens Food, and between whiles give them Wine and strong Drink, which must
be very Injurious to their Health; for all Children are tender, both as to
their Spirits and Bodies; and because they are growing, their Nature requires
great store of moisture, which can be no otherways maintained but by a simple
and mean Food and Drink: If you mix their Food with Sugars, Wine, Spices, and
Spanish Fruits, they will certainly over-heat the Body, stop the Pores, dry up
the Radical Moisture, hinder the pure moist Vapors of the Air that they cannot
penetrate the Body: These destroy the Stomach, blunt the edg of the Appetite,
contracting the Vessels of their Stomachs, making them lean or Consumptive, and
in others breed abundance of gross Phlegmatic Humors, all according to the
Nature of each Child's Constitution: It causes likewise all their external
parts to burn and glow with unnatural Heat, generating many Windy and Watery
Diseases and Evil Juices in their Joints: All these Maladies are much augmented
by other indulgent ways Women use toward their Children, as keeping them
over-warm, especially at night, and feeding of them too often and too
plentifully, insomuch that their Stomachs are always fouled and furred with
gross and Phlegmy Matter, their Food being too much in Quantity and too rich in
Quality, which makes the Children uneasy, apt to cry, and froward, and puts
their Nurses to abundance of trouble, which would be in a great measure
prevented, if Temperance was observed, and Women would be content to give their
Children that kind of Food that were proper for their Ages and Constitutions,
and which does grow under and by the Virtue of our own Constellations; for
every Country or Climate does furnish the Natives thereof with all things, both
for Food and Physic proper to preserve Nature, having more agreement and unity
with our Constitutions. Is there any sort of thing brought from the West or
East Indies, from Spain or any other Country, that is to be compared to our
Bread, Cheese or Butter? Have we not a great multitude of excellent Herbs and
Roots, which make good wholesome Food? And have we not also excellent Water,
which is not only the best of Drinks it self, but by the help of our own Grains
and Fruits, makes various sorts of Drinks as strong as Wine? And do we not make
excellent Drink of Apples, more proper for our Bodies, and more suitable to our
Nature than any of the Spanish Wines? What is it that English People want,
either for the Belly or the Back, if Wantonness or superfluity was set aside?
Are not all the sorts of Food that are of our own Growth more suitable and
friendly to our Natures, than those that come from other Countries? Are not
those that live in the most remote parts of England, and far from Cities and
Seaports, where Money is scarce, and such things dear, that the common People
cannot buy them, most healthful and freest from Diseases? But now those
Outlandish Ingredients begin to be so much admired, that the good Dame, viz.
the Farmers Wife will sell her Eggs, Butter, Cheese and Wheat to buy Sugar,
Spice and Tobacco, which stand them in no stead, only to increase Intemperance
and Distempers. The very Plough-men and Shepherds defile their most pleasant
Air with the fulsom Fumes of Tobacco. Likewise, the common use of these things
have made way for various Trades and Employments, so that a great part of the
People are employed to bring them over, and to distribute them here; so that
there is small hopes of leaving off these Superfluities; they are become as it
were Essential to the Nature of the Users; but the chief Happiness of English
People is, that their own Country does abound with all things that are needful
for the support and preservation of Nature, and that every one is left to his
free choice. Therefore a Wise Man may in the midst of those various
Superfluities live soberly and temperately to his own comfort, and the praise
of his Creator.

2. It is to be observed, that most of the Fruits and Spices that come from
those hot Countries are not only disagreeable to our Natures, but even the
Natives of those places do very moderately and sparingly use them, esteeming
them not fit to mix with their common Food; the same is likewise true of their
Moderation in the use of Wines; for they do not drink it as we do in that
abundance, but sparingly, and mixed with Water; besides, the frequent use of
the forementioned Ingredients do make English men too Effeminate, and do in no
wise agree with their Constitutions; for cold Countries do make hardy, strong
and Martial People, as also Food of that Nature does by its simile maintain and
preserve the Health of the Body and Mind, far beyond what is brought from those
hot Climates. But if the Natives of those Countries should eat and drink those
Spices and Wines in that Quantity as we do, it would as it were destroy the
very Radix of Health, which is one main cause why our English are so unhealthy
when they travel and live in such hot Countries; for they continuing the same
Intemperances which they accustomed themselves unto in their own Countries
(which those places will not admit of) their Bodies and Natures do much alter
and change, when they alter the Climate; and not only our Bodies, but also our
Dispositions and Inclinations are thereby much changed. Therefore all People
ought strictly to observe such degrees of Temperance in such places as are most
suitable and profitable to preserve Health; for not only all sorts of their
Fruits and Food, but their Drinks also do much differ from ours, the
predominant Quality whereof standing chiefly in the Nature of Sol and Venus;
and if such Fruits and Wines be not taken sparingly, they will quickly awaken
their Centers and Natures in the Body, and cause the pure subtle Spirits to
evaporate, as most do find after drinking plentifully of Wine or strong Drink,
and eating Food in which those Rich Fruits are compounded, how indisposed will
Nature be, how heavy and dull the senses, and as it were stupefied? And this is
caused not only by overcharging of Nature with the Quantity, but with the
Quality also of the Food, which does so violently open the Solar and Venerial
Properties of the Body by a sympathetical operation, and does evaporate the
pure Spirits, and consumes the sweet Oil, whence the pleasant Life burns; after
such Intemperance in eating and drinking, you find great alterations in the
state of your Body. Some think, That the stronger the Liquor, and the Richer
their Food is, the more Virtue and Strength is in it; but the contrary is too
apparent; for nothing is more hurtful to Nature than that which contains much
Nourishment; for this cause many People are out of order, their natural
strength decaying by degrees, and occasioning many Diseases to reign, which had
no being in former Ages, when the use of such things were not known. In remote
parts, where such Fruits and Wines cannot be procured, they are happily freed
from many grievous Distempers, with which we are afflicted. But all that I can
say will not convince such as are Wise in their own Conceits, nor prevent them
from boiling two Quarts of Ale to one, with good store of Oatmealand Spice, and
then sweetning it well with Sugar, give two or three Quarts a day hot to
Child-bed-Women.

Of Fish.
Fish generally are cold and moist, of them some are easy, others hard of
Digestion: The frequent and plentiful eating of this begets Phlegm, and a kind
of cold moist matter in the Body; likewise we are to account some of them
unclean and unwholsom, others clean and wholesome, the first sort are such that
are bred in muddy stinking Waters, as Ponds, etc. where the Water has no
motion, or in Rivers which receive the Excrements of Cities or Towns, such Fish
produce bad Nourishment, corrupt the Blood, and cause Obstructions, Scabs,
Leprous Diseases, etc. If People were sensible of the hurt they do, they would
no more eat them, than they would Frogs, Snails, yea, Snakes, for they all have
one and the same Original, and are generated from a like matter: These
Creatures, or rather Vermin (for so I may call them) are produced from
Putrefaction, gross and unclean matter, and would be abominable to Humane
Nature, if they were known to be such; besides the Diseases they cause, they
also defile the Spirits by awakning their Similies, they prove frequently to be
of Ill Consequence both to the Body and Mind. These Fish that have no Scales
are unclean, and the Nourishment they afford are of a moist and slimy Nature.
But on the contrary, those that have both Scales and Fins, are wholsomer, and
are of a dryer Substance, and easier of Concoction; those that are bred in
clear gravelly running Waters and Rivers, are sweet, pleasant and wholesome, if
taken in their proper Seasons.

Both the Seller and Buyer of Fishes are guilty of great mistakes about them;
the Fisherman does commonly let them dye of themselves, or by throwing one
upon another, causes one rather to suffocate another; this way does a great
deal of harm to the Fish, as well as to other Creatures, viz. Cows, Sheep, etc.
But the better way is to give them a wound so soon as you take them out of
their proper Element, rather than to suffocate them; for by this, the pure
Essential Spirits and Balsamic Body suffers Violence. There is a custom among
some to keep Fish alive until they have a mind to eat them; this is chiefly
practiced among the Dutch: Though it be a very good Custom, yet a great many
commit Errors in this particular, for they are ofttimes kept in a small
quantity of thick standing Water, until they languish and grow weak, fainty and
poor: But if you have a mind to keep them, let them be put where there is
plenty of good Water: Do not put any great quantity together, neither keep them
too long before you use them.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Mischief of Variety of Meats and Drinks, and the Inconveniences of
Improper Mixtures; and on the other side, what Foods are fit to be Compounded.

THE mixture of several things of disagreeing Natures, is common in this wanton
Age to most sorts of People, except such as are constrained through pure
Necessity to live on simple Meats and Drinks; but in this adding of diverse
sorts of Food together, so as to render them Wholesome, or not very Prejudicial
to the Health, there is required a greater Understanding than ordinary
House-wives are endued with, or indeed the best Cooks; for their business is to
gratify the Extravagant Fancies and Liquorish Pallates of those they belong
to, rather than to study to prepare what is agreeable to Nature.

For when you mix two, three, or four things together, if the predominant
Quality in each be of contrary Natures, then such Food will produce a
disagreeing Nourishment in the Stomach, whence must arise an inward Strife and
Contention for mastery, so that ofttimes the pure Virtues and Spirits suffer
violence, and become suffocated. This is manifest in all sorts of Herbs, Woods,
Earths and Drugs, which Dyers and Painters use, two of which being mixed,
produce a third of a kind and nature contrary to both; and if you add a third
Ingredient of a Nature contrary to those two, it will become a fourth Species:
The same thing happens in Eatables. As you alter the Taste of any simple Food
by adding one or more Ingredients: So you vary its Nature, so that it becomes
not only of another Taste, but a quite different Operation; for this cause
there ought to be great Caution and Discretion used in Mixing of Food, or else
you bring all into Confusion: We ought to understand the Nature of each
Ingredient, and what Juices and Nourishment, two or more things conjoined, will
produce; for each particular makes some Variation, either for the better or the
worse; for all Tastes in Food have the very same Original as Colors, and Cooks
ought to be as skilful as Painters in their Mixtures, which if well observed,
most People would be free from desiring such Compounded Dishes, most Men
through ignorance of the Nature and Operation of things, imagining that the
more both mean and rich Ingredients are mixed together, the greater and better
the Nourishment: The contrary whereof is true, for such things do generally
produce a Nourishment of a contrary Nature to most of the Ingredients, as is
evident in Painting; for Example, take Indigo, Ultramarine, or any Blew, and
mix it with White, and it makes a Sky to what degree you please; but then put
a third, viz. mix a Pink Color, and makes a Green, which is a fourth Color of
a contrary Nature to both the first, second and third; also mix Verdigrease and
Pink, and it makes a Green; take Lake and Ultramarine, and it gives a deep
Purple; mix Lake and White together and you have a Pink Color; and if you
would have the deepest Black, take the whitest Ivory you can get, and burn it,
and the Ashes will perform your desire; so likewise Copporas, Gauls and Logwood
dye a Black, though none of them are so.

Furthermore, it is to be noted, that there are but Seven perfect Colors in
the World, which have their Original from the seven Constellations, viz. Black,
Red, Yellow, Blew, Lake, Green and White, each of which does contain the true
Nature of all the seven; but that Quality that predominates denominates the
Color, and all the other lie as it were hid or captivated; but when another or
contrary Color is mixed or incorporated therewith, then both those Colors lose
their right in Nature, and through an inward strife and contention, there is a
Third awakned, which before the mixture lay hid and captivated, and this third
is of a contrary Nature to both the first; and so you may by continual
Additions of other Colors, alter it into a fourth, a fifth, a sixth, and so
on; for from an apt Commixture of these seven Colors, an ingenious Artist in
Painting can imitate and represent the Colors of all things in the whole
Universe: The like is to be understood of Tastes and the nature of Food, mixing
of two things of contrary Qualities, produces a third Juice different from each
of them; and if you add a third Ingredient, that is in nature contrary to both
the first, it will awaken another Nature, which lay hid or captivated; and so
there arises a fourth thing, and this it performs by Simile, making that
propriety in Nature strong which was weak, and causing that to become manifest,
that before did disappear. As in the before mentioned Instance of mixing Blew
and White that produces a Sky-colour, which is one degree of Variation; but
then mix Pink-colour with these two, and it makes a Green, which is quite
contrary to both the first and second: Now before the Pink was so added, this
same Green was essentially in both the Colors, but not manifest till the Pink
captivated both the first and second, and made them disappear, and so brought
to manifestation that Color which before lay dormant. So great is the Power of
Nature of altering, changing, and as it were new-making, where things of
contrary Qualities are intermixed, and this is as strongly and really (though
perhaps not altogether so visibly) in Foods as in Colors.

Hence the Wise men in all Ages have chiefly commended Simple Meats and Drinks,
for they knew somewhat of the secret Powers and Operations of Nature, and were
sensible that there were but very few that had understanding rightly to
compound Diversities of Provisions; this must be reckoned one of the principal
Reasons why People lived so long of Old in perfect Health, because they used
simple and innocent Meats and Drinks. But in our days there are but few that in
their whole Lives do know the particular Operation of any one sort of Food, for
they will not content themselves without various things mixed together, many of
which being of disagreeing Natures, are attended with very evil Consequences:
And especially (with grief, shame and pity I speak it) there are scarce any
People in the World more guilty of Gluttony and improper mixtures of Food than
the English Nation, who likewise are more guilty herein of late Years than ever
heretofore; for they have not only a great number of various sorts of Food in
their own Country (which are most agreeable to the Constitutions of the
Inhabitants) but* vast quantities of Fruits and Spices, Liquors, etc. that are
brought from other Countries, and the remote Regions of the World, which serve
only to gratify wanton and liquorish Pallats, and promote Gluttony and Excess.

And here I shall nominate some sorts of Food, which commonly are eaten, as
Examples, to demonstrate with how improper Ingredients the same are Compounded,
insomuch that Nature does abominate them.

1. Observe the composition of Cakes, which are frequently eaten, and given
especially to Children as Food; In them there are commonly Flour, Butter, Eggs,
Milk, Fruit, Spice, Sugar, Sack, Rose Water and Sweetmeats, as Citrons, or the
like: Now here are Ten Ingredients, which are of so many several Natures and
Operations, but being intermixed all in one Mass, the simple and natural Virtues
of all and each of them are destroyed, and changed into another Nature; so that
the predominant Quality of each of them suffers Violence, and loses its
natural Power, and there it becomes a Confusion, and the simple Taste of each
thing is so intermingled and adulterated, that the Pallat cannot distinguish
one from another, and the whole proves ungrateful to the Stomach, as appears in
that, Should any Person be confined to such Cakes only, and make them his
constant Food but for two or three Weeks, Nature would grow sick and out of
order, and the Stomach and Pallat would nauseate and abominate them; and any
two of the said Ingredients make far better and wholsomer Food: For how long
may a man live with Bread and Milk before Nature becomes weary? Diverse have
scarce used any other Diet for many Years together: So likewise Bread and
Butter, Bread and Eggs, Bread and Fruit, Bread and Sack, or other Wine, is very
good Food, and a man may use any of them a long time without nauseating Nature.
So that you see here, that Ten rich Ingredients mixed together do not make so
good, wholesome or natural Food, as One or Two of them; for if two things be
mixed together that bear a friendly Aspect to each other, such things make but
a degree of Variation, and that for the better; for when the Ingredients are
proper, and not too many, the inward or hidden Qualities in each thing are
awakened and strengthened, so that such Food becomes more agreeable, and gives
better satisfaction to Nature than any one sort of Food can do: As for Example;
Bread and Milk have a simile with each other, therefore a man may live a long
time with it before Nature be cloyed; the like may be said of Bread and Butter,
Bread and Cheese, etc.

2. In some other compounded Foods the case is far worse; for in Cake all the
Ingredients have attained their full Ripeness, Strength and Virtue: But in
other cases raw unripe Fruits are compounded and made into Food, as green
Goosberries and Sugar in Tarts, etc. where the Berries and the Sugar being both
Extremes, such Food cannot therefore afford a proper Nourishment; and if a man
should be confined solely thereunto for a Month, his Nature would neither be
sustained nor satisfied, because such immature Fruits are too Crude and
Phlegmy, and the use of them was first brought in by foolish Nicepallated
People and Gluttons. For no sort of Fruits nor Grains ought to be eaten till
they have attained to some degree of Maturity, nor will they before afford any
firm Nourishment, though they be never so artificially mixed with Spices,
Sugars, etc.

3. It is no ways proper to mix Fruits that grow in hot Climates, as Raisins,
Currants and Sugar, with Flesh and Fish, as is done frequently in Pies, Sawces,
and other sorts of Food; for the same disagreeing in their Radixes, generally
prove of ill Consequence to Health, and nothing is so good, so pleasant, and so
wholesome to be boiled and eaten with Flesh, as our own Country Herbs and Roots:
And it is also to be noted, That all Foreign Fruits are more agreeable when
mixed with our Fruits, than with our Flesh, though we have little or no need of
them with either.

4. It is an ill Custom among many to compound Food by mixing unprepared things
with such as are already prepared; as for Example in those they call
Bread-Puddings: Now Bread, when it is well baked, and other Circumstances
performed to it, as they ought to be, is then prepared to its highest degree of
use and excellency, being the most friendly Food that ever was invented, and
whatsoever preparation or alteration it passes through afterward, causes a sick
faintness to attend it; for in its first preparation or digestion its crude
phlegmy, gross parts were destroyed; and the gross Body opened, by which the
pure spirituous parts and balsamic Virtues become more volatile; so if Bread
be put to a second preparation, or goes through another digestion, the essential
Virtues thereof are as it were totally destroyed, and all such Food has a
fainty or sickish Taste and Smell, and if a man should but for a small space be
confined thereunto, his Stomach and Nature would quickly grow weary and
abominate it; (only those that do frequently use such Unnatural Preparations,
do in some degree hide the fainty Quality by various mixtures) The very same is
to be understood in all kind of Food. For would any man willingly eat of Meat
that is once boiled or roasted, and let be cold, and afterward boiled or
roasted again? Or mix such Flesh with raw, and so prepare them together?

5. This is further manifest by all Broths, and Pottages that stand to be cold,
and are heat again; when first made they are full of Life and Spirits, of a
pleasant Smell and brisk Taste, grateful to the Stomach, and easy of
Concoction; but when they have been at the Fire the second time, the spirituous
Qualities that in the first preparation were set at liberty, and rendered
Volatile, are evaporated, and they become of a strong dull Taste and Smell. For
all sorts of Food over-prepared, or twice prepared, are hurtful: For this cause
Water-Pap that is made of Bread is not an wholesome Food, and no way proper for
sick People or Children; and so much the worse, when it is made fulsom and
strong by the various Ingredients they add to it; The same may be said of
fermented Liquors, as Beer, Wine, etc. if they be committed to the fire, they
become of a dull fiat heavy Nature, void of Spirit and Life; or if such be put
into Food, and that same Food afterward prepared by fire, then also they lose
all their pure Virtues, and there does only remain the strong original Quality,
which is a Death rather than Life. This should be well noted by all
House-wives, and by Nurses especially among sick People, and not make them as
much Posset Drink or Broth as will serve them twenty four Hours, and when
occasion is, heat it again and again, thereby destroying all its pure
spirituous Parts and Virtues, till it becomes as sick and fainty as those that
are to eat and drink it; for such things are burthensom to a well-Stomach, and
what then must they be to such as are sick and out of order, whose Spirits are
few, and those-weak and languishing?

6. There is another Trick of Nurses, which even the learned do often advise,
viz. when People are sick, to boil their Drink with a Crust of Bread in it. Now
both these have been prepared before, even to the highest degree; so that by
this boiling them together again, as well the Drink as the Bread lose their
Virtues, and the Drink becomes as flat and dull as Pond-Water in a hot Summer
day; and then the Wise Nurse adds a lusty Quantity of Sugar to hide its gross
dull fulsom Taste, which renders it still duller and heavier on the weak
Stomach of the sick. Now all such Drinks are nauseous to Nature even in times
of Health, so that if a well man should drink constantly of such Perboyled
dulcified stuff, it would disturb Nature, and send dulling Fumes into the Head,
destroy his Appetite, and cause an unpleasant heat in his Stomach, with a
clammy Droughtiness, nor would it give Nature any satisfaction; And if its
effects be such on the sound, what mischief must it need do those that are
already Diseased? If a sottish Ignorance did not possess many of them that pass
in the World for Learned men, great Rabbis and profound Doctors, they would
certainly never act so contrary to Reason and Nature as they do: Nor do I know
any Reason why good Ale or Beer should be esteemed Raw, as it is by most, even
Physicians themselves; has it not passed through several Digestions, as boiling
by Fire and Fermentation, which are the highest Preparations it will admit of,
so that neither Nature nor Art can advance it? For if such Liquors be committed
to the fire a second time, the spirituous parts do either evaporate, or are
suffocated; they are so pure and volatile, and stand so external, that they
will not endure any violent Motion or harsh Fire to touch them, without
manifest Injury; therefore all common Beer and Ale well brewed, and of a proper
Age, being brisk and full of Life, is abundantly to be preferred before Drink
again boiled, either by it self or with a crust of Bread.

This may somewhat be illustrated even in Common-Water, which is crude in
comparison of Beer and Ale, and has never passed through any Digestion to unlock
its spirituous parts; yet if you take such Water from the Spring, and boil it,
'twill open the crude Body, and cause the pure spirituous parts to become so
volatile that they will evaporate, so that 'twill be good for little or
nothing, if it be not used presently. If you would know whether this be true or
no, do but walk into the House of Dame Experience, Take Common-Water, boil it,
put it into a good sweet Vessel or Barrel; then fill a like Barrel with Water
from the same Spring unboyled, and keep them for further use, as Seafaring men
do for their Voyages; then observe what follows, The Water that was boiled will
stink, and never be sweet again; but the other, though it stink, or rather
ferment (as some Water will do twice or thrice) yet it will become good and
sweet again for all Uses. Again, if you boil Water in cold Weather or Frost, it
will afterward freeze sooner and be colder than such as has not been boiled.
Now there must be some Reason for this, which is no other, than that the boiled
Water has lost its inward spirituous or warming Nature, so that it is become
more Saturnine, cold and earthy, whence the Air has the greater Influence upon
it, and causes a quicker Congelation: So likewise it is to be observed, that
if you boil Water an hour, or any considerable time before you put in your
Flesh, Herbs, or what else you would dress in it, such Food will not be so
sweet nor wholesome as what is put into the Vessel as soon as the Water boyls; or
if you boil Water an hour, and then let it stand till it is cold, and afterward
boil any Food in it, it will give it a strong fulsom Smell and Taste, make it
hard of Concoction, affording but a bad Nourishment. All which shows, the Fire
has power to open the body of the Water, causing the spirituous parts to become
volatile, and makes them capable of being evaporated on a second boiling, much
more than of Beer, Ale, etc.

7. There are many other Improper Mixtures that are common in time of Sickness
as well as Health, as mixing several sorts of Syrups with their Drink, and
making up Cordials with Syrups, which Nature does loath; for no Syrups are so
grateful to the Stomach as White Sugar, they being naturally of a dull, heavy,
flat Quality; they are a broken body, the pure spirituous parts are suffocated,
and so have not that briskness on the Pallat and Stomach as Sugar. For though
Syrups be made of White Sugar, yet they are nothing so good, being mixed with
any Drink or Food, nor so grateful, as the same Sugar; for every time Sugar is
melted down, the spirituous parts are flattened, and it cannot attain its
proper natural Goodness, except it be cured again, and such an order observed
as follows in Refining, for then there is a separation made, and it obtains a
purer and finer Body, which is not done in Syrups; and therefore if in Health
you drink them in Beer or Wine, the Stomach does not so well like them, nor
will they be so pleasant, especially if often drunk, much more nauseous must
they needs be to the sick: And especially most burthensom to weak Natures are
such Syrups, when mixed with improper Ingredients and Liquors, as with cold
distilled Waters of various Herbs of disagreeing Natures, and then to add (as
most do) that which they call Epidemick Water, which makes a Cordial sicker
than the Patient that takes it. I would have any moderate Person consider and
judge, whether a man in good Health can without great violence to his Stomach,
and disorder, sup off such Cordials, and other compounded Slip-slops as the
Sick are forced continually to swallow down? And if so, what a deplorable
condition are the Sick in, when most of the things both for Food and Physic,
that are ordered and prescribed by Physicians and Apothecaries, are generally
nauseats to Nature? So that when we would describe a filthy abominable Taste,
we say it tastes like Physic, or like a Medicine. It Is enough in all
Conscience to make a well Person Heartsick, to be confined but two or three
Weeks to the Circumstances a sick Body is subjected unto by these Men of
Method, and their Tutored Creatures the Nurses: For,

First, he must have all his Drink boiled forsooth, with a Crust of Bread in
it: This too he must drink as hot as may be endured; and Mistress Nurse for
pure Laziness will make at Once as much fulsom slip-slop as will serve a whole
Day and Night; and so the poor languishing Creature must take it heated again
and again: Then Gaffer Doctor enjoins him every two hours a quantity of his
sick Cordial: and to complete the Tragedy of his Martyrdom, there must be a
rouzing Fire in the Room, though it be at Midsummer, the Curtains must be drawn
close, and a Cloth before the Windows, so that there can scarce come the least
Breeze of Wind or pure Air into the Room; whence the imprisoned Air therein
becomes sulpherous and so noxious, that such Chambers send forth such strong
fulsom Scents and Fumes as will disorder the most healthy, if they continue
there but a while. These are some of the abominable (I had almost said
Murderous) courses the poor sick are confined unto, which is much to be pitied,
and deserves to be remedied. -- And therefore though this Discourse may seem a
Digression, I am confident the Judicious will pardon it.

8. Another very improper Mixture, is, when People eat several sorts of Flesh
and Fish at one and the same Meal; for these two Creatures are of different
Radixes, therefore being eaten together make an unwholsom Nourishment in the
Body of a contrary Nature to them both, especially when the various sorts of
Sawces and Ingredients of that kind are intermingled. There are some foolish
Epicures that stow so many various Kinds and Natures in their Paunches, as if
they would eat up all the freight of Noah's Ark at a Mouthful, and cannot Dine
without as many different Ingredients as an Apothecary puts into the
Composition of Mithridate, which is said to consist of about Two Hundred. But
so far were the Wise Ancients from this extravagant Gluttony and Uncleanness,
that such of them as did admit the eating of clean Flesh and Fish, would not
use the same Vessels is preparing the one, as they did with the other, but had
distinct Kettles and Platters for each, to keep them apart.

9. There is another sort of Food much eaten by the English, and more than by
any other Nation, viz. Pies, which are many times compounded of Ten or Twenty
several Ingredients, many of them of contrary Natures and Radixes, as first,
there is the finest Wheat-flour, the course or branny part (which contains the
most opening, cleansing, digestive faculty) being unhappily taken away, and so
curiously separated, that the fine Flour thereby becomes of a stopping
glutinating (or glewing) Nature: 2dly, There is good store of Butter mixed with
it. And 3dly, Flesh, and several sorts of Spices and Spanish Fruits, and many
other things, which are all baked together, and there they boil in the deadly
sulphurous Airs of the Ovens, without the Influences of pure Air, and without
sufficient Liquor to help the Digestion, or cleanse and purify the grossness
of such things, but they lie suffocated in their own Juices, the Good and Evil
all jumbled together, whence the whole becomes Naught; the Nourishment such
Food yields is neither proper nor wholesome; for the Inequality of the
Ingredients have destroyed all the simple Virtues of each, so that there is
Confusion and Discord awakened, which in the Body irritate their Likenesses,
and thence Diseases and Disorders follow.

Therefore the more Wise and well-minded Persons in all Ages, whose desire was
to know and fear the Lord, and assist his Handmaid, Nature, have always chose
the most simple innocent Meats and Drinks, knowing that such had near Affinity
to Harmony, and had not power to beget or excite any quality or property in
Nature, but what was like themselves, Peaceable and Harmless; for the nearer
the Equality and Concord any sort of Food or Drink is, the greater Power it has
to preserve the Body and Mind in the like sweet Temper and Unity, which cuts
off all Diseases in the Bud, and prevents their very Seeds. For this cause
Water throughout the World in Primitive Times, and in most Countries to this
very day, has been, and is esteemed the best Drink, for that it gives to such
as drink it a full satisfaction; whereas all other sorts of Drinks, especially
those that exceed in any particular quality, do leave some desire behind, after
a man has drank them, to drink more, (though perhaps already he has exceeded
in Quantity); the very same is in superfluous Food, only men cannot eat so
long, nor so much as they can Drink, because Food is heavy and hard of
Concoction, and requires time to digest; whereas drink is thin and Spirituous,
and therefore it quickly makes separation, and finds many ways to pass away,
which Food cannot do: Therefore overcharged Meals of sumptuous Food, do often
prove more dangerous to the Health of the Body than a debauch of Drinking, tho
both are worse than brutish, and very hazardous.

But on the contrary, those that accustom themselves to simple Meats and
Drinks, do not only highly satisfy and gratify Nature, and preserve
themselves in perfect Health, which is the reward the Lord has ordained for the
Temperate, but they cut off all Superfluities (the Seminaries of Diseases) in
the very Bud; whereas the Gluttonous and Intemperate are liable to a thousand
Snares and Inconveniences, which makes their Bodies unhealthful and
unserviceable, and beclouds their Minds and Intellectuals, so that they can
neither know themselves, nor their Creator in any other thing as they ought.

But still there are some sorts of Food that may be properly Compounded, as
bearing a Simile with each other: As, 1. Bread, Butter, and Herbs either Boiled
or Raw, as also several sorts of Roots. 2. Bread and several sorts of Fruits.
3. Bread and Milk, or Milk and Flour boiled together, with some Water and
Oat-meal, and Milk and Water boiled. 4. Bread and Butter, Bread and Cheese. 5.
Milk and ripe Fruits, as Milk and Apples, etc. 6. Butter and several kinds of
Pulses boiled. 7. Bread, with all sorts of Flesh fit to be eaten. 8. Herbs and
Flesh. 9. Roots and Flesh. 10. Bread and Eggs; but Butter is but an improper
Ingredient with Eggs. 11. Bread and Fish. 12. Oil and Fish; for Butter is not
so good: Also Fish is wholsomer boiled in Water, than prepared any other way.


I could nominate many more Mixtures, but these are the most natural and
agreeable to each other, and most of them have mutual and friendly Aspects from
their Radixes; so that what variation these Ingredients do make, it is for the
better, they advancing each others Virtues.

If People could be persuaded to be moderate in Quantity, and prefer such
simple Viands and proper Mixtures in their food and drink, and observe to
prepare their Meat according to the Rules before specified, most of those cruel
Diseases now reigning and raging would be prevented. There is abundance more in
the observation of these things, than the generality of People understand or
imagine. All that I desire of the Reader, is, that he would be so friendly to
himself to make Trial; for no man can be truly sensible of the Evil of any
thing, except he separate himself from his Errors, and tries the contrary.
Butchers, Tallow-Chandlors, Poulterers, and many other offensive Trades
perceive not those filthy Stinks and Fumes which Slaughterhouses,
Melting-houses, etc. send forth, except they separate themselves for a while
into a more pure and cleaner Air, and then they become capable of
distinguishing one from the other. For the like Reason, those that have
accustomed themselves to unnatural and improper mixtures of Food or bad
Preparations, their Pallates and Stomachs are become One with such things, and
they can as little distinguish the pure natural Taste and Scents of Food from
the contrary, as the Tradesmen aforesaid can the noisome fumes of their own
Shops and Workhouses. There are many Thousands of brave finical Dames in this
Nation that are so curious in their Houses, and in whitening their Linen, that
they themselves can hardly tell what will please them; and yet after all, they
lie on Beds that do really stink worse than Common Houses of Office, tho being
used to them, they do not smell it, neither can they, so great is the power of
the Evil Nature and Custom. And in these stinking Dunghills these delicate
Madams spend two Thirds of their time, and surely then it is no marvel if they
are afflicted with so many Diseases and Weaknesses; for if they did commit no
other Disorders or Intemperances, this alone were sufficient to destroy their
Health, as I have at large demonstrated in my Discourse of the Generation of
that pernicious Vermin called Buggs.

CHAP. IX.
The Reasons in Nature why Cities and great Towns are subject to the Pestilence
and other Diseases, more than Country-Villages: The Excellency of Solitude, and
Advantages of a retired Country-Life.

THe Reasons are, 1. That the Air, which is the Essential Life of all material
Beings, is defiled by the Congregating of such Troops of People together, whose
very Breath is enough to make the Air thick, hot and sulpherous.

2. The Closeness of the Streets and Houses, whereby the pleasant Influences
and Salutiferous Breezes of Wind are obstructed, which does condense the Air,
and render it thick and humid.

3. The abundance of Smoke that the multitude of Chimnies send forth, which is
of a keen sharp sulpherous Quality, that incorporating it self with the Air,
increases its dullness, and fills it more full of gross Humidity, whence
proceeds Stoppages, and many Obstructions and Diseases of the Breast, and the
Blood becomes tainted with a sharp salt Humor that causes the Scurvey and a
wearisom Indisposition throughout the whole Body.

4. The great Number of Houses of Easement that breath and send forth their
putrid Smells and Scents into the Air, together with the various Uncleanness
that otherwise proceed from both Healthy and Diseased People, together with the
Washings and Cleansings of Houses, and the fulsom Liquors Flesh and Fish have
been boiled in, mixed with other loathsome and filthy Excrements, all which are
continually exposed in the open Air, and do wonderfully defile it, not
forgetting the Smoke, Dust and Ashes of Sea-Coal, (where the same is used)
which is of a pernicious Nature.

5. The vast Number of various sorts of Beasts and other Creatures, that are by
Droves daily slaughtered, and no care taken, but their Blood is exposed to the
open Air, and runs through the Kennels as if it were clean Water, and no more
notice taken of it, whereas the same does not only send forth deadly Smells and
pernicious Vapors, but fills the Air with Revengeful Spirits, which are
inhal'd into the Bodies of Men, and there stir up Smilies. Add to this the
great Numbers of stinking Trades, which are in such places, as
Tallow-Chandlers, Tanners, Dressers of Leather, Soap-Boylers, etc.

All these gross Scents, Fumes and evil Vapors that Cities are subject to,
especially great Cities and populous, such as Lodon, Paris, etc. their Nature
being Saturnine and Martial, proceeding from the gross fierce wrathful matter,
as derived from things wherein the pure Spirituous parts and Balsamic Virtues
are destroyed and totally suffocated, so that there does remain nothing but the
gross phlegmatic Body, and poisonous Spirits, whose Fumes incorporate
themselves with their Similies in the Air, and all the Elements and Stars,
where by a secret and sympathetical power they awaken (by degrees) the wrathful
and poisonous Properties; for every particular Quality in Nature has a Key in
its self to open the Gates of its own Principle, whence proceed Pestilential
Airs, according to the degree of the awakened Poisons and Wrath, there being a
certain sympathy between the Terrestrial Bodies and the Celestial; for all
things both in Heaven and in Earth, have but one only ground, and flow from the
two grand Principles, viz. Good and Evil.

For this cause, when the original Poisons in Nature and wrathful Spirits, are
by the occasions before mentioned, or any others, stirred up that they overcome
the pure Virtues, they powerfully penetrate all Elements and Bodies, and
wheresoever they find matter capable or disposed to receive them, incorporate
themselves, and with highest diligence endeavor to destroy the good Virtues,
and thence arise evil Airs and various Diseases, which suddenly seize the
Bodies of Men. And this Nature does not only in the Evil, but also in the Good,
but not in a sensible way; but in a Natural, by Likenesses, where things agree
in Number, Weight and Measure, there they powerfully incorporate and rejoice,
and cast out their Contraries. A pregnant Example of this we have in Sounds; if
two Instruments of one sort be turned to an equal pitch, strike one of the
Strings, and the same String on the other Instrument will shake or tremble;
this I have done my self, and also seen it done by others, so that there is no
boubt to be made of the matter of fact. The very same sympathetical Power have
all other things, though in some it be more Occult. What man in the World would
believe the attractive Inclination which the Loadstone has upon Iron, if it did
not appear to his sight? All or most men of Reason believe that the
Constellations, Signs and Elements have a particular, and also a general
Influence on all Inferior Earthly Bodies, which is apparent to all our Senses,
varying Times and Seasons, Night and Day, making the Earth fruitful, and the
contrary; and do not our Bodies alter as the Elements do? And as the Influences
of the Sun vary, so do all things under Heaven. How verdent and sprightly does
our Mother Earth appear in fresh and rich Emdroideries, and all the Trees in
new Perriwigs, and Flowers springing, and wanton Birds, with inimitable Harmony
seem to welcome the approach of that great Eye of the World, when he begins to
renew his Visits to us in the Spring, and all Creatures look blyth, and jolly,
and the Blood capers in Youthful Veins, and nothing appears in Natures
universal Face but Smiles and Gallantry: On the contrary, when he with draws
his vivifying Beams, and retreats to the Chambers of the South, how dull and
dejected does every thing become, and Fields and Trees stripped of their Ornament
and Beauty, languish like forsaken Lovers, and appear forlorn as hopeless
Prisoners, and Melancholy as old Age?

Nay, if under the Protection of Truth we might Alarm lazy Tradition with a
bold Paradox, without dreading Excommunication from the Vertuoso, for advancing
Heresies in Philosophy, I would add, that Inferiors counter-act on Superiors,
as well as Superiors on them; that all things in this lower World have the like
Influences on the Celestial Bodies and Elements, as the Coelestials have on
Sublunaries and Terrestrials, and that this mutual Influx they have one upon
the other by a certain natural Attraction and sympathetical Inclination. Thus
the wonderful and wise Creator has endued every thing with an Attractive and
Influential Virtue; and hence it often comes to pass that the Sons of Men by
their Unclean Conversations do awaken and stir up the Wrath of the Celestial
Bodies, and by a secret, and yet powerful Attraction, draws down the malignant
Configurations, which sometimes cause Epidemical Diseases, at other times Wars,
Famine, etc. all according to the Nature of the Evils, or Property of Nature
that was awakened. As for Example: If the People of any Town or City give way
to Uncleanness in Meats, Drinks, etc. and addicted to the Impurities of
Venus, as most such places are, then by mutual Inclination the like Property in
the Celestial Bodies and Elements are excited, and by degrees contaminate the
whole Atmosphere (or parts of the Air next the Earth) with Pestilential
Poisons, causing Botches, Boils, Venerial Diseases, Fevers and Plagues, all
according to the degree of the awakened Wrath, and the length or shortness of
the time of its operation; for all Plagues and Pestilential Airs, caused by
Uncleanness, do by degrees corrupt the pure Spirits or venerial Properties in
the Body; for whenever this sweet Quality is violated, the Distempers thence
arising will for the most part manifest themselves in Botches, Boils, Scabs or
Leprosies, and Spots in the Flesh, often accompanied with general Weakness, and
a decay of the Radical Moisture.

But if the Properties of Saturn and Mars be so violently stirred up or
awakned, and the fierce Storms of Nature do predominate in the Hearts and Souls
of Men, then follow Tumults, Wars, Burning of Towns and Cities, and such like
Calamities and Devastations. For Men's evil Words and Works and Unmerciful
Cruelties certainly awaken the Wrath of God in the Stars and Elements, and
hasten on Judgments. No Man or Nation can escape the great Law of Retaliation,
which the Creator ordained in the beginning; for Moses's Law was the greatest
and most excellent of all Laws, because it was built and had its Root in
Nature; therefore whenever the Jews observed it, they were sure of being
blessed; for Those that were obedient thereunto did preserve the Camp of the
Lord from being defiled: The Camp of the Lord is Man, and if Man keep himself
from being defiled he will not awaken the Wrath of God in the Stars and
Elements, but as he keeps himself clean, and from doing Violence, and obeys the
Voice of Wisdom, and follows the friendly Counsels of the divine Principle of
God's eternal Love and Light, then it is most certain, that by a secret power he
will awaken the benevolent Properties of the Celestial Bodies and Elements,
and attract their propitious Influences. For the Lord promised to such as were
obedient, the Dew of Heaven; but when they became Rebellious, Unclean and
Intemperate, then the Lord permitted the Evil Configurations and Influences of
the Celestial Bodies to take place, and many sore Evils and Calamities they
endured: This the Scriptures of Truth do testify, and indeed it cannot be
otherwise; for it is the Eternal Law of God in Nature, That whatsoever Property
or Principle Men do awaken and enter into with their free will, whether it be
good or evil, the same grows strong, and he is comprehended by it, and
swallowed up in it, and made a subject unto that Kingdom; and this both in the
particular and in general, as Experience teaches; for whenever any particular
Man gives way to any particular Evil that is a sin against God and his Law in
Nature, and shall continue in the same, without Repentance, it is certain he
will pull down the Judgments upon himself; but as Men's Sins and Transgressions
are not alike, so neither their Rewards or Punishments.

This is further manifested by Men's Words and Works; does not every word carry
the Power of its Principle whence it had its birth? For that Property that was
predominate in the Word, Sound or Tone, the same, or the like Quality it does
stir up and awaken in those to whom the Words or Discourses are directed,
whether it be good or evil; if the Words are formed by the Saturnine Property,
then they awaken Envy, Contention, and a Morose Dogged Humor: If they proceed
from Mars, then the fierce wrathful Fires are excited, and so of the rest. For
if it were not so, an Angry Word would not have any power to move them to Anger
to whom it is directed; nor would Loving Speeches beget Love, nor a Meek Answer
(according to Solomon's Observation) Turn away Wrath: But as one Man has power
to stir up and awaken Love or Anger in another, by his Words and Works, the
same is to be understood in all other things; for there is a proportionate
similitude between Men and the Celestial Bodies and Elements, Man being not
only an Image and Likeness of God and Nature, but the Horizon of both Worlds,
in which the Superior and Inferior Natures are conjoined, and the Son of the
Stars and Elements; so that there is a power in Men to awaken and attract their
good or evil Nature, as well as there is in the Coelestials to alter or change
Men's Bodies and Minds. This many of the Philosophical Ancients have consented
to, and most Astrologers are of the same Opinion: The Calculators of Nativities
find by their daily Experience that Vitiousness and Intemperance in the Natives
Life not only cause a very malignant Configuration of the Celestial Bodies to
take place and have its Effects, but also he that lives Intemperately is always
in danger, and subject to the male Aspects of the Superiors: Whereas on the
contrary it is most true, that a Wise Man (that is temperate, just and
circumspect) may rule his own Stars. But when Persons give themselves to
Inordinate Living near or about such times as the Heavens threaten them with
evil Aspects, Transits or Directions, then such disastrous Influences
powerfully take place.

For this very reason Men are often ensnared and drawn away to many
Inconveniences before they are sensible of it; for the wrathful, unclean Nature
having been by degrees awakened and strengthened by its simile, either in
Meats, Drinks, Employments or Communications (for every Property must have such
Food as has affinity therewith, or else it cannot increase, nor be brought
into Manifestation, but without it, it languishes and becomes impotent in its
Operation) the Person so offending is thereby subjected to all the malignant
Configurations of the Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies: Yet if such an one
shall turn to the Lord by Prayer, and abstain from the Evil Courses of this
Life, he presently destroys and weakens that threatening Malignity; and this
sober and temperate Life will by simpathy strengthen the Spirit of Wisdom and
Undestanding.

If this were well understood, there would be more Care and Diligence used,
both in particular and general, as to outward and inward Cleanness than there
is: For in great Cities and Towns especially, there are many Superfluities and
Uncleanness committed against God and Nature, and therefore such places above
others do suffer many Inconveniences. The unclean Vapors and evil Spirits that
do arise from Blood and other Excrements, do not only awaken the Wrath in the
Elements and Stars, and draw down their evil Influences, but incorporate with
the common Air and defile it, which being so corrupted, nothing is more
Injurious and Pernicious to the health of the Body, and also to the Mind; for
outward Uncleanness do naturally and powerfully attract the evil Power, both
Externally and Internally, because all such pernicious Scents and Smells do
arise and proceed from the poisonous Root, and so bear a near affinity to the
evil Angels and Spirits, and do naturally attract them. So when the Elements
are disturbed by malignant Configurations and Aspects, as in great Tempests of
Thunder and Lightning, and the like, the evil Spirits and Angels are very
busy, and appear almost externally; for by those malignant Configurations the
Wrath in the outward Nature is violently excited, and the same being
predominant in the evil Angels, they at such times become more apt and powerful
to do mischief.

External Uncleanness does not only pollute the Body and Senses, but also the
Soul and Spirits; for which cause some of the wise Ancients would not wear any
Woolen Garments, because they are made of the Excrements of Beasts: And indeed
all Hair and Wool does contain a gross fulsom impure Nature, but it lies so
hidden that it cannot be perceived, unless it be set on Fire, and then it
manifests it self by its filthy offensive scent.

For the same Reason some of the Philosophers lived retired; nay, many of the
Holy Men and Prophets of Old (as the Scriptures testify) when the Spirit of
the Lord was in a more than ordinary degree upon them, and pleased to give them
Visions, and make known his Will unto them, did withdraw themselves from Towns
and Cities, and from the Multitudes of People into the open clear Air in
Fields, Woods, Mountains, or by the most pleasant Rivers and Fountain of Water:
And our blessed Savior, Christ himself did often practice such Retreats, when
he made his earnest Supplication and Prayers to the Father. Few do understand
or imagine the manifold Benefits unfrequented places and clean pure Airs afford
both to Body and Mind, the Senses and Intellectuals of well disposed Men, being
free from those Uncleanness Cities and Towns are subject to, both External
and Internal, for in those loansom places the common Air is pure, thin and
clear, free from those fulsom Vapors, Scents and gross Smells which Cities are
subject to, and free from those varieties of Cursing, Swearing, and Multitudes
of vain and impious Discourses which all places are liable unto, where Rabbles
reside, and which wonderfully awakens the Internal Wrath, and gives many
Advantages to the evil Angels and Spirits to work their vile Purposes: But on
the contrary, in open serene Airs, as in Fields, Mountains, and by River-sides
and Woods, there is no such Tumults, no stabbing of Heaven with dreadful
Oaths, horrid Curses and frightful Execrations; no banishing of Temperance
with drunken Healths and roaring Huzza's; no fulsom fumes of Tobacco, nor viler
Steams of detestable Brothel-houses, to infect the chaste Air; no Plays or vain
Games, no Mistressing nor Revelling to spend precious time; no clattering of
Coaches, Drums, Fools, Fiddlers, etc. that make such a continual Din, that a Man
can hardly call his Ears his own. But on the contrary, all is sedate and
serene, still as the voice of good Spirits, and quiet as the Birth of Flowers;
no noise to be heard but the ravishing Harmony of the Wood-Musitians, and the
innocent Lowings of Cows, and Neighings of Horses, and Bleating of the pretty
Lambs, or the like natural Tones, wherein there is nothing of disturbance or
danger, because nothing of Evil, but every thing praising the Creator according
to the Capacity and Nature of each. Here it was, in these and the like places
that the good Angels of the Lord appeared unto the Sons of Wisdom, and taught
them the true Knowledge of God and the Nature of things, and showed them what
should come to pass in future times. And whoever will obtain the true
apprehension of God, of Nature, and of himself, must be separated, and choose
sometimes to sequester himself from the Tumults, Confusions and Distractions of
the public World, and Crowds of the chaffering and busling Rabble.

Besides all this, Cities for the Reasons aforesaid, are more liable to
contagious Diseases: And because the Nature of Infection, and how it is spread,
and how to be avoided, is very little, or scarce at all understood, we shall in
the next place address our selves to discourse thereof.

CHAP. X.
Of Infection, or catching Diseases, and how they are transferred from one to
another, and that all Diseases are Catching.

THE learned Moses, whom the Lord inspired with divine and humane Wisdom,
commanded, that none should sit on the Saddles, lie on the Bed, nor wear the
Clothes of the distempered, which if any did, they should be pronounced
Unclean, and must pass through Purification. Now if there were no possibility
of Catching the Disease and Uncleanness that the Sick was infected with,
wherefore should this great Philosopher and Illuminate of his Age, who saw with
divine Eyes into the Secrets of Nature, command his People to observe so many
Circumstances, which were not only difficult, but chargable to them? Certainly
if it had not been some real benefit to them, it would have been the greatest
Folly to command them so punctually, and punish them for not observing and
obeying those Rules. But far be it from us (whatever the foolish World may
dream) to harbor such thoughts of the Law of God and his holy Prophet, That
Law had its Foundation from the Center of Nature, and to demonstrate the same,
we must treat of the Punishment of Uncleanness, and on the other side, of the
Excellency of Cleanness and Purity, the handling of which will give
satisfaction touching the things proposed, to be discussed in this Chapter.

1. All created things, in the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, do
proceed from One only ground; and though the multitude and variety of them be
beyond any human Number or Comprehension, yet each and every one of them does
in one degree or other contain the true Nature and Property of the whole, but
more especially the humane Nature, for every Property has a Central Being in
Man, both the Good and the Evil. But the Properties and Qualities are not in
each Man alike, but varied; in some, one quality of Nature is strong, in others
another; whence proceeds the difference of Men's Inclinations, Dispositions,
Love and Hate; and that Property which is strongest in the Radix, oversways and
governs the whole Life: Yet even that which is weakest in the human Nature, is
capable by the accession and assistance of its Similies to be made and grow
very strong; and on the contrary, strong Inclinations and Properties are made
weak, all acoording to Time, Place, Employments and Communications, or a Man's
joining himself with this or the other thing.

For this cause the Philosophical Ancients made distinction of things, some
being Clean, others Unclean, betwixt which they commanded a separation should
be made; but few in this blind Age do understand or regard the same, though
there be scarce any sort of Learning more necessary: For those secret
conveyances of Virtue and Vice, Cleanness or Uncleanness, or the transferring
of Distempers from one to another, is done after an hidden imperceptible manner
by way of Spirits, Glances and Rays: The natural Spirits in Men being so subtle
and penetrating, as they powerfully search into all things, so that a Man
cannot touch any thing, though it be ever so Impassible or hard, as Iron,
Stone, or the like, but these nimble Scouts do not only penetrate it, but are
more or less retained thereon; if this were not so, the Dog would not find the
Stone his Master throws among many others, nor follow him (unseen) by his
Footsteps; nor could the deep-mouthed Hounds trace the light-heel'd Hare in
all her doubles and windings, and though she run so swift as if she scarce touched
the surface of the Grass, yet she leaves real Effluviums and Impressions enough
to betray her to those persuing Enemies. Nothing can hold or withstand the
Spirits, they are so thin, quick and piercing; no Iron, Stone or Wood can
resist them, but they penetrate and search the depth of all things, and also
will incorporate with those hard Substances; and if so, how much must they be
imbibed by Beds, where People lie warm and sweat, and where the Air cannot come
with its refreshing Influences to cleanse and purify those grosser Excrements,
the Vehicles (or Lodgings) of malignant Spirits, that are continually breathed
forth by all Infirm Persons, which are so much the more retained therein,
because all Feathers are of an hot sulpherous unclean Nature, and therefore
more disposed to entertain and welcome such unclean fulsom Vapors, which are
presently awakned when others come to lie in such Beds, and readily enter and
penetrate all parts of their Bodies, even to the very Center; and especially if
it happen (as often it does) that such Persons succeed to lie in such Beds, as
have but weak Heats and few Spirits, and under the Dominion of theirs who
lodged there before; then those pernicious Vapors and Spirits more violently
seize them, and incorporate with their Similes, and quickly awaken the sleeping
Poisons, and infect the whole Mass of Blood, and thence flow Diseases, the most
dangerous of all others, because they weaken and cramp Nature by degrees,
stealing on gently, and mildly destroying the Health before People are
sensible; for when once any begin to feel them, then commonly they are grown
incurable; neither do the Physicians know what to administer, because they do
not know whence such Distempers proceeded.

But on the contrary, those People that have strong Spirits and natural Heats,
and who have Dominion over the Spirits of such diseased Persons, as they shall
lie with or after, or whose predominant Qualities in their Radix are of a
contrary Naure, are nothing so subject to catch or receive Injuries this way,
because they resist and repel such ill Vapors and Spirits, that they cannot
enter or wound them. For as Diseases are received by Simile, and being weak
under the dominion of the distempered Persons, so on the other side may those
ill Rays be withstood by Antipathy, so as they cannot enter the Center of Life,
by which means the Radical Moisture and Balsamic Virtues are preserved: Hence
many do commit great Uncleanness, and lie in all manner of Beds, and with
People that are infected with loathsome Diseases, and yet are not sensibly
touched; but as we use to say, The Pitcher never goes so often to the Well, but it
comes home cracked at last. So even these VIGOROUS Constitutions must expect by
degrees to be debiliated, and at last become liable to the like Impressions as
well as others.

I am not ignorant that many People will be very incredulous in these matters;
it is true, they believe that the Plague, Smallpox, the Itch, and other Mangy
and Leprous Distempers are catching, because the Effects immediately follow,
and they see them externally in the Flesh; therefore most Persons do both fear
and shun communicating and lying with such; but as to all inward Diseases of
various Kinds and Natures, few or none either fear or regard them, not
imagining that there is any danger of Contracting those Distempers by
conversing or lying with or after those that are so internally diseased. But I
must be free to tell them, that all inward Diseases, as Consumptions, Ptysicks,
etc. are of a far more dangerous consequence as to Health, than Itchy or
Leprous Distempers, the one being outward, the other inward; the one hid and
hard to be discovered till it is too late, but the other manifest and more
easily cured. And Nature has the same power to receive inward Distempers as
outward; but whereas the latter are in the external parts of the Body, as the
Flesh, or at deepest in the Blood (as all Itchy and Leprous Distempers are)
such as catch them, have them in the same parts. But on the contrary, when the
Diseases are inward, and hid in the Body, it frequently happens that such as
are infected therewith, find not the ill effects in the very same parts, but
elsewhere, yet arising from the same cause. Nor do Diseases thus transferred,
use to make People sick in the beginning, but steal on by degrees, so that
there are very rarely any Remedies applied till it be too late.

And as strong Constitutions many times keep off the Assaults of contagious
Diseases; so neither are all weak-spirited People liable to receive Injuries
and Diseases this way; for there are many who have naturally weak impotent
Spirits, and consequently feeble Bodies, who yet are as free from catching
Diseases as any others, because they are clean and sound, so that the Rays and
pernicious Vapors, and bad Airs have no power to seize on them, wanting a
Friend or Confederate Traitor within to let them in, nor can they incorporate
themselves by reason of the antipathy of Nature: For as every thing or Spirit
is received by its Simile, so on the contrary it is withstood and resisted by
its opposite; for this cause one is in danger of receiving Injuries this way,
and another not, and contagious Airs are not fatal to all, but in the greatest
Sicknesses or Epidemical Pestilences many all the while continue sound and
well, and these, as well weakly People as those that are strong and healthy;
nay, many weakly People continue sound whilst those that are much more strong
and healthy are seized and die: For the Air being unclean, and corrupted by the
humid poisonous Vapors and Species, penetrates all parts of the Body; and
wherever it finds matter of its own kind, or capable to receive its
Influences, then it powerfully stirs and awakens the inward or central Poisons
of Nature, which before lay hid or captivated in the Embraces of the sweet Oil,
and thence presently follow violent burning Fevers, which in few days cut off
the thread of Life; For every Life in its Root stands in the highest Persons, so
that there is matter in every man, if it be kindled, able to destroy the Life
in a moment: And therefore we often see by experience, a man sound and well one
day, and the next near the Grave, or the whole Mass of Blood corrupted, as in
the Smallpox, or the like: For when the inward central Poisons are awakned,
they are so strong, that they can, and do often convert the whole Body and Flux
of Humors into their own Property, viz. into a Poisonous and Leprous Matter.

It Is vulgarly believed, that Distempers do oft-times seize the Body through
Fear, which is true in a Sense; but first it is to be noted, That the Spirit
was wounded by some Gleam or Ray, and the poisons awakned beforehand; for all
fear and dread does arise from the Spirits, which are often wounded before a
man can be sensible; hence arises that which we call a Pannick Fear, that is, a
Dread, Consternation or Astonishment, which we can give no Reason for; also the
Spirits are often hurt by a Voice, or hearing a Word spoken from the Mouth of
another. The very Air conveys the Speeches of diseased People, more especially
if there be fit and prepared matter for Diseases, for then it is done in a
moments time insensibly; for as soon as those dreadful Vapors incorporate
with, and awaken the Poisons in the Body, presently the Fantasy and
imaginative Faculty of Nature is filled with fear and dread, more or less,
according to the degrees of those Poisons and strength or weakness of the
Natural Spirits and Radical Moisture.

It is further to be considered, that sometimes the state of the Body is such,
and the Spirit so weak, that every small Intemperance, Uncleanness, ill Air,
etc. will easily seize the Spirits and wound the Health; the true Causes of
which are known but to few, as when Celestial and Terrestrial Influences do
concur, then every little Accident indangers Nature; For there are many secret
Reasons why Diseases are more apt to seize the Body and Spirits at one time
than at another; and on the contrary, a man may commit extreme Outrages and
Intemperance at some times of his Life, and yet continue his Health; though every
Intemperance sows some Seeds of Diseases, if Abstinence and Cleanness duly
observed afterward do not root them out; for these, if followed, will cleanse
and purify Nature, and digest all such Superfluities as disorders have
contracted.

For these Reasons a man ought never to be over-confident, or think himself
secure from Sickness, which often surprises us when least we expect it, which
happens for want of the presence of, and being governed by the good Genius; for
though Distempers for the most part proceed from irregular Lives, and other
Accidents of the like Nature, yet it must be acknowledged, that many cruel
Diseases are occasioned by Rays, Gleams, Surprises, Fears, Joy, Sorrow, etc.
which seize the pure Spirits, and cause a suffocation of them, so that in a
Moments time the Radical Moisture and Balsamic Virtues turn eager, a loathing
and weariness ensues; and Nature having lost her way, the Stomach grows sick
and indisposed, and its Action cease, because the same chiefly depends on the
strength and goodness of the Volatile Spirits and Radical Moisture; then also
the Pallat forfeits its property of distinguishing, whence most sick People
complain they cannot taste the natural Sweetness of Meats and Drinks: If this
were not so, People would not be able to live ten, twenty, or thirty days in
Fevers, and other Sicknesses, with such small quantities of Sustenance. But
what they take in such Sicknesses affords but little Nourishment, and that
which it does is very impure; for Nature is then in strife, and contends with
her Enemy, using her utmost effects to vanquish him. At this time a skillful
Physician is very useful, and of as great an advantage to Nature as Auxiliary
Recruits coming in to the Relief of an Army engaged in a doubtful Battle.

It is most manifest that what Food is agreeable to one, is not to another, and
so of all other things; and therefore it is sottish Ignorance to argue, that
because one man does not receive harm by lying in, or with such a Bed or
Person, therefore another shall not: For this is no Rule, as we have
sufficiently demonstrated and showed the Reasons thereof. Nor must you forget
that all soft warm Feather-Beds do not only help to transfer Diseases from one
to another, but also they are Unwholsom and Unhealthy in themselves, as is
beforementioned. And indeed next to Temperance in Food, nothing is more Healthy
than sweet hard Beds, and to lie single, or not more than Two at most in a Bed,
especially young People; for lying alone cools the Body, and keeps it in an
equal Temperature, and procures quieter Rest, and makes People more lively and
brisk, preventing many Diseases and burthensom Inconveniences. -- But here I
must be silent, lest the Ladies be offended. However if good Council may
procure my Pardon, I doubt not but to recover their good Opinion as soon as
they shall have read over the following Chapter.

CHAP. XI.
Of WOMEN, their Natures, Complexions and Intemperatures; as also of their
Children; Together with an account of the Generation of all Windy Diseases.

THe Nature and Complexion of Women does differ and vary, even as Men's, some
being more Sanguin, others more Choleric, etc. But generally they are more
Sanguin than Men, of weaker Heats and fewer Spirits, therefore cannot endure
any Inequality or Intemperances without great danger to their Health, whether
it be in Meats, Drinks, Exercises or Passions of the Mind. Their predominant
Quality does stand in and proceed from the Element of Water; therefore are of a
finer, softer, yielding Temper than Men, and their Love does exceed that of the
other Sex; and indeed all kind of Passions do both sooner and deeper wound
their Spirits. Therefore all sudden surprises of Love or Hate, Joy or Sorrow,
are apter to destroy the Health of Women, and suffocate their Spirits, stopping
the Circulation of the Blood, and causing the Body to swell, and then abundance
of Wind is generated, which stops all the Passages, so that People in this
condition can hardly breathe.

Now the Original of all such Diseases, which are called Vapors or Wind, come
through the weakness of the natural Heat, and because the Spirits of most Women
are so Volatile, that every sudden Accident or Inequality does either evaporate
or suffocate them, during which time the whole Operation and Circulation both
of the Blood and Spirits is hindered; and so the Life seems to be in danger,
which causes a Commotion of the inward parts, as if they did arise out of
their natural places, which is nothing else but certain Stoppages and Swellings
of the Vessels that the Breath or Air cannot pass, and then the Body is in a
kind of Agony, and trembles during the Fit, which is never long, for if it
were, the Life could not continue: But through this agonous condition and
struggling strife of the Properties of Nature, the Element of Fire is awakned,
which is of a quick powerful active Quality, and does penetrate all parts of
the Body, and breaks open all the Passages, which sets Nature into a great Heat
throughout all the Body, like a Fever, and then this taciturn Contraction and
suffocation of the Spirits does begin to cease; but great dry Ardors do remain
a considerable time after, and by their violence do awaken the Element of
Water, which causes a breathing Sweat to succeed, that is very beneficial to
Nature, and gives ease, and so the worst seems to be over for the present.

Now all those Diseases that cause Nature to shake and tremble, as Agues,
Vapors, and the like, are caused through the suffocation of the Spirits, which
does first awaken the Original Quality, viz. the astringent taciturn twitching
Property, that does forcibly draw and contract all the inward parts, and
particularly the Vessels of the Stomach, and in a moment stops all the
Passages, which Nature cannot endure and live, and therefore uses her utmost
efforts to get rid of those Chains, by which contention the bitter Quality is
awakned; for that Quality above all others cannot brook Confinement, but breaks
open all the barricado'd Passages with its fiery and rapid Motion, and awakens
the hot Property, which presently sets Nature into such a Flame, as should it
continue, would soon consume her; but these Heats do so violently hunger after
and draw the Airy Quality, as its true Life, that it rouzes the Watery Element,
and thereby quenches that Combustion, whereby Nature receives Relief and
Refreshment. But the Original Cause of all at the first, is the wounding the
Volatile Spirit, which in Women is quickly done, but Men are very rarely
troubled with this Distemper of Vapors, and the like, because their Nature
stands in and proceeds from the Root of the Fire, and the Properties of Saturn
and Mars are more predominant in them, and therefore their natural or central
Heats are greater and stronger than Women's, and consequently are of better
Judgments and Abilities, both for the doing and the governing of all things:
For Man was made first, and has in himself the strong might and tincture of
the Fire, which is furious and forth driving, very desirous to manifest it
self. But the Tincture of the Female is from the Water, viz. from Venus.
Therefore the Males of all sorts of Creatures are far hotter, and of stronger
and greater Spirits, and more desirous of Copulation, or more unchaste than the
Females, not subject to those Uncleanness, but fit for Generation at all
Times and Seasons, which Women are not: And hence it is, and always was
accounted a greater Sin and Shame for a Woman to be unchaste, than for a Man,
though it is not excusable in either: And for the same Reason, Women were never
allowed those Privileges of Polygamy as Men among the Ancients. For the
unchastity of Women destroys the Generation of Mankind in the Root, and brings
Confusion and Desolation to Families; so that Wantonness in Women is a Sin
against God and against Nature: For the Creator in the beginning has implanted
Modesty, and given the Bridge of Chastity unto Women, and indeed unto the
Females of all Creatures, by enduing them with a cold meek Temper, derived from
the Element of Water, which does allay and cool them, and therefore they are
naturally more moderate, and not so hot and desirous of Copulation as Men; and
when once they have Conceived, are satisfied till such time as they have
brought forth, setting aside the Consequences proceeding from a debauched
Imagination, or the wanton Provocations that happen between Men and Women,
which force and strain Nature; but as for pure natural Inclinations they cease,
and are as free from them as Sheep, or the Females of any other Creatures.
These are the wonderful Works of the great Creator; for if it were not so, all
Generation would be destroyed and corrupted, even in the very Root, as
sometimes it comes to pass among Lascivious and Petulent Men and Women, through
various sorts of Uncleanness, which are against God's Law and the Right of
Nature. Do not all the Beasts of the Field observe their Times and Seasons? And
after Conception, do they not strictly withstand their Males, and not suffer
them to touch them till after they have brought forth, and also brought up
their young Ones, and made them capable to shift for themselves? All which time
they remain without Inclination, because the end of Nature is answered; and
this is according to the first Law of God, which all Creatures have kept
(especially the Females) unviolated, EXCEPT WOMEN.

But though I said, that Woman's natural Inclinations to the Sports of Venus do
cease after Conception; yet it is not so to be understood, but that Nature in
Women does remain in a possibility of being awakened, as by the ardent desires
of the Mind, which if kindled, can easily stir up, the sleeping Powers of
Nature, and by many other wanton ways, which are used to provoke Nature beyond
the proper degree, or what is Natural, which is not only a Sin, but tends to
Corrupting of mankind in the Root.

Which Wantonnesses and Unnatural Courses of Life, are much furthered by sundry
sorts of Meats and Drinks, exciting Nature to her damage, and corrupt the Seed,
as the great number of gross adulterated Foods, and strange Mixture of Flesh,
Fish, Herbs, Fruits, etc. and the too frequent drinking of Wine and strong
Drinks, which heats the Seed, and provokes Nature, and make her lose her way,
which is very pernicious and dangerous to all sorts of People, but more
especially to WOMEN; and therefore the Ancients did direct those of that Sex,
to observe an higher degree of Temperance and Order than they prescribed to
Men, as knowing that the whole Welfare and Preservation of Mankind did chiefly
depend on their good or ill Constitution: The Food therefore appointed to them
was Simple and Natural, as various sorts of Herbs, Fruits, Grains, and pure
Water for Drink, which are endued with simple and equal Natures, and have
Affinity with the Feminine Nature, having no manifest Quality that does too
violently predominate, therefore have no unequal Operation, but do administer
both dry and moist Nourishment, far beyond all high prepared Foods and strong
Drinks. For all sorts of Meats and Drinks do beget their Likenesses, and for
that Reason mean simple things have in all Ages been Commendable, especially
for WOMEN.

What we have said of Diet, the same is to be understood of Exercises, and
therefore the Philosophical Ancients did not count it proper or suiting their
Nature, to put Women ordinarily upon any share or care of the Government or
hard Labors, because of their weak Spirits and Heats; for on all occasions of
Difficulty, Labor and Trouble, they are subject to be either too Choleric or
too Sanguine, which their Nature cannot bear; for all Inequality, be it what it
will, proves Injurious to them and Children: Besides, it is very unseemly to
see Women dirty, and employed in hard slavish Drugdery, and such of them as are
forced thereunto through the bad Husbandry of their Parents or Husbands, do
they not by following such robustick Labors become bold, rude and uncivil, and
seem to have to put off the Womanish Nature both in Words and Works? Now this
Rudeness is bad in the Males, but an Hundred times worse in the Females: For if
their sweet courteous friendly Tempers and Natures be destroyed and wounded,
the Generation of Mankind is thereby corrupted in the Root. Therefore Men ought
not to put Women to such robust Employments and hard Labors as many do, except
pure Necessity compels them to it.

It is a common Opinion, That WOMEN are more Salacious and Unchaste than Men;
but the same is a great mistake, and built only on this Ground, because many
Women are found easily to comply with Men's Insinuations and Temptations, which
does not proceed from any natural desires of Lust or Unchastity, but from their
friendly Tempers and sweet Sanguine Dispositions, many of them being naturally
so Sanguine, that the very show of Love and Friendship will presently awaken
the Love-Principle in them, even before they themselves are sensible of it; so
that if a Man do but carry himself fair, courteous and kindly to them, he may
command them beyond what is convenient, which many wicked Fellows knowing, make
it their Business to betray them, which proves the Ruin of many. Now Men
finding them thus to comply, they being ignorant of their Natures, and also of
themselves, judge that of Women which they find true in themselves. And to this
Scandal some vile Women have also given a further occasion by prostituting
themselves to all Unchastity; but those Abominations do not proceed from their
simple natural Inclinations and Dispositions, but through their depraved
Free-wills and lewd Customs, whereby they have forced Nature out of her simple
way, and then such become worse and far more detestably Impudent than the most
debauched of Men. But still Women as Women, and according to their simple
natural Dispositions, ought by all Men to be highly esteemed and honored; and
if they themselves were but in the least sensible of, or understood the noble
Excellency of their own Complexions, Natures and Compositions, they would scorn
any such base Actions, and loath themselves for their depraved state and
condition, especially some of them, who have precipitated themselves into all
kinds of Intemperances and superfluous Courses and evil Customs, whereby they
have abused their Natures, destroyed their Healths, and intailed Diseases and
many Miseries to Posterity, which is much to be pitied.

But to descend to more particular Directions touching Women.

1. Their Food ought to be well prepared, neither too much nor too little, but
according to the Rules in our Chapter of preparations; for Food well prepared
is not only of easier Concoction, but breeds better Blood and finer Spirits,
than which nothing brings more advantage to Females, by reason of their weak
Hearts; also such good Blood breeds most excellent Milk.

2. They ought to eat and drink so moderately, that the natural Heat of the
Stomach may overcome and digest it without any difficuly, so that there may no
superfluous Dregs remain, as are always wont to do, where Nature is
overcharged, which fills the Vessels full of sharp crude matter of a griping
Nature; for a small quatity of Meat and Drink, when well concocted, affords not
only a better Nourishment, but also greater Strength, than abundance gorged
down more than Nature can manage. It being a gross Error for People to imain,
that a great quantity must be thrust into the Belly, or else they cannot
subsist, never consulting the strength of the natural Heat: Nothing destroys
the Health, and breeds evil Juices in the Body more than this Intemperance,
which most People are subject to more or less; and from hence are generated
Windy Diseases and Griping Pains in the Stomach, and Fumes in the Head, which
miserably afflict many of these Gluttonous People.

3. They ought as much as in them lies to forbear all sorts of rich fat Foods,
that do consist of various Natures, and disagreeing among themselves; all such
Foods are heavy of Concoction, fur the Passages, dull the edg of the Appetite,
and breed bad Blood: But on the contrary, all simple innocent Foods, which for
the most part are easy and light on the Stomach, are most agreeable to the
Foeminine Constitution, and also for their Children, as Bread, Butter, a little
Cheese, Milk, Herbs variously ordered; Flesh, but in its proper Seasons, and
simply and well prepared.

4. But much Flesh, and the frequent eating thereof, does prove injurious to
Women, especially those of gross Phlegmatic Complexions, whose Heats are so
weak, that they are not able to make a perfect Concoction or Separation; for
such Food is apt to fur the Passages, and breed abundance of evil Juices, which
fills the whole with gross Phlegmatic Humors, that makes it dull heavy and
indisposed.

5. Women ought not to drink Wine or strong Drink, which are bad for Men, but
an hundred fold worse for Women, especially Brandy, and all distilled Liquors
and Spirits; for all such Drinks do not only destroy the natural Heat, causing
the Stomach to become cold, and attended with a sick qualmishness, but also
send Fumes into the Head, weaken the whole Body, and giveoccasion for the
Generation of Windy Diseases and Vapors; and indeed all strong Drinks, if not
very sparingly taken, destroy the Health of the Female Sex, being contrary to
their Tempers; for their Heats being weak (in comparison of Men's) and their
Spirits few; therefore every inequality is harmful to them and their Children.
Besides, they are subject to various Diseases, which cannot happen to Men; and
of all these, strong Liquor is an especial promoter; and therefore the
Philosophical Ancients allotted only Water for Women's drink. And if our Women
were but sensible of the ill Consequences of their frequent Sipping of strong
Drinks, they would be as far from doing it as those in other Countries, there
being hardly any Women in the known World that are such great Drinkers and
lovers of strong Liquors as the English; neither are any so turbulent fiery and
Masculine Spirited, as accordingly they are troubled with various Diseases, to
which the Women in other Countries are strangers.

Furthermore, strong Drinks (if not sparingly taken) heat the Blood, causing
sharp salt Humors to possess it, which also makes their Milk hot and windy,
very prejudicial to Children; for whatever Inconveniences the Mother suffers,
the Child partakes thereof, both in the time of Pregnancy (or breeding) and
whilst it sucks. Therefore Moderation and Temperance, both in quantity and
quality, is highly necessary for them, because the whole preservation of
mankind does in an especial manner depend on their prudent living.

6. If Women have regard to their own Health, and the Preservation of their
Children, they ought not to eat any Food hotter than their Blood; but after
their Food is prepared, let it stand open, that the fiery sulpherous Vapors
may freely pass and fly away; for those Steems are very prejudicial to all
Peoples Heath, but more especially to the Females: And this ought to be
observed in Flesh above all other Food, and also in Puddings, and the like
things that are of a gross strong Quality, and so have the greater power to
retain those fiery Steams, which are of an hot griping windy Nature, and
causing a Mank or Scurvy in the Blood, and makes the Milk windy and sharp,
which violently gripes the poor young tender Babe that sucks it. It Is true, Use
not only Familiarizes the most unnatural things, but renders them as it were
Natural, and in some respects almost Necessary (witness Tobacco-smoaking, to
such as are besotted to it) so that often times the leaving off those ill
Habits do prove very hard and difficult; nay, sometimes the abrupt leaving them
is as dangerous as the Evils that flow from the constant use of them, so easily
is Nature depraved and turned out of her simple way: Thus, such as have long
used themselves to hot Foods, if at any time they miss them, and are forced to
make shift with cold, then their Stomach seems empty and unsatisfied, only
because it is depraved, and for want of a little Custom of eating cold. Hence
many believe that there is good Nourishment and Virtue in hot Food, viz. better
than in the same Food cold, or as warm as the Blood; nay, many are so fond of
this fiery sulpherous Steam or pernicious Vapor, that the good Dame will be
angry with her Maid, if by any neglect she let this precious Steam fly away,
calling all the Family to come quickly, lest the Meat be cold, and (as she
calls it) g^^d for nothing: Whereas in truth it will be then much the more
wholesome; for those pernicious sulpherous Fumes ought to be separated from the
Meat, before it be received into the Body. And a little use of eating cold Food
would remove all such ill Habits, and make cold Meats and Drinks more friendly
and satisfactory to Nature, and help to prevent the Generation of all windy
Diseases.

Furthermore, as cold Food does sharpen the Appetite, so neither will the same
quantity thereof swell the Body, or indispose Nature so much as the like
quantity of hot Victuals will, and the Body will feel it self more airy and
lightsomer. It Is true, hot Food will heat the Body, especially all the external
parts, but then it is an unnatural heat, which is more burthensom than
pleasant; for the fiery sulpherous Steems that remain in Food after it is
prepared, are of the very same Nature and Operation, as the heat of Charcoal;
and so Experience will teach you, that it is very unwholsom to hold ones Head
over the Steems that proceed either from boyld or baked Foods, or over
Furnaces, or Pots, or which proceed from Ovens; for they take away the
Complexion, and make People look Pale and Weakly; now if their Operations
externally have such a visible ill effect, how much more Prejudicial will they
be when internally received, and with the Food swallowed into the Body?
Possibly in some strong Constitutions, those Inconveniences may not be felt
till Age comes on, but few then are free from them, tho insensibly from what
causes they proceed.

Also, it is to be noted, that this fiery heat Food does retain after it is
prepared, is contrary unto the natural Heat, both of the Food and the Stomach
too, and will no longer remain than whilst it is forced by the constant heat of
the Fire, and then of its own accord will separate and fly away as soon as it is
removed from the Fire in an humid Vapor, which Fumes if they be stopped by
covering such Foods, so that they cannot separate and fly away, then they will
re-enter, and ^^use the Meat to eat strong and fulsom. In a word, it is nothing
but Custom that makes hot Foods easy and agreeable; but all the Custom in the
World can never make them so natural and friendly as Cold, after a little use.

7. They ought to accustom themselves to moderate Exercises in open Airs, which
is profitable for all People, but especially for those of the fair Sex, for it
hardens and strengthens Nature, begets a good Appetite, prevents Obstructions,
breeds good Blood and pure Spirits, which renders the whole Body lightsom and
pleasant; nothing next Temperance in Meats and Drinks being more profitable
than moderate Motion, and Airy Houses and Rooms, and not to pen up themselves
(as many do) in close hot Rooms with great Fires, which prevents the most
pleasant and friendly Element, the Air, that it cannot have its free
Influencies; and so what Air does remain in such places, like standing Water in
a Pond in the heat of Summer, corrupts and becomes thick and humid, which dulls
the edg of the Appetite, weakens the natural Heat and the Functions of the
Stomach; besides, much sitting by Fires and in hot Rooms, draws forth and
destroys the pure thin moist Vapors and Volatile Spirits, opens the Pores, and
makes all the Body tender; so that such People do not only become uneasy and
indisposed, but subject to the Inconveniences of catching Colds, if they do
but step into the open Air.

Likewise, moderate Clothing is very commendable as to Health; for much or
thick Clothes are apt to heat and tire Nature, and either hinder Exercises, or
make them burthensom, put the external parts into an unpleasant Heat, and
hinder the cool refreshing Vapors from penetrating into and relieving the
Body: Therefore those that use themselves to a mean in Clothing have better
Appetites, and longer Breathed, stronger, and not so apt to recieve Injuries by
every small accident, as those that inure themselves to very warm Clothes, hot
Houses, an idle soft Life, and the like Effeminacies.

8. Women ought not to lie too long in Bed, as most of them that are of any
Quality or Ability do; their Beds being for the most part of Feathers, which
are soft, hot and sulpherous, with Curtains drawn close before the Windows and
about the Bed, whereby the imprisoned Air, hindered from its free Circulation,
stagnates or corrupts; and this too is very Prejudicial to their young
Children, whose Heats are weak and Spirits tender, often causing Fevers and
Convulsions, especially when other Intemperances concur.

Besides, this soaking so long in your Bed, weakens all the Members, especially
the Back, which is a principal part, and the Body being kept hot, and lying
long without Motion, hinders the Actions of the Stomach, impairing so much its
due Heat, that Nature wants Fire for Kitchinwork, I mean, is not able to make a
profitable concoction or separation of the Food, so that great part of it turns
to gross phlegmatic Juices, for which very cause many Women are stupid, weak,
feeble and presently tired, and out of Breath, if they do but use any kind of
Exercises, and hereby their Travel in Childbearing is ten-fold more burthensom
than otherwise it would be, witness many ordinary Country People, who have
nothing the trouble at such times as our fine lazy sluggabed-Dames.

Besides, (as I have already observed elsewhere) Feather-Beds are ponderous
close Substances, in their own Nature unclean, and lying several Years in
Corners, or the closest parts of Rooms seldom exposed to the open Air, they
contract abundance of gross humidity, and the various diseased People which lie
and sometimes dye on them, leave behind contagious Effluviums and venomous
Particles, lurking perhaps for an Age, and not drawn forth till a Person
happens to lie on them, whose Similes awaken them; For Beds are continued from
Generation to Generation, and not thoroughly cleansed once in twenty or thirty
Years, and so become very prejudicial to all sorts of People, but especially to
Women, who spend two thirds of their time in them; and also to their Children,
whose Natures are weak and tender, and consequently apt to receive every evil
Scent and Vapor, which such Beds do plentifully send forth, which in many
Constitutions by way of the Fores, penetrate all parts, and wound the Spirits,
and by degrees weaken and destroy the Health: If Women were sensible of the
Mischiefs attending their indulging themselves thus in their stinking Nests
every day almost till Noon, they would surely be ashamed of, and detest their
own Sloth and Folly therein.

9. Women in time of their Month or Lying-in, are for the most part through
hard Travail, and many natural Weaknesses and other Diseases brought very low,
and their Spirits weak and but few: Now in this low condition their Nurses do
as it were force such great quantities of sweet strong Suppings on them, even
against Nature, or more than Nature can bear; for the Nurse and Mistress do
both foolishly imagine, that there is no other way for Nature to be restored,
but by great quantities of strong virtuous Food, never remembering the Rule --
That Nature ought always to be stronger than the Food; and not the Food
stronger than Nature: Also, they make them drink and eat such Foods as hot as
possible they can, crying, Mistress if you do not eat it whilst it is hot,
'twill be worth nothing. When in truth she gives it her so hot that it is worse
than nothing: Also, many of them will boil Ale or Beer, with Oat-meal and Spice
till it becomes thick, and then add store of Sugar, which ought not to be,
because no fermented Liquor will endure a second preparation, without a total
destruction to the pure Spirits and balsamic Virtues, as I have demonstrated
at large in another place. Therefore the Oat-meal and Water ought to be boiled
first and briskly, not too long, and then add a like quantity of Beer, Ale or
Wine, as you please, and set it on the Fire, and let it be made boyling-hot,
but not boil, and then take it off the Fire, and scum the gross phlegmy part
off which swims on the top, and let it stand till it be about as warm as your
Blood, and then you may drink it with safety; but always remember, that the
quantity be not too great, nor the quality too strong for Nature; your best
time to put in your Spice is with your Ale, Beer or Wine, but let it be
bruised, and make but a little at a time, so that you may have it fresh and
fresh; for heating such Foods, and most others, a second or third time does
destroy the brisk lively spirituous parts, and renders them dull, heavy, hard
of Concoction, and not so pleasant to the Pallat.

10. Most Women that have where-withal do enrich their Food and Drinks with so
many foreign Ingredients, as do not only make them too rich, and consequently
generate too much Nourishment, but also entice the Pallat to receive more than
is needful, whereby the natural Heat and Stomach is overcharged, and the
Vessels stretched beyond their proper and natural Proportions; so the Body
swells and becomes uneasy, and Wind in abundance generated. Nor do such after
eating and drinking find themselves Refreshed, which is the Intention of Food,
but on the contrary, are more disordered through fullness, than they were
before with hunger: Therefore it concerns all, especially such as have but weak
Spirits and Heats, not to exceed either in quantity or quality, but administer
proportionable Food, that the natural Heat and Stomach be not put to any
difficulty to digest and concoct it; so the pure Spirits shall thereby be
preserved free from Oppressions: For all Health and Joy consist in the goodness
of the natural Spirits, it being a grand Mistake in most, who think to recover
lost strength by over-rich Food, strong Cordial Drinks, and great quantities;
for they but add a second charge and inconveniency to Nature; for the Spirits
that were weak before, by these Intemperances are made weaker. Likewise, all
Women in this time of their Lying-in, should be advised not to drink too freely
of any sorts of Liquor, especially such as are apt to breed much Milk, for fear
of sore Breasts and Fevers; let them beware of strong Drinks, because they heat
the Blood and Body beyond Mediocrity, evaporate the Volatile Spirits, and
awaken the Central Fires, which ought not by any means to be stirred up.

11. Cleanness in Women is a most sublime Virtue, and to be had in the highest
Esteem and Veneration, because of the manifold benefits which do thence
proceed, it preserves mankind in the very Root, which the great Prophet Moses
well understood, whence arose his Laws of Cleanness and Separation. Many of the
Ancients did not count it lawful to know a Woman after known Conception: 1st.
Because then the End of Nature is answered, and also God's Law: 2dly. Because
then the Inclinations to Copulation in all Females cease, except in some
depraved Natures, and through wanton sinful Provocations, as is before
mentioned. Now this being none of the least Intemperances and Uncleanness,
ought to be considered by all People, the rather for that it strikes at the
Root, and corrupts mankind in the very Radix; But on the contrary, there is
nothing more preserves the Fruit sound and healthful, than Cleanness and
Separation.

Also, if Men did separate themselves from Women all those proper times and
seasons which Nature forbids them, and did sometimes lie alone, and keep
themselves Chaste, it would render them more healthy, strong and full of lively
Spirits, and more Masculine, it being an Effeminating thing for Men and Women
to lie always together, making no distinction of Uncleanness, or of Sickness,
there being scarce any particular Intemperance or Uncleanness that destroys
more Men, Women and Children than this; besides, it enfeebles the Courage, and
makes Men low Spirited, and also lessens their Affections, except in some few
dulling Natures; in a word, it debilitates all the parts, and brings an infinite
number of Diseases: How many thousands of poor Children are yearly destroyed by
the Effects of the beforementioned Intemperances, some by Leprous Scabby
Diseases, Boils and running Sores, and the Disease vulgarly called, The KING's
Evil (but to speak Truth, it is the Mother and Father's Evil) others with weak
Joints and Ricketty Distempers, and many other Calamities, as Consumptions,
Stoppages, Convulsions and windy Diseases.

But here I am apprehensive, that I shall offend the Women by telling them the
truth, and which any of them might know to be truth, if they would but look
into themselves, and examine things. It being a gross Error for any to imagine
that Man in the beginning was made, as to his outward Man, more corrupt, or
subject to Distempers than the Beasts of the Field, all sorts of which are now
an hundredfold more Healthy than Mankind; yet both they and Man, as to the
Elements of the Body, are compounded of one and the same matter: And as the
Creator has endued Man with Wisdom, Reason and Understanding above and beyond
all other Creatures visible, so on the other side, there is not a Creature
under Heaven of a sounder and more healthy Constitution than Man in his
Original; nay, it is certain Man is naturally the most complete; for the holy
Angels have always appeared in Humane shapes: Likewise, Man according to his
bigness, is not only strong, but of a great Spirit, full of Vigor, and the
soundness of his Primitive Constitution appears by his long Life in the first
Ages: Therefore it is not through the Imbecility of his natural Frame and
Composition (as some would have it) that he is afflicted with such a number of
Diseases, from and by means of his Intemperance and Uncleanness, in which two
Evils Men do surpass all other Creatures, and consequently are more diseased
than any of them.

But had Man lived in obedience to the divine and natural Law of God, he would
as much have surpassed the Beasts in Health as now they do him, and Children
would be as sound and free from Diseases as the young Ones of other Creatures
are, had not their Parents corrupted themselves by their Intemperances in their
Radix, and trained their Children up in the like Inconveniences; and this is
the true cause of Man's Imbecillities, whereby he is become inferior unto the
very Beasts as to Health: Not that he was made so in his Creation, for we do
read that the Ancients were sickly and subject to this and the other Disease,
nor of the immature Death or Sicknesses, either of their Women, or especially
of their Children, whence we may conclude that they were sound, and not liable
to so many burthensom Diseases, as we and our Children are subject to; and this
we may be the rather confirmed in, because the Scriptures do testify, That the
days of Mankind were shortened because of their Intemperances, as Genesis 6. The
Violences and Intemperances of Man had corrupted the whole Earth, and all
things therein, which was the grand cause of infinite Distempers, and the
shortning of Life; an example of this we have in many of the Beasts, who are
exposed to the unmercifulness of Men, and more especially in Horses, who in
their Radixes are one of the most healthy sorts of Creatures, of strong hardy
hot Constitutions and Natures; nevertheless, through the hard usage and strain
their cruel Drivers force them unto, they become the most diseased of all
others.

Moreover, these inhumane Outrages, Uncleanness and Intemperances, do awaken
Gods Wrath in the Constellations and outward Elements, and powerfully, as by
Simile, draw down malignant Influences, whence proceed particular and universal
Calamities. Whereas if mankind did live in the observation of Gods Law in
Nature, and contented himself with what was needful and suitable to his Nature,
the same would not only lay a sure Foundation for Health, both of Body and
Mind, but Magnetically attract the benevolent Influxes of the Celestial
Bodies, and make even this lower Life a kind of Paradise both for Innocence and
pure unsullied Pleasures.

12. All Women and Nurses ought to be careful that they do not swathe or bind
their young Infants too hard, which many are guilty of; for the delicate tender
Nerves and small Bones of Children cannot endure such usage without great
Inconveniency, by awakning the internal heat, which spreads through all the
Body, and makes the external parts glow with an unnatural heat, which makes the
Child fret and cry, and that spends its strength, and puts its whole Body into
disorder: And after they have thus pinioned up the poor Infant, and wrapped it in
so many Coverings, they then cover it up again in a Cradle or Bed (but the best
of the two is a Cradle) where for the most part they are kept over-hot, and the
pleasant Air prevented of having its free Influences upon them, whereby their
pure Spirits are suffocated and rendered impure, the Circulation of their Blood
obstructed, which occasions many Infirmities, as loss of Appetite, stoppages of
the Breast, and Generation of that universal Disease the Wind, which is a
mortal Enemy to Children: Also this hard binding does often deform the Body,
and destroy the Proportions of the Limbs and Joints, which are easily forced
out of due place in those tender Years, which brings a great deal of uneasiness
and torture to them, and proves of very evil consequence as to Health, as many
of our fine-Citizens Wives, and others may know by woeful Experience.

Indeed these preposterous ways are so contrary and disagreeing to Nature, that
thereby is destroyed the chief pleasure and delight of young Children; but to
make them amends for such their hard Usage and Deformities, if they happen with
difficulty to outlive Childhood, their Parents being much concerned at the
crookedness and disproportions of their Children, which themselves have chiefly
occasioned, must needs send for the Iron or Steel-Bodice-maker, which rarely
does any good, but generally the contrary, putting Youth to unspeakable Misery
to no purpose; and this conceited Remedy proves of as dangerous consequence to
many as the first Original Evil: Therefore these Courses ought to be avoided,
for they bring many Distempers on the Body, which Nature is never able to
out-grow, especially in weak Constitutions, for they infeeble the whole Body,
cause the Contusion of the Breast, lay Foundations for Consumptions, and cause
many to have pale thin Complexions, weak Joints, etc.

Of Food fit for Children, and the contrary: Also of Quantity and Quality.
The best Food for young Children, next their Mothers Milk, is good Cows Milk
raw, with some crumbs of Bread in it, always observing that it first stand till
it be cold, after it is milkt, before you give it them: For it is a great Error
in Physicians and others, to advise consumptive People to drink Milk hot from
the Cow, for that Heat is of a Windy Quality that swells the Body, and sends
Fumes into the Head, and is harder of concoction than the same Milk is, when
it is cold. Touching which, I desire not that any Body should take my bare Word
in opposition to the Learned, but it being so easy and familiar a thing, let
them try, and then they shall know by Experience.

Therefore I say, in Summer your Children may eat it Cold, but in the Winter
you may warm it as hot as your Blood, or if you have a desire to alter it, the
best way is to boil it, adding some Water to it with a little Flour, and
sometimes Oat-meal; but remember that it do not boil too long, nor too thick,
for that makes it of a grosser Nature and harder of Digestion, and breeds
thicker Blood, which is of ill consequence to Children.

I know Mistress Nurse will be offended that I talk of giving Children Raw
Milk: But I must tell her, that properly the same ought not to be called Raw,
because it has passed through several Digestions and Fermentations, even to
the highest degree, so that it is not inferior to Women's Milk, and much better
than most of theirs, because of their Infirmities and improper Foods and
Drinks. And Women's Milk may as properly be counted Raw as the Cows, to whom I
know no Creature comparable for Sweetness, Cleanness and Wholsomness; their
breathing is an excellent Perfume, and their very Excrement is little less, and
yet our good Dames would think it a sad business, if they should give their
Children unboyled Milk; whereas the boiling thereof destroys the wheyey part of
it, and fixes it, and makes it thicker and harder of Concoction; but on the
contrary, Raw Milk, as they call it, that is, unboyled, is of a cleansing
Quality, easy of Digestion, carries away downwards all windy matter out of the
Stomach and Vessels, and causes it to pass away freely, there being no sort of
Food or Physic like it, so that it is an excellent Remedy to prevent all
Convulsions and griping Pains of the Stomach, attending windy Diseases in
Children.

And when Children begin to be capable to eat harder Food, then Bread and
Butter, and Bread and Cheese will be good Food for them; (provided that the
Cheese be not too old, nor too stale and strong, for such Cheese is very
injurious to Children, heating the Blood, and causing too great a Drought.) But
most Foods that are in use in this wanton superfluous Age, are improper for
Children, one of which is much in use among the richest sort, and indeed most
People nowadays feed their Children with it, viz. Water-Pap, that is, Bread
and Water, supposing that sort of Food to be light of Concoction, which is a
great mistake; for Bread, the chief Ingredient therein, has already passed
through the highest Preparation it is capable of; for the first preparation in
all sorts of Food does digest and destroy the crude Body of Phlegm, and sets
the spirituous parts at liberty, which by a second Preparation must be
destroyed; and then such Foods and Drinks become dull and heavy, and lie hard
upon the Stomach, yielding but a bad Nourishment, breeding thick gross Blood,
whence proceed Stoppages, and many Infirmities of the Breast; and are so
contrary to Nature, that those that do prepare any sort of Food a second time,
are forced to add some predominating strong Ingredients that are rich, as
Sugar, Spice, and Spanish Fruits to hide the Qualities of the first and grand
Ingredients; for who could endure to eat Bread and Water boiled together alone,
or Bread and Ale, or Bread and Wine? And yet all these in themselves, and
without any alteration, are very pleasant and wholesome.

Furthermore, all fat Flesh is very hurtful to Children, for it furs and oils
the Stomach and Passages, and in some Children, whose retentive and digestive
Faculties are weak, and the Expulsive strong, it quickly slips out of the
Stomach into the Bowels, and loosens the Belly too violently, causing griping
Pains, especially when Flesh is not good, and at some certain seasons of the
Year.

Likewise, all kinds of strong Drinks are Abomination unto the Natures of
Children, it drys and heats them, infects the Blood with sharp mangy Humors
and Diseases, evaporates the pure volatile Spirits, etc. But of all sorts of
Drinks, the most fit and proper for Children is Water; the next is small Beer
that is well brewed.

All kind of melted Butter and fried Food, be they what they will, are hurtful
to the Health of all People, if not very sparingly taken, but more especially
to Children; for Butter has passed through several Digestions and Fermentations
that have opened the gross body, and made the spirituous parts flying or
volatile, and therefore if Butter stand open a little while in the Air, it
destroys the goodness and pure brisk taste of it; but if it be committed to the
Fire, then the pure Virtue is immediately suffocated or evaporated, and then it
turns into a gross strong Oil, which is very offensive to Nature; but many to
prevent its running into Oil, will add Water to it, and keep it in motion, and
so by the help of the Water, the motion and the Air, the Spirituous parts are
kept living, which indeed is the best way of melting of Butter: Nevertheless,
even this is grosser on the Stomach, and oils, furs and obstructs the Passages
more than Butter eaten on Bread, which is the best and most natural way of
using it.

The truth hereof is further manifested by this; take Butter, Flour and Water,
and make it into Paste, as they do for Pies, and then bake it, and let any of
those which love such things best, be confined to live on it for two or three
Weeks, and confine another to Bread and Butter, and see which will be tired
first; it is certain he that eats the baked Bread and Butter shall presently
loath it, but he that lives on the common Bread and Butter may continue to live
thereon, and be well sustained, without being weary of it for many Years, and
yet all is but Bread and Butter, only the preparation makes the difference. For
you may observe, that all kinds of Food made of fine Flour and Butter, and
baked, is of a close heavy substance, hard of Digestion, that fouls and makes
the Blood thick and gross, and being first invented for Wantonness and State,
are continued to gratify the same Properties, and therefore ought to be
banished

Of the Quantity of Childrens Food.
There are but few Mothers or Nurses but do err in Quantity as much, and more
often than in the Quality of the Victuals which they take themselves or give
their Children. Now over-charging of Nature is more dangerous than Food that is
of a contrary Quality, or made so by improper Mixtures and Preparation, tho
both are very bad. It Is hardly to be imagined how little in Quantity and mean
in Quality will gratify and maintain Children in perfect Health and
Liveliness, and therefore we should consider how difficult a point it is, even
for People of mature Age, to be Temperate in eating and drinking, more
especially when Meats and Drinks are made by Spices, Sugars, foreign Fruits,
and other mixtures, enticing to the Palate, the pleasure of which you must
note, does always continue many degrees beyond the necessity of the Stomach,
which is one of the chief causes of Gluttony. Now if it be so hard and
difficult a thing for Men and Women to be Temperate, and abstain from Excess
who have Experienced the Dangers, Indispositions, Relapses and the like evil
Consequences thereof, how then can we expect that Children should understand
when they have enough, that is, sufficient to sustain Nature, and no more? It Is
certain all healthy Children will eat and drink to the end of the pleasure of
their Pallates, and till their Stomachs loath it, more especially where such
Food or Drinks are made enticing, as of late Years most are: And therefore it
may be truly said, that all or most Children, are as it were taught and trained
up to Gluttony from their Infancy, which has many evil Consequences.

1st, The over-charging Children with Meats and Drinks, does suffocate their
pure volatile Spirits, which in them are very tender.

2dly, It stupifies all the Senses, causing dull heavy Indispositions to attend
the whole Body, awakening the central Fire, which spreads it self, and causes
an unkindly heat through all the external parts, and in some weakly
Constitutions brings an inward Fever that consumes the very Flesh off the Bones.

3dly, It furs and stops the Passages, breeds thick gross Blood and evil
Juices, which fall down upon the Joints and makes them feeble, and dilating the
Vessels of the Stomach do so impair the natural heat and digestive faculty,
that most of that excessive Food is turned into phlegmatic gross watery or
windy Humors, which ascend into the Head, and causes it to grow great, and as
it were swell, being heavy and sottish, which Distemper is usually called, The
Rickets, which generally proceeds from Intemperance, and the indiscreet
managment of Mothers and Nurses; for Superfluity does not only contract
malignant Diseases, but makes all sorts of Children (as well the strong and
healthy, as such as are weak) so uneasy, that thereby they are apt on all
occasions to fret and cry; it likewise makes them nasty, and of an unpleasant,
dull sottish Humor, requiring double the Tendence which otherwise they would
need. And when by over-gorging they have made them thus froward, then to quiet
them, they presently clap more Victuals or Drink into their Mouths, and thus
force them even against their Desires, as well as beyond the Necessities of
Nature, more than their Stomach can bear, which continues and increases their
Disorders; nay, they feed them till they sputter out of their Mouths, and also
cast it up, which latter, many silly Women: count a good sign of Health;
whereas in truth, this Puking (as they call it) is a sure token indeed that
such Children have strong Stomachs, but withal that their Stomachs are
overcharged and disordered with too much Food; for no healthy Stomach either
Young or Old, will cast its Food up when in Health, if such Foods be eaten
moderately, and be not too much in quantity, or of a contrary quality.

Also, sometimes when the Stomach is too moist, and full of watery Humors, such
Children and others ought to fast a while, and then eat some drying Food. But
on the contrary, those Children that have weak Heats and Stomachs, though over
charged, will seldom cast it up again, but if they do, it makes them very sick
and disordered.

All which Evils are not by any means to be prevented, but by Sobriety and good
Order; for all Mothers ought to give Children Meats and Drinks according to
Reason, and not according to the Childrens desire; much less ought they to
force them when their Stomachs loath it, which wounds Nature in the very bud,
destroying the airy lively Spirits, which Children, as all other young
Creatures, are most endued withal. Observe likewise, not to give your Children
Food too often, that is, not before the former is digested, which many Women
do, and so destroy the poor Childrens Health, and lay Foundations for Diseases.

Add to these Mischiefs of Intemperance in Children, that it dulls the Wit,
clouds the Fancy and darkens the Apprehension, and so renders them more
incapable of all kind of Learning; For Temperance and Cleanness do not only
make the Body sound, healthy, light and pleasant, but strengthens the
Intellect, makes the Spirits brisk and lively, helps the Memory, and gives a
penetrating understanding, and fits one for all Employments both of the Body
and Mind, and lays a hopeful Foundation for Health, Strength and long life.

To conclude, Cleanness and good Tendence in Children is very profitable, and
their Beds ought to be clean, sweet, hard, and in airy Rooms, for their Spirits
are so tender, that any gross thick Air suffocates them: And as their Coverings
ought not to be too thick or heavy, so also should their Day-Garments be
moderate, easy and cool, nor should they be forced to Sleep, as the Custom of
some is, but to go to sleep as Nature inclines them: Also, they must not sit or
lie too long without Motion; for it is that gives Spirit and Life to all young
Creatures.

It is to be noted also, that Women's Distempers, as to Windiness, and many
other Weaknesses, are much increased by their straight Garments and Lacings,
which do press and wound the strength of that part, it being one main Reason of
their shortness of Breath, contracting the Passages and Vessels of the Stomach,
which causes also Sickness, with pricking pains in the sides, and often sends
Fumes into the Head, nothing being more Injurious to them than those Bodice and
Stays, which are as stiff and hard as Boards, which makes the Stomach, Waste
and Back so feeble, that many when they leave them off, they feel themselves so
weak that they are forced to continue them, neither can they hardly turn
themselves in their Beds, but seem as if they were unjoynted, which causes
many other Inconveniences, as growing deformed, and makes Labor and Exercises
burthensom.

If these Rules be followed and observed by any, they will find great benefit
thereby, and be eased of much Trouble, and prevent a great Number of Diseases,
and lay Foundations for an healthy sound Generation.

CHAP. XII.
The Cause of SURFEITS, and how to prevent them and keep the Body in Health. As
also of large Drinking after Meals; and of eating of Suppers.

WHen any one finds himself much wearied or very hot through some violent
action, or fainty through Labor, or long fasting, or any other Accidents of
the like Nature, which may have wasted the Radical Moisture, and spent the pure
Spirits, whereby the whole Body becomes heavy, dull and indisposed. Then to
recover Nature and the Spirits, and yet at the same time prevent the Diseases
called Surfeits, these following Rules are absolutely necessary for every one
to observe:

1. Before eating or drinking you ought to rest, by sitting still and silent,
or taking a small nap of sleep, or if convenience will permit, go to Bed and
keep your self warm for an hour, or two, or three, according to the greatness
of the occasion, which will recover the Spirits and strengthen the natural
Heat, and sharpen the Appetite, refreshing the whole Body, and chearing all the
Senses, so that you shall not only eat and drink with tenfold more pleasure and
delight, but with much more safety, as to Health. For no Meats or Drinks
(though of the highest Preparation) have such Power to recover and restore the
Spirits, and make the sweet Oil in the Body burn clear, as Rest has; for which
cause a man can fast longer from Food, and with less prejudice to his Health,
than from Rest or Sleep. Nevertheless in some of these times of Weariness there
is necessity of present eating or drinking, but then it ought to be done
sparingly, and such Food as is easy of Digestion, as thin brisk Gruels,
Pottages, and the like, and that in a small Quantity; for when the Spirits are
spent by any of the forementioned Accidents, the natural Heat of the Stomach is
so weakened, that it cannot bear any great Quantity of Meats or Drinks, nor such
Foods as are too strong in Quality, without manifest danger to the Health. All
Inequality in this state is very perilous; for when the Radical Moisture is
wasted, the natural Spirits are dull and impure, which cannot be restored but
only by Rest; for the quickness and sharpness of the Stomach and digestive
Faculty does chiefly consist in the Goodness and Quantity of the Radical
Moisture and pure Spirits: And for this cause those that are tired with Labor,
a less Quantity of strong Drink or Food will overcome them: Also, those that
are endued with strong Spirits, and whose Radical Moistures are pure and free
from Obstructions, have good and sharp Appetites, and can eat and drink greater
Quantities without prejudice to their Health; but on the contrary, such as have
but weak Heats and few Spirits, have but little Stomachs, and faint desires to
eat, their Stomachs being full before their Bellies; and the same is to be
understood when the Spirits and Natural Heat are impared and made impotent by
Accidents. Therefore Rest after any kind of Weariness (be it what it will) is a
most safe means to preserve Health, and prevent the generation of Diseases.

2. It is to be noted, that Surfeits and Obstructions are not (as many suppose)
contracted at the first or second Inconveniency (except the Accident or
Disorder be very great) but by degrees, every Excess sows some seeds for
Diseases, which would be prevented, if care were taken, and Nature not
overcharged, especially at the forementioned times, viz. when the Spirits are
weakened or spent, for then the sweet Oil and Radical Moisture immediately turns
sourish, and then follows an unnatural Heat and Disorder through the whole
Body, with a dizziness in the Head; for the Volatile Spirit is the true Life
and Being of every thing.

Many lively Instances might be given to demonstrate this, as we see in all the
Vegetations of the Earth, if the spirituous parts be any way destroyed or
suffocated, that Herb, Seed or Grain decays and becomes of no use or virtue;
which is likewise manifest in all Spirituous Liquors, as Beer, Ale, Syder,
Wine, etc. if by long keeping or other accidents the spirituous parts be wasted
or evaporated, immediately the sweet Quality (as it were) dies, and then the
bitter sour astringent Properties predominate, and appear in their own Forms,
which whilst the spirituous and sweet Qualities were strong, and not violated,
did lie hid, being therein incorporated. So that were it possible for Man by
any Art to retain the Volatile Spirit in any Liquors or other things, then such
things would continue firm and good in all their parts forever.

The same is to be conceived in the Humane Nature, and therefore all People
ought to consider the danger the Spirit is in on all Disorders and
Superfluities; for presently the Appetite is dulled and the Palate cannot
taste or distinguish the pure Relish of any sort of Food. For where the Spirits
are weak all the Properties of Nature become unequal in their operation, and
rise up with a kind of violence or hunger after the sweet Oil, with eagerness
to devour it, which is the true Life, Pleasure and Moderator of all the other
Properties and Qualities; and therefore when once the same is wounded, the
whole System of Nature is disordered, and all her Economy disturbed. And this
is really the very Root of all Distemperatures both of the Body and Mind; which
if every one did understand, and take care that Nature were not overcharged,
might easily be prevented. But though Nature does frequently complain, sigh,
groan and languish under many such Inconveniences and burdens, yet few there be
that ever think or consider the cause from whence such Indispositions proceed,
but for the most part, through Ignorance, take wrong measures; for if any find
themselves weak, fainty, weary, and the like, they presently think to supply
this defect of Nature by giving her good store of rich Food and Cordial Drinks,
which for the most part do but add a second burden to her, and proves of a
more hazardous consequence to the Health, than the first Disorder, since these
Indispositions generally come not for want of Nourishment, but rather the
contrary, and for want of due Rest after too violent Actions or overlong
continuance at them, and for lack of giving Nature proportionable Meats and
Drinks, whereby the Spirits and Radical Moisture are wasted, as aforesaid; though
it must be confessed, That Health and Strength cannot be maintained, but by a
constant supply of Meats and Drinks, yet the main thing is in the due and
proper Timing thereof. Therefore weak-natur'd People at all times, and others,
whenever by Labor, Travel or Fasting they are brought into a weak and fainty
state, should then be more than ordinarily careful that their Meats and Drinks
be not too strong, nor too much in quantity, nor of a contrary quality, but
proportionable to the present strength of their Natural Heat.

3. Great drinking of Wine and strong Drinks, after full Meals of Flesh and
Fish, (most of them being of disagreeing Natures one to the other) do often
wound the health; and that constitution is rarely known that they do not prove
of evil and dangerous consequence unto; which many of the richest sort of
People in this Nation might know by woeful experience, especially in London, who
do yearly spend many hundreds, (I think I may say thousands) of Pounds on their
ungodly Paunches. Many of whom may save themselves that charge and trouble they
are usually at in learning of Monsieur Nimble heels, the Dancing Master, how to
go upright, for their Bellies are swelled up to their Chins, which forces them
to behold the Sky, but not for Contemplation-sake you may be sure, but out of
pure necessity, and without any more Impressions of Reverence toward the
Almighty All-wise Creator, than their Fellow Bruits; for their Brains are sunk
into their Bellies; Injection and Ejection is the business of their Life, and
all their precious hours are spent between the Platter and the Glass, and the
Close-stool and Piss-pot. Are not these fine Fellows to call themselves
Christians and Right Worshipfuls?

The natural Heat being overcharged by too great a Quantity of rich Food, that
contains overmuch Nourishment, stops the Passages, arrests the Spirits, and
makes the Stomach violently attract unto it self from all parts of the Body,
the pleasant moist Vapors, to help and assist her to overcome and digest that
load of Victuals which they have ingorged, that often puts Nature very hard to
it in her internal Laboratory, causing a kind of suffocation of the pure
Spirits, drying and consuming the Radical Moisture and thin refreshing Vapors.
Therefore after such Epicurean Meals, there is always an Indisposition through
the whole Body, with dulling Fumes in the Head, and drouziness, that generally
continues, four, five or six hours, more or less, according to the strength of
each man's Constitution, and the quantity of Food. During which time the
Passages of the Spirits are obstructed, the Pores stopped, so that the thin
pleasant Vapors of the Air from without cannot penetrate, and thence the Blood
is heated, and its Circulation hindered; and all this by gross phlegmatic
Juices arising from Superfluities, which impede the Passages and free Course of
Nature. But after some hours, when Nature has strugled with these Besiegers,
and flung off their Chains, and overcome her Enemy, and forced her way, and
made a separation, then the Road of the Spirits is again laid open, and the
Pores are unlockt to let in the refreshing Breezes, and the Man grows brisk and
lively, and fit for business. -- And so indeed he might have been all this
while, if to pamper a liquorish Palate, and gratify an extravagant Humor and
Custom, he had not wilfully Ingurgitated so much Food, as thus oppressed Nature
for the present; and though he think now all is over; and is ready the very next
day to attack her again with a like Debauch, yet he shall shortly find, the
Dregs remain, there is a Morbifick matter left, and continually increased,
which at length being ripened into Act by some proper Aspect of the Heavens, or
similary Accident on Earth, breaks forth into a most grievous Surfeit or
violent Fever, and the Man is all on sire, and sighs, and languishes, and dies.
And who shall pity him? since if he would in time have hearkened to the Voice
of Reason or Experience, either of them would have told him, That the sole
Intention of Nature in eating and drinking is purely to support and refresh
her, and not burden her; and therefore he ought to have chosen simple Food, and
the quantity not too great for the natural Heat, and then he should have found,
after such eating and drinking, a certain pleasant and refreshing and chearing
Joy spread through the whole Body, from the Center to the Circumference, being
more brisk, lively, active and useful than before.

But still, many there are, that be not content to Overcram Nature with too
great a quantity of Food, but they will needs drown her too, with a deluge of
Drink, pouring in such vast Quantities of Wine and strong Liquors into their
foolish Hogsheads, as if they designed to make their Souls immediately swim out
of their Bodies. This second Charge, especially when it comes immediately upon,
or soon after the first, wounds Dame Nature to the very Heart, and sets her on
fire, consuming the sweet Oil and Radical Moisture by wholesale, suffocates
the purer Spirits, and puts the Blood (their limpid and natural Habitation) all
into a combustion; and the first and greatest Sufferer in this Hurliburly is
the pure Volatile Spirit, Balsamic Body and pure Oil, which is of a friendly
Nature, so meek and gentle, that it cannot, without manifest danger to the
Health, endure any such harsh Fires or churlish Motions. And whenever Violence
is offered to this benign quality, Nature falls into a languishing, which makes
the Functions of the Stomach to cease, and the Salt's spirit loses its
savor, if the Disorder happen near the Center of Life: But if only the pure
Spirits and sweet Oil of any Member be hurt, then it often falls out that the
Evil and Defect remains only in that Member, and the Stomach and Center
continue well; and in such cases the Life is seldom in danger.

But many Physicians, mistaken in Nature, do conclude, That the cause of such
Defects proceed from some ill-habit or vitiated Tone of the Stomach, and more
Central parts; and therefore they will give strong Potions of harsh Medicines,
both Purging and Vomiting, which for the most part hurt Nature, weaken the
Center, help to weaken and destroy the Balsamic Virtues, and the Limb or
Member afflicted grows worse; for when in any Member the wrathful Saturnal and
Mercurial Poisons and sulpherous Heats of Mars are stirred up and awakened,
they will in a little time envenom the whole, and make it burn like fire with
Pains, whence Swellings and Putrifactions proceed. Did People rightly
understand this, they would be afraid to commit such Excess, loading Nature
beyond what she can bear, by adding Intemperance to Intemperance, as first to
over-gorge themselves with too much, as well as too rich Food, and then to
drink such great quantities of Strong Drink after it; these two Superfluities
Nature cannot bear at one time without great Injury to Health.

And therefore since some Men are such Swine as to delight to overcharge Nature
with too much Drink, their safest way is to drink when their Stomachs are
rather empty than full; for hard drinking does not very often surfeit, when the
Stomach is free from Fullness (except men drink to a very excessive pitch, and
of various sorts of Drink, or such as is bad in its kind) especially when men
are at mature Age, or rather old than young; for indeed all strong Drinks are
absolutely against the Health of Young People, by reason their Blood is more
hot, which being increased, sets Nature on Fire, and precipitates them into
Fury, Lust and Madness.

But it may be observed, that more People do surfeit themselves and destroy
their Health by Gluttony and Superfluous Eating, than by Overdrinking (though
perhaps the Sin of Drunkenness makes more noise in the World) for Gluttony is
hid in the Bud, and little or no notice taken of it, but is indeed committed by
all sorts of People, both Male and Female, Young and Old, but more especially
Young People and Children. And the Reasons hereof are, because Food is of a
heavy gross Nature, and hard of Concoction, and requires time for Digestion, so
that Nature cannot so easily rid her self of it; but Drink does pass through
several Digestions and Fermentations, by which the spirituous parts are already
become volatile, that the Stomach and Natural Heat have no such difficulty to
separate it, for that is done almost as soon as it comes into the Stomach, the
spirituous parts incorporating themselves with their similies, viz. with the
natural Heat, as every man is sensible of, presently after the drinking of
strong Drinks, which set the whole Body into an heat, if such quantity be drunk
as causes an evaporation of the natural Spirits, and the phlegmatic part
thereof falls down into the Ureters; so that though it must be confessed, That
superfluity in drinking is very injurious to Nature, yet being of a thin
spirituous quality, it finds many quick ways of evacuation and transpirations;
therefore not so dangerous as overmuch eating; but both are bad against Health,
and great sins against God and Nature. Besides, those that are inclined to
Drink, are manifest to all men, and so their Irregularities often restrained
through shame, and respect to their Credit; whereas the other gormandize
publicly, and without the least Reflection, so general and customary is that
Vice become.

4. The Eating of Suppers is profitable but to few, except Young People, whose
Employments are hard, and in the Fields or open Air, or such as do not make
Dinners, and whose Food and Drinks are mean; for such People may eat Suppers
without prejudice, as also such as accustom themselves to eat in the morning
and fast till night; also they that be of House-Imployments. But for all sorts
of People that live sedentary Lives, and are of easy Employments, more
especially those that are of mature Age, as Gentlemen and Citizens, etc. who
use themselves to lie long in Bed in the Morning, and to great Dinners and rich
Cordial Drinks, whose Tables are so adorned and set forth, not only with such
great store of rich Food, but also with other Circumstances of great Charge, so
that a sober man would not imagine that so great Cost, Pains and time should be
spent thereon, except such Dinners would continue and sustain Nature several
years; but alas! the same is all swallowed and devoured in one hour, and all
the pleasure of it gone, and for real use an honest piece of Bread and Cheese*
should do a man three times more good than all this variety of Dainties, whose
best service is to make work for the Doctors and Apothecaries, and they to
provide Employment for the Sextons; or if they escape the Wooden Tenement and
Flannel, all they have to show in Memory of these chargeable Treats, is an
empty Purse, a disordered Mind, a loathsomely sullied Soul, and an indisposed
distempered Body, as full of Diseases as an Hospital.

To this sort of People it is most injurious to make Suppers; neither indeed
are they good for any who live easy, and eat Dinners, because the space
between Dinner and Supper is not sufficient to make a perfect Concoction,
especially with those that eat much. Flesh and Fish, or Food that is fat; for
after such Food men ought to fast at the least eight or ten hours, because the
oily substance furs the Passages and dulls the natural Heat and Action of the
Stomach, and consequently requires a longer time for Concoction than Herbs,
Seeds, Fruits or Grains. Besides, Flesh is of a grosser substance, and more
phlegmatic, therefore apt to generate Obstructions, thicker Blood, and more
impure Spirits, and therefore those that feed thereon ought to fast a
considerable time after it (by which means the natural Heat of the Stomach may
the better digest the superfluous gross matter) before fresh Food be taken into
the Stomach again.

Therefore the best times for eating, are about eight or nine in the Morning,
and five in the Afternoon; for nothing gives greater advantages to the Stomach
to cleanse it self from all gross superfluous matter, than time and forbearance
of eating or drinking for a fit space, which makes the edg of the Appetite
sharp, and Palate the perfect.

Moreover, Suppers (except to young People, and such as have prepared their
Stomachs by large Fastings and Labors) fill the Body full of Wind, and cause
it to glow with an unnatural heat and unsound sleep. And yet some there are,
who (through a disorderly Life, their Natures being depraved) are so troubled
with windy Diseases, that they are forced to eat Suppers to prevent the
burdensome pains of the Wind, and yet all will not do. But the most considerable
thing why Suppers prove burdensome and unhealthy to Nature, is, because in the
Night the Body is without Motion, and seems to cease from Action, and the Rooms
are made close, and the whole Body kept much hotter than in the day, all which
does prevent the pure thin vapors of the Air from penetrating the Body; but in
the day the body being kept cooler than in the night, it is fuller of motion
causing a more perfect Concoction.

Therefore the most natural and approved way to Health, is to make but two
Meals in 24 hours, one (as I said) in the Morning, the other about 4 or 5 in
the Afternoon. And it is to be observed, that the strongest Food and greatest
quantity ought to be eaten in the Morning, and the smaller quantity, and such
as is easiest of Concoction in the Afternoon, viz. Milk-Pottage, Milk and
Flour, Milk as it comes from the Cow, after it is cold, eaten with Bread,
Water-Gruels, etc. Now the Reason of this is, because in the Morning, the
Spirits, through Rest, are restored fresh and brisk, and the Sun is not come to
the Meridian, but by that time it arrives there, the Food is pretty well
digested; for you must note, that when the Sun comes to the Meridian, it does
more or less exhale or cause some Evaporations of the natural Spirits,
especially in hot Seasons; and therefore Nature is then more indisposed, dull
and heavy than at other times. Also, the forepart of the day has spent the
Spirits by Labor, Exercise, etc. For this cause most People do find themselves
dull and heavy after Dinner.

There is nothing that does more help Concoction than the cool refreshing
Influences of the Air; for it strengthens the natural Heat, and makes it more
central; for which cause People in cold Weather have greater and stronger
Appetites, and more Spirits than in hot; and therefore are able to endure more
Action; so likewise such as are bred in cold Countries, are harder, stronger,
and for the most part longer lived than those that inhabit in over-hot Regions;
for Heat dries up the thin spirituous Vapors and Radical Moisture in the Body,
and causes the internal Heat and Moisture (which should serve for the help of
Concoction) to spread it self into all the external parts of the Body; for all
outward Heat does by simile draw forth the internal heat, and causes the pure
Spirits to evaporate. For this very Reason men's desires are much after Drink in
hot Seasons, and on the contrary for Food in cold; thus likewise the heat of
Beds, where most People wrap themselves up very warm, takes away the Appetite;
for let a man go to Bed somewhat hungry, yet after he has slept, his Stomach
shall seem dull, and his desire of eating gone, till his motion for a while in
the Air does recall it; and the same quantity of Food eaten for a Supper, which
proves burdensome to him that goes to Bed, shall be most pleasant and lightsom
to one that sits up all night, so great is the power of Air and Motion.
Therefore all hot soft Feather Beds, with thick Coverings, which most People
use themselves to, with Curtains drawn, etc. so that their Chambers are in the
next degree to Bagneo's or Hot-Houses, are very inconvenient; for they weaken
the Back and Joints, destroy the Appetite, and render the whole Body so
delicate and tender, that every little Inconveniency is felt, and such People
can scarce endure the fresh Air to blow upon them, without some prejudice to
their Health, which does increase stoppages and all Windy Diseases; but on the
contrary, open fresh Airs, Rooms that have large Windows and fair Prospects,
and the Bed open, hard and clean, so that the refreshing Influences of the Air
may pass freely, will strengthen the whole Body, beget and increase Appetite,
and make the spirits powerful, whereby Nature does avoid many Inconveniences
and Diseases.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Windy Diseases, the Reason thereof in Nature, and why English People,
especially Women are so much troubled therewith; Also an Account of the
Inconveniency of eating and drinking between Meals.

THE Generation of Windy Diseases in the Body arise from many Causes, but
chiefly from Three, viz.

1. From eating and drinking of too great quantities of various sorts of gross
fat Food and strong Drinks, of disagreeing Natures; which stretch the Vessels
of the Stomach beyond what is natural, and generate evil Juices of a sower keen
quality, and sharp griping Nature; for it is not purely Wind, or an airy
quality, that does so gripe and pain the Body, and send up such Fumes and
Vapors into the Head; for if it were so, Nature would find some way to
discharge it, which perhaps might make a noise, but not be so painful. But this
windy substance is mixed with a sharp sower thin poisonous matter that runs out
of one place into another, and causes griping pains; and all this chiefly
proceeds from Repletion, and too much Nourishment, and uncocted matter. For
when Meats and Drinks are taken, that are either ill prepared or too much in
quantity, or of a contrary quality to the Constitution, then the natural Heat
of the Stomach and digestive Faculty cannot concoct such Foods nor make any
perfect separation, nor cast out those evil Juices and Venoms, which all sorts
of such Food does contain, but especially Flesh and fat strong Meats, which are
apt to lodge in Vessels, and cause Pains and Swellings; for what part or Member
soever of the Body is by any Accident made weak, these evil Humors will flow
unto and seize that part in an especial manner; thus, If the Brain be weak it
causes a violent Headache to continue for several days together, with a
dizziness; but if the more central parts, as the Breast and Passages be
impotent, then you shall find all the Faculties of the Stomach debilitated, and
its rententive Property so impaired, that it cannot retain the Food, whence
proceeds loathings and vomitings; but on the contrary, if the Center be well
fortified with a powerful natural Heat, then the Stomach easily flings them
off, and they disperse themselves into the Members and more external parts,
which causes swellings and grievous pains in the Hips Legs and Arms, or
where-else it happens, often shifting from one part to another, which some call
the Windy Gout, a Disease, though very painful, yet not so dangerous as when it
lies and centers it self near the Heart and vital Parts; for when they lodge
about the Stomach, such People are not well either full or fasting; for after
eating this Humor does so sower the Food, that it makes the Stomach sick, and
subject to sower belchings, and the whole body to swell, and sickish Qualms to
arise: And this enticeth many to take a dram of Brandy, or other strong
spirituous Drink to help Concoction, which seems to give some ease for the
present, but in a little time the same Inconveniency will return, and then
again, away they run to their Doctor Brandy-Bottle, and thus come to accustom
themselves to such strong fiery Liquors, whereby they yet more and more weaken
the Stomach, and cause the beforementioned Windy Diseases to increase, so that
in a little time they shall not be able to eat any Food without a Dram after
it; nay, it will come to that at last, that they will not be able to digest
their Food either with it or without it, the Liquor will make such a Prey of
Nature, causing the Head never to be free from dulling Fumes and Vapors.

Now these Diseases are very rarely cured by any of the Medicines that are
appropriated to them, because most People do more or less continue the same
Disorders which were the first cause thereof. For no Medicines have such Power
either to prevent or remedy these Disorders in the Body, as Temperance,
Cleanness and good Order; for they have an inward Power and certain Efficacy
for that purpose; and if Temperance be continued, it will augment the Radical
Moisture and pure Spirits, and by degrees strengthens the natural Heat of the
Stomach, which only has the Power to draw all such windy gross sharp matter
from all parts of the body, and so cast it out, if through length of time it be
not become too central; for the natural Heat has a magnetic Virtue, that
forcibly attracts all such matter as burdens Natures, even from the most inward
Cavities and furthest Ciroumference unto it self, and there digests and throws
it off, both upwards and downwards, if a proper degree of Temperance be
observed both in quantity and quality, and fresh supplies of Food and Drink
come not too often. For so powerful is this attractive Faculty of the Stomach,
that it will draw the very Flesh off the Bones, as is most manifest both by men
and beasts, if the Stomach be not supplied with convenient quantities of Meats
and Drinks; for this Heat which serves for concoction and separation is never
idle, but always continues its motion and action, so long as the Spirits are
lively, and that there does remain any Oil in the Lamp. For this cause moderate
Fasting has been commended by all wise men, and a clean well prepared Diet
has great Power, not only to prevent Diseases, both of the Body and Mind, but
also to root them out, especially when the cause of such Diseases (as generally
it happens) have arisen from over-charging of Nature with too great quantities
of Flesh and Fish, and the more because People make no distinction between
Clean and Unclean, nor of the Seasons of the Year, of the Surfeits or Diseases
the Cattle are subject unto, whose Flesh they eat, nor regard the improper
Mixtures of such Food, etc.

2. The second cause of Windy Diseases, I assign to be the frequent eating and
drinking of Hot Foods, I do not mean such as are hot in their own nature and
operation, but such as having been prepared by Fire, are eaten before those
fiery sulpherous Steems are evaporated; for they are of a very pernicions
venomous quality, and altogether of a contrary Nature to the genuine Heat of
Nature and particularly of the Stomach also; for this fiery heat will no longer
incorporate it self with such Foods, Broths, etc. than it is forced by the
constant heat of the fire; for as soon as they are taken from thence this
sulpherous Steem or humid Vapor will hastily separate of its own accord, which
does manifest that this Heat is an Alien, and that Nature casts it out as an
Enemy; for indeed it contains three venomous qualities, that are absolutely
pernicious to Health, viz.

1st. The first is an harsh Fire, of a Saturnine Martial Nature, of a keen
sharp fretting operation, which dulls the pure Spirits, and infects the Blood
with a Maingy itching Humor.

2dly. It contains a gross deadly poisonous Water, or humid quality, that does
incorporate it self with the grossest parts of the Air, and fly away in a steem
or vapor; and if Food be eaten before those fiery evil vapors be separated
and evaporated, it swells the body and hurts the natural Heat of the Stomach,
and insensibly, but certainly generates both Windy and Watery Diseases, filling
the inward Vessels of the Body with evil and venomous Juices, sending Fumes
into the Head, and disordering the whole body; and this more especially in
Women and Children, who, as we have showed you before, are by Nature much more
liable to Windy Diseases than men.

3dly. If this furious Steem be by any Vessel that covers the Meat, after it is
taken out of the Pot, or off from the Spit, so that it cannot fly away, but is
stopped and turned back, or confined to stay with such Food, after it is prepared,
then will it re enter into it, and make it flat and heavy, and alter the Taste
of it, so that it will be strong and gross on the Pallat, and heavy on the
Stomach.

It is also to be noted, that the common eating of Hot Foods does possess the
Blood with a salt sharp fretting Humor, like a Mainge; and if Children were
not accustomed to such things from their Mothers Breast, it would more sensibly
break out upon them in that kind: For this very Reason, in Dogs and many other
Creatures, if such hot* Broths or Food be given them, it will cause the Mainge
in their Blood; and the very same it occcasions in the human Nature, but not
externally so manifest, because rendered more familiar by use.

3. The Third Cause, not only of Windy Diseases, but of many others, is,
Peoples eating and drinking too often: Nothing more burdens Nature, or
generates more crude sharp Humors; for when fresh Food is thrust into the
Stomach before the former is digested, it mixeth with the half-concocted Food,
which does surprise Nature, and disturb her Work, and fouls the Stomach,
causes sower Belchings, makes the Vessels to swell, and in some Constitutions
is attended with griping Pains and Indispositions through the whole Body, etc.
for the natural heat is so oppressed with these continual supplies of Food,
before it calls, or is ready for them, that it cannot make any perfect
Separation, which is a main cause of Windy Diseases, filling the Vessels with
unconcocted Juices, which powerfully obstruct the due Functions of Nature, and
hinders the Circulation of the Blood and Spirits; which is the reason, that
when such People do travel or labor, and oft-times only upon the Change of
Weather, they are indisposed and presently tired, and out of Breath, and
troubled with an inward heat and drought, continually calling for Supplies of
Drink, which does but promote Disorder, and swell the Body, and make the
Exercise more burthensom.

For indeed drinking between Meals, is very injurious to all sorts of People,
except to those that labor hard, and sweat much; for such may drink, but very
moderately; or else they may quickly outdo Nature; but for others, that live
easy Lives, and do not sweat, to be sipping, or rather pouring down strong
Drink and Wine between Meals, does prove of very evil Consequence; for it
destroys the edge of the Appetite, and makes the Stomach disordered, always
seeming as if it wanted something; and in some Constitutions, an hot heavy
dullness; for all strong Drinks, received in a greater quantity than the Stomach
can conveniently master, leave a sour, heavy, stinking Matter behind them in
the Body, which furrs the Passages with a slimy Substance, and which causes
loss of Appetite, shortness of Breath, Rheums, with sharp tickling Matter that
first ascends into the Head, and offends it, and then falls back again into the
Breast, and upon the Lungs, whence Coughs and Consumptions proceed. Also, in
some People it begets a kind of unnatural hunger or craving in the Stomach, or
a sharp gnawing Pain, which causes many to eat, but they are never the better
satisfied nor eased, but rather increase the Pain thereby. I am confident,
abundance of People can witness this to be true, from their own Experience, and
yet will not consider or regard the true Reason or Causes of it: For it is a
gross Mistake, when any shall feel their Stomachs gnaw or gripe in this manner,
to run presently to the Cupbord, and think thereby to cure that defect; which
for the most part does but increase it, and no longer gives ease than the Food
or Drink is in the Mouth; for this evil habit of the Stomach does not proceed
from want of Food or Nourishment, but through sharp, crude, superfluous Matter,
which dulls and disables the Natural Heat, that it cannot perform its due
Office of Digestion; for, where Food is thus too frequently crammed in, the
digestive Faculty has not power to make separation; which does, as it were,
suffocate the pure Spirits, and then presently the sweet Oil, or Juices of such
Food, turns either of a keen, sour, or bitter Quality, according to the
disorder or nature of each man's Stomach and Constitution; which depraved
Juices disperse themselves into several parts of the Body, enfeebling the
Joints and Members, wounding the Spirits, and making room for outward Colds,
and the like Accidents to take place; for Colds do rarely seize any part of the
Body, (provided the Accident be not too extreme,) except first there be some
inward defect or weakness; as may appear by those that are troubled with
stoppages of the Breast, whom every petty Accident, nay, even the alteration of
the Air shall sensibly afflict.

But as Nature abhors all Extremes; so, on the other side, overlong Fasting
does help to generate windy Diseases, especially in infirm People, whose
natural Heats are weak, and Spirits few; for they will soon grow fainty, and
Fumes and Vapors will be apt to fly up into their Heads, and when they come to
eat, a small matter makes them sick; for too long fasting does spend and
evaporate the Spirits, and waste the Radical Moisture, and hurt the digestive
Faculty; so that after eating and drinking, the Senses seem to be stupefied,
and the whole Body sleepy and indisposed; and besides, after such long Fasting,
People are apt to strain Nature, by taking more Meat and Drink than she can
bear. Therefore a Mean is safest in all things; for if any refrain from Food
too long, the Action of the Stomach is so vigorous, and its attractive Faculty
so powerful, that it preys on the natural Spirits and radical Moisture, so that
you shall then find a very imperfect Appetite; whence comes that common Saying
-- I have out-fasted my self; or, My Stomach is gone. For the strength and
perfection of the Palate and Stomach consists in the strength and vigor of the
Spirits and radical Moisture; therefore both superfluous eating and drinking,
and also immoderate fasting, do generate Diseases, and cause Indispositions
both in the Body and Mind: Therefore it is not so commendable, nor so healthy
to make but one Meal in twenty four hours, as to make two moderate Meals in
that space; for otherwise there is apt to be too great an Emptiness, and too
eager an Hunger, which makes People give themselves such a freedom of eating,
as thereby the Vessels a^e stretched by the great quantities of Food, which
makes such have great Bellies, and prove fat and gross: But though they will
eat but once a day, yet many of them that are able to come by it, do give
themselves the liberty of drinking lusty Evening-draughts, which do so stupifie
the Senses, and heat the Blood, and furr the Passages; so that it is no wonder
that they are not prepared for a Breakfast.

In a word, there is nothing so safe, nothing so pleafant as Temperance, and to
observe proper times and feasons for eating and drinking, and keeping within
the bounds of what is necessary, both in quantity and quality: And this we must
aver, That as the world goes, few there are that hurt their Health with
Fasting, in comparison of those Multitudes that destroy themselves by
Superfluities: nor is it so dangerous a consequence, if any competent care be
taken.

It is also to be observed, That all kinds of Food ill prepared, is hurtful,
and apt to forward those Windy Distempers; for any Food that is too much or too
little dressed, or under or over-prepared, is prejudicial to the Health; but
over-prepared is the more hurtful of the two (unless where it is very much too
little done;) for over-preparation, be it of what you will, does in a great
measure destroy the brisk, lively Spirits, which renders such Food of a heavy,
dull, gross Nature and Operation; so that it cannot administer such proper
Nourishment, nor can the natural heat of the Stomach draw such pure Spirits
from it, as otherwise it would yield (for it cannot give what it has not.) It Is
therefore a great Error, as to Health, to overprepare Food, as the custom of
some is, viz. to boil Flesh so long till it is ready to fall to pieces; which
many do, because the Broth should draw forth all the strength and virtue; also,
they boil it in but small quantity of Water, with the Pot or Vessel covered, by
which means the Broth loses its proper and natural Complexion, and becomes of
a dull reddish Color, mixed with black, which is very pernicious both to those
that are in health, and such as are already sickly; but especially, for weak
consumptive people, whom Physicians generally order to eat of such Pottages;
for their natural Heats being weak, and Spirits low, these unnatural
Preparations, and gross Foods do further the growth of their Distempers; for
all such Pottages have lost their pure spirituous parts, and volatile virtues
in the preparation, and are loathsome to Nature, especially to weak people,
because, by the small quantity of Water, long boiling, and the grosness of such
Flesh, the lively Virtues and Tiuctures are destroyed; and therefore such Goods
lose their natural Color, and fragrant Sent, and become strong and fulsome;
for no preparation ought to be continued any longer than the crude body be
opened, and the gross matter digested; for if it be continued longer, then the
pure spirituous parts will evaporate. The Intention of kinds of Preparation,
is, to digest the phlegmatic gross Parts, that thereby the spiritual Virtues
may he set at liberty; but then, if the Preparation be continued, your Fire
will serve you as the Celestial Fire, viz. the Sun and Elements, do the
Husbandman, when he makes his Hay, or the Malster his Malt; for first, the Sun
exhales the gross Body, and phlegmatic Parts of the Grass or Herbs, and sets
the Spirit at liberty, which perfumes the whole Field with most delectable
Odors; but if this Hay be continued too long in the Sun and open Air, its
spirituous Quality will also be exhaled; and then it will become like Salt that
has lost its savor, good for little but the Dunghill. The very same is to be
understood in all Preparations of Food; for it has rarely been known that any
such gross, over prepared Broths ever did any good to such consumptive People,
but rather the contrary; for all Flesh ought to be boiled in plenty of good
Water, (and River-Water is best,) and quickly done, even to a point, and the
Broth ought to be thin, with a brisk, pleasant smell and taste, and the Flesh
of a whitish color; such Broths, if well prepared, and the Flesh be good, will
perfume the whole Room where they are. The very same is to be understood in all
other boiled Foods; as, Herbs, Roots, or Grains, be they of what sort they
will, being thus naturally ordered, they will in their kind be brisk and
acceptable to the Stomach, easy of Concoction, and breed good Blood, and pure
Spirits; but the common Food, and ways of Preparation, which most prescribe for
sick or weakly People, are so fulsome, and strong, that the frequent eating of
them is enough to make well-people sick; it being no unusual thing for
Physicians, and others, to order such Food for weak or sickly People, as they
themselves, or any others that are in perfect Health, cannot endure to eat or
drink; so that the Change is much for the worse: which is much to be pitied,
That Ignorance and Blindness should so possess Peoples Hearts. This I speak and
write from that Understanding which the Lord of all things has given me, in
discharge of my Duty to my Brethren and Fellow Creatures.

Of Fatness.
Fatness is very comely in Men and Women, when it does not exceed the Medium,
nor proceed from Idleness and Intemperance in Meats, Drinks, or Exercises. Some
Men are from their natural Constitutions more apt to be Fat than others;
especially those in whom the sweet Quality is strong; such as are the
Sanguine-Flegmatick, Sanguine-Cholerick, Sanguine-Melancholy, and who are of
pleasant, merry Dispositions, much inclined to Delights, but not so much to
Action, as those that have the astringent, or bitter Qualities predominant; nor
are their Spirits so vigorous, or natural Heats so sharp; and therefore their
Meats and Drinks make more Humors, because the Action of the Stomach is not so
strong; neither is its attractive Faculty so powerful, so that a smaller
quantity of Food does sustain them, than does others. But as these sort of
People are apt to increase in Flesh and Fatness, so also do their Inclinations
increase to Drink which seems more grateful to them than others, because their
Heats are not so strong to concoct Food as other men's are; hut Drink being of
an easy concoction, and of a pleasant, chearing Quality, which such People
delight in, having a Simile with their Natures, they take more delight in
drinking, than in eating; especially after they are arrived to a mature Age;
and also they are very inclinable to Laughter and Merriment, by reason of the
abundance of sweet Oil in their Constitution.

But fat People do much differ; some are more lively, strong, active, and
long-lived than others; for where the Phlegmatic Property of Nature is strong,
and joined in the Government with the Sanguine, or Sweet Quality, they are apt
to grow very fat and corpulent, being slow of motion, and of dull, heavy
disposition, inclined to an easy, soft Life, and to drink much; their Fires,
and natural Heats being but weak, there is not a perfect Concoction made of the
Food and Drinks, but every thing tends to generate abundance of gross
Phlegmatic Juices, which swell all the Body, and Members thereof.

If the bitter Quality be powerful, and share in Dominion with the Sanguine, it
makes Persons merry and brisk; but not so cumbersomly Fat and Phlegmy as the
former; because here the Natural Heats are stronger, consequently they have
greater Stomachs, better Appetites, and are given more to Action, esteemed good
jolly Companions; many of them will speak well, and boldly; they are of strong
Constitutions, but great Drinkers, which oft-times wounds their Health.

When the Astringent Quality is Co-partner with the Sweet, it gives People
full-bodied, and fleshy, but not fat; of healthy Constitutions, but not so
pleasanthumour'd, or merry as the former: Many of this sort, are both great
Drinkers and Eaters too, being inclined to Intemperances.

But if Temperance, Cleanness, and proper Exercises were observed, with due
Food and Drinks, there would be but very few People over-fat, let them be of
what Constitution or Complexion they will; it being an easy Matter in the
beginning, to prevent it; but after Persons are grown very fat, it is more
difficult to contract Nature, and the Vessels; yet it may well be done, but not
without some Trouble. The best way to prevent Fatness in the beginning, and
also to abate it, are, 1. Instead of Morning-Draughts of strong Drink, to drink
or eat a Pint or more of thin, brisk Water-Grewel, light-boiled, or such as
some call half-boyl'd, with only a little Butter, Bread, and Salt, but not too
much Butter; and then to walk, or use some proper Exercise for several hours.
2. Be sure let your Dinner be moderate; not to gratify the pleasure of the
Palate. 3. Such People ought not to drink between Meals. 4. Then at Night,
return again to your Water-Grewel. 5. Instead of your strong Drink and Wine,
let your Drink at Meals be no stronger than Nine Shillings Beer. 6. They ought
to exercise themselves in the open cold Air, which will wonderfully sharpen the
Appetite, and strengthen the Stomach, and extend the Passages thereof, which in
most fat People, are too narrow; for through the abundance of gross Phlegm,
they are apt to be furred and stopped: Therefore fat People cannot eat such
Quantities as lean will do: They are also more short-breathed, and sooner
sweat, and are tired; for where there is such superfluity of Flesh, the Spirit
becomes weak, and more impure; beside, so much Flesh is of it self heavy, and
burdensome.

For all which Inconveniences, overmuch Fatness is to be avoided as much as in
one lies; which is best, and indeed can only be done by these Rules of
Temperance, just now recited. Suppose a Man were to seek for Fat Men and Women,
would he go into Country Villages, and poor small Towns, among Plough-men and
Shepherds? Scoggin sought more wisely, when he looked for an Hare on the top
o'th house. No, no, such a Man's Errand would lie in great Cities, and
Market Towns, where there is store of strong Liquors and Idleness, This all fat
People ought to consider, and not to excuse themselves, as many of them do, by
saying, It Is all one, we may eat, drink, and do what we will, we shall be fat;
and such like silly Tattle; having no more understanding of themselves, or the
Nature of things, than Swine have, who are bathing themselves in the Mire, and
eating themselves fat in the Sty.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Flesh, and its operation on the Body and Mind; That the common eating
thereof, does awaken the wrathful Nature in Mankind, etc.

THough we have before in several places of this Treatise, occasionally
mentioned Flesh, and that vulgar eating thereof is prejudicial, yet we esteem
it a matter of such Importance, as deserves to be particularly and distinctly
treated of in a Chapter by it self. For there is greater Evil and Misery
attends Mankind, by killing, hurrying, and oppressing his Fellow Creatures, and
eating their Flesh, and that without distinction, than is generally apprehended
or imagined. Man's strong Inclinations after Flesh, and his making so light and
small a matter of killing and oppressing the inferior Creatures, does manifest
what Principle has got the Dominion in him; for had Man continued in the pure
Law of God, and lived in the power of the humane Nature, and followed the Voice
and Dictates of the Divine Principle, which he was created to live in, he would
have been far from oppressing, killing, or eating the Flesh and Blood of the
Beasts, which was not allowed him in the beginning; for Man was created to be
obedient, and to live in the power of the Divine Principle; and therefore was
put into a Garden amongst innocent Herbs, Fruits, and Grains, which were
intended and ordained for his Food; and was forbidden that Fruit in which was
manifest Good and Evil, which should not have been awakened and made manifest
in Men; for all Hurrying, Hunting, Oppressing, and Killing, be it in what kind
you will, arises from one only Ground, viz. from the wrathful Powers of Nature.
Now Herbs, etc. have an innocent Original, and no Power to awaken, or kindle
any other Properties but what are like themselves; but the Beasts are equally
endued with Wrath, Revenge, Hate, Envy, Love, and indeed with all the wrathful
and sensual Passions: For which cause their Flesh, (especially when unclean,)
and Blood was so strictly forbidden by the holy Ancients; for the humane Nature
ought not to have incorporated it self with the bestial; otherwise God would
have indulged man the freedom of eating of Flesh in his first estate, since he
loves it so well; but on the contrary, the Diet prescribed him, was this, --
Every green Herb shall be unto thee for Meat: There was no mention made, or
thoughts of Flesh.

2. It should be considered, That Flesh and Fish cannot be eaten without
violence, and doing that which a man would not be done unto, and making
destruction of God's Creatures, which are generally more profitable living than
dead, (as Cows and Sheep, which are the Creatures most eaten.) Now killing, not
only of those of our own kind, but also of any other Creatures, came in with
the Transgression; for Man was not made to be a Tyrant unto the rest of God's
Creatures, nor to live in the wrathful, bestial Nature; but in love and
meekness to have dominion over all things for their good, and to maintain Unity
and Concord; which can never be done, unless he live in the Spirit of Love and
Meekness; whence arises that noble Virtue, Compassion; which opposes all
Violence, as much as the Night does the Day. This all the wise Ancients
understood; but more especially the most learned and illuminate Prophet Moses,
who did use all possible Means, both Natural and Divine, to bring the Children
of Israel off from eating of Flesh; as appears first in their forty years
Travel in the Wilderness, during which, they were not commonly admitted to eat
Flesh; as appears by their Murmurings after the Fleshpots of Egypt; which,
when the Lord heard, he said unto Moses, Give them Flesh. Moses answers, Shall
we kill our Numb. 11. 4, 18, 22.
Flocks and Herds, or where shall we have Flesh to feed this Multitude? Which
shows, they did not use to kill and eat the Beasts in their March toward the
Holy Land; for if they did, why then do they complain for want of it? It Is
true, the Lord gave them Flesh; but it was in his Wrath, and to their
Destruction: For they had awakened the Center of Wrath, which provoked the
Lord; (for Flesh cannot be otherwise procured;) but this they ought not to have
done: for the Lord had brought them out of Egypt by his mighty Power; that is,
out of the Vanity, Violence, and Oppression; for so Egypt rightly signifies;
and the Wilderness does intimate the Path and Way of Regeneration, that leads
all that persevere in Self-denial, to the holy eternal Land of Peace, that
flows with Milk and Honey: Therefore none ought to look back or murmur, that
are once got through the Red Sea, lest they fall, as the Children of Israel
did, and become like Lot's Wife, Monuments of Vengeance.

3. All kind of Violence, whether toward our own kind, or upon inferior
Creatures, and whether little or much, does wholly arise from the awakened
Wrath of God in Nature; and from the very same Root does proceed all
Backbiting, Envy, Strife, Rancor, and Contention, and whatever else a Man can
think of, that is of that Nature; there being but one only Foundation that does
generate Discord and Inequality amongst all Creatures; and whenever any man
does hurt, oppress, kill, or speak evil of any other Creature, it proceeds from
this original Spring of Wrath. On the other side, from the Divine Principle of
God's eternal Light and Love, does arise and flow, as from an inexhaustible
Fountain, all Friendly Qualities, Love, Good Will, Meek, innocent Compassion,
courteous Dispositions and Inclinations, and whatever can be called, or
deserves the Name of Good. No man did ever strike, oppress, use violence to, or
kill either Man or Beast from the excitement and power of this friendly
Principle; for all Contention, Strife, and Cruelty, is as contrary to the
Nature and Operation of this Principle, as Light is to Darkness; but from this
Divine Fountain in Man, does proceed that great Law of doing unto all
Creatures, as a man would be done unto; which cannot therefore admit, that any
Violences or Injuries should be done unto God's Creatures, either superior or
inferior.

This our great and blessed Lawgiver, Jesus Christ, did demonstrate, whilst he
was in the humane Property; for all his Practices, Examples, Discourses, and
Preachings unto Mankind, were tending to lead them into Peace, Meekness, and
Unity; and therefore he said unto Peter, Put up thy Sword, for my Kingdom is
not of this World; that is, My Kingdom does not consist in Wrath, Enmity,
Oppression, Cutting off of Ears, and Killing; but in Peace, Love, and Concord:
So likewise have all the holy and enlightened Men in all Ages, both by speaking
and writing, declared against Violence, and endeavored all that in them lay,
to draw all men to Unity; which was the first state of Man, and which he lost
by suffering his Will and Desire to enter into Violence and Inequality, viz.
into dark Wrath; which presently causes uneven operations in his Soul, which
our Savior Christ came to seek and to save, that is, to draw the Soul of Man
back again out of Egypt, through the Red Sea, and Wilderness, into the Land of
Promise, a state of Innocence and Unity. For except Man do again depart from
all Violence, and from under the Government of the Spirit of Oppression, and
comes to know somewhat of the operation of the Divine Principle, he cannot be
happy in this World, nor in that which is to come. This some of the Indian and
Ethnic Philosophers seem to have been sensible of, when they used all pains
and diligence to bring those Savages from Cruelties and Inhumanities, viz. from
all Violence, and killing the inferior Beasts of the Field, and prohibiting
them from eating their Flesh and Blood; for Man being more highly graduated
than any of the Beasts, as being endued with divine and humane Wisdom, and the
Nature of all things, viz. with the Treasures both of Time and Eternity, ought
not by any means enter with his Desires and Will into the savage Nature of wild
Beasts; neither should the depraved Property of Beasts be awakened in Man; for
whatsoever he joins himself unto, or communicates with, whether it be Meats,
Drinks, Employments, or Communications, that very thing, be it what it will,
shall powerfully impose the true property of its Spirit on the Man, by way of
Simile. Were not this so, the wise Ancients would not have made such
distinctions between clean and unclean Creatures; neither would they so
strictly have commanded, that the Blood should be destroyed by Fire, or buried
in the Earth, neither would the Apostle Paul have said, That evil Communication
corrupts good Manners; that is, evil Company, or the evil Spirit in ill Men,
does awaken and strengthen its Likeness in the good Man, and causes the divine
Principle and Voice of Wisdom to withdraw, or become captivated.

And it seems our Forefathers, even in this Nation, have in some degree
considered the great force and power of the wrathful, savage Nature of the
Beasts, and that Men by accustomed violence toward them, and their
communication amongst slaughtered Animals, were rendered rash, precipitate,
fierce, and cruel, and as it were, destitute of Humanity; and therefore by our
ancient Laws, and the immemorial Customs of this Realm, Butchers, and such
People as are of Killing-Employments, are not to be Jury men, as being esteemed
neither fit nor capable Judges of Life and Death: And in the common Proverb, if
a man be fierce, cruel, and subjected to the Spirit of Violence, we say, Such a
one is like a Butcher. Nor can we but observe from daily experience, that all
sorts of People that are of rude, robustick Employments, and communicate much
with fierce and strong Beasts, as Bear-wards, Hostlers, Drovers, and the like,
are generally headstrong, rash, fierce, surly People, and appear evidently to
participate of the brutish Nature of those Animals with whom they converse. And
as the Sheep is one of the most innocent of Beasts, so Shepherds have in all
Ages been celebrated for the most harmless and best-humour'd of Men; and
therefore Governors, both Temporal and Spiritual, are recommended unto us under
the Name of Pastors or Shepherds of the People.

4. That killing, and eating the Flesh and Blood of both clean and unclean
Beasts, was not in use from the beginning, is clear from the Second Chapter of
Genesis; therefore we should consider when, and by whom the same was
introduced. And first, we must note, That the first Beasts that were killed,
were not Cows and Sheep, and the like useful Creatures, whose Lives are far
more profitable than their Deaths; but wild savage Beasts, and Birds of Prey,
the countenance of whose Lives was prejudicial unto Mankind, and the rest of
the Creatures; nor were they hunted and slain to be eaten; but to free Men and
other Creatures from danger. But after a little use and custom of Kiillng, the
Spirit of Wrath and Fierceness, by the fierce Action in the Killer, and the
revengeful Spirits proceeding from the Creature killed, both concurring, was so
powerfully stirred, awakened, and strengthened, that Killing became as familiar
as gathering of Fruit; and the unclean brutish Nature increasing, they could
not only kill without remorse, but began to count it a delight and pleasure,
and then they could eat the Flesh, and lap up the Blood of their
Fellow Creatures, which they had slaughtered, as freely, and as greedily as
Dogs and Lions, or any other wild Beasts could do it; for by continual use of
Killing and Violence, the very same savage, wild Nature of those cruel Beasts
of Prey were become predominant in Men; so that now, they could not only
butcher, and eat the Flesh of Beasts with pleasure and delight; but they could
also, without remorse, torture, and slay those of their own kind; and in some
parts proceeded to eat them too, as the Canibals, who feed on Humane Flesh, and
will most savourly gnaw a Shoulder of a Man, a Breast of a Woman, or the
Haunches of a Child, and think it altogether as sweet and wholesome as my Lord
does his Venison, or my Lady her Partridge.

5. It is to be noted, That if Mankind had continued in its primitive State of
Innocence and Unity, there would have been no Hatred, Strife, Oppression,
Fighting, or Killing one another, no Slaughtering of Beasts, Fish, or Birds,
nor Eating their Flesh and Blood; for that was not permitted until Man had
immersed his Will into the warful, savage, unclean Nature of the worst of
Beasts: For there is no Creature in the World that has any desire to eat Flesh
and Blood, and tear the Creatures to pieces with violence, except those in whom
the fierce, wrathful, savage Nature does predominate. And therefore after Man
had awakened the Wrath, and entered into the cruel Spirit of Killing, the wise
Prophets imposed special Commands not to eat the Flesh and Blood of such
Creatures; as, Swine, Dogs, Bears, Wolves, etc. But can we believe that Man was
at first made like those savage, unclean Beasts of Prey, or indeed worse? For
so now he is, and does exceed in Uncleanness and Cruelty the worst of Beasts,
as much as a Spar-Hawk exceeds a Titmouse; for indeed Man is endued with all
Properties and Qualities; but the Wrath, and evil, unclean Nature ought not to
have been manifested; but the divine and humane Nature should have governed his
Life; but instead thereof, the same are now, as it were, hid in Man, and the
cruel, fierce Spirit does predominate; which makes him so near affinity with
all wild Beasts, and Birds of Prey, and to desire such Food as they do; for
that Nature that is chief in the government of any Creature's Life, be it
either good or evil, clean or unclean, will stir up desires of Food suitable
and correspondent therewith. This is plain in several sorts of Beasts, as those
in whom the simple, harmless, clean Nature claims Dominion, delight in a like
clean and harmless Food, and their Natures are satisfied therewith; not but
that there is an unclean Nature, and fierce Quality in the cleanest and best of
Beasts, capable in some degree of being awakened; for it is not impossible by
degrees and use, to teach and bring Sheep, Cows, Horses, and many other
Creatures, to eat Flesh, and drink Wine, and strong Drinks; and after a little
custom, those unclean, fierce Qualities will grow so powerful, that they will
not only eat and drink such things; but also desire them; for all Creatures
have one only foundation; and each Particular contains the true Nature of the
whole, only the Qualities and Properties of Nature do differ; so in one, one
Quality is strong, in another, the contrary; which makes that great Variation
which we see and admire amongst the Creatures, as to their Dispositions,
Shapes, Forms, Tones, Sounds, etc. And hence proceeds the possibility of
altering, changing, strengthening, and awakening of Dispositions, Inclinations,
and Qualities in each Creature. This was the grand cause in the beginning, why
Man was prohibited the eating of Flesh, and Killing, and why Moses in the
Wilderness did not permit the Children of Israel to kill and eat Flesh, during
their forty years Travel; for the Wilderness represents this World, which all
must pass through, and deny themselves the Vanities, oppression, and Violences
thereof, or else they cannot enter the Holy Land, but must fall in the
Wilderness; for those that have, through the divine Power of the Lord, escaped
the hands of the Egyptians, and are got clear of the Land of Bondage, and have
left Pharaoh and his Host swallowed up in the Red Sea, ought not to long or
lust after the Violences and Flesh Pots of the Land of Vanity, but to continue
in the Spirit of Meekness, Love, Humanity, Self-denial, and to do unto all
Creatures as a man would be done unto himself; which is the true Path of the
New Life, that leads into the right-hand-way, and goes to the heavenly City.

For those wise Philosophical Seers into the divine and humane Mysteries, were
sensible of the manifold Evils that attended Mankind by his joining himself
with the unclean Beasts, and by killing, and eating their Flesh, which did so
powerfully-awaken and strengthen the inhumane Properties in Man, that he by
degrees became delighted in all kind of violent, cruel, bloody Actions, not
only to the inferior Creatures, but also to those of his own kind; whence
Cruelties and Murders have been so mightily encouraged, that scarce any have
been counted of Noble Birth and Blood, but such as have been famous Man
slayers, and destroyed many of their own Species. Some of the Eastern-Sages,
from a true understanding of the Law of God in Nature, declared against these
Inhumanities, and sanguinary Customs; as Pythagoras and his Followers, to this
day, in some Parts of the East Indies; who, by their good Examples, and
innocent Lives, do draw off many of the Savage People from the same, to a more
pure and peaceable course of Life: For, First, They taught them the ill
Consequences of Oppression, Violences, Killing, and Eating the Flesh of their
Inferiors, and making themselves the Sepulchers of the dead Bodies of Beasts:
And when they had done this, then it followed, that they would not strike,
harm, oppress, or kill those of their own kind; for he that does scruple to use
violence unto, or kill a Sheep or Cow, will, to be sure, be far from hurting or
murdering a Man. And thus for many Ages have they led peaceable and harmless
Lives, in Unity and Amity with the whole Creation; showing all kind of
Friendship and Equality, not only to those of their own Species, but to all
other Creatures, hurting or enslaving none, but allowing them all those
Privileges and Freedoms that the Creator had given to all the Inhabitants of
the World, nor cutting off the Thread of their Lives before their appointed
time: And it has been observed, that these Men, sinde their time of Love and
Clemency to the Creatures, have not only been blessed with the Goods of this
World, and Dew of Heaven, far above their wild, savage Neighbors; but also
were never known to contend, oppress, fight, kill, or commit Man slaughter; but
have lived these many hundred Years in Peace and Concord with all the Creation;
whereas before they were convinced that it was an Evil to destroy, and eat the
Flesh and Blood of Beasts, they made no more of killing, and oppressing Men,
than a Wolf does of devouing a Sheep, or one of our Butchers of knocking down a
Cow.

The very same, and far greater Advantages would come to pass amongst
Christians, if they would cease from Contention; Oppression, and (what tends
and disposes them thereunto,) the killing of Beasts, and eating their Flesh and
Blood; and in a short time humane murders, and devilish seuds and cruelties
among each other, would abate, and perhaps scarce have a being amongst them.
For Separation has greater power than most imagine, whether it be from evil or
good; for whatsoever any man separates himself from, that Property in him is
presently weakened. As, suppose a man separate himself from any kind of
Intemperance, Violence, or Uncleanness, and join himself to Virtue, then
presently the wrathful, unclean Nature is weakened, and grows faint for want of
its proper Food; but on the contrary, the humane and divine Principle grows
strong.

Likewise, Separation does wonderfully dispel the dark Clouds of Ignorance, and
makes the Understanding able to distinguish between the good and evil
Principles, first in himself, and then in all other things proportionably; but
so long as men live under the power of all kind of Uncleanness, Violence, and
Oppression, they cannot see any Evil therein, because the humane and divine
Principles are so weak, feeble, and as it were dead, because their Counsels are
continually disobeyed, and instead thereof, the Spirit of Error is followed.
For this cause, those that do not separate themselves from Uncleanness,
Oppression, and the like Evils, but are contented to follow the Multitude in
the Left Hand way, and resolve to continue the Religion of their Forefathers,
though thereby they do but mean Custom, the greatest of Tyrants. It Is, I say,
impossible for such People ever to understand or know any thing truly, either
of divine or humane Mysteries, nor can any man penetrate thereinto, except he
first separate himself from all evil and unclean Ways of the Multitude, and
their Customs; for it is the departing from Evil, and the practice of Good that
crowns a Man with Wisdom, Virtue, and Understanding, and renders him capable to
put the right intrinsic Value upon things, and reckon them at their true
price; for it is generally acknowledged amongst men, the highest Folly to judge
of those things which they have never known, nor been experienced in: Who would
ask an honest Tarpawlin-Seaman's Advice in a Law-Case, expect a Plough man
should relish the Delicacies of an excellent Lesson of Music; or think a
Cobbler fit to value some curious Masterpiece of Vandike, or Lilly's Painting?
So improbable it is, that men should have judgment in any Science, Art, or
common Trade, if they had not separated themselves from other Matters, and
applied themselves some time to such Crafts or Sciences. And yet so vain are
most men, as to suppose themselves capable to judge of divine and humane
Mysteries, though they are still hurried with the Violences, and wallow in the
Uncleanness of the Multitude, and hardly have had once in their whole Lives a
serious thought about these sublime Matters, or ever applied themselves to the
Practice of them.

6. By what has been said, it may sufficiently appear, That all things are
moved by Simile, and every particular Property of Nature, both in the Evil and
Good, does eagerly hunger after such Food as is proper to maintain and nourish
its own Body; from which ground it comes to pass, that the evil and wicked
Bestiality of a Nation, or particular Man, does sensibly move the Wrath of God
in the outward Elements by the same way of Simile, and strengthens it
powerfully, and, as it were, naturally kindling and drawing down the corrupt
Nature in the Stars and Elements; whence proceed both public and private
Calamities: On the other side, Justice, Clemency, Ceasing from Violence and
Cruelty, and walking in the friendly Way of Righteousness, Temperance and
Purity, does awaken and corroborate the benevolent Influences of the Celestial
Bodies, and attract Blessings and Prosperity: As witness the Jews, when they
lived in the Laws of God and Nature, they were blessed with the Dew of Heaven,
and the Fatness of the Earth, and with Health, and all other Benefits; but when
they broke his Commands, and ate polluted things, then was kindled the Wrath of
God and Nature, and many Calamities were showered down upon them. Hence also
the holy Scriptures testify, That the Prayers of the ungodly are an
abomination: God does not hear or answer them, because they proceed from the
wrathful Fountain, and have no Sympathy with the Divine Principle. But on the
contrary, the Prayers and Desires of those that live in the fear of the Lord,
and are guided by that divine Principle of his eternal Love and Light, are as
sweet Incense in his Nostrils, and he will answer them from his Holy Hill; for
by way of Simile, they open the everlasting Doors of the Palace of Glory, and
draw down, and are strengthened with the pleasant Fruits of Paradise.

Thus every thing moves toward its own Center, and powerfully attracts Matter
out of all things, to nourish and maintain its own Body; and this was the cause
why the Ancients made distinctions between clean and unclean Creatures, Meats,
and Communications, knowing that all things that a man does touch, have power
to make him him either better or worse.

7. Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ says, That Man shall answer for every
idle Word: Which Saying does contain a great Mystery: So likewise we read in
the Revelations, That Blessed are they that die in the Lord, they cease from
their Labors, and their Works follow them. Both these Places are to be
understood alike: First, Every idle Word, and also every good Word and Work do
respectively proceed from two grand Fountains or Principles in Man. Now all
idle and evil Thoughts, Words, Inclinations, and Dispositions, as Envy, Hatred,
Backbiting, Violence, Oppression, Fighting, and Killing one another, do all
proceed from the wrathful, fierce Principle, and by it are comprehended and
received, as similary thereunto: On the other side, all good Words and Works
arise from the Light and Grace of God, viz. from the divine Principle, which
does therefore likewise receive and comprehend them. He that calls his
Brother a Fool, shall be in danger (says the Scripture,) of Hell fire: The
Reason is, Because every Word or Work that is framed or created from the Wrath
in Man, and received by its Likenesses, if not repented of, does endanger the
Soul, and is apt to precipitate the Man into the Hellish Nature; for every Root
will greedily embrace its own Fruits; and every Word has a Key in it self to
open the Gate of its own Principle, and to awaken and strengthen its own
Property; as is manifest from every Moment's Experience: Does not the angry
Words and Looks of one Man awaken the fierce Wrath in others, to whom they are
directed? The very same good Words and Works will do: A soft Answer (says the
Wiseman) pacifies Wrath. Every Word carries the Power of that Property or
Principle that was predominant in it, or from whence it was generated; and
therefore wheresoever its Sound or Voice enters and meets its Simile, they
immediately incorporate and join Forces, strengthening and increasing the same.
If this were not so, the Apostle Paul would not have said, That Evil
Communication corrupts good Manners; nor David have avouched, With the Froward
thou shall learn Frowardness. Therefore it is absolutely necessary for People to
know somewhat of themselves, else they cannot understand from what Property or
Principle each Thought, Imagination, and Word does proceed, and guard
themselves accordingly. It Is the true knowledge of God in a Man's self, that
teaches Wisdom, and gives understanding of Good and Evil.

8. But there are many Thousands that hardly ever in their whole Lives do so
much as enquire after that true Knowledge, which dwells essentially in Man, or
mind that internal Oracle, where in Difficulties they may and ought to enquire,
as the worthy Prophet David said, I will hear what the Lord will say in me:
Therefore as for those that have hearkened to the Voice of Wisdom in themselves,
and obtained any true Knowledge of God, they contend not about outward Forms
and Modes of Religion; for they have a more sure word of Prophecy, shining as a
Light in a dark place, to which you do well to give heed; being a guide that
teaches all Virtues, and condemns all Vice: But on the other side, those
that never turn their Eyes inward, nor regard the Voice of Wisdom, that cries
in the Gate of their City, (as the Wise Man loves to speak,) but look abroad,
and hearken after other Voices, such cannot stand alone; they are mere
Adjectives in Religion, Philosophy and Reason; and are forced continually to
lean on the Shoulders of others, and remain Darkness in themselves, as though
the Lord had not given them any Salt to savor their Ways; there being no end
(and 'twere well there had been no beginning) of Man's running after other
Gods, and of worshipping of Idols; but where the true Knowledge of God is not
first attained in a Man's self, there neither can any man be satisfied with
what another Man knows, because it cannot be essential to him, but may be
either true or false; because such Ear-Knowledge does not arise from the Light
of a Man's Life, but is a thing accidental, foreign, and at a distance.

This folding up of a Man's own Gifts and Talents, (which the Lord has given
every Man to profit himself withal,) in Napkins of a supine and careless
Negligence, and hiding them in the Earth, has been the chief cause of Men's
running to and fro, and contending about other Men's God's, esteeming and
setting up Signs, and mere Shadows, and neglecting the true Substance; what
Aristotle held, what Galen taught, what Hippocrates, or St. Augustine, or Tho.
Aquinas, or twenty such noted Men have said of such or such a matter, they can
tell; but how the thing is in it self, they themselves are as blind as Bats;
and the Reason is, they are like the Old Hagg that Seneca somewhere mentions,
who never put her Eyes into her Head but when she went abroad. Thus some of our
silly Travelers will tell you forty Stories of France, Spain, and Italy; but
of the Rarities, the Commodities, the Manufactures, the Laws and Privileges of
England, their Native Country, they are utterly ignorant. What a Madness is it
for me, with toil and hazard to ramble to the Ends of the Earth, to dig in the
Mines of Potosi, or pick up the glittering Dirt of Guinea, when God has
furnished me at home with a Soil that yields me precious Oar, much more noble
and useful?

Now that these Hear-say-Men, or Book-Philosophers, called, The Learned, are as
ignorant as any (nay, commonly more than any others,) of the true knowledge of
God in themselves, appears undeniably, by their walking contrary to the Ways of
Virtue, by their compelling and forcing others to their Self-invented
Belly-Forms, that are utterly destitute of the Life of Truth, who do commit the
greatest Outrages against God, and against his People; but chiefly the Learned:
It is they that set the Rabble on to torment the innocent and simple-hearted,
and all such as are of contra^ry Forms to themselves: All which are the Effects
of the awakened fierce Wrath, and does declare that the Devil and Hellish
Powers do predominate in their hearts, and that Love, Mercy, Meckness, and
doing as a Man would be done unto, have no being in them; and it will be so as
long as Men prefer Vanity, Tradition, and their Belly, before the Man that told
the Woman of Samaria all things that ever she did; which is Jesus Christ, the
true Light, that enlightneth every Man that comes into the World.

It was not therefore without deep Understanding, that the more prudent in all
Ages did esteem the knowledge of themselves before all other Seize, and
recommended it as a thing principally necessary to every Man; for all that do
know the Power of God in themselves, and are guided by the Voice of Wisdom, and
live in the friendly Love of God, have abandoned, and utterly exiled all
Hatred, Pride, Malice, Backbiting, Fighting, Killing, Violence, and Oppression
whatsoever, either of Man or Beast, and in them meek, innocent Dispositions and
Inclinations do reign, using and doing unto all Creatures as one would be used
and done unto; for Violence, and all kind of Cruelty and Oppression is as
contrary to such Natures, as Darkness to Light. And we may affirm, That never
any Men have harmed, oppressed, killed, or used any kind of violence to any
innocent Creature from the excitement or power of this Divine Principle.
Therefore let every one consider this; they that find Hatred, Envy, the Spirit
of Oppression and Violence to dwell in them, may certainly conclude themselves
in the fierce wrath of God; for all such Dispositions and Inclinations do
proceed from that dark Root of Bitterness, which is all contrary to the Spirit
of Jesus Christ.

Great is the whole Mystery of Godliness; but especially Christ manifest in the
Flesh, viz. That the eternal Love and Light of God should dwell essentially in
man; for after Man suffered his Will and Desires to enter into Vanity and
Bestiality, the Lord said, It is not good nor safe for Man to be alone; but
promised him, the Seed of the Woman, the holy Principle of divine Light and
Love, which will bruise the head of the Serpent in all that adhere to, and
follow its Counsel; that is, it will destroy the works of the Devil, and then
all Violence and Oppression departs from that Man; and that Saying is
fulfilled, The Lord is my Strength, my Safeguard, and Portion: And every Man
thus qualified, is taught of God; Jehovah is his Tutor, and his Guide, the
mighty Counselor; so that he will no longer run after other Gods, nor contend
for any thing but Truth and Righteousness, and to live a sober, harmless,
innocent Life in the sight of God and Man, and doing unto all as he would be
done unto. And such purified Souls amidst all the Hurries, (the Storms and
Agitations of the World round about them,) do securely ride at Anchor in a
blissful Calm, and are satisfied with their Portions, and know their Center,
and to them all Contention cease, and there is Peace on Earth as in Heaven.

9. There is no necessity for Mankind to oppress, burry, and kill the Beasts,
and eat their Flesh and Blood, as many ignorantly affi^m; crying out, What
shall we do with them? They will over run us, and eat us up, if we do not kill
and eat them. But I answer; That there is no sort of Cattle but is otherwise of
use besides to be eaten; and Horses are not eaten, and yet what Nation
complains of having too many of them? But some will say, Many of them are
killed by Violence and Oppression; which is confessed: But if there were no
Horses destroyed that way, but used moderately and gently; yet there would be
no fear of having too many of them: the like may be said of other innocent
Creatures.

10. The eating of Flesh, and killing of Creatures for that purpose, was never
begun, nor is now continued for want or necessity, or for the Maintenance of
Health; but chiefly because the high, lofty Spirit of Wrath and Sensuality had
gotten the Dominion in Man, over the meek Love, and innocent, harmless Nature,
and being so rampant, could not be satisfied, except it had a proportionable
Food; and of all others, Flesh has the greatest affinity, as is mentioned
before. And if all Men would refrain eating of Flesh, there would be no cause
for them to complain for want of Food; for the Almighty has in all particulars
been gracious and bountiful unto all Creatures; but more especially unto
Mankind, for whom he has spread a plentiful Table; furnishing the whole Earth
with a great multitude of variety of Herbs, Fruits, Grains, and Seeds, fit for
Food, which do afford a Nourishment of a most excellent Substance, and far
beyond Flesh; as it does appear by all that have applied themselves to such
harmless, innocent Foods, especially in decayed Natures, and sick, as all with
one voice consent, as well the Learned (as they call them) as the Simple: For
when People are ill, and Nature weakened with Distempers, they all advise them
to Pottages, Grewels, and various sorts of Foods made of Herbs, Fruits, and
Grains; but no Flesh must come near them during their Weakness. Now if these
Vegetables and Fruits do afford such an excellent nourishment, and have such a
natural and secret Power to help and recover Nature, and restore lost Health
and Srength, how much more then shall they maintain and preserve it when it is
restored?

But Flesh was never desired because Men found any defect in the nourishment of
Vegetables, and the like; but because it has a Simile with that unclean
Nature, and fierce Wrath that now became predominant in Man And for that
Reason, the wise Ancients used so much diligence to persuade the common People
from the frequent eating of it; especially without distinction, as well because
it cannot be procured without Violence, nor be eaten without being more or less
infected with the Sensual and Beastial Nature; for those fierce, revengeful
Spirits that proceed from the Creature, when the painful Agonies of Death are
upon it, though they make no noise, nor can externally be seen, heard, or felt;
yet they fail not to accompany the Flesh, and especially the Blood, and have
their internal operation, and leave their impressions on those that eat it, by
a secret, hidden way of Simile, the same whereby the Loadstone draws Iron;
there being naturally a most attractive Faculty or Virtue in each thing,
especially the Animal Life, to seek out, and incorporate with its Simile. This
being God's way in Nature, to move all things by Sympathy and Antipathy; the
one by its attractive power draws all things that have any Affinity with it
self; and the other dissipates all things by a contrary opposite will. And thus
Men are (not seldom) drawn into several Inconveniences before they are sensible
of it; for Nature leaves the Ways of Sense and Understanding, and goes on in
her common Course; there is no consideration whether it be good or bad; but
every one of her Qualities and Properties does its own work, and keeps its own
way; so that into whatsoever Quality Man does immerse his Will and Desires,
that Form or Property is presently awakened, and does forcibly draw all things
that have Affinity with its Nature; by which it becomes through use and
practice, very strong and powerful: As, those that fear the Lord, and live
soberly and temperately, draw Virtue and Goodness out of all things, which does
wonderfully strengthen and support them; and on the contrary, those that give
their Wills up unto Ungodliness, attract Poison out of all things, which does
also increase and strengthen the evil Nature in them. These are the two
Tinctures that have power to open all Bodies, whether Vegetable, Mineral, or
Animal, and to transmute and draw all things into their own Property
respectively.

Did Men understand or consider this Power of Nature, they would not so much
desire Flesh without distinction, nor make it their common Food; but rather,
with the wise Ancients, would have Herbs, Seeds, and Grains in high reputation;
not only for that they maintain Men in health, strength, and agility of Body
and Mind, and attribute to long Life, far beyond all Flesh; but also, because
such things have a true innocent Original, being endued with neither Love,
Hate, Fear, Joy, nor Sorrow, but void of all Passions, Sense, and
Perturbations; and therefore not capable of enkindling any such thing in Man,
or awaking ought but what is like themselves: Thus in their own kind they are
harmless and innocent; but Flesh is altogether the contrary, and cannot be
procured without oppressing the Way of God in Nature, and causing the Creatures
to sigh, groan, and cry to be delivered into the glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God; and this keeps the fierce Wrath in motion, and causes it to break
forth upon them in many and great Calamities.

11. When the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15. 17. accused the Disciples for
eating of Bread with unwashen hands, our Savior Christ tells them, It is not
that which goes into the Mouth defiles a Man; but that which proceedoth out
of the Heart. This the Disciples did not understand; and therefore asked Jesus,
What it did mean? Who answers, Out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts,
Murders, Adulteries, and all kind of Intemperances. Now if the Fountain be
bitter, the Streams cannot be sweet; if the Heart be defiled, then all the
Thoughts, Words, and Works are also defiled; but if the Heart be clean, then
the Cogitations and Desires are so also; for every man becomes either clean or
unclean, as he consents to, or suffers his Will to enter into the good or evil
Principle in himself. Therefore no Meats, Drinks, Words, or Works have any
power to defile a Man, so long as his Heart, that is, his Thoughts and Desires
are clean; for then from thence can proceed no inclination or disposition to
any outward thing, but what is like it self; for if the divine Power and
Humanity ^o predominate in a Man's heart, it attracteth such Matter out of all
things, as is capable to increase and nourish its own Body; for no Man ever
did, or can observe the Rules of Cleanness, Sobriety, and Temperance, before
there was an inward Work and Reformation in the Heart; for all Men are first
defiled in Imaginations and Desires, before they bring it forth into Action.
Gluttony, Drunkenness, and all kinds of Superfluity proceed from a contaminated
Heart; which, if it were clean, then Thoughts, Words, Meats or Drinks, Quantity
or Quality would not fully him; because his Desires would be bounded, and
contented with what was needful; but when a man is corrupted within, there is
no end of wanton, vain, supersluous thoughts, and desires after those things
that are needful, nor indeed convenient for him.

There is a twofold manner of Defilement; 1st. By Imagination and Desires. 2ly.
The putting those Thoughts and Desires into Action; which is ten-fold a greater
Evil than the first. All good Men that have desired to live in Self denial,
know this to be true; fortho' evil Thoughts and Desires will frequently obtrude
themselves; yet if a Man stands upon his Guard, they are easily cut off in the
Bud, because they are not yet grown up to a Substance, and therefore do not
bring the Soul into such a horror as attends her when a Man pursues his evil
thoughts, and brings them into action.

In Man are the two grand Fountains, viz. Good and Evil; and the Scripture
says, The Right Hand way, and the Left. Now which-soever of these two
Principles do carry the uppermost dominion in the Heart of Man, from thence are
generated, and do proceed the predominant Thoughts, Desires, Words, and Works.
This is clearly manifested in all other Creatures, as well as in Man; (though
in a more especial manner, in the humane Nature:) For do we not see, that
according to the prevailing Property in each Beast, suitable are their
Inclinations; if it be the Sanguine, Friendly Property of Nature, then such
Beasts are tame, and easily tractable, of friendly Dispositions, and pleasant
Forms and Shapes; and all such Beasts were by the old Seers, and Men of God,
pronounced clean; and they desire not, nor incline to any other sort of Food
but what is clean, innocent, and of a proportionable Nature to themselves? On
the other side, those Beasts in whom the unclean, fierce, wrathful, inhumane
Nature has dominion, their very Shapes and Forms show Fierceness, their
Countenances are terrible and frightful to behold, and their Inclinations are
both cruel and unclean; they are not satisfied with innocent Food, as other
Beasts are; because such harmless things have little or no Simile with the
Ferocity of their Nature, which prompts them to tear and hurry their
Fellow Creatures, and eat their Flesh and Blood; as, Dogs, Cats, Swine, Bears,
Lions, Tigers, Foxes, and many others; diverse of which our Savior likened Men
unto, because he saw that the same fierce, unclean, savage Nature of such
Beasts did rule in them; and thence the said Men were more fierce, ravenous,
and hungry after Blood, and all other Uncleanness, than the very Beasts of Prey
themselves; so greatly mischievous is the depraved Nature of Mankind, when he
suffers his Will and Desires to enter into, and live in the power of the Wrath
of God in Nature. But to eat Bread, or any other Food with unwashen hands,
(provided the Food be clean, and not too much in Quantity, nor of a contrary
Quality,) is no manner of Uncleanness, but a vain Superstition in the
Pharisees, who did love to make clean the Outside of the Cup, but did not
matter the Inside; whereas the Work of Christ was to clean the Inward Man from
every unclean Thought, Desire, and Inclination. And when this cleansing state
can be witnessed by any Man, then no Meats, Drinks, nor other unclean thing can
enter into him, so as to defile him; because his Desires thereunto are cut off
in the Bud, and utterly mortified; for no Man ever did commit any Uncleanness
or Intemperance, but first the contrivance thereof was in the Heart; nay, when
Men first think to commit an Uncleanness or Violence, there does oft-times
happen in the Heart great controversy or struggling between the divine
Principle, and the Wrath; and which of these two does prevail and get the
dominion, accordingly the Man acts, or forbears; and sometimes it comes to
pass, that in this inward contest, the evil Imaginations are cut off in the
Bud, that is, when the divine Principle prevails, and will not susser them to
proceed into Act, and attain unto a Substance; but when the wrathful Nature
gets the Day, then every unclean Thought and Desire is accomplished, and
becomes a substantial Evil.

Thus you see the grand Root and Cause of all kinds of Virtue and Vice, is
inward, not outward; each Man's Fruits manifest from what Principle they derive
their Birth: The external Cleanness and Virtue is only a manifestation of what
Property does reign in the Soul: Therefore the first step to Virtue, Cleanness,
Sobriety, and Temperance, is to turn the eye of the understanding inward, and
there examine and try what kind of Spirit rules in the Heart. This Knowledge of
a Man's self, and to distinguish between the good and evil Principle of Nature
in himself, is of absolute necessity to every person; for he that cannot
distinguish the two Seeds, viz. that of the Woman, and that of the Serpent
within, can never be able to judge of Good or Evil, Clean, and the contrary
without. A true inward Knowledge goes before Self denial: he that cannot
distinguish the Properties of his own Nature, cannot know what to deny himself
of, or what to embrace: But happy is the Man that gets Wisdom, and finds
Understanding.

12. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 10. That the Apostle Peter had
a Vision; in which appeared before him all manner of Beasts, Fowls, and
Creeping Things, both clean and unclean; and the Lord said unto him, Arise
Peter, kill and eat: Who answered, Lord, I have not at any time eaten any thing
that is common and unclean And the Lord said, What I have cleansed, call thou
not unclean: Then Peter arose, and said, Of a Truth, the Lord is no respecter
of Persons, neither to Jew, nor Gentiles; Bond, nor Free, but every one that
fears God, and works Righteousness, is respected and accepted of him. This
Vision was intended, not so much to show the lawfulness of eating clean Flesh,
or the contrary; but to convince Peter, and to take off the Scruple he had
touching preaching the Gospel to the Uncireumcised, or Gentiles; for in the
Vision was rep resented to him all kinds of Creatures, as well poisonous
creeping Vermin, as clean and unclean Beasts; which was a true Figure of the
unregenerate state of Mankind and how the bestial, fierce Wrath of the clean
and unclean Beasts does reign in him; and also, that the poisonous Qualities of
all sorts of creeping Creatures and Vermin, have a being and rule in Men. This
is a great Figure, which did show our depraved state, and that the Creator did
not respect one more than another, but every one that would receive the Counsel
of the Divine Light, and through the good power and virtue thereof, purge and
cleanse themselves from the unclean, bestial, and poisonous Nature, should be
accepted of him, and that Peter should preach the Gospel freely both to Jew and
Gentile: Therefore whosoever shall interpret this Text otherwise, are mistaken,
as is apparent; because, as I said but now, there were represented in the Sheet
poisonous creeping things, and Vermin, never known to be eaten by any Nation or
Sect; but which did aptly denote the unclean state of Man, and that poisonous,
unclean Property of all sorts of unclean Beasts and Vermin, that does rule in,
and defile his Heart and Soul; whence proceed those brutish Inclinations and
Dispositions to Oppression, and all kind of Evil; as also, Intemperances,
Superfluities, Gluttony, and the desire after unclean Food; which evil Nature
and venomous Contagion Jesus Christ, the Cleanser and Purger of Souls, came to
destroy; which Peter's Vision did manifest, in that he was commanded to preach
unto all Men the glad Tidings, viz. That Christ the Redeemer was come to seek
and to save that which was lost, viz. the Soul of Man captivated under every
inferior, bestial, and unclean Power, which Christ by his holy Grace, and
divine Power does destroy, if its Counsel be obeyed; for no sooner does it come
to have dominion in the Heart, but all those Beasts of Prey, viz. Pride,
Revenge, Ambition, and Cruelty; and those creeping venomous Vermin, Lust,
Treachery, etc. are overcome, and their Principle so weakened, that in a little
time they will find no place in the Soul; for there is the same possibility and
energy in the divine Principle in Man, as there is the wrathful, cruel
Principle; if the Will and Desires adhere unto, and follow the first, then that
grows strong, and gets the dominion, and purges out of the Heart Violence and
Oppession, and destroys all Sensuality: But if the Counsel of the fierce,
wrathful, bitter Root prevail, then the Man's Mind becomes a Cage of unclean
Birds, and is filled with Bestiality and poisonous Inclinations; whereby Men
come to exceed all the Savages of the Desert in Cruelty and Uncleanness; and
most of them that have Power, live upon the spoil of others Labors, and by
killing and oppressing as well those of their own Kind, as all other Creatures.
Hence, because Man that was originally formed the Image of God, and the Rival
of Angels, had now so far degenerated and depraved himself, as to engross all
the worst Qualities of even the worst of Beasts: The holy Sages are wont to
liken some Men to Dogs, for their snarling and contention; others to Wolves,
for their ravenous Cruelty; others to Swine, for their sottish Sensuality; and
our Savior calls the Scribes and Pharisees a Generation of Vipers, for their
venomous Qualities.

Farthermore, this Vision of Peter does declare, That this evil, bestial,
cruel, unclean Nature, that had gotten the dominion in Man, should be destroyed
through the divine Power; for the Lord said, Arise, Peter, kill, and eat; That
is, Mortify the bestial Properties, and let the unclean Thoughts, Words, and
Works be cut off in the Bud by the Sword of the Spirit. It was the poisonous
Vermin, and violent, unclean Nature within, which the Lord would have destroyed
and killed, not the Beasts without; for Man's most deadly Enemies are those of
his own Household; inward, not outward: and accordingly the chief work of every
good Man is internal; and if the Heart and Soul be clean, then the Thoughts,
Words, Works, Meats, Drinks, and all other things belonging to the whole Life,
are also clean; for where the divine Principle has the Ascendent, all the
Thoughts and Desires are generated from the same, and relish of their Original,
which does attract the pure Virtue out of all things, because it has an Unity
and Agreement with its own Nature.

13. It is a grand Mistake of People in this Age, to say or suppose, That Flesh
affords not only a stronger Nourishment, but also more and better than Herbs,
Grains, etc. For the truth is, it does yield more Nourishment, but not of so
firm a Substance, nor so good as that which proceeds from the other Food; for
Flesh has more Matter for Corruption, and nothing so soon turns to
Putrefaction. Now it is certain, such sorts of Food as are subject to putrify
before they are eaten, are also liable to the same afterward: Besides, Flesh
is of soft, moist, gross, phlegmy Quality, and generates a Nourishment of a
like Nature: Also Flesh heats the Body, and causes a Drought: Likewise, Flesh
does breed great store of noxious Humors: And it must be considered, that all
sorts of Beasts, and other living Creatures are subject to Diseases, and many
other Inconveniences and Uncleanness, Surfeits, Over-driving, Abuses of cruel
Butchers, etc. Which renders their Flesh still more unwholsom: But on the
contrary, all sorts of dry Foods, as, Bread, Cheese, Herbs, and many
Preparations of Milk, Pulse, Grains, and Fruits; as their Origiual is more
clean, so being of a sound, fir^ nature, they afford a more excellent
nourishment, and more easy of concoction; so that if a Man should exceed in
quantity, the health will not thereby be brought into such danger, as by the
superfluous eating of Flesh.

Add to this, That all kind of Vegetatives being well prepared, and the
Mixtures properly made, are abundantly more pleasant and delightful to an
undepraved Palate, and also to the Stomach, than Flesh, as they are also much
more pleasant to look upon. What an ill and ungrateful sight is it to behold
dead Carcasses and pieces of bloody raw Flesh? It would undoubtedly appear
dreadful, and no Man but would abhor to think of putting it in his Mouth, had
not Use and Custom from Generation to Generation, familiariz'd it to us; which
is so prevalent, that we read, in some Countries the Mode is, to eat the Bodies
of their dead Parents and Friends, thinking they can no way afford them a more
noble Sepulcher than their own Bowels; and because it is usual, they do it with
a little regret, or nauceousness, as others have when they fall aboard the Leg
of a Rabbit, or the Wing of a Lark. Suppose a Person were bred up in place
where it was not a Custom no kill, and eat Flesh, and should come into our
Leaden-Hall-Market, or view our Slaughter-houses, and see the communication we
have with dead Bodies, and how blithe and merry we are at their Funerals, and
what honorable Sepulchers we bury the dead Carcasses of Beasts in; nay, their
very Guts and Entrals; Would he not be filled with astonishment and horror?
Would he not count us cruel Monsters, and say, That we were brutified, and
performed the part of Beasts of Prey, to live thus on the Spoils of our
Fellow Creatures?

Thus Custom has awakened the inhumane, fierce Nature, which makes killing,
handling, and feeding upon Flesh and Blood, without distinction, so easy and
familiar unto Mankind: And the same is to be understood of Men, killing and
oppressing those of their own kind: For do we not see that a Soldier, who is
trained up in the Wars of bloody-minded Princes, shall kill an hundred Men
without any trouble or regret of Spirit, and such who have given him no more
offense than a Sheep has given the Butcher that cuts her Throat. If Men have
but Power and Custom on their side, they think all is well; whence one that was
going to be a Soldier, being asked, What he was going to do? nimbly answered, I
am going to break one of God's Commandments by the Authority of Custom and Law.
To such People Violence, Oppression and Killing of Men and Beasts, is as easy
and inoffensive as plowing of the Land, or gathering ripe Fruits; so rarely
does any consider whether it be right in the sight of God's Law in Nature; and
so sadly is Man depraved, and Self deprived of the true Understanding of
Wisdom; and yet if some of these same Men happen in a private Quarrel or
Contest to kill a Man (although it were partly in their own defense, or to have
committed private Murders,) their Minds and Consciences have been so loaded
and troubled with a sense of Guilt, that many times they have been forced to
confess their Evil, though they knew their own Death would be the consequence
of that Discovery; the chief cause of which is, because Law and Custom do
forbid them to kill men that way, but if two Princes have ever so little
difference, or if there be none; yet if one of them, for his own Glory, and to
enlarge his Empire, have a mind to make War against his Neighbor, on pretenses
never so frivolous, false, or unjust, yet at the Beat of Drum, or Sound of
Trumpet, he shall have a great number of Men offer themselves, and take delight
to kill, oppress, burn and destroy Men, Women, and Children, without any cause
given, or ever considering in themselves whether it be right in the sight of
the Creator, or his Law in Nature, and without having any remorse or trouble of
Conscience for the same; but rather boast, and think the better of themselves,
the more Murders they have committed.

The very same is to be understood in most other things; but more especially in
Religion. Shall we not see a Turk afflict himself for having tasted a drop of
Wine? and a Papist be mightily troubled for having eaten a Mouthful of Flesh on
a Friday? And yet the same Men, at the word, one of his Mufti, and the other of
his Pope, or the command, or instigation of some bloody, sottish, Belly-God,
devilish Priest, be ready, nay, zealous to kill, burn, and destroy the
Innocent, and lay waste whole Countries; all which is contrary to all kinds of
Friendliness and Humanity, and also to God's Law in Nature, and to the Law of
God recorded in th Scriptures? Which shows that Men are gone from, and do
trample under their feet the divine, friendly Love and Light of God, and all
natural Affection and Humanity, and have immersedtheir Wills, and their whole
Hearts and Souls, and precipitated them into the fiery, stern Wrath of God,
having no humane clemency; but acted by the cruel, fierce nature of Dogs,
Lions, Swine, etc And as those savage Beasts do delight to kill, hurry,
oppress, tear, and eat the Blood of their Fellow Creatures; so most men place
their chief delight and pleasure in hunting, killing, oppressing, and
devouring, not only those of their own kind, (which is contrary to most of the
worst of Beasts; for few of them will prey upon, or worry those of their own
Species,) but all other Creatures: None of the Elements are free from his
Snares and Cruelties; the Earth, the Air, the Sea, cannot preserve their
innocent Inhabitants from his pursuits and outrages; but he rifles the whole
Creation; and yet still all is too little to satisfy his insatiate Mind, and
ungodly devouring Paunch; so great a Tyrant and Devil is he become to all the
rest of his Fellow-Citizens of the World. It Is this proud and troublesome
Thing, called Man, that fills the Earth with Blood, and the Air with mutherous
Minerals and Sulphur; no wonder then if the very sight of a Man be more
dreadful to most Creatures, than that of a Bear or Lion, and they will fly
from him as fast.

Those Beasts that are called clean, are such as do refuse all kind of unclean
Food; for the predominate Quality in them consists in the friendly Nature, or
their Properties are nearer the Equality: Therefore such Creatures, as they are
more clean; so also are they more gentle and friendly in Inclinations and
Dispositions, it being contrary to their Natures to worry, oppress, or seek the
Lives of their Fellow Creatures; but are contented with their innocent and
natural Food; they are the only useful and beneficial Creatures unto Man, his
perpetual Friends, by virtue of their Fruits his Life is sustained; but for the
multitude of their Benefits, he rewards them with Oppression and Death; nor
will content himself with the good things they produce for his Sustenance; as,
Milk, Butter, Cheese, Eggs, etc. but must also kill them, and eat their Blood
and dead Carcasses. Now, if Man had not suffered the Hellish, Devilish Nature
to have been awakened in him, he then would not have desired, nor longed after
the Oppressions and Fleshpots of Egypt; but would have rested content with
innocent, harmless Food of the Land of Canaan; but the wrathful Fire being so
greatly moved, and predominating in the Hearts and Souls of Mankind, above and
over the divine, friendly Love of God, no Food will give satisfaction unto, nor
answer the hunger and desires of that awakened wrathful Property, so well as
Flesh and Blood, because it is the highest Life, and has a nearer Affinity to
that predominating Quality that so bears sway in most Men's Hearts.

I look upon it as a great Mistake, for a Man to say, and believe, That all
these good Creatures were made to be killed and eaten, and that Men's Lives
should be sustained thereby. The Lord made all Creatures for his honor and
glory, and for the reasonable service and use of Mankind; whom he ordered to
have dominion over all Creatures; which Man has lost, by suffering his Desires
to enter into the wrathful, fierce, bestial nature, which the Humanity ought
not to have touched; for Man is higher graduated, and ought not to have bowed
himself to those inferior Powers, nor suffered their low, bestial Spirits to
enter him; for God made Man in his own Image, the Horizon of both Worlds, the
Epitome of the whole Creation; so that he is liable to be wrought upon by all
inferior things: If this were not so, there would not be any such danger of
infecting the humane Nature by Communications, oppressing, killing, and eating
the Flesh of the Beasts; for where nothing is, there nothing can be awakened;
as our Savior Christ said, If your Children ask you for Bread, will you give
them a Stone? There being no affinity between the Stomach and a Stone; but on
the contrary, there is agreement between Bread and the Stomach.

Whatsoever Man gives way, or joins himself unto, the same through a little
custom and practice will have power to impose its own Property, and captivate
the Soul: Hence it comes to pass, that Butchers, Soldiers, and all Men that
are of robustick, slavish Employments, are for the most part cruel, inhumane,
subject to all the savage Bestiality that the wild Beasts, and Birds of Prey
are, and oft-times far worse; for Beasts do only live in the wrath of the
outward Nature; but Man does both partake and live in the operation of the
outward, and also of the hellish Nature: Therefore it is no fit comparison to
liken some sorts of cruel Men to savage Beasts; for thereby the poor dumb
Creatures are abused: They do according to their kind; but Man was made for
another Life, viz. to live in the power and operation of the divine Principle
of God's eternal Light and Love; but he has degenerated from his first state of
Innocence, and many Men, by giving way to Cruelty and Violence, are become so
bad, that they cannot be compared to any Creature in Nature, but merely to
Devils. O! how abominable and wicked a thing it is in the sight of the Lord,
and his friendly Love in Jesus Christ, for Men to take his holy Name in vain by
their Swearing, Lying, Stealing, Cheating, Circumventing each other, Fighting,
Killing, counting it no Evil to hurry, oppress, worry both Man and Beast,
spending their precious time in Wantonness, and all kind of Superfluity of
Naughtiness and Intemperance, making it a Sport and Pastime, Good-Fellowship,
and Civil Neighborhood to be drunk, to eat to Gluttony, and to keep Tables
filled with Superfluities, is counted Hospitality, and a Thing of State: On the
contrary, to eat and drik only for ends and necessities of Nature, of ready,
simple, harmless Meats and Drinks, is held poor, base, and beggarly, and
derided by most that have wherewithal to do otherwise; making the Creator, as
it were, the cause of their Wantonness; saying, Has not God given us those
Creatures freely for our use? May we not do what we will with them? Are they
not cur own? These are the common Excuses of these wretched Belly-Slaves, not
considering that most or all those good Creatures which they spend on their
Lusts, and to gratify their wicked Inclinations, are gotten by their
oppressing both Man and Beast, eating and drinking the Blood of the poor; and
the whole Creation does groan because of their Violence and Oppression. If a
Man have Ten Thousand Pounds per Annum, it is still as great an Evil for him to
spend any part of it in Superfluity and Wantonness, or to gratify his Passions
or Lusts, and to live a soft, effeminate, idle Life, as it is for a mean Person
that works for his Bread; for Superfluity, Gluttony, and Idleness are equal
Evlls unto all Men; to the Noble and Rich, as well as the Poor and Ignoble; it
being the effect of a base, low, depraved and wicked Opinion amongst Men, to
say, I have wherewithal, I will therefore indulge my self, eat to Gluttony, and
drink to Drunkenness, lie a-bed the best part of my Life, and rise to be Idle;
I will have my Horses and my Coaches ready, steep my Brains in Wine, make my
Guts a Magazine of Dainties, and stretch my lazy Limbs on Beds of Roses, and
Couches of Ivory. And in this heat of Lusts and Wantonness, they get Children,
and bring them up in all kind of Superfluities, Luxury, and Idleness; so that
every succeeding Generation is more corrupt than the former, sowing hellish
Dispositions, and entailing them on their Posterity; such as the Tree is, such
is the Fruit; an ill Bird, a worse Egg; for the Seed does contain the true
Properties, Dispositions, and Inclinations; and Children being begotten from
such Matter and Essences, those cruel and hellish Affections grow up with them,
and become essential: Besides, Children seeing the Oppressions and Excesses of
their Parents, do endeavor to imitate and follow their Examples; so that the
young idle Ones will cry, What should I work for? Have I not an Estate? Have
not I enough to keep me without taking any Pains or Care for any thing? Many of
this sort of Lubbers deserve to be served as Alexander the Great served a King
he conquered, who loved Money excessively, and therefore had a Chapel which he
had filled with Gold and Silver, and therein placed his whole delight and
Happiness; which Alexander understanding, put him in amongst his Money, and
shut him up with it, bidding him eat it; and so the miserable Man starved to
death upon his Treasure. Suppose a Man had ten Thousand Acres of the best Land
in England, he may starve as this Prince did, if this Land be not manured by
Labor and Industry: All the Land in England will not afford one Bit of Bread,
unless pains be taken with it.

But here some will object, and say, We are of Noble Birth and Blood, our
Progenitors and Fathers have been great Lords, Nimrods, mighty Hunters; they
have ventured their Lives, and oppressed the Poor and Weak, deflowred Virgins,
taken away Men's Wives by force, killed the Aged, and carried captive the
Young, laid waste Cities, brought desolation upon flourishing Kingdoms, and
killed, starved, ruined, and undone many Thousands of People. From these, and
the like Heroic Acts of Hellish Cruelty, our Coats of Arms are derived;
wherein to show our Nature, and wherein our Glory consists, we bear the
Pictures of the most savage, useless, and rapacious Beasts and Birds that can
be thought on, as, Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tigers, Eagles, etc. These are our
Badges of Honor, and hence our Noble Birth, and High Blood have proceeded;
this being the true Foundation of most of that Gentility and Nobility which the
World so much admires, and that serves their Posterity to boast of.

But tell me, I pray you, Noble Gallants! if ever you are at leisure to
entertain one wise or serious thought; tell me, I say, Is there not one only
God that made all things? Did not he make one Man out of the Clay or Dirt of
the Earth, and breath into him a living Soul, and make him his Viceroy, and
allot him dominion over all things, (not one man to worry, kill, and destroy
the Well-being and Peace of another, and of all other Creatures?) Are not those
Millions of Men and Women scattered over the Face of the whole Earth, descended
from this one Man? As well the Caesar's, and the Grand Signiors, the Things
clothed in Cloth of Gold and Tissue, as the vilest Beggars, and the poor
tattered Boy, that stands barefoot in Frost and Snow, shivering at the foot of
some Welsh Mountain? Are we not then all own Couzens? Our Pedigree the same,
and equally ancient?

Has not the Lord also endued this one Man's Offspring with equal Parts,
Senses, and Members, as to the Elements of their Bodies? A fair Grecian Woman
being at a Banquet, and at the Sport called Questions and Commands, with many
others of her Sex, whom she perceived to bave heightened their Complexions by
Painting; when it came to her Turn, commanded them all to do as she did, and
immediately called for Water, and soundly washed her Face; which they doing,
lost all the artificial Roses of their Cheeks, and appeared in their natural
deformity; which showed that their Beauty was but adulterate, hers real: Just
so shall we find this boasted Nobility to be nothing but Art, Fancy,
Ostentation, and Vanity, if we put it to the Test. Let every man be stripped
and left destitute of those Excrements of Beasts, and inferior Creatures,
which he is such a Fool to be proud of, and appear in his own natural Hue, and
see then who can distinguish the Noble from the Ignoble; my Lord frrm his
Footman; the Rich from the Poor; In such a light, as well as in the dark, Joan
would be as good as my Lady, and perhaps better, because wholsomer. I have
enquired of Chirurgions and Chemists, and they have told me, they cannot find
any difference in the color, nor any other excellency in the Blood of Peers
above that of Peasants; where then lies this famous Generosity of the red,
circling Juice, so cunningly close, that no body can find it?

Besides, I pray tell me, Has the Noble any more Privileges by Nature's
Charter than others? Has he any more Senses than his Neighbors? Has he as many
Palates as he has Palaces? No, no; God has made no more difference between the
Noble, as they call them, and the Ignoble, than there is between the poor Man's
Cow and the rich Man's; the latter may probably be somewhat the fatter; the
meanest Farmer has altogether as large a Stomach, though not so large an House
as his Landlord. Now for certain, if the Lord had made difference, and created
one Noble and Great, and another the contrary, then he would also have endued
them with some peculiar Benefits and Marks of distinction, by which one might
be known from the other; but it is not so; there is no other Mark of
distinction between them, but as is before mentioned; Oppression and Violence
both to Men and Beasts, killing, slaughtering, destroying, and the like
devilish Actions, by which many have got Riches, Renown, and Authority; this
being the common Rule, he that has done most bloody wicked Acts, and got the
most Money, is most Noble, and the best Gentleman.

But if those that are possessed of the Goods of this World, and that call
themselves Noble, had any peculiar Marks of Dignity given them by God or
Nature, inseparable from their Persons, there might seem something for them to
boast of; and yet no real ground for it, even in that case: because still they
would be God's Gifts: As, suppose they were blessed with perpetual Health, and
long Life; or if their Natures would not be glutted and distempered with
continual eating or drinking, or for want of exercise; or if they could
lengthen out the pleasure of any of the Senses, without prejudice to Nature,
and breaking of God's Law: But alas! none of all this can be; as little Meat
and Drink will support an Emperor, as the meanest of Men; all sorts are as
pleasurable and grateful to one as the other; or if there be any advantage, it
lies on the poor Man's side. There is a pleasant Story of King Henry the 8th.
in the first part of his Reign, riding a hunting, and being hungry, he strayed
from his Attendants, and came all alone to a Monastery about Dinnertime; where
the fat lazy Abbot welcomed him very kindly; for hearing the King was in that
County, he concluded this to be one of his Guard: At Dinner they had great
Varieties, and the King fed like a Farmer on a piece of Roast-Beef; but the
Abbot, who daily crammed his Paunch with Delicacies, could scarce relish a Bit
of any thing before him; and pleasantly said to the King, Honest Friend! I
would give 500 l. I could but pick so heartily as you do on a piece of Beef.
The King returned him some small Complement, and after Dinner took his leave;
about a Fortnight after, sends a Messenger for this old fulsome Abbot, and
ordered him to be carried to rights to the Tower, and that he should be there
kept close Prisoner, and allowed but so much Bread and small Beer a day, and no
other Food. The Abbot could not imagine what he had done, to occasion such an
Imprisonment; and being thus dieted, he soon came to have a good Stomach; and
after about a Month, the King ordered the Keeper to carry him in a good piece
of hot Roast-Beef, on which the Abbot fell with such violence, as if he would
have eaten it all at a Mouthful: The King, who was planted in a Room where he
could see how he laid about him, at last steps in, and demands his 500 l. For,
says he, you said you would give it; and I have performed the Cure, and got you
a better Stomach than all the Doctors in England would have done. And so upon
Payment of 500 l. discharged him.

This Story is very pertinent to our Subject; the Rich with Varieties destroy
both their Appetites, and Tastes; the poorer sort enjoy the natural pleasure of
both. There are in all Men but five Senses, and four Elements; and the Creator
has made no distinction, by giving more to the Noble than to the Poor; but
bestows them freely and equally on all; and every man has a like benefit of
them, and the Nobles and Grandees cannot prolong the pleasure of their Senses
by possessing much, viz. by great and rich quantities of Food and Drinks,
sumptuous Furniture, gaudy Garments, great Houses, many Servants, etc. All
which, if great Prudence and Moderation be not observed,) will rather destroy
the true Delight and Pleasure of the Body and Mind, and render such as use them
altogether incapable to enjoy the common Blessings the Lord has given unto all
men; but on the contrary, every sort of simple Food and mean Drink to the wise
man, and well-prepared Stomach, is like the Honey and the Honeycomb, it makes
all the Senses rejoice in each other. This being the greatest advantage and
privilege any mortal man can naturally enjoy in this Life, to give Nature both
in quantity and quality, what is needful for the support of Strength and
Health, which very small and mean Meats, Drinks, Clothing, and Houses will
perform and such as are easily procurable with little labor to the Body, or
Vexation to the Mind; so that a Man need not hazard his Health, nor bring his
Soul into Perplexity to obtain those necessary things that serve for the
sustaining and prolongation of his Health and Life: But on the contrary, all
those Supersluities which do chiefly serve to gratify Wantonness and evil
Imaginations, are for the most part not to be obtained without Trouble,
Oppression, Violence, and the hazarding the Health, both of Body and Mind; and
when they are obtained, most People spend them on their Lust, in a base,
superfluous manner, filling the Body with iucurable Diseases, and much more
infecting the Soul.

It must be confessed, there are some Men really and intrinsecally much more
Honorable and Noble than others, viz. those that obey and keep the
Commandments of the Lord, and have not violated his Law in Nature, nor spent
the good Creatures of God on their Lusts, and have denied themselves
Superfluities, and not done violence to, nor oppressed Man or Beast, but have
lived temperately, soberly, and innocently, putting all things to that use for
which they were made; this sort of People are truly Noble, without being
beholden to the Favor of Princes, the Breath of the Vulgar, or the Mercenary
Paint of an Herald: But still, they must not boast of it, or ascribe it to
themselves and their own Wisdom, on pain of Death; for, alas! what have they
which they have not received? Every good and perfect Gift (says the Apostle,)
comes from the Lord, and he alone, and he always ought to have the Praise, the
Honor, and the Glory, Amen.

If Men had conducted their Lives in this manner, and not suffered their
Desires and Wills to enter into the various Powers of God's Wrath in Nature,
the whole World had been a Paradise of Peace and Love; but now most People have
precipitated themselves into the Nature of Bears, Tigers, and Foxes, and some
into Dogs, Cats, Swine, Bulls, etc. Hence they seek, and make it an honorable
Employ to kill and destroy one another, and he that proves most successful in
this bloody Villainy, dubbs himself an Hero, and his Race call themselves the
Brave and the Noble, and have but little regard for others, in respect of
themselves, and like Senseless Sots, account it their privilege and Right in
Nature to Lord it over their Fellow Creatures; than which, nothing can be
either mere unjust or ridiculous. There is no mark of distinction, no eminent
Token whereby to demonstrate their Nobility; for the Lord has endued the
poorest and meanest of men with all the Noble Faculties of Nature, both Divine,
and Humane, as liberally as the mightiest Potentates: Has not the poor Man as
great Pleasure in, and Refreshment and Nourishment by eating and drinking, as
the most Noble? Is not his Sight as clear, and as perfect to behold the amazing
Wonders of God's Creation? Do not the melodious Harmonies and charming Airs of
Music delight the Pliantasie, and cheer the Soul of a poor Man, as much as a
KING? And (if we may descend to grosser Pleasures,) have not the meanest of Men
as great content and satisfaction with his poor Russet-Coated Wife, as the
greatest Prince with his Gayest Bride? Whence the Poets always feign LOVE, (the
noblest of the Passions,) to be bred amongst the Villagers, and a Companion of
Rusticks and Shepherdesses: Nay, (to go higher,) has not the great All Wise
Creator given the most friendly Element, the Air, in Gavil-kind, to all the
Sons of Men, every one enjoying an equal Portion? And are not the greatest of
Men subject to all the Injuries of the Elements, and Necessities and Accidents
of Natural Life, viz. Heat, Cold, Hunger, Thirst, Diseases, and even Death it
self, as much, and as frequently, and as certainly as the Poor? And yet still
men are so foolish and so vain, as to vaunt of their Great Birth, and their
Noble Blood: Can any thing be mote extravagantly ridiculous?

True it is, all that are Governors, Magistrates, and Officers of the People,
ought to be honored and respected in their Places, according to their
respective Dignities; and so much the more, if they govern according to the Law
of God and Nature, doing every man Justice and Right, and being a Terror unto
evil doers, and a Praise unto them that do well. But this real Honor,
contracted on Political Considerations of Office and Virtue, is nothing to that
Fantastic Glory, derived merely from Ancestors, and the brave Feats done by
our Great-Grandsires Grandfathers, so much boasted of by those who please
themselves in being Great, rather by their Mother's Labors than their own.

14. It is to be noted, that most sorts of Flesh and Fish, as to their
operations on the Body and Senses, are not so innocent, brisk, aerie, and
lively, as Herbs, Seeds, Grains, Fruits, and various sorts of excellent Food
made of them; though many of our English Belly-Gods suppose Flesh to be most
mighty in its operation; but they are grossly mistaken; and no wonder, since
their Brains, Wits, and Understandings, are, through Intemperance, Superfluity,
and Gluttony, sunk into their Bellies; for Flesh is of a gross substance, dull,
and heavy in its operation, fills the Body with abundance of slimy, corrupt
Juices, bad Blood, and in many Constitutions, too great a quantity, and causes
the Animal Spirits to be very impure; whence arise Boils, Scabs, King's-Evils,
Leprosies, and sometimes clotted Blood, like pieces of Flesh, which lie in some
of the Vessels of the Stomach, till being gathered into hard Lumps, they sorely
oppress Nature, and cause Distempers, which are the Death of Multitudes.

Flesh and Blood is too near of kin to the Animal Life in Man, to be a proper
Food for him; it is like the Marrying of Brothers and Sisters: Therefore the
Ancients were curious in forbidding especially the eating of the Flesh of any
of those Beasts that would naturally eat the Flesh of their Fellow Creatures;
and we need go no farther than every Man's experience, to know that all such
Flesh, and also Fish, have a rank, strong, fulsome Taste, and affords a like
Nourishment: Nor has Flesh and Blood grown into great reputation from the
excellency of its Taste or Nourishment, but chiefly (as we have elsewhere
observed,) from the near affinity it has with the awakened Wrath, and bestial
Nature, which in most men predominates. Hence, when once Men have tasted Flesh,
with the Blood, the Bestial Qualities are presently irritated, and so pleased,
that nothing else will afford them such satisfaction, because of its great
affinity with the Bestial and Animal Life; the hunger grows so strong in many,
that they will eat Flesh or Fish that stinks, and is half putrified, if they
cannot have other, rather than feed upon Bread, Butter, Cheese, or the like,
which is an bundred-fold beyond it, both as to Taste, Nourishment, and Virtue.

The same is to be understood of all sorts of unclean Birds and Beastss of
Prey: As for example; If a Dog chance to suck the Blood, and eat the raw Flesh
of any Creature, it does so violently open the gate of the fierce Quality, that
the Hunger grows so great, that he becomes ten-fold more eager, revenous and
fierce than before: This every one almost does know, and if they consider it
well, shall find the very same Effects in Bodies humane, as each man may feel
in himself, if he be a diligent observer of his own Nature. If this had not
been so, Moses, and many wise men in most Ages, had never made such strict Laws
against eating of Flesh without distinction, and that such Flesh as was allowed
to be eaten, should be thoroughly cleansed from the Blood, etc. Which rendered
such Flesh far wholsomer, and to afford a better nourishment; but not so much
as our way of Killing and Dressing, which in truth, in most Creatures, (as
Cows, Oxen, etc.) is next door to strangling; whereby the natural Spirits are
suffocated, and causes the Blood and fierce, wrathful Spirits to center and
lodge themselves in all parts of the Body, and hinders them, that they pass not
so freely away, where the wound is made. This the Apostles understood very
well; We have no other Commandment to lay on you, but that you abstain from
Blood, Fornications, things offered to Idols, and things strangled; there being
more Evil in all sorts of Flesh and Fish that is so killed, than most do
imagine; for when there is no Wound made, the animal, bestial, wrathful,
fierce, original, poisonous Spirits become suffocated, and Death's stroke
brings the whole Nature into such amazing, frightful Agonies, as few Men, or
Killers of Beasts are sensible of, or endued with so much humanity to consider;
(for if they did suffer Compassion to arise in them, their lewd Trade of
killing would not be so easy to them,) I say, the central Poisons being
awakened by the stroke of Death, and finding no Passage, they seize the pure
Spirits, whose Habitation is the Blood, and then presently the sweet Oil or
Balsamic Property turns sower, strong, and fulsome, as is manifest every
where, both in Animals and Vegetables, whenever the pure, spirituous parts
are by any improper preparation, or other Accidents, wounded, suffocated, or
evaporated; then in a moment's time the sweet, balsamic Property is depraved,
and turns eager and unwholesome. Hence it is, that the Flesh of those Creatures
that are strangled, does neither look so well, nor eat so sweet, nor is so
healthy as other Flesh; for when any Creature perceives its Life in danger,
there is such a struggling and horror within, as none can imagine, but such only
as have been near dead by the like means, it being the very same in a Beast, as
in Men. This being better understood by the Ancients than nowadays, it was
therefore amongst them not lawful to kill any Creature that was to be eaten,
without making a Wound; by which means, the Blood did pass freely away, and
with it the fierce, and wrathful Spirits and Poisons, and so the Flesh was
purged, and freed from many sorts of Uncleanness, and even this Blood so let
forth, was to be buried in the ground, or burned, and so the bestial Spirits
prevented from Evaporations, or incorporating themselves with the Air, and
consequently from entering into, and infecting the humane Nature with their
wrathful Effluviums, and dreadful Species, that the Blood of all Creatures are
full of, when killed in their health and perfect strength.

The greatest Excellency and common Virtue of men's eating much Flesh and Fish,
is, that it makes them surly, robustick, sordid, and of cruel, inhumane
Dispositions and Inclinations; it being the most proper for Soldiers, Hunters,
Moss-Troopers, and all such as would have the bestial, savage Nature
strengthened and increased, and have a mind to be Lions and Devils, not only to
their own kind, but all other Creatures; and so long as People give their Wills
up unto the fierce, proud, wrathful, poisonous Nature, we may not expect any
other Trade to be driven amongst us; whence we sind, that the meek, friendly
Principle is trodden under foot: Compassion has little or no place in Man,
farther than it is a Custom; and he seems wholly given up to Rapine,
Oppression, and Wickedness.

Whereas on the contrary, Herbs, Fruits, Grains, and many other the like
innocent sorts of Food are more pleasant to the Eye, of a better Scent and
Smell, afford a more grateful Taste to the Palate, Nourishment finer, and of
better Substance to the Stomach; they are of an easier Concoction, breed better
Blood, are much more readily procured; the Creation groans not, or sighs;
there is no Pain, Violence, or Cruelty committed in the Use of them; they
generate purer Spirits, and make the Body lightsome and pleasant, free the Mind
from Dullness, Care, and Heaviness, quicken all the Senses, make a good
Understanding, preserve Innocence, increase Compassion, Love, Humility, and
Charity, give the Spirit of distinction between Good and Evil, Clean and
Unclean, and help us with many opportunities for the study of all true Wisdom,
both of God, Nature, and our selves. In a word, the Virtues both Divine and
Natural, that follow Abstinence and Cleanness, are not to be numbered; many of
them I know by experience, through the mercy and good favor of the Lord: It
makes a man hate all rude, vain, talkative Company, and the many Inconveniences
that attend such a course of Life; it also makes the observers thereof capable
at all Seasons to speak the Words of Wisdom, either divine or humane, being but
like large Glass-Windows to an House, it lets in the pleasant, light Air, by
giving opportunities to all the noble Faculties of man's Soul to exercise their
Functions; it tunes the Properties of Nature; whence proceeds most excellent
Harmony; and whoever shall try it, shall certainly find much more satisfaction
and advantages than is here related, or indeed than can be expressed in Words.

15. It is farther to be noted, that all kind of Inventions and Arts that
encourage Violence and Oppression, have proceeded from the fierce, harsh wrath
of God, and the uneven properties of Saturn and Mars, as Gunpowder, Guns,
Drums, and all Warlike Instruments of Music. There is nothing that does more
manifest this than Gunpowder; where the pure spirituous Parts, and balsamic
Virtues in all the Ingredients, are suffocated and destroyed, so that it
becomes a mere composition of Wrath and Fierceness; for every Property of
Nature becomes fierce and terrible, or strong, fulsome, and poisonous, if the
virtue and light thereofbe destroyed, or separated from it; for every
particular Creature or Substance, both Vegetable, Mineral, and Animal, does
consist of Fire, and Light, Love, and Anger, Joy, and Sorrow, Good, and Evil:
These are the Radixes of each Subject throughout all the three Kingdoms of
Nature; and if in any thing you violate the lovely, light part, then the angry
Properties appear in their own Forms; an Instance whereof we have before
mentioned in Charcoal, which is one Ingredient toward Gunpowder; and all the
rest are alike, being of a terrible, rending, tearing, devilish, fierce nature;
and in it is a true Figure of the Wrath of God in the outward nature: So
likewise the sound of Drums, and all Weapons of War and Violence, proceed from
the same Root of Wrath; and accordingly the use of all such things, do much
encourage and strengthen the wrathful Properties in Mankind, who, if they had
not, or did not suffer their Wills and Desires to enter into the Wrath and
fierce Properties of Nature in themselves, and were not acted and influenced by
it, there would never have been any of those Hellish Inventions, as, Swords,
Guns, Powder, Drums, Bows, Arrows, and other murdering Engines, nor any
thoughts of Killing, Oppressing, and Destroying those of their own Kind, nor
any other Creatures; but Man should have kept that Dominion over the Creatures
wherewith the Creator invested him in the beginning, and no Creature should
have had power to have influenced him, or imposed their Properties upon him:
Hence then, touching all Fighting, Oppressing, and Killing, let it be little or
much, and the pretense what it will, we affirm, from a true light and ground,
That the same do arise, and proceed from the fierce wrath of God, and from that
devilish, hellish nature in Man, which is as contrary to the friendly Love and
Light of God in Jesus Christ, as the Night is to the Day; for if in man, or any
other Creature, the evil Property do predominate, and is most manifest, there
the good Qualities and friendly Light is overcome; and so on the contrary: For
every Property and Principle does manifest and bring forth its own fruit; as
our Savior Christ says, Every Tree is known by its Fruits; a good Tree cannot
bring forth evil Fruit, nor an evil Tree good Fruit. According to what Property
does rule in the Heart of any Man, such are his Thoughts, Words, and Actions;
where the divine Principle of God's eternal Love and Light does predominate,
such Persons bring forth those good and precious Fruits of Love, Mercy,
Compassion, courteous Speeches, Works of Charity, and doing unto all men as
they would be done unto; but those in whom the hellish Principle bears sway,
their Fruits are worse than Briars and Thorns; such as Backbiting, Hatred,
Oppression, Killing, not only inferior Creatures, but even those of their own
Kind, and working all sorts of Impiety with greediness. Therefore it is of
unspeakable moment, to be able to distinguish in our selves the Two Principles,
and their respective Fruits, and to be careful to deny, and root out the Evil,
and cherish, and follow the Counsel of the holy Light, which if obeyed, is
sufficient to destroy all the mischievous Works of Self-hood, and the Devil;
for as the more men habituate themselves to Cruelty, Oppression,
Unmercifulness, Killing, and the like, the stronger the hellish Principle of
Wrath does grow, and the worse, and more cruel they become: So in the practice
of Virtue, every Property and Principle grows strong by Use and Exercise; and
he that enters into the narrow Path of Regeneration and Selfdenial, ought
always to fear to oppress, or do unto any Creature that which he would not have
done unto himself; for Oppression, Killing, wrathful Words and Works, do belong
to the Egyptians, and not to those that travel toward the Land of Canaan. An
Instance of which we have in St. Jude, who said, That when Michael, the
Archangel, disputed about the Body of Moses, with the Devil, he did not dare
to bring any railing Accusation; not but that the good Angel might, as to
Justice, have done it; but he did not dare do it; because he must first have
entered with his Will into the wrathful, fierce Principle, or hellish nature,
and awakened it in himself; therefore he only said, The Lord rebuke thee. And
for the same Reason, our Savior Christ commands Men not to be angry, nor call
their Brethren Racha, or Fools; that is, any Name of Wrath, Malice, or Contempt.

If this were rightly understood and regarded, Men would not dare to abandon
themselves to such Heats, Passions, and Furies as every day we behold; they
would not make it a Trade, a Sport, a Pastime, to kill, murder, and use all
kind of Violence. We read in Genesis of Lot's Wife, that she looked back
toward Sodom, for which she was turned into a Pillar of Salt; she entered into
the fierce Anger and Wrath of God and Nature, which she was forewarned of; so
that she was precipitated into, and comprehended in the grand Fountain of
Wrath; that is, the original Forms of Nature, of which Salt is one; and
therefore the Prophets, and all those whom the Lord enlightened with divine and
humane Understanding, and whose chief business was to reclaim men from the
Snares and Evils of Oppression and Violence, and teach them the Ways of Mercy,
Clemency, and Love, often threatened them with the same Judgment which befell
Lot's Wife, it being the portion of all that live and die in the Spirit of
Oppression. Nay, was not that great Man Moses prevented from entering into the
Holy Land, because he was wrath with the Children of Israel, when they
murmured, and complained for want of Water; saying, Ye Rebels! must we fetch
Water out of this Rock for you? Whereupon, says the Lord to him and his
Brother Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the Eyes of the
Children of Israel, therefore shall you not bring this Congregation into the
Land which I have given them. Here Moses and Aaron had suffered their Desires
and Wills to enter into the Wrathful Center, and Self-hood; whence the Word
Rebel was formed; for the very Sound thereof demonstrates from what Principle
it does proceed. And hence probably it may be, that the evil Angel did so
dispute about, or claim a property to the Body of Moses.

This therefore is a principal Point in Religion, for every one to understand
and distinguish in himself from what Principle every Thought and Word does
proceed; for otherwise Men may and do precipitate themselves into the wrath and
fierce original of the hellish Nature; which, if once it get to reign in the
Heart, it quickly blisters out its Venom at the Tongue in such lewd Words as,
Rebels, Rogue, Dog, Devil, and horrid Oaths, Curses, and Execrations; the very
sound of which is enough to declare whence they proceed; whereas from the
divine and truly humane Nature do arise and slow Words of Comfort and
Consolation, those soft Answers that turn away Wrath, and all those delightful,
sociable, obliging Charms of friendly Conversation, wherein consists one of the
greatest Felicities of this mortal Life, and which, for ought I know, will be
one main occasion to our Happiness in Heaven. And wheresoever such Words are
entertained, they strengthen and increase their own Principle, both in those
that speak them, and in those that hear them.

Of that great Man, King David, who is sometimes styled, A Man after God's own
Heart, the Scripture says, That the Lord did not admit him to build the
outward Temple, (which was a true Figure of the internal and spiritual Temple:)
And what was the Reason? Because he had been a Man of Violence and Blood, which
had so awakened the Principle of Wrath and Fierceness, as did very much impede
the divine work, And this it will do, not only in David, but all others in whom
it is kindled. No Man can do the Work of Wrath, and not awaken and strengthen
the Principle which leads to such Acts, as is farther manifested by all those
that are of violent Trades, and killing Employments; although such People do
not kill the Beasts in Anger, or in a way of Revenge for any Injuries pretended
formerly to be done; but do it merely as it is their Occupation, whereby to get
a Livelihood; yet nevertheless, insensibly, and unknown to their Reason and
Intention, they do by degrees irritate and corroborate the fierce Properties of
Nature, and become rash, fierce, hot, and cruel.

No wonder then if most of the holy Men, and Prophets, who by a divine Eye and
Understanding, did pry into the hidden Mysteries of God and Nature, were strict
Abstainers, and separated themselves from the Uncleanness, Oppressions, and
Violences that the superfluous, worldly Belly gods do subject themselves unto;
whose chief care is to procure such Meats and Drinks as will gratify their
Palates and Appetites; for pleasing of which, they regard not whom they
oppress, be they Men or Beasts, some of them spending as much in one day, as an
hundred Men can get by their hard Labor, and all to please the wanton Lust,
and momentary Pleasure of the Throat, they having but only the mere Forms and
Shapes of Men, and being really void both of Humanity and Christianity. From
this ground does proceed all violent Courses and Contentions, both public and
private; which Evils will never be remedied, except Men take up the Cross, and
deny themselves, and follow the Counsel of the divine Principle, and hearken
unto the Voice of Wisdom, which continually cries in the Gate of every Man's
City, and happy is he that hearkens unto her; for she is a sufficient Guide to
lead every one into the pure, simple Way of Truth, and teach us from what we
ought to separate our selves, whereby we may acquire Health to the Soul and
Body, and the Treasures both of Time and Eternity. But none are or can be
sensible of those Advantages, but such alone as are got through the Red Sea,
and the Howling Wilderness, and have entered into the Land of Canaan, for it
seems too mean a thing, and the Ways that lead to those holy Virtues, are too
plain for the great People of this World.

But our Lord and Savior Christ says, My Kingdom is not of this World; and
therefore when Peter in the most just and pious Cause that can be imagined,
(viz. to preserve his innocent Master from unjust violence,) drew his Sword,
our Lord calmly bid him put it up, for the Sword cannot be drawn, but by and
through the Power of God's Wrath, which does predominate in most Men's Hearts;
and this Christ came to destroy: For he preached Peace, Love, and good Will
unto all Men; and therefore his Doctrine is called, The Evangele, or Gospel;
that is to say, Joyful News, or Glad Tidings.

Some there are that do say, That if they should not kill, and eat the Flesh of
the Creatures, they could not subsist or live; which, in a bad sense, is true:
For should they cease from Violence and Killing, then that cruel, wrathful,
fierce Life in them, could not subsist in such vigor and strength as it does;
but must of necessity become weak, and, as it were, die; that is, it would no
longer domineer in the Heart over the friendly Principle of God's Love: But as
to the Health of the Body, which is that which I mean, Herbs and Fruits will
sustain Nature in every respect far beyond the best of Flesh.

16. It is said in Genesis 4. That Adam knew his Wife Eve, and she conceived, and
bore Cain, and said, I have gotten a Man from the Lord; [that is, from the
strong Powers of the Wrath in Nature; from whence all Lordliness, Pride, and
Oppression in Government arises.] And she conceived again, and bore his
Brother Abel; and Abel was a Keeper of Sheep; [that is, a Keeper of, and
Dweller in Innocence:] But Cain was a Tiller of the harsh Earth; [which must be
broken and torn up by Violence and hard Labor both of Man and Beast, which was
the Curse that the Lord laid upon Adam.] And in process of time, it came to
pass, that Cain brought of the Fruits of the Ground an Offering unto the Lord:
And Abel he also brought of the Firstlings of his Flock; and the Lord had
respect unto Abel, and unto his Offering; but unto Cain, and his Offering, he
had no respect: And Cain was very wroth, and his Countenance fell; and the Lord
said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? and if not, Sin lies at thy Door, and unto thee shall be his desire,
and thou shall rule over him; [that is, unto thee, Cain, shall be the Desire of
my Kingdom of Love and Divine Light; but if thou will not hearken unto its
Counsel, and be obedient to my Commandments, then thou shall rule over him;
that is, over the Divine Power, as it came to pass; for Cain talked with Abel;
that is, the Wrath contended with the Love and Divine Power; and it came to
pass, when they were in the Field, [that is, where the wild, harsh Nature does
predominate,] that Cain rose up against Abel his Brother, and slew him Here the
Wrath prevailed over the divine, innocent Principle, and destroyed it, as it
does at this day; for those two Brothers did rightly and truly signify the two
grand Principles, and the two Seeds, that of the Woman, and that of the
Serpent. And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is thy Brother? And he said, I know
not; Am I my Brother's Keeper? Here Cain, viz. the Property of Wrath, denied
the Murder, and pretended he had done him no Evil, or knew nothing of him; But
the Lord answered, and said, What have thou done? The Voice of thy Brother's
Blood cries unto me from the ground; and therefore the Lord cursed Cain, and
tells him, he shall be a Fugitive, and a Vagabond. Then Cain bowed himself, and
said unto the Lord, My Punishment is greater than I can bear: Behold, thou have
driven me out this day from the face of the Earth, and from thy face shall I be
hid; and it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me, shall stay me:
This Confession and Submission did so pacify the kindled Wrath, that the Lord
said, Therefore whosoever slays Cain, Vengeance shall be taken on him
sevenfold; and the Lord set a Mark on Cain, lest any finding him, should slay
him. This Mark was the Light of the Lord, that enlightens every Man that comes
into the World, and which does more or less mollify and withstand the fierce,
wrathful Powers in Mankind; for if this were not, the Wrath of Cain would grow
so powerful, that the Children of Abel would not have any being in this World.
Then Cain went out from the Presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod,
on the East Side of Eden; that is, he went into the outward Principle of this
World, and dwelt in the Land of Vanity, at a distance from the divine
Principle; which is intimated by Eden, in which Cain did not live, but on one
side of it, viz. in the operation of both the good and evil Nature, which most
Men of this World do live in. And it is also said, That he built a City; that
is, he became strong and powerful in the Property of this World; and therefore
Cain was an Oppressor, and one that did domineer, and Lord it over his
Brethren, and slay the divine Principle of God's Love; and hence all Violences,
Contentions, Killing, and Works of Darkness; for Cain does truly signify the
Fountain of God's Wrath, and the original Properties of the Father's Nature;
and Abel does represent the eternal Principle of God's Love in the Son's
Property: Cain intimates the Fire; and Abel the Light: if the meek Spirit of
Abel were not overcome, and murdered by the fierce Wrath of Cain, there would
be Peace on Earth as in Heaven; and as when Cain arose, and contended with, and
slew Abel, he made no resistance, this was a true manifestation that the fierce
Wrath had got the Victory; but Abel's Blood cried unto the Lord. The very same
is to be understood in all kind of Oppression, both to Man and Beasts; they all
by a sweet sympathetical operation call for Vengeance; for God is no respecter
of Persons or Things; but whenever any Creature is oppressed, the same does
from the awakened Wrath, curse the Oppressor, and send up Cries and terrible
Complaints to Heaven; which moves the Principle of God's Wrath, whence so many
Judgments fall upon the People; nor is it possible it should be otherwise, as
long as the Spirit of Cain predominates in their Hearts, tearing and destroying
the Peace and Well-being of one another, and of all the inferior Creatures,
far worse than the wild Savages of the Desert; for when their Bellies are full,
they do rest satisfied until they are hungry again; but Men are become such
Belly-gods, and Slaves to their Lusts and Passions, that they are never
satisfied, either full or fasting; but always contriving Mischief, and how they
may betray not only those of their own kind, but also all other Creatures;
insomuch that all the Elements mourn, and are filled with the Cries, Groans,
and mournful Complaints of their miserable Inhabitants.

True Religion does consist in this, as our Lord Jesus Christ taught both by
Precept and Example, that Mankind do no Violence, but live in the power and
operation of the Spirit of the humble, meek Spirit of Abel; for every violent
Action and Oppression, let it be little or much, or offered unto whatsoever
Creatures, does as naturally and spiritually awaken in them and without them
the fierce Wrath of God and Nature, as the Blood of innocent Abel did cry, and
awaken the Lord; whence Cain's Judgment proceeded. And withal, we are to
remember, that the Offerings of such as live the in power and operation of the
Spirit of Cain, are not accepted of the Lord, because they are tainted with the
Spirit of Violence and Oppression; for every Principle is moved by a
sympathetical operation; and therefore when Men live and act in the power of
God's Love, and Light in Jesus Christ, the Offerings of such are most grateful,
and powerfully attract the sweet Influences of God and Nature; but where the
wrathful Principle reigns without the Love and Light of God, it is a mere
Devil, and does attract Venom and Poison out of every thing, to the increasing
and strengthening of it self.

The holy Ancients have in many other places of the Scriptures deciphered, and
endeavored to describe these two grand Fountains or Principles under the
Allegory or Figure of two Brothers: But it is to be noted, that the younger
always obtained the Blessing; as the case of Jacob and Esau, and Isaac and
Ishmael, which does contain many great Mysteries; for Ishmael is the Son of the
Bondwoman, where the Forms and Properties of Nature are at strife and
contention; the same is said of Esau, that he was a rough man, and a Hunter;
which Names in the Radix do signify strong men in the Wrath and Principle of
the wild Nature, into which most men are fallen; nor does any Religion or Form
of Godliness bring profit to the Soul, but that only that is void of violence;
and therefore the Offerings of Cain, Ishmael, and Esau, and many others, were
not accepted of by the Lord; for the fierce Wrath and violent Spirit did reign
in them; and thence their Offerings proceeded, and so could not awaken or open
any other Principle, but only what was like, and from the same Root and Center.
If this were well considered, so many persons would not content themselves in
Religious Forms, and giving God long Prayers, whilst all this while their
hearts are full of Envy, Backbiting, Contention, Oppression, Hurrying, and
Killing Men and Beasts; most of them counting it their Right to domineer over
the meek, humble Spirit of Abel; but the Blood of Abel does cry unto the Lord
for Vengeance; for this is the great Law of God in Nature, that there can be no
Evil, Violence, or unjust Action done, be it either to the superior or
inferior Creatures, but there must be retaliation made; for the Groans of the
oppressed have a natural Force, and powerful Inclination to open the Gate of
God's Wrath, and draw down the Judgments of the Lord; because all things were
made by one, therefore they have but one only Root and Foundation, and
proceeding from that one Lord and Creator, they all live and move in him, and
by his Power and Spirit, and are all sustained by his divine hand of
Providence, which does not respect one, and neglect another; there being in him
no variation, or shadow of Change or Passion, but equally distributes his
Blessings to all his, according to the Nature of each one; having given every
thing its well being in its self, and allotted thereto a certain number of
days, and ordained proper Food for every Creature; therefore whenever Men
shall violate these Laws of God in Nature, and work contrary unto them, by
oppressing the Creatures, then the Wrath of the Creator is kindled; for every
Creature, when it is in danger of being hurt, or pursued for its Life, does as
naturally and powerfully cry to the Creator for help, in their own natural
Language, as Men do; and tend and fly to that Fountain of Being and Protection;
for their Lives are as sweet, and their Desires to continue it, are as strong
as Man's,

17. Here it is like I shall be complained of, and condemned by the wise Men of
this World, who count it their right in Nature, as Cain did, to domineer and
Lord it over all Creatures; who will say, The Creator has no respect or regard
to the preservation or well-being of inferior Animals, but only unto Men; and
that his Will is, that Men should destroy, and live upon them, and use them as
they please; Were they not made for that purpose? and if we should not destroy
them, they would destroy us, etc. Thus they object; but the Truth tells every
one, That there are no Creatures that will hurt, or be injurious unto Mankind,
but only Dogs, Bears, Foxes, and other of the like Nature, who are Beasts of
Prey, and fierce by kind, few or none of which are eaten: But this Allegation I
shall more particularly consider in its proper place. Others, more materially
will urge the Authority of the holy Scriptures, to prove that killing, and
eating of Flesh, was according to the Will of God; which is true in a certain
Sense; but from the beginning it was not so; but only after Man had disobeyed
the Lord his Maker, and broken his pure Law, and embarked his corrupt Will and
tainted Desires in the fierce Spirit of Oppression, and suffered the bestial,
savage Nature to predominate in him over the divine Principle of God's Love and
holy Light; as the Scripture does testify, Genesis 6. The Lord looked down from
Heaven, and behold every imagination of Man's Heart was evil, altogether evil,
and that continually: Also, the Lord said, The Earth is filled with violence,
it repents me that I have made Man; and the Earth was corrupt before God, and
filled with violence; for all Flesh had corrupted his way upon the Earth, etc,
Here it appears, Man had with his Will and Desires entered into the violent
Spirit, which had corrupted the Earth, and all things therein; whence the
desire of killing, and eating of Flesh and Blood of Beasts did proceed; and for
this reason, the Lord was so provoked to Anger, that he said, My Spirit shall
not always strive with Man, for that he is Flesh; yet his days shall be an
Hundred and Twenty. Here the Lord shortened the Days of Mankind, as David says
in another place, The Wicked shall not live out half his days. If Man had not
thus entered into the violent Spirit of wrath, the Lord had not destroyed
Mankind; but being thus incensed, he commanded Noah to build an Ark, (which
signifies a place of Safety, Peace, and Mercy,) and to take the clean Beasts by
Sevens, (which is a holy Number in Nature, comprehending all Mysteries;) but
the unclean by Pairs or Two's, which is a Number of Contention, as being the
first that separates from Unity. He was likewise required to take all sorts of
Food, both for himself and for the Beasts; but there was no mention made of
Flesh; and all the Creatures, both clean, and unclean, that he took with him
into the Ark, he delivered out again, after the wrath of God was assuaged;
there was no Oppression, Violence, nor Killing in all that time; for if there
had, then would the wrath have been again awakened, and Noah, with the
Creatures, would have been comprehended in the same Judgment with those without
the Ark: For the Ark does truly signify the heavenly Principle of God's
eternal Love, in which he has established his Covenant with Mankind; and all
Men that safeguard their desires and wills in this holy Ark, denying
themselves, and abandoning all kinds of Violence, but taking with them all
kinds of Food that do bear a Simile with this friendly Principle, shall be
preserved from that deluge of Wickedness and Misery, wherein the rest of the
World is overwhelmed.

Now after this Deluge, the Lord did permit Man to eat Flesh; but not without
distinction, not with the Blood; for Man would not be obedient, nor keep
himself within the Bounds and Limits of the holy Ark of God, but turned their
Wills into the wild, bestial Nature, and so longed after the Essences and
Qualities of the Beasts; whence arises the desire of killing, and devouring of
Flesh. This the Lord did well know, and also his Prophets, viz. That if Man did
not obey the Voice of Wisdom, and abstain front eating of the Fruit that grows
in the midst of the Garden, viz. in his Heart, which is the wrathful, violent
Spirit of Oppression, he should die; which Spirit should not have been
manifested, nor have had any Government in Man. As for the Tree that grows in
the midst of the Garden, it is called the Tree of Life, but not without a great
Mystery; for the Center of Life stands in the Wrath's Property, or fierce Fire,
whence proceeds the Sensibility, and knowing Part in Man; and therefore he was
forbidden to eat thereof, that is, he should not have awakened it by his
Imaginations and Desires, but have continued in Resignation and Self-denial,
and then the Evil would not have been manifested in him, nor have overcome him;
but as it came to pass, well might the Prophets call it The Tree of Death: For
when Man did eat of the Fruit thereof, be died unto the divine Life, and lived
in the Power of the fiery Spirit of wrath, which has corrupted all Flesh, even
the very Earth, and all things therein. 'Twas after this was come to pass, when
Man had by his Longing and Lusts precipitated himself into the fierce Spirit,
and wild Nature, that the Lord permitted him to kill, and eat the Flesh of the
Beasts; but it must be understood, that this License or Permission of killing,
or eating of Flesh, proceeded from the wrath of God in Nature; as the Scripture
says in another place; Such as the People are, such is their God: For the Lord
appears to every one according to what Spirit and Property they live in,
whether it be in his Love or his Anger. If they live in the divine Principle of
his eternal Love, then he appears to them in the same Principle, as a loving
Father, and the God of all Consolation: And on the contrary, when men introduce
their Wills and Desires into the fierce wrath, then the Lord appears to them in
the same Spirit, dreadful and Terrible: As the Scripture says in another
place, Unto those that fear my Name, and obey my Commandments, I will be
merciful and gracious; but to those that despise my Commandments, I will be an
angry, jealous God, and a consuming Fire: Or, as the Apostle says, To one a
savor of Life unto Life, to the other of Death unto Death. Thus all shall
glorify God either in his Love or Anger, and remain Monuments of his Mercy, or
Trophies of his Justice.

Thus it happened to the Men of old, whom the Lord permitted to kill their
Fellow Creatures, and eat their Flesh; their Cruelties and Oppressions soon
awakened the Wrath of the Lord, even as the Blood of innocent Abel did;
therefore the Lord, said, He would go down and see if it were so: Which
Expression of God's coming down, does intimate the kindling and awakening of
his Wrath in the external Element, as it came to pass in the ensuing Deluge,
when the Element of Water was enraged; from this very Property of the awakened
Wrath, did the permission proceed for killing and eating of Flesh; as also all
the Commands for Fighting, and the like; for if the Lord's People in former
Ages had continued their Obedience, and lived in his fear, there had never been
any cause or foundation for Wars nor Oppression; for, as our Savior says, The
Tempter comes, but finds nothing in me; that is, he finds no Wrath nor
Violence awakened in him, and therefore he could have no ground to work on, nor
matter to entertain him, or that would suit his Principle. The like is to be
understood of all Men that do live in the Power of God's Love and Light; for
whenever the Lord suffers any to sight, or engage in War with his People, the
original cause thereof has been Sin, in that they have forsaken the ways of
Truth and Righteousness, and entered into Oppression, Pride, and Cruelty, which
awaken the evil Principle, and cry for vengeance, and strengthen the common
Enemy of Mankind, and then the Lord suffers Wrath to take place. Now whereas
Men say, It is lawful in the sight of God to fight, kill, and destroy one
another, and oppress, and kill all other Creatures; it is true, if it be
understood as it ought to be, viz. in the sight of the Principle of his Wrath,
as he is a consuming Fire, and a jealous God; but not as he is a God of
everlasting Love and Mercy in Jesus Christ; for in that respect all Fighting
and other Violences are as contrary to him, as Light is to Larkness. Therefore
in the Revelations, to the Souls that were under the Altar, crying to God to
avenge their Cause, being slain for the Testimony of Jesus, it is answered,
Rest for a season, which was as much as to say, Be still, do not awaken the
Powers of Wrath; for no Man can call for Vengeance, but from the Power of that
Principle; and therefore White Garments were given unto them; that is, they
were more replenished with the blessed Power and Virtue of the Love of God in
Jesus Christ.

Some may say, If we should not fight, and be ready to withstand our Enemies,
and neighboring Nations, we should quickly be brought into subjection. This is
very true, if Men should leave off fighting, and yet live such wicked, ungodly
Lives as they do; but if any Nation would repent of the Evil of their Ways, and
enter with one mind into Unity, and live in the power and operation of the Love
of God, etc. they then should have no occasion to fear or dread any outward
Enemies, having so perfectly subdued those within, they should rest secure.
This the Children of Israel did often witness; when they did fear the Lord, and
refrain from Idols; that is, when they did not set their Hearts and Affections
upon the Creatures, nor live in Wantonness, etc. Then their Enemies were bowed
before them, and the very sight or appearance of Ten would make a Thousand fly;
but when they did forsake the Fear of the Lord, and turned the use of natural
things into wantonness, they awakened the Wrath; by which their Enemies got
many Advantages over them, and overcame them, and carried them away captive;
The very same is nowadays amongst us; this being a certain Truth, that will
stand for ever against all gainsayers, and evil Men, viz. That all Oppression,
Violence, and Killing does proceed from the seed of the Serpent, the Betrayer;
which I wish all our Hero's, and Fighters, and great Martial Men would well
consider, and turn the Eye of their Understandings inward, and search
themselves, then they would certainly find, that it is the fierce, Cain-like
Spirit* which reigns in them, and excites them to commit such Outrages. When
the Soldiers asked the Lord Christ, What they should do to be saved; he said
unto them, Be contented with your Pay, and do violence to no Man: Which is to
say, They should be Soldiers no longer; for all Soldiers do live in the Spirit
of Violence, and must kill and destroy whenever their Commanders please. So
likewise Christ says to Peter, (than whom certainly never man drew Sword in a
better Quarrel,) Put up thy Sword, those that use the Sword, shall perish by
the Sword; my Kingdom is not of this World; that is, My Kingdom consists in
Love, Mercy, Meekness, Friendliness, Peace, and good Will unto all Men.

18. It is farther to be considered, that the eating of Flesh was not permitted
till after the overflowing of God's Wrath had got the dominion in Man's heart,
and God* had tried and proved them, and saw that they were stiff-necked, and
would not be obedient unto his Commands, nor enter into the holy, divine
Principle of Love and Peace, but would live in the Power of the lordly,
poisonous Nature, and continually lusted after Oppression, and the Ways of
Egypt; and for this cause the Lord suffered them to be carried away into the
Land of Nod and Egypt, which is a Land of Vanity, Oppression, and Cruelty, and
they suffered the fierce Wrath to domineer over them; but in process of time
they cried unto the Lord, and he had regard unto them, and raised up Moses, and
inspired him with divine and humane Wisdom, and made him their Guide; for Moses
does signify The Strength and Power of God, in his meek, friendly Light and
Love; or, A Cleanser and Purger of the People from Iniquity. This great
Prophet, by the mighty power of the Lord, wrought many wonderful Miracles
amongst the Egyptians, which made the Wrath to bow, or give way, and by a
strong hand caused his People to pass through the Red Sea; that is, through the
fierce Wrath and fiery Judgment of the Lord, untouched, and unhurt, whilst the
same Sea of Wrath did swallow up and comprehend the Egyptians, the Men of Sin
and Vanity, with their Horses and Chariots; that is, with all their strength
and deeds. Then the Lord caused his People to travel forty years in the
Wilderness, which signifies the wild Nature, which they were not to stay in;
Likewise, these forty years are an holy, mystical Number, viz. the Number of
Regeneration, during which time the Lord works many Marvels, and delivers the
true Israelite from inward and outward Enemies.

Yet still they provoked the Lord their God to wrath, by lusting after the
Fleshpots of Egypt; that is, the Oppression, and the Cruelty; for the Lord did
not permit them in all their March toward Canaan, to kill their Flocks or
Herds, nor to eat any Flesh in those forty years travel; for they were not to
stay or continue in the wild, bestial Nature, but to pass through, and by
degrees leave it behind them, and to deny themselves all those Oppressions,
Vanities, worldly Lusts and Passions, which the Men of Egypt are subject unto;
that thereby they might be cleansed, purified, and fitted to enter into the
holy Land: For the chief Enemies the Children of Israel met with, were their
inward Lusts, Passions and bestial Spirits, which did mightily strive in them,
to get the Victory over the divine Principle of God's Love, and this was the
main Cause of their many Lets, Stops, and Hindrances, and the Occasion that so
many Thousands did fall in the way, and never entered into the holy Land; of
which the Lord told them, That it was a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey,
not with Oppression, Cruelty, Killing, and Blood, but with Milk and Honey, the
Emblems of Innocence and Sweetness, and beautified with many excellent Virtues,
for the maintenance of the Life and Health of Man; but because they looked
back, and longed after the Egyptian Vanities, they did fall, and could not
enter into the Land of Peace. As in like case, the Scripture says of David,
That he being a Man of Violence and Blood, as having been bred up in Wars and
Fighting; therefore the Lord would not admit him to build the Temple: Which
outward Temple was a true Figure of the inward, divine Temple; for David had
awakened the wrathful Powers of Nature within and without himself; and
consequently was not so fit for Temple-work, wherein there must not be heard
any noise of Axes or Hammers, much less the clashing of Swords, and rattling of
Spears; these are the Music of Babel's- Builders.

But perhaps some will say, Though it cannot be proved that the Children of God
did eat any Flesh in their Travel toward the Holy Land; yet long before that,
the two Angels that were going toward Sodom, to destroy it, did eat Flesh,

I Answer: This is so far from being an Objection, that rightly understood, it
confirms and illustrates all that I have been saying; for, first, it is plain,
these Words are not to be understood literally; for Angels are incorporeal;
therefore Flesh must needs be too crude and gross a Food for such intellectual
Essences, void of Matter; and therefore some more hidden meaning and
signification is to be understood; and indeed there lies couched a very great
Mystery in this Passage. The Sodomites had by their crying Sins awakened the
fierce, wrathful Principle in Nature, even in the outward Elements, which did
kindle the Indignation of the Lord, and draw down the Judgment. Now out of this
strong power of the kindled wrath these two Angels did proceed, which had in
them the power of the same Principle, viz. the inward and outward Wrath; and
therefore it was no marvel that Abraham should kill and shed Blood at their
approach, whose traveling toward Sodom, and staying here by the way, does
denote the gradual kindling of the fierce Wrath; and their eating Flesh under a
Tree, or Oak, does signify the harsh, wild Nature; for they entered not into
Abraham's Tent, (that is, into the divine Principle,) but hasted toward Sodom,
that was in the kindled Wrath of Nature. Moreover, there were Three Angels
appeared unto Abraham; but there went but Two toward Sodom. Now I have told
you, that the Number Two is a Number of Division, and intimates the strite
between the Properties of Nature; but as touching the Third Angel, the
Scripture is silent; for Three is an holy Number, and signifies the heavenly
Seed, in which the Lord has established his Covenant of Grace and Mercy with
Mankind. It was therefore this holy Number that brought the glad Tidings unto
Abraham and his Wife, that she should bear a Son in her old age; which is as
much as to say, That the divine Principle, viz. The Love and Light should
abide, and manifest it self in Abraham's Line; for the Word [Abraham] does
signify, The original Properties and Strength of God in the Fire; and his
Wife, the Love or Meekness, from which Principle should be generated a Son of
true Light: For Isaac does intimate the divine Principle, or Son of God, who in
the fullness of time was manifested in the humane Nature. This holy Number
Three, or good Angel, continued with Abraham; that is, the divine Principle,
and holy Power staid, and made intercession for the Sodomites; for so we find
Abraham immediately entreating and petitioning the Lord to save the Cities of
the Plain, for the sake of such Righteous as might be therein; but the Two
fiery Angels hasted toward Sodom; for the original Fire is fierce and quick in
its motion; and when any People have by their Transgressions kindled the Wrath
of God, then there does arise an Instrument out of the same Principle, which
does destroy and punish that People, as is manifested in this outward World,
which is but a Figure of the inward; for when a Prince and his People have by
their Sins stirred up the Lord's indignation against them, then a neighboring
Prince or Nation is excited to be their Scourge and Punisher, though oftentimes
the latter is as great an Evil-doer as the former; for every Principle and
Property both in the divine and humane Nature, does always raise up Instruments
from it self to perform its own work; for look what Property or Principle is
most predominant in either a particular Person or Nation, good or evil, just or
unjust, such an Angel they have given them, or is attracted by Simile: If the
fierce Wrath bear sway, then the evil Angel obtains the Government of that
Person or People, which does inwardly stir up Enmity in the hearts of Men one
against another; whence does arise all kinds of Oppression and Violence both of
Man and Beasts. Besides, it is to be understood, that the Angels, both good and
evil, are prompt, and always desirous to obey and attend all such as live in
the power of their respective Principle, as the Scripture takes notice, That
the evil Angel was ready, and offered his service to be a Lying Spirit in the
Mouth of Ahab's Prophets; for the evil deeds, and perverseness of Mankind to
each other, and their oppressing the rest of God's Creatures, does as naturally
awaken the fierce, dark Powers, and attract them, as the Lodestone does Iron,
whence does proceed the Judgments, and so many Calamities.

For no Extremes can continue long without alteration, as we see, if any
particular Person give himself to Vanity, and commits Evil with desire and
greediness, such an one cannot continue long without bringing destruction to
Body and Soul: For when any Property of Nature is so violently awakened, it
powerfully draws to it self all things that are capable, or have a Simile with
it, viz. the evil Angels, and also the Venom out of all things, and so grows a
devouring hungry Fire, that is, never satisfied till it has consumed all the
sweet Oil and Radical Moisture, and then the Body droops, and languishes, and
dies.

On the contrary, Virtue and the Fear of the Lord, do with a powerful hand not
only withstand and resist the baneful Influences of bad Angels, and all other
evil things; but does also attract the Virtue out of all things to the
increasing and strengthening its own Principle, and innumerable good Angels are
ready at all times to assist and defend the sober and upright in Heart; as the
Scripture says, He has made his Angels ministering Spirits, to administer to
those that serve the Lord, and are in necessity. In another place, the Lord
says, Is there any Evil in the City, (that is, in Man,) and am not I the Lord
in the midst of it? As much as to say, I am in and through all, and govern all
things in my Love, or in mine Anger; and Man being his Image, does in his
measure the same: but the Evil should not have been awakened, or manifested in
Man; therefore he was in the beginning forbidden it; but after he had eaten
this Fruit, the Lord said, The Man is become as one of us, knowing Good and
Evil. Then the Gates of Paradise were shut against him; and it is said, The
Lord drove him out of the Garden into the Earth; that is, into the wild Nature,
to labor and dress it; and the Lord set two Cherubims on the Eastside of the
Garden, with flaming Swords, that did turn every way to keep the Tree of Life,
lest Man should touch it, and live for ever. The East here does signify in the
Radix, the open Gate, or Eye that sees into the great Mysteries, and working
Powers of the Creator. The Tree of Life does intimate the creating Power of
God, and the original Forms in Nature, viz. the three grand Properties, Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury; from whence all the variety of Complexions, Forms, and
Qualities do arise; the Cherubims, and Flaming Sword that defends this Tree of
Life, do signify the original Fire, and strong Forms of Nature, in which the
Lord calls himself an angry, jealous God, and a consuming Fire. The Cherubims
are the strong, fiery Angels, and great Powers of God in the working and
government of all the Kingdoms of Nature; which mighty Operations, and my stick
creating Powers Man was not fit to know, after he had awakened the Wrath, and
came to know Good and Evil; for if Man should once have touched this Tree of
Life, then would he have been capable to have wrought Wonders in the dark,
strong, fiery, original Property, viz. the dark Magic, and changing of one
Form into another; and the creating Power of God would have been known unto
Man, who then would have lived for ever in the hellish Qualities.

It may be noted, That the Lord said nothing in the beginning to Adam of the
Tree of Life; but only of the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, the Fruit
of this latter Tree only he should not have eaten; for Eating signifies to
nourish and strengthen, which Adam should not have suffered his Will and
Desires to have longed after; for if the fiery, wrathful Principal had not been
awakened in Adam, then the Lord would not have drove him out of the Garden,
that is, out of the Government of the divine Principle, neither would there
have been any danger of his touching of the Tree of Life, that is, of the
original, creating, strong Powers of the Lord; for if he had continued in the
Government and Operations of God's eternal Principle of Love and Light, then he
would have been satisfied with the Fruit of Paradise, whose Originals sprung
and proceeded from the Filial Property; and therefore the illuminate Prophet
Moses says, God placed Adam in a Garden; which does intimate a separated place
of Pleasure, where all sorts of innocent Herbs, Fruits, Grains, and fragrant
Flowers do thrust and give forth their delicate Beauties, ravishing Odours, and
excellent Virtues in silence; there being no grutching, envying, or contention
amongst them, because of their different Scents, Colors, or Properties; but
all stand still, and suffer the divine hand to do with them as he pleases. Not
but that in the most fragrant Flower, and best of Herbs and Fruits, there is
the strong, poisonous Root, viz. Tree of Life; for the Radix of every Creature
stands in Poison: And therefore in what Creature soever these original, fiery
Properties are predominant, all such Creatures are of a greedy, ravenous, fiery
Nature: If it be an Herb, it is poisonous, rank, and fulsome; as on the
contrary, all Things and Creatures, in which the divine Principle does
predominate, the poisonous, wrathful Tree of Life lies hid and unmanifested; as
in a curious Flower, which is of various Colors, and sends forth a most
fragrant Scent; here is no Poison, Wrath, nor evil Quality manifest, but as a
Man may say, a Paradisical and most pleasant Virtue, the original Qualities are
occult, because the good Properties predominate: But yet there would be no
Virtue, if there were no Vice; for these original Forms are the cause of all
Motion, whence the Life and Light does take Birth; but if this original Fire do
predominate in any thing, be it what it will, it presently becomes fierce and
poisonous: Therefore when Adam did eat of the Fruit of the Tree that grew in
the midst of his Paradisical Garden, that is, in the very center of his Life;
which central Fire he was forbidden to awaken and feed on, he was forthwith
turned out of the Garden of Pleasure; which if he had not done, then the
blessed, fra grant, divine Fruit would have predominated, and the evil Nature
would not have been manifested, and he had still continued in Paradise, from
whence he was now necessarily expelled; for when the original Fire and strong
Power was manifest in the Center of Man's Life, he would have proceeded
farther, viz into the very Center of Nature, and become a Formerand Figurer in
the fierce Wrath, and then there had been no hope of his Restoration;
therefore the Lord drove him out of Paradise, and from the Tree of Life, into
the humane Nature, whose operation is in Good and Evil; by which Means the God
of Wisdom, Peace and Mercy, has through the Feminine Tincture, in the fullness
of time, restored again whatsoever Adam lost, as to the Soul. For the eternal
Son of Love says, That he came to seek and to save that which was lost, and
proclaimed Peace and Good Will unto all Men; that is, he invited them to come
unto him, and he would refresh, and ease them of their Burden; for he says,
My yoke is easy, and my Burden light, and you shall find rest to your Souls.
And if this Voice of Wisdom were hearkened unto, Men would no longer live in the
wild Nature, and bestial Qualities, nor oppress God's Creation, the Groanings
thereof would no longer be heard, nor would those that are traveling to the
Land of Promise, any more look back, and hanker after the Fleshpots of Egypt,
but would content themselves with the innocent food of Paradise; nor would they
murmur like the Israelites in the Wilderness, Give us Flesh, or else we die;
that is, if they did not feed upon the Fruit of the forbidden Tree, and
bestial, savage Nature, and follow the Superfluities of the Egyptians, the
wrathful, fiery, bestial Life would die in them, which they were very unwilling
to part with; therefore the Lord heard them in his Wrath, (for they had
awakened it,) and in the same Principle he gave them Flesh, which darkened the
divine Principle in them, and gave advantages to the Wrath, that it got the
victory over them; therefore many Thousands of them were thereby destroyed in
the Wilderness; that is, in the wild, bestial Nature, and entered not into the
Holy Land; for Bears, Lions, and the like Beasts of Prey, are not admitted to
enter there: Without are Dogs, says the Apostle. All that enter the New
Jerusalem, must leave behind them Pharaoh and all his Troops in the Red Sea,
and travel through all the degrees of the wild, bestial Nature, and return unto
every Form and Constellation, all such Inclinations, and evil Dispositions as
Men have received from them, viz. Unto the first Form, or Constellation, called
Saturn, you must leave Covetousness, Envy, Suspicion, and all dark, evil
Thoughts and Jealousies. Unto the second Form, called Jupiter, you must leave
all worshipping of Idols, false Forms of Religion, envious, peevish
Inclinations, and Persecutions, which are devilish Dispositions that do possess
many; from whence do proceed great Troubles and Discords. When you come to the
third Form, called Mars, you must with him leave all Wrath, Passion, Cruelty,
and Violence. With the fourth Form, called, The Sun, you must leave all Pride,
High-mindedness, and Self-conceit, all Inclinations tending to Ambition and
Vainglory. But at the fifth Form, called Venus, you must abandon all Desires
after unlawful Beds, all wanton Discourses, and Enticements to fleshly Lusts.
When you arrive at the sixth Form, called Mercury, put away all idle Jesting,
much Talking, Lying, Dissembling, and carrying two Faces, so as to appear good
with the Good, and bad with the Bad. And at the seventh Form, called, The Moon,
you must leave all unconstant Humors, and fickle Fancies, as also, Gluttony,
and sottish, swinish Living, as to Superfluities either of eating or drinking.

All these bad Dispositions and Inclinations, the Children of God, and of the
divine Principle, must deny themselves, and leave them behind in the
Wilderness; for they do belong unto the wild, bestial Nature, and thither ought
to return; and none that live under their Powers, can enter into the Holy Land.

19. It may be farther objected, If Flesh had not been in some degree
profitable unto the Children of Israel, and if Killing were not lawful, why did
the Lord command Beasts to be killed for Sacrifices? I answer; The killing of
Beasts for Sacrifice, is a great Figure or Mystery, which shows the depraved
state of Man, and how he is fallen from his primitive Integrity and Innocence;
for it signifies, that Man by his Evils and Transgressions, had so mightily
awakened the Wrath, and fierce, fiery Power of God, that it would not be
satiated; or appeased, except there were Violence used, and Blood spilt; for
all Sacrifices were made to atone and satisfy the enkindled Wrath, which after
the Gate of Violence was once opened, nothing but Blood could allay; for Man
having awakened it by Sin, nothing in the Vegetable Kingdom, no Herbs, Fruits,
Grains, or Seeds, would answer the ravenous Appetite thereof; and therefore it
required Blood, which is the highest Life in the humane Nature, and cannot be
procured but by Violence, and has the nearest Affinity to the Wrath of any
thing in the whole Creation; whence it is said, Blood requires Blood: And this
may be illustrated in every particular Man, when he does suffer the fierce
Wrath and Fire to burn in him, he becomes like a raging Bedlam; nothing can
calm or satisfy him, except he does some Mischief, kill and oppress; for in
such a Fit Blood and Revenge is sweet unto him, and as soon as he has glutted
himself with Blood, that wrathful Property is satisfied: And as it is thus in
the little World, the same is to be understood by way of Analogy, in the great.
For this cause the Lord declared, That whoever did kill a Man, his Blood he
would require at his Hands: The Reason and Equity of which Law comprehends all
Creatures; and therefore it is said, That Beast that shall shed Blood, or kill
any other Beast, should be slain. So that it is without doubt the original cause
of killing of Beasts, and offering them in Sacrifice, was to see whether it
would have satisfied that fierce, poisonous Wrath, which Man had so terribly
awakened by his Violence, and corrupting the whole, whence the Deluge proceeded.

But after the Flood, which had so swept away all Mankind, except eight
Persons, to prevent the like dreadful Judgment for the future, Sacrifices, and
the Blood of Beasts was used to assuage the Wrath, and to make atonement for
the Sins of Men; because the Blood of Beasts has both the nearest affinity to
the original Properties of Man's Life, and also to the awakened Wrath, as well
within, as without him; for Men cannot kindle the Wrath within themselves, but
they must do it without them also. But ^^ill, the Scripture says, That the
Blood of Bulls, and the like, would not satisfy the Justice, and awakened
Wrath of God, nor make a perfect Atonement for the Sins of Mankind; and
therefore, besides their daily Sacrifices, the High Priest was once every Year
to go into the second Tabernacle, but not without Blood, which he offered for
himself, and for the People: Also it is said, that the way into the Holiest
Tabernacle of all, was not made manifest whilst the first Tabernacle was yet
standing; whence it appears, that all the Sacrifices, and other Circumstances
of Worship in the time of the Law, did proceed from the Wrath, especially
Sacrifices and Killing, which cannot flow from the divine Principle; for that
holy Principle of Love and Light was not manifest whilst the first Tabernacle
did stand; that is, so long as the first Principle of God's fierce Wrath did
predominate: But all Sacrifices, Violences, and Killing do cease in all those
whom the Lord does appear to in the power of his Son Jesus Christ; but so long
as Men are captivated in the first Tabernacle of Wrath, the Holiest of all is
not manifest; that is, the holy and good Love of God in his Son, is not known
or manifested in them; and therefore it is said, Sacrifices and Offerings for
sin thou did refuse; that is, the divine Principle had no pleasure in
Violence, in the Blood of Beasts, and Groanings of the Creation; but then steps
in the Holy Principle of Love, and says, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God!
That is, to destroy the Works of the Devil, and establish everlasting
Righteousness; and he takes away the first, (that is, the kindled Wrath,
Violence, and Oppression,) and establishes the second; that is, his eternal
Light and Love in Jesus Christ, in whom alone he is well pleased, which brings
glad Tidings unto all Mankind, and to the whole Creation, especially if Men
become the S^^s of God; for then all the inferior Creatures would be delivered
into glorious Liberty.

It does appear by what the Apostle says, That all Sacrifices; Killing, and
Blood of Beasts, could not sufficiently appease God's Wrath, nor reconcile Man
unto God, otherwise than as if one Man kill another; the Blood of him that is
slain does call for Vengeance on the Slayer; but all this while, the Principle
of God's fierce Wrath is by their violence and oppression increased and
strengthened; even so it was in all Sacrifices; Men, by their Violences had
corrupted the Earth, and awakened God's Wrath, which called for Vengeance, even
as the Blood of a particular Man does on a Beast; for all kind of Violence, be
it either little or much, does call for vengeance and retaliation, if not
confessed, repented of, and by the power of the divine Love of God forsaken;
which holy Principle of God's eternal Love and Light in his Son, was not
manifest unto them, (as the Apostle says,) because the first Tabernacle or
Principle of God's Wrath had, through their Cruelties and Evils, gotten the
Ascendent over them; so that the divine Principle could not have its operation
in them, so long as they continued in their sins, committing those Violences
and Oppressions; for the first Tabernacle, or Wrath in Man, must be done away,
before the second can take place; that is, before the holy Light of the Son of
God can reign and rule in our hearts; for nothing can allay, overcome, or make
the stern, fierce Wrath of the Father to bow, or satiate its fiery hunger in
Mankind, but only the eternal Fountain of his meek Love in Christ; from whom,
(as the Scripture says,) there does flow Rivers of living Waters; which alone
can allay the fiery Wrath, and reconcile Men to the God of Peace, and bring to
naught the lofty, proud, violent Desires, and vain Thoughts and Inclinations in
Man, and by its operation gives them an Eye of discerning, to distinguish of
God's Love and Anger, in himself, and makes the fierce, harsh Fire of Wrath to
burn more gentle; so that instead of its raging Fierceness, it becomes a meek
and cherishing Fire; which is the pleasant motion in every Life, that tunes a
Man up to an intellectual Harmony, causing all the Properties and Qualities to
kiss and incorporate with each other; whence arises a most pleasant Crasis, or
Euphony of Temper, Thoughts, and Operations. A Similitude whereof we have in a
Musical Instrument, that is skilfully tuned, and played upon, where there are
various Strings and Notes, whence proceed different Sounds; but all conspiring
to make up most ravishing and delightful Harmony, the dull, melancholy, harsh,
jarring Notes of Saturn and Mars, being made pleasant by the incorporating of
the melodious Sounds of Venus, Jupiter, the Sun, and Mercury. Do not the
Foundations of all Harmony, both in Men, and all other things, arise from the
Basis, viz. from the first Principle or Tabernacle; for if there were no Fire,
there would be no Light; so, if there were no Basis, there could be no
Trebbles; or if there were, yet there could be no Harmony, if one were without
the other. What Harmony do Men make to themselves or others, when the heavy,
fierce Fires of Saturn and Mars do carry the upper dominion in them? But if the
Gravity of Jupiter, and Sweetness of Venus, do interpose, then all is made
delightfully pleasant. But as it is impossible for any Man to make good
Harmony, that has never learned Music, nor knows how to tune his Instrument;
because one String will be several Notes too high, and others as many too flat
or low, from which can proceed no Melody, but a rumbling, jarring Noise of
Discords. So impossible it is that any Man should attain to the holy Harmony of
God in the Kingdom of his Love and Light, or to live in the power of Unity,
except he be born again, and has learned himself; for the true knowledge of
God in a Man's self, is absolutely necessary; for if a Man do not understand
the Treasures and holy Virtues, the Vices and Evils he always carries about him
in his own Vessel, how is he like to distinguish the Natures, Properties, and
Operations of those things which he shall daily meet withal within him?

20. This degeneration of the humane Nature, is apparent from the Words of our
Savior Christ, who saw into the very Roots of their Hearts and Spirits, and
yet made no scruple to call them Foxes, Sons of Belial, etc. For such inwardly
they were; as appeared by their Works: But it had not been so from the
beginning; for if it had, Man would not have been clothed with such a complete
Angelical form and shape as he is; for when the Creator moved himself by the
production of all things, each was clothed with an external Body, suitable to
its Spirit, and according to the degrees and nature of each Spirit, such form
it attained; for each spiritual Substance had power to attract out of all
things such corporeal Matter for a Covering or Body, as had a Simile with its
own Nature, as appears most manifestly by the Shapes, Forms, Inclinations, and
Dispositions of each Creature. And as the internal Property and Disposition of
each Creature did vary, so their outward Form and Shape did vary.

Thus, where the fierce Wrath did predominate, there sprung up wild Beasts, and
Birds of Prey; but where the Qualities of Nature were more equally mixed, there
were formed more benign and friendly Creatures; as Beasts and Birds humane,
tame, and tractable, called by the wise Men, clean Beasts and Birds; and where
the Spirit was more noble and great, so the Body and Form was accordingly. And
as Man was in the Spirit, and primitive Properties and Qualities, greater, and
more noble than any other of the Creatures visible; so the Lord gave him a
proportionable Body above all the rest of the lower Creation; for we never read
that any of the Holy Angels of the Lord appeared in any other than Humane Form:
But when God has at any time permitted evil Angels to assume Shapes and Forms,
they have always been hideous, monstrous, and frightful; as, Dragons, Lions,
Cats, Swine, and the like; which may demonstrate what Principle and Kingdom
they belong unto, and which would have been Man's Condition, had he not fallen
into the humane Nature; which has not only been the chief Means to preserve
Man's Angelical Form, but to raise him to a Supernatural Dignity., by the Lord
Christ's assuming an humane Body, and making all them Sons and Coheirs that
believe in him, and are incorporated with him: For, though Man, through Sin and
Transgression, has lost his Heavenly, Angelical Understanding and Wisdom,
(which yet shall be again restored to all those that obey the Counsel of the
holy Seed, and divine Light,) yet he did not bereave himself of his first
Shape, or Angelical Form, because he fell into the Humane Nature, where every
Body has the Seed in it self to produce its like Species in all respects.

But as for the Spirits or Souls of most Men, they have through the desire of
Vanity, Oppression, Violence, Killing both Men and Beasts, wanton Superfluity,
Pride, Vainglory, etc. precipitated themselves into the divided Forms, and
harsh, fierce Wrath of God, and into Bestiality, and the savage Nature; so that
they have lost the humane Property, are grown hardhearted, cruel, and sordid,
having no Compassion, Fellow-feeling, or Mercy; and all that do live and die in
this savage, brutish state, shall in the Resurrection, when every Soul shall be
re-invested with a new Body, attract such Matter out of all things, as their
Spirits are capable of, and have a Simile with; and so appear in Forms hideous,
frightful and loathsome, as their Natures require; for such Seed as Men do sow,
such a Body may be expected: for so the illuminate Apostle speaks of the
Resurrection, God gives to every Seed its own Body; and therefore if Men sow
hellish Seeds in their Lives, no wonder if they be clothed with suitable
shapes in the next World.

But on the contrary, those that in their earthly Pilgrimage have retained
Humanity, and introduced their Wills and Desires into the divine Principle of
eternal Light and Love, and been guided by the counsel thereof, shall in that
day arise in a more perfect, beautiful, and glorious humane Shape and Form, of
whom Christ Jesus was the first; for after his Resurrection he appeared in the
same Shape, Form and Body as he had before his Death.

21. Consider how unpleasing it would be to most People, to behold the dead
Carcasses of Beasts cut into pieces, and mangled, and all over bloody? And how
nauseous and frightful a thing it would be to think of putting those begored
Gobbits into our Mouths, and feeding our selves thereon, did not continual Use
and Custom make it familiar? And how difficult a Task would it be for many
People (who do for the most part live under the power and operation of the
tender, compassionate Principle of God's Love,) to kill the Beasts for their
own Food, until a little Action of that kind and custom hardens them therein?
How quickly also will the dead Carcasses putrefie and stink, defiling the
Elements, both Earth and Air? How offensive are the Places where Flesh is
killed and sold? How rude, cruel, fierce, and violent are most of those who are
employed therein? In a word, there is nothing that is pleasant, or friendly in
the whole business, nor any one Circumstance that is grateful to the innocent
Principle in Man; nay, the Taste of most sorts of Flesh is strong, fulsome, and
smells of the original Cruelty to all those that have for any time separated
themselves from the eating thereof, or having communication with it. And indeed
none are, or can be sensible how it is, nor be competent Judges of what is said
here, but only such as have made Trial. Is there any comparison to be made
between an Herb-Market, and a Flesh-Market? In one there is a thousand pieces
of the dead Carcasses of various Creatures lie stinking, the Channels running
with Blood, and all the Places full of Excrements, Ordure, Garbage, Grease, and
Filthiness, sending forth dismal, poisonous Scents, enough to corrupt the very
Air: In the other, you have delicate Fruits of most excellent Tastes, wholesome
Medicinal Herbs, savoury Grains, and most beautiful, fragrant Flowers, whose
various Scents, Colors, etc. make at once a Banquet to all the Senses, and
nourish the purer Spirits, and refresh the very Souls of such who pass through
them, and perfume all the circumambient Air with redolent Exhalations. This was
the Place, and Food ordained for Mankind in the beginning: The Lord planted a
Garden for him, replenished with all manner of ravishing Fruits and Herbs:
There was no Flesh-Markets nor Shambles talked of in the primitive times; But
every green Herb, Fruit, and Seed shall be for Food to Man, says the Creator.
Which if it had been still observed, Man had not contracted so many Diseases in
his Body, and cruel Vices in his Soul, by making his Throat an open Sepulcher,
wherein to entomb the dead Bodies of Beasts; nor should the Noble Image of the
Deity have been thus shamefully defiled with Brutalities.

Creatures of Sea and Land we slay,
And in our Maws do bury;
And worse by half than Beasts of Prey,
Are at their Fun'rals merry.
How shall they but Bestial grow,
That thus to feed on Beasts are willing?
Or why should they a long Life know,
Who daily practice KILLING?
22. There remains yet one Question, which I have been often asked, viz. If all
People should live on Fruits, Herbs, and the like what should we do with the
Beasts, and what would become of them? They would grow so numerous, that they
would be prejudicial to Mankind, etc. To all which I answer:

1. That these are rather Suppositions, than Arguments, mere Fancies, weak, and
unconcluding, because unexperienced. There is (and pity it is, that there is
but) little likelihood of the generality of Peoples forsaking this ill and
harmful (but too long continued) devouring of Flesh; and consequently there is
no great force in this Objection; yet still it may not be amiss to warn the
Lovers of Virtue and Piety, to abstain, for the many Reasons aforesaid; but
these are but a few, and the Multitude will still pursue, and ingulf themselves
in their accustomed Cruelties and Superfluities.

2. Should any Nation or great number of People, through the divine sight, and
true Wisdom, scruple Violence, Oppression, Killing, and Eating the Flesh of
their Fellow Creatures of an inferior Rank, the same Wisdom would teach them
what to do with, and how to order the Beasts.

3. There are abundance of several sorts of these Creatures in the World that
Men do not kill and eat; and yet there are no more of them than are useful; or
not so many, as to occasion any such prejudice to Mankind, as this Objection
supposes, but find room enough in their proper Elements, and the almighty
Providence liberally sustains them. To instance in one most common and useful
Species, viz. Horses; they are not any where that I know of, usually killed to
be eaten; and yet I never heard of any Country in the World that complained of
being over-stock'd with them. It may perhaps be alleged, That the hard usage
and tyranny which Men inflict upon them, do destroy great Numbers of them. I
confess this is too true; but yet if there were no such Exorbitances committed,
there would not be too many, nor would their Troops be burdensome unto
Mankind: For, are there not various sorts of Birds, many of them not fit to be
eaten, and others, that for the most part escape the Stratagems and Snares of
the Fowler, and yet we do not find too many of them; nor indeed shall you but
very seldom find any of them dead, though they cannot hide their dead, since
their Feathers would betray them: The Raven, as unfit for Food, because of its
rapacious preying on dead Carcases, and the pretty Robin-red-breast, for its
Innocence, are very seldom killed, and yet they do not become offensive to Men.

4. How many sorts of Beasts and Birds, both wild and tame, are there in other
Countries, that are rarely killed by Men, and yet there is a natural
consumption of them; nay, there are diverse kinds, whom to kill or injure, is to
this day accounted ominous, or foreboding Mischief to those that meddle with
them; for which cause most People forbear to offer violence to them, unless by
accident; and yet there are no more extant in the World, than of others, whom
Men make it their Business, and Interest, and Diversion to destroy.

5. If People had not occasion for so many Sheep for their Wool, or Cows for
their Milk, etc. they might as easily lessen the Numbers of them, as increase
them; which every Husbandman might be sensible of, by keeping the Males from
the Females, and not suffering them to generate too young; whereby such Beasts
would he larger, stronger, and more healthy; whereas now so many Cattle are
industriously bred up in many places, that when a Scarcity happens of Grass,
Hay, or Corn, multitudes of them perish; for Cattle being now become a grand
Commodity, and (as it were) a Manufacture; Husbandmen for the most part living
at racked Rents, are forced to raise as many of them as possibly they can, and
to keep them on improper and unhealthy Pasturages, and to over-labour both
themselves and their Beasts, merely to raise Rents for their idle, extravagant
Landlords, who only aim to satisfy their Pride and Superfluity.

6. It Is certain, that God and Nature, (who do nothing in vain,) never created,
or made more Creatures in any of the four Worlds or Elements, whether visible,
or invisible, than the same would nourish and maintain; as in the Element of
Water, if there were never any killed by Men, their Mother-Element, that
brought them forth, would be sufficient to nurse them up, and maintain them.
The like is to be said of the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Earth; for do
we not see, even in Deserts and Wildernesses, all Nature's Productions are
liberally provided for, and fewer there of every Species, than in those we call
Civilized Regions? So gross an Error it is to imagine, That if Men should not
kill them, the Earth would be overrun, and that there would be so many of them
as would not be sustained, but that they would be injurious to Mankind: For in
truth nothing would or could hurt or injure Man, if he lived in Innocence, and
did not first outrage them; for as Innocence hurts nothing, so nothing can hurt
it.

23. Now it is farther to be considered, That if any Nation or People should
leave off, or scruple killing Men, and the inferior Creatures, and eating
their Flesh and Blood, from a true understanding of God's Law in Nature, and in
obedience to the friendly and innocent Principle of God's Love and Light, then
all Oppression, Violence, Controversies, and Killing would cease, and that
excellent Saying of the Prophet would take place, viz. That every Man would be
taught of the Lord: All outward Enquiries would have an end; then would not Men
build outward Temples, in which they say, They will worship God; but in truth,
they make the Seats of War, Dissension, and Controversy; but instead thereof,
Men's Bodies would become living Temples, in which his holy Spirit would have
the dominion; then the dolorous, frightful Noise of Guns, Drums, Swords, and
the Tumults of Armed Men would not be heard in the Streets; no Plotting and
Contriving the destruction of each other would be; neither would the Prince
need to fear his own Warders; nor no wounding one another by Backbiting and
slanderous Speeches; neither would the superior World and Element be filled
with the mournful Tones, and doleful Cries of the inferior Inhabitants, nor
with the wrathful, fierce Species of Manslaughter, which does render every Man
unsafe, even from the Prince, to the Peasant; neither would there be any vain
Plays, Games, nor wanton, superfluous Treats, to waste precious Time, and
destroy God's good Creatures; then Man would not say, what should be done, and
do it not; then the inward, savage, violent Beasts of Prey would be rooted out
of Man's heart, and the violent, wrathful Spirit must lose its dominion, and
lay down its wrathful Arms, and Weapons of War, and become subject to the
divine Principle of God's eternal Love; neither would Men then count themselves
at home in this World; but Strangers, and Guests, that must wander hence; then
also all outward fighting, and slaying one the other for Money and Honor,
would have no being; for having overcome the inward Enemies of their Members,
they would rest secure; there being no Peace so excellent and commendable as
that which is made by good living, neither in the sight of God nor Man, viz. by
the Sword of God's Spirit, not by the high, lofty, domineering, envious Spirit,
who, by force does endeavor to subject all unto it self, such a Peace cannot
long continue unviolated, because it proceeds from the poisonous, serpentine
Root, and it has its motion and operation where the Forms of Nature are
divided, and at Enmity with each other; also, here each Property does with
highest diligence endeavor to get the dominion; which sometimes one does, and
then by and by another; so that there is a continual strife and enmity for
Superiority or Government; which is the foundation of all Controversies,
Violence, Oppression, Fighting, and Killing, and why Men forget God, and
despise the Dictates of the innocent Principle of his Love; which continued
Violences and Oppressions do more and more kindle, and keep the fierce Wrath in
motion, and by a sympathetical inclination draw on Man many sore Evils; for
every Principle or Quality becomes either strong and powerful, or weak and
impotent, according as Man shall join himself, or live in the power and
operation of, whether it be in the evil or good; therefore it has always come
to pass, that those that have given themselves up, and immersed their Wills and
Desires into the Principle of Wrath, have become strong and powerful therein,
committing Intemperances, and outraging God's Law with greediness, but on the
contrary, those that have separated themselves from Violence, Intemperance, and
Uncleanness, and followed the Counsel of the Voice of Wisdom, they have become
strong and powerful in the same Principle; whence has flowed all kinds of
Virtue. What could hurt Man, either externally or internally, or destroy his
Peace and Well-being, if he lived in Innocence? The Creator has not made any
visible Prince greater, or ordained any to reign over him, but only the
friendly Light and Love, which he has dispossessed himself of, by stepping out
of the Law of God in Nature, and so has lost his dominion, both external and
internal, and thereby has subjected himself under the dominion of the
poisonous, fierce Wrath, where Enmity, Strife, and Violence take their Birth.

But this is the happiness still of Mankind, that the God of eternal Peace
has, in his Mercy, given a portion of his friendly Light and Love, to every
one to profit withal; and also Man's Will is free, if he do not suffer it to be
depraved, and captivated under the dominion of the evil Nature; for this cause,
the Scripture of Truth says, That the Lord has set Life and Death before Man;
that is, in Man; as also, the Right Hand Way, and the Left, and bid him choose:
The Right-hand-Way is the Principle of his eternal Love and Light in Jesus
Christ; and the Left, is his fierce Wrath; and he that chooses the good part,
does not only become a Friend of God's, and himself, but also to the whole
Creation, and becomes incorporated into that unspotted Body, and holy Fountain
of Innocence, into which state all the inferior Creatures, as well as Man, do
travel with pain, and groan to be delivered, as the worthy Apostle Paul says;
The whole Creation groans to be delivered into that glorious liberty of the
Sons of God; this is the Land that flows with Milk and Honey: Here is Peace,
and Plenty of all things; for Unity and Innocence makes the Kingdoms of this
World Emblems of Paradise: For Temperance, Cleanness and Separation from
Violence, freeth the Body from great Labors and Travels, and the Mind from
carking Cares, Suspicions, and Perturbations, attracting the benevolent
Influences of the Celestials, and all the Host of Heaven and Earth blesses him
that lives in Innocence, because he oppresses nor hurts nothing: It is
Violence, Oppression, and Superfluity which have broke the Unity between God
and Man, and also between all other Creatures, and rendered Man the most
unhappy of all others; his wrathful Mouth is so wide, and his Paunch so large,
that the Spoil and Destruction of all the numerous Inhabitants of the Elements
will not content him; he contends with all things, and therefore all contend
with him; no place is free from his poisonous Rays, and unreconciled
Controversies, therefore all curse him, and he does the same by them: Every
Creature fears Man, because he hurts and destroys their Peace; and in so
doing, he does the same by himself, for the Groaning of those Creatures that
suffer Pain and Oppression will overtake him that does it; but, on the
contrary, those that have separated themselves from Violence, Oppression, and
Superfluity, all things that are necessary for them, and for the support of
Life, are near at hand, and may be easily procured, without hazarding the
Health either of the Body or Mind, and without Oppression to any of God's
Creatures; as the great number of fragrant Herbs, Seeds, Grains, and Fruits,
which are endued with brave innocent Properties, and many excellent Virtues,
beyond Expression; which being well prepared, and moderately eaten, do not only
maintain Health and Strength, but they do beget their own Species, and innocent
Properties, both in the Body and Mind, as I have before demonstrated: And
whosoever shall make trial, and initiate now this innocent way of Living, shall
not only make Peace with the whole Creation, but shall overcome his inward
Lusts, and violent Passions, which are Man's deadly Enemies; and then he may
rest secure under his own Vine, viz. under the Government of the divine
Principle of God's Eternal Love. Here all Contention cease; no hideous Cries,
nor mournful Groans are heard, neither of Man nor Beast; no Channels running
with the Blood of slaughtered Beasts; no stinking Shambles, nor bloody
Butchers; no roaring of Canons, nor firing of Towns; no loathsome, stinking
Prisons, nor Iron Grates, to keep Men from enjoying Wife, Children, and the
pleasant Air, nor no crying for want of Food and Cloths; no Rioting, nor wanton
Inventions to destroy as much in one day, as a Thousand can get by their hard
Labor and Travel; no swearing, nor stabbing Heaven with dreadful Execrations;
no galloping Horses up Hills, without any consideration or fellow-feeling of
the Creatures pains and burdens; no deflouring of Virgins, and then expose
both them and their own Seed to all the Miseries imaginable; nor no Letting
Lands and Farms so dear, that the Farmer must be forced to oppress himself,
Servants, and Cattle almost to death, and all too little to pay his Rent; no
Disobedience of the Inferior, nor Oppression of the Superior; but the first
knows how to obey, and the last how to govern; neither is there any Want,
because there is no Superfluity nor Gluttony: No Noise nor Cries of wounded
Men, no need of Surgeons to cut Bullets out of their Flesh, nor no cutting
off Hands, broken Legs and Arms; no roaring nor crying out with the torturing
pains of the Gout, nor other painful Diseases, as Leporous and Consumptive
Distempers, except through Age, and the Relics of some Strains they got whilst
they lived in intemperate Egypt; neither are their Children afflicted with such
a great number of Diseases, but are as free from Distempers as Lambs, Calves,
or the young ones of any of the Beasts, who are preserved sound and healthful,
because they have not outraged God's Law in Nature, the breaking of which is
the Foundation of most or all cruel Diseases that afflict Mankind; there being
nothing that makes the difference between Man and Beasts, as to Health, but
only Superfluity and Intemperance, both in Quality and Quantity. Man, in his
first state, was made the soundest, healthiest, of the greatest Spirit, and the
longest life'd; as witness the Ancients in the first Ages of the World: But
when Man entered with his Will into Violence, Oppression, and Cruelty, then the
Lord said, That Man had corrupted the Earth, and filled it with Violence; that
is, the Elements and Properties of the Humane Nature was corrupted, and become
unequal in their Operation; every particular Quality did endeavor to get the
upper hand: Here the Harmony was broken, and Discord took place; here was the
Strife: Then the Lord shortened Man's Life, but not before he became
intemperate, and did Violence, not only unto himself, but to all other
Creatures; therefore they do groan to be delivered into that first State, and
glorious Liberty, Man was created in; which if he had continued in Obedience,
and lived under the Government of the innocent Principle of God's Light and
Love, all the inferior Creatures would have enjoyed all the Privileges and
Liberty which were ordained for them, according to their Capacity. For this
Cause, whenever any of the inferior Creatures are oppressed, hurt, or
killed, they do, by a natural Disposition and Inclination, cry unto the
Fountain whence they proceeded, and groan for Deliverance; which will never be,
until Men, with their Wills and Desires, enter into the innocent Principle of
God's Love, and holy Light, whence does arise no Disposition of Hatred,
Violence, or Oppression; it being as contrary to it, as Light is to Darkness:
All Cruelty and Bloodshedding do proceed from another Fountain, as different
in Nature and Operation, as the common consuming Fire does differ from the
Light thereof; which is of a most friendly, pleasant Quality, and benevolent
Operation; but the Fire is fierce, and altogether the contrary; yet
nevertheless, the harsh Fire is the cause of the Light; and if there were no
Fire, there would be no Light: The Fire is the Father, and the Light is the
Son; and they are Emblems of the Father and Son, or of the internal Fire and
Light: The Light of this internal Fire is a most pleasant, chearing Quality of
Life; but the Fire, in its own Nature, is a strong, harsh, sulphurous Property,
a devouring, lofty, proud Spirit, who endeavors to consume all things, and the
internal, dark Fire is its Root; and the Scripture says, Who can dwell with
everlasting Burnings? God is a Consuming Fire to all that are not clothed with
the Son's Wedding Garment of Light, Love, and Innocence; therefore the
scrupling Violence and Oppression, both to Man and Beast, and denying our
selves of other Vanities and Superfluities, is of great moment, and the only
Path that leads Men to the holy Land, preserving both the Body and Soul in
health. For this Cause, in the Beginning, the Lord put Man into a Garden, which
does truly signify Innocence; and gave him a great number of fragrant Herbs,
Seeds, Fruits, and Grains, which are all endued with an innocent Nature and
Operation; but when he had precipitated his Will and Desires into the Principle
of Wrath, then presently the Earth was filled with Violence, and the Element of
his Body and Soul was corrupted; then Distemperatures took place in him, and
his Life was shortened, but not before. Therefore the Eating of Herbs, Seeds,
Grains, and Fruits is of far greater consequence than most imagine, and they
may justly be esteemed the Food of good Angels, for their Innocence, excellent
Virtues, Fragrancies, and Odours; and therefore they were the Food ordained for
Man, whilst he remained in his Angelical State; and if he had continued in
Innocence, he would never have desired any other Food; but when by Desire he
awakened the fierce Wrath, and lived under the Power and Government of its
Nature, then he could not be satisfied without doing Violence, and Killing; for
innocent Herbs and Fruits had no Simile with that Nature that had gotten the
upper Dominion in him, for every Property, as I have told you before, must have
its own Food, or else it cannot subsist; then it was, and not before, that the
Lord permitted Men to kill and eat the Flesh and Blood of Beasts; which would
never have been, had Man continued in Innocence: And therefore great are the
Benefits, and manifold Privileges, that now do accompany all those that have
attained to that state of Purity and Innocence which our first Parents were
clothed with; their Minds being freed from Snares, and their Bodies from
superfluous Labors, therefore can say;

We have no need of Lawyers; Honesty, Justice and Prudence makes their Trade
nothing worth; and but a few Physicians, and none of them keep neither Coaches
nor Chariots, they are not clothed with Gold, Silver, nor Plush Coats, our
Temperance keeps them poor: The true Knowledge of God and Nature in our selves
destroys the Trade of divining for Money: Our Superiors are not proud nor
ambitious, neither do they spend the choicest and richest of the Earth in
Courtly Gluttony, Drunkenness and Superfluity; nor the Inferiors be not bold,
surly, inhumane and swinish; nor are any of us delighted with slanderous
Speeches, nor lend our Ears to hear Lies; nor are we pleased with the evil
Reports of others that do wound those who are not present, which do chiefly
serve to advance Hatred and make Divisions; neither do we nourish such evil
Passions, but take care, by the observing of our Duty (that is, by doing unto
others as we we would be done unto) to destroy those evil Beasts of Prey in the
bud: We pray for our Enemies, and praise them when they do well; nor are we
grieved when Prosperity attends them, nor rejoice at the Evil which happens
unto them: We are not subject to that detestable Spirit of Scoffing, Jearing
and idle Jesting; neither do we spend whole days and nights in Drunkenness, nor
waste precious Time in wanton vain Discourses; neither are we skilled in
Horse-Races, nor exhaust our Treasures by Gaming, and Night-Revelling: Our
Streets are not troubled with the Cries and Complaints of the Blind, Lame, and
Distressed; nor are our Common Halls filled with the disharmonious noise of
drunken Healths, and roaring Huzza's; no fulsome Fumes of Tobacco, nor
detestable Steams of Brothel-houses, to infect the chaste Air; no Mistrissing,
nor Revelling, turning Day into Night, and Night into Day; no Merriment or
Sporting at the Funeral of the Beasts; neither do our Women spend most of their
Time in lying a-bed, Idleness, nor in superfluous Inventions to gratify their
luxurious Palates, nor with playing and sporting themselves with negre nosed
Dogs, who make these ravenous, unclean Savages their Day and Night-Companions,
for which some have been put to death by the Sentence of the Judge, by playing,
kissing, and embracing of them, sitting in their Laps, which many of them will
hardly afford their Husbands the like kindness; also sit at their Tables,
feeding them with the choicest of Food and Dainties, whereas at the same time
they will suffer those of their own kind to perish for Want; which Custom and
Communication is inhumane, depraved, and most detestable: Neither do we
accustom our selves to Lie, nor go to drunken Clubs, to tell Stories of Dogs,
Tobacco-boxes, Hunting, Riding for Wagers, Scoffing and Jearing each other,
speaking lightly of their absent Acquaintance. We do not forget that Scripture
that says, Let us lay aside all Maliciousness, Guile, Dissimulation, and Evil
Speaking: Neither do we celebrate any unnatural Marriages. Our young Men do
hold it unlawful to marry Women past Childbearing, or those that are deformed,
diseased, or unfit for Generation, for the sake of Money, Honor, or any other
base depraved Ends: Our Ways and Passages are not filled with Thieves and
Vagabonds; we fear not those of our own kind: Our Sons are not disobedient,
drunken, nor riotous; neither are our Daughters unchaste, nor idle, though
their Parents be rich (which are the Wellsprings of Evil, and Mistress of
Poverty;) neither do we surfeit our selves by Over-labour, nor put Nature on
the Rack by violent Exercises, whence proceed sundry Diseases: Neither have we
any occasion to be obliged to those we like not, neither do we make a boasting
Show of our Friendship: We do overcome Ingratitude by our continual Kindness
and Well-doing: We fear no Enemies but those of our own House: We readily
expose our Goods to those that are in want: Our Superiors hear all Complaints
and Petitions readily; neither do we detain the Rights and Privileges of any:
We count nothing so profitable, noble, and honorable, as that which we give
and assist our Neighbors with: There comes no Harmony into our Ears, which is
more welcome than the Prayers and good Wishes of our Neighbors and Friends: We
count Riches and great Substance base and abject, if possessed privately, or
spent superfluously on Men's Lusts and Passions; but on the contrary, being
well employed, and put to the End for which they were given, does innoble them,
and make them magnificent, and a Blessing: The Knowledge of God, and his holy
Law, in Nature, does invite us to do good: There is no better way nor means to
imitate God, than to live soberly in peace, doing good to one another, and by
allowing that Liberty to our Neighbors, and to God's Creation, as we would
willingly enjoy: We come in nothing nearer the Nature of God, than to cease
from Oppression, and to do good: We desire to live in Peace, and to have our
Liberty; and so do all other Creatures: We do not desire to be hurt,
imprisoned, banished, stoned, or killed; wherefore then should we deal so
unmercifully with any of God's Creatures, especially with those of our own
kind? All Creatures shun and dread all such Evils: God made all things by his
wonderful Power, and he does by his holy Word preserve all; why then should we
work contrary to him, seeing we cannot make one Hair either white or black? Man
is the only Prince and Governor in this World, and therefore he ought to take
his Measures of Government from his Creator, whose Image he is, and not from
the depraved Nature, which he, through Sin, is fallen into, where every Form
and Property of Nature does, with highest diligence, endeavor to be Lord, and
to domineer over each other; which the Man of Vanity counts right, but it is a
gross Error. Man was made to live in Unity, and to have Dominion, and govern
over all things: In the same Spirit of Unity, he that does good, and lives in
Peace, does, by a magnetic Quality, draw Virtue out of all things: The fear of
Want, Sickness, and even Death it self is made easy to us, by Mercy and
Well-doing; wherefore then should we fear any thing, seeing we hurt nothing? He
that lives according to God's Law, shall not die before the highest Number be
accomplished; and then Death will be easy unto him, and his Change a Comfort.

We do count it an Indiscretion to condemn all that do not walk just in our
Path, provided it be not an Evil against God, and his Law. Carking Cares
perplex not our Minds, nor do Over-Labours tire our Bodies. We are honestly
curious in the Enquiry of the Mysteries of Nature, for God does will that Man
should partake of his Secrets: Opinions nor Sensuality do not becloud our
Understandings. We do not oblige our selves to follow Authors, a few Books do
serve our turns: Our principal Book has but three Leaves, by which we always
pray unto the Lord, that he would teach us which is the true Knowledge of God
in our selves, and the three grand Principles of the Universal Nature, wherein
is contained all Mysteries, both divine and humane. We trouble not our Heads,
nor spend much good Time in learning many Languages. We account, the more Paint
the Glass-Windows have, the more it keeps out the Light. Neither do we account
or esteem that to be Pleasure, wherein Voluptuousness is Captain; for such
Pleasures do tickle the Senses only for a Moment, and then slip away, and leave
behind them a disordered Body, and a perplexed Soul; the Memory of which calls
for Repentance, and do engender in the Mind Sottishness and insolency, and a
Forgetfulness of all Good; making the Body an House of Sorrow, and the Soul a
Den of Thieves: Intemperance never goes alone, having many other Evils, and
perverse Companions attending her; but, at her first appearance, does court her
Lovers with a curious, painted, smiling Countenance, which does allure and draw
after her a great Train of young Gallants, by her counterfeit Beauties; but we,
through the good Favor of the Lord, know her Snares, and that she is that
Woman the wise Man says, Sits in the Corners of the Streets of Man's City,
alluring and inviting the foolish Ones by her fading Delights and Pleasures;
therefore we warn our Citizens to beware of her Charms. But Virtue, who is our
Captain, though at first she do appear to us with a dismayed Face, and in
modest, plain Garments, and neither decked with feigned Speeches, nor with
fading Beauties, but with other most sublime and durable Riches; as,
Temperance, Cleanness, Separation, Self-denial, which is a little austere and
burdensome at first to old Adam, and to those that have spent most of their
days in the Intemperances and Oppressions of Egypt; nevertheless, a little Use,
Custom, and Self-denial, makes them most friendly, both to the Body and Mind;
for she freeth them both from Ignorance, vain Opinions, Self-conceitedness, and
all other Snares and Troubles, and crowns the Soul with eternal Felicity: If
our Children are gluttonous, idle, or disobedient to Parents, our Law and
Custom constrains them to make retaliation by Servitude in our public Houses,
and Places provided for that purpose: We do not enslave our Bodies by Labors,
nor put our more noble Parts on the Rack by carking Cares, to maintain our
Wives and Children, because we observe order, and count that unlawful that is
not needful; a little serves and supports the necessity of Nature, where
Superfluity is laid aside: The more Children we have, the richer we do esteem
our selves, we do not pray and wish that we may have no more Children, and at
the same time continue the Means; neither do we hinder Conception for fear of
Disgrace, Trouble, or that we shall have more Children than we can maintain;
all those things we esteem to be Sins against God, and his Law in Nature: We
are contented, and highly gratified with the most pleasant Fruits of the
Gardens, and desire, as much as we can, to imitate our first state of
Innocence, counting every green Herb and Seed our principal Food, having a
Simile with the friendly Principle in Man: We fear all Inclinations after Flesh
and Blood, they smell of the Original Sin, and of the awakened, fierce Wrath of
God, which renders man fitter to live in a Flesh-Market and Butcher's Shambles,
than in a Garden; there being no more affinity between Slaughter-houses,
Shambles, Butchers-Shops, and Sheep, than there is between a pleasant Garden,
and the Fruits that grow therein, and Dogs, Lions, Bears, and the like wild
Beasts of Prey: We do not complain, and say, If we should not eat Flesh and
Blood, we should die, as some will, meaning the death of the Body; this none
need to fear; but the main thing lies occult; they are not willing to kill and
destroy the Government of the violent, wrathful Spirit, and ravenous Nature,
which most Men love to practice; all such things that support and keep that
Spirit in motion, which would quickly be weakened, if Man did not supply it with
its proper Food and Aliment. If Violence nor Oppression did not come into the
noble Tents of Men, then Man would be like a pleasant Field in May, where there
grow various sorts of fragrant Herbs, Fruits, Grains, and Seeds, of different
Forms, Shapes, Colors, Beauties, Odours, and Natures; but they have but one
Mother, whence they have and receieve Virtue, Life, and Power, standing all in
quietness and silence, suffering all sorts of Winds to blow on them; they
complain not, neither do they grutch or envy each other, because they are not
all alike, or that one is more beautiful and fairer than another; no, they all
thrust forth their Virtues in quietness, to God's Praise and Glory; even so it
would be with Man, if he did fear the Lord as he ought, and lay aside Violence,
and live in Innocence, then the Tempter would lose his labor.

2. If any amongst us be idle, gluttonous, or commit any evil, and will not
amend his Life, and become sober at the first, second, or third Reproof, then
they are committed to Houses and Places appointed for several sorts of Work,
and there they are put to such Labor, Arts, or Trades as they shall be capable
of, being well furnished with Meat, Drink, Clothing, sweet, wholesome Chambers
and Beds, there to continue until they have made retaliation; their greatest
Punishment is, they are confined to work double the time that is allotted for
others, viz. twelve hours in a day; for we do not oppress our selves nor
Servants with labor; it being not lawful among us to work above six hours in a
day, which does bountifully support us with plenty of all things; where
Superfluity is not, there needs not much labor neither to Man nor Beast, the
remaining time is set apart for Prayer, Meditations, and Contemplations of the
divine and natural Mysteries of God, as Arts and Sciences, and all lawful
innocent Recreation: We do account none capable to know the hidden Mysteries of
God and the Creation, but those that become even as Nature her self, viz. true,
simple, constant, patient, and pious, no ways hurtful to any thing, viz. a
regenerated Man, none else are fit for the search and speculation of divine
Mysteries, but those that are thus qualified; when by an innocent, pious Life
we have made God our Friend, then the Heavens, the Earth, Elements, and all the
Terrene and Celestial Influences are constrained to come to our help: We draw
Peace, Love and Virtue out of all things; for every Likeness does forcibly draw
proper Aliment out of all things, for the increase and support of its own Body,
both in good and evil; and for this same purpose we do often meet together, for
our outward occasions do not hinder us, where we do speak and discourse freely,
like so many Children, keeping nothing back or hidden, whether it be good or
evil; but manifesting the inward secrets of our Hearts, and the Mystical
Operations of the various Properties of our own Nature, and of the Force,
Power, Virtue, and Vice of each Quality, and of their rising, and continual
contest amongst themselves for Mastery; and also the manner and way the divine
Principle of God in us, does open the seven Seals, and call the Soul back out
of Egypt, viz. out of Discord and Inequality, into Concord and Harmony: We do
not admit of any Discourse that is not filled with Virtue and Experience,
either of divine or natural Wisdom, by which the low, mean Capacities are
raised by Simile, Use, and Custom, to some degree of Wisdom; Silence being in
much esteem amongst us, counting it a very difficult thing to hear the Voice of
Wisdom, if the Ears are not first made good by Silence; for he that cannot
distinguish Sounds, cannot tune his Instrument, and consequently he can make no
Harmony; the like is to be understood of the various Voices in Man; if he do
not understand by the Sound of each Voice, and from what Center it had its
Birth, and what Property does predominate in each Voice, then such an one
cannot rightly and properly distinguish the Voice of Wisdom from others; for
this cause many do take the one for the other. We do not admire any Study so
much as the knowledge of our selves, esteeming that to be only profitable both
to the Body and Soul: We have but few Merchants amongst us, and those that are,
are ready to break; for their Wares have but little Credit with us: We do not
need Wine, Sugar, Spices, Fruits, Drugs, nor indeed none of the Novelties
brought from the West and East Indies, accounting them not proper, nor
agreeable to our Natures. We know that the Herbs, Fruits, Grains, Seeds, and
Drugs, that grow under the elevation of our own Pole, are more Homogeneal. We
are of the Kingly Prophet David's Mind, counting all those needless Dainties
the price of Blood, for the most part procured by great hazard, trouble, and
labor: And if David counted Water (which was procured by hazard of a Man's
Life,) the price of Blood, it being a most necessary thing for the support of
the Life, and he at that time in great need of it; how much more then must we
esteem those needless things the price of Blood, that are procured by the loss
of Life and Health? Our married Men and Women are not like the Moon, the
farther she is distant from the Sun, the clearer and greater light she gives;
but when she draws nearer, her light is lessened: Our Women do not spend most
of their time in superfluous Dressing, and decking themselves like painted or
gilded Looking-glasses, which present a false Face: We love, and marry them for
Virtue, more than for Money, Honor, or Beauty, because none of these things
make them so Praiseworthy as Sobriety, Modesty, Obedience, and good Works:
They are so friendly to us, as not to charge us, or put us to that unnecessary
Labor and Trouble of rich Attire, or other Superfluities; their modest Looks
and honest Behaviors, do not only engage us to love them, but leads all that
cast their Eyes on them, to Continency and Chastity: We do not know the
Expenses of either Apothecaries, Doctors, or Doctresses; they prevent that by
good living; neither do they teach, or train their Children from their Breasts
to Gluttony, but supply them with proper Meats and Drinks, both in Quantity and
Quality, which makes them strong, lusty, brisk, and healthy, of clean, sweet
Tempers, not apt to cry, or be disordered, but play like Lambs; neither are
they so subject to immature Deaths, of good Genius's, apt to all sorts of
Learning, (not subject to the Ioint-Aches, King's Evil, Leprous Diseases,)
which do proceed from our well-Tillage and Manuring of our Ground in the
beginning; also we take care to keep it clean from Weeds, and to sow good Seed
in the proper times and seasons: We do make it our business to understand the
Nature and Quality of each Soil; for some Men's Transgression the Earth is
naturally subject to bring forth evil Fruit, or Vegetation not so profitable
for use; and if there be not special care taken, and industry used, the good
Fruit will be overrun, and much weakened by the Thorns and Briars, and hinder
the good Seed from taking Root, and so become corrupted in the Bud: We do also
esteem that Country most miserable, that does neglect the proper Tillage, and
Education of Children, it being the grand Fountain of all Superfluity,
Gluttony, Seditions, and Murders, and a contempt of God's Law written in the
Heart, Scriptures, and Book of Nature; for this cause the Learned Moses
commanded, That the drunken, gluttonous, disobedient sons should be stoned to
Death. Therefore we have Laws and Customs that do compel all Fathers to
instruct their Children in all Modesty, Honesty, Cleanness, Sobriety, and
Silence before their Elders; and we trust not the education of them to others;
for if we will not take pains with them our selves, how can we believe that
others will? We account it more profitable for them to be educated, and
instructed in the Precepts of Wisdom, and Knowledge of Nature, than for us to
spend our Time, wear our Health out; and perplex our Minds to get Riches and
Money, which for the most part are the very Seeds of Oppressions and
Intemperances: We do not admit the importing of Wine, or any strong Drinks to
be made, that is capable to make Men drunk; not that we do esteem those brave,
noble Creatures unlawful, but because the young Men, and simple, low-spirited
People have not government to use it as it ought, or to the best advantage of
Nature, but altogether the contrary: Therefore the Wise amongst us do refrain
it, and prohibit themselves for their sakes: We had rather the excellent Fruit
of the Vine should be lost, than our People destroyed in the use of it;
therefore if any amongst us, do make, or invent any sort of Drink, that will
make Men drunk, they are punished with perpetual Servitude, and the Drinkers
thereof with little less; Drunkenness being the leading-Card to all Evils: We
have not forgot the many Burdens, Miseries, cruel Slaveries, and Oppressions we
endured whilst we remained in intemperate Egypt, though the Foolish Ones have:
And if we should give liberty again to Drunkenness, Gluttony, and the like
Vanities, we may justly expect the same measure, and to have no more Mercy than
Pharaoh and his Troops had; for wheresoever Superfluity, and Gluttony is, there
you may be sure Oppression does reign, which does powerfully stir up the Wrath;
therefore the first step toward the Land of Peace, is for Men to abstain from
all Uncleanness and Violence; which the Prophets, and Holy Men of God
proclaimed in all Ages: We know that to be lawful that is needful, and suitable
to Nature's wants; being sensible that every Extreme begets its Simile, both in
the Body, and also in the Mind; whether it be Meats, Drinks, Words, Exercises,
or Communications: We cannot do Violence, or oppress any thing, but first we
must be strong in the fierce Wrath, whence the Violence does proceed; neither
can we do any thing, whether in the Evil or Good, but first we must be strong
in that Principle whence the Good or Evil does proceed; therefore it may be
truly said, Wrath and Fierceness hurts all things, and all things hurt that;
but on the contrary, Innocence hurts nothing, and nothing hurts that; it being
an irrepugnable Tower against all Evil and Violence. Living well is the best
defense against Men's inward and outward Enemies: It is also a custom amongst
us, if any of us, by the enticement of our liquorish Palates, or other
Accidents, commit any Intemperance in Meats, Drinks, or otherwise, we in all
Particulars, make it public at our Meetings, and such do, of their own free
choice, appoint unto themselves a certain time of Abstinence and Separation,
according to the nature of the Offense, viz. Days, Weeks, Months, or Years;
whereby our Bodies are cleansed, and purged from superfluous Matters, (which
are the Seeds of Diseases,) by which we are preserved in health, and our Souls
are freed from the Chains of that Offense, and our Minds and Spirits
strengthened by the Spirits of our Friends; Penance and Separation keep the
Evil fresh in our Minds, with a continual Spur to call on the Lord for Mercy:
This many of the Prophets and holy Men practiced. We do account it unlawful to
innoble the Carcases of slaughtered Beasts, by intombing them in our Bodies:
The Flesh of Beasts is too near akin unto us; therefore the humane Nature
ought not to join or incorporate it self with the Bestiality: The
Wood-Musicians do freely communicate with us, because we do not hurt them: All
things are friendly unto us, because we are like unto them; also the holy
Scriptures do testify the Truth of this, viz. The Lord has made his Angels
ministering Spirits, to minister to them that fear him, and live in his Love.
Abstinence, Cleanness, and Separation do fortify us, and support our Spirits,
which do by a secret and natural Attraction, even as the Loadstone does Iron,
attract the Celestial Powers, by which the good Angels become prompt, and do
readily serve us, and communicate to every one according to his Merits and
Capacity.

But on the contrary, those that have introduced their Wills and Desires into
the central Wrath, and live under the divided Forms, and evil Properties, do
thereby subject themselves, not only to all the inferior, bestial Properties,
but are always liable to be tempted, and give great Advantages to the evil
Genius, and to the malignant Configurations of the Celestials, which forcibly
attract unto them the evil Angels, which draw many into great Errors; as,
Gluttony, Drunkenness, Adulteries, Theft, and Murders; as also, unto all vain
Sports, and violent Exercises; as, Bear-baitings, Bull-baitings, Fencing,
Fighting with Dogs and Cats, Swearing, Lying, and Fighting with one another; as
also, Playing at Cards, Dice, Nine pins, and many other evil, robust, Egyptian
Sports, which are the Inventions of the evil Genius, and Angels, and do all
proceed from the fierce Wrath of God in Nature. It is farther to be noted, that
all those that are Spectators, and love to see those violent Exercises, and
vain Pleasures, and take delight to be in the presence of them, are all led and
governed by the same evil Genius, and with their Wills do confent to those
Villainies. O ye Multitude! stand still, and consider what fire it is that is
kindled in you, and what Fuel it is that does keep it burning, and from what
Center it takes its Birth; and then you will find it to be the hellish Fire,
which proceeds from God's fierce Wrath, which can no ways be quenched, but by
your ceasing from Evil, and standing still, and the Lord will, by his Power,
part the Red Sea, and conduct you safe through his Wrath, and drown the Man of
Sin, but preserve his Camp by his holy Angel.

3. But in our Country we have none of the aforementioned Sports, nor Egyptian
Pastimes: We do not use Cruelty, or do Violence, neither to Man nor Beast, for
fear we should become worse than Savages, as the People of Egypt, and those of
the Land of Nod are; for no Man can do Violence, and not awaken the Wrath, and
violent Spirit; for all Inclinations to Violence, do proceed from the same
Spirit, and all that take delight and pleasure therein, are precipitated into
it, and then this hellish Quality gets dominion, and crucifies the Son of God,
(viz. the friendly Principle of Light and Love,) afresh, as the Scripture
says. For these Reasons our Philosophers will not admit any Violence to be
done, either to Man or Beast; because all Oppressions and Violences, whether
they be little or great, have but one Root or Fountain; the same is to be
understood of Virtue; and as Use and Custom do increase Virtue, and make it
impregnable, so does the practice of Evil make the fierce Wrath strong and
powerful: Therefore we have no Bear-baitings, to gather the rude, violent
Multitude together, and to torment the Creatures of God, who bear his Image,
either in his Love or Anger; neither have we Bull-baitings, to make and force
one Beast, contrary to their Inclinations, cruelly to tear another to pieces,
whilst a company of People look on, that in their nature are tenfold worse than
Beasts; neither have we any Cockfightings, nor no Festival Days, that serve
chiefly to call the violent Rabble together; nor no Whitson-Ale, or
Morris-dancing; all our Dancing and Fencing-Masters, since we came out of
Egypt, have given off their Trade, and applied themselves to the Study of
Wisdom; and many of them are become excellent Proficients therein: All our
Alehouses and Taverns are put to honest uses, viz. to entertain Strangers; and
the Instruments of Music, which were used in them, during Pharaoh's Reign, we
have caused to be burned, as a Sacrifice, or Retaliation, because the Egyptians
had profaned the Lord in the use of them. We have no fatted Swine, fatted Oxen,
or Punchanelloes amongst us; neither have we any of Pharaoh's lean Kine. We
wear no Swords by our Sides, but all our Weapons of War are inward; and we
never use them for any other Occasion, but to defend our Souls from
Viciousness. We join not Harmony, Swearing, and vain Discourses together, as
the Egyptian Masters of Music do. Our Men do not rob Women of their principal
Ornament, neither living nor dead, nor adorn their Heads with theirs; which
shows (in those that do) a base, depraved, effeminate Nature: Most of this sort
of People belong to Pharaoh's Troops, that are, or may expect to be swallowed
up in the Sea of Wrath. Our Women do not gather themselves into Companies in
the Streets, and there spend Time in evil Communication; neither do they stand
idling at their Doors, in painted, counterfeit Dresses, to allure the wanton
Eyes of the Passers by. We have no Play Houses, neither dare we use Consorts of
Music in any such places. We do not suffer our Children to go to any of the
public Shows, and Games of Sodom, for fear they should look back, and so
become Monuments of God's Wrath, as Lot's Wife was. We do not allow or suffer
our young Men to run nor ride for Wagers; neither do we suffer our Women to use
robust Employments, for fear they should become rude and immodest, as the
Egyptian Women are; for the whole preservation of Mankind does chiefly depend
on their well Conduct and Temperance. We turn our Backs on all idle Discourses
which serve only to invite Men to Folly, and spend precious time. Our Friends
Abstinence, Temperance, and Cleanness do continually show us the vanity of such
things, and spur us on, and hasten us toward the Land of Peace. We do not look
back, for fear we should awaken the Center, the original Poisons; and then our
sweet Water would be in danger of being dried up, as it came to pass in Lucifer
and his Legions; there being but nine Figures, or degrees of Wisdom, attainable
by mortal Men, the tenth Number, viz. o, is the highest; and those that have
gradually passed through the Nines, must stand still in silence, and leave off
all numbering, and suffer God's Holy Spirit to work the Will and the Deed in
him, as he pleases.

We have no Butchers, Fowlers, nor any that belong to the Trade of Killing,
Violence, or Oppression amongst us; most of them revolted, and joined
themselves to Pharaoh, before they came out of Egypt, and were destroyed with
his Troops in the Sea of Blood, or Wrath; and those of them that passed through
the Red Sea, were cut off in the Wilderness; for finding their Trade very bad
and low, and the nearer they came to the Land of Peace, the worse it grew; so
they began to tumult, and complain, and murmur against the Lord, that he dealt
so hardly with them: Which awakened the Center of Wrath, and destroyed them; so
that none of this sort of People entered the holy Land that flows with Milk and
Honey, and not with the Blood of the humane nor bestial Nature. Neither have we
any Billings-gates; all that sort of People are our Hewers of Wood, and Drawers
of Water: And but very few Inns of Court-Gentlemen, or Templers; all of them
that escaped the Egyptian Plagues were destroyed with Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, in the wild Nature of this World, or Wilderness. Neither have we many
Churches, and yet have a great number of Temples, in which we worship the Lord;
but there be no Bells in them, that are compounded of imperfect Metals;
therefore we have no need of those robustick Musicians, viz. Ringers, to call
the People to worship; such Music is too Saturnine and Martial for us: No,
every one of us has his own Bell, and none can ring, or make Music of it, but
himself; which being skilfully handled, makes a more sweet, soft, and pleasing
Harmony, than the Egyptian Bells, who are loud, harsh, and penetrating; and all
the Ringers are rude, cruel, and inhumane: Our young People do not learn to
ring any Bells but their own; which, when well learned, calls them to the
Worship of God in the proper Times and Seasons, even as the good Spirit of God
shall teach them, as the Scripture says, The holy Men of God taught and spoke
as the Holy Spirit moved in them. We do not admit any to be Magistrates or
Governors over us, but only those that by Industry, Prayer, and Meditation
have attained to a more excellent Understanding of God, Nature, and Themselves,
than their Neighbors; which does render them fit to govern: We account none
capable to govern others, that have not first learned, in all particulars, to
govern themselves. It is contrary to our Philosophy to mix or compound our Food
with things of disagreeing natures: We use no double Preparations; the more
simple our Food is, the more agreeable it is to our Nature, and best sustains
our Healths. It is not a Custom for our Women to give, or suffer their Children
to drink any kind of Beer, or Syder, whilst their Food is chiefly Milk; there
being nothing more contrary to Milk, than such sharp Liquors; Milk being of a
sweet, gentle, mild, friendly Nature and Operation, having no manifest Quality
that does too violently predominate, there being a certain Harmony between the
Properties of Nature in Milk; and therefore it has always been found by
Experience, to be the best Food for Children, and all young People;
administering proper Nourishment, in Equality, to all Parts: But on the
contrary, all sorts of Beer, Syder, and other fermented Drinks, are of a sour,
keen, or sharp Quality; and for this cause, being mixed with Milk, it turns or
separates the wheyish part from the thick; the same is to be understood, if
Children or others drink after eating of Milk, if they do not forbear a
convenient time, till the Stomach has made separation, and altered the
Property of it. Besides, the constant drinking of such Liquors do sour the
Stomach, and generate a keen or sharp Quality, which is apt to turn the Milk
into an hard, tough substance, and thereby puts Nature to great difficulty to
concoct or make Separation. Does not our daily Experience show us, that all
Curd of Milk is hard of Concoction, and burdensome to the Stomach? For this
Cause, many having used themselves to drink plentifully of strong Drinks, and
to the eating of compounded Food, which have so sowr'd the Stomach, and altered
it from its simplicity, that the eating of this friendly, harmless Food becomes
offensive to them, and disagreeing, especially to some particular People, whose
Stomachs are, as it were, naturally inclined to generate a sour Matter: For
this cause, if any shall drink immediately after eating of Milk, it will cause
them to puke up the thin, wheyish parts, whilst the hard substance remains in
the Stomach, which does foul, and hinder Concoction. For these Reasons, it is
much better for all Children, and young People, whose Food is chiefly Milk, to
drink Water, it being the most like Milk of any Drink, of a mild, gentle,
friendly Nature and Operation, which is farther manifested by its being mixed
with Milk; they mix or incorporate themselves as one entire Body, making no
variation, or separation, as other Liquors will; and therefore it has been
found by Experience, in all Ages, to be the best, and most natural Drink for
all People, but more especially for Women and Children, who are endued with
tender Spirits, and gentle Heats; and if their Meats and Drinks have not a near
Affinity, both in quality and quantity, to their Natures, it will quickly put
them out of Tune, and cause them to fall into Diseases, and then Nature will
become unequal in her Operations. Every like does, with highest diligence,
endeavor to beget its Simile, both in the Body and Mind: Water being in its
own nature so clean, simple, and innocent, that it does not only wash and
cleanse the Mouth thoroughly, and all the Vessels of the Stomach, from such
gross, thick Matter that does stick and furr them; but it does distill its moist
Nourishment into all parts of the Body, without making any noise, or causing an
unequal Motion, cooling and refreshing Nature; strengthens Concoction; thins
the Blood, causing it to circulate freely; makes the natural parts brisk and
lively. For this cause, those Women and Children that do constantly drink
Water, are not subject to so many Diseases as others whose practice is to drink
strong Liquors. We have but one sort of Bread, which is neither coarse nor
fine. We never change the Fashions of our Garments, nor deck them with
Superfluity; but they are plain, noble, and modest, sufficient to defend us
from the Injuries of the Elements. We use not many Words in our Buying and
Selling; neither do we praise the things we sell, beyond the true Value; nor
dispraise the things we buy, for Interest, or without understanding the true
Goodness, or Value: We flatter not those we get by, and speak lightly of better
Men: We suffer not our Commodities to be undervalued, and our selves to have
the Lie, without giving them Reproof, in hopes we shall get a Chap-man; nor are
we patient, when abused by our Chap-men, holding our peace for hopes of Gain;
neither are we moved to Passion for the like Affront, when Interest is not at
stake. Our Nobles, Governors, and Princes are not distinguished from the
meaner sort of People by their great Palaces, rich Clothing and Ornaments, or
number of Chariots, Footmen, Horses, and the like; they have no other Marks of
Distinction, but only their white Robe. Our Clergy do not command a Day to be
set apart for divine Worship, and suffer the Rich to make their Servants and
Cattle work, and take no notice of them, and punish the Poor for the like
Offense. We can send our Children to Market, to buy any Commodity, if they can
but speak plain, and not fear being wronged: Nay, we can send them to
Smithfield, to buy Horses; for we have no Jockies or Horse-Coursers amongst us,
who do make it their chief Business to sell counterfeit Wares: Neither do our
Leathern Doublets stock their Cows; that is, not to milk them in three or four
Days before they bring them to Market, or expose them to Sale; which does not
only put the Creatures to much pain, but it stints them, that they will give
but little Milk the following Summer. We do not make that Day which we set
apart for the Worship of God, a Day of Feasting, Drunkenness, and Gluttony:
Neither do we deck our selves with rich Ornaments, to draw unto us every gazing
Eye, which does render the Mind incapable of every good Work: Neither do we
live in Superfluity, and at the same time suffer our Poor to want Bread. For
this cause, those Days that are by us set apart for divine Worship, we, with
one Consent, do fast, or live more than ordinarily abstemious; which done,
every one casts up his Account; and what he does find he has saved of what his
usual Expense is, that he gives to the use of the Poor. Also we have many other
Fasting Days in the Year, as Christmas, Easter, Whitsuntide, and the like; at
which times we observe an extraordinary degree of Temperance; and what we save
thereby, we put into the Poor's Box. Also when there are any extraordinary
Bargains made between Buyers and Sellers, whereas the Men of Mode do agree to
have chargeable Treats, and superfluous Dinners, which we give to the Poor, and
many other things of this nature: And at the Years end, every Man casts up his
Account; and for every Pound he has increased his Stock, so many Six Pences he
gives into the common Treasure, for the use of the Poor; so that they are well
provided for, and Money to spare for other necessary Uses. What we formerly
spent in superfluous Feasts, Garments, and other Extravagances of this nature,
we now put to good Uses; as the Planting of Trees of all sorts, especially of
Fruit, which do supply us with Drink and Food, and bring forth without plowing
or sowing. Also we employ a great number of People in making of good Roads and
Highways, both for Foot and Horse, but especially for Foot, for we do accustom
our selves to go on foot; we seldom ride, except on extraordinary Occasions. We
have but one Apothecary in a City, and he is admitted to sell no other Cordial
but only good Wine; neither is Wine to be sold in any other place. We never
eat, or very rarely drink between Meals; our Set-Times of Eating are at Nine in
the Morning, and Five in the Afternoon: Neither do we sit an Hour or two
feeding on Varieties, nor entice one another by feigned Entreaties to eat more
than Nature requires; but every one of us take as much Food and Drink as is fit
and suitable to Nature, as Reason and Wisdom shall govern him. We eat many
sorts of Food, without any other Preparation, but only what Nature has done to
our hands; as Milk, various sorts of Herbs, Fruits, and sometimes Eggs: Neither
do we eat any of our Food hotter than our Blood, but for the most part quite
cold; especially in Summer, and moderate Seasons. We account our selves
Gluttons, if we do not feel our selves more pleasant, airy, brisk, and lively
after Eating, than before. We use our selves to gentle Exercises, in open airy
places. Our Beds are sweet, hard, and clean, and Chambers airy. We admit not
above two at most to lie in a Bed together, nor the Young with the Old, or the
Diseased with the Sound. Our Day-Garments are neither thick, nor thin; but of
the two, rather thin than thick. We count it an Evil to have our external
Members to glow with an unnatural Heat after Eating and Drinking. We prevent
scabby and Leporous Diseases by Temperance and Cleanness, and not by Physic.
Our Women observe the time of their Uncleanness, and separate themselves,
according to the great Law of Moses. Our Seers have good skill in curing
Diseases by Sympathy and Antipathy: They never give Advice, nor administer any
Medicine, before they have bowed themselves before the Altar, and enquired of
the Oracle of God in themselves. We esteem none fit for Physicians, but only
those that are, from their Radixes, born with natural Gifts, and afterward who
have learned themselves; nor esteem any Man for his Babylonical Gibberish. We
press every one, when they find themselves disordered either in Body or Mind,
to stand still, and cease as much as possible from Imaginations, or lending an
Ear to every Woman's Story or Medicine; but first call on the Lord, desiring
his Counsel; and whatsoever the Oracle, or divine Principle does show you,
(though it be the meanest of Medicines, as Herbs, Fruits, Seeds, Drugs, or
Minerals,) that be sure to do; as the Mother of Christ said to the Servants
that waited at the Marriage where Christ wrought his first Miracle, and made
Water Wine: What soever he bids you do, that do. Every mean thing becomes
effectual, where the Directions proceed from the right Fountain, and if Faith
and an innocent Life be not wanting. Also we prohibit our young People from
eating unripe Fruits, as Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Cherries, and the like; or
eating of them after full Meals, or between Meals, or when they have been
gathered and exposed to the gross Airs of Cities or Towns two or three Days:
Neither is it a Custom amongst us to compound ripe and unripe Fruits together,
nor lawful for any of us to eat Sweetmeats, or delicious Tarts, after we have
eaten sufficiently of other simple and natural Food. Our Custom will not admit
us to entreat our Friends to eat or drink beyond what is needful. We have not
forgot the great Affliction, and torturing Distempers we endured whilst we were
in Captivity, and under the Government of Pharaoh's Taskmasters, viz. under
the unequal Oppressions of the awakened Wrath, and divided Forms of Nature,
where each Property endeavors to get the Mastery; and therefore we do
continually shun, and arm our selves with the Armor of our Lord Jesus Christ,
viz. by taking up the Cross, and denying our selves those Egyptian Vanities and
Superfluities, which the common Enemy of Mankind does seek, with all cunning
Inventions, to enslave us again in worldly Lusts, that he may separate us from
our sovereign Good; but the Word of Truth is engraven in our Hearts, by whose
Power and Virtue we withstood his Temptations, and beware of his Snares in
time, and count it our chief Good that the Lord has, in his Eternal Mercy,
delivered us out of Captivity; therefore it behooves us to live soberly in this
present World. We desire always, and in all states, to submit our selves to the
good Pleasure of the Lord, for we do not know what is good, no farther than we
are guided by his Holy Spirit; it belongs to him to determine what is most
expedient for us, and his own Glory. We all hold this Maxim, That all that have
thoroughly profited themselves in the School of Christ, do daily beat down, or
keep under the Elemental Body, by denying themselves the Worldly Vanities
within. We do not give Names to our Children, nor imitate the Philosophical
Ancients, like Apes, without understanding the true Nature or Genius of the
Child, as to call them at a venture by such Names as do express a Deity,
whereas this Nature and Genius of the Child is quite contrary: This is not to
imitate our first Parents; Adam gave Names to every Creature, and Thing,
according to their Natures; that is, expressing their Natures and Properties:
He did not give Names to wild, savage Beasts, that did signify Cleanness, or
friendly, tractable Dispositions and Natures; nor call Sheep Lions, nor Lions
Sheep: The Prophet Isaiah says, Woe unto those that call Evil Good, and Good
Evil; being ignorant of the true Nature of things, and divine Mysteries, they
make no distinctions between Good and Evil. Adam called his Firstborn Cain:
Why did not he call him Abel? No, that would be to call a Devil a Saint, and a
Saint a Devil: Cain does sound forth and signify the strong Might and Power of
the Wrath and divided Forms of Nature, which had Dominion in him; and Abel
does, as we have told you before, signify the eternal Principle of God's Love,
viz. Cain imitates the fierce devouring Fire, and Abel the Light thereof: The
very same is to be understood of Ishmael and Isaac, and Esau and Jacob; the
elder does truly signify the consuming Fire, and the younger the Light
thereof; the first is the Father, and the second is the Son. The Ancients did
not therefore gather together all the good Names, which do express the holy
divine Power, and eternal Grace and Love of God in his second Principle, or
eternal Light, and call their Children by them at a venture; no, this would
have been great Impiety: Would not every sober Man count it sordid and vain to
call an Angel a Devil, and a Devil by the Name of an Angel, as most of the Men
of Egypt do at this day? They name and call their Children by Names expressing
the divine Virtue and Power, when as most of them do live under the Government
of the evil, unclean Nature, and the Spirit that does predominate in them is
fierce and wrathful, so that they call Good Evil, and Evil Good; which is far
off from imitating the holy Men of the first Ages. This does more clearly
appear by Abram, which does signify the original Wrath and wild Nature of this
World: Why did not his Parents call him Abraham, Emanuel, Grace, Hope, Charity,
Abel, Jacob, or Isaac? No, those Names were too sublime; but Abram did truly
sound forth and signify his inward and outward Nature: But in process of time,
when the Light of God's Grace and Eternal Mercy appeared to him, and that he
believed in God, which was accounted to him for Righteousness, then the Lord
said unto him, Thy Name shall no more be called Abram, but Abraham, which does
truly comprehend and signify both the first and second Tabernacle. The Lord
did not destroy or annihilate the Wrath and wild Nature; no, that must not be;
if there were no Fire, then there would'be no Light, as our Savior Christ
says in another Case, He came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. The
Lord did reinforce Abraham's Soul, and replenish it with his holy divine
Principle of Love and Light; and therefore his Name should no more be called
Abram, a Thorn, or wild Thistle; but Abraham, the Father of the Faithful. The
same Order, and changing of Names was continued till Christ was manifested in
the humane Nature, and afterward by all the divine Seers: Did not Christ change
St. Peter's Name, because of his fixed Faith; calling him Sephas, which
signifies a Stone, or Rock? And was not Saul called Paul after his Conversion?
The Ancients never changed Names, but first their Natures were changed: Christ
called Herod a Fox, which did truly signify his inward Nature, and what Spirit
did govern in him: The same is to be understood, when the wise Ancients gave
Names to their Children, Places, Cities, and other things; which Names did
always truly signify what Property or Quality did predominate in the Child or
Thing so named. This Knowledge is Angelical, which Man has lost, by suffering
his Desire and Will to enter into Vanity; and as the Name of each Creature,
which Adam gave them, does express their Properties and Nature, so the Name of
each Angel does express and signify their Office: The understanding each Name,
and what is signified thereby, does remain as a Mystery unto Mankind; which is
the original Language, or the true Language of Nature, the sound of each Word
or Name does declare what Property is predominant in it; which original
Language of Nature, Birds, and some other inferior Creatures, do retain to
this time, because they have not broken the Law of God in Nature, but have
lived in the Simplicity thereof; and though they are not endued with that noble
Faculty of Speech, nevertheless they can, by their general Tone and Cry, as
intelligibly communicate their Desires, and various Passions, as Love, Hate,
Hunger, Thirst, and the like, as Men can by their distinct Dialects, viz. by
altering and varying this one simple Tone, or Cry; as when they are hungry, or
want their Fellows, or if one particular Bird does know of some Food that his
Fellows are ignorant of, then he sends forth such a Tone or Sound, as does as
intelligibly acquaint all those of their own Kind, as Men can by discoursing
together; for every Tone and Cry, according to the various States, Wants, and
Conditions the Creature is in, such a Center or Property is awakened, and
stirred up; and that same Property of Nature does sign and carry the upper
Dominion in Sound, Tone, or Cry, which does intelligibly communicate and
incorporate with its Simile, and awaken the same Property in all those of their
own Kind that hear them; who are thereby made sensible of their Conditions and
Desires. Nay, there are some Creatures that have neither Voice nor Tone,
nevertheless they can communicate their Desires and Wants to their Fellows by a
mere Touch. All those, and many greater, and more sublime Gifts and Graces Man
has deprived himself of, by suffering his Desires and Will to enter into
Violence, Oppression, and Superfluity; changing and converting the natural use
of things to his own Self Ends, to advance Pride, Vainglory, and Gluttony, and
to accommodate his Lusts and Passions, which no other Creature has done;
therefore he is troubled and perplexed with a thousand Evils and Miseries, that
other Creatures are not subject to; the Consideration and true Sense thereof
does make my Heart to ache, and my Body to tremble, having a true Sense of Man's
miserable State; for wherever we go, if it be amongst Men, we see little else
but Wrath, Cruelty, and Oppression; as Swearing, Lying, Idle Jesting,
Drunkenness, Gluttony, and Worldly Discourses: But if a Man walk into loansome
Fields, amongst the Beasts, there all things are quiet and still, all Creatures
praising their Creator, according to the Capacity of each.

CHAP. XV.
The Voice of the Dumb, or the Complaints of the Creatures, expostulating with
Man, touching the cruel Usages they suffer from him.

THE Tyranny of Man over his Fellow Creatures, (the Root of which we have
discovered in the foregoing Chapters,) leads us a little more nearly to
consider the sad state and condition of those inferior Animals under his
savage Butcheries, and how ungrateful, as well as cruel, he is toward them;
for as most of them contribute to his well-being, either by bringing him in
Food, as Milk, Honey, butter, Cheese, Eggs, etc. or Raiment; as Wool, Furrs,
Skins: or Ease; as the Horse to carry him; the Ox to draw for him, and the
like, too tedious to enumerate: So is there scarce any of them, upon whom he
does not extend his Rage; and generally the more harmless and useful they are,
the more barbarously he deals with them: So that as their Groans ascend up to
Heaven, so their Cries fill the Earth; and methinks their inarticulate
Lamentations should reach to the Ears of our Minds, and respectively vent their
several Dolours in some such kind of Expostulations.

The Complaint of the Cows and Oxen.
Cruel and hard-hearted Man! Were thou constituted our great Creator's Deputy,
and Vice roy of this Universe of sublunary Beings, that thou should play the
Tyrant and the Epicure, and domineer with rigor over all the rest of its
Inhabitants? Do thou in any kind imitate thy Sovereign, from whom thou do
derive thy Title? Is not he good, and bountiful, and merciful to all the Works
of his Hands, and the Preserver of the whole Creation? and dare thou take
upon thee to a Destroyer, a Killer, and daily Practiser of Cruelty? Know
thou not, that we inferior Creatures were not given thee as a Prey, that thou
might dispose of us absolutely at thy lustful and irregular pleasure, but
entrusted to thy Conduct and Oversight, to be subservient unto thee, to
minister to thy Necessities, to employ the Faculties of thy Soul with a devout
Contemplation on our numberless Numbers, various Shapes, distinct, and
wonderful Natures, etc. and thereby ravish thee with Thoughts of Iehovah's
infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, that has formed, governs, and
conserveth so many Millions of wonderful Beings? And will thou, instead of this
noble, serene, and quiet study of worthy Faculties so divine as thou art endued
with, forget thy Duty, thy Office, and all Obligations, as to be the first that
disturbs this blessed Harmony, and by thy Sin, and Folly, and Madness, set all
the Creation into a Tumult, and a Combustion, and exercise thy fierce Passions
upon us lower Graduates in this mighty Academy, and worry, and kill, and devour
us.

We are God's Creatures, and by his divine Power have our subsistence, he has
formed us, and given us Shapes suitable to our inward Natures, by his admirable
Wisdom, and subjected us under his good Law in Nature, which we have not at any
time transgressed: With patience we endure the Summer's scorching Heat, and the
Winter's Snow: We wear our own Clothes, even those natural Coverings bestowed
upon us, as the Livery of our Maker: We are not fond of Variety, when one Suit
answers all the Ends of Nature as well, or better; much less are we so vain, to
glory in our Shame, be proud of that which should reproach us with Sin, and
value our selves, because we have got other Creatures Excrements upon our
Backs: Amongst us there are no quarrels about Gentility; nor do we esteem or
despise one another, because our Coats are of different colors, and our Horns
not all of a length: We have all our Food in common, and never grutch or
grumble that one eats more, or daintier than the other: We call nothing our
own, but what is in our mouths; We all drink out of one Cup: Our Drink is never
too new, nor yet so old as to be sour; nor have we any hankering Inclinations
after other Liquors: Our Beds are always ready: Nor are we vexed with the care
for to morrow; but enjoy what is present, and are satisfied: We admire not your
stately Structures; nor can our Eyes be dazzled with the Witchcraft of Gold: The
Stall and the Crib serve us as well as Palaces; and all our delight is to
behold the pleasant green Fields, sprouting up their delicious Herbs and Grass
into our Mouths, and view the gliding Streams, or murmuring Fountains, ready to
supply our Thirst.

We observe our Times and Seasons of Generation; and as we have no inclinations
thereunto, until able to conceive; so as soon as we have conceived, we will no
longer endure to accompany with our Males; nor do we make a sport of, or
endeavor to pleasure our selves with that great Mystery of Nature, but only in
due Seasons, for to bring forth our own Likenesses, which is the Will of the
Creator, for the continuation of our own kind: Nor are we tempted with Beauty,
Honor Riches, or any other thing, to act contrary to the Law of Nature: That
troublesome Passion, called Love, as it is a fond, foolish Excess of Desire or
Dotage, over us has no power; yet we love, and are tender of our little Ones*
till they can provide for themselves, and then we leave them to the Hand of
Providence: We raise no Wars or Tumults, nor contrive treacherous Plots, and
Sham-Plots against each other, or against Men, We have no Weapons, but such as
God and Nature have endued us with for our particular defense: And if at any
time we do fight, (for which Man must justly bear the Fault; for if he had not
transgressed the Divine Law, we never had had any such inclination at all,) our
Battles are sudden, and not premeditated Murders; nor are our Numbers unequal,
but one to one; and prefently are reconciled, and again in Peace: But though we
live thus innocently, in the obedience to God's Law in Nature, and have not
done any thing whereby to awaken his Wrath, or draw down Judgments on our
selves; yet we suffer many, and great Miseries, Oppressions, and Tyranny; which
comes to pass through the Transgression and Fall of our Prince and Governor,
(viz. Man;) he has violated the divine Law in Nature, and is become
disobedient; whereby he has opened the Floodgates of Wrath, and enthralled
himself in many Miseries, and inured himself to all kinds of unjust Cruelties,
and makes us groan under heavy Burdens; and all we can do, is too little to
give him satisfaction. We COWS give him our pleasant Milk; which is not only a
most Sovereign Food of it self, but being altered, and variously dressed, makes
a great number of delicate and wholesome Dishes; but this will not content
them; for after we have for several Years twice a day yielded them plentiful
Meals of Milk, and every Year (for the most part) a Calf; which they have
rended away from us before its time, to our great affliction; (for it is
unnatural to take away any Creature's Young, before it can provide for it
self;) when they have thus bercaved us of the Fruit of our Wombs, and killed,
and eaten them, yet sometimes, through Covetousness, notwithstanding all these
Benefits, they will half starve us; and if it chance that any one of us do not
give good store of Milk, and bring them forth as many Calves as their Avarice
expects, then our cruel Egyptian Masters cry, Hang her, knock her of the head;
what is she good for? Counting nothing good, but what brings in great profit to
satisfy their Lusts; and when thus, through many Miseries we have sustained
from them diverse Years, then what Reward do they give us? Why, truly they will
put us into a good Pasture, and then we think this is pure kindness, and begin
to forget our former Injuries; but as soon as we have gathered our Flesh, and
begin to be plump, and fat, then they swap us away for a little Money to the
Butcher, and he knocks us of the Head, and cuts our Throats, and our kind
Masters perhaps devour a piece of us; and if our Flesh prove not so delicate as
they would have it, which is their fault, then they curse us again, when we are
in their Bellies.

And we that are Oxen, do they not in our Youth cruelly cut us, and deprive us
of the benefit of Generation? Do they not gall our Necks almost to the Bones,
with their hard and heavy Yoaks? Do not we draw their burdensome Carriages
through the deepest Dirt, and stubborn Clay? And do we not help to Till the
most stubborn Earth, that it may bring forth the Corn and Fruit for your
sustenance? And many a hard days work do we endure, until our very Hearts ache;
whilst our unmerciful Drivers prick us with us their sharp Goads, and beat us
without pity or humanity; and at last, when we are able to do their Drudgery no
longer, they being not yet satisfied with our Labors, will fatten us up for
the Slaughter, and feast themselves with their Carcasses, and accommodate
themselves with our Skins for Leather, to make them Shoes and Boots, and other
Necessaries. Nay, our Males, whom they suffer to remain capable of Generation,
besides being, as it were, Pimps to them, and making them serve all the Cows in
the Parish, or Lordship, for twopence apiece: They have another wicked Trick,
to bait them with Dogs, and there the Rabble, (more Beasts than those they come
to see,) meet, and shout, and are merry, to see the poor Creatures tear, and
worry, and kill one another; and this they call Sport and Pastime. Nay, of
late, in some Countries, as in Spain, the Men have no more Wit nor Grace, but
they will venture to bait us themselves; and this Fashion they are bringing up,
and setting on foot in other Countries; and if, when by their rashness, and ill
practice they have enraged us, we do with our natural Arms send off Dons and
Gallantillo's packing, it is no more than they deserve, since they are so
willing to expose themselves to die Folly's Martyrs.

Thus all of us live in great Slavery most part of our Lives, far below that
generous Liberty wherein our great and good Creator had estated us by his grand
Charter of Nature, and at last we die both untimely and unwillingly, many of us
cut off in Youth, or in the prime of our strength, to please the Palates of
extravagant People, whose Lusts nothing but Flesh can satisfy: Have we not
then just reason, O Man! to complain of thy Injustice? Have we not cause to
keep back and restrain those daily renewed Fountains of liquid Crystal,
wherewith we sustain you; to shake off your Yoaks, and, inspired with Rage and
Revenge, tear you to pieces with our Horns? Yet we do none of these, but
continue our drudging Services, and perpetual Tribute to the Milk pail, and
submit our selves to your Knives, and your Axes; and yet neither your own
Cruelties, nor our submissive Patience, can mollify you into greater
Moderation; and can we choose then but send up our Complaints against you in a
silent Eloquence to Heaven? And can you expect any thence in return, but
Showers of Judgments upon your Heads, since you have thus presumptuously opened
the Fountains of Wrath, and brought in War and Destruction upon us?

The Sheep's Complaint.
If Benefits might expect other Returns than Injuries, and Innocence be thought
worthy of Indemnity and Protection, we should certainly enjoy as much Felicity
as any part of the Creation whatsoever. For can there be any Creature that more
liberally contributes to the Life and Accommodation of Man; or that is of a
softer and more gentle Temper, or behaves it self more innocently toward all
the rest of its Fellow Creatures? For our Creator has endued us with a meek,
friendly Nature; and we are contented to live as we were made; the various
sweet Herbs, and Flowers that grow on the tops of the Mountains, afford us
ample satisfaction; and we are delighted in Solitariness and Cleanness; hence
all the good and wise Men of old, always compared good-natured Men unto us: We
are free from Covetousness; for our Desires exceed not the Necessities of
Nature: Our Imaginations do not wander after the Varieties of foreign Regions;
nor have we any occasion to travel out of our own native Country, into other
Climates; but sometimes we are compelled, and forced away by our covetous
Keepers; but it has always been the worse for those that transported either
us, or our Wool; so that it seems, wherever we come, we are a Blessing; yet
whithersoever they carry us, we need no Interpreter; for we are not acquainted
with the Babylonical Language, where one understands not another. Distances
of Places, or various Elevations of the Pole, do not cause our Speech to
differ; for we can as familiarly converse with those of our own kind, when
removed a Thousand Leagues off, as if we had still remained on Cotswold Hills,
or Salisbury Plain; for we are not subject to the Tyranny of Schoolmasters, or
the Pedantry of Grammar, nor troubled to spend seven years under the filthy
punishment of the Rod, or more cleanly Discipline of the Ferula, merely to
learn a few Gibberish Words; but we bring into the world with us one simple and
general Tone, or Sound, which we can vary and alter according to the degrees of
our Spirits, Affections, and Passions: When we call for our strayed Lambs, it
is after one manner distinctly understood by those of our Kind; and when we
miss our Fellows, it is another; but still to them intelligible, that it is to
such a purpose; and so, when we call our Fellows into the Cornfieldsd, or when
we have need of Pasturage, still we send forth peculiar Tones, or Bleats. Our
Food, and our Drink is all simple, and natural; and therefore we are seldom
sick; and if we are, the chief cause thereof, is our Shepherds and Guides; who,
for Covetousness of Gain, will half starve, and founder us one half of the
year, and then afterward, in the declining part of the year, when all Grass
grows weak, gross, and full of Phlegm, then they put us into fresh Cornfields,
and other Pastures; whereupon, those Diseases which were contracted for want of
proper food, and by the unskilful management of our Guides, do manifest
themselves sometimes by breaking out with the Scab, and various other Diseases.
And also, when years happen very wet, especially when store of Rain comes in
August or September, and causes Land-floods, then if our Guides be not skilful,
and very careful of us, we suffer Epiaemick Diseases; for those of our kind are
so tendernatur'd, and so equally tempered, that we cannot bear any Extremes
without manifest prejudice to our Healths, more especially excessive Moisture;
for we are Phlegmatic Sanguino by our Natures, and a little inclined to
Melancholy; for this Reason, very wet, dripping Seasons, especially in the Fall
of the year, prove dangerous to us; and therefore, at such times, our Owners
ought to keep us pretty long in our Folds, and to feed us on the highest
Grounds, that so the sweet Influences of the Sun and Elements may dry and
exhale that gross Moisture which the Night produces, before we feed thereupon;
also they should then give us some Hay or Corn in our Folds, which would not
only dry up those moist Humors, but strengthen our Spirits, and enable us to
withstand those malignant Dews; But most of our Keepers are altogether ignorant
of our Nature, and so not only suffer us to fall, but by their ill conduct
precipitate us into many Inconveniences; which, if we were left to the dictates
of our own Instinct by Nature, we should avoid; for we naturally delight on
high ground, as Mountains, Downs, and high Corn Fields, and there we are very
healthy, never afflicted with the tortures of the Stone, the trembling Palsy,
the meager Consumption, the idle Gout, or the lascivious POX; we need not your
Bagnio's or Hot-Houses; we never are troubled with your horrid, purging, and
vomiting Potions, nor crammed with Bolus and Turpentine; our Food and Drink is
truly natural, and innocent, and suffer all Changes of the Elements and Seasons
without complaining: Our Love is as it were universal; and War, and Strife, and
Contention are strangers to our Folds: Our Females are chaste; our Males free
from Jealousy; and our young Ones are at once the Emblems of Innocence, and
harmless Sport, and Recreation; Cleanness and Simplicity dwell in the Root of
our Lives, and the fierce, wrathful Nature terrifies and troubles our Spirits;
for which cause Wolves, Dogs, Foxes, Bears, Lions, etc. all Creatures in whose
Radix the Wrath of God and Nature does predominate, are our sworn Enemies.

We are also very profitable to those that keep us; for every Year we bring
them a crop of fine, soft Wool, which covers the Nakedness of our Princes, who
ofttimes become proud by our Spoils; it is from us a most advantageous
Staple-Commodity is raised, whereby whole Countries support themselves, and by
which Multitudes of Merchants grow rich; nay, our very Dung or Excrement is so
rich, that it causes the Ground to bring forth abundance of Corn: But
notwithstanding all these obligations, our unreasonable Taskmasters (Men) are
not contented; but after they have yearly plundered us, both of our native
Raiment, and the Fruit of our Bodies, (our sportive young ones,) and made the
most they can of us living, as soon as our Females become super-annuated, and
not able every Spring to furnish their voluptuous Tables with a Lamb, they call
them Old Crones, and esteem them little better than Dogs and Cats; but if they
imagine they can make Money of us, they will for a small time Regale, or
flatteringly feast us with store of Pasture; and when they think we are fat
enough to gratify their extravagant Desires and Appetites, then are we sold,
driven, abused, and finally have our Throats cut, and our Bodies quartered, as
if we had committed Treason.

Now tell us seriously, Can there be any thing more ungrateful, cruel, and
tyrannical? Do such dealings look like Man in his first state? Do not our
innocent Cries, and dying Groans under your merciless hands, penetrate the very
Heavens, and awaken even the center of Wrath? For no Violence can be done, but
Wrath must have the chief hand in it; and it is also certain, if Men did not
live in the power of the wrathful Nature, there would be no killing; for it is
contrary both to the humane and divine Nature to destroy; and for this cause it
is contrary to the Nature, not only of our kind, but to most other clean
Beasts, to eat Flesh, or kill and prey upon any of their Fellow Creatures. But
on the other side, those Beasts that are unclean, and whose predominant Quality
stands in the wrathful Nature, are all, or the most of them, led by a natural
instinct, and inclination, to kill and prey upon some others of the Creation;
nay, upon Man himself, if they find him at an advantage; because those bloody,
ravenous Dispositions are planted in the very Center of their Lives; but those
of our kind, are in their Radix of near affinity to the undepraved, humane
Nature. And therefore we will be bold, since we have obtained so much honor
and liberty to plead our own innocent Cause, and tell our Governors, viz.
(Men,) this serious Truth, That all Violence, as beating, hurrying, hunting,
hacking, baiting, killing, fighting, rage, and contention whatsoever, be the
occasion what it will, does arise from the Fountain of Marah, the Root of
Wrath, and Bitterness in Nature. And if our Lord (Man) were so innocent, wise,
and simple-hearted, as not to hurry, kill, and destroy those of our kind, and
others of the like nature, then all Wars and Contention between those of his
own kind, would cease; but so long as that terrible, fierce, wrathful Spirit
predominates in Mankind, there will be continual Wars, Rumors of Wars, Plots,
Conspiracies, and horrid Murders and Assassinations amongst themselves; nor
can we hope to escape their bloody hands, but our Lives must be subject to all
kind of Miseries, and we must be contented to be led, not only to the Shearer,
but also to the Slaughterhouse in silence, as well as Innocence, and shall not
lift up our Voice to repine or complain (to them) any more, since they served
that great, and most holy Shepherd in the same manner, even the Savior of the
World, that was so far from Killing, that he laid down his Life for his Sheep.

The Horses Complaint against their Masters.
Has not the Creator of all Beings endued us with great Spirits, and strong
Bodies; excellent Shapes, and delicate Forms; not only pleasant to behold, but
of great use to Mankind; bringing to them, by our Labors; a thousand daily
Benefits? By our Strength we tear and plow up the stubborn Earth, and harrow
her obdurate Clods: We carry them through Dirt and Mire, swim with them through
the Waters, and bear them over dangerous places, and often hazard our Lives
with willingness to save theirs: We, with great Toil and Labor, draw their
Luggage in Carts and Wains; and their fat, lazy Paunches in Chariots and
Coaches: In Cases of Expedition they ride us Post, and by our help remove
themselves above an hundred Miles in a very few Hours. All this we do, and are
contented to do; but what is reasonable, and agreeable to our Natures, will not
satisfy the unreasonable Desires and Lusts of our Masters; but through many
Abuses, and cruel Strains, and immoderate Labors, which they force us to, even
beyond the power and strength of our Nature, they have so wounded our Spirits,
and destroyed our Natural Heat, that although our Creator has endued us with
great Spirits, and Bodies strong and healthful, beyond most of our
Fellow Creatures, yet we are now become liable to as many Diseases almost as
our intemperate Masters are themselves.

To enumerate all the Grievances we suffer, would be endless: Some of our
Tyrants will gallop us many Miles, till we are all over in a Foam and Sweat,
and then tie us at an Ale-house-door, in the cold Dirt, whilst they are
Carouzing and Huzzaing, like mad Devils, with their roaring Companions, and
never regard us, who in the mean time become foundered, or catch the Fashions,
or some other Disease, that perhaps hangs upon us as long as we live; and when
at Midnight they have finished their Revels, up they get again on our Backs,
and switch and spur through Thick and Thin, over Hedge and Ditch, ready to
break both our Necks and their own at every step, as if the Devil drove them.
Others lead us with excessive Burdens; and if we go not as fast as they would
have us, then they plow our Sides with their armed Heels, and beat us without
any Reason or Humanity: Nay, some of our Drivers are so possessed with a
devilish violent Spirit, that for getting the value of Six Pence, they will
whip and beat us like Furies, and make us draw or carry such excessive
Burdens, that we strain our Eyes out of our Heads, and break our very Backs;
and if we complain, as oft-times we do, by our unwillingness to go, then they
will not only belabour us with their Whips and their Cudgels, but curse us with
a thousand horrid Execrations, and many devilish Wishes; which sometimes do
awaken the very Wrath of Nature in us, and makes us sullen, cross, and
stubborn; and then they abuse us yet more.

Others make use of us to hunt our Fellow Creatures; and riding us excessively,
destroy many of us in that Sport, as they wickedly call it. There are another
sort of things called Idle Men, or Gentlemen, (but nothing gentle do we find
from them,) who finding some of us endued by God with great Celerity, and
Swiftness of Foot, they put us upon Running of Races one with another, for to
gratify their foolish Vanity, Pride, and Covetousness. Likewise when Ambition,
Malice, Revenge, or some other wrathful Passions, set Princes and Nations at
variance; or when Insurrections and Rebellions are raised, and Wars are waged;
though we have neither hand in the Quarrel, nor are like to get any share of
Honor or Spoil by the Victory, yet we are forced to do a great part of the
Service; and with the hazard of our Lives, rush into the Battle; and by being
used to the Martial Sounds of Trumpets, Drums, and Guns, we become as mad and
outrageous as our Riders, and seem to take delight in those Violences and
Confusions; and yet, after all our Services, sometimes our Riders, in hard
Sieges, will kill and eat us: And many times, when we grow old, we are knocked
on the Head, and made Dogs-meat; our Days shortened without any Consideration of
our past Merits, and our murdered Carcases given to feed a Company of ravenous
Hounds.

Is it not hard that we should be thus dealt with, and be made to undergo such
terrible Slavery, as sometimes when former unreasonable Labors have drawn out
our Eyes, yet even then no Rest, no Compassion is extended to us; but, blind as
we are, we are put into the Mill, and there forced to drudge out the Remainder
of our Life in a Circle of Misery? Have we not just Reason to complain of such
cruel Usage, seeing we are the Delight and Pleasure of most Men, and the
Companions of Princes? And if we that are their Favorites endure such
Hardships from them, what can other Creatures expect? Nay, for all they pretend
to admire and love us, yet they treat us worse than other Creatures: The Sheep
and the Cows live at ease; and Sheepherds are much more compassionate,
tender-spirited People, than those that have the Government of us, for when
their Lords are pleased to prepare them for the Slaughter, they put them into a
goodly Pasture, where they have Rest and Plenty; and when they are grown fat,
though they kill them, yet they afford them an honorable Burial; interring
their Carcases in their own Paunches, and mixing their dead Flesh with good
Liquor, and the precious Juice of the Grape, and fragrant Spices: But when we
have spent all our youthful Days in over-hard Labor, and continual Travel, and
suffered so many Inconveniences from Man, and for his sake contracted many
Diseases; then, to make us amends, when we are almost ready to starve, without
ever cherishing us up, they knock us on the Head, an fling our Corpse to the
worst of Dogs, viz. filthy, ravenous, bawling Hounds. This is our Reward
amongst the Sons of Men.

But let Man know this for a certain Truth, That the Groaning of that Creature
that suffers Wrong, is the beginning of Pain and Torment to him that does it;
and though we are dumb, and cannot call to our Creator after the manner of Men,
with dissembling Hearts, and lying Tongues, yet we send up our Petitions to him
after another Method, and in a natural way, and are sure to be heard; for we
move the Principles of Nature by a certain sympathetical Operation, which
awakens the Wrath, and draws down Judgments on the Oppressors.

For most of the Sons of Men are deceived, to think that it is no Evil to abuse
and tyrannize over the i^feriour Creatures, as though we had no sense or
feeling of our Pains. Are not we the Work of the great Creator's Hand? And
though we are not so highly graduated in Nature as Man, yet we serve him (for
the most part much more truly and constantly) in our station, for his Honor
and Glory: Do we not proceed from the very same Earth Man did? Are we not
compounded of the sevenfold Nature as well as he? Is there any Element wanting
in us; and do not we contain the true Nature and Property of them all? Is it
not by the invisible Spirit, and wonderful Power of our Creator, that we live,
and move, and have our Being? Are we not the Sons of the Stars and Elements,
even as Man himself? It Is true, we are not endued with the divine Principle of
Light, nor have we immortal Souls, as Men have; therefore our Creator does not
require that of us, as he does of Man, who is the complete Image of God and
Nature, endued with Gifts divine as well as natural, and in every particular
fitted to be a Prince and Governor; but he has not stood in, nor kept to that
essential Law, but proved disobedient to the Voice of Wisdom, and entered with
his Desires, not only into the Nature of the wild, savage Beasts of Prey, but
awakened the fierce Wrath, and thereby deprived himself of the divine
Understanding, and true Method of Governing, and would fain be an absolute
Monarch, or arbitrary Tyrant; making nothing at his pleasure to break the Laws
of God, and invade and destroy all the Rights and Privileges of the inferior
Creatures. But our Creator will retalliate all our Wrongs; nay, the very Arts
of Violence used unto us, naturally carry with them their own Punishment;
therefore all those that use us roughly, and oppress us, and such as are of
killing Occupations, are generally headstrong, violent, surly, and cruel.

But though we do undeservedly suffer many Miseries, this is our Comfort, our
Lives are thereby shortened; and when Death comes, we are totally released from
all our Slavery, and hard Labors: But it is not so with our tyrannick Masters;
their Works will follow them to Eternity, and they cannot escape divine
Vengeance, if they do not, on this side the Grave, repent and forsake all their
sinful Vanities and Oppressions. Therefore, O Man! consider thy Ways, and thy
End, and what Principle is predominant in thee; and if thou expectest to die
the Death of the Righteous, remember -- That the righteous Man is merciful to
his Beast.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Herbs, the proper Seasons of gathering them, and Ways to preserve them, so
as they may not lose their Virtues.

GReat is the Excellency of Herbs, Plants, and Vegetables, both for Food and
Physic, and almost innumerable their Virtues; but two things are especially to
be regarded: 1. That they be gathered in their proper time: And 2. So to
preserve them after they be gathered, that when you have occasion to use them,
they may not have lost their Virtue.

As to the first, We read, Genesis I. 14. that God said, Let there be Lights in
the Firmaments of Heaven, to divide the Day from the Night; and let them be for
Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and for Years. And V. 16. God made two
great Lights, the greater to rule the Day, and the lesser to rule the Night.
And the wise King witnesses, That there is a proper Time and Season for doing
all Things under the Sun. As the Creator made all things in a certain Measure
of Time, so all things, both Celestial and Terrestrial, do vary and alter
according to Time: The heavenly Bodies, the Planets, have their Times of
Strength and Weakness; sometimes near the Earth, sometimes remote, sometimes in
friendly places of the Heavens, and agreeable to their own Natures; thence
called their Houses, their Ioys, their Exaltations; at other times in Signs of
contrary Qualities, which are called their Detriment, or their Fall; sometimes
by friendly Aspects they are assisted, and fortified; at other times, by
Malevolent Rays they are debilitated; and hence they have variously at several
Seasons respectively, their good and evil Influences and Operations in all
inferior Bodies; especially such as are assimulated unto them, and thence said
to be governed by them.

Does not the Excellency of Vocal and Instrumental Harmony consist in a proper
Measure of Time? And are not the Complexions, Shapes, Forms, Inclinations, and
Dispositions, both of Men and Beasts, good or evil, handsome or the contrary,
according to the time of Conception and Birth, and according as the benevolent
or malevolent Configurations of the superior Constellations are at that time.
Also the Lord has ordained a certain measure and number of Days for the Females
of all sorts of Creatures to go with Young, viz. between the Conception and
Birth: And is there not a certain Time and Season for the Sowing of all Grains
and Seeds? And as every thing is timed, the Effects are better or worse: Also
there is a proper Time for the cutting of Corn and Grass, and gathering of
Fruits. Every Man and Woman have their Time of Strength and Weakness, and all
Beasts have the same; so have all Herbs, Fruits, and Grains their Seasons, and
proper Times, when their Virtues are at the highest; therefore I have thought
it convenient to give some Directions for the gathering of some of the most
material Herbs; and when those Constellations that govern them are strong, and
well dignified, either by House, Exaltation, or friendly Configuration with the
Fortunes, or by being Angular, and the like; at which times all Vegetations are
in their flourishing state, and will prove the more effectual in the curing and
preventing of Diseases, more especially if the subsequent Rules of drying and
preserving of them afterward be observed.

But this is to be noted, that sometimes it happens that some sorts of Herbs
cannot be gathered in two or three Years time under good Influences, by reason
their Significators are debilitated; but if Herbs are gathered and preserved as
we direct, they will keep two or three Years, but the first and second Year
they are best. It is also to be noted, that on the friendly Aspects and
Conjunctions of the Planets, the secret Virtues of Herbs are multiplied and
manifested; and if the Physician, or other User of them, knows them, and have
Judgment to use them, they may perform great Cures: But if they shall take the
gross, flegmy Herbs, without distinction, and administer them,
without-separating the crude, earthy parts from the more spiritous and
balsamic Virtues, they often prove destructive rather than sanative;
increasing the Malignity of the Diseases and Venoms in the Body, rather than
expelling them. Would it not be very easy both for the Learned, and also for
the Unlearned, even every one, to get an infallible Medicine, and cure every
Disease, if it were true which the Ancients have left on Record of Herbs,
appropriating one Herb to cure forty or fifty several Diseases, and Defects of
Nature; which do generally deceive all those that do rely upon and follow their
Receipts and Traditions, as shall more at large be demonstrated from a true
Ground in Nature.

Here follows the Tables for the gathering of Herbs in their proper Times.

A TABLE showing the apt times to gather Herbs Astrologically, that is, when
the Planets that govern them are dignified, and in friendly Aspects, being here
calculated for Nineteen years.
Herbs under Saturn.
April and May
Buckthorne,) Plantane,) Comfry, Cross-wort, Elm-Tree, Flexweed, Fumitory,
Water-fern, Peach-Tree, Snake-weed,
May and June
Arsmart, Buckthorn, Clowns,) Woundwor.) Seatica Creeses, Hearts ease, Horse
tail, Knapweed, Knot-grass, Mullen, Redbeets, Solomon's seal, Servis Tree,
Shepherds purse Stinking glad Vine Tamarishtree Throughleaf
June and July
Amaranthus, Byfoyle, Blewbottle, Wild Campions Dodderofthime Goutwort,
Hemlock, Henbane, Nightshade, Rupture wort, Spleenwort, Woundwort,
August and September.
Bistote, Devils bit, Pellitory of the Oak,
October and November.
Black thorn, Hemp, Hawk weed, Loose strife, Medler, Moss, Popler tree, Quince
tree,
December.
Ivy, Bl. Hellibore,
Ann. Dom April May. June. July. Aust. Sept. October. Novem December. 1683 14
23 2 11 12 4 23 6 30 25 13 14 15 15 8 15 24 1684 4 14 19 29 11 21 6 17 19 1 29
9 19 27 15 24 1685 13 22 2 11 22 23 13 14 2 8 19 9 16 29 25 1686 4 13 11 21 21
7 11 16 20 15 24 6 13 16 4 1687 4 14 2 21 7, 12 8 20 22 6 22 28 7 17 3 1688 24
22 1 19 5, 17 6 19 8 29 4 9 20 14 1689 9 30 18 2 19 7 25 14 28 23 21 26 26 1690
5 16 22 26 7 26 21 6 31 2 19 24 1691 1 2^ 5 6 5 22 1 24 7 20 12 24 1692 21 2 16
19 20 24 20 9 22 1693 17 13 17 19 28 6 30 12 28 21 5 22 1694 12 29 6 16 9 5 10
11 1 24 9 10 16 24 1695 6 24 17 24 12 21 29 4 5 10 23 28 1696 10 5 13 30 21 5
30 1 2 10 17 3 15 25 8 14 1697 9 10 18 5 1 13 23 14 28 14 27 School 8 10 19 31 3
21 2 25 10 26 28 21 22 1699 6. 8 24 1 21 30 12 8 10 13 21 28 1 8 1700 2 20 11
12 24 27 23 6 19 20 18 29 3 19 21 1701 4 4 26 9 25 3 8 9 3 20 1 21

Herbs under Jupiter.
April and May
Bill-berries, Chervil, Cheas-nut, Scurvy Grass.
May and June
Alexander, Avens, Balm, Copmary, Cinquefoyl, Dogs-grass, Endive, Rosos,
White-beets, Wood-betony,
June and July
Agremony, Asparagus, Burriage, Clove-Gilliflowers, Dock, Fig Tree, House-leek,
Long-wort, Sage, Samphire, Sucory,
August and September.
Hazle-tree,
October and November.
Horse-tongue, Liver-wort,
Ann. Dom April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. 1683 19 2 9
29 27 9 16 25 7 5 31 17 14 23 1684 5 22 27 11 31 29 12 24 29 15 13 29 1685 5 24
29 20 30 31 6 31 1 12 30 16 4 13 1686 13 24 5 4 12 24 12 15 1687 9 6 21 12 27
28 29 3 10 11 23 1688 9 6 25 29 1 12 18 2 1689 4 24 25 18 12 13 16 7 21 28 6 4
7 10 1690 6 10 11 9 20 18 27 3 9 25 28 1691 15 21 25 19 23 6 14 23 11 1692 20
30 7 27 24 27 2 13 5 14 27 3 19 14 1693 15 24 13 14 27 13 1 4 7 3 5 1694 30 28
29 30 19 6 20 23 2 4 6 28 18 27 1695 12 19 21 3 3 4 30 17 31 7 9 17 5 9 1696 26
9 23 9 13 3 5 17 4 12 11 12 18 22 9 1697 15 15 28 20 21 28 20 27 29 14 27 School
11 29 16 31 17 22 5 26 19 24 1699 5 7 18 23 1 21 5 7 10 14 1700 3 10 3 28 7 3
22 24 30 31 8 1701 9 15 26 10 9 15 16 17 15 6 9 2 18

Herbs under Mars.
June and July.
Thistle, Cotton Thistle, Alheale, Barberries, Cardus Benedictus, Buck, Doves
foot, Dragones, Flex-weed, Fursbush Garlic Master-wort, Pepper-wort, Ground
pine, Rest-harrow, Round docks
August.
Ground Bassil Bucher-broom, Broom, Hawthorn Nettles, Rubarb,
September.
Flee-wort, Mustard, Taper-wort, Wormwood,
October and November.
Hawk-weed, Madder, Onions, ^in,
Ann. Dom June. July. August. Septem. October. Novem. 1683 27 15 12 21 14 15 26 7
11 1684 7 11 4 21 21 24 13 25 26 1685 7 15 23 1 25 19 1686 2 13 29 14 18 2 30
1687 5 15 4 10 23 29 9 11 1688 28 19 15 24 1 18 1689 12 25 19 28 17 30 29 7
1690 9 14 7 4 30 7 17 26 28 1691 29 6 21 8 9 11 31 17 1692 7 13 4 28 20 25 21
11 18 1693 4 10 22 4 8 8 27 1694 6 18 13 5 18 1695 29 2 6 8 17 30 1696 6 13 21
9 28 9 25 17 1 22 19 1697 5 20 28 5 6 12 21 29 6 10 School 3 9 12 28 18 28 13 12
1699 0 00 21 5 7 5 1 28 1700 0 21 26 3 28 30 1701 9 18 26 5 9 4 3

Herbs under Sol.
April, May and June.
One blade, Butter bur, Angelica, Burnet, Cellindine, Eyebright, Pimpernel,
Rose a solis, Rosemary, Rue. Wall-nut-trees,
June and July.
St. John's Wort, Marigolds, Misselto, Small centry, Tormentile.
August and Septem.
Ash-tree, Bay Tree Piony, Saffron,
October and November.
Juniper-berry bush,
Ann. Dom April. May. June. July. August. Septem. October. Novem. 1683 18 23 27 7
29 19 6 16 1 14 31 8 15 1684 6 22 1 9 18 23 14 19 15 22 27 26 1685 16 20 24 15
29 2 6 16 9 28 1686 5 3 20 28 7 13 18 31 15 20 8 14 1687 2 29 16 26 11 20 27 4
28 29 3 18 1688 10 16 28 10 13 16 24 28 9 3 1689 4 26 22 30 14 17 12 4 21 17
1690 6 11 13 19 21 10 20 25 26 30 1 2 9 1691 26 10 5 27 7 11 16 5 14 1692 9 7
31 13 16 26 22 23 18 29 2 11 20 1693 11 18 20 6 22 28 1 13 30 30 5 18 1694 3 12
20 3 6 18 9 26 4 8 11 1695 2 24 9 20 8 22 23 5 6 26 1696 1 26 5 20 3 21 28 23
13 18 2 10 1697 5 18 28 12 2 4 18 13 12 20 15 School 7 19 7 31 12 29 2 5 18 25 9
19 26 1699 3 7 8 20 23 12 16 1 23 7 8 5 12 13 1700 20 2 10 21 24 21 3 5 19 8 28
1701 9 12 4 ^ 14 17 5 8 19 1 9 1

Herbs under Venus.
April and May
Ale-hoofe, White Arehangel, Beans, Black Elder-tree, Coltsfoot, Cowslips,
Collibine, Common Eldertree, Cherry-tree, Daisies, Cude Weed. Ladies bed straw,
Ladies Mantle, Self-heal, Wood sorrel, Wall-Pennyroyal,
May and June.
Dwarf Eldertree, Featherfew, Diep-wort, Damask Roses, Groundsel, Hartichoaks
Honey-suckles Herb Robert, Mint, Money-wort, Meed sweet, Nep Pennny-royal
Plantane, Senicle, Strawberries,
June and July.
Askanot, Arch Stinking Beech-tree, Bishops weed, Blackberry-bush, Burdock,
Camomile, Crabs-claws, French-beans, Figwort, Golden Rode, Gromill,
Gooseberry-bush Horehound, Motherwort, Mugwort, Mother of thime Ragwort,
Wood-sage, Spignole, Vervine, Sow Thistle Soap wort, alias, Sothern-wood
August and September.
Winter-cherries, Darnel, Eringo, Peach-tree, Plumbs, Wheat, Yarrow,
October and November.
Garden-Parsnips
Ann. Dom April. May. June. July. August. Septem. October. Novem. 1683 9 9 25 4 9
15 28 7 19 26 1 8 1684 28 11 28 18 21 25 1 21 23 9 15 25 13 1685 11 28 29 10 18
22 7 20 14 17 18 25 8 13 29 1686 3 5 8 2 21 3 20 1 4 5 13 1687 15 24 12 21 7 10
12 13 23 2 8 28 1688 9 14 29 17 8 24 28 29 18 26 20 1689 19 24 29 5 6 5 13 16
21 25 29 2 10 31 10 26 1690 5 6 6 21 6 24 14 16 21 3 10 17 19 1691 22 12 25 3 1
8 11 20 17 18 5 12 1692 29 2 11 23 6 28 11 23 9 14 1693 15 17 16 14 16 4 13 19
13 31 ^ 7 8 28 1694 3 29 29 3 12 2 11 18 28 1 1695 6 3 26 30 12 9 19 4 6 9 25 6
9 1696 10 12 23 30 17 26 9 23 30 9 12 1 17 31 9 30 1697 15 27 12 28 4 6 28 13
23 27 School 7 22 29 19 1 10 9 21 26 10 17 6 9 1699 16 9 18 24 12 7 21 28 13 14 5
10 17 1700 3 11 16 2 21 24 29 1701 22 29 13 14 16 26 3 10 15 3 4 2 21

Herbs under Mercury.
May and June.
Amara Dulces, Dill, Fern, Fennel, Germender, Lillies of the Valley, Parsley,
Pellitory of Spain,
July.
Jack by the hedge, Scabious, Smallage, Carraway, Horehound, Savory,
October and November.
Maple-tree, White maidens-hair, Liquorish, Wild-Carrots, Sweet-Marjorem,
Mulberry-tree,
Ann Dom May. June. July. October. November. 1683 18 20 22 9 25 19 5 8 11 14 23
1684 8 19 31 29 30 4 18 24 13 15 19 22 15 1685 5 9 10 13 23 29 30 6 4 16 28
1686 20 5 11 13 14 5 6 8 12 16 30 1687 7 15 28 8 12 7 9 10 18 2 17 23 1688 9 25
5 28 6 4 19 26 1689 2 6 7 26 2 3 5 25 19 31 3 10 31 17 1690 3 12 13 31 1 24 11
6 31 17 10 24 26 27 29 1691 12 21 3 21 23 29 14 21 22 16 18 31 24 1692 31 7 11
4 6 19 22 24 19 17 20 22 1693 11 16 27 6 10 13 17 12 30 3 11 21 1694 28 19 20
30 3 16 6 8 10 8 18 24 1695 17 4 6 29 17 31 10 17 25 26 1696 9 13 20 7 9 19 21
26 10 31 10 15 25 1697 10 17 27 2 13 25 27 28 14 19 28 School 10 1 11 16 9 12 17
9 10 24 28 1699 9 22 23 29 5 16 23 21 22 12 13 17 28 1700 2 3 16 26 27 28 20 21
31 1 15 1701 10 26 14 15 18 25 16 21 3 18

Herbs under Luna.
April, May, and June.
Adders Tongue, Water Cultropes, Chick-Weed, Coral-wort, Water-creeses,
Duckmeat, Flower-de-luce, Ladysmocks, Lettice, Moon-wort, Brink-Vervine, Clary,
Wild-clary, Mouse-Ear, Orpine, Poppy, Rattle-grass, White Roses,
July.
Clivers, Cucumbers, Water-flags, Flew-elling, Water-Lilly, Purslain, White
Saxafrage, Willow-tree, Looss-strife,
Ann. Dom April. May. June. July. 1683 16 21 14 25 9 15 9 13 1684 5 14 23 4 14
4 26 27 1 2 24 1685 12 23 20 18 11 21 10 25 1686 8 23 2 22 10 20 29 4 15 28
1687 1 12 6 28 4 29 30 28 1688 14 28 13 29 30 6 7 1689 13 27 28 3 10 11 8 16 5
6 1690 23 24 29 2 26 7 8 7 8 1691 4 28 13 14 15 16 3 4 1692 7 30 1 9 10 7 8 20
3 30 1693 5 17 18 14 21 4 18 28 3 28 1694 3 4 19 20 21 8 18 12 1695 4 14 2 3 2
4 1 2 4 1696 9 10 29 30 1 2 18 19 2 3 30 22 23 1697 2 6 14 20 5 26 5 6 School 21
26 10 11 26 2 16 17 1699 10 15 14 15 8 17 26 10 11 26 1700 6 14 27 2 11 18 1701
26 30 2 21 22 23 5 6 15 25 4 14

The Explanation of the Tables.
FIrst, Look for the Plant that you have a mind to gather, in the Table, and
that will tell you what Month they must be gathered in; and then look in the
Table of Months, and there you will find what Days will be best to gather them
in.

As for Example.

I would know what time is best in the Year 1683. to gather Fleewort; looking
in the Table, I find Fleewort to be an Herb of Mars, and to be gathered in
September; then look underneath for September, and against the Year 1683. I
find 12 and 21, which does show, that the 12th and the 21th are the best Days
to gather that Herb in.

Again, I desire to know what time is best, in the Year 1684. to gather
Scurvey-Grass in, I find Scurvey-Grass to be an Herb of Jupiter, and to be
gathered in April and May; then look in the Table underneath for April and May,
and against 1684. I find 5 22 27, 11 31. which shows that the 5 22 27 Days of
April, and the 11 and 31 Days of May, are the best times to gather that Herb
in; and so of the rest.

When you have gathered your Herbs in their proper Seasons, not only those you
intended for Physical Operations, but also such as you keep for common uses,
you are in every particular to observe the same Method and Rules that
Husbandmen do in making of their Hay, that is, to dry them in the Sun, where
the pleasant lively Rays of the Air have their free Influences, and to keep
them duly turned, until the gross moisture, and phlegmy substance be Exhaled,
or consumed by the Sun and Elements; and if the Season be dry, the best way is
to put them together as they do Hay, and let them lie out all Night; but if
not, then put them in the House at Nights, and when they are sufficiently
dried, then make strong Paper-Bags, and stuff them in as hard as possibly you
can, tying them up close, and lay them in some open airy dry Room; but in the
Winter, when the Air is humid, you may dispose of them in Rooms, where Fire is
kept, but not too near; for too much, either Heat or Moisture, quickly destroys
their pure Virtues; for the Volatile parts, when the slimy Substance is
digested, will not endure any Violence without manifest Injury to the whole.

2. Herbs thus preserved, are best for all uses, when they have lain together
two, three or four Months in the Bags, for in that time they will heat and
ferment, and pass through another Digestion, which does consume a certain
fainty moist Quality, (which the Sun and Elements could not destroy in the
first preparation, without Prejudice to the whole) whereby their pure
Spirituous Parts become more free and Volatile, and will give forth their good
Virtues as readily as Malt does, when they shall be put into any proper
Menstruum or Liquor. Herbs, I say, thus ordered, are fit for all Physical and
Common Operations; do not the Husbandmen observe all the forementioned Rules
in making their Hay? viz. when they have dried it in the Sun and open Air, not
in the Shade (as Physicians and Apothecaries do, (who destroy thereby the
Virtue of their Herbs) then they make it into small Cocks, and let it stand two
or three days, or more, as the Weather will permit; after which, many will make
it into large Ricks, viz. Almost a load or more in each, and let it stand two
or three Weeks more, which does prepare and make it fitter to be made into
Stacks or Mows, where it must settle very close, and heat and ferment, and so
in four or five Months time it will by this second Fermentation, digest and
destroy that moist fainty Quality, which all Hay newly made does plentifully
contain; After this it sends forth a finer or more pure Scent and Smell, and is
far better for all Cattle: Where by the way it is to be noted, that Hay made
into Stacks in the open Air, is to be preferred before that in Barns or Houses;
for the former will settle much harder and closer, because the pure thin
Spirituous Vapors of the Air do penetrate it, and thereby keep the Spirituous
Parts living, and free from Suffocation, or contracting any gross Humidity,
which all places do abound with, where the pleasant comforting Rays of the Sun
and Air are hindered from their having their free Ingress, Egress and Regress;
therefore such Hay has a more odoriferous smell, that proceeds from the
goodness and strength of the Spirituous Parts, and all sorts of Cattle will
choose to eat this before any other, especially Sheep, who are of all others
most curious. Whereas Hay put into Barns, etc. will not settle so hard and
close, though never so much care and pains be taken in treading it down; the
Reason is, because the Sun and Air are shut out by the Walls and closeness of
the Houses, so that there is great store of Humidity that suffocates the
Volatile Spirits.

3. In drying your Herbs, care ought to be taken that the same be neither too
much nor little; for the Sun and Air, by their secret Influence, exhale,
consume and destroy the gross Humidity and Phlegm, that before did hold the
Spirituous Quality captive, which hereby is set at liberty; as is manifest in
all Herbs and Grass, whilst it remains green and unseparated; if you smell to
it, its scent is gross, fulsome and earthy; but when the Sun and Elements have
made separation, then it sends forth a Smell most Fragrant and Delightsome,
perfuming the whole Field with its wholesome Odours; But then if the same be
there too long continued, the very same Influences which exhaled and destroyed
the gross phlegmy Body, will also prey upon and consume the Spirituous Parts
too, as all observing Husbandmen do know; and then such Herbs, or any other
thing of like nature, will not have any true Virtue or Life in them. On the
other side, if they be not dried enough, the gross phlegmy Substance that
remains will suffocate the pure Spirits, and cause Putrefaction, and kindle the
bitter, sower and astringent Qualities, which in a short time will destroy all
the pure Balsamic Virtues.

4. If any kind of Herbs be dried in the Shade or House, they thereby lose all
their good Virtues, or very much impair them; For, It Is the Sun and open Air
that keeps the Volatile Spirits, and Balsamic Virtuers living, for want
whereof, the true Life, and spirituous Properties will be suffocated and
destroyed. Is not the Air of all Houses gross, fulsome and humid, if you
compare it with the common Air abroad? Are not all Insects and Vermin generated
in shady dull places? and whence is it, but through the great store of Humidity
and gross Vapors, which such places do contract? Thus Moths are bred in
Garments that are kept in close places, where the Air has not its free
Influences; whereas on the contrary, the Sun Beams, and open Air, prevent the
generation of such Vermin.

But now contrary to Nature, Reason and common Sense, the fashion which our Lip
learned Physicians and Apothecaries that serve a perpetual Apprenticeship to
Tradition, practice is this. -- They dry their Herbs in the Shade, and
afterward expose them to the Sulpherous Stinking Humid Air of their Houses.
But, I believe, should the Learned Doctor or Pot-earrier of them all, tell a
Countryman, that the best way to preserve the strength and natural Virtues of
his Hay, were to dry it in the Shade or House, he could not but laugh at their
simplicity; for he knows that Hay so dried and made, would starve his Cattle,
and that that proves the best Hay, which is made when the Sun shines clear, and
in a fresh gale of Wind: For'tis the pure thin Spirituous Vapors of the Air
that penetrate all Bodies, and keep the Spirits of each thing living in all
Preparations.

A Man would think it almost impossible, for those that make it their whole
business to prepare Medicines, to be so sottishly Ignorant of the Nature of
things, and the Knowledge of themselves. What a clutter do they keep with their
vast Volumes of Pharmacy, and musty old Rules? And yet when all is done, one
may modestly avow, that an ordinary Husbandman has abundantly more
understanding in the proper and natural way of preparing the Food for his
Cattle, than these Worshipful Rabbis have either in the Preparations of their
own, or Patients Food, or Physic; and the Common People seeing what these Men
of reputed Learning do, follow them like Apes, never questioning whether it be
good or bad; so verifying the Proverb, where The Blind leads the Blind, etc.

Tell me, I pray, what Virtue or true Life has Carduus, Wormwood, Centaury,
Winter-Cherries, and many other sorts of Physical Herbs, when dried in the
Saturnine Shades, and then exposed to the dull thick Airs of Shops, Cellars,
Garrets, and Herb-womens Stalls, and other close sulpherous Places, more fit
for the Generation of Vermin and Insects, than any thing else. It Is confessed,
a Man may use some of the beforementioned Martial Herbs, as coursly as he
will, nevertheless they will retain the strong fulsom bitter Taste and
Qualities of Mars and Saturn, because it is the Original and very Center of
their Life, and therefore cannot be destroyed, except such Herbs be
annihilated; but the pure Essential Virtues and Balsamic Body are wholly
destroyed: Therefore Medicines made of any Herbs prepared, as most Physicians
and Apothecaries do, are loathsome to Nature and the Stomach, and they have no
power to assist Nature, or cure those Diseases which the wise Anclents have
appropriated them unto. Now if Physicians and Apothecaries do not understand
these things that are so plain and evident to every Shepherd and Husbandman,
they may well be suspected in their Compositions; for if the first Preparation
be wrong, and the true and living Virtues destroyed, let the wisest of them all
use what Art they will, they can never obtain the lost Virtue, nor make a good
Medicine thereof; indeed such Herbs and Things may serve their turn to make up
their confused Compositions, which do consist of as many Ingredients as there
are Weeks in the Year, most of which are of as disagreeing Natures, as Light to
Darkness, or Summer to Winter; for this cause most of their Medicines prove
ineffectual; for the Physical Virtues of most of the Simples are destroyed for
want of Care and Understanding, either whilst they remain entire, or else by
such an undue Composition, where things of quite different Natures confound
each other. For if two things of contrary Natures he added together, they make
a degree of Variation, and produce a Juice or Virtue of a third Nature; but
then, if you add a third Ingredient, whose predominant Quality is contrary both
to the first and second, then such a Composition, or Medicine, does make three
degrees of variation, and produces a Juice or Virtue of a contrary Nature and
Operation to both the first and second Ingredients, (which I have particularly
demonstrated from the Arts of Dying and Painting, in the Chapter Of mixtures of
Food) so that when ten or twenty several things are added together, they make
such a Confusion, and as it were strife in Nature, that such Physic or Food
has not the true Nature nor Operation of any one of them; and being unnatural,
the Stomach and whole Nature of Man does loath them; for in such Mixtures,
things not Homogenial, or agreeable to each other, being jumbled together,
there thence arises an inward and secret strife for Mastery, and so that
Quality becomes strong, which before their incorporating was weak, and so and
contra, making that Property appear which lay hid, and hides that which before
was most manifest; so great is the power of the Sympathy and Antipathy of
things.

For this Cause the Ancients did forbid those Varieties of Mixtures both in
Food and Physic; for they saw from an inward eye of understanding, the great
danger of compounded Dishes or Medicines, and that the common use of them did
generate compounded Diseases, which no Medicine has Power, or any Physician
Skill to Cure. Therefore the generality of Men in former Ages, and also those
in this, who live on simple Meats and Drinks, and observe the Rules of
Sobriety, are free from those torturing Diseases that the Superfluous and
Intemperate are subject unto; such as use due Labor and Exercises, and live on
Bread, Butter, and ordinary Cheese, Milk-Pottage, Gruels, and the like, and
drink small Beer, and observe the Rules of Chastity, and lie on hard Beds, few
of this sort of People are troubled with the Gout, Dropsy, Stone, Palsy,
Consumption, windy Diseases, or the like; nothing being a greater Evil to
Nature, than those improper and unnatural Mixtures both of Food and Physic,
the first being the very Radix of Diseases, and the second does increase and
prolong them. Physicians may pretend and boast as much as they will of the
Excellency of their Dispensatory-Ware; it is certain, that such Diseases as are
generated by degrees, by the frequent use and eating of compounded Foods,
(which generally consist of disagreeing Ingredients as aforesaid, and made
merely to prolong the pleasure of the Throat) are not to be routed by all their
Regiments of Compounded, Recompounded, Decompounded, and Surrecompounded
Medicines, as daily Experience shows.

Therefore let no Man have Faith, or repose Confidence in such adulterated
confused Nauseities, but fear the Lord, and learn to know the Power of
Temperance before it be too late; for when once Diseases have invaded the Body,
and wasted the Spirits, then it is a difficult matter to root out such Disorders
either by Temperance or Medicine; but still the first has the greater Power to
give Relief, there being far greater Danger in rich compounded Foods and
Cordial Drinks, and compounded Potions of Physic, than most imagine, or can be
sensible of, except they separate and enter into Self-denial, and observe both
Quality and Quantity of Meats and Drinks, and then their Eyes will be opened,
and see the Errors of those things which formerly they practiced.

It is not for nothing that Mankind is so miserably afflicted with such a
number of Torturing Diseases, nor is it through any Natural Defect, as some
vainly suppose; for Mankind in his Radix is the most complete, soundest and
healthiest of all Creatures, endued with the greatest and strongest natural
Spirits, and had he not depraved himself by Disorders and Superfluities, would
have exceeded all other Animals, as to health. Do we ever read of any of the
Prophets or Patriarchs, in the first Ages of the World, that they were Sick?
No, there is not a word of their Sickness, but that they lived to great Ages in
perfect Health, (for ought we find) and soundness of Mind and Body. There was
then no need of Universities, where Men must spend ten or twenty Years merely
to read Receipts over, and to learn to write a Bill of Confusion to the
Apothecaries, or to put their own Eyes out, that so they might see with other
Men's, nor to learn Canting words, to deceive the Ignorant. Their whole drift
and design from the beginning to the end being to get Money, to live in
Wantonness, Gluttony, and Superfluity. There was no occasion amongst the
Ancients for this sort of People; for every one was his own Physician; for so
long as Men studied the Knowledge of God and Nature in themselves, there was no
place for this External Babylonical Building, or for the authorizing of
Ignorant Pedantry for the sole Curing, or rather Killing of their Neighbors.
Can any understand, or read another Man's Book, that cannot read one word in
his own? A Man's self is a Book, in which is comprehended all kind of Learning,
both Humane and Divine, the Radix of all Arts and Sciences. For in this Little
World (Man) was communicated unto the Wise Ancients the Virtues of all Herbs,
Seeds, Granes, Animals, and Minerals; for the Ancient Physicians had not
Libraries of many Thousand Books, nor did they spend their time in reading
other Men's Works, nor satisfied themselves with Traditions, but were contented
with one Book, viz. The Knowledge of God and Nature in themselves; and this Book
they read with their own Eyes, and not with the Counterfeit Spectacles of
Aristotle or Galen. If Men would but stand still from Self-hood, then would
they see the Salvation of the Lord. The Old Physicians and Naturalists, when
they were not well, or any of their Neighbors were distempered, did not
content themselves with musty uncertain Receipts; for they knew that the same
Herb which has proved beneficial to the Cure of one man's Diseases, might not do
any good, but rather harm to another, even though their Diseases seemed to
proceed from a like Cause: And does not our daily Experience manifest the truth
of this? Therefore they in all difficult points applied themselves to the
Divine Oracle, and Holy Light in themselves, which did teach them some Herb,
Seed, Grain, or the like, and also the manner how to use it, which did perform
wonderful Cures, because there was an inward Virtue, and the power of the
Spirit went with them; they did not keep any certain Method with all Patients
alike, as our Quacks do nowadays; for the same Herb, or other thing that
cured a Consumption in one, they did not administer to another in the like
Disease, except they were pointed unto it by their Good Genius. Herein consists
the right Cure both of the Soul and Body, when man does apply himself to the
right Object, with Faith in the Lord; then will the Lord teach him in all
particulars; for the Spirit of the Divine Power can make every little and small
thing work wonderful Effects.

It Is true, the Ancients did set down in writing many of those Herbs, and other
things, which their Genius did teach them for the Cure of various Diseases; but
they did as little think, that after-generations would make a great Trade of
getting Money by their Receipts, as the Prophets and holy illuminated men of
God did, That the men of the world would do the like by their Writings; and yet
alas! what an Huckstering there is kept nowadays with them both? The worthy
Sayings and Writings of the Ancients cannot be understood or applied, but only
by the same Spirit that gave them forth, either in things Divine or Natural.
But these things are not considered either by those that are called Divines and
Physicians, or by the People: But so soon as any one finds himself disordered
by Sickness, they presently run to the Doctor, and the Doctor to his Books, and
out of some one of them Scrawls a Receipt, and if that will not do, the poor
Creature may die for him; for neither the one nor the other so much as think to
enquire of the true Physician, viz. the neverfailing Oracle in themselves,
which if hearkened unto in Humility, would teach them what to do in all
particulars, as it did the Ancients; for those Herbs, and great Cures wrought
by them, were not set down and recorded, that after Generations should imitate
them like Apes, without the true understanding of the Spirit, but that men
might see the wonderful Power and Efficacy of the Spirit of the Lord, when men
do apply themselves unto its Government. If men would but stand still, and not
so eagerly pursue Tradition, and the Inventions of men and Self-hood, then the
good Genius would be ready and prompt to show and instruct them in any things
belonging to their Preservation: for in the way of God and Nature, every little
thing is made strong and powerful; but when men have not the knowledge of God
and Nature in themselves, then all goes astray, and the true Efficacy or Virtue
is not known, nor have the Applications of the best things any good effect.

By what has been said, appears the Reason why those Physical Herbs and Seeds,
which the Ancients have appropriated for the cure of such and such diseases, do
not cure those distempers, nor have any such Effects; for if every Herb could
accomplish such Cures as are recorded thereby to have been done, certainly
there would none be sick, but All would be made whole; but Experience shows the
contrary; Nay, are there not many living Testimonies at this day, who waiting
in Humility at the Internal Altar, have been directed, such an Herb, or other
thing; and the manner of using it, which being followed, the Cure has been
effected in a wonderful manner? And yet the very same Persons at other times,
in the like Distresses and Disorders, have not minded their good Genius, but
looked abroad amongst the Swine for Cure, where there is neither Life,
Knowledge, Power nor Virtue, but only an Ignorant busy Imitating Ape, clothed
with a Velvet Coat, and as their Course has been, the success proved
answerable; he has perhaps purged their Purses to a Vacuum; stuffed their
Bodies with Slops; filled their Chambers with Gally-Pots and Glasses; weakened
Nature, and strengthened the Disease, so that it carries away Life Captive at
the Wheels of its Triumphant Chariot; and all that Mr. Dunce-Doctor has to say
for himself, is, That he proceeded secundum Artem, and destroyed you after the
exactest method in the World.

All Practice of Physic that is from Receipts and Tradition, is uncertain and
abominable to Nature, more especially where there is a multitude of Ingredients
mixed together, for the most part of various Natures, and contrary Qualities,
as though they would force Nature into obedience, by the several sorts of
Engines and Enemies of diverse kinds, which they bring against her; Whereas in
truth, when there are twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty or an hundred several
things compounded together, and of as many distinct Natures, no man on Earth
can know the Genuine operation of such a Medicine. Does not Experience show,
that in Food, if you compound ten or twenty sorts of things, the best and
strongest Stomach will loath such Food after one Meal or two; Who is there (let
his Constitution be what it will) that would be satisfied, if he were confined
to live on your richest sort of Cake-Bread, that has ten or twelve Ingredients
in it? Are not the pure natural Operations of each thing destroyed and
adulterated, where various things are thus mixed together of different Natures?
And does not the Palate and Stomach grow weary and sick, if confi^^^ to such
Foods? The very same is to be understood in Physical Preparations, there being
not much difference between the Apothecaries, and our more curious Cooks
Compositions, both being alike preposterous and inimical to Nature.

To demonstrate this, I shall here insert a learned Doctor's Prescription. A
Gentlewoman had a Son, whom being not well, she supposed was in a Consumption;
she applies her self to a Famous Doctor for Learning and Skill, who informs
her, her Son was in a wasting condition; and you must needs believe it, for he
saw it in the Boy's Piss; Then she desired him to give her Directions how she
might prevent that Consuming Distemper? Mr. Doctor having once more peeped in
the Urinal, thrice shook his Noddle, and twice stroked the place where he
should have had a Beard, perceiving the Angels to appear, was presently
enlightened by the False Prophet, Tradition, to give the Gentlewoman this
following Bill to the Apothecary, which does consist of no less than three and
thirty Ingredients. But by that time the Apothecary had mustered up his several
Slops, and completed the Composition of Omniumgatherum, the Smallpox began to
appear, and put a period to Goodman Doctor's future proceedings, who else, to
prevent the Boy's Consumption, would have loaded his Guts with Materials enough
to half set up an Apothecary.

The Receipt.
R. Ol Amygd. dulc. rec. Sir. Capiat Veneris ana iss. Sacchar. Cant. iss, mis.
exactissim. Capiat cochleare unum ter quaterve in die superbibendo iv. (...)
pozem. sequent. calid.

Re. Decoct. pector depurat. lbjss. Tinct. Crocj. Sir. capil Veneris ana iss.
mis. fiat Apozema.

R. Cons. Ros. rub. antiq. per setacerum traject. ii. Pulv. Haly iss. Laud.
liquid. i. Sir. Balsamic. q. s. m. f. Electurium de N. m. singulis noctibus.
quo Capiat Quantitatem.

In English.
Take Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, Syrup of Maidenhair; of each one Ounce
and half, White-Sugarcandy-powder one Dram and half, mix them, and take one
spoonful three or four times a day, drinking after each Dose a quarter of a
pint of the following Apozem warm.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction depurated, a pint and half, Tincture of
Saffron, and Syrup of Maidenhair, of each one Ounce and half, mix them for an
Apozem.

Take Conserve of Old-Red-Roses pulped, two Ounces, Pulvis Haily a Dram and
half, liquid Laudanum one Dram; Syrup of Balsom a sufficient quantity, to make
it into an Electuary. To be taken the quantity of a Nutmeg every Night at
bedtime.

This is the Bill, whose Ingredients (if you trace them to their Originals) are
thirty three, and their various Natures as many, disagreeing one with the
other, and consequently make a Medicine of a loathing Quality, and far sicker
in Nature than the distempered Patient.

The very same is to be understood of most or all the things they administer
under the Name of Cordials to sick languishing and dying people, as being
Mixtures of cooled stilled Waters of several sorts, with certain Syrups,
Epidemick-Waters, and other like Slops, which are all great Nauseates to
Nature, even in the healthiest state; and if so, what a miserable Condition
then must the Sick be in? The truth is, men in the time of health, strength and
vigor, do make the best of Cordials too common to them, viz. Wine, which many
drink to the destruction of their Health, and then when they are sick, they
must have a change, though it be for the worse; and so they take up with these
loathsome Compositions of the Apothecaries, which are so sar from being really
Cordial, that they are oppressive to Nature.

It Is a thing of evil consequence to be ignorant of the most excellent and
sublime Virtues of the Herbs, which our own Country does produce, both for all
Physical Uses, and also for Food, there being no way so safe for Nature, as to
apply and use simple Herbs in the Cure of Diseases; for as simple Food is
always the most harmless, as administering a proper and equal Nourishment to the
Body and Spirits; the very same is to be understood in all Physical Operations;
for the Nature of each thing is adulterated, and its physical virtue destroyed
by the contrary Qualities of other intermixed Ingredients.

It is further to be noted, that most sorts of Herbs, when cut in their proper
Seasons, and under good Influences, and afterward dried according to the Rules
beforementioned, are far better than when green, for the makng of
Posset-drinks and Decoctions, and also for Cordials by infusion; for the Sun
and Elements do exhale and destroy the gross earthy phlegmy substance, and
preserve the pure spirituous parts, and Balsamic Virtues, and sets the Spirit
free, that it becomes volatile; which pure Virtues in all or most green Herbs
are captivated by the earthy Body of Phlegm. Therefore when dry Herbs, (which
are properly preserved) are committed to any proper Liquor, as Hot-Water, Beer,
Ale; Cider, Wine, Spirit of Wine, etc. any of those Liquors will greedily
receive the good Virtues and Spirituous parts better than they can from Herbs
that are green. And when Herbs have lain together five or six Months, they are
fitter for such uses than when first gathered; and being so preserved, as
before is directed, will keep good for several years.

This preparation of the Sun and Elements is much to be esteemed, and no
preparation performed by common Fire is to be compared therewith; for by this
Chemical Art of Nature, the more sublime Virtues and vegitative Qualities are
preserved, and the gross earthy Substance destroyed; but in all our Chemical
Preparations and Separations, there is a contrary Operation; for when the
Chemist takes Herbs, and commits them to his Fire, he cannot preserve neither
the pure Volatile Spirit, nor Balsamic Body or Vegitative Virtue, but only the
fierce fiery harsh astringent bitter Spirits, which properties are the original
of every Life, and cannot be destroyed in any preparation, though never so
unnatural, except the things could be annihilated; for this Cause all such
Sulpherous fiery Liquors will not work and ferment, as all other sorts of
Liquors will, even Water it self, when any Balsamic Body is joined with it, as
Sugar, or the like; but those other Chemical Liquors are at the end of Nature,
and therefore they will not admit of another Motion.

Hence it follows, that all sorts of Spirits, as of Scurvey-Grass, of Salt, and
many others of like Nature that are prepared by Fire, whereby the Radical
Moisture, or sweet Balsamic Quality, the Volatile Spirit, and Vegitative
Virtue or middle Quality are al^ destroyed, have no such physical Virtues (...)
their Authors appropriate unto them. And we do affirm, that such as have the
Disease called the Scurvey in their Blood, shall be as soon and as well cured,
by taking every morning so many Drops of strong Spirit of Wine, as they shall
by taking this sort of Spirit of Scurvey-Grass, and so of the Spirit of Salt,
and others: For the harsh sulpherous Fires in Stills, where the friendly
Element of Air is hindered from having its Influence, does totally destroy the
pure Virtues, and opening cleansing Qualities, and there does run off only a
fierce, keen, harsh, fiery, astringent, bitter, furious Spirit, which is very
pernicious to Nature, and to all the friendly Virtues in the Body; nor was it
ever known that any such Spirits have given help, or cured any of those
Diseases, which the Lying Authors do so much boast of. You may try whether this
be true, if you take any opening, cleansing or purging Herbs, Seeds, or the
like, and put them into any kind of Liquor, viz. Water, Beer, Ale, Wine or
Brandy, (the last of which those great Physicians and Masters of Art, do use to
draw their Spirits of Scurvey-grass in); when you have put your Ingredients
into your Liquor, let them lie in it two or three days, more or less as you
please, then put the Herbs and Seeds, with the Liquor, into your Still or
Limbeck and draw it off, and you shall only have an harsh, strong, fiery, tart
Spirit, void of all the Purging, Opening and Cleansing Qualities such Herbs or
Seeds were naturally endued withal.

The very same, or other as great Evils are in many other of the Physicians and
Apothecaries Preparations, which ought to be considered, and their blind
Traditionary senseless Ways and Methods to be abandoned, as destructive to the
Health, and Well-being of Nature.

It is further to be noted, that none ought to apply themselves to the ^^actice
of Physic but such only as the Lord has in their Radixes endued with proper
Gifts, and natural Parts; for it is not sufficient for them to read other men's
Works, and vapor with their Receipts, like the proud Iack-daw in the Fable,
with the fine Feathers stolen from other Birds, but they ought to know the true
Principles, Nature and Operation of every Herb, Plant, Animal or Mineral, that
they make use of, and for what it is good, and the contrary in themselves, and
also what Simples are proper to be Compounded, and what not; For he that has no
true Knowledge in himself of the Nature of things, but follows Tradition
blindfold, and trusts to other peoples Sayso's, must needs make strange work,
and instead of Curing, oftentimes Kill; and when he does Cure, it is by mere
chance; Whereas Physicians ought not to administer any Medicine without true
Knowledge both of his Patients Disease, and what he gives to remove it; all
things, especially where men's Lives are concerned, ought to be done with sight
and judgment, and not without Faith and Prayer to God, the Creator of all
things, who is the inward Virtue, Power and Life of every thing: For Faith and
Prayer do Wonders, opening the inward Virtue and Center of every mean and
simple Medicine or thing, even Clay and Spittle with it, shall cure the Blind;
this all Physicians ought to be inwardly sensible of, and not put so much trust
in their Authors; for many of them have been very vain and extravagant in their
Writings, telling us that such and such Herbs and other things were endued with
such wonderful Virtues, and would cure such Diseases, when in truth there were
no such things; and also invented many improper Compositions, even any thing
they fancied, and most of their Sayings are mere Stories, and as contrary to
Truth, as Light to Darkness. Now on such a tottering Foundation, what Structure
of safety can be expected to be built? Our Modern Physicians are much like our
Lawyers, if a man is like to lose part of his Estate, and will vindicate his
Cause by Law, it is twenty to one but he spends the other partto secure that,
and after abundance of charge and trouble, loses the whole: Just so if a man
through Disorder and Intemperance has in part destroyed his Health, he may be
sure to destroy the other part also, if he keep close, and follow the
Physicians Prescriptions, and take good store of their adulterated Medicines.

We must also note, that every Patient ought to turn the Eyes of his Mind
inward, and wait at the Altar of the Lord for an answer, and not to do or take
any Medicines without some Assurance or Faith in the Lord of his Blessing; nor
ought any to think himself too mean or simple, because he is unlearned; for do
but read the Scriptures, and you may be satisfied, that the Lord in all Ages
has plentifully given his Gifts and Graces both Divine and Natural, to the
Simple and Unlearned: And as to the Learning of this World, did not our Lord
Christ himself give his Father, the Author of all Beings, thanks, That he had
hid the Mysteries of Salvation (both of Soul and Body) from the Wise and
Letter-learned of this World, and revealed them unto Babes; poor, mean and
unlearned People; Peter the Fisherman; Paul the Tent-maker, etc. For indeed
the Rich and Learned have shut and double-bar'd the Windows of their Souls
against the simple Light of Truth; they have clothed themselves with Vanity
and Self-hood, being contented with Tradition and a Worldly puffing-up
Knowledge, which serves them to swagger with, but not to do any good with,
either to themselves or others; so that there is no room for the operation of
the friendly Love and Light of God; they are so full of swelling proud Spirits,
and noise and boasting: Hence it comes to pass that these Admirers of Tradition
and Pocket-Learning, and the ways of the Multitude, are always apt to despise
the Simplicity of the Divine Power, and Voice of Wisdom, not only in
themselves, but all others; and therefore the Lord chooses to unfold his holy
and natural Mysteries unto the Poor and Needy, and such who are not wise in
their own Eyes, and whose Eyelids are not lifted up: For nothing obstructs the
Work of the Lord, and the Revelations of his Holy Spirit in men, more than
Inward-Riches, Self-conceitedness, and the Babylonical-Learning of the Schools
of this World, which like a too Luxuriant and not well Cultivated Soil, produce
such abundance of Rank-weeds, as overtop and choke the good Seed, that it
cannot attain to any maturity in the Government of a man's Life; the same is to
be understood of all outward Fullness and Intemperances: Therefore let none
think themselves unworthy because they have not the Learning of Babel, or
because they are simple; for such as are unlearned and empty, if they come to
the Lord in Humility and Faith, he will abundantly teach them, and plentifully
fill them with all good things.

The most natural and proper way of making of Cordials with any kind of Herbs,
Seeds, Flowers, Spices and Drugs, either simple or compound.

Take any sort of Herbs, Seeds, Flowers, Spices or Drugs, either simple or
compound (but the first is to be preferred before the latter) the Drugs and
Seeds are to be bruised or cut, what Quantity you think convenient, infuse them
in Ale, Beer, Cider, Wine or Spirit of Wine; but remember that they do not
continue above one hour in your Liquor; but if the Quantity of Seeds, Herbs,
Drugs or Flowers, be great, and but little Liquor, then half an hour will be a
sufficient time for you to continue your Infusion; the same is to be understood
if your Herbs or ingredients be of a strong bitter Quality, as Wormwood,
Featherfew, Tansie, and the like, your Vessel ought to be close stopped all the
time of your Infusion, then strain out your Liquor, putting it into Bottles,
and when it is settled, sweeten it to what degree you think fit, with
Refined-Sugar, which is to be preferred before any kind of Syrups; for they are
broken flat Bodies, like any sort of Food that is prepared twice, and therefore
when mixed with any kind of Liquor or Drink, they give it a sickish fainty
Taste, being dull, heavy and unpleasing to the Stomach. Which of you, that
prefer the use of Syrups so much, if you were to have your Drink sweetened when
you are in health, would choose Syrups to do it with? I believe scarce one man
of an hundred, but rather White-Sugar, with which, when you have sweetened your
Infusion or Liquor, prepared as aforesaid, you have a Cordial far more friendly
to Nature, and more impregnated with the real and natural Virtues of the Herbs,
Seeds, Drugs, etc. which you have made choice of to use, than any that is or
can be drawn by Distillation, for the Reasons beforementioned.

But if you let your Ingredients lie soaking two, three, four, five, Days, or a
Week, more or less, as is usual for most people to do, then the pure Volatile
balsamic Virtues and Tinctures will become either suffocated or evaporated;
for all sorts of Menstrums or Liquors do first extract or receive the pure
subtle spirituous Qualities, especially of all such Herbs, Seeds, Grains or
Flowers, as have already passed through any kind of Digestion or Fermentation,
as all dry Herbs have, that are prepared according to our Rules; and also all
green Herbs that are Spicy and Aromatic do the same; therefore if continued
too long in such Liquors, the pure Virtues, and sweet spirituous parts become
suffocated by degrees, and then presently appears the strong, gross, bitter,
sower and astringent Qualities, which poisonous Properties do prey upon and
devour the sweet Body and pure Spirits; for which cause all such Infusions or
Cordials have a strong fulsome smell and taste, and equally unpleasant to the
Nose, the Palate and the Stomach. Many Examples I could instance to
demonstrate this, but I shall only name one, which is very plain, familiar and
material, viz. in Brewing Alc and Beer; First, you make your Liquor boiling
hot, then put the Malt to it and stir it, letting it stand together one hour
or thereabouts, and then you let that Liquor run off, and so have a brave
friendly Sweet Wort. But should you have done as most Physicians, Apothecaries,
and others do, viz. have let your Malt and Liquor stood infusing five or six
Hours, a Day, a Week, or the like, I appeal to your selves, if your Wort would
not have turned sower, sharp, keen, and of no use or virtue, except for
Stilling; whereby it is evident, that all Infusions that are continued beyond
their proper time, do lose all their good Virtues, more especially if they be
such things as have already passed through any kind of Fermentation or
Digestion, the gross Bodies of all such things being in a Degree opened,
whereby the Balsamic Virtues become, as it were, volatile, which before lay
hid or captivated in the Body of Phlegm, as is most manifest in all Grass or
Herbage. Take an handful of Grass and smell to it, does it not send forth a
gross, fulsome earthy smell and scent; but if you expose the same Grass two or
three Days to the Sun and open Air, which will exhale and destroy the fulsome
phlegmy parts, and more earthy substance, opening the Body, and then the
Spirituous parts become so volatile, that it will perfume the whole Field. And
if this Preparation be not discontinued, the same Sun and Elements will exhale
and destroy the good Virtues also; and for this cause, I told you, that dried
Herbs, Seeds and Grains, are to be preferred before Green, except some Spicy
Herbs, whose pure Virtues stand a degree more external than others, and such
are best to be used Green: But others, when infused green, impart their gross
phlegmy Substance to the Liquor.

Dried Herbs, Seeds, Grains, and the like, when committed to any proper Liquor,
do more freely give forth their good Virtues, than the Green; for the
Spirituous Qualities, and sweet Body is more ready to infuse it self, than
other the astringent, bitter or sower Qualities; but they follow close at the
heels of the good Virtues, and if the Infusion or Preparation be not rightly
timed, then these fierce original strong Qualities will suffocate the Supple
spirits, and in a moment the sweet Body turns sower, eager and astringent, and
the use of all such things proves very destructive to the Health of the Body,
and are very unpleasant to the Palate and Stofor as there is a most pleasant
sweet friendly Power and Virtue in all Herbs, Seeds and Grains; so on the
contrary, there is a strong gross poisonous fulsom Quality, there being nothing
so good but it has an evil in it, nor any thing so evil, but there is an
essential good in it; therefore there is required Wisdom and Understanding in
all Preparations, whether for Food or Physic.

The Proper Natural way of making Physical Decoctions, Posset Drink, etc. with
Herbs and Seeds, so as they may not lose their Virtues.

The most essential way to make Decoctions of either Herbs or Seeds, is after
this manner; First, Take what Quantity of good River-water you shall think fit,
making it boiling hot, or you may boil it a little, (but the former is best,
viz. to make it as hot as good House-wives and Brewers make their Liquor, into
which they put their Malt; for the much boiling of Water does not only
evaporate the spirituous Qualities thereof, but it fixes it so, that it has
not that power to draw or extract the Virtue and good Properties of such
Ingredients as shall be added; for which cause few Brewers will suffer their
Liquor to boil, or their Malt to be put in too hot) when your Water is thus
hot, then take it off the Fire, and put what Herbs, Seeds, or other Ingredients
you please, and let them lie in it about an hour, and then strain your Liquor
from the Herbs, etc. and let it stand until it be thoroughly cold; then add to
it either Ale, Beer, White or Rhenish-wine, or any other Wine you shall think
most convenient for your particular use, so as to make it either strong or
weak, as you please, and then sweeten it with good Sugar; but if you would
sweeten it with Spanish Fruits, then you are to add the Fruit bruised at the
same time as you put the Herbs into the Liquor, and let them infuse together,
and it will do very well; and when it is strained and cold, add your Wine, as
aforesaid, and put it into Bottles for your use, and it will keep 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, or 8 weeks or more, as you make it in strength, and drink very pleasant
and delightful, being endued with all the good Virtues of the Ingredients.

Physical Decoctions made after this manner, will be as welcome to the Pallates
and Stomachs of the Sick, as good Wine, Beer or Ale; for there will be no sick
fainty gross strong taste nor smell in them, as there always is in those made
after the common way; for all sorts of Beer; Ale and Wines, have already passed
through Fermentation and Digestions, which have opened the gross Body of
Phlegm, whereby the spirituous parts are set at liberty, or become Volatile and
External; so that such Liquors or fermented Drinks will not admit of any other
or further Preparation, especially by Fire; for so soon as they approach it,
the said Volatile Spirits become either evaporated or suffocated, and then
presently the sweet Balsamic Body dies, and turns of an evil, sower, heavy
taste and smell, and of a dead heavy Nature and Operation, having in it neither
true Virtue nor Power; therefore the Learned have no reason to oppose me in
this Particular, for let us both* appeal to Experience; Take you the best Beer,
Ale or Wine, and warm or boil it, and let it stand till it is cold, and then
tell me what it is good for? Verily for as much as Salt is, when it has lost
its Savor. Nay, will not the very standing of such fermental Liquors open to
the Air, cause the spirituous parts to evaporate, and the sweet Body to die,
and become sower and eager?

It is therefore no Paradox, but a Natural Truth, that the boiling of Herbs,
Seeds, etc. in Beer, Ale or Wine, does totally destroy both their Natural and
Physical Virtues, and such Decoctions are a mere loathing to Nature, a Death
instead of Life.

In making of Posset Drink, you are to observe, when your Milk boyls, to turn
it with Ale, Beer or Wine, then strain it and set it again upon the Fire, and
make it boiling hot, but let it not boil; then take it off, and add what Herbs,
Seeds or Flowers you please; (but if Seeds, they must be bruised) and let them
infuse half a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, and then strain it, and your
Posset Drink will taste and smell, and retain the pure essential Virtues, and
lively Tinctures, which the Herbs, Seeds or other Ingredients were endued with,
and be an hundred times more pleasant to the Palate, and agreeable to the
Stomach, and also much more beneficial against the Disease such Ingredients are
appropriated unto, than those commonly made, wherein the Ingredients are
boiled. Try and then judge.

It is to be noted, That all sorts of Cordials, that are compounded with
various sorts of Distilled-waters and Syrups, or with Strong-Water, as that
they call Epidemick-water, are an abomination to Nature, even in perfect
Health, when the Palate and Stomach are strong, sharp and powerful; and what
are they then to weak sick People, and Languishing Natures? For first, the
Natural Physical Virtues are destroyed by ill management, and unnatural
Preparation of each Ingredient before they are mixed: And secondly, the jumbling
together such various things, most of which are of contrary and disagreeing
Natures, is sufficient to destroy the good Virtues of the best of things; and
therefore it is certain such Medicines and Cordials have not power to help or
cure the least of Distempers; not but many thousands after taking great
quantities of their Slops may recover, and then many people slander the Doctor
with a Cure, and ascribe to his Medicines mighty Virtues, whereof indeed
neither the one nor the other was ever guilty: They have just cause rather to
acknowledge the divine hand of God, and his Handmaid Nature, and thereunto
attribute the Recovery of their Health, and not to those sick fainty
Medicaments, which generally do abundance more hurt than good.

Likewise their Epidemick-water is in its own Nature of a fierce hot Quality
and Operation; and tho it be made of the best of Wine, viz. Sack, yet the
Limbeck does totally destroy its pure volatile spirits, and balsamic virtues,
and also the Opening Cleansing Quality of all the Herbs or Drugs that are
distilled with such Liquors or Wine, so that there does remain or run off only
a strong sulpherous brandish Spirit, that has no other Operation than
Common-Brandy or Spirit of Wine: It Is true, they do allay this hot fiery Nature
and Quality, by adding to it Sugar, or the like, which renders it more
tolerable to the Palate and Stomach; but the Operation is the very same as
Brandy sweetened, or any other Spirits. If a strong healthy person should be
confined to the Cordials, Iulips, daubing Electuaries, and great number of sick
Potions, boiled Drinks, and variety of sweet Slops (and nothing more hurts and
obstructs the Stomach than sweet things) to the close Rooms, lusty Fires, drawn
Curtains, and other torturing Circumstances, wherewith Doctors and Nurses
torment those whose Nature is already wounded and languishing, it would no
doubt in a very short time destroy the Health of the strongest of men.

Therefore I would have every Intelligible Person consider the same, and the
Reasons of things, and not be led away by Ignorant Sots, who are mere
Pretenders, and not Physicians; for Physicians ought, 1st. to be born with a
Natural Genius, and suitable Gifts, rendering them capable of understanding
natural things. 2ly, They ought to apply themselves to the Knowledge of God,
Nature and Themselves. 3ly. They ought to apply themselves to the Oracle of God
in themselves, to be taught by the Voice of Wisdom, which cries in the Gates of
every man's City: For he that has not Eyes of his own, and Understanding of his
own, tho he be the greatest of Scholars in outward Learning, can never
distinguish between Good and Evil, but is always uncertain, and all his
Administrations as vain and presumptuous, as a blind man's Judgment is of
Colors. 4ly. They ought to have the fear of the Lord, (which is the beginning
of wisdom) always before their Eyes, and not make Money and sordid Interest the
chief end of their Practice, as most do: For Physicians of all sorts of People,
should be the most Knowing, the most Just, the most Charitable, and the most
Temperate. But whatever Titles men may have, or how many Books soever they may
have tumbled over, if they abandon the study of Virtue and Piety, and aim at
mercenary Lucre, and vain Glory, instead of doing Good to men, and bringing
Glory to God; it is vain to expect any benefit from such Peoples hands; They are
all (as the Scripture says in another case) Physicians of no value; nay, they
have not that Natural Distinguishing and Sense as is common to many Beasts; for
the man that is not directed by the Spirit of the Lord, is an hundred fold more
ignorant of the Operations of Nature, than a Beast that lives under the Laws of
Nature; and therefore we see many Dumb Creatures have more Sense to discern
what is for their Preservation than Men, and Men have learned the Virtues of
many Physical Herbs from them; as the Tortoise, when hunted by the Adder, is
said to fortify himself by eating of Originum; and the same is said of the
Stork when she has eaten Snakes, she seeks for the same Herb Originum, and
finds a Remedy; it is also related, that when the Weezle goes to fight with any
poisonous Creature, it first eats Rue, whence men came to know that Originum
and Rue are good Antidotes against Poison; so in some other Animals there is an
inbred skill and Medicinal Art, as when the Toad is wounded, it is said, she
will go to Sage or Rue, and rub the Wound, and so escapes the Danger: We are
told that Swallows first taught us that Celendine is Medicinal for the Eyes,
being the same wherewith they cure the Eyes of their Young Ones: The Pie when
sick, puts a Bay-leaf into her Nest, and recovers: So Cranes, Daws, Partridges,
Black-birds and Crows, purge their sick Stomachs with the same: It is reported,
If a Lion be sick, he is recovered by eating of an Ape: The Lapwing being
surfeited, cures her self with Southernwood; the wounded Heart runs to his
restorative Ditany: Swine, when stung by Snakes, eat the Snakes and are well;
and Dogs, when wounded, cure themselves by continual licking of the Wound: also
they purge their nauseous Stomachs by eating of Grass, as Cats do theirs by
eating the Herb Nipp. Philebotomy, or Letting of Blood, Physicians, (as is
written) learned this practice first of a Beast called Hyppopotamus, living in
the River Nilus, which being of a ravenous Nature, and therefore often
overcharged with much eating, is wont to seek in the Banks for some sharp stub
of a Reed, upon which pricking his Leg, he thereby eases his full Body,
stopping the bleeding afterward with Mud. So that some men who are curious in
Observation, have learned many Medicinal Virtues of Herbs from Brutes, which
they are led unto by a natural inclination, which we call Instinct, having
always obeyed the Law of God in Nature, and lived under the simple Influence
and Operations thereof, and do therefore retain those natural Faculties and
Selfpreservations which the Lord endued them with in the Creation: But Man that
was made but a little lower than the Angels, and superior to all the Creatures
of this sublunary World, having transgressed both the Divine and Natural Law of
God, has thereby corrupted the Earth and all the Elements, and made all its
Inhabitants to mourn and groan, by reason of his Violence and Oppression, by
which he has depraved himself both of the Divine and Natural Understanding,
and has not the common Sense of distinguishing what is for their own
preservation, so well as many Brutes have, which is much to be lamented, that
man should so prodigiously degrade, dishonor and incaptivate himself.

There is another thing worthy to be considered by all men, but more especially
by those that apply themselves to Physic that the most celebrated Authors of
that Art, and such as have written of the Nature, Virtues and Uses of Herbs,
Drugs, Fruits, Seeds and Grains, and whose Rules and Prescriptions our Modern
Doctors make the foundation of their Skill, and the limits of their Practice,
were born and bred, and lived in places far remote from us in other parts of
the World, and in different Climates, whose Productions vary as much in
Magnitude, Forms and Qualities, as one Color does from another: and as the
Elevation of the Pole being either more Southern or Northern, alters the
Language or Speech, and the Nature, Shape, Complexion, Inclinations and
Dispositions of the People; and the more remote each Country is, the greater
is the Variation of their Constitutions and Manners; and as all their Beasts,
Birds and Fish, do differ in Name, Nature, Shape and Form, the very same is to
be understood of their Herbs, Drugs, Flowers, Seeds, Fruits and Grains, they
all differ both in their Virtues and Vices from ours; and tho some of theirs
may be, and are translated, and through a great deal or Care and Industry will
grow, yet still they are not so Natural, nor are their Virtues so Genuine, as
those that originally spring up from that proper matter, or Salnitral Quality,
which our own Mother Earth affords under our own Elevation, and that peculiar
operation of the Coelestials under which we breathe; neither are such Exotic
Herbs or Plants endued with so proper or genuine Medicinal Virtue as they have
in their natural Climate.

Now let us consider where and when most of the Great Masters of Physic who
are the Beams and Eyes of our Doctors, and the Foundations of our Colleges
(^lived. Hypocrates was a Grecian, of the Isle of Chios in the Mediterranian,
above two Thousand Years ago. Galen, born at Pergamus in Asia, about the Year
of our Lord 140. and being Physician to an Emperor, rich and high in favor at
Court, he scraped together all the Books of Physic that he could hear of, and
took the Receipts, and most material parts thereof, and set them forth as his
own Works, concealing the Original Authors, and destroying their Works, which
was easy for him to do so long before Printing came up, when Copies were so
very few and scarce; and by this fraud and base ambitious Trick, he became
celebrated as the only Father of the Art of Healing; and to this Day remains
the Idol of the Methodists (as they call themselves) that is, the Sons of
Tradition and Implicit Faith. These two Authors wrote in Greek, not so much to
puzzle their Readers, or keep up their Learning from People, as our Modern Men
write all their Bills in Latin, (merely that the Absurdity of their
Prescriptions may not appear) but because Greek was their natural Mother
Tongue. Averroes and Avicenna were Arabians, and lived about the Year of our
Lord 1160. Dioscorides was of Anoharba, a Town in Cilicia, and lived before
Christ's Incarnation; so that he and the two first were Heathens, and other two
were Mahometans, and great Blasphemers of the Sacred Writings of our Blessed
Savior Christ; These are the great Masters that Christians learn the sublime
Art of healing from. Pray consider, is it likely the Holy God would communicate
the Mysteries of Nature to such Idolaters? Besides, does not Common-sense tell
every man, that the Herbs, Plants, Grains, Fruits, etc. that grew in Greece,
Asia or Arabia, a thousand or two thousand years ago, may be vastly different
in their Natures, Properties and Effects, from those that grow with us at this
Day? Nay, it is impossible it should be otherwise, if we consider the difference
of Climates, the alterations of the Celestial Bodies, the various Mixtures,
Transplantings, Improvings, etc. of Plants, Herbs and Flowens, the different
Modes of Manuring and Cultivating Ground, the change of Peoples Constitutions,
the contrariety of our Northern Bodies, to those Constitutions of Asia and
Greece, etc. And yet whatever these Old Doting Gentlemen have been pleased to
say of any Herb, Plant or Grain, as that it is hot and dry, cold and moist, in
the first, second and third Degree, that it opens, binds, purges, provokes
Urine, cures such or such a Disease by an occult Quality, that is to say, (they
know not how, by a Trick it has got) or whatever else they please to stuff
their Books withal, either out of Ignorance, Misinformation, or mere vain Glory
to amuse their Readers; all this, I say, must be swallowed without chewing, and
he that can remember their Tattle, counts himself a most Learned Physician.
Hypocrates was a Physician in his own Country, and in a degree a knower of the
Virtues and Vices of such Herbs, Drugs, etc. as his own Climate, and the
Coelestials in that Elevation brought forth, but he did not know any thing of
our Northern cold Countries, nor of our Beasts, Herbs, Fruits and Drugs. The
very same is to be understood of Galen (the extravagant Builder, and Luxurious
Courtier) and of all these eminent Authors which our formal Physicians do so
much dote on, they were great strangers to our Climate, and to all the
Productions and Vegetations thereof.

Besides, the People in those Times and those Countries, did not only differ
from us as to their Natures and Complexions, but also in all or most of their
Customs of Living, as in their Meats, Drinks, and the Preparations thereof:
They did then, and most of them do to this Day, drink Water, and many of them
go almost naked; the use of Soft-beds, and warm close Houses was hardly known
to them except to some few: Their Princes and Great Men did live more Sober and
Temperate than the meanest amongst us: They were contented with such simple
Meats and Drinks as their own Climate did afford, which were as easily procured
as cooked (as it were) by Natures own Hand: They were not acquainted with that
variety of rich compounded Foods and Cordial Drinks, and consequently were not
subject to so great a Number of compounded or complicated Diseases as we are.
Therefore simple Herbs, Seeds and the like, had greater power to cure such
Diseases as were contracted from such Meats and Drinks: Nor did they accustom
themselves to the eating of such great Quantities of various sorts of Flesh,
both clean and unclean, without distinction, as we in the Northern Countries
do; nor were their Minds and Spirits so continually perplexed about profits or
losses, or how to procure those Varieties and Rich Dainties, the enjoyment
whereof is of more dangerous Consequence than the hazard and trouble of getting
them. For these Reasons every simple Herb and Medicines made thereof, has much
more power to cure and help such Diseases as the People of those Countries were
subject unto: And if Hyppocrates, Galen, or the wisest of them all did live in
this Day, wherein all kinds of Excess and Riot do reign, with the innumerable
Inventions of new Dishes, and unnatural Compositions of Food and Drinks, they
would be forced to take new Measures, and alter their Ancient Rules, which were
good and proper in their Time, and to their own Natives, but are adopted for us
or our Times; and therefore it is the greatest of Errors for us to appropriate
such Virtues and Cures to those Herbs as the Ancients did, who wrote of the
Virtue and Use of such Herbs as grew in their own Climate, and appropriated
them to the Diseases that were generated in the same place, and under the same
Elevation and Celestial Influences.

And although some will object, and say, That many of the same Herbs are
transplanted into our Country. Tho the same should be true, yet all men know,
and daily Experience teaches, that in a few Years the Climate, Earth and
Celestial Influences will alter and change such Herbs or Fruits into the
Nature of that Country where they grow; as the Oranges of China, which of late
were planted in Spain, they have there in few Years lost that Finess and
Delicacy of Taste, and are become more Tart and Sharp, like the Original
Oranges of that Country; therefore they are forced to renew the Plants which
are brought from their Natural Soil once in a few Years, tho the difference
between Spain and those Climates they naturally grow in, is not so great by
many Degrees, as our more Northern Countries are to Asia and Africa. Spain and
Portugal are comparatively but a little distance from us, and yet you see what
a vast difference there is between our Fruits and Herbs, and theirs, being
quite of another Nature and Operation, It Is true, they will grow here, but
their Fruits will not come to any Maturity. Now if the Variation be so great in
Countries so near us, it must needs follow, that those Herbs, Seeds, Grains and
Drugs which grow in Greece, Arabia, AEpypt, Persia, and the like remote places,
must be still more different and contrary.

Most of those Foreign Southern Climates naturally produce rich sweet Wines,
Sugars, and delicate Fruits, as Pine-Apples, sweet Oranges and Lemons,
Plantans, Coco-Nuts, Sower-Sops, etc. which are all contrary in Nature, Form
and Qualities to our Fruits, and so are their Herbs, Seeds, Roots, etc. And
it is absurd to think, that the Arabians, Grecians, Egyptians, etc. did ever
make it their business to study the Virtues and Use of our Herbs, Roots,
Fruits, Seeds, Beasts or Grains, whose Country and Productions they were
altogether Strangers unto, as well as to our Constitutions, Complexions, and
the manner of our Living, Meats, Drinks, Employments, Intemperances, and the
like.

It is also to be noted, that the Celestial Influences and Operations of the
Stars and Elements, are not the same in one Country as they are in another,
but according to the Elevation of the Pole, and the Neighborhood or remoteness
of that most Glorious Body the Sun; Hence it is that in the Southern, Eastern
and Western Regions of this inhabitable Globe, there are great numbers of Birds
and Beasts that are not known to us, and of different Forms, Colors, Tones,
Natures and Inclinations from ours; the same is to be understood in all their
Fruits, Vegetatives and Minerals. The Salnitral and Seminary Virtues of the
Earth, varying also in the predominant Qualities from ours, there being a
concurrence in all Countries and Climates between the Influences and Operations
of the heavenly Bodies, and the earthy; whence it comes to pass, that the
people of the South are black, and the Northern white; their Country generates
Gold, and ours Lead, Tin and Iron; the East Indies yielding precious Stones,
which is a Degree higher than Gold, and the West Indies Silver, which proceeds
from the powerful Influences of the Sun and Venus, but especially of the Sun,
its warming Beams continuing there all the year without much variation; and
therefore their Nights and Days are more equal than in the North, where the
cold harsh Properties of Saturn and Mars do bear sway: Therefore the Herbs,
Drugs and Fruits that are brought forth in those remoter Regions, are not
Homogenial to our Bodies, as Experience might teach us, by the great numbers of
new Diseases that have of late been cantracted by the superfluous Mixtures of
the East and West-Indian Ingredients with our common Food, as Spices, Fruits,
Sugars, as also Tobacco, etc. which have strangely wasted the Healths of many:
For the All-wise Creator of all Beings, has endued both the Heavenly and
Earthly bodies with an inward Virtue, Power and Nature in every Climate and
Country, so as all places do plentifully bring forth all manner of Herbs,
Fruits Seeds, Drugs and Grains suitable and proper for the Sustenance of both
Men and Beasts of that place, and also for Medicine, there being a
Sympathetical agreement in the Radixes between the Animals of each Country, and
the Vegetations thereof, both being brought forth under the same Influence. Do
not our own Herbs, Fruits, and Grains, growing in our own Country, maintain the
numerous Troops of brave Animals amongst us, viz. Cows, Sheep, Horses, and many
others in plentiful healthy state, without the help of Foreign Vegetatives? And
are there not a great number of Medicinables likewise of our own growth, proper
for the cure of those Diseases that are generated in our Elevation? and had it
not been the great happiness of England if men had known no more of
Outlandish-wines, Spices, Sugars, etc. either for Food or Physic, than our
Beasts do, which would have rendered us more healthy, and sounder both in Body
and mind? For in the Beginning, the Divine Word of the Lord that (as the
Scriptures testify) made all things, moved it self in all Places and Climates,
and formed, framed and figured all Bodies, according to the Degrees of the
Innate instant Qualities of each Place; and as the property of the Sevenfold
Nature and Constellation did there predominate, and as the Salnitral Properties
and Spirits were internally strong or weak, good or evil, such was the Nature,
Inclinations, Forms and Shapes of the Creatures in each Climate; for every
Creature was clothed with a Body according to the Nature and Degrees of the
Spirit, which is the Life of all things, having an innate Power to attract
proper matter for a Body of a proportionable Nature. And as the Internal Powers
and Qualities are infinitely various, so are the External forms, every thing
both in the Animal, Mineral and Vegetative Kingdoms, varying in Shape, Virtue
and Vice. And where the Property of the Wrath did predominate in the Salnitral
Quality in any Country, there did arise, and were made fierce wrathful wild
Beasts of Prey, as Bears, Lions, Tigers, etc. On the contrary, where the sweet
Water and friendly Nature had Dominion, there were generated Tame, Mild
Creatures, as Sheep, Cows, etc. the same is to be understood in the Vegetative
and Mineral Kingdoms, and the outward Body or Signature does in all particulars
manifest and show the inward Nature of each thing to the enlightened
understanding, and sagacious Naturalist, whom God and Nature have made capable
of such sublime Learning.

It is very Improbable (if I had said Impossible, I had not much over-shot the
Truth) that one Herb should have specific virtue and power to cure so many
various Diseases and Defects of Nature, as the Ancients do appropriate, except
such an Herb, Fruit, Seed or the like, be endued with, and have the Universal
Tinctures complete, which has never been known; nor is it possible that any
gross Herb should have that Divine Efficacy to cure so many Different
Distempers, and in various Complexions, except there be a Living Faith in the
Patients, and also in the Physician, which then can make Water Wine, and Clay
and Spittle an Eye Salve, and as Christ says, remove Mountains: as also
witness the Woman that had the Bloody Issue, she believed in her heart, That if
she could but touch the Hem of Christ's Garment, she should be whole; which
enabled her to press through the Throng and Multitude to touch his Garment;
where it is to be noted, that this Woman did first press in her self by Faith
through the Wrath of God, and Multitude of: Evil Properties and Inclinations,
into the Divine Power and Virtue of the Son of God, which by a sympathetical
Attraction, and Divine Power awakened the Balsamic Virtue, and friendly Nature
first in her self, and afterward in our Lord; for then he enquired, Who had
touched him; At which his Disciples marvelled, because of the Multitude that
pressed him; but Christ was sensible of the Inward Kindlings, and of the secret
Attractions and Influences, the Wowan's Faith had in a powerful Degree
awakened, and as it were drawn forth and united or joined it self with the
friendly Divine Principle of the Light and Love of God in Jesus Christ, which
healing Virtues her earnest Faith did draw forth; and so miraculously her Cure
was immediately effected; for Christ says, Thy FAITH has made thee whole.

The truth is, there is but One Way for the right Cure of all Diseases, both
Corporeal and Incorporeal, whether they proceed from the Body or the Mind,
which is by the Virtue and Power of the Good Quality and friendly Nature which
the Creator has endued every Herb and other thing with; for as the Sickness of
the Soul or Mind is nothing else but the Deprivation of the Divine Vision, viz.
man's being departed from the Government and Council of the good Light and Love
of God, which cannot be remedied, nor the Soul restored unto its first state of
Health, Strength and Unity with God, but only by Faith, and elevating the Soul
to the Divine Principles, which will reinforce all the good Powers and Virtues
of God's Love, and not only render a man sound and healthy, but the same
Grace-being obeyed, will maintain the Soul and Spirit in serenity; so the very
same is to be understood of all kind of Sicknesses of the Body, and Elements of
the Outward Nature, Diseases being nothing else but an unequal Motion, or
Contrarieties of the Properties and Qualities of Nature, which comes to pass
through various Intemperances, and concurring Influences of the Elements and
Celestial Bodies, which wound the pure Volatile Spirit, and then presently the
sweet Oil and Balsamic Virtues, or Humor Radicalis, turns sour, and loses
its friendly Nature and Operation, and the harsh astringent fierce original
Poisons do rouse themselves, raging and domineering, and put Nature into an
agonious Condition, which can no way be allayed or moderated, but either by the
Secret and Divine hand of God, which strengthens and raises up the half Dead
or fading Oil and wounded Spirit; or by a Balsamic Medicine, which may by
simile incorporate it self with the wounded Spirits, and Radical Moistures, and
so reinforce and restore them to their former strength and power, and then
immediately the raging Fury of the bitter astringent and sour Properties
becomes moderated, not annihilated, and then the strife and contention of
Nature cease, and the Cure is effected.

Therefore every Physician should understand how to prepare such a Medicine as
can by its innate power and virtue thus incorporate it self, and operate in
raising up the languishing powers of Nature, or else he is not fit to be called
a Doctor. The Old Physick-Mongers tell us, that Mallows and Marshmallows
(which differ but very little in their Qualities) being variously applied, will
cure near Fifty Diseases or Defects of Nature, which are generated, and do
proceed from as various Causes, and as Different Matters, Seeds and Radixes;
but how unlikely, improbable, nay, impossible it is, that one Herb should
effect so many Disagreeing Cures, let Reason and Experience judge: Infinite
almost is the variety of Constitutions, whence the same Intemperances that will
load one man with fat and phlegmy gross moist Humors, occasioning various
Dropsical Diseases, will in another produce Leanness and Consumption: Much
drinking of Wine and Srong Liquors puffs up some Bodies, and wears away others.
And the same is to be understood of all things in the Vegitable, Animal and
Mineral Kingdoms; therefore there is an absolute necessity to study to know the
Properties and Qualities of a man's own individual and specific Nature and
Complexion, and not rely upon, and trust to the adulterated Medicines, ahd
fantastic Directions of ignorant Physicians, there being nothing that brings
so many both Natural and Divine Benefits unto a man, as the true knowledge of
himself, and is yet the least minded of any thing in this World. What pains and
slavery do Youth undergo to learn a few strange Words, be able to tell the Name
of a thing in Latin and Greek, or three or four Languages, and when all is
done, they know not one Tittle more of the Essence, Nature or Use of the Thing,
than if they had called it* in plain English, as their Granum does. What
Drudgery do they submit unto to learn some ordinary Mechanic Trade (which yet
in general are more laudable by half, because more useful than many of those
Crafts which idle men call Sciences)? others run all sorts of hazards; the
Scorchings of the Tropicks, or the Ice of the Northern Pole cannot affright
them; they will venture into New Worlds, and become acquainted with Stars that
never peeped into our Hemisphere, only to get a little useless, uncertain,
perishing, and many times harmful and destructive Riches. They Will be acquainted
at Iava and Iapan, the Streights of Gibaltore, and the Bay of Mexico; but all
the while are mere Strangers at home, to understand their own Constitution, to
know what is good and profitable for the Conservation of their Being, how to
preserve their Body in Health, and their Mind in Serenity; to make their Lives
truly comfortable, and their Deaths happy: These are things that scarce any
man studies for, or labors after. Greedy we are to amass White and Yellow
Dirt, and fill our Houses with that Lumber, which sillily we call Goods, but
utterly neglect the true Knowledge of God, and Nature in a Man's self, which
does furnish one with all kind of profitable and permanent Riches, Pleasures
and Delights, both of Time and Eternity; and which yet are so easy to be
acquired, as we need not serve an hard Apprenticeship, or hazard our Health or
Life by Sea or Land to obtain it,

But the Minds of people are set wholly upon outward Trumpety, admire nothing
but Shows, and Titles and Vanity, Money and Babylonish Learning are their
Idols. If a Fantastical Blade in a Velvet Iacket tells the people that one Herb
will cure a hundred various Diseases in as many particular people of contrary
Complexions and Natures, (though he himself with that Herb or any other, cannot
cure one of them); or if he bids them jumble an hundred things together, most
of them being of contrary Qualities, and tells them it is an excellent Medicine,
though he knows not the true Nature of the several Parcels, much less the
Qualities of the Whole) yet all is swallowed as an Oracle, his Authority is not
to be disputed, he was a great Man, could speak several Languages, and was such
a King's Doctor, and has writ abundance of Books, and keeps his Coach, and has
got a bushel of Money by his Practice; Will you question such a man's Judgment?
Whereas, if we may speak a bold Truth, it is certain there have been in all Ages
a sort of a Letter-Learned Curers of both the Souls and Bodies of men, which
have proved the Pests, the Vermin, and Evil Savage wrathful Beasts of the
Earth, that have destroyed all the good Fruits of God in this World; and as
soon as such good Fruits begins to bud in mankind, are ready with the Beetle of
Aristotle, or Aquinas (an Old Aphorism, or a New Canon) to beat it down under
their feet, and extinguish it. These are the Egyptian Necromancers that
bewitch poor people to admire and run after them; and like our common Vagabond
Gypsies, the intent and design of all their Canting and their Skill, is to have
their hands crossed with a piece of Silver or Gold, and to juggle your Money
out of your Pockets. For to gain the greater Veneration and Esteem, they have
invented abundance of hard Words, or speak in unknown Tongues, making the
people believe thereby, that they know the more of God and Nature: Whereas they
are only Changers of Words, and know nothing of the Inward Virtue and Life of
things, whether Divine or Natural. If a man could name any particular Herb or
Disease in an hundred several Languages, what would this better him as to the
Inward Virtue of that Herb, or the Nature and Cure of that Disease? All
Languages are but one in the Root, und therefore to speak with several Tongues,
has never been known to make a man wise, where a good natural Genius is wanting.

But unto the Study and Knowledge of God, and his Divine Principles of Love and
Light, I recommend all the Lovers of Wisdom, which is sufficient to teach them
all things Divine and Natural, and to heal all their Diseases; for so says the
Kingly Prophet David, Psalm. 107. 20. The Lord sent his word and healed them,
and delivered them from destruction. And again, Psalm. 30. 17. I cried unto the
Lord, and he healed me. So Genesis 20. 17. Abraham prayed unto the Lord, and be
healed Abimelech and his Wife: Also, Moses cried unto the Lord that he would
heal Miriam of her Leprosy, and the Lord commanded, That she should be shut
out of the Camp seven days, and then she was received in again whole, Number. 12.
13. And Deuteronomy. 32. 39. God speaks thus, See now, I, even I am he, and there is
no God with me; I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal, neither is there
any that can deliver out of my hands. And Matt. 10. 18. Christ gives his
Servants power to heal the sick, cleanse the Lepers, and raise the dead. In a
word, Multitudes of Examples we have in the Scriptures of Truth, that all the
Prophets and Holy men of God, who were guided and directed by his Spirit of
Wisdom in all their Troubles, whether they were Diseases of the Body or the
Mind, always made their Application unto the Lord, and he healed them, and
taught them what means to use, that always proved effectual, though seeming
never so mean and simple. Therefore let every one address to this Grand
Physician, whose Arm is not shortened, nor his Mercy and Goodness diminished.
But if Men will give themselves up to the Spirit of Error, Ignorance and
Blindness, and live in all Intemperance, Gluttony, and Superfluity, which
brings on them a multitude of Diseases, and then enquire and run after the
False Prophets and Necromancers, whose Practice is merely for Money, Honor,
Pride and Estimation, studying how to deceive the people by canting Words,
Plush Coats, gilded Coaches great Houses, etc. which do amuse the Rabble, and
make them have great Thoughts of them, though most that have tried their
Medicines might know that they are worse than the Diseases they are prescribed
against: I, say, If you follow these Courses, it is no wonder if your Lives
become burdensome unto you, and complicated Diseases torment you, and an
untimely Death cut you off. For you may take a Cart Load of gross unseparated
Herbs and Juices, as our Physicians use, with a Tun of their sick Decoctions,
and a whole Apothecaries Shop of their Confused Compositions, and be further
off from a Cure than at first. Therefore the safest Course I can direct my
fellow-Mortals, is, To fear the Lord, live sober and temperate, both in the
Quantity and Quality of Meats, Drinks and Employments. And if Diseases do at
any time invade the Body, by any Accidents, or through the Male-Configurations
of the Constellations, or the like, then humbly to apply themselves by Prayer
to the Lord, and to the Oracle of God in a man's self; and then, as the Mother
of our Lord said unto the Servants that waited at the Marriage where he wrought
his first Miracle, Whatever he bids you do, that do ye; that is, whatsoever the
Divine Light or Holy Spirit of the Lord directs you to, or bids you do, that be
you sure, in all particulars to observe. For the Reason, Wit, Skill, and all
Knowledge of the outward man ought to be as Waiters, Tenders or Servitors, to
execute and obey the Commands of the Spirit of the Lord. Men ought to stand
still from reasoning and Imaginations, and wait at the Altar of the Lord, and
hear what he will teach; which Directions man ought to follow, and to act as
this blessed Light, and friendly Principle of God does excite him; for in its
power and virtue consists the right Cure of Body and Soul, and in it is safe to
move and abide; Amen.

CHAP. XVII.
Of BUGS; and from what Matter and Aliment they do proceed, and how to prevent
their Generations. Of the Excellency of clean sweet Beds, and perniciousness of
old stinking Feather-Beds. Also, several Receipts how to kill Bugs and Fleas.

CLeanness in Houses, especially in Beds, is a great preserver of Health. Now
Beds for the most part stand in Corners of Chambers, and being ponderous close
Substances, the refreshing Influences of the Air have no power to penetrate or
destroy the gross Humidity that all such places contract, where the Air has
not its free egress and regress. In these shady dull places Beds are continued
for many years, and hardly see the Sun or Elements. Besides, Beds suck in, and
receive all sorts of pernicious Excrements that are breathed forth by the
sweating of various sorts of people, which have Leprous and Languishing
Diseases, which lie and die on them: The Beds, I say, receive all these several
Vapors and Spirits, and the same Beds are often continued for several
Generations, without changing the Feathers, until the Ticks be rotten. Besides,
we have many Feathers that are imported from several Countries, which are the
Drivings of old Beds, the uncleanness whereof is not considered. As to the
Nature of Feathers, they are of a strong, hot, sulsome Quality; for Fowls, of
all Creatures are for the most part the hottest, and their Feathers contain the
same Nature: Therefore the constant lying on soft Feather-Beds, does not only
overheat the Back and Reins, weakening the Joints and Nerves; but they have
power also not only to receive, but retain all evil Vapors and Excrements that
proceed from, and are breathed forth by various Diseased people. Hence it comes
to pass that sundry Distempers are transferred from one to another, by lying
upon or in such Beds, which Distempers do secretly steal on a man by degrees,
so that he cannot imagine whence the Disorder proceeds, or what the cause
thereof should be. But I would not have the Reader mistake me; all people are
not subject to get Diseases this way: There are some whose Constitutions are
strong, and their Natural Heat and Spirits are vigorous and lively, by the
Power and Virtue whereof they withstand and repel all such evil Vapors and
Scents as do proceed from such Beds, when a man is hot and sweats in them, that
they have no power to seize the Spirit: But, on the contrary, when such people
shall lie on such Beds, whose Natural Heat is weak, their Spirits few, and
whose central heat is not able to withstand or repel those Vapors and Scents
which such Beds send forth when a man is hot in them; this last sort of people
are subject to receive Injuries, and contract Diseases; for those evil Vapors
do powerfully penetrate the whole Body, and if they are not withstood by the
central heat and power of the Spirits, then these evil Vapors do seize the
Spirits, and incorporate themselves with their likenesses; for every particular
thing does sensibly and powerfully seek out its likeness, and wheresoever it
finds its simile, it has power to incorporate and become essential. These are
the chief Reasons why one man gets Diseases by lying with Diseased Persons, and
in unclean Beds, and others not. It is a general custom when men go abroad or
travel, to desire clean Sheets, imagining them to be a sufficient bulwark to
defend them from the pernicious Fumes and Vapors of old stale Beds; but it is
too short. For it is certain, that most or all Beds do perfectly stink, not
only those in Inns and Houses of Entertainment, but others; not but that every
ones Bed does smell indifferent well to himself; but when he lies in a strange
Bed, let a man put his Nose into the Bed when he is thoroughly hot, and hardly
any common Vault is like it.

Now this sort of Uncleanness, which does proceed from old Beds, is not only
the greatest, but also the most injurious to the Health and Preservation of
Mankind, and the least care is taken to prevent it. Every one that can, will
have plentiful Changes both of Linen and Woollen Garments, for if they have
not, experience does show, that the Excrements and Breathings of the Body will
generate Vermin: Also, do not most people take care that their Furnitures are
daily brushed and rubbed, and their very Floors washed, as tho they were to eat
their Food on them? But all this while they lie on Beds that have not been
changed, or hardly aired in several years. Let an indifferent person judge
which is most pleasurable and healthful, to have a clean Floor to tread on,
(which costs many a hard days labor to keep so, and is dirtied in a moments
time) or to have a clean sweet Bed to lie on? There is no comparison to be
made, the difference is so great; the one being essential either to health or
sickness; the other an indifferent thing. If there was but the tenth part of
the care taken to keep Beds clean and sweet, as there is of Clothing and
Furniture, then there would be no Matter for the getting of Diseases, nor for
the generation of Bugs. I woutd have all Housewives and others, consider the
Reasons of these things. Are not Lice, that troublesome Vermin, bred from the
breathings of the Body, for want of often change both of Linen and Woollen?
And will not Fleas breed from the very Dust of Chambers where people lie? Also
any Woollen that has been used about Beds, although the cold Winter have
destroyed them, yet if these Clothes lie in any close place, where the Air has
not its free egress and regress, these very Garments will generate Fleas the
Summer following; but if these Clothes had never been used about Men and Women,
they would never have bred Fleas; for there is no matter of Element in Wool or
Cloth for the generation of such Creatures; but Wool, Cloth, Furs and Hair, are
chiefly the Element of Moths, and sometimes of small Worms; that is, if such
are kept in places where the refreshing Influences of the Air have not their
free egress; for all such places do contract great store of Moisture, which
when hot Weather comes, causes Putrefaction, whence all such Vermin do
proceed. But if those things be in daily use, and exposed to the open Element,
they never breed any Vermin: so that the generation of those things are
generally caused by Accidents; not but that there is matter in the Radixes of
such things for the generation of such Vermin.

2. From the pernicious Smells and putrified Vapors that do proceed from old
Beds, are generated the Vermin called Bugs, (of which, neither the Ancients,
nor the Modern Writers of this Age, have taken notice) according to the degrees
of Uncleanness, Nature of the Excrements, and the closeness of the Places where
Beds stand; for some Peoples Excrements are not so unclean as others: Also, in
all close places, especially in Cities and great Towns, the Spirits and thin
Vapors of the Air are suffocated, which makes the same Air sulpherous and
humid, whence does proceed Putrefaction. Therefore it is not to be thought a
general Rule, That all Old Beds should breed Bugs, as some (who are ignorant of
the Operation of Nature) will be apt to say, If one Bed do breed them, why not
all? No, it is according to the nature of the uncleanness, and other accidents
that do happen: for where, (as is said before) the thin pure Air, with the
refreshing Influences of the Sun and Elements, have their free egress and
regress, all such matter is destroyed, whence such Vermin are produced. The
Original of these Creatures called Bugs, is from Putrefaction, occasioned by
stinking Scents and Vapors, which do proceed from the Bodies and Nature of Men
and Women, and the mixing or incorporating of these Vapors with moist and
sulpherous Airs; for where there is no heat nor humidity, there can begin no
Putrefaction. Therefore all that have attributed the generation of this Vermin
to Wood, as Bedsteads, and the like, are grossly mistaken in the productions of
Nature; for there is no matter in Wood that can generate such a Vermin, it
being productive only or chiefly of two Creatures in England, viz. of
Wood-Lice, and a small Worm. These Wood-Lice are never generated but in places
where the Sun and Air have not their free influences, so that there is store of
humidity contracted; and when the Sun comes to such Degrees of the Zodiac,
this Creature is generated, which is of as different a Nature from Bugs, as
Sweet-wood is from a stinking Bed. Also Wood does breed a certain small Worm,
but never till the Salts Nature and Power is decayed through length of time:
then the Air enters it which does presently cause it to contract a humid
Quality, from whence proceeds Putrefaction, whereof when the Sun is powerful,
this Worm is bred. But so long as Wood continues sound, and is kept dry, the
Air having its free influences on it, I affirm, That no sort of Wood ever
breeds any kind of Vermin.

3. There are many also that attribute the generation of this Creature to
Hogs-Hair, which being mixed with Lime, and Houses plaistered with it, does
occasion (say they) the Generation of Bugs. Now it is most certain that there
is no possibility in Nature for this Production: for no kind of Hair ever
breeds any Living Creature, except it be put into Water or Mud when the Sun is
powerful, and then this Creature thus generated, retains its first Species,
viz. a Hair, with a live Head, which was its Element whence it proceeded: but
if you take it out of the Water, it presently dies: so also it does when the
Sun declines in heat, as most sorts of Vermin that are bred through Heat and
Moisture do. But Hair being mixed with Lime, all Matter of generation is
thereby totally destroyed: For Lime does chiefly contain a harsh, fiery, keen,
sharp, corroding Quality; it is so sharp, that it does destroy all Life, and is
as contrary to it, as Light is to Darkness; the predominant Qualities in it is
the Salts Nature, from which no Living Creature can be produced. Besides, if
there were never so much matter in Hair for the generation of such Vermin, Lime
would destroy it; for in Lime there is only a Salnitral fiery Virtue.

4. If the Reasons before mentioned be not sufficient to convince the ignorant
of their erroneous Opinions in this particular, then I hope the following one
will, which is more familiar to every one. It has never been known, that this
troublesome Vermin was ever seen in Warehouses, Kitchins, Parlours,
Dining-rooms, or any places where Beds have never been, except they have by
accident been brought into such Rooms or Warehouses, by Furniture of Chambers
that have been troubled with them, tho all such places have the same Furniture
as Chambers, except Beds.

5. From the same Substance or Matter whence Bugs are bred, is also occasioned
the generation of many nasty Diseases in the Blood; so that the destruction of
the Matter that breeds them, is of greater Consequence than most people are
sensible of: And if these following Rules be observed, I dare affirm, That the
Generation of Bugs will cease, and also many other Inconveniences and
Distempers that are got by this sort of Uncleanness, will be avoided.

First, You are to destroy all Press-Bedsteads, which stand in Corners of
Rooms, being made up with Boards so close, that the Air cannot penetrate, or
dry up and consume the moist sulpherous Vapors that are contracted. These
Sorts of Beds, that stand so, are apt to have them more than others. Also, you
are to set your other Sorts of Beds as near as you can in the most airy places
of your Rooms, exposing them to the Air the most part of the Day, with your
Chamber-windows open, that the Air may freely pass, which is the most excellent
Element that does sweeten all things, and prevents Putrefaction. In the Night
also you ought not to have your Window-Curtains drawn, nor your Curtains that
are about your Beds; for it hinders the sweet refreshing Influences of the Air,
so that the Air of all close places becomes of a hot sulpherous Nature and
Operation; the thin pure Vapors, which do wonderfully refresh Nature, are as
it were suffocated: And this preventing the Influenees of the Air, is in an
especial manner observable, when people are sick, or out of order, as tho the
sweet pleasant Air had been the cause of their Disease: such Rooms being so
very close, with great Fires in them, that if a Healthy Person do but continue
three or four Hours in them, the fulsome Steams, and thick Vapors will much
disorder him, and take away the edge of his Appetite: And if so, what will the
Operation be on those whose Spirits are weak and disordered with Distempers?

What is more pleasant and healthful than good Air? It chears and comforts the
Spirits, it opens the Passages of the Joints and Nerves, it purifies the Blood,
creates an Appetite, increasing Strength and Vigor. But on the contrary, hot,
thick, sulpherous Airs, do not only obstruct the Passages of the Spirits, but
suffocate them, loading the Joints and Nerves with evil Juices, whereby the
Limbs and Members become full of pain, causing a general Tenderness to possess
the whole Body, and destroying the Appetite, and the power of the digestive
Faculty in the Stomach. Also, do not all Houses and Places grow Musty, and
contract too great store of Moisture, if the Air be any way prevented by
Window-shutters, or the like, that it cannot have its free egress and regress?
Therefore moderate Clothing, hard Beds, Houses that stand so as that the
pleasant Briezes of Wind may air and refresh them, and also Houses that are
full of W^^^ows, are to be preferred. For where the Air has not its free
Influences, the Spirit becomes dull and heavy, this being the true Life of the
Spirit in every thing.

7. Now the certain means and way not only to prevent the Generation of this
Vermin, but also to preserve Health and Strength, is Straw, or rather
Chaff-Beds, with Ticks of Canvas, and Quilts made of Wool or Flocks to lay on
them; which certainly is the most easy and pleasant Lodging that can be
invented; and a little Custom will make it appear friendly to Nature, and in
every respect far beyond the softest Feather-beds on which, when a Man lies
down, he sinks into them, as into an Hole, with Banks rising on each side of
him; especially if two lie together, when first they go to Bed they lie close,
and after a little time, when they begin to be hot or sweat, they are generally
willing to lie a little further off, that they may cool themselves, but cannot
do it without great difficulty and trouble, by reason of the softness of the
Bed, and those Banks that rise on each side. Besides such soft Feather-Beds do
over-heat the Reins and Back, making all the parts tender, and causing
Sweating, and many other Inconveniences to attend the Body. Feather-Beds also
are nothing so easy as Quilts, after a little time being accustomed to them;
they are also extreme fulsome, and by their Heat they do powerfully dry up the
Radical Moisture, causing a general Faintiness to attend the whole Body. But on
the contrary, hard, even Beds, that lie smooth, are not only easy through
Custom, as is mentioned before, but a Man may turn freely, both Sleeping and
Waking. They harden and strengthen the whole Body, especially the Back and
Reins, make the Nerves and Sinews strong, preventing the immoderate Evacuations
by Sweating, and keeping the Body in a temperate Heat. Besides, such Beds may
be often changed with but little Trouble and less Cost; they send forth no
stinking Fumes or ^^eams, as Feather-beds do; but are sweat and clean.
Certainly nothing is more healthy, next to Temperance in Meat and Drink, than
clean hard Beds.

8. All sorts of Beds, especially Feather-beds, ought to be changed, driven or
washed, at the least three or four times in a year; or else it is impossible to
keep them sweet and clean, and to prevent the Generation of Vermin, or. the
other Inconveniences beforementioned. Would not every one condemn a Man, if he
should wear a Shirt a year, and lie in one pair of Sheets seven years? Which if
any should do, it would not so much endanger his Health, nor bring half the
Inconveniences on his Body, as old stinking Feather-beds do: which possibly
stunk before ever they were lain on, by reason of the fulsom Excrements that
the Quills of the Feathers contain. Also Feathers do certainly contain an
unclean putrified Matter, that has a near affinity with the Nature of Bugs;
and therefore Feather-beds are more apt to breed them, than Wool or Flocks;
tho both will do it, if the forementioned Rules be not observed. But if you
are not willing, or so lowlyminded, as to have Straw or Chaff-beds under your
Quilts, then you may have Flock-beds with Canvas-Tickings, which may be both
aired and washed as often as you please, with little Trouble and Charge. If any
shall question the Truth of what I have alleged concerning Beds, I desire they
would please but to try the Experiment, by filling a Bed with the freshest and
cleanest Straw or Chaff, which will smell very pleasant; and having so done,
let them lie on it half a year in a corner of a Room, as Beds generally stand,
and then smell to it; and instead of sending forth a Pleasant Scent, as it did
at first, it will send forth a strong, fulsome, musty Steam or Fume. And if
this will do so, what will Feathers do, that in the Boot of Nature are unclean
fulsom Excrements, of a hot strong Quality? Therefore they have the greater
power not only to attract and suck into themselves the fulsom Excrements that
are breathed forth of the Body by Sweatings, and the like; but they have also
power to retain such evil Vapors; and when others come to lie on them, and are
thoroughly hot, it awakens those pernicious Steams, which often bring many
Inconveniences on the Body. Besides, it is very unpleasant to lie in such
Beds; a Man must always be forced to keep his Nose aboveboard. Indeed each Man's
own Bed does not stink or smell strong to himself, because he is accustomed to
it; neither does a Tallow-Chandler smell those horrible Scents and pernicious
Fumes, that old Tallow sends forth when it is melted. But let any other Person
that is not accustomed to it, be near such things, and it will be very
offensive to him. Even so it is in all other stinking Trades, and things of
this nature; so that the greatest Slut in the World does hardly smell her own
House or Bed stink. For in Man is contained the true Nature and Property of all
things, both of Good and Evil; therefore he is both liable, and also apt to
receive all Impressions, and to be wrought on by all things he shall either
communicate with, or join himself to, whether it be Cleanness, or the contrary.
Also by Meats, Drinks, and Communication, all things have power by a
Sympathetical Operation to work on Man, because he is like unto all, bearing a
proportionable Nature unto all things. If People did understand this, they
would prefer Sobriety and Temperance with Cleanness, far beyond what they do;
and then Men would not be subject to so many Diseases, as now they are.

9. Heat and Moisture is the Root of all Putrefaction; and therefore Bugs are
bred in Summer, but they live all the Winter, tho they are not then so
troublesome. They harbor in Bedsteads, Holes, and Hangings, Nitting, and
breeding as Lice do in Clothes: But all Men know, that Woollen and Linen are
not the Element of Lice, but they are bred from the fulsome Scents and
Excrements that are breathed forth from the Body. The very same Radix have
Bugs; and if there be any difference, they are from a higher Putrefaction, and
therefore they are a more noisome stinking Creature.

Several Receipts to destroy Bugs and Fleas.

TAke a convenient quantity of unslaked Lime, and put it into some Water, and
let it stand three or four days, then pour off your Water, and add to it a
quantity of common Salt more or less, as you think good, (but the stronger the
Water is made, both of Lime and Salt, the better it will perform the Cure);
then take this Liquor and wash the Floor, and the Sides of the Wall, and the
Bedstead very well two or three times a Week, for a Month or two together, (not
forgetting to give your Room as much Air as you can, by setting your Windows
open most part of the day) this Liquor will destroy both Bugs and Fleas, if
other Circumstances of good Housewifery and Cleanness be observed.

Another.

Take Colliquinto Seeds, a sufficient quantity to make Water strong, boil them
one quarter of an hour in Water, and wash the Walls, Floot, and Bedstead with
this Water two or three times in a Week in the hottest Season for a Month, or
as you see occasion. This will also prevent the breeding both of Bugs and
Fleas, [But do not forget to let into your Rooms your Friend the Air.]

Another.

Take Wormwood in its proper Season, dry it according to our Directions, and
slip it from the stalks, and put it into White Paper Bags made flat, and prick
Holes in them to let the Fumes out, and put some of these Bags between your Bed
and the Sacking, Mats or Boards, and some of them under your Boulster, and also
under your Bed on the Floor, and some of the same Wormwood loose on the Tester
of your Bed. The Fumes and Scents of this Herb, does not only prevent the
Generation of all kinds of Vermin, but it makes the Air of such Rooms, where it
lies, wholesome.

Another.

Take Wormwood and Rue, a good quantity, boil them a quarter of an hour in
Water, then take common Salt, and add to this Water what quantity you please,
(the stronger the better) then wash the Sides of the Wall, Floor, and Bedstead
with this Water two or three times a Week, and it will kill both Bugs and Fleas.

Another.

Take the Rinds or Outsides of Green Wall-nuts, bruise them, and steep them in
Water three or four days, and wash your Rooms and Bedstead with it two or three
times a Week, and it will work the same effect.

Another.

Take Wormwood and Mustard Seed bruised, boil them in Water a quarter of an
hour, then add Salt to the Water, and wash the Wall, Floor, and Bedstead with
it, which will prevent the Generation of all kinds of Vermin, if the sweet
Influences of the Sun and Air be not prevented.

Another.

Take the Lees of Soap after you have done washing, and boil Onions in it, then
add a little Salt to it, and wash your Room and Bedstead with it.

Another.

Take strong Vinegar, and mix some Salt to it, and sprinkle your Room; this
does not only prevent and kill Bugs and Fleas, but it is otherways wholesome.

A Fume.

Take Brimstone, and burn it on a Chafing Dish of Coals in the middle of your
Room, (but remember to shut your Windows) this do two or three times a Week, or
as often as you please, the oftener you do it, the sooner will the Cure be
performed.

Another.

Take three or four Ounces of Genny-Pepper, more or less, burn it on a
Chafing Dish of Coals in the middle of your Chamber, shut your Windows and
Doors, and go out, or else it will serve you as it will the Bugs and Fleas. If
you do thus two or three times a Week for a Month or two in the hot Seasons, it
will destroy all kind of Vermin in the bud.

Another.

To conclude, There is nothing better to prevent the Generation of Bugs and
Fleas, and to keep your Bed sweet, than every Morning when you rise to set open
your Windows, and lay open your Bed-cloths, and so let it continue four or five
hours, in which time the excrementitious Fumes, and gross humid Steems, which
the Body breathed forth in the foregoing Night, will Evaporate by the help of
the Air; this is a very good way to keep the Bed sweet, and to prevent the
breeding of Vermin, it being impossible for any to keep their Bed sweet, if
they do not more or less observe this Rule.

CHAP. XVIII.
A short Discourse of the Pain in the Teeth, showing from what Cause it does
chiefly proceed, and how to prevent it.

THe terrible Pains and Diseases of the Teeth do chiefly proceed from two
Causes. The first is from certain filthy phlegmy Matter which the Stomach and
Vessels do continually breathe and send forth, which does Lodge or Center in
the Mouth, especially between the Teeth, and on the Gums; and some People
having fouler Stomachs than others, such do breathe forth very sower, stinking,
phlegmy Matter, which does not only increase the Pain, but causes the Teeth to
become loose and rotten: And for want of continual cleansing and washing, those
Breathings, and this phlegmy Matter turns to Putrefaction, which does eat away
the Gums, as tho Worms had eaten them. And this defect is generally attributed
to the Disease called the Scurvey; but it is a mistake, the Cause is chiefly,
as is mentioned before, from the Stomach, or for want of Cleansings.

2. This Distemper of the Teeth and Gums does also proceed from the various
sorts of Meats and Drinks, and more especially from the continual eating of
Flesh, Fish, and fat sweet things, compounded of various Ingredients of
disagreeing Natures, which do not only obstruct the Stomach; but fur and foul
the Mouth, part thereof remaining upon the Gums, and between the Teeth. For all
such things do quickly turn to Putrefaction, which does by degrees corrupt both
the Teeth and Gums. Besides, our Beds take up near half the time of our Lives,
which time the Body is not only without motion, but the Bed and Coverings do
keep it much hotter than the Day-garments, especially of those that draw the
Curtains of their Windows and Beds so close, that the pure Spirits and thin
refreshing Vapors of the Air are hindered of having their free egress and
regress, which does dull and flatten the Action of the Stomach. Therefore the
Night does foul the Mouth more than the Day, furring it with a gross slimy
Matter, especially those that have foul Stomachs, and are in years; for
whatsoever are the disorders of the Body, the Mouth does always partake of
them, which ought to be cleansed every Morning.

3. It is to be noted, That most people do also attribute the Diseases of the
Teeth to Colds, Rhumes, and other outward Accidents. It is true, outward
Accidents will further this Disease; but then there must be Matter beforehand,
otherwise outward Colds can have no power to cause this Pain. The same is to be
understood in all Stoppages of the Breast, and other Obstructions, as Coughs,
and the like. For, if any part be obstructed, or there be Matter for Distemper,
then, on every small occasion of outward Colds, or the like Accidents, Nature
complains. If your Teeth and Gums be sound, and free from this Matter, take
what Colds you will, and your Teeth will never complain, as daily experience
does show. For all outward Colds and other Accidents of the like nature, have
no power to seize any part of the Body, except first there be some inward
Defect or Infirmity: Suppose the Teeth be defective, then the Disease falls on
that part; or if it be the Head, Eyes, Breast, Back, or any other part or
Member of the Body, that is obstructed, the evil is felt in that part.
Therefore if the Mouth be kept clean by continual Washings, it will prevent all
Matter of Putrefaction; and then Colds, and the like Accidents, will have no
power to seize this Part, or cause this terrible Pain. Even so it is in all
other Parts of the Body.

4. There are many various things, of diverse Natures, prescribed by Physicians,
and others, as Washes, etc. to preserve the Teeth and Gums; but most of them,
if not all, to little or no purpose, as daily Experience teaches: For, all
high, sharp Salts, and things of a sour or keen Nature, do rather cause the
Teeth to perish, than the contrary; as do all hot Spirits, be they what they
will: Many have destroyed their Teeth by the frequent use of such things, and
it has hardly ever been known that any such things have ever cured or
prevented the aching Pains of the Teeth, but water only. Many examples I could
mention to demonstrate this; but too tedious for this place.

5. The best, most sure, and never-failing way to prevent the Diseases and
Pains in the Teeth and Gums, is every Morning to wash your Mouth with at least
ten or twelve Mouthfuls of pure Water, cold from the Spring or River, gently
rubbing your Mouth with your Finger, or a Cloth, and so again after Dinner or
Supper, swallowing down a Mouthful of Water after each Washing: There being no
sort of Liquor in the World so pure and clean as Water; and nothing does
cleanse and free the Teeth and Gums from that foul Matter which does proceed
from the Breathings and Purgings of the Stomach, and from the various sorts of
Food, so well as Water: The use of other Washes is to little or no purpose; but
whosoever do constantly wash their Mouths with Water, as is before mentioned,
shall find an essential Remedy. All hard Rubbing and Picking of the Teeth ought
by any means to be avoided, for that is injurious to them. And whenever you
find your Mouth foul, or subject to be slimy, as sometimes it will more than at
others, according to the good or evil state of the Stomach, though it be not
after eating; at all such times you ought to wash your Mouth. This Rule all
Mothers and Nurses ought to observe, washing the Mouths of their Children two
or three times a day; and also to cause their Children to swallow down a little
Water, which will be very refreshing to their Stomachs: For Milk does naturally
foul and fur the Mouth and Teeth, and if they be not kept clean by continual
washing, it causes the Breeding of Childrens Teeth to be more painful to them.

6. To keep your Teeth white, one of the best things is a piece of a China
Dish, or a piece of a fine Dutch Earthen Dish, made into fine Powder, and the
Teeth rubbed with it.

7. Few there be that understand or consider the excellent Virtues of Water, it
being an Element of a mild and cleansing Nature and Operation, friendly unto
all things, and of univesal Use: But because it is so common, and so easily
procured, I am afraid that many People will be like Naaman the Syrian, when the
Prophet Elisha advised him to wash seven times in the River of Jordan to cure
his Leprosy; it being the Ignorance and Folly of most People, to admire those
things they do not know, and, on the other side, to despise and trample
underfoot those Things and Mysteries they do know; which the Learned in all
Ages have taken notice of: For, should some People know what Apothecaries and
others give them, they would despise the Physic, and have but little respect
for their Doctor.

All Housewives do know, that no sort of Liquor, be it what it will, will
cleanse and sweeten their Vessels, but only Water; all other Liquors leaving
only a sower stinking Quality behind them, which will quickly cause
Putrefaction: But Water in its own nature is clean and pure, not only for all
Uses in Housewifery, and the Preservation of Health; but the Saints and Holy
Men of God have highly esteemed this Element, by using it in the exterior Acts
of Divine Worship, as having a Simile with the Eternal Water of Life, that does
purify and cleanse the Soul from Sin.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Marriage^, and the Inconveniences of unequal Matches.

SInce the main Scope of this whole Treatise is but to set before my
Fellow-Mortals the means and courses whereby they may obtain Health both of the
Body and Mind, and show them from whence the grievous Diseases of the one, and
tormenting Passions of the other do proceed. And since there is nothing that
more frequently brings Grief, Affliction and Distraction on the Minds of People
(and many times lamentable Diseases in their Bodies too) than inconsiderate and
unfit Marriages, I could not but think it necessary to add a few words on a
subject so general and important.

THis sacred tie of Marriage was instituted by God in Paradise, that the Woman
might be an helpmeet to the Man, and each party a Comfort and Solace to each
other, and so propogate their Kind in Love and Peace; but by Peoples corrupt
manners and abuses of that holy Institution, it is now to many become the
greatest Plague of human Life, where two unsociable Creatures are yoked
together to each others torment, yet cannot be separated, but are forced with
struggling, and goring, and kicking each other, to drudge on a most
uncomfortable days work of Misery, till Death unharness them. But I shall not
spend time on general Complaints, which are bootless, but come to particulars.

1. Of all sorts of Marriages, the worst and most unequal'st is for Young Men
to Marry Women who are (through years) past Childbearing, which as it is
seldom, if ever, done but for some base, hellish, sordid, self ends on the
Man's side, and brutish unnatural stimulations of Lust on the Woman's, so it
very rarely fails to be attended with its own Punishment, even in this Life,
there being few sins that people are guilty of, that do more openly and
shamefully contradict the Laws of God and Nature, and that too (which renders
it ten times the worse) under color of an holy Institution of God.

In the Beginning, after the Lord created Male and Female, he said unto them,
Increase, multiply, and replenish the Earth. This was the Command of the
Creator, which all Mankind are obliged unto; and whosoever breaks this Law for
any particular self ends, as Money, Gluttony, Honor Idleness, or the like
Vanities, does draw upon himself the indignation of God, because he has on
purpose withstood the most Natural influences and Operations of Nature, and
turned them into Wantonness. These kinds of Marriages do also contradict the
whole course and progress of Nature, and seems to threaten all things with a
period; and hereby man shows himself a hundredfold worse and more depraved
than the basest and most savagest of Beasts, who will neither touch their
Females when they are with Young, nor after they are Old, and past Breeding.
Which might be an Example unto us, if Pride, devilish Lusts and Intemperances
did not possess peoples Souls. All Creatures in this World, even the very
Vegetables, do strive with highest diligence to produce its Seed, wherein is
contained all the Properties of the Body, and then the old Body dies. This is
the Bond of Nature, which preserves all things, and all Creatures do vehemently
desire to bring forth their Likenesses, which God's Law in Nature does by an
inward impulse constrain them unto, and in the performance thereof all
sensitive Creatures have the greatest pleasure and satisfaction. Every Man and
Woman in the World, except some few, who have depraved themselves, has a
Natural Desire to raise up unto themselves Posterity; for without it Nature
cannot be satisfied, but something seems always wanting, they have not
discharged one great end of their Being, and will die extremely in the Worlds
Debt, how rich soever they may be accounted,

When Young and Old intermarry, there is an inward, natural, and therefore
unappeasable contrariety, loathing and dislike between them, whence arises
Aversion, Hatred, Jealousy and Irreconcilable Discords, and causes the Young
Man to long after forbidden and unlawful Beds; It takes away all the true
Natural Delight and Pleasure, and renders the Mind incapable of all Spiritual
Duty, polluting the Soul and Body, whence does proceed both Ruin and
Destruction to the Health, and also to the ill-gotten Estate; for if a Young
Man could attain a Young Virgin with the same outward Advantages, viz. Money,
Honor, Idleness* etc. as he can have with an Old Woman, this latter sort might
go without their Young Gallants. But how base a thing it is, and how
unnaturally it looks that men should value Money more than the Law of God, and
the satisfaction of Nature, and the raising up of Seed unto themselves, which
is a thing of so great moment, that the Lord commanded, That the Brother of him
that died Childless, should Marry the Wife of his deceased Brother, that he
might raise up Seed unto him; for he that dies Childless, seems to have lived
to no purpose, and not to have answered that End for which he was made: Nor
have we any Example in the Scriptures of Truth, that ever any such Unnatural
Marriages were celebrated.

Furthermore, Children do increase Love, and makes the Affections more warm
between men and their Wives, encouraging lawful Care and Diligence, both in the
Father and the Mother: Nor is there any thing can make a Marriage-State
tolerable, but True Natural Love and Affection, not to be altered with
Troubles, when Sickness, and the like Accidents happen, there being few Married
People but meet with many Troubles and Crosses, which true Love to Wife. and
Children makes more easy, and encourages each Sex to go through them with
cheerfulness of Spirit: But on the Contrary, when Men meet with Disappointments
and Crosses Abroad, and their Love is Cold at Home, then all is out of Tune, and
the Fantasy is set on wandering after Vanity, which gives occasion for the
Wife to do the like; And thus there is caused an Unequal Disharmonious Life,
and is the Fruit of the Tree of Wrath which Mankind has stirred up through
their Unnatural Lusts and Passions, which cannot escape the Divine Hand of
Retaliation; for if all the Hairs of our Head be numbered, and that a Sparrow
cannot fall without Divine Providence, how then should those great Sins, which
are absolutely against God's Divine and Natural Law, and against the Right of
Nature? must they not be taken notice of by his Divine Hand? For every
Principle both in the Evil and the Good does comprehend its own Children, and
also their works; and if men, by superfluity of Naughtiness, and Devllish
wantonness, have kindled the fierce Wrath, then they must not receive their
Reward from another Principle.

But sew there be that are truly sensible, or do consider how great a sin it is
for men and women on purpose, for the sake and love of Wantonness, to hinder
the ends of Nature, making a Sport and Pastime of that great formative Power,
which is essencial in every man and Woman, that thereby they might produce
their Species, and the Images of their Creator, which they bear; the Word of
Divine Power is always in motion, viz. a forming, figuring and shaping of all
things, both Spiritual and Corporeal; if it should cease, all things would drop
into their Original. And if men would but be still, and cease from their own
ways of self-hood, and from kindling the fierce wrath of God, they could not
but see the gross evil of such unnatural Practices, which how odious it is, we
may perceive by his fierce indignation against Onam, whom the Scripture
testifies, the Lord slew, because he wilfully prevented Generation, which
thereby seems to be reckoned as a Degree of Murder: Therefore let all that fear
the Lord separate themselves from such unfit Marriages, which ought not by any
pretenses to be countenanced, but condemned by all sober-minded people, as a
practice of Sodom and Egypt, and such as follow it without repentance, will be
swallowed up by the Red Sea of Divine Vengeance and Indignation.

2. Such men as through Age or other Infirmities, are so weakened, and their
Natures so decayed, as they are incapable of Generation, are not fit for
Marriage, nor ought to delude themselves with the pleasurable Fancies of Youth;
for the company of women in age, if there be not Strength and Temperance, is
not only a Sin against God and his Law in Nature, but generally proves of ill
consequence as to Health, though otherwise men may in the sight of God be
permitted Marriage even in Old Age, that is to say, such men who are vigorous
of Strength, lasting Healths; but then it ought to be to such Women as are not
past Childbearing; for the suitableness of Marriage is not when the Man and
the Woman are of an equal Age, but when on either part they can answer that end
for which Marriage was ordained, viz. the having of Issue and Posterity. But
generally, as for ancient men, if it has pleased the Almighty to take away the
Wives of their Youth, it is far better they should spend the remainder of their
Days single; for Solitude does afford unto the sober-minded and contemplative
Soul many excellent Advantages, both by Night and Day, it being easier for such
an one to keep his Mind intent and upright, and free from cares and wandering;
for there are many infirmities that attend Women, which will always add some
trouble and affliction to the Husband, more especially if there be a dear
affection and respect; besides, that Society plunges men more in the Affairs of
the World, which if we mind Virtue and Eternal Happiness, as we ought to do,
will prove as so many Clogs and Fetters to the Soul, and press her down to
earthly Thoughts and Considerations, when she would gladly mount up to Heaven,
on the soaring Wing of a Devout Meditation; and this ought the more to be
resented by Aged People, because they are certain their opportunities can be
but short, because there is but little Sand left in their Lives-Glass, and it is
pity to triflle away any of it on Vanity, in making Love where no Fruit can be
expected, or on the gossipping Stories of Talkative Women, that like the
Nightinggale, is become nothing but Tongue and Voice; and much worse to be
snatched from the sweet Contemplations of Eternity, by the perpetual bawlings
and noise of an unreasouable Screich-Owle, or Croakings of a Nigh-Raven, that
makes ones Bed more uneasy than a Nest of Hornets, or Regulus's Barrel stuck
full of sharp Nails, whereinto he was thrust stark naked.

The Inconveniences that attend Marriage in Age are many, the Benefits very
few; how ill it looks to see the Spring of Wantonness arise in the Autumn of
Life, and a Man, (according to the Vulgar Proverb) appear like an Onion with a
Gray Head and a Green Tail; too pregnant Symptoms that they have not forgot
their Youthful Vanities and Lusts, but would fain act them over again, tho
Nature refuses them the means; their Minds being as much as ever inflamed with
sensual Fires, tho their enfeebled Bodies cannot keep pace with them to bring
their loose extravagant Desires into act. Such Matches therefore, however they
may be cloaked with the Title of Holy Matrimony, are indeed Rapes upon Nature,
and lustful Sallies of a debauched Imagination, which always proves very
prejudicial to the Health of the Body, and obstructs the ways of Virtue and
Piety. Besides, if the Wives of such Doting Old Men happen to be Strong,
Youthful and aimable, they are freequently tempted by Lude Young Gallants, to
defile their Nuptial-Beds, and finding at home only Dalliance, (enough to stir
up wanton Desires) without Ability to satisfy and allay them, they thereupon
are too often led away to take wrong measures abroad, to the Destruction of
their own Souls, and many times of their Bodies too, to the Grief and Disgrace
of their too late repining titular Husbands, and the Dishonor and Confusion of
Families. Therefore, if men on whom Age has snowed her Silver Locks, (which
ought to be the Ensigns of Wisdom) will enjoy Health, and Strength, and Peace,
and live a virtuous quiet Life, let them beware of embarquing themselves in
such unfit Marriages, which if they shall prove tolerable to themselves, as
rarely it happens, yet if they have Children by former Wives, it is great odds,
but it proves a great Mischief to Them, and an occasion of such unnatural
Heart-burnings and Animosities, as every prudent man would willingly prevent.

3. There are another sort of Youngsters, that are for an equality in Estates
and Births, despising the innocent, simple and natural influences of agreeing
Hearts, and united Affections, and all those Real, though Secret Grounds of
Love, whence proceed our inclinations to affect such and such Complexions,
Features or Humors; all which is not regarded by this sort of people; but they
are mere Iockies in the Art of Wiving, and will Higgle for the other Hundred
pound in Portion, and fifty pound more at the birth of the first Child, or else
the poor Lass after the Wedding-Cloathes are made, must go look her an Husband;
such sordid Spirits as these, make nothing to strain Nature, and offer Violence
to their own Inclinations, nay, to their Consciences too, if it may but make
for their Covetous Interests. The first Question they ask, is, Has she store of
Money? If she have, that is sufficient encouragement, whether she be of good
Temper, or Virtuously inclined, or of an healthy sound Constitution, fit to
bear healthy sound Children, or be a good House-wise, and of a prudent peaceful
Behavior, or have the fear of God before her Eyes, or not, they never regard;
and yet these ought to be the chief Ends and Considerations of every mon in
Marriage, and not the mixing of Mannours, and joining together of Farms, and
coupling of Stocks, as if their Bags must needs mutually Engender, and breed
and multiply as well as their Persons: This making of Matrimony a Matter of
Money, and Miserly Parents sacrificing their Children to Mammon, is a wretched
Idolatry, little inferior to theirs of Old, who offered their Sons and
Daughters to Molock they made oblations of them in Flames, which quickly
devoured them; but you deliver them up, and force them into loathed Embraces,
where perhaps they languish out twenty or thirty Years in perpetual Vexations
and Torment, without one hours solid Content or Satisfaction, and all this for
a little Base Pelf, which never has been known to make any happy, where
Content, Sobriety and Virtue have been wanting.

But if God's Law, and the Influences of unbiast Nature did take place in
peoples hearts, there would not be such over-looking those that have but a
little Money; the Rich and Noble then would often marry with the poor, or those
they now call their Unequals: For where shall we find a healthy, fresh, rosy,
straight-Limb'd, Angel-fac'd Innocent Virgin, fit for Emperors to get Princes
upon, sooner than amongst the Daughters of Shepherds, or the untutored Troops
of a poor Country-Village? Did men live in the Power and Operation of God's
Laws, and the Dictates of Nature, none of them would delude the Simplicity of
Virgins, by Deceitful Kindnesses, and when they have gotten their Lewd Desires
of them, then leave them, and their own Offspring to beg their Bread, exposed
to shame and want, and all the Evils imaginable, making nothing to cut off the
Thread of Love, and bury Affection through the power of their depraved Wills,
which is a Crying Sin, and next door to Murder.

The truth is, there is scarce one Person of an hundred that make his or her
choice from Wisdom, or a right Understanding, and to answer the end for which
the Lord instituted Marriage in the beginning; but if a Man have but an Estate,
tho otherwise never so diseased, infirm, or unfit, all is overlooked and
excused, Money covers all Infirmities, where the heart is degenerated from
Truth and Virtue, making that there Master, which if well used would be a good
Servant, most People being so blind and stupid, that they dare not cast their
Care, and repose their Trust in him, who by his bountiful Divine Hand of
Providence takes care for all, and preserves all, and from whom every good
Gift proceeds, both Temporal and Spiritual; this trusting and relying on the
Creature more than the Creator, is the greatest Idolatry, and that which the
Lord abominates, for a Curse does follow all those who prefer their devilish
Lusts, and foolish Passions, and greedy Desires of Money, before the good and
holy fear of the Lord, and his Innocent Law, Themselves, Wives and Children
being afflicted with a numberless Number of Diseases and Infirmities; and what
Fruit can be expected from such corrupt Trees? Whence think ye proceed Leprous
Scabby Diseases, Joint-evils, and that which they call the King's Evil,
wherewith many thousands in this Nation of all sorts are afflicted, as also the
Gout in Youth, Consumptions, and other incurable Diseases? Are not most or all
these Evils the effect of undue Marriages, Uncleanness, and Intemperances?
And yet if a Man ask them, how came such or such a Disease, they will
confidently answer, We do not know, even as it pleases God; we know nothing we
have done which should occasion it. Thus laying the Cause on the Lord, of all
their Infirmities and Evils, never considering that it is the Reward of their
own Transgression, and of their own Evil Courses, which have awakened the
poisonous Properties in the Elements of the Body.

4. A fourth sort of Blameworthy, are those who do Marry without any due
Consideration of the weight and importance of what they go about; sure a thing
in which the Happiness or Misery of a Man's whole future Life is involved, and
which can be done but Once, should be considered Twice before we undertake it.
But many People are so hurried away with the Heat and Fury of youthful Lusts,
Passions, and Wantonness, as they mind nothing but a present Satisfaction of
their brutish Desires, vainly imagining that they shall never be otherwise;
but alas! as soon as those fiery Transports are allayed, their Love languishes,
grows cold and flat; and those very Embraces wherein they placed their highest
Happiness, become wearisom, nauseous, and perhaps loathsome, and then these hot
Lovers become Rude, Sordid, Stubborn, Bold, Surly, and Inhumane, having no true
Natural Affection unto, nor taking any honest Care for Wife or Children, but
grow Dissolute, Drunken, and Idle; as they get Childen in the heat of Drink and
Lust, so they make not the least Provision to preserve them. How many thousands
of poor Women and Children are more miserable than any Creatures on the Earth,
if we do but consider the Hunger, Cold, Diseases, Griefs, Vexations, and
Distractions, which they endure from the intolerable Idleness, Debauchery,
Crosness, or other ill Carriage, Words, and Communications of some brutified
Things, whom they are obliged to call Husbands and Fathers?

5. The Fear of the Lord being the beginning of all Wisdom, both Divine and
Humane, ought to be the principal Object of every Man and Woman's Thoughts,
Words, and Actions, and then they would be taught by the Spirit of Truth, how
they may choose unto themselves suitable Wives and Husbands: For Marriage is as
it were the Foundation either to Virtue or Vice; and nothing can make a
Conjugal Life happy, but suitable Dispositions and Virtue, and where their
coming together is from a well-grounded Love, and natural Affections mutually
combined to answer the End of that State, that is, to raise up Seed in the fear
of the Lord, and then the Blessing of the most High is with, and upon them in
all their Affairs; and whether they have much or little of the World's Wealth,
they are satisfied, as knowing that it is not Riches, but true Love that can
make a married Life pleasant, or encourage Industry in the Man and Wife: But
where Equality in Tempers, Years, and Virtues meet, it makes this Society the
most happy of all others, there Love covers a multitude of Infirmities, Joys
are doubled, Griefs divided, and all Troubles made easy.

It Is true, every Married Estate is followed more or less with Inconveniences;
for it forces a Man to appear in the World, and thrust himself into Business,
and attend and bow himself to those that perhaps he does not much care for, or
desire their Company, because they often spur him to Evil, or to do that, which
if Interest were not at stake, he would not do; and where there are six or
seven more in a Family, there will unavoidably be committed many Disorders,
sometimes by Servants, sometimes by Children, and seldom is it that they are
all in Health long together. And if it happens that the Wife have a good esteem
of her Doctor and his Physic, then she will do nothing without his Advice,
which proves not only chargeable, but many times continues their ill Habits of
Body, and this is apt to make Men grumble, fret, and repine; and thereunto the
other Cross-accidents usually attending Married Persons, as increase of Charge,
the uncertain Gains, and the certain Expenses, the hazards of Childbearing,
the crying and noise of Children, and their Death, the Lamentation of a tender
loving Wife, refusing to be comforted for her Children, because they are not:
or if there be no Children, then the Discontents of Barrenness, and Rachel's
outcry, Give me Children, or else I dye. All these Troubles, Inconveniences,
and many others too tedious to instance, are apt to hover round the
Marriage Bed; and therefore it ought to be well fortified with a fixed and
unalterable Love, founded on Virtue, Piety, and Judgment, for want of which,
Multitudes of both Sexes as soon as the Honey-Moon is past, and the first
fervours of their Passion glutted and slipped away as a Dream, do become
burdened and uneasy, and spend in vain a thousand Wishes, That they were
single again. For in truth, Marriage does very rarely answer the Ends of those
that chiefly propose Pleasure, Money, or the satisfaction of any particular
Lust or Passion; therefore none are happy, or can answer the End for which
Marriage was ordained, but only those who choose their Yoke-fellows in the fear
of the Lord, and from a well-composed Disposition, and pure natural Affections,
not having an Eye to Money, Honor, Idleness, Lusts, or a petulant Abuse of the
Creative Power of God; for Man is the Image of God, and his Son and Offspring,
therefore they ought not to take unto themselves Wives of all that they like,
as the Sons of God are complained of to have done, Genesis 6. They saw the
Daughters of Men were fair, and they chose unto themselves Wives of all that
they liked; not what the Lord liked; nor in his fear, but what themselves
liked; that is, for Lust, Honor, Self Ends, which was all contrary to God's
Law and Commandment; therefore the Lord was provoked to Wrath, and they brought
forth Giants, Monsters, and Destroyers, and the Lord cut short their days. --
My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, nevertheless his days shall be an
hundred and twenty years. Here you see Man's Life was abridged by reason of
their unfit Marriages, and the Corruption of their Conversation, whereby
Mankind became corrupted in the very Root, whence proceeds not only fierce,
beastial Inclinations and Dispositions, but a great number of Diseases, which
many bring into the World with them, of which most are incurable.

6. There are but very few Persons that do keep to, or observe the Rules of
Temperance in the use of the Marriage Bed, but are generally too indulgent and
immoderate in the Pleasures of Venus, which of all others are most enticing,
and seems more natural than any other Superfluity; but it is also the most
dangerous both to the health of the Body and Mind; for when Men give themselves
up thereunto, it destroys the vigor of the Understanding, make the mind poor,
base and effeminate; and as to the Elements of the Body, it weakens and
consumes them, and by degrees Contracts such Diseases as strike at, and corrupt
the very Root of Nature. In a word, nothing more Unmans a Man, than this sort
of Intemperance; therefore the following Rules and Observations will be
beneficial to all that shall observe them.

1st, Every one ought to be Temperate in Meats and Drinks, and to eat those
things as are naturally equal in their parts, and to avoid all Rich Cordial
Drinks, and Spiced Compositions, for such things over-heat the Blood, and open
all the Gates of the Venereal Property, whence proceed irregular and vehement
Inclinations, which ought to be avoided. Instead of such Excesses, you will do
well to entertain proper Labor and Exercise, which will prevent the Generation
of such Superfluous Matter, and this will be the more effectual, if sometimes
you will be so kind, as by Abstinence, to give Nature time to Concoct her
Crudities, and Fast at the least eight or ten hours between your Meals. For in
truth, were People but sensible what Benefits attend moderate Fasting, there
would not be so many secret Gluttons in the World, and a great part of that
Debauchery, whereby so many Estates are swallowed, so many Families
dishonored, and so many Persons Bodies weakened and decayed, would be
prevented.

2dly, All young People ought to refrain the reading the Books of Romances,
Plays, etc. whose chief Subject is to treat of Wanton Love-stories, and also to
avoid idle Venereal Discourses, and Lascivious Pictures, which do secretly and
insensibly stir up, and strengthen the Venereal Qualities of Nature, and cause
Youth to think and do that which otherwise would never have fallen within their
Imagination; and having once got possession in the Soul, they will soon wholly
subdue and captivate it; for when once a young Person of either Sex has bassled
Modesty, the Lifeguard of Chastity; or if once they have suffered the fort of
their Virginity to be irregularly stormed, tho they shall never so much repent
of, and resolve against such Folly for the future, yet they will find it a very
hard Task to obtain the Gift or Power of Continency again, tho they seek it
with Tears, as Esau did his Birthright. It Is easier to Prevent than Repent;
and not so hard for those who never violated their Integrity, to perish
therein, as for those that have once trangressed, to conduct the rest of their
Lives according to the Prescripts of Chastity and Virtue; for the latter, are
for the most part subjected by every Snare to all inferior Powers, and the
Vanities and Wantonness of the Flesh, whereby they commit great Outrages
against God's Law in Nature. Add to this, that Lasciviousness does much lessen
that esteem which Men ought to have for Women, and brings Contempt upon a
Matrimonial Life, and withal contracts many incurable Diseases, and consumes
the outward Substance.

3dly, As the first Errors in any kind are generally of fatal Consequence, so
most young People New-married, inconsiderately lay a foundation for their
future Discontents and Miseries, (like ill Horsemen) they Whip and Spur so at
their first setting out, that it is no wonder if they Tire before they arrive at
their Journies end, contracting Surfeits, Gouts, general Weaknesses, alteration
of the Complexion, Consumptions, and other languishing Diseases, as may appear
by many young Men and Women, especially Men, who grow Pale, and their Flesh
wastes, and their Joints grow feeble, and their Nerves tremble, and an
universal Indisposition seizes and spreads it self through the whole Body, and
then what can be expected, but that their Children should become weakly, and
subject to Diseases? Nay, many times for this very reason, they are radically
tinctured with Infirmities, and branded with Diseases even in the very Womb,
and thence by way of Rebound or Retaliation, variety of Diseases result back
again to their Mothers, before they are yet disburthened, or can imagine from
what Cause those Disturbances arise. Thus many that were brave healthy Virgins,
are no sooner Married, and become Child-bearers, but they grow weak, feeble,
and full of Diseases and Disorders, which is the more remarkable, since the
same, or the like, is not to be instanced in any other Creature: This should
teach Men to behave themselves friendly, and with as Even and Pleasant a Temper
as possible they can to their young Wives, because nothing does so much Injury
to Women (especially when Pregnant, or great-with-Child) as a cross surly
Carriage from those, from whom they expect Indulgence and a pleasant Humor.
For let us complain never so much of Shrews and Scolds, yet I must do Truth
that Justice, as to avow, That the Crosness and Illcarriage of the Wives has
not the hundredth part of that power to hurt and wound the Healths of Men, as
the unkindness and ill deportment of Husbands have to prejudice the Women; for
that Sex being of a weak tender Nature, their Fires burn but weak, and their
predominant Quality stands in the meek Element of Water, so that every little
Affront from those they Love, wounds them to the very Heart, and does very
often awaken, even the very Central Spirits, whereby Nature is put into an
agonious trembling Condition, whence proceed Suffocations of the Spirits, and
Stoppages of the due Circulations, and thence variety of Diseases.

Futhermore, Married People ought not by any kind of Arts, of compounding or
preparing of Meats or Drinks, endeavor to heighten and strain Nature, whereby
they may be the better able to gratify their Lusts and Extravagant Wantonness;
for all such things are an Affront to Nature, and force her out of her simple
way; and tho for the present, by such Arts, the Party seems more vigorous, yet
he shall soon find that the same decays, and renders him much more weak and
impotent, than if he had never meddled with such Abominations. Nor ought any to
suffer their Imaginations, Wills or Desires to enter too violently into the
Venereal Properties; for the Imagination of Mankind is so strong and powerful,
that it can kindle and awaken all the Central Properties, whereby many
particular Persons, tho by their Constitutions, cold and but weakly, do yet
through Imagination and strong Desires stir up Nature to a great height, even
to the ruin of their Healths; for Nature never ought to be spurred or strained,
but suffered gently to go on in her own Pace, and her own Way. The lawful use
of the Marriage Bed is never hurtful to mature Age, if Nature be not stimulated
on by some unnatural Course or Superfluity, either of Imagination, Meat,
Drinks, Idleness, or the like, but rather makes People more lightsome and
pleasant, as being a thing purely Natural; but if raised, or forced on by Art,
then there is no Intemperance or Superfluity does so soon wound the Health, or
bring so many Inconveniences on both Body and Mind.

4thly, The most proper Age for Men to Marry at, is from Twenty six Years of
Age to Thirty, or thereaabouts, for then Nature has attained to the highest
degree of Maturity, so that the moderate use of Lawful Sheets will not hurt;
besides, at those years, it is to be supposed, Persons will (if ever) be come
to some degrees of Discretion, Understanding, Staidness, and Moderation, to
know their Duties, and how to behave themselves to their Wives and Families.
There is nothing more injurious to the Health of the Body, than a too early
Acquaintance with Venus, or immoderate use of her in Youth, whilst Nature is a
growing, it does in some Constitutions weaken the Spermatick Vessels, and the
retentive Faculty, so that Nature is never able to out-grow it. For the Female
Sex from Eighteen to Twenty six, is a very proper time to alter their
Condition, and of Virgins commence Women. It Is a very ill custom People have
got to Match their Daghters almost as soon as they are out of their
Hanging-Sleeves, and I know no excuse for it, but the Licentiousness of the
Age, which is such, that if Parents do not provide Husbands for their Daughters
at Fourteen, they are ready to provide them themselves, or do worse: The
Proverb is certainly true, and in more Senses than one -- He that Marries a
Girl, marrs a Woman; it spoils their Growth, hastens on Diseases, causes a
breed of small sickly puling Children, makes her a Mistress before she
understands her self, whence ill management of the Family, and forty other
Mischiefs, too tedious to enumerate.

5thly, As Nature, Reason, and the Law of God require Women to separate
themselves when their Uncleanness, or Monthly Visits are upon them, (for
Conception at such times is unnatural, and fails not to intail Leprous and
Filthy Diseases on the Children then begot, as Boils, Botches, King's Evil,
etc.) so it will be also convenient for Men sometimes to lie alone; for the
lying of Man and Wife together always in the same Bed, is apt to decrease Love,
and make it cold, and also destroys the Health and Courage of Man; whereas
their separating (provided it be done freely and prudently, and not in
discontent or sullenness) and lying alone sometimes for a season, increases
the strength of the Body, and makes the mind more vigorous, and renders their
coming together again more desirable and pleasant; it being an hard thing for
many Men to have such esteem as they ought to have, for those things they
over-tharge themselves withal, tho they be the best of Enjoyments. And this
lying alone is the rather to be urged, because Women have no natural
Inclination to Venereal Actions after Conception, setting aside their depraved
Desires and Imaginations, arising from the provocations Men may use, which do
kindle and violently stir up the hidden or sleeping Properties of Venus, and
strain and force Nature out of her Way and Operation; therefore no Woman ought
to know her Husband after known Conception, till after they be delivered and
well again. All the Creatures of the Field, even the whole Creation may be
Examples either to teach or upbraid Mankind in this particular, yet few there
be that are sensible of the greatness of this Sin, nor of the evil Consequences
that attend Mankind by the Practice thereof. Indeed Custom makes the greatest
Evils* easy and familiar, and even excusable in the Eyes of most People, but
not in the sight of God and Nature. For this cause Mankind is afflicted with
many and great Perturbations and Distempers, which no other Creatures are
subject unto, because Men break the good Law of God in Nature, and turn the
natural use of things into Wantonness, which cannot pass unretaliated; for the
Divine Eye and Providence takes notice of all the Good and Evil Works of
Mankind, and Rewards every one according to its Intrinsic Nature, which we
ought to regard, and not esteem a thing Good or Lawful, merely because
Customary, and because the multitude do it, but rather for that very Reason we
ought to suspect it; for there is scarce a worse Guide than the Crowd. Few
there be that ever in their whole Lives consider, or so much as imagine, that
they can be guilty of any Sin with their own Wives, tho they commit all kinds
of Folly, Wantonness, and Uncleanness with them. Whereas in truth, since
thereby they violate the Law of God, and course of undepraved Nature, there is
but very little difference, as to the Intrinsic Evil, between him that Marries
an Old Woman, or him that commands his Wife at unfit seasons, as in the time of
Pregnancy, or her Lunar Visits, and him that goes to Common-Harlots; only the
former is not so Scandalous, because allowed by Law or Custom, which forbid the
latter; but in the sight of God and Nature they are both grand Evils.

6thly, Intemperance is so great an Enemy to Mankind, that it corrupts both
Root and Branch, as when Men overcharge themselves with Meats and Drinks, which
heat the Blood, and so violently inflame and swell the Spermatick Vessels,
whence proceed wanton Desires, and loose Imaginations, that vehemently impress
and incorporate themselves in, and with the Venerial Properties, even as the
Imagination and Desires of a Woman with Child do impress the Image of the thing
longed for, on the Fruit or Child. The Seed does contain all the true
Properties, and the whole state of the Mind and Sensual Powers, whether it be
Good or Evil at the time of Conception, and accordingly the Fruit is endued
with good or evil Dispositions and Inclinations; and the Face or Complexion of
each Child is figured or framed according as the Posture and Aspects of the
Parents Faces are at the very juncture, or time of Conception, viz. whether
they look Soberly, or Merry, Languishing, or with Wide Mouths, Eyes distorted,
sullen, sleepy, or heavy and dull, or lively and brisk, or any other Fashion or
Form, the very same will the Imagination impress on the Fruit or Child; for
Nature has a secret Power of conveyance, by Virtue of the Phantasy and Spirits,
which is unperceivable to the Parents. Therefore all Fathers and Mothers ought
at all times to be Sober, and keep themselves cool and low, that the Spirit of
Understanding may have its Operation. For every Thing or Quality, whether it be
Evil or Good, has a Key in it self to open its own Principle, and has a Seed
to beget its own Likeness in all Particulars. For this cause a simple mean
Life, in which the Power of God and Nature have their Operation in equal weight
and measure, is to be preferred before the Grandeur and State of this World,
Sobriety, and the Fear of the Lord being the Foundation of all Virtue; for all
Health, Strength, and Vigor, both of the Body and Mind, do consist in the
Unity of the Parts, and a just Temperament or Equality. As on the other side,
Contrariety is the Root and Parent of all Diseases, both Internal and External.
Therefore let every one apply himself to Wisdom, which will teach the Knowledge
of God in a Man's self, which Knowledge and Eye of Wisdom will lead and conduct
every one that is an obedient Student, into the Life of Uniformity, where every
property of Nature does impress and reign in each other, sending forth Hymns
and Hallelujahs, and Everlasting Songs of Praises unto the God of Unity and
Order.

Lastly, It is to be noted, That the Lord and Great Creator of all Beings, has
subjected all Creatures unto his unalterable Law of Nature, and therefore they
keep and observe their proper Times and Seasons for Generation, and
consequently are more healthy and sound than Mankind; but Man being made
greater than any other Creature visible, viz. God's Image, and endued with
Divine and Humane Wisdom, and a free uncontrollable Will, which he can immerse
either into Evil or Good; the Lord for this cause says, I have set Life and
Death before you, choose ye. Now most Men inclining to the left-hand-way, are
thereby precipitated into all Uncleanness, Unchastity, and Intemperance, and in
all Evil do as much exceed most sorts of Beasts, as Men do excel Beasts in
Wisdom; for the Lord endued Man with the Spirit of Understanding, by which he
might be a Guide and Law unto himself; but he has degenerated, and withstood
the good Counsel of Wisdom, and chosen the left-hand-way, which leads into all
kind of Evil and Superfluity; Whereas if this had not come to pass, but instead
thereof, if men had chosen the right way, and lived in the Power and Operation
of God's Law, then there would have been no need of Outward Laws and
Magistrates, but every Man would have done what was Right and Just in the sight
of the Lord, from an innate power and virtue in himself, and not for fear of
external Laws; neither would he have leaned on the shoulders of the Multitude,
nor complied with Tradition and Custom, against the Dictates of Nature and
Reason. The Beasts of the Field bieng under the driving and impulse of God's
Natural Law, they are wholly acted by it; so that when Nature stirs and prompts
them on, then they move, and when Nature stands still, they are quiet: This is
the Way of God, and his unalterable Law in the course of natural things; but
Man has so greatly depraved himself through the power of his Free Will, always
inclining to Evil, that he forces Nature out of her simple Way, violating the
Law of God, to the great hurt of his Soul and Body. But few there be that are
sensible of the sublime Virtues and Benefits that accompany Sobriety and
Chastity, tho the Pleasures that attend them are so many and great, and most
easily attainable, if we will hearken to the Voice of Wisdom, which is the best
Physician, and the best Lawgiver, and the only Theology; in a word, The opener
of all Seals and Mysteries, both Divine and Humane, and Happy, yea, thrice
Blessed are all they that are acquainted with, and obey it.

CHAP. XX.
How to cure Wounds, Cuts, Pricks of Thorns, and other Accidents, without
Salves, Ointments or Plasters; Also, if any part of the Body or Flesh be
Poisoned, it is a certain Remedy.

MANY persons happening to Cut, or Prick with Thorns or Splinters some Parts of
their Bodies, or being troubled with Ring-worms, Tettors, Fellons on their
Hands or Fingers, or with Common Bruises, or any the like Accidents, running
presently to Chyrurgions, who for gain put them to much pain and misery, or
otherwise tampering therewith, so far increase those Maladies, that many times
they grow to Gangreens and Mortifications, and their Fingers, Arms, Legs, are
often forced to be cut off, and not a few have their Lives thereby shortened.
To prevent which Mischiefs, I think my self obliged, in Charity ty my
Contrymen, to recommend to them an easy ready Course of Remedy, without any
Charge, Trouble or Hazard, which, as has been proved by manifold Experience,
will not fail to heal and cure all such Defects; and let none slight it, for
its plainness and meanness, for all the ways of God and Nature are so; but the
Inventions of proud Man are generally obscure, scarce, intricate and difficult.

That which I advise is only this; As soon as you have cut or pricked your self,
or perceive any of the beforementioned Accidents to trouble you, and that your
Flesh is envenomed, suck it with your Mouth, and spurt out what you draw from
it, and continue so to suck ever now and then; the more constantly you do it,
the sooner the Cure will be effected. But if the Hurt be great or dangerous,
then for the more speedy and certain Cure, you ought to put Milk, or Milk and
Sugar in your Mouth, and so suck the part afflicted, and then spurt it out, and
repeat it several times, and then let it rest a while, and afterward do the
same again; and if your Wound be great, or the Flesh raw, or some Flesh cut
off; then when you have done sucking of it one time, in the interim, till you
come to suck it again, lay a Poultice of Bread and Milk on the place; and next
time you have sucked it, lay fresh on again. This is a certain Cure, if you
continue it, and it will perform the work in a shorter time than any Plasters,
Ointments, or any such things; But sometimes the Venoms of such Sores are so
great, that it will require a proportionate time, and in such cases it will be
requisite to suck it the oftener, and you need not despair of healing it to
admiration. The same is to be understood of Wens and Moles.

For the Attractive Faculty of the Mouth and Stomach is so strong, that it does
by a secret power and virtue draw away the inward poison that is kindled or
awakened by such Accidents, and prevents the Flux of Humors; for when any part
of the Body is hurt or wounded, the Violence does certainly stir up or awaken
the Mercurial Poisons of that part, which do not only cause the Flesh to burn
and heat, but those Original Poisons do so violently attract matter unto
themselves, that the Wound or Hurt will quickly swell or putrify; for the
Attractive Faculty of Nature stands in, and has its power from the Poisons of
Saturn and Mercury. Now these Venomous Spirits that are so violently awakened
by the Wound, the constant sucking with the Mouth, does in a secret and most
hidden, but real and certain way, draw forth from the part afflicted, which
does not only cool it, but hinders, and totally prevents the flowing of the
Humors, from the adjoining part, also dislodges the poisonous matter from that
very part, so that by this way of Sucking, the Member or part where the Wound
happens, is rather made less than bigger; for that which causes any Wound to
swell and putrify, is a certain Spirituous Poison, which this attractive
Faculty of the Mouth does draw forth, and spits it away, so that then the Flesh
will not heat, swell, nor putrify. For the same Reasons, Dogs, and some other
Creatures do certainly cure any Wound they receive, or other Accident of like
Nature, by their continual Licking of their Hurts; for when those hot Venoms
are removed, Nature needs no other Remedy, but can help her self by her innate
power. Therefore in managing of the Cure of all Hurts or Wounds, the Artist's
chief work should be to allay or draw forth those original Poisonous, hot
Sulpherous Spirits, that are so violent in their Operation, that they cause
that part to burn, swell and rage with great extremity of Pain. For when, in
any part of the Body the pure essential Spirits and Balsamic Virtues are
wounded or hurt by any kind of Violence, presently the Original or fierce
Brimstony Spirits are awakened, and then they appear in their own Form, which
so long as the pure Spirits and Balsamic Oil remained entire, were hid, or
rather moderated and burned gently and friendly, and gave life and motion to
Nature; but as soon as the pure Oil and Spirits are wounded, the aforesaid
latent fierce Spirits break forth, and show themselves, and become of a furious
Nature and Operation.

The very same is to be understood in the Vegetable Kingdom; if you destroy the
pure Spirits and sweet Oil, or Balsamic Virtues, in any thing, then the
original Forms of Saturn and Mars appear, as is manifest in Charcoal and
Brandy. For all things, both Vegetables, Animals and Minerals, have but one
only ground and foundation, and he that understands one, by the same Spirit may
see into the Grounds and Reasons of them all; Nay, the chief Cause and
Foundation of all Diseases and Distempers in the Body is from the same Ground;
for when by Accidents or Intemperance the pure Natural Spirits and sweet Oil in
the Body suffers Violence, be it in what part of the Body it will, then
presently the Poisons in that part are stirred up, and then there is pain felt
there, and thence follow those terrible Fevers and Diseases that destroy Life
in a moment.

The Mouth and Attractive Faculty of the Stomach does not only draw forth of
the Wound, Bruise or Sore, green or old, the poysonful Spirits which cause Pain
and Swelling, but by a secret Balsamic Virtue heal such Hurts. But where the
Hurt is full of Matter, and subject to putrify, then it will be convenient to
put the Juice of Limes, Lemmons, or some such keen sharp Juice into your Mouth,
and so suck your Wound, and spurt it out, and then take more into your Mouth
several times, for several days together, and not be weary in a day, as some
are; for Nature cannot destroy those kindled Poisons in an instant, but it will
certainly do it in a shorter time, than either Salves, Plasters or Ointments,
viz. in two, three or four Days, most ordinary Hurts will be cured, if you
apply your Mouth to the sucking of it often, both in the Night and the Day.

And therefore I commend this way of Cure, especially to the Country People,
who often fall into such ill Accidents, as Cuts, Pricks, Thorns, Splinters,
Bruises and the like, which often cost them dear, viz. the loss of an Hand or a
Leg: Nay, many times in small Hurts in the Flesh, having no Understanding to
help themselves, but relying upon other Unskilful People, many have not only
lost their Limbs, but their Lives. But such as shall use the Means
beforementioned, shall by God's Blessing prevent all such Dangers.

If the Wound or Hurt happen in a place where you cannot come at it with your
own Mouth, you may get some Body else to do it. Also, it is convenient, that
all Wounds, Prieks or Cuts, when first made, should be made to bleed as much as
may be, without prejudice to the Body; for in the Blood the fiery wrathful
poisonous Spirits pass away, and then the Cure is effected much the soonner:
But such as do not bleed, nor can be made bleed, are more dangerous and not
soon or easily healed. Besides, it is to be understood, when the Wound bleeds
freely, there is not any suffocation of the pure Volatile Spirits, or at least
wise, not in that Degree, as when it does not bleed: For which cause, all such
Beasts, Fowls or Fish, as are killed to be eaten, if they bleed freely, their
Flesh becomes sweeter and pleasanter to the Palate; and easier of concoction,
and breeds better Nourishment, and is far Wholsomer and Healthier than those
Creatures that are strangled in their Blood, as many Land-Creatures are
commonly, and Fish in general, which is Uncleanness in the highest Degree, and
proves unhealthy to the Eaters thereof.

But because this Remedy here prescribed, is so easily procured without Money
or Price, and so truly Natural, I am still afraid that not only the Learned,
but many of the Vulgar will despise this simple way: For Man is so depraved
from the innocent Ways of God and Nature, that he despises all in comparison
of his own Art, and most men esteem and give place to those things they do not
understand; and on the contrary despise and slight the things that they do
know; and so long as any particular thing remains a Mystery, they admire, but
as soon as they come to know it, they trample it under their Feet with disdain.
Therefore all the Phylosophical Ancients hid the Divine and Natural Reasons of
Things, because they could not find any, or very few capable of that Doctrine.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Harmony, and the Power thereof; the several sorts of Musical Instruments,
and under what Planet and Sign each of them is.

AS the end of natural Motions is Rest, and nothing more refreshes a Mind
wearied with Labors than the sweet Airs of Music and Harmony, so now drawing
toward a Conclusion of this Treatise, I shall put a period thereto with some
unvulgar Considerations of the Nature of Sounds and Melody.

Of all kinds of Harmony, as well Vocal as Instrumental, whose variety is
beyond any Humane Number, together with the various Notes, Cries and Tones of
Birds and Beasts, the Number Seven is the Radix, viz. the seven Properties or
Constellations, as is manifest by the seven Notes or Distances on Musical
Instruments, for those Seven Notes are the Basis of all Musical Composition.
The Number Eight is a Beginning again, or a Replication or Repetition of the
same. And which soever of these Seven Forms or Constellations does carry the
Upper Dominion, either in any Instrument of Music, Words, or Voices of Men,
Sounds, Notes, or Cries of Birds or Beasts, that same Property does impress its
Signature thereon: The same is to be understood of the variety of Shapes,
Figures and Forms in the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms; and also of
Colors, there being but Seven Perfect Colors, from which a Skilful Painter
can very lively imitate all Appearances, Shapes or Colors in the Universe, the
Number Seven being the Fountain whence all the Wonders of the Creator do
proceed, it being the highest Number in the outward Principle.

Thus when the Saturnine Property shall have the chief Dominion or Government
in any Creature or Instrument of Music, then the Words, Voice, Cries, Tones or
Sounds thereof are sad, hoarse, heavy, slow, melancholy and unpleasant, as if
they were pressed to the Center. But when Mars shall bear sway, then their
Notes, Words, Cries or Sounds are rough, loud, fieree, sharp, threatening and
jarring, as if the Center of Wrath were kindled; for this Cause all Words of
Men, Sounds of Instruments, and Notes or Tones of other Creatures, in whom the
Properties of Saturn and Mars do predominate, are dolorous, melancholy and
frightful, as is manifest by all sorts of Wild Savage Beasts and Birds of Prey,
as Wolves, Swine, Bears, Lions, Owls, Kites, Ravens, etc. all which are
chiefly under the Regiment of Saturn and Mars. But all Creatures and
Instruments, in which Jupiter is predominant, their Sound, Words, Notes and
Tones are grave, constant, sweet and friendly. Where Sol rules, they are
venerable, filled with Majesty, and a certain kind of lofty Grace. When the
Property of Venus bears sway, the Voice or Notes are delicate, fluent, merry,
charming and voluptuous, carrying with them a sweet Violence. If Mercury have
the greatest Interest, then they are more remiss and various, but very sweet
and pleasant. And lastly, when the Moon shall have Dominion, the Tones, Sounds
or Voices are loud, shrill, wanton and unconstant, yet fluent, pleasant, merry,
and fit for Revelling.

It is to be noted, that every particular Creature, but more especially Man,
does contain the true Properties and Natures of all these seven Forms or
Constellations, but that Form or Constellation which does predominate, does
sign the Words, Sounds, Voices and Notes in each Creature, and all the other do
follow and intermix their Sounds and Tones in subserviency therewith, that so
in some, where the Properties are near an equality, it is a difficult matter to
judge what Quality is chief; but those that can distinguish the Forms, and what
Sounds each gives, may, with regard had to the shape and figure of each
Creature, be capable to determine the Complexion, and what Property has the
chief dominion over it. But still, it is to be noted, That each Creature can
alter and vary its Words, Voice, Sounds and Notes by an innate Power according
to the state of the Mind; for the Will in all Creatures, according to the
capacity and nature of each, is the Primum Mobile, having power as it pleases,
and as occasion and necessity requires, to stir up and awaken other Centres or
Natures, either for the better or the worse, as the Will shall give it self
unto, or be precipitated in any of the Seven Forms or Properties, whence often
do proceed various gestures, motions, words, sounds and voices, which do vary
and differ from the predominant Quality of the Complexion, being at some times
more sanguine, mild and friendly, but at other times fierce and angry, or dull,
heavy, venomous and melancholy, or hollow and strained, as if Nature were
forced out of her way. Thus it is apparent Man may speak friendly to one, and
fierce and doggedly to another at the same time, as his occasions, passions and
interests are; for every word, sound, voice, note or cry of Men and other
Creatures, does not only declare what Center and Property it proceeded from,
and which does predominate in them; but does also stir up the like Centres or
Properties, and thereby excite those of their own kind to various Passions
according to the equality or inequality of the Fountain, Spirit or Form whence
they were generated, either to Love, Trouble, Joy, Grief, Pleasure, Anger,
Concord, or the contrary, and so make Impressions, and impose their Properties
on those to whom they were directed: Every Word, Sound, Tone or Note having the
Key in it self to open the Gate of its like Property, and there to join or
incorporate; for this cause, Angry words beget Anger; and on the other side, A
soft Answer turns away wrath. Whence is manifested the great power and
efficacy of words, sounds and harmony, especially if the Composition shall be
agreeable unto, and follow the Celestial Harmony, it will not only impose its
own Properties on the Hearers, but begets friendliness and concord, powerfully
attracting the benevolent Influences both of the Coelestials and Terrestrials,
changing the Affections, Intentions, Gestures, Motions, Actions and
Dispositions of the Auditors, quietly alluring them to its own Property. The
grave consorts of Music, both vocal and instrumental, are true similitudes of
the Harmonical state man was created in, if he had not fallen therefrom, and
suffered his desires to enter into Inequality, where every Form and Property
does strive with all its might to be Lord over the other, and so destroys all
Harmony, and is the true Original of all Inequality and Discord, which is the
Root of all Violence and Oppression: Whereas on the contrary, Harmony and
Concord, whether it be external or internal, is in its own Nature innocent and
friendly, the true fountain whence proceeds all Joy and Pleasure, both in
Angels, Men and all other Creatures, because they all originally were derived
from Unity.

All Instrumental and Vocal Music, works various effects on the Hearers,
according to the Equality or Inequality of each: The grave Consorts of Organ,
Viol, and Voices, beget Gravity and composed Dispositions, and work so
powerfully on some Sanguine-tempered People, as to make them forget all
Troubles, Sorrows and Perturbations, raising up the hidden Properties of Nature
and Fantasy to a state of Unity, that is, absolute Felicity, during the time
of hearing such Harmonies: But others, who are of unevener Tempers, and further
from Equality, both in their Humors and Elements of their Bodies and Minds, it
makes worse conditioned, melancholy, sad and dull after a little time of
hearing. This new change or alteration of Disposition, seeming burdensome to
them, therefore such never care to hear Music long, but had rather be
entertained with the Noise of the Multitude, the Cries of deep-mouthed Hounds,
and Discourses of Vanity. There are other musical Harmonies that are light and
wanton, as of Violins, especially when they shall play such Tunes or Lessons as
are composed by, and proceed from the wild airy Fantasies of Venereal
Musicians, which the present Age is pestered with, whose Imaginations are vain,
lascivious and extravagant; and when such Airs meet with suitable wild, wanton,
amorous, youthful Hearers, they have power to stir up and impress their own
Properties on them, by incorporating with their similies.

Man is capable by his Will to work and to be worked upon by all things, as he
immerseth his Will either into Equality or the contrary; if the first, then his
actions, words, etc. incorporate with all things that stand in equal weight and
measure, which is the joy and solace of Nature: And so, on the contrary,
Inequality and Discord move by simile likewise; and therefore the holy
Scripture faith, The Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord; for
the God of Love and Mercy cannot be moved, nor the Divine Influences attracted,
but only those that do imitate him by living in Unity and Well-doing; and such
as live under the Government of the evil, unequal fiery Nature, cannot, either
by their Words, Prayers or Works, move or attract any other Quality, but what
is alike to their own Nature: And consequently the Addresses of the Wicked move
God in the Principle of his Anger by simile, because all their Words and
Prayers proceed from an evil Root.

Thus Discord is the Root of all Evil, and the corruption of every Life, both
external and internal, Death it self being nothing but a Contention, Strife,
Disharmony and unequal operation of Nature, where the strong original Forms of
Saturn and Mars do rage and domineer, and with a fierce hunger destroy and
raven up the friendly properties and preservatives of Life. All Diseases and
Infirmities, both of the Body and Mind, arise from the unequal operations of
Nature; and Health is nothing but Harmony, or an Agreement of the parts.

It is also to be noted, that Harmony and Concord do contain the true
Properties of all Elements, Forms and Constellations, even those strong fierce
forms of Saturn and Mars, whence arises Envy, Strife and Contention; but when
these are united unto, and evenly managed by the friendly powers of Nature,
they are the cause of all Joy and pleasant Melody, there being no Evil but
Inequality, where Nature is divided, and every property is in Rebellion, and
endeavors to be Master: Therefore the Lord said in the beginning, That all
things that were created, were good; for neither the Name nor the Nature of
Evil was existent, nor should ever have been known, if the Angels and Men had
continued in that Harmony they were created in. There being no Evil where the
Forms and Properties of the Divine and Humane Nature are united, nor any good,
where they are separated from the Divine Principle, which is the friendly
Fountain that qualifies and moderates the venomous, fierce raging Properties of
Saturn and Mars: So that the very same Qualities that are the Root of Sorrow
and Misery, both of Men and Angels, that live in, and under the dominion of the
divided Forms and Properties, are the true cause of all Joy, Pleasure and
Content to others that live in Unity and Concord, where all Forms and
Properties embrace and court each other, whence does arise and proceed the most
harmonious Consorts and heavenly Joy: This is manifest in all Vocal and
Instrumental Music, (which is a lively and true Similitude of the internal and
mental Harmony, as that is the Root of this outward Melody). Are not the
Saturnal and Martial Strings and Notes as material and useful as the Jovial and
Venereal? The first being the Base and Radix of all Composition, and the latter
the Trebles; the Basis gives Majesty, and the Trebles Sweetness; the one being
the Male, the other the Female, and by their Incorporating or Embracing each
other, is begotten the true Harmony both of corporeal and incorporeal Bodies;
nor can it subsist or continue where there is a separation of those Properties;
if there were no Fire, there would be no Light.

Hence it appears, that every thing is either Good or Evil, as it draws near,
and unites it self, or is severed from that Fountain of Unity and Harmony
whence it proceeds; for this separation is that which is called the
Degeneration or Evil. And as every Creature, both in the Animal, Vegetable and
Mineral Kingdoms, stands near, or afar off the Unity; so are they either Good
or Virtuous, or Evil and Poisonous, according to the degrees of the Forms and
Properties of the sevenfold Nature, which being near the Equality, denominates
Men to be Sanguine; as those who are more unequal in their Compositions, in
several respects, are called Choleric, Melancholy or Phlegmatic. And so in
Beasts, Birds and Fish, those that are unequal in their Frame, are fierce,
cruel and ravenous; but those wherein the Properties are more mild, friendly,
tame and better tempered, are called Clean, and the other Unclean; The same is
to be understood of all Vegetables and Fruits; not but that the evil and
venomous Qualities in themselves, and rightly managed, are altogether as useful
as the Pure, being the original of Life, and cause of Motion; so that there is
nothing bad that the Lord has made, but as it becomes separated from its
Original state of Unity and Harmony.

2. Of all sorts of external Harmony, Vocal has the highest Graduation, and is
not only best liked, but makes the greatest Impression on the Hearers;
forasmuch as it arises by an Harmonious consent of the humane Soul, having a
nearer Affinity to their Fantasies, than the Sounds of Instruments, by which it
easily penetrates by its Motions the well-tempered Air, and so into the airous
Spirits of the Hearers, transferring the Affections of the Singer, and piercing
even into the Inwards of the Soul. For all Harmony, both Vocal and Instrumental
(but especially the former) have a certain secret Power to moderate various
Passions and Diseases, especially when they happen to be more Mental than
Corporeal; for then if the Lessons, Compositions, Instruments and Genius of the
Musician, shall by sympathy correspond, and agree with the dismayed Property of
the Distempered, it will by degrees raise and strengthen the weak Properties,
and bring Nature into a more equal Operation, Great, various and wonderful are
the Uses, Effects and Benefits of Harmony, Unity and Concord; it is certainly
the true and real Paradisical Life; The Instrumental and Vocal being a shadow
or similitude of the Inward or Heavenly; and as it contains many great Secrets;
so if used in the fear of God, its Effects then prove beneficial; but if
contrariwise it be practiced, it becomes the greatest Curse; for the higher any
thing is graduated in Nature, if not well used, the Evil thereof becomes the
greater.

What Sounds and Tones proceed from the four Elements respectively.
From the Earth, proceeds heavy, dull, slow, melancholy Tones and Sounds,
rather a Noise than Harmony, mournful and unpleasant; she never insnareth any
by her Charms.

From the Water, flow various, mixed, wanton Tones and Sounds, as it were
unconstant.

From the Fire, sparkles up a brisk lively Harmony, but fierce and penetrating,
loud and jarring.

From the Air, are breathed in sweet, ravishing, harmonious Tones and Sounds,
Sanguine and delightful; this Element being the Radix of all Sounds and
Harmonies.

What Planet and Constellation governs each Instrument of Music.
Bells are under Mars and Saturn, and the Sign Aries: They afford a Melancholy
harsh sort of Music, loud and penetrating; their dolesome Tones are from
Saturn, suitable to accompany dying Groans, and attend Mourners at Funerals;
their harsh jarring Sounds proceed from Mars; They are most adopted to
Robustick Natures, who generally take the greatest delight in their Harmony:
Ringing, moderately used, is a good Exercise for strong Bodies; but rude, and
not so delicate and genteel, as the practice of other sorts of Music; and is
also apt to be prejudicial by too much Violence.

Drums are under the dominion of Saturn and Mars, in the Signs Capricorn and
Aries, which their dull, heavy, melancholy, rattling, jarring Sounds do
manifest; for as they arise from the dark wrathful Center in Nature; so they
carry with them the power of the same Properties, and therefore do encourage
Wrath and Violence, the pleasant Element of Air, which is the Life of all
Harmony, is here encompassed or penned up so close, that it cannot have its
free Egress and Regress, which suffocates the thin spirituous Vapors thereof,
and that causes Sounds, heavy dull and frightful. The Air being the pleasant
Life in all things, and the original of all Sounds, Voices and Harmony; and in
what Things, Instrument or Creature soever the Properties of Saturn and Mars
are strong, and the sweet Influences of this Element obstructed, from that
Thing or Creature can proceed no delightful Sounds or Melody, but dull, heavy,
dolorous Jarrings, Noises or Sounds; for there is no true Life, Light, Harmony,
or pleasant Sound can arise from any, in which the Properties of Nature are
unequal in their qualifying or operation; for then the wrath of Nature becomes
fierce and raging, and destroys the Moderator or friendly quality, and so
Nature can no longer continue in equal weight and measure.

Trumpets are under the dominion of Mars, but their Sounds and Harmonies are of
a twofold Nature and Operation; they have their fierce encouraging wrathful
Sounds from Mars, and their losty Majestical Harmonies from Sol; they afford a
Masculine Music, which encourages Warlike Inclinations and Dispositions,
animating both Men and Beasts, with a certain delight and Warlike Charming.

Bag-Pipes are under the dominion of Venus and Mars, in the Sign Scorpio; this
sort of Music is sometimes used in Wars, but the Sounds and Harmonies thereof
are more Effeminate and Venereal, than Martial, fitter for Peace than War, and
for the Shades of Venus than the Fields of Mars, being an excellent sort of
Harmony for Shepherds, to entertain their innocent Flocks with, which Sheep
much delight in.

Organs are under the Empire of Jupiter and Sol, in the Sign Leo; the Sounds
and Harmonies of this Instrument are Great, Noble, and full of Majesty,
Sweetness, and Gravity; they seem to be as much Divine as Humane, or to afford
some Glimpse or Simile of the heavenly Joy and Consort; in this Instrument the
Air, and the pure thin Spirituous Vapors thereof have their free Influences,
whence those lofty brave friendly Sounds and Harmonies do proceed.

Waits are under the Dominion of Jupiter, in the Sign Libra; the Sounds and
harmonious Consorts of this Instrument are great, noble, and pleasing to
Nature; but if the Players thereon be not well skilled, they quickly awaken
Mars's property, which causes the Sounds to be a little too loud, rough,
rattling, or jarring.

Flutes or Recorders are a brave noble Instrument, being skilfully handled, and
make some of the best Harmonies of Pipes, being agreeable to both Vocal and
Instrumental Music; their Sounds and harmonious Tones are grave, and full of
Majesty, attractive and delightful, especially in open Fields, and near Rivers
and Fountains of Water, being under the Dominion of Jupiter and Mercury, in the
Sign Sagitary.

Flagolets are under the Dominion of Mercury and the Moon, in the Sign Cancer;
this Instrument is not so noble as the former; its Sounds and Harmonies are
more Youthful than Grave, being a good Field-Musick, more proper for Shepherds
and Herds-men, or Carters, and drivers of Horses, and the like, than for
Consorts in Houses, being shrill, loud, penetrating and violent; but if well
handled, it makes pleasant Harmony in open clear still Airy places.

Hautboys are much of the Nature of the last, being under the Dominion of the
Moon and Mars, in Cancer, a good Field-Musick, for such as look after Cattle;
but not proper for House-Consorts, unless the Player have greater skill, and a
better hand than is common; its Sounds being wild, loud, and penetrating.

The Base-Viol is under the Dominion of Jupiter and Sol, in the Sign Libra; its
Sounds and Harmonies are Grave, Noble, Great and Delightful, Pleasant and
Alluring: but the Musician must have skill and hand, or else Mars will spoil
the Harmony by his rough jarring Sounds.

Violins are under the Dominion of Venus and the Moon, in the Sign Gemini; this
Instrument affords much Harmony; but it is more Airy, Brisk, Youthful and
Effeminate, than Grave; but Delightful, having a sweet charming violent
Operation.

The Harp is an Instrument as Excellent as Ancient; it is endued with great
Variety, and if skilfully handled, its pleasant Sounds and Harmonies quietly
allure all things that are capable of its Influences, to its own property,
being under the Dominion of Venus and Mercury, in the Sign Libra.

The Lute affords most pleasant, soft, friendly Harmonies, having a sweet
Violence, and Attractive Operation, but Effeminate; it is under the Dominion of
Venus and Mercury; its sweet attractive Sounds and Harmonies arise from the
Properties of Venus, and its Variety from Mercury.

The Harpsicals are under the Rule of Venus and Mars; from the former it
derives its sweet Sounds, and the jarring rough Ringings are from the latter;
but if the Musician have skill and hand, it makes excellent Harmonies, and
great Variety; its Sign is Aries.

The Gitarr is under the Dominion of the Moon and Venus, in the Sign Taurus;
the Player on this Instrument ought to have both good skill, and a ready hand,
or else Mars will step in with his jarring Tones and Sounds.

Cyterns and Gitterns are under the Moon and Venus, in the Sign Sagitary; being
well managed, they yield pleasant, soft, effeminate Harmonies.

Of the Power and Virtue of Mental, Vocal, and Instrumental Harmony; that it
can pacify Wrath, and the contrary.
All men do endeavor by a secret and natural Inclination, to draw all things
unto their own Property, Understanding and Life, whether it be good or evil,
equal or unequal; and into what property or principle soever he does
precipitate himself, that same quality does reign in his Thoughts and Will, and
has the Key in its self to unlock all Nature's secret Cabinets, and by its
Rays can penetrate into the Depths; and wheresoever it finds its Simile, there
it incorporates and joyneth Forces, and so becomes strong and powerful, and its
contrary is dismayed and weakened: This is manifest in all unequal passionate
Words and Discourses, and also in friendly Harmonies and Speeches; every Word,
Sound or Cry, stirs up to Love, Anger, Concord or Discord, according to the
principle of that Root, or predominate power from whence it proceeded. And
these Sympathetick Operations of Nature and their Antipathies, have far greater
power and efficacy in and upon the humane Nature, or Minds of Men, than on
Inanimates, they having a near Affinity in their Basis; therefore Concord and
Discord, or Love and Anger, do move by Simile more quick than Lightning; for
all things do naturally incline to the Center; and as Men by Words and Actions
can and do move each other to Friendship or Hate, the same is to be understood
of all other things, according to the capacity of each, as all robustick,
rough, killing Employments, do secretly stir them up to Wrath, Discord and
Inhumanity, as the contrary Trades do beget more humane or tractable
Dispositions. And so in the same manner, and more effectually, does Music work
upon the Mind and Passions of Man: This the Kingly Prophet David was sensible
of, when he harmoniz'd and played on his Harp to King Saul, in whose Soul he
perceived was kindled the Wrath, and the unequal Powers of Nature; which the
Mental and Instrumental Harmony of David did assuage or mitigate, by awakening
and strengthening its Simile, and by its friendly Influences compose, and as it
were by a sweet Violence, chase away Inequality, Discord, and Enmity. For there
is as great a power in Harmoney to kindle and beget its likeness, as in Wrath
to stir up Discord. Thus Saul as it were unawares suffered his Will and Spirit
to entertain the internal and external Harmonies, that proceeded from David,
which did by a certain Gleam or Ray penetrate Saul, and incorporate with its
Simile, and moderated the Dis-harmonious, Envious, Evil Spirit in Saul, raising
those Properties that were too flat; and on the other side, letting down those
that were too sharp and fierce, even as a Musician Tunes his Instrument, there
being a Sympathetical Operation between the inward and the outward Harmony, as
appears, 2 Kings 3. where the three Kings and their Hosts were like to perish
for want of Water, which came to pass through the Dis-harmony and Inequality of
the Elements and Constellations; for whenever any Element or Property does
too violently predominate, it destroys the Harmony and Well-being of the whole,
and Nature becomes like an Instrument out of Tune: For this cause the Prophet
Elisha called for a Minstrel or Musician, that is, for Harmony, viz. for a
quiet still state of mind, not only to show the three Kings what Life they
ought to live, who were departed from Unity and Concord, but also the Prophet
desired to be tuned and composed, which would render him fit for, and capable
of that Divine Work which he was to do: For when the King of Israel, and the
other two, came first to him, he seemed to be somewhat Angry, or in Wrath with
him, saying to the King, Get thee to the Prophets of thy Father; what have I to
do with thee? As if he should say, Thou art in the way of Wickedness, Idolatry,
Violence, and Oppression. This answer was uneven, as if it proceeded from some
Passion or Intemperance of Mind; but the King of Israel not being moved to any
degree of Inequality, but answered mildly and friendly, with a yielding and
penitent Voice; Oh! Nay, the Lord has called these three Kings together, to
deliver them into the hand of Moab. This Humility and Temper in the King
begetting its own Property in the Prophet, he then calls for the Musician, viz.
for Concord and Harmony; and in the time of this heavenly Consort, the Hand of
the Lord came upon him, and the Divine Power did arise in him, and he
prophesied from an equal Motion, and holy driving both of the Divine and
Natural Properties, as well of the External as the Internal Nature; then there
followed a Sympathetical Operation of the Forms, an Incorporating and
Harmonizing with each other; and so the Element of Water was excited and
strengthened, which before was weakened, and made as it were to disappear by
the predominancy of the Element of Fire; for when the Elements have their
Qualifyings and Operations in Equality and Concord, this is the true Music of
Nature, the Harmony of the Mycrocosm. Harmony being the true Center of all
External and Internal Felicity, wherein all things rejoice; as the contrary, is
the Displeasure, the Vexation, the Terror, and the Torment of the whole.

In the first of Chronicles we read that Four thousand of the Priests and
Levites praised the Lord on Instruments of Music by David's appointment. And 2 Chronicles. 5. One hundred and twenty Priests blowed with Trumpets, and so agreed
with the Voices, that it seemed but one Voice, and when they lift up their
Voices with the Trumpets and Cymbals, and other Instruments of Music, the
House of God was filled with a Cloud, so that the Priests could not endure to
minister, by reason of the Cloud; for the Majesty of the Lord filled the House.
Here the Mental, Vocal and Instrumental Harmony of the People did by a secret
attraction draw forth and incorporate its self with the inward and holy
Harmony, so that the Glory of the Lord appeared externally; there was an inward
Life, Power and Agreement in the minds of the Musicians, and whole
Congregation; all was done in the Unity of the Spirit, and to the Glory of the
Lord. But on the contrary, as Amos has it, Chap. 6. Those that sit on the Stool
of Wilfulness, and lie on the Beds of Ease, and practice Wantonness upon their
Couches, and eat the best Lambs of the Flock, and slaughter the fattest Calves
of the Droves, and that sing to the Lute, and in playing on Instruments of
Music compare themselves to David, and drink Wine in Bowls, (that is, to
superfluity and excess) and anoint themselves Effeminately with Oil, and yet
have no Bowels of Compassion, nor Commiserate the Afflictions of Joseph (that
is, the Miseries of their Brethren and Fellow Creatures) but crucify the Lord
of Life, (that is, the Divine Principle, by their Discord, Oppression, and
Intemperances) shall be the first that shall be led away into Captivity: For
every Thought, Word and Work follows the Principle from whence it proceeds; and
as every Man shall apply Music, or any other thing, either to the glory of
God, or to his vain Glory, Vanity or Lusts, so it becomes either good or evil
to him. So that what is a Blessing to one Man, proves a Curse to another; and
that which some honor the Lord withal, others do dishonor him with. And as in
a well-tuned Instrument, the Strings being struck or played upon, will make the
Strings of another Instrument, tuned to the same Key, to move, shake or
tremble; The same, and far greater Sympathy is to be understood in the humane
Nature, though in so secret and imperceptible a manner as to outward Sense,
that many Thousands are wounded or impressed with the Influences, before they
perceive, or are aware of it.

He that has not the Fear of the Lord, and the Knowledge of God in himself, is
liable to be hurt by most things, not only in playing upon Instruments of
Music, as Amos has it, but in and by all other things; therefore as the Wise
Man says, Even in Plowing of Land we ought not to make others Rules our
Prescriptions, so as to imitate them like Apes; nor ought we to be froward and
averse to it, because many in former Ages, or in the present, have or may use
Music as a Companion of Debauchery, or enticement to Evil, to the dishonor of
their Creator, and the hurt of themselves: But all men ought to be sober, and
use things to their right ends, for which they were designed by God and Nature,
and then whatever they take in hand, will prove good and profitable unto them.
Wherefore most convenient it is for every particular Man and Woman to search
and examine themselves, that they may come to understand what Spirit and
Principle has dominion in and over them; if it be the Divine Principle and
Voice of Wisdom, then it will lead them into the heavenly Harmony, where all
the various Properties and Qualities of Nature do in friendly manner embrace
each other, whence proceeds an eternal Peace and Consort. But they that shall
find the Spirit of Envy, Strife, Backbiting, Jeering, Scoffing, Uncleanness,
Vanity, Oppression, Killing, and the like, to bear sway in their Minds, and
reign in their Hearts, such cannot make any pleasant Harmony, but altogether
the contrary, a most unpleasant Noise, burdensome to themselves and the whole
Creation.

But by the way, it is to be further considered, that there is no possibility
that any should obtain that sublime State of Unity and Concord, and to have
Peace and Good Will for the whole Creation, except there be a continual
Self-denial; no Observations or Medium, tho they be agreeable seemingly to
Scripture, will do; Men must not stand still in the Wilderness, but press on
toward Perfection in perseverance.

Many in this Age have been taught this by woeful Experience: At first, when the
Day did begin to dawn, and the Star of God's Eternal Love to shine in them,
whereby they saw the Errors of their Ways, whence did arise Self-denial and
Scruples, as to the Modes and Customs of Egypt, and the vain Multitude. If such
had not stood still and fixed themselves in some outward Forms, but followed
like the Ancient Sages of the East, the Conduct of that heavenly Star, till
they arrived at the place where the Child Jesus was born, they might have
traveled without stop or hindrance, through the unequal ways of this World,
and the Heathenish Customs thereof, and arrived at the Celestial Canaan, a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and entered into the ravishing Harmonies of
the New Jerusalem. But too many, after a few Steps in this Holy Journey, having
denied themselves the Superfluities and Vanities of the World, as some would
not eat Flesh, because it could not be procured without breaking the Harmony
and Unity of Nature, and doing what one would not be done unto, and refrained
many sorts of Plays and Vain Exercises, and Riding in Coaches and Chariots, and
unnecessarily on Horses, for fear Pride should get the Dominion, going on Foot
being generally esteemed Poor and Base, as tho the Creator had not given Man
Feet and Legs for that use; and also were wary of gratifying their sensual
Appetites with various sorts of Meats and Drinks, both in Quantity and Quality;
but because they did not persevere, but looked back toward Sodom and Egypt,
became Pillars of Salt, and fell in the Wilderness. And the Reason is, they
gave themselves liberty, and so went back by degrees, and before they were
sensible, were again ensnared and entangled in the Vanities of the World, and
so deprived of those blessed Talents which before they enjoyed.

A wise conscientious Scruple, and Self-denial, are always the forerunners of
true Wisdom, if diligently pursued and improved, being the ways by which the
Spirit of God has dealt with Man in all Ages; thereby giving him a right
Understanding and Distinction of what things are good, wholesome, and
profitable, and what not. And this tenderness has generally the greatest power
and vigor in the beginning, as all that have traveled in this way can
witness; but in process of time, if there be not great Diligence used, this
Divine Seal becomes defaced, and the Scruple grows less and less, and a certain
Freedom appears to the Understanding, which is the only time of Trial, and the
hour of Temptation. Most lose ground when they come to this state, by purposing
to themselves the using of those things moderately and temperately, which
formerly they have spent in superfluity, and of late have altogether declined;
but with Color of using moderately, many are ensnared, and by degrees led
again into Captivity. It being for Example, more difficult to drink Wine with a
just Moderation, than to drink no Wine at all. And it is the part of a wise Man,
if he sees an hundred things lawful, to deny himself of ninety of them, being
certain of this, that every inferior thing a Man touches, or communicates
with, has a special Power and natural Inclination to beget its own property,
and by degrees enslave the more noble Properties in Man. Therefore it is safer
to deny ones self many of those things that are lawful and mean, as well as
those things that are not, because Men has Power either by Sense or
Understanding, to hinder the Influences and Spiritual Impressions of Nature, if
he shall join himself to any thing, whether it be Meats, Drinks, Employments,
or Communications; there being no Caviates that can prevent those
Inconveniences, but only Scruple and Self-denial, which has been, and alone is
the first step, and also the last, to all Virtue and Wisdom. He that can
regulate himself and his Imaginations, Words, Communications, Meats, Drinks,
and Employments, may preserve his Spirit pure and potent, and make his Soul
thereby an unpolluted Temple of God, which is the Supreme Music attainable,
where all the various Forms do incorporate and embrace each other in an holy
Consort of Love, and where there is no despising, envying, or persecuting of
one another, because they are of different Forms, Shapes, Figures, Complexions,
Inclinations, or Understandings, of which Vocal and Instrumental Harmony is a
true Similitude. Therefore it is much to be pitied, that those that are Players
on Instruments, and skilled in Music; be not more Temperate, Sober, Grave, and
Wise; for the wicked Wantonness and vain Lives of some of them, have brought a
Scandal on Music; and most People being ignorant of the Nature and Eccellency
of Harmony, have charged Music as tho that had been the chief Cause of those
Evils some of them have committed against God, Themselves, and the Law of
Nature. But this is a grand Mistake; for the Original Cause of all Evil and Sin
proceeds from a Man's own Lusts and Passions, and not from any outward thing.
It Is true, Man has the two Seeds and Tinctures in himself, and as he shall
give his Will up unto either Evil or Good, so he has power to attract unto
himself either Virtue or Vice out of all things, and also to use them either to
the Praise of his Creator, or profit of himself, or the contrary; as the
Apostle says, Unto the Pure, all things are Pure; but to the perverse the
contrary; for the Lord appears to every Man, either in his Love or Anger,
according to what Principle he has suffered his Will to enter into, as the
Scripture says, That the Lord is an angry jealous God, and a consuming Fire:
And yet again it says, That he is a merciful gracious God, full of Love and
Pity, and will show Mercy unto the third and fourth Generation of those that
fear his Name, and live in Unity. Therefore Music is not at all to be
contemned or slighted for the badness of some that pretend to its outward
Practice, for they still are Strangers to its inward Power and Efficacy. For
Concord and Harmony are the best Accomplishments and sublimest Gifts that can
be attained in this World, the pleasures of Time and Eternity, enduing both
Soul and Body with perpetual Health, it being that happy state which Man, and
all other Creatures do travel with great Desires and Groanings to be delivered
unto, even that holy Unity whence all proceeded.

But Unity, Concord, and Intellectual Harmony, have hardly any thing in the
hearts of Men; for if they had, then there would be Peace and Love, not only
amongst Men, but to the whole Creation; for that Paradisical State in this
World, which many have hoped to see, and do expect shall come, viz. that all
Mankind shall live in perfect Love, Concord, and Harmony, can never be expected
to come to pass, except Men do take other Measures than hitherto they have
done. For before any can attain to such a blessed harmonious Condition, he must
first live in the Observation of God's Law in the outward Nature; for the
greater cannot be understood, if the lesser be not put into practice. Man
cannot by his Prayers move the Lord in his holy Fountain of Love, except he
lives in the Power and Operation of the same Fountain; nor can attract the
sweet Influences of the Elements and Celestial Bodies any other way, but by
living and observing the simple innocent Law of Nature. For this cause, those
that live under the Dominion of the Spirit of Discord, Pride, Envy, and
Contention, their Devotions cannot move the Lord in this principle of his Love
and Mercy; but on the contrary, moves him in the stern Wrath, and therefore is
said to be an Abomination unto him. For this Reason there ought to be more care
in every one to know what Spirit reigns in the hidden Ground of the heart, than
about outward Forms: Every one that fears God and works Righteousness,
says the Apostle, is accepted of the Lord; who makes no difference of Forms;
for every Form is either Good or Evil, as the People are either Virtuous, or
the contrary. Therefore it is highly necessary for every one to study the
knowledge of himself, that he may understand the differences of Spirits, and
from what Fountain or Property every Thought, Word, and Work, does proceed; and
to recommend and promote such Self-study and Heart-knowledg, is the scope of
this whole Treatise, which being once attained unto, a Man may be able to
correct himself, and Tune his own Instrument; whence will proceed Concord,
Love, and Harmony, without which there is no Satisfaction either in this World,
or that which is to come: For to fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the
true Music which all Mankind ought to be skilled in, and practice. This is
both the Glory and the Happiness, the Joy and Solace of created Beeings, the
celebrated Music of the Spheres, the Eocho of Heaven, the Business of
Seraphims, and the Employment of Eternity. Amon.

FINIS.
A DIALOGUE Between an East-Indian Brackmanny, OR Heathen-PHILOSOPHER, AND A
French-Gentleman, Concerning the Present Affairs in EUROPE.

LONDON: Printed for D. Newman, and R. Baldwin; at the King's- Arms in the
Poultrey, and near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1691.

A Dialogue between an East-Indian Brackmanny, or Heathen Philosopher, and a
French Gentleman, etc.
Heathen. SIR, I will not be so inquisitive as to ask what Accident or Occasion
brought you into these Oriental Regions. Be it either Curiosity, or Business, a
natural desire of improving your Understanding, or intension of Commerce, I
speak you heartily welcome, and shall to my power be ready to serve you,
esteeming it both my Duty and my Happiness, to do good Offices to all the
Creation, and especially to Strangers, as standing manytimes most in need of
them.


Frenchman. Worthy Sir, your Civilities have rescued me from that common Error
of thinking, that out of Europe, or the Pale of Christendom, dwells nothing but
Rudeness and Barbarism. I find no less Courtesy in this, than in the other
Hemisphere; and perceive People may be born at some thousand Leagues distance,
under different Climates, and where the same Stars are never seen; nay, which
is more, under various Religions and Rites of Worship, wholly strange to each
other, and yet may agree well enough, if they would give their minds to it, in
the practice of the common Duties of Humanity.


Heathen. There is no doubt of it, Sir; for the Modes and Customs of your
Country differ just as much from Ours, as Ours do from Yours; and therefore we
are not for that vanity to scorn or laugh at, much less hate and plague each
other; but rather impartially consider which is most agreeable to Nature, to
the noble divine Principle, and the real benefit of humane Life -- But waving
this Discourse, pray what is the present News in Europe?


Frenchman. That Question will lead us to the very Antipodes of what we were
discoursing of; for nothing is more frequent among us than Contentions,
Controversies and Wars.


Heathen. For what, I pray?

Frenchman. Some for Empire, some for Glory, but most about Religious points,
and the nearest way to Heaven.


Heathen. Now in my Opinion, neither of these things should administer occasion
for such Violences and Confusions. For if men considered the weight and cares
of Empire, those that are without it, would rather fly from, than fight for it.
And that Prince's Dominions are wondrous small, that cannot employ all his
Virtues in meliorating his own Subjects, rather than in invading, oppressing,
and ruining those of his Neighbors. Nor can I understand, that any Glory is to
be got by destroying men. I think it is rather matter of Praise to beget them.
Your Alexander and your Caesar (for we have heard of their Names, and the
former spread the Venom of his Ambition even into these parts) made some
Millions Fatherless, yet could neither of them boast of one Son of his own, but
both died Childless. And then for Religion, that, methinks, should teach you
quite the contrary, especially your Christian Doctrine, which (I have heard)
enjoins you to love your Enemies, to turn the left Cheek to him that smites
you on the right, etc.


Frenchman. It Is very true, the Principles of our Religion are such, but the
general Practice nowadays runs quite contrary.


Heathen. And yet Practice is the Life of any Religion: If you do verily
believe those Principles of Christianity to be true, why do you not follow them
in your Conversations? If you do not believe them, why do you call your selves
Christians? If you do believe them, and yet resolve not to practice them, you
are wilful obstinate Rebels, and greater Affronters of Christianity than we
that do not make profession of it. Can any thing be more absurd, than to turn
Earth into a kind of Hell, under pretense of driving men to Heaven? and to
commit Murders and Cruelties for the sake of the God of Life and Love? Alas,
Sir! the Infinite Deity delights not in Manslaughter; Strise, War and
Contention enter not into his Tabernacle: Above, all is clear, bright, serene,
calm and quiet; it is in the lower Regions of the Air only, that Storms are
generated, and Thunder and Lightning break forth. God is no Respector of
Persons, but (as your own Prophets say) every one that does well is accepted of
him; he causes the blessed and glorious Body the Sun to shine on the just and
unjust, and commands the sweet Influences of the Coelestials to fall upon all:
The Blessings of the four Worlds are equally distributed to all men, as well
Inferior as Superior. He sustains and preserves the universal Systeme of Nature
by the hand of his outspread Providence; and when the Sons of Men, by their
sinful Vanities, Oppressions and Violences, have awakened his Wrath, he does
not presently dart down the Thunderbolts of his Vengeance on their guilty
Heads, but first sends his Brackmannys to tell them of their Evil, and call
them to repentance. And if Mankind will walk in the right Way, and dwell in the
everlasting Regions of Bliss, they must endeavor to imitate their Creator,
whence our Seers call Man the Image or Likeness of God, and the Horizon of both
Worlds, since in him the Superiors and Inferiors are united. Now if People
would study to be truly like their Maker, Violence, War and Oppression would
have no place in the World.


Frenchman. I perceive you are much for peace and quietness; yours is a
strange Religion indeed, that will not allow of the Noble Feats of Arms, and
the Arbitrament of the Sword.


Heathen. For ought I can hear, your Religion allows the same as little as
mine; and threatens, that whoever uses the Sword, shall perish by the Sword.


Frenchman. And yet the Cause, or at least the Pretense of most of our Wars is
Religion; and it is by the Profession of Arms that men amongst us become great
and honorable.


Heathen. If Killing be so honorable, Butchers sure with you are a worshipful
Company.


Frenchman. Butchers of Beasts are but meanly regarded, but Butchers of Men
are celebrated as the only Hero's.


Heathen. And after what fashion, I pray, do these Hero's live?


Frenchman. For the most part, they are such as love to eat to Gluttony, and
think that day ill spent wherein they are not drunk; their Discourse is nothing
but Boasts and Rotomantado's, intermixed with such horrid Oaths and Blasphemies,
that modest men tremble more at their Talk, than for fear of the fury of their
Arms; wherever they come, they carry Ruin and Confusion with them, destroying
Men, and debauching Women, deflouring of Virgins, ravishing of Matrons,
Robbing, Plundering, firing of Houses, devouring what they can, and destroying
the rest, is their Profession and Delight; and this they call Living at
Discretion.


Heathen. If these be the Christian Hero's, I wonder what are your Devils! I
hope these are none of those that you said do contend so much about the Right
way to Heaven.


Frenchman. Yes, I Will assure you, none more ready to Kill and Damn all that
will not be of the Religion they pretend to. We have in our Country a parcel of
People called Heretics and Hugonots, their Conversation is generally Just and
Honest, and they are Peaceable and Obedient to their King, and as ready to
serve him, and do good to their Neighbors, as any: But they will not join with
us in our Religions, Opinions and Ceremonies.


Heathen. As how, I pray?

Frenchman. Why, they will not acknowledge our supreme Caliph at Rome to be
Infallible: They will not say their Prayers to a Statue, an Image, or a
Picture, because they fancy those fine things can neither hear them, nor help
themselves: They will not own that the Bone, or a piece of the Garment of a
Man, who is himself many Years agone dead and rotten, can Cure them of
Diseases, or preserve them from Dangers; But especially when we give them a
piece of Bread, and tell them it is Flesh, Blood and Bones, they think it is
Bread still, and are so impudent as to believe their own Eyes before the
Dictates of our Priests.


Heathen. Why, Do you your selves believe and practice these Absurdities?


Frenchman. Ye marry, and would burn you too, if you were in some parts of
Christendom, and durst say you did not believe them as well as we.


Heathen. Then I bless the good and infinite Being, that I have no business in
such a Christendom. But pray proceed with the Story of your Hugenots.


Frenchman. We endeavored to suppress and, root them out by severe Laws, and
open Wars; but finding that Course ineffectual, we resolved upon a Stratagem to
cut them off; pretended to be very kind to them, and that we desired a perfect
Reconciliation, and to that purpose made a Match between one of the chief of
that Party, and a great Lady of ours; to solemnize this Wedding, the principal
Hugonots repaired from all parts of the Kingdom, and had the greatest
Assurances given them of Friendship. But one Night whilst they suspected
nothing, Soldiers being drawn together, at a certain Hour fell upon them in
all parts of the City, destroying Men, Women and Children; so that in two or
three Hours time, there were above Ten thousand of their dead Bodies flung
naked into the Streets, and the Channels flowed with their Heretical Blood: And
at that time Messengers were sent to other Cities and Towns to do the like, so
that in a few days there were above Forty Thousand of them slain. Was not this
a noble Expression of Zeal for Religion?


Heathen. God keep such bloody Zeal still from our Indian Territories. Do your
Priests allow of such doings?


Frenchman. Allow! Yes, and applaud them too, they are the Men that excite us
to these gallant Exploits; and for a Reward for these Services, do forgive us
all our Sins, and assure us of Heaven.


Heathen. I know not what they may pretend; but this I know, that God is Love,
and that such barbarous Cruelties are to him an Abomination; And to speak
truth, so long as men continue Obstinate, Revengeful and Contentious, and
suffer the wild savage Nature, and bitter Spirit, to reign in their Hearts,
neither Men nor God can forgive them; for Inequality and Discord cannot move
Equality: such a Spirit is contrary to the Divine Nature, and therefore cannot
expect Forgiveness till it is changed and transformed. For men cannot draw nigh
to the Fountain of Benignity, nor be heard of the Sovereign Being, but as they
become like unto him, for every like is molded by its likeness; Blood requires
Blood, but the Merciful shall find Mercy from the God of Peace and Compassion,
whose Mercies never fail. For this cause we have for many Generations totally
abstained from all Violence, Oppression and Killing, either of Man or Beast;
for the Groanings and Miseries of those Creatures that suffer Wrong, are the
beginnings of Trouble and Sorrow to those that do it, and do certainly stir up
and awaken the fierce Wrath in Nature, as the Loadstone attracts Iron.


Frenchman. These are pretty Nations, but methinks impracticable: For if we
Europians should live the Life you talk of, and lay aside Arms, and not
vindicate our Religion and Liberties by the Sword, we should be overrun, and be
made the greatest of Slaves. Have not you heard of the Inroad made (at this
instant) by the Turks into Germany? Now would you have us stand with our Arms
across, and suffer them to overrun all Christendom?


Heathen. I pray, what do you account the occasion that moved the Turk to this
Expedition.


Frenchman. Why, the Emperor of Germany in certain of his Territories, had
some of those Heretics that I described to you but now, and he would force
them to be of his Religion; and to compel them therereunto, seized on their
Priests, and clapped them into Dungeons and Prisons, where they were starved, and
pined away in Want and Misery; and others he sold for* Slaves, and sent
Soldiers amongst them to kill and destroy all that would not conform to his
Ceremonies: Hereupon they took Arms in their own defense, and observing their
Brethren to live free from such Violences, and enjoy their Religion under the
Turks, paying only such Tribute, they desire the Turk to protect them, which
offends the Emperor, and so the Quarrel increasing, the Turks sends an Army
against him.


Heathen. This confirms and illustrates what I assert; for here you see this
Deluge of Calamity had not happened to Germany, had they not first stirred up
the Wrath, and causlesly vexed their Neghbours. It appears plainly these Flames
arise from Sparks of their own kindling; besides, Experience shows, that none
are such Vassals, and subject to so many Miseries, as those that give
themselves to the use of Arms, viz. to Guns, Swords, and the like Weapons of
Wrath, and most of them perish by the use of them. For our own part, it is true,
we do live in subjection, and under the burden of many great Taxes, which are
levied on us at the pleasure of the Princes we live under; but then they
protect us from the Injuries of the Multitude, allowing us our free Egress and
Regress through their Dominions, and unquestioned Liberty for the Exercise of
our Religion, and manner of living: They do not endeavor to peep into our
Breasts, or examine our Opinions, or punish us for not thinking as they do. We
go freely about our Occasions; nor do they permit every Idle Fellow to take
away our Goods, nor give us abusive Words, or hurry us to loathsome Prisons;
nor are our Sons forced into the Wars: They threaten no Punishment to us,
provided we do not offend the Civil Laws; for they matter not what gods we
worship, nor after what fashion, so we are just to men, and live peaceably, and
pay our Tribute. If they have our Money, they know they cannot want Men that
will fight for two Pence a day: But we value our Health, our Lives, Liberties
and Religion, more than Money. We all drink Water; and the fragrant Herbs,
wholesome Seeds, Fruits and Grains, suffice us abundantly for Food: Our Stomachs
are clean, our Appetites sharp, so that we taste the inward Virtue of each
thing, and sing Songs of Praise to the Creator, who affords unto us the plenty
of the Earth, and the pleasant Dews of Heaven; so that as Fish live in the Salt
and Brackish Ocean, and yet their Flesh is fresh and sweet; so we in the midst
of a tempestuous troublesome World live Calm, and, as it were, in Paradise.


Frenchman. I am glad to bear you esteem your selves so happy; there are few
Mortals that are so content with their Lot, but are whining, repining,
complaining, and always on the Tenter-hooks of new Hopes and Desires.


Heathen. And the reason is, because they forsake Nature, and let loose their
Desires, which having once cast off the Bridle of Moderation, run on without
stop or bounds.


Frenchman. But I perceive you are for Liberty of Conscience, and that every
one may follow his own Opinion and Fantasy; and of so, we should have a mad
World; such a License is destructive to Government, and the very Nurse of
Rebellion.


Heathen. I do not well understand what you mean by Opinion and Fantasy,
People will think as they list, do you what you can. But this I know, that he
that fears God, and hurts not his Neighbor, oppresses not the Creation, and
obeys the Civil Laws of that Country he lives in, and freely pays all Duties
and Tributes to the Prince that protect him, is a good and faithful Subject to
God and his King. Nor have we any temptation to Rebellion, for to us all
Governments are alike, as long as they protect us from Violence. I have read
something of your Europian Affairs; and if I mistake not, in France, Spain,
etc. where the Laws are to force People to be all of a mind, there have been
abundance more Rebellions, Insurrections, Plots and Conspiracies against the
Government, than in Countries where Liberty of Conscience is publicly allowed;
whence I rather infer, that not the indulging, but restraining Liberty of
Conscience is the grand Cause of those Disorders amongst you. It Is certain,
every man ought to have Liberty in Well-doing, and to be punished only for the
contrary. And we Bannians scarce know any thing that is a greater Evil, than
for men to contend, hate, envy, oppress, fight and destroy one another, because
they are not in all particulars like themselves: For men naturally are as
various in their Intellects, as in their Shapes, Forms and Complexions; for the
Shape and Form of every Body is according to the Nature, Equality, or
Inequality of the Spirit. The Lord has made all things to differ; there is not
any two things in the four Worlds alike in all particulars; therefore whosoever
is offended with another, because he is not persuaded, or does not understand
just as he does, is in truth offended with his Maker, who is the Author of that
Variety. If two things were exactly in all respects alike, they must become the
fame; the nearest similitude of things is made by casting them in a Mould, and
yet even then they differ.


Frenchman. You say right, and therefore to make all men's Understandings of a
size, our Churchmen prepare Moulds for them, viz. Creeds, Liturgies, Systems of
Divinity, and the like, wherein they cast and fashion all men's Understandings,
so that none but must own these, though he do not understand a word of them;
nor must dispute them, though his Heart and his Brain tell him they are false
and impious.


Heathen. This is much such an Uniformity as I have heard in some of your
Books, was practiced by the Tyrant Procrustes, who dwelling near a common Road,
seized all Travelers, and carried them to his Bed, which was framed exactly
for his own Stature, and if their Bodies were longer, chopped off their Feet or
Heads to make them fit; and if too short, strained their Bones and Sinews out
with Engines to a due proportion; Was not this Gentleman a great lover of
Decency, Order and Uniformity? If there were not Variety, there would be no
Motion, for it is the various working Power, and, as it were, Strife between
the Properties that causes all Vegetation and Manifestation; if there were but
one thing, there would be nothing, or a standing still, which the Jews great
Prophet seems mystically to show, when he says, God made all things out of
Nothing: For there was no Manifestation or Appearances before God moved himself
on the Face of the Waters; which moving seems to signify the Strife of the
various Forms, Qualities and Properties of the hidden Nature, without which
nothing could be generated. But here I must be silent, for we are counted
Heathens already, and I do not know what worse Censures may pass upon us, if we
too far explain those Notions, which though founded in Nature, are yet so
disagreeable to the Conceits and Practice of the Multitude. But this we are
sure of, that men ought not to hate or suppress any thing but Evil; for Man's
most deadly Enemies are within himself; whence one of the wisest of the Jews
Kings affirmed, That he that overcame his own Lusts and Passions, was a greater
Conqueror than he that subdued a City.


Frenchman. For my own part I shall for the future be more careful how I
credit Reports; we in our Country are told by our Learned, that you are mere
Heathens, Infidels, Idolaters and Worshippers of the Sun, Moon, and all the
Host of Heaven.


Heathen. I nothing wonder that you Europeans should be mistaken about us, who
live so remote, since you seem so little to understand the Opinions of each
other amongst your selves, every one misrepresenting the Sentements and
Doctrines of all that differ from him. It Is true, we do highly esteem and
admire all the Heavenly Host, and those Refulgent Quires of the Coelestials,
especially that glorious Eye of the World, the Sun, as being the Handy-works,
and Wonderful Powers of the incomprehensible Creator, and think it part of our
Duty to express our Gratitude and Veneration to the one only Fountain whence
all those amazing wonders proceed; for he that contemns the Streams, cannot
truly honor the Fountain. Do not your own Prophets teach you to Honor Rulers
and Governors, because they derive their Government from God? And if you do
not only worship and bow the Knee one to another (who are at best but brittle
animated Dirt) but also reverence the work of your own Hands, as a Man clothed
in goodly Raiment, and the like, how much more ought we to have in high
Veneration those wonderful Fountains of Light, Heat, Motion and Vitality, which
are the manifested Powers of God, and his upper Vicegerents and Lieutenants
over the Lower world? Did not you tell me but now, that you esteemed your
Hugonots worthy of Death or Persecution, because they would not pay Esteem and
Adoration to a few painted Cloats, the Pictures of their fellow Creatures,
which you call Saints, not knowing whether they be truly so or not; and yet
will you condemn our Brachmans, for directing their Esteem to these glorious
Masterpieces of the Creation? If you count such lifeless pitiful things, as
Wood and Stone, or things painted and fashioned by Man, fit to be
Representations of your Gods, and means whereby to enliven your Fantasies and
Minds to an higher degree of Devotion (which was the sole intent of the first
Inventors of those things) what regard then ought we not to have of those
living Powers of God, the Celestial Bodies, by whose sweet and friendly
Influences all created Beeings are preserved and nourished? What is more
exciting to a well disposed Mind, than to behold that glorious Body the Sun,
with the innumerable Train of Stars, and the various Species in the four
Worlds? or what does more ravishingly declare the Greatness, Goodness, and
eternal Wisdom of the immense Creator? This is a Book we study, in which the
grand Charter of Nature, and the Holy Mysteries of God are recorded, and we
think we do not err in preferring it before the endless and contentious
thwarting Volumes of the Talkative Philosophers and Wrangling Schoolmen.


Frenchman. I have been told, and you seem to own it, That you will not Kill
any of the inferior Creatures, nor eat their Flesh; but I pray, has not Man
power to do as he pleases with those Creatures? and were not they made for
that very purpose?


Heathen. God has made all Creatures inferior to Man, who has freedom to use
and do unto them all as he pleases, having free will to choose either Good or
Evil; but he that follows the better, and leaves the worse, chooses the better
part, and is made God's Friend, and in Amity with all the Creation; for man is
a likeness of all things, and contains their true Natures and Properties; and
therefore whatever he gives himself unto, the same becomes strong in him, be
it Virtue or Vice: For which cause, our well-advised Fathers commanded us, our
Wives and Children, to abstain from all kinds of Violence and Oppression,
especially to those of our own Species, that thereby our Souls might be
preserved from being precipitated into wrath, and so retain Humanity, and the
more noble Faculties of our Souls unspotted, as well as our Bodies rendered
wholesome, clean, and fit to be Temples for the Divine Spirit; esteeming
Abstinence, Cleanness and Separation, to be the true paths that lead to all
external and eternal bliss; it being in our opinion an unfit, and altogether
unworthy thing, that the great, noble and immortal Soul of man should so much
degenerate from its high and illustrious Birth, as to join or suffer it self to
be incorporated with the low and savage Nature of Beasts. Nor do we think it
lawful for us to heat our Veins, and distemper our blood with Wine, since Water
more kindly quenches our Thirst; the innocent and fragrant Herbs and Fruits of
our Gardens afford us ample satisfaction; and we should be ashamed to make our
Bodies the Graves of the Inferior Creatures. And tho our Princes are sometimes
harsh and severe to us, yet we pacify them with meek, submissive and humble
Behavior. And since as little as possibly we can, we hurt not any thing,
therefore nothing hurts us, but we live in perfect Unity and Amity with all the
numberless Inhabitants of the four Worlds, doing by them as we would be done
unto, whereby we dis-arm their Rage, and their Fury finds no place against us.


Frenchman. But pray tell me how long you have led this kind of Life; and
whether your Sons and Daughters do follow your Religion and Example? for
amongst the Europeans nothing is more common than for Youth to degenerate, and
wander after the Multitude, and abandon their Fathers Rules, especially if they
should be but half so singular as you are.


Heathen. As for the Antiquity of our Course of Life, I think for the greater
part, I may date it from the World's Original. Your own Doctors teach, that
Adam, the first Man, was placed in a Garden, and that the green Herb. and Tree
bearing Fruit, was to be to him for Meat; and do generally agree, that
afterward, at least during the Old World, viz. to the time of the Flood (which
was in the Year of the World, 1656.) eating of Flesh was not allowed or
practiced; and though afterward it was practiced, yet it is probable it did not
obtain with all: But there is reason to believe, that still the better and more
reserved sort did abstain: For about the Year of the World, 3300. (near the
time that your holy Records mention Jerusalem to be besieged by Nebuchadnezzar)
we find the famous Philosopher Pythagoras flourishing, who expressly taught his
Followers (which by reason of his Parts and Virtues were not a few) not to eat
any Flesh, but content themselves altogether with Vegetables; and this great
Man traveling for the acquest and diffusion of Knowledge into diverse parts,
left not our India unvisited, and there planted this wholesome Doctrine, which
ever since has not wanted Observers, derived down by a continual Succession to
our Times. It Is true, our Ancestors have obliged us to some things, which may
seem frivolous and vain, as not to kill any kind of Vermin, which are very
offensive to the Life of Man: But indeed these Prohibitions well regarded, show
their more deep Wisdom and Foresight; for they did consider, that their
Philosophy would not only be embraced by Wise Men, but also by a great number
of Fools (as the most part of all Men are, in one thing or other) and if they
should have permitted them to have killed any kind of Creatures, the Foolish
would have concluded, they might by the same Rule as well kill others, and so
by degrees come to kill men, as most other Nations do. Besides, not only our
cleanly regular temperate Lives free us from many of those Vermin wherewith
others are troubled, but we take it for a Rule, that such as would live an
abstemious separated Life from Evil and Violence, must refrain from some things
that are lawful, as well as from those that are unlawful; as one of your
Prophets says excellently, All things are lawful, but not expedient. Touching
our Sons and Daughters, they all constantly follow our Footsteps, and it has
very rarely been known, that any of them have forsaken the Percepts of their
Fathers; being descended from a Root of Temperance and Equality, they are
naturally Sober and Temperate, for they use not Tippling-Houses, nor spend
their Patrimony in drinking Wine, Gaming, Debauchery and Gluttony; so that the
more Children we have, the Richer we esteem our selves, they proving no more
chargeable to us, than Lambs do to Sheep: They all marry Wives of our own Tribe
and Religion, and there is no Dispute about either Portion or Jointure: Their
greatest Pleasure, and chief Recreation is to contemplate the Heavens, and
their glorious Furniture, the Sun, Moon and Stars in their Various Motions and
Configurations, as also the pleasant Gardens, Groves and Fountains, and to free
the Inhabitants thereof from the Tyranny and Bondage of men, as much as in them
lies: And so through the whole course of our Lives, abstaining from all that
tends to Evil, and promoting what we can the good of the whole Creation; we
endeavor to imitate the adorable Maker and Conserver of the Universe, whose
Offspring we are, and in whom we live, and move, and have our Being.


Frenchman You have not only gratified my Curiosity, but in several things
informed my Understanding. And I heartily wish that your Virtue and Morality
were crowned with true Christianity, and our Christianity embellished with the
real practice of your Virtue, Temperance and Moderation. And so bid you
Farewell.


To show that the recommending Abstinence from Flesh, is no new Upstart
Conceit, I shall here add those notable Verses of the ingenious Poet Ovid,
written above 1600 Years ago, in his Metamorphosis, as I find them translated
by Sandys, where he brings in the famous Philosopher Pythagoras (from whom the
Indian Bannians derive their Doctrine) thus discoursing.
FOrbear your selves, O Mortals, to Pollute
With wicked Food, Corn is the generous Fruit.
Apples oppress their Boughs, plump Grapes the Vine,
Thousand sweet Herbs, and savoury Roots combine
With beauteous Flowers of most fragrant scent,
Your nice and liquorish Pallates to content.
The prodigal Earth abounds with gentle Food,
Affording Conquest without Death or Blood:
But Beasts with Flesh their ravenous Hunger cloy,
And yet not all; Horses in Pastures joy,
So Flocks and Herds: But those whom Nature has
Endu'd with Cruelty and savage Wrath,
Wolves, Bears, Armenian Tigers, Lions, in
Hot Blood delight. How horrible a Sin!
That Intrails, bleeding Intrails should Entomb!
That greedy Flesh, with Flesh should fat become!
Whilst by the Livers Death the Living Lives.
Of all which Earth our bounteous Mother gives,
Can nothing please, except thy Teeth in Blood
And Wounds, and Stygian Fury be imbrew'd?
Naught satiate the wild variety
Of thy rude Paunch, unless another dye?
That good Old Age, that Innocent Estate,
Which we the Golden call, was fortunate
In Herbs and Fruits, her Lips with Blood undy'd;
Then Fowls through The Air their Wings in safety plied;
The Hare then fearless wandered over the Plain,
Nor Fish by their Credulity were slain.
Nor taught, was Man, that fawning Treachery,
All lived secure, till he that did Envy
(What Demon e're it was) those harmless Cates,
And cramb'd his Guts with Flesh, set open the Gates
To cruel Crimes. But first, these slaughtering harms,
A fire of Zeal at Holy Altars warms;
Enjoining Sacrifices with the Blood
Of Savage Beasts, which made our Lives their Food.
Thus the Wild Boar for rooting up the Corn,
And leaving painful Plough-mens hopes forlorn,
Was thought to merit Death: Vine-brouzing Goats
Do next to angry Bacchus yield their Throats.
What harm have poor Sheep done, whose Udders swell,
And yield of Nectar a perpetual Well?
Supplying Man with their soft Wool, and are
Alive than Dead, more profitable far.
Or what the Ox, a Creature without Guile,
Inured to Patience, and continual Toil?
He most ungrateful is, deserving ill
The gift of Corn, that can Unyoke, then Kill.
The Husbandman that Neck with Ax to wound,
Is too severe, that plowed his stubborn Ground;
So often tilled, so many Crops brought in,
Yet not content therewith, ascribes the Sin
To guiltless Gods, as if the Powers on high
In Death of laboring Innocence could joy.
Whence springs so dire an Appetite in Man
To interdicted Food? O Mortals! can
Or dare you feed on Flesh? Henceforth forbear,
I you entreat, and to my words give ear,
When Limbs of slaughtered Beasts become your Meat,
Then think and know, that you your Servants Eat.
FINIS.

