FORTY SERMONS UPON Several Occasions By the Late REVEREND and LEARNED Anthony
Tuckney, D. D.

Sometimes Master of Emmanuel and St John's College (successively) and Regius
Professor of Divinity in the University of CAMBRIDGE.

Published according to his own Copies.

By his Son JONATHAN TVCKNEY, M. A.

Sometimes Fellow of St John's Coll. in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Jonathan Robinson and Brabazon Aylmer, at the
Golden Lion in St Paul's Churchyard, and at the three Pigeons in Cornhill.
MDCLXXVI.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THat thou art here presented with the ensuing Sermons, is from the same desire
and design that acted the Reverend Author in the preaching of them, viz. of
recommending the Truth and Grace of God to whomsoever they shall come. And
having been with approbation and acceptance entertained in those public
Auditories where they were delivered; It is to be hoped that being now exposed
to public view from the Press, they will no less both profit and delight. The
matter and contexture of them will easily induce any who knew the Author to
believe them to be his. But that none may think themselves imposed upon, they
may be assured that they have all been carefully and faithfully transcribed out
of his own Notes which he left behind him. And though some of them may be more
peculiar in their use to some sort of persons according to the Auditories
whereto they were preached; yet even in them there is handled matter of
universal Christian knowledge.

That therefore the great end of all Preaching, Writing and Reading (namely
Knowing, Loving, and Living to God in Christ) may hereby be promoted, God
Himself of His mercy grant, who teaches his to profit: And so neither shall
the Publisher, to whom the Author's memory ought to be ever precious, nor the
Reader have cause to repent them.

December. 6. 1675. Jonathan Tuckney.

THE TEXTS OF THE Several Sermons.
12 SErmons on Phil. 3. 8. and on 5 and 6 Verses, viz.

V. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the Excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.

V. 5. Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of
Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, as touching the Law, a Pharisee.

V. 6. Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness
which is in the law, blameless.

Sermon 13, 14, 15, and 16. on Prove. 8. 21. That I may cause those that love me
to inherit substance, and I will fill their Treasures.

Sermon 17, 18, 19, and 20. on 2 Pet. 1. 4. That by these you might be
partakers of the Divine Nature.

Sermon 21. on Philip. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ.

Sermon 22, and 23. on Psalm 119. 96. I have seen an end of all perfections:
but thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

Sermon 24. on Exodus 28. 36. Holiness to the Lord --

Sermon 25. on Matthew. 5. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have
lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under-foot of men.

Sermon 26, and 27. on Isa. 32. 1, 2.

V. 1. Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in
Judgment.

V. 2. And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from
the Tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land.

Sermon 28. on John 5. 14. Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said
unto him, Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee.

Sermon 29, 30, 31. on Psalm 73. 28. But it is good for me to draw near to God.

Sermon 32, 33. on Luke 21. 19. In your patience possess ye your Souls.

Sermon 34, 35, and 36. on Genesis 49. 18. I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.

Sermon 37, and 38. on Matthew. 24. 45, and 46. Who then is a faithful and wise
Servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over his Household, to give them meat in
due season?

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.

Sermon 39, and 40. on Philip. 1. 21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain.

SERMON I.
PHILIPPIANS 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.


THE Creature at best is but finite, so that we may At St. Mary's in Cambridge
July..... 1646.
very easily look round about it (and as it is Psalm. 119. 96.) see an end of
all the perfection of it; and withal so empty and defective, that the nearer
Fuit mane, and ecee fuit Leah. But Infinitum Genesis 29. 25.
non potest transiri; the infinite perfection and fullness of Christ is such,
that as none knows it, but he that enjoys it; so, he that knows and enjoys it
most, sees further cause to account him more than all, and all besides him,
nothing. As, the longer the eye looks upon the body of the Sun, the more it is
blinded from seeing other things below, whilst it is more and more dazzled with
its light and brightness. It was so here with our Blessed Apostle; whilst he by
an eye of faith was looking up to the Sun of righteousness, there was height
and depth, length and breadth, which he could not comprehend. Divine Beauty
more ravishing at the second view; a growing excellency and worth (as sometimes
of the Sibylls Books) at every after prizing, rising to a higher rate; And so
(...) latter thoughts proved the better; that, as time was when Christ in
himself grew and increased in favor (...) jacturam feci. C. a lapide
similitud^ est sampta a navigantibus. Calvin. in locum.
both with God and man. Luke 2. 52. So he is a rising Sun still in S. Paul's
increasing admiration and love of him, and that even when he had lost all for
him. To which purpose in these 7th and 8th Verses (which we may call Paul's
Bill of Rates) there are two things very observable.

1. How he doubles his words, (...), all three words twice used, and if you
will take in that (...) in the 7th verse, and (...) in the 8th, you have them
thrice in two verses: To express as the strength of his affection, so the
setledness of his judgment, that what he said, non excidit imprudenti, was not
a rash inconsiderate brag, which afterward upon better thoughts he ate up
again; but what with his whole heart, and most deliberate resolution he would
stand to. Nor is this all; But, consider, as first how he doubles and trebles
his words, so

2. Secondly, ut crescit, surgit oration, how his speech rises.

1. From an (...) in the 7th verse to an (...) in the 8th. (...). But what was
gain I counted loss for Christ. But as though he had said that is not enough,
nor spoken strongly enough, I have more to say, and that more confidently (...)
quin etiam certe, an asseveration not more unusual than strong, and expressing
his stronger resolution upon further deliberation; no fewer than five Greek
Particles put together, and yet no Pleonasm, nor any of them expletive, unless
to set forth his fuller certainly and setledness in this particular.

2. From an (...) v. 7. what things, or those things to a (...) v. 8. The
indefinite is risen up to an universal, to an All things, not only his Jewish
Privileges, (in the former Verses,) but even to his best Christian Graces, (in
this.) Nor did he think that he De justificat. lib. 1. cap. 19.
blasphemed in saying it, though Bellarmine be bold to say, that we do, in so
interpreting it.

3. From an (...), I have accounted in the time past, v. 7. to an (...), in
this 8th verse, I do account them so for the present, as not altering his
judgment, or repenting of his bargain, as sometimes men do of a formerly
over-valued novelty, which afterward they have lower and yet wiser thoughts of.
But it was not so with him, as appears from

4. The 4th step from (...) in the beginning of this verse to (...) in the
latter end of it. For Christ he accounted all things not only loss, (which yet
in themselves might be precious, as many things are with the Seamen in a storm,
with an unwilling will, cast overboard, then parts with, but afterward
grieves for) but upon his better experience and estimate both of him and them,
even vile dogs meat in comparison of the bread of life.

5. Nay fifthly, from an (...) to an (...). He did not only account them loss
in his judgment, and readiness to lose them, but he had actually lost them. And
yet,

6. Which is the sixth Emphasis, he accounted himself no loser, but an happy
gainer by the bargain, as the last words of the verse express it. They are
(...). That I may win, and his winnings were clear gains: for so according to
the Greek it is to be rendered. That I may gain Christ.

In which words we have these two particulars.

1. The purchase or thing valued, (...), etc. The excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord.

2. The price that he rated it at, and was willing to come up to, and that was
to the loss of all things, (...). Yea doubtless, and I count all things loss
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.

It Is pity these two should be parted, that so rich a Pearl should want such a
wise Merchant rightly to value it. And therefore, as I find them together in
the Text, so I shall put them together in the observation that I shall handle
out of it, and it is this.

That there is a surpassing worth and excellency in the knowledge of Christ
Jesus our Lord, for which all things are to be accounted loss for a Believer.

The first branch whereof contains the Doctrinal part, and the latter may serve
for the Application.

To begin with the first. There is a surpassing worth and excellency in the
knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord.

For the subject of which Proposition, by the knowledge of Christ 1. Subj.
Jesus, we are to understand the knowledge of whole Christ, his Person, God,
Man, in Himself and Offices, the Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church. In
all which, Faith finds transcendent Soulravishing excellencies and mysteries.

Nor this barely speculative and notional, though even herein it Neg.
has an (...) above all other learning whatsoever. So that Porphyrie needed
not to have pitied Paul's rare parts, as cast away upon the foolishness of
preaching. If I would be a Scholar, I would be a Christian, I would read the
Scripture, though I were so graceless as to do it only for the excellency of
the matter, the strength of the argument, the variety of choicest style and
story, all in it met together, which I so over-prize in other Authors, though
asunder. If it were but only for bare learnings sake, I would learn Christ and
his Gospel. For what are all your fine-spun abstractions, extractions,
subtilties, demonstrations to this great mystery, God manifested in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
etc. Here is work for a Doctor Angelicus: study for an Angel. If they, who
always behold the face of God in Heaven, have yet their Matthew. 18. 10.
face toward the mercy-seat, and (...), as S. Peter Exodus 25. 20.
expresses it, 1 Pet. 1. 12. even stoop down earnestly, desiring to have a
look; what an advancement of learning is it to us (whose Eyes you know what the
Philosopher compared to) (...) Metaphys. l. 1. c. 1. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
(...), with an unvailed face to behold the glory of the Lord in the glass of
the Gospel; The bare Theory whereof is so noble and transcendent. But this
knowledge (I said) is not barely speculative and ^^tional, but

1. Fiducial. And so in Scripture we have knowledge put for faith. Affirm.
Fiducial.
Isa. 53. 11. John 17. 3. the knowledge of Faith whereby we apply Christ to our
selves, and know him to be ours, as Paul here did, when he says, the knowledge
of Christ Jesus; but he adds my Lord. And so For Christ, v. 7. and For the
knowledge of Christ here Cum ait propter excellentiam cognitionis ejus,
intellige excellenti am justitiae ejus quae nobis donatur and imputatur. Zanchy.
in the Text are put for the same. It Is a knowledge whereby I gain Christ, v.
8. and have him, and am found in him, v. 9. and not only an ability to conceive
and discourse of what is in him, and comes by him; for so the Devilish Renegado
may be enlightened. Hebr. 6. 4. The Devil himself could say, I know who thou
art, the holy one of God, Luke 4. 34. The greatest Scholars have not always
been Christ's best Friends. Time was when the greatest Rabbis were his worst
Enemies. Lucian and Porphyrie acute men, but sharpened against him. He was one
of the wits of the World that said, (...); that took cognizance of the cause
but only to condemn the innocent. Unless thou look at Christ with Faith's
Eye, the more quick thine is, and the more earnestly thou look on him, thou
wilst either more despise him, or despair, or Isa. 53. 2, 3.
prove more desperate against him;

Either more desperately mad, as the man set against the Sun with his Eyelids
cut off. Balaam a damned Witch with his Eyes open, Numb. 24. 3, 15, 16. None
spit more venom on Christ, than they that do it on his face, who look and loath
together.

Or more deeply sunk in despair, when thou have so much of an eye as to see a
wrinkle on thine angry Judges brow. In that Case the more good that I know is
to be had, and I have it not, the more is my misery, as the famished man's to
see food, which he must not taste of, or the condemned man's to behold goodly
builddings, and pleasant Fields and Gardens, which he passes by, as he is led
out to execution. This knowledge therefore is first fiducial, as appears from
v. 7, 8, 9. 2. Experimental, as Interpreters bring Experimental.
that v. 10, 11, etc. That I may know him, etc. which is explained in those
following words, (...) and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of
his sufferings, such as that woman had that was bealed of her bloody issue,
Mark 5. It is said v. 33. that she knew what was done in her when (as it is v.
30.) virtue had gone out of Christ to her. And so, Then we know Christ indeed,
when we feel virtue coming from him, and find that we have fellowship with him;
when whatsoever was in him, was done or suffered by him, is really proved, yea
and exemplified by something in us, or done by us, as the fruit or stamp of
something that was first in him. As then, in this kind, we know (...), the
power, virtue, and energy of Christ's Resurrection, as Paul's Phrase is, when

In point of Justification (as the effect of it, Romans 4. 25.) by this evidence
of his Victory our Consciences are assured that he has satisfied for our
Debts, and overcome all the Enemies of our Salvation.

And in point of sanctification (as the (...) of it, Col. 3. 1.) our dead
hearts are raised up to a life of grace, and to seek those things which are
above.

This, This was the lesson which the Doctor of the Gentiles was yet a learning.
This fiducial experimental knowledge of Jesus Christ was that, which he who was
caught up to the third Heaven, was all his whole life still further aspiring
to, because when he was at the highest, yet it was still above him: which may
be one part of the meaning of this (...), of the Divine Excellency of it.

Which is here predicated of it, an (...) a supereminentia, 2. Predicate.
as Interpreters render it, an admirable, superlative, incomparable Excellency.
(...), whether an H^braism, or Atticism, I dispute not: but put substantively
to express its substantial excellency, as (...) Salutare Tuum, Luke 2. 30. to
signify such a saving thing as we want a word to English it. Such is this,
(...), or as Photius renders it, (...), such an hyperbolical transcendent
excellency is there in this knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord.

But (more particularly) this (...) (I conceive) may be Distinctivum speciei,
vel Gradus, signifying the surpassing worth of it in comparison either of other
things, or of some lower degrees of it self.

Zanchy thinks this latter, and by this (...), this excellency of the knowledge
of Christ understands some further and more eminent degree of it, which every
Believer had not attained unto, nor Paul himself perfectly. For whereas there
is a threefold knowledge of Christ, Ex Lege, Ex Evangelio, Ex visione, from the
shadows of the Law, the light of the Gospel, and the full Vision in Glory, the
second of them is more excellent than the first, and the third than the second.
The first he had past, and attained some measure of the second; but the further
degrees of it here, and the perfection of it in Heaven he makes account is
this, (...), the top branch of this Tree of knowledge, or life rather, which
therefore as he aspired to v. 10, 11, 12. so here in the Text he accounts all
as loss and dung in comparison of. I may not quarrel so grave an Author: but
yet crave leave to express mine own thoughts, viz. that its meant of the whole
Gospel-fiducial-experimental saving knowledge of Christ, reaching even to the
lowest and least degree of it, and especially in reference to justification, in
which sense only some of these (...) in the Text are to be accounted (...): and
yet in that sense truly there is a (...), a matchless excellency in the least
degree and measure of the saving knowledge of Christ.

And so taking it as distinctivum speciei, in worth and excellency it far
surpasses. 1. All other things. 2. All other knowledge whatsoever.

First, All other things, though otherwise and in themselves of Excels all
other things.
greatest worth and price. Job goes over all the Lapidaries most precious
Jewels, and cannot find its match. Cap. 28. 15. to 20. And should you (without
ground) call in question his skill, yet you cannot doubt of Solomon's; whose
incomparable ability joined with his long-studied and dear-bought experience
rendered him the ablest Priser of whatever was to be found in the worlds
Inventory, and yet he brings in the same account, Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15. and 20.
15. where you find that Silver, Gold, Rubies, a multitude of them, nay all that
you can desire are not once to be compared with it. And yet this avouched by
these two great men, who by reason of their experience and enjoyment could best
tell on the one side what the worth of the best things in this World came to.
To which if you will add a third (that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses,
this truth may be more fully established) let it be our Blessed Apostle, who
had on the other side as deep an insight into the unsearchable riches of
Christ, as any. And he, if he would

Either wish for others, it is (not that of Austins, that they might have a
sight of Christ in the flesh, but) that they might have a spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him. Ephesians. 1. 17.

Or vote for himself. So, as the Beatifical Vision is the top stone of his
happiness in Heaven: to be with Christ is his (...) there (Chap. 1. of this
Epistle v. 23.) so, savingly to know him is his (...) here, that in worth and
price infinitely surpasses all other things. This should have been further
pressed and insisted on, if I had now spoken to them, whose trade lies in such
inferior Commodities. But seeing that I am especially dealing with you
(Reverend and Beloved) whose more noble and honorable negotiation lies in
richer Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Give me leave to apply my self to
you, and tell you.

2. That this saving knowledge of Christ is signanter said to be All other
knowledge.
(...) not only of all other things, but of all learning and knowledge the most
excellent.

Some knowledge and wisdom being Earthly, Sensual, Devilish. James 3. 15. to
which it is as light to darkness, which it not only exceeds, but expells and
scatters, as the Morning-Sun does the Night-fogs. So of old, when the Word
became Flesh; the Devils Oracles, even of their wisest Apollo, became dumb.
(...) -- As, before that, Moses his rod and serpent ate up those of the
Egyptian Sorcerers. Exodus 7. 12. Such wisdom of Egyyt. The wisdom of the Father
unlearns us. To touch or taste of such a tree of knowledge is a forbidden fruit.

Other knowledge and learning indeed there is, which in these Schools of the
Prophets has long flourished, and long and long yet may and (God grant) more
than ever, which we hope Authority will yet countenance and advance, that our
Wars may not end in Barbarism, and our Sun be turned into darkness whilst our
Moon is Act. 2. 20.
into blood, notwithstanding the mad rage of diverse brutish men that decry
learning because themselves have none, like the Ape in the Fable, would not
that others should have what they want, that themselves might cease to be
ridiculous. This is but the Dogs barking at the Moon, which he cannot reach; or
like their cursing the rising Suns light, because it discovers their nakedness.
The Apostle calls such Brute-Beasts, that speak evil of the things they
understand not. 2 Pet. 2. 12.

But, to return to my purpose, though such kind of learning is of admirable use
in its kind, and next to the saving knowledge of Christ the highest perfection
under Heaven; yet at this (...) it strikes top-sail (as Hugo Cardinalis notes
upon the Text) knows its place, as an Handmaid to be subject and subservient
unto Faith: which, as it illuminates all other learning, and raises it up to
an higher pitch, so it withal regulates and subordinateth; it self ever
retaining the Sovereignty of being Scientia Scientiarum.

For this reason, Prove. 1. 20. called (...) in the plural number sapientiae, or
omnimoda sapientia, all wisdom and knowledge being contained and more than
summed up in the saving knowledge of one Christ, that as it pleased the Father
(...), Ephesians. 1. 10. in him to sum up all things, so in him also to lay up all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3. so that it would prove no
hard task to demonstrate that whatever was choice and eminent in the learning
of all Philosophers, and their several Sects may be found spiritualized and
sublimated and infinitely exceeded in the knowledge of Christ. In Comparison of
it Aristotle's intellectual virtues are but mere fooleries. Platoes (...) is
here overmatched, (...). Philip. 4. 7. Take notice there of the (...) of the
Text. It passes all understanding, though spoken but of one parcel of what we
know and have by Christ; He being the learned Grecians Alpha and Omega. Revel.
1. 8. Containing more knowledge than all the Letters of their Alphabet put
together can express; And His Fear (even to that (...) Deuteronomy. 4. 6. that wise
and understanding people) both Pro 9. 10.
(...) and Pro. 1. 7.
(...) not only the first imperfect beginning, but also the chief head, and
highest apex and pinnacle of wisdom. Here we meet with that (...) that
substantial knowledge. Prove. 8. 14. and that (...), that variegata sapientia.
Ephesians. 3. 10. both the best ground, and the most curious embroidery; that
lays the substantial groundwork of all our happiness and peace, in the hid
but holy and unchangeable Counsel of the eternal God; and discovers and
displays all the various and glorious manifestations of Gods Wisdom and love in
His Son, and to us His Servants, from election to redemption, justification,
adoption, sanctification; till it rises up at last to glorification. And does
this then fall lower than this, (...) in the Text. Does not the knowledge of
Christ Jesus our Lord (as our 2 Cor. 3. 9.
Apostle said in another respect) exceed in glory.

More particularly. The surpassing excellency of this knowledge above all other
may be considered in respect of

1. The Author of it, who is God and Christ himself, both objectum Author.
and principium intelligendi. Both Word, and Prophet, as well as Sacrifice and
Priest. The Adamant polished with its own dust, and Heaven seen only by its own
light. Christ by the illumination of his own spirit, being a spirit both of
revelation to unbate the object, and of wisdom to enlighten the eye. Ephesians. 1. 17.

You may know from whence this knowledge comes.

1. By whither it goes, in tantum ascendit quantum descendit, it rests not (as
the River to the Sea) till it get to Heaven at last, and therefore from thence
it came at first.

2. By whom it instructs (...). Matthew. 11. 25. (...). 1 Cor. 1. 27. makes Babes
learned, and even fools wise to salvation. And who will wonder that even Saul
is among the Prophets, if God be their Father. 1 Samuel 10, 11, 12, 13. It was no
other than the Wonderful Counselor that could enable a few Fishermen and
others whom the learned Greeks would call Barbarians (...), etc. so does
Amelius Platonicus, style John the Evangelist.
and Idiots to confute and convert a then learned World, and in aftertimes the
weaker Sex and weaker parts to nonplus greatest Scholars; and to this day
poor weak simple-hearted Christians to know that of the mystery of Christ, and
the graces and comforts of His Spirit, which many great Clerks are ignorant of.
And all this because they are (...), taught of God, and the other (...), that
have learnt of themselves: And then, by the better master, you may easily judge
who is like to prove the better Scholar.

If you say, But does not all knowledge agree in this, that all comes down from
the Father of light? James 1. 17.

I answer yes: and yet the same Apostle could, Cap. 3. 17. speak wisdom from
above, and distinguish it from another sort, v. 15. whose springhead lay
lower, so that although all lawful knowledge comes from God, yet there are
upper and nether springs.

Other knowledge.

Either coming from God as a Creator; this as a Redeemer.

Or that from him as a teacher by way of common illumination; this from him as
our head by the grace of union, in which sense he Mr. Perkins.
is said to be made of God to us wisdom. 1 Cor. 1. 30.

This immediately infused. That Is donum, that by ordinary means and our own
study and industry is acquisitum. Now infused habits exceed them that are
acquired: and that knowledge is more full and clear which we have of God's
teaching than that which we have of our own learning. Daniel is ten times wiser
than all the Magicians, Cap. 1 20. One shower from Heaven will fill our Pools
more than many Buckets of our own drawing. So that Elihu sets a Non sicut upon
it. There Is none teaches like God. Job 36. 22. Nor is there any learning like
that which God thus teaches, which is the first (...), or Excellency namely in
regard of the Author of it.

2. In regard of the matter and subject of it, which uses to innoble Matter.
the faculty and science that is conversant about it. And this also is God and
Christ again. John 17. 3. their Natures, Attributes, Counsels, Works, not only
of Creation, but of Redemption: and which of those two are the greater works?
And which therefore the more noble study? The former the Philosopher is taken
up and puzzled with (...) said Job. Cap. 26. v. 14. what poor short broken ends
are they of knowledge which the ablest in those faculties attain to; in which
Galileus with his glass is short-sighted, and Aristotle (whom after-ages have
despaired to exceed, and not dared to contradict) in his Problems chooses
rather to content himself with Queries than to venture upon Resolutions and
Determinations. But a greater even in this kind than Aristotle, nay than
Solomon is here: and matters of higher speculation, and more Divine
Contemplation. God became man; Man born of a Virgin. Here you may see Life
Dying, and yet when dead reviving. I cannot say all that is, nor may I all I
can. The great Doctor of the Gentiles, when he cannot sound the bottom, stands
by the brink and cries, (...). O the depth of the riches both of the knowledge
and wisdom of God: how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out. Romans 11. 33. Here are judgments unsearchable! nay riches of grace
inscrutable. Ephesians. 3. 8. Peace passing understanding. Phil. 4. 7. 7. joy
unspeakable. 1 Pet. 1. 8. glory unutterable. 2 Cor. 12. 4. light
unapproachable. 1 Timothy 6. 16. here are those (...) the great things of the law.
Hos. 8. 12. Here those (...), the wondrous things of God and Jesus Christ,
whose Name is Wonderful. Isa. 9. 6. all he was, and did, and suffered, a
miracle. The Apostle has summed it all up, and calls it (...). 1 Timothy 3. 16. a
great mystery. He indeed there says, that it was believed in the world. But it
was by them who were above the World, in whom faith exceeded reason, and
humility discovered wisdom in that in which the Greeks proud learning could see
nothing but foolishness, so much wiser is the foolishness of God than the
wisdom of man: and so much more excellent is the knowledge of Christ than all
other learning, by how much he himself, who is the chief lesson learnt by it,
excells all other things, who is All in All, and therefore without him all else
is just nothing.

3. A third, fourth, and fifth excellency of this knowledge, Properties,
Effects, Ends.
might be shown in its properties, and in the effects it produces, and in the
end it leads to, which three, the both positive and comparative goodness of any
thing is wont to be judged by, which I have not time distinctly and at large to
prosecute, but must cast all these suffrages into one Urn, and read so many of
them as the time will permit, and as they come to hand.

1. This is sound and substantial knowledge. Prove. 2. 7. as closing with the
substantial wisdom of God; whereas our other greatest wisdom is often vain. 1
Cor. 3. 20. and much of our knowledge, (...) scientia ventosa, an aerie
vapouring wind. Job 15. 2. and many of our studies both in younger and riper
years, no better than Elians (...), in which we lose our time, and if at last
we find not the way to repent of it, may come to lose our selves too.

2. It Is sure and certain. In other studies we walk much in the dark, else Job
had not been so soon posed, or we so much puzzled as we are sometimes to come to
a clear Demonstration. What a clashing was there between the Academicks and
Stoics, about this Quaere. Whether all our knowledge were Science or Opinion?
yea, and in Lactant. l. 3. c. 3, 4.
many things that we think we know, how often is a Pythagorean (...), the
authority of a fallible master rather than the truth of the lesson, that which
our knowledge is lastly resolved into? But here, we have Christ the faithful
witness. Revel. 1. 5. the holy Ghost a spirit of truth. John 14. 17. the
Scripture a most sure word. 2 Pet. 1. 19. that here to be a Sceptick is to be
an Atheist, whilst faith is above Science, and belief above Demonstration,
fastens on that which Reason cannot reach, believes that which it self cannot
prove, and adheres to that which sense contradicts, comes to an (...) without
contradiction. Heb. 7. 7. to an (...) without controversy. 1 Timothy 3. 16. nay
to a (...) to a rich full s^il of assurance, without so much as the least
stumbling scrupling doubt. Col. 2. 2.

3 It Is an experimental knowledge, following upon pardon (They shall know, for
I will forgive) Jer. 31. 34. and knowledge by remission. Luke 1. 77. and joined
with sense. Philip. 1. 9. so that we see the promised Land, not as in a Map,
but as Travelers that have been there with the Samaritans. John 4. 42. we
believe not because others have told us (which yet most men's knowledge of
Christ is resolved into) but upon our own knowledge, and that knowledge upon
our sense and experience, as Job, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
ear, but now mine eye sees thee. Chap. 42. 5. I hear and I see, I see and I
feel, and I feel more than I can express or fully understand. I have found God
to me what he has said in his word: and there is that in my heart which
contradicts such and such false Doctrines that are contrary to it; so that even
when my head is so weak that I cannot sometimes answer the Cavillers argument,
yet mine heart from an intus existens, denies the Conclusion; that when I come
to read and hear the word, it is like two men reading of two Copies of the same
evidence. The original I find in my Bible, and the Counterpane I find in my
heart, and therefore dare sign it and seal it with my blood. O happy Ministers!
if we from our own hearts we could speak to the hearts of our people, could say
with the Psalmist, Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what
he has done for my soul, and with Christ. John 3. 11. we speak what we know,
and with the Apostle, what we have heard and seen, and our hands have handled
of the word of life, that declare we unto you, John 1. 3. O that we never spoke
of that which we are least acquainted with, and against that sin which it may
be we are notorious for! If so, however we may preach Christ, yet certainly we
do not savingly know Christ, for this excellent knowledge is an experimental
knowledge.

4. And from all the three former in the 4th place, it comes to be truly
delightful and fully satisfactory, and in which the mind does fully acquiesce,
as Aristotle says, Intellectus est in quiet. In other studies the mind is
restless, and its disquisitions endless; the vastness of its capacity not being
able to be filled up with the fullest view of inferior objects, but here
meeting with an infinite God, and his infinite wisdom, justice and mercy in
Christ, the largest Vessel is filled up to the brim in this Ocean; the wavering
Needle is fixed, and the Dove has found a place where to rest the sole of her
foot; sits down, (and with Peter when he saw Christ transfigured Matthew. 17. 4.)
says, It Is good to be here, is satisfied in all its desires.

And, let me add, is more than satisfied for all its pains. Solomon Eccles. 1.
13, 14. etc. c. 2. 12. c. 2. 18.
in all his other Enquiries, confessed he dealt with folly and madness, and in
the close found nothing but vanity and vexation, so that he comes to hate all
his labor, and to repent of all his pains; as we shall of all our other
studies, if with them we study not savingly to know Christ.

I acknowledge indeed that a serious student in other arts takes great content
in that very search, and much more in the finding out of some truth, which lay
in the dark, and he was much set upon, and this not only in more solid
Demonstrations (and then Archimedes as well apaid Cries out with his (...)) but
sometimes even in some minim Criticism, as I remember the learned Casaubon in
his Annotations upon Athaeneus hitting (as he thought) upon the true notion of
a certain Greek Word, professes that the content that he found therein, and
such like, was a full satisfaction for all his pains in all his studies.

But alas! what is such a word to the Essential Word of God! what is Archimedes
his Cylinder to Jesus Christ? or what is his (...) to the satisfaction of the
Spouse sick (not of other questions, as 1 Timothy 6. 4. but) of love. Cant. 3. 4.
when she had found her lost Savior! If it be so pleasant a thing, to see the
Sun. Eccles. 11. 7. what is it to behold the sun of Righteousness? If the top
of Heavens joys be from an open-faced Vision, then, even these glimpses, though
but as in a glass, and through the Lattess, sets the ravished Soul on the
highest Pinnacle of content and comfort, which it can be here lifted up to.

5. Which leads me to the last excellency of this Divine Knowledge, and it is
the unvaluable benefit and profit of it. The pleasing itch of delight oft-times
accompanies other studies which are most vain and useless, and in the upshot
mischievous. But, Qui miscuit utile dulci, is an Artist indeed. The wise man is
profitable to himself (says Eliphaz, Job 22. 2.) and here, Qui fructuosa, non
qui multa scit, sapit, which made Lactantius adventure upon a bold comparison
between the vulgar Idiot, and the great Scholar, and made him bold to conclude,
Plus sapit interdum vulgus, quia tantum quantum opus est sapit, because the one
knows though but little, yet what is profitable to his purpose: the other upon
his great studies and readings, or Common-Place-Book like a rich treasury
topful of Notions, is a Dictionary of Words, and a Bibliotheca materiarum
Molanus.
(as he called his Book) a whole Library of learning, but sealed up with this
Motto on it. Cui bono? Neither Press nor Pulpit, himself or others bettered,
but often wronged by it; many a full-stuft Scholar being a very empty useless
man, whilst he studieth more Sciences than Arts, and so desires only to know,
and so in infinitum, without end, to no end, knowing more than he either gets,
or does any good with.

But Solomon who was the wisest man, and therefore best knew wherein wisdoms
greatest excellency lay, says, Wisdom is profitable to direct. Eccles. 10. 10.
and Prove. 14. 8. that the wisdom of the prudent is to direct his way; not to be
fluttering about every thing, as the Butterfly about every flower, and so be
something in every thing, and nothing to purpose in any thing, but (as Plato in
his Theages well shows) to know my (...), and that I may get and do some good
by it, as the Be that sits and sucks the Flower from which she may get Honey
to her Hive. I this is properly 2 Chronicles. 30. 22.
good knowledge. Psalm. 119. 66. and in this above all the saving knowledge of
Christ excells. The fruit of the tree of knowledge had this double bait of
pleasure and profit. Genesis 3. 6. but an book withal, that took her who was taken
with it. But in this knowledge of the tree of life, there is the bait without
the book. Milk and Wine. Isa. 55. 1. and no poison in either; greatest pleasure
and profit mixed together, making happy, and adding no sorrow with it. Let me
name a few particulars.

1. By this knowledge of Christ we come to the best knowledge both of God and
our selves.

Of God, for his glory and beauty is most seen in the face of Jesus Christ. 2
Cor. 4. 6. The Father here is best, is only known by the Son. In the Creatures
we behold his footsteps, but here his image; 1 Cor. 1. 21. Romans 1.
even the express image of His Person. Hebr. 1. 3. In the Law his Holiness and
Justice, especially looked out. In Christ and his Gospel shine forth Holiness,
Justice, Mercy, all and altogether, and all in their perfection, and of all his
mercy most, by which he would be most known to his people; the vail is nothing
to the face uncovered. 2 Cor. 3.

Of our selves.

Our sins by his sufferings. No way for the more full searching of our bloody
wound comparable to the considering that Plaster of his blood, which was shed
to heal it.

Our Duty. We have no stronger inducement, nor fairer Copy of doing and
suffering, than to consider what our Lord Jesus Christ has done and suffered
before us, and for us. In all which our true Abimelech Father-King says (as
that other did. Judge 9. 48.) Look on me, and do likewise.

2. A second benefit of this knowledge is, that it is a transforming knowledge.
2 Cor. 3. 18. whilst we are looking into the glass, we are changed into the
image. Intellectus fit idem cum objecto. The Eye and man is made like that he
looks on. Here, as in the story of the brazen serpent, a look heals, and the
man (with Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 4. 34, 36.) cease to be a beast, when he comes
to his understanding. This knowledge and wisdom joins practice with notion, and
moral virtues with intellectual, is not it self only Heavenly and spiritual.
Col. 1. 9. pure and peaceable. Jam. 3. 17. but (which is more) makes us so. But
so does no other knowledge, I mean the knowledge of no other things, or some
other kind of knowledge of Jesus Christ.

For the knowledge of other things like the Glowworm, has more light than
heat in it; as he said of the Philosophers Books, animum non dant quia non
habent. Solomon's experience in this kind told him, that what was crooked could
not this way be made straight, and Paul tells us. Romans 1. 21, 22. etc. how
brutish the most knowing Heathens had then proved, as after-ages and Authors do
hold forth their greatest Philosophers defiled with foulest Lusts, Solen. (...)
apud Plutarchum. Item Zeno apud Diogenem Laertium. Lactant. l. 3. c. 20.
not Socrates himself exempted. Per canem and anserem dejerare, and gallum
Aesculapio were none of his Beauties, and others matter of his foulest
blemishes. The Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 9. calls them foolish lusts, but yet such as
the ablest of those Sons of wisdom were dishonored and defiled with.

And for others, who by the preaching of the Gospel come to some kind of
knowledge of Christ; truly oft-times the light they The Gnostics would be so
called from their pretended greater knowledge in the things of God: but so
filthy as that they got a more proper name of Borboritae, Augustine. de haeres.
6.
have is so far from directing them in the way, that by it they take advantage
to run the more out of it, like them. 2 Pet. 2. 21, 22. that proved Dogs and
Swine for filth and rage, even after the knowledge of the ways of
righteousness, none using to be more loathsomly filthy, or desperately mad
against Christ than they who have been enlightened to see only so much of Christ
as to make their soar eyes smart, and themselves fret and blaspheme. Those
(...), Hebr. 6. 4. commit that irrecoverable sin, and the Devil is a Serpent as
well for his venom as his subtilty. Very knowing men, yet known for many
notorious miscarriages (their Lusts rising up against their Consciences, and
their practice quite crossing their light) have been no great strangers, either
in the World, or in the Churches of Christ.

3. In particular, this is an humbling knowledge, which to be said of any other
knowledge would be little less than contradictio in adjecto, for Paul says,
Knowledge puffs up. 1 Cor. 8. 1. who himself had a prick in the flesh to prick
that Bladder, that it might not swell with abundance of Revelations. 2 Cor. 12.
7. Other things, as profits, pleasures and the like, are too low for a wise man
to stand on tip-toes upon: He accounts it but childish for any to account
himself fine for such gayes and brouches: yea, but knowledge and learning is a
more Divine spark, and has in it (he thinks) that which is worth being proud
of; and out of that pride oft-times accounts Christ and his Ordinances and ways
foolishness. 1 Cor. 1. 23.

But the more that thou savingly know Christ, the better thou will know thy
self, and that (I am sure) will ever be with better thoughts of him, and worse
of thy self, as Job when he sees God, he abhors himself. Cap. 42. 4, 5. Peter
knowing it was the Lord that was present, casts himself down into the Sea. John
21. 7. and the Saints and Angels in Heaven whilst they have nearest access, and
fullest view, stand at a most reverential distance.

4. Fourthly, and last of all, (which is the upshot of all) this is a saving
knowledge, that makes us wise to salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

1. That makes us pleasing to God. Hebr. 11. 6. and justifies us before God.
Isa. 53. 11. which other learning and knowledge not sanctified and subdued by
this comes cross to, but always falls short of, for (whatever it may to others,
yet as our Apostle says of meat, 1 Cor. 8. 8.) it commends us not to God.
Non enim ab eo peritia, sed fides exigitur. It may indeed make our faces shine
more bright before men. Eccles. 8. 1. but we are never the more amiable for it
in God's Eye, if he do not look upon us in the face of Jesus Christ: and
therefore it is, that whilst to babes and children his Son is revealed. Matthew.
11. 25. there are but few of these great wise men that are called unto this
mavelous light. 1 Cor. 1. 26. But on the contrary rather as they by reason of
their pride are usually at odds with him, so he (who uses to resist the proud)
has a controversy especially with them (with the wise men of Edom. Obad. v.
7, 8.) and accordingly is wont purposely to set himself to befool such
Ahitophels in their Counsels, and to take such Foxes in their own craftiness,
that so he may cast down those (...). 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. that he may bring all
into Captivity to the obedience of Christ.

2. But, to end all, seeing God himself. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. accounts it the highest
point of wisdom to consider the latter end, herein above all appears most
eminently this (...), the supereminency of this saving knowledge of Christ.
That it lays in for death, and provideth for eternity.

Now in Death all thy other learning, which thou have spent so much time and
pains for, is quite lost. Thy bark is split, in which all thy treasure was
stowed; nor is there more treasure sunk in the Sea, than there is learning
buried in some great Scholars Graves, which is a great loss to the Church,
State, nay it may be to the whole World, and yet may be the greatest to
themselves. Whatever their Notes may do to others, such Notions will not then
help themselves: so that in case by that time they have got no better learning;
the hard Students Candle, which was wont to outwatch the longest night, will
grow dim in that Evening, and burn blew in that damp, yea and quite go out in
that darkness. And so notwithstanding all those former sparks (more precious
than those of Diamonds) he may then lie down with sorrow. (Isa. 50. 11.) with
this Motto on his Study-Door. Qualis artifex pereo! the knowing man not then
knowing what will become of his Soul, Quos nunc abibis in locos? or if he do,
the more is his grief, when with anguish and horror he thinks and says,
surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum. I repeat not what follows in the
sentence, as desiring it may never overtake any of us in those straits. But woe
to us if it do.

But the more blessed therefore is this more excellent knowledge, that we now
speak of which is not so much a tree of knowledge, as a tree of life, and is
therefore called eternal life. John 17. 3. by which my Soul lives in death,
that I can tell what to do, when other far more learned men are at their wits
end: that in mine evening I may have light. Zech. 14. 7. whilst others far more
sharp-sighted stumble in that dark entry into outer darkness for ever. O give
me that sweet Bird that will sing in such a Winter, that lamp of a wise Virgin,
that will burn clear at midnight; that Matthew. 25. 6, 7, 8.
torch which will not light my body to the Grave, but my Soul to Heaven. I,
this, this is the light of life. John 8. 12. by which, when my bodily eye grows
dim, and upon my eyelids sits the gloomy Joh 16. 16.
shadow of death. I may then lift up an Eye of faith with Steven at the very
point of Death. Act 7. 56. and then see Christ more clearly, and know much of
him more fully than ever before, as it is related of Oecolampadius, upon his
Deathbed, being asked Mylii Apophthegmata merientium.
whether the light of the Candle troubled him, laying his hand on his breast
said, Hic abunde lucis est, or with Laurentius. At Nox mea tenebras non habet.
The more darkness without, the more light within; when the Curtains are drawn,
Christ more unvailed; and when the dying body smells now of the Earth to which
it is sinking, the Divine Soul (ut in rogo Imperatorum) savours of Heaven, to
which it is ascending with a farewel-faith, and welcom-Vision, no more to see
Christ, as here, through a glass darkly, but face to face; to know him no more
in part, but 1 Cor. 13. 12.
even as I am known. I close mine eyes to see my Savior, and like old Simeon
lay down my head in my Fathers bosom, with his Nunc dimittis. Now Lord let thy
servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

THE Text had two parts.

1. The Purchase, (...), the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord. 2.
The price that our Apostle Preached at St. Mary's October. 18. 1646.
was cheerfully willing to come up to, that he might compass it, (...), he
accounted all things loss, that he might gain it.

In the handling the former part the last time I endeavored as I was able
(though infinitely under its worth) to hold forth and commend to you the
supereminent excellency of the saving knowledge of Christ above all other
things, and all other knowledge whatsoever. But as (they say) the Jews are now
wont, when ever they build an House to leave some part of it imperfect in
reference to Jerusalems ruins which they would remember, so in all our largest
discourses of Christ and his Excellencies of necessity something, yea much must
be left unsaid, because there is infinitely more than we can comprehend: the
half of our Solomon's glory will 1 King. 10. 7.
never be told. Here the most copious and fluent Orator must close his
imperfect speech with a Dicebam instead of a Dixi, and draw the Curtain of
silence over those (...), which he cannot draw and set out to the life. And yet
it is good digging deeper in such golden Mines, and another hour would be well
spent in viewing and admiring that infinite excellency, which in Heaven we
shall be adoring to Eternity. Should we lanch out, we may soon be swallowed up
in that bottomless Ocean. And therefore for this time let us rather draw the
net to the shore, and in the second applicatory part of the Text see what we
have taken, or whether our selves rather be so taken with an holy admiration
and desire of it, that with our Apostle we can be willing to suffer the loss of
all for it. (...), yea doubtless, and I count all things as loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.

And if that be such a transcendent excellent knowledge.

First, How low should the consideration of it lay even Scholars Behold the
height of the Stars, how high they are! said Eliphaz to Job: But it was that he
might have Cap. 22. 12.
more lowly thoughts of himself. And when we look up and see how high Heaven is
above, we cannot but think what poor low things we are in the Ant-hill here
beneath. Yea by how much more exactly the Astronomer by his instrument can take
the height of Sun or Star, by so much the more fully he apprehends at what a
wonderful distance he and the highest Mountain of the whole Earth is under it.
O that the consideration of this high transcending excellency of the knowledge
of Christ might help us (though not to low thoughts of learning yet) to more
lowly thoughts of our selves notwithstanding all our other knowledge, that the
dazeling brightness of the sun of Righteousness might at least so far blind us,
as to hide pride from us: pride, which is the great learned man's greatest and
dangerousest snare, in which by reason of his learning and knowledge he is
easiliest taken, and by which he is most of all hindered from this more
excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ.

1. Most easily taken with it, it being a very hard thing to be a knowing man,
and not to know it, to be learned and humble together; for the King of Tire to
be as wise as Daniel, and not to be as Ezekiel. 28. 2, 3.
proud as Lucifer, (...), knowledge puffs up says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. 1.
and usually the more aerie and empty the knowledge is, it makes the bladder
swell the more. The Devil is a very knowing and a very proud Creature. The most
learned Philosophers and wisest Statesmen amongst the Heathen, have been noted
for pride; vainglory and an impotent desire of applause being accounted by
them a piece of gallantry rather than a vice. And although by Christians it
cannot but be accounted a sin, yet even amongst them such as excel others in
knowledge are often known by it. The more able in this kind of old were very
ready to despise the weak, and to overlook them which were under them. Romans
14. 3. The supercilium with which the great Rabbis despised the poor ignorant
people that knew not the punctilioes of the law. John 7. 49. and the Typhus of
many of our great Critics, who account themselves the greatest (if not the
only Scholars) plainly show, that as it was an hand of pride which was lift up
at first to the tree of knowledge, so it is a fruit, which has been very ready
to grow upon that tree ever since. To have high parts and a lowly heart, is a
rare temper, most excellent, but seldom met with. A man cannot look upward and
downward together. Happy were it that even the man of God to all his other
learning could add this skill, whilst with one eye he is soaring aloft in
highest speculations, at the same time he could look so low as to see himself
and all other learning nothing, but folly in comparison of this more excellent
knowledge, because as pride first is the Scholars special snare, in which he is
easiliest taken. So

2. That whereby he is most hindered from this saving knowledge of Jesus Christ,
whether we consider it on Gods part or our own.

1. On Gods, who takes no pleasure to communicate Himself in so precious a
mercy to a proud Creature. The Scripture says he beholds such afar off. Psalm.
138. 6. and then they will be as far from beholding Christ in any nearer
approach. Nay that he resists them. James 4. 6. and what advance can Balaam
make when an Isa. 29. 15. Romans 1. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20, 21.
Angel, can these when God stands to resist them? The Apostle in his Epistles
to the Romans and Corinthians, fully shows, how God blasted all those
high-conceited, great learned men of old, (...), whether Philologists or
Philosophers, natural or moral, as some expound those three words, (...)
Grotius.
(...), he brought to naught all their wisdom, that as learned and profound as
they were, (...), when they professed themselves wise, they became fools, when
they proved so proud as to account the Gospel foolishness; and notwithstanding
all their depth and solidity they became most vain, vanished quite away into
mere emptiness, were swollen empty Bladders.

-- (...).

in the wisdom of God, by wisdom could not come to the knowledge of God; but
proved most vain and corrupt when they endeavored to be most accurate, as its
observed, that Aristotle speaks more wide of God in his Acroamaticks than in
his Exotericks, and in aftertimes how dull and arid some Schoolmen and other
Writers are in the more spiritual truths about Jesus Christ and the Power of
Godliness, who were most subtle and acute in other speculations: the saving
knowledge of a crucified Christ suting best with that Christian heart, in which
proud conceits of these carnal excellencies are crucified, and God delighting
to give grace to the humble, and Jam. 4. 6. Psalm. 25. 9.
promising the meek that he will teach them his ways. In some low Vault (they
say) they may see Heaven more distinctly than they that are on the upper
ground. I am sure the more lowly the heart is, the higher pitch it rises to of
the saving knowledge of him, who bad Matthew. 11. 25. ad 30.
us learn of him to be meek and lowly, presently after he had thanked his
Father that he had hid those things from the wise and prudent, and had revealed
them to babes. Babes in humility do here prove men in understanding. It was a
Piscatoria simplicitas, that at first made the best Preacher, and a like
simple-hearted lowliness of spirit is yet and will ever be a great help to make
the best Scholar, especially in this piece of learning of the excellent
knowledge of Jesus Christ, who is ever ready to teach them most, who
acknowledge themselves to know least, as he is wont to be all in all to them
who to themselves and in themselves are nothing. It is Scultetus his Exercit.
Evangel.
observation of Osiander, and some other like him, that usually (...) are wont
to be very proud; but all may observe, that they who are (...) of all, are most
humble. Socrates did not know the less, because he professed he knew nothing,
nor was Agur any whit the more unlearned, because he acknowledged he was more
brutish than any man. Prove. 30. 2. Some think he was Ithiel and Vcal's Tutour,
who are there mentioned. That I cannot say. But this I may, that a man of his
humble temper is the fittest Scholar for Jesus Christ, who (as others think) is
signified by that Ithiel and Vcal; so that we have not more need to be
studious, if we would be learned, than to be humble if we would be made wise to
salvation; because pride on the one side makes God unwilling to teach us,

2. And us on the other, as unwilling to learn of him. Pride may possibly prick
us on to learn other things, but it is an humble heart only that knowing its own
blindness and darkness sends a man to School that he may learn Jesus Christ;
for selfulness (as an intus existens) hinders us from taking in the fullness of
Christ, as the Jews going about to establish their own righteousness did not
submit to the righteousness of God. Romans 10. 3. and the thoughts of their own
freedom hindered them from accepting true liberty by Christ. John 8. 33. so
conceit of our own learning and wisdom so prepossesseth the heart, that it
prejudiceth it against the saving knowledge of Christ, so that his Gospel to
the learned Greek is no better than foolishness. 1 Cor. 1. 23. and with the
great Rabbis they are but the cursed Idiots which know not the law, who
believe in Christ. John 7. 48, 49. The highest and hardest Lessons in Christ's
School, as Self-Denial, Taking up the Cross, and the like; being diametrically
opposite to the main Principles of that (...), which therefore stands out in
Enmity against them. Romans 8. 7. and because it looks at them as silly and poor
low notions, fit only for mean and low spirits and apprehensions, does not more
hate them than despise them, as Micha^l did David for 2 Samuel 6. 16. 20.
dancing before the Ark, and told him in plain terms that he played but the
foolish Morice-Dancer in so doing, as the wise men of the World are wont so far
to make use of Religion as may countenance their designs, but (they say) they
will not follow it too near at the heels, lest it should dash out their brains.
And so P. Martyr and Deodate, expound those searchings of heart about Reuben,
of Judge. 5. 15, 16.
their being wise Statesmen, but therefore so wise, as they would not foolishly
adventure for God and his people. It Is a very bitter Pill, and hardly
swallowed, that a man who is in reputation for Eccles. 10. 1.
wisdom, should out of zeal to God, and in obedience to his word, do that which
the World would call him a fool for his labor; or that a very learned and
great-read man (as Paul even in the judgment of his Enemies, in this kind usque
ad invidiam, rarely eminent) for him. 1 Cor. 2. 1. to preach not so loftily as
to give Felix occasion to say, that much learning made him mad: but so plainly,
as Act 26. 24.
other learned men might count it the foolishness of preaching, here is 1 Cor.
1. 21.
always a trial, and too often a snare, which he is a happy man, that is not
taken in.

For the Devil too well knows how precious and useful a talent knowledge and
learning is, and therefore he labors.

1. Either to bring men to neglect it, as they that dote upon honors, As the
Dunghill Cock did the Pearl.
profits and pleasures, that have more of the brute than the man in them. Such
fools hate knowledge. Prove. 1. 22.

2. Or to corrupt it, so as God may have no pleasure in it, and no readier way
to that than by making them proud of it, as we have it in the instance of
Babylon, and the King of Tire. Isa. 47. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 27. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.

But, that when God raises up our parts in learning, we do not lift and puff
up our hearts with pride, it may be of great use to consider,

1. How frequently the Holy Ghost in Scripture blows upon all our wisdom and
learning, that he may blast the beauty of it, and so keep us from being proud
of it, cries, Woe to them that are wise in their own Eyes. Isa. 5. 21.
proclaims it the greatest folly to trust to our own wisdom. Prove. 28. 26. warns
us not to lean to our own understanding. Prove. 3. 5. nay charge us to be
fools that we may be wise. 1 Cor. 3. 18. and the like. And is all this to
advance 1 Cor. 8. 2. Job 15. 8.
folly? or rather to debase pride. To undervalue learning, No, but to show of
how little worth it is in comparison of the learning of Christ; not (as the
Devil blasphemously suggested to Genesis 3. 5.
Eve) because God envieth us knowledge, but because he would have us know our
selves, and how little able we are of our selves savingly to know him.

2. How blind and ignorant we are by nature. One of the most Aristot. Metaphys.
l. 1. c. 1. Job 36. 29. 37. 15, 16, 17, etc. do thou know? and do thou
know? and so c. 38. 4. 2. 39. 1.
quick-sighted Sons of Nature compares us to Batts. The Scripture to wild
Ass-Colts. Job 11. 12. says it is but a very little that we know of the things
of nature. Job 26. 14. and just nothing of things of an higher nature. Job 8.
9. that as natural men we do not, nay we cannot know them. 1 Cor. 2. 14. and
when they are so hid from us, should not pride be hid from us to? when God asks
Job, where is the place of darkness. Job 38. 19. may not every natural man lay
his hand upon his heart and say, here Lord.

3. For acquisite knowledge and learning. How extremely ignorant greatest
Scholars have been of the things of God? The wise men of the East, (whatever
they were called before) began Cartwright in loc.
then to be truly wise when they came to seek after Christ. Matthew. 2. 1. for
otherwise there were some nearer home that were wise to do evil, who to do good
bad no understanding. Jer. 4. 22. and therefore the Prophet there, and in the
following Chapters all to besools Jer. 5. 21. 8. 8, 9.
them. Nicodemus a Doctor of the Law, could not say his Catechism. John 3. 10.
The great Philosophers even in the wisdom of God knew not God. 1 Cor. 1. 21.
nay, Noctuae Athenas. In Athens it self was an Altar but to the unknown God,
whom ye ignorantly worship, said Paul. Act 17. 23 But was it not a bold part of
him See Chrysostom in locum.
to brand those University-men with Ignorance, who most abounded with
knowledge? Or, was it not rather strange that to them that were so studious and
inquisitive after news, v. 21. God's Creation of the World, and Christ, and the
Resurrection (the three first great Letters in every Christians Primier) should
be (...) strange things, v. 20. thinking (as some of ours have observed) Seldom
de Diis Syris.
that whilst he preached, (...) (v. 18.) the former had been a new God, the
latter a new strange Goddess, which he had propounded to them to be put into
their Calendar. But it is no news that Christ and the true God should be
mistaken for a strange God to such as are strangers from God, though never so
well acquainted with other literature, of whom is too often verified what Lucan
said of the Dryades.

Solis nosse Deos and coeli sydera vobis,
Aut solis nescire datur.
There were learned men in England, when yet Mr. Fox said to his friend,
Brother, Brother, Jesus Christ is not known in England. We think there is more
knowledge in England now than there was then, I fear (though) Christ is less
known, I am sure he is more blasphemed.

4. Nay fourthly, to this purpose consider, that whilst we here carry this dark
house of earth about with us; even by grace we know but in part. 1 Cor. 13. 9.
are but tender-eyed Leah's, and Genesis 29. 17. Rev. 3. 18.
therefore have need of Christ's Eye Salve, that we may better discern his
beauty and our own deformity. Nay though the Spouse has Doves Eyes (and they
are bright and clear) yet they are inter cincinnos within her locks: so that
neither her beauty is seen by Cant. 4. 1. Brightman in loc.
others, nor does she see the beauty of Christ so fully as might be desired.
When nearest, we are far from a full view, and when gotten highest, this (...)
is so far above us, that if duly considered would lay us low in thoughts of our
own underling lowness, as one that standing alone thinks himself a ^all proper
man, or by one that is lower than him^^^^ overlooks himself; if by a Giant sees
what a dwarf he is.

5. This I only add, that those whom God has lifted up and advanced to highest
abilities and serviceableness in his Church, he has been wont first to lay low
in their own Eyes, taken them off from their own Legs, let them see how
brutish. Prove. 30. 2. and how childish. Jer. 1. 6. they are in themselves, able
to know little and to do nothing, that he being acknowledged to be All, he may
have all the praise; they humbled at the first, and he exalted both then and
ever after.

Thus the transcendent height and excellency of the knowledge of Christ should
lay us all low in our own Eyes.

But should withal raise up all our hearts to higher desires and to apply or
(as the word is) to bring our hearts to wisdom. Psalm. 90. 12. and according to
Solomon's direction, above all gettings to get understanding. Prove. 4. 7. what
a greedy but yet holy Covetousness does St. Austin commend to us in that
expression of his, Capiat quisque quod potest in quantum Tractat. 1. in Joan.
potest, qui non potest, nutriat, cor ut possit, etc. that every one should
take what he can, as much as ever he can, and he that is weak should labor to
grow up to more strength, that at last he may carry away more than now he can,
was it a (...) that the man was sick of; that the more he ate the more he
hungered? No, but a spiritual appetite of a divine object, that, (as fire the
most spiritual Element, the more its fed the more it burns, so) the more that
the Divine Soul tastes of this sweetness, the more it thirsts and longs for
greater supplies.

1. And this because herein we cannot exceed: for however in some other Cases
(whilst we follow our own conceits) we may be overwise. Eccles. 7. 16. and too
much learning has made some men mad: yet I am sure the more we have learnt of
Christ, the more are we able (with Paul) to speak the words of truth and
soberness. Act. 26. 24, 25. and no fear of being here over-wise, unless we
could be over-happy: or of going and getting too fast or too far, when Paul who
very far advanced, professes he had not attained. Philip. 3. 12, 13.

2. But the danger on the contrary is in falling short, and it is just so much
of eternal life, as it is of the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. John 17. 3.
Ignorance being Satan's blind, which he sets up in our way to life; the mother
of Popish Devotion, but in truth one of the most dangerous Precipices into
irrecoverable destruction; for as there is no hitting upon happiness by a blind
peradventure, so there is no right ordering of our steps to it, when we know
not, that we are out of the way. What mischief other sins do us by their
greater atrocity and more deadly guilt, the same ignorance does (it may be) by
leading of us blindfold into the worst of them; for they that walk in the dark
know not at what they stumble. Prove. 4. 19. Or at least by cutting off all hope
of help, whilst it renders us senseless both of remedy and malady, both of the
smart of our wound, and of the way, nay of any need of our Cure. Other sins are
like a malignant Fever, this of ignorance like a senseless Lethargy; much
different, but both deadly. And so Solomon's Proverb that brings this
blind-folded man erring from the way of understanding, leaves him in the
Congregation of the dead (Prove. 21. 16.) as in an irrecoverable, hopeless
condition. To which purpose is both that of the Prophet, where God
compassionately complains, that his people perish for want of knowledge. As
likewise such other expressions as those. Psalm. 49. 20. 79. 6. 95. 10, 11.
Hos. 4. 6. and that of Elihu. Job 36. 12. where to die without knowledge is
threatened as that which seals upon us the bottomless pit, so as never to see
or take hold of the paths of light and life, and so this inward, and at last
that outward darkness meet and lie down together for ever. I only add that the
desperateness of this danger is aggravated, when this ignorance is affected,
when we are willingly ignorant. 2 Pet. 3. 5. as we do not know, so we will not
understand. Psalm. 82. 5. not only simply blind that we cannot, put froward, and
so wink with our eyes, and will not Jer. 9. 6.
see. Matthew. 13. 15. And this is the rather to be heeded because too often
practiced; no knowledge and wisdom being so despised and loathed as this of
Christ, which the Text calls excellent; all other kind of learning, though not
alike fancied by all, yet hated by none but by brutish ignorants that know not
the worth of it. That I may use Solomon's Phrase, Prove. 1. 9. it is an ornament
of grace to the head, makes us fine, and so we are both glad and proud of it.
But it is this true knowledge of Christ that works grace in the heart, which a
corrupt proud heart cannot brook, and therefore does hate it. Prove. 1. 29. and
all the means of it, say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Job 21. 14. Now of all others these froward fools hating
of knowledge the Scripture looks at as a most dangerous, says that this their
peevish turning away will slay them. Prove. 1. 32. that whilst they hate wisdom,
they love death. Prove. 8. 36. and their bidding God depart now will be answered
with a Depart from me ye Matthew. 25. 41.
cursed at the last day.

And that we may be the more sensible how nearly we are herein concerned; be
pleased to consider that Ignorance of Christ is so much willingly and wilfully
affected, as the proffers of Christ, and the means and opportunities of the
true and saving knowing of him and acquaintance with him are neglected. Now our
opportunities in this kind are fair and our advantages great; we had therefore
need have our eyes in our head to look about us, that we prove not like
Solomon's fool, that has a price in his hand, but Prove. 17. 16.
wants a heart to improve it.

1. As men. For a man without knowledge is unmanned and become a beast. Psalm.
49. 20. Anaxagoras said he was born coelum and solemn intueri, to eye the Sun
and heaven. Poor man! that he was so short-sighed as not to have looked higher
to the Sun of righteousness, we are indeed all born to look upward, and it will
be too low if it be not as high as God in Jesus Christ, who stooped so low as
to become man, that man in and by him might come to know and enjoy God. I
confess that humane reason cannot at first discover Christ, but being
discovered by faith, it is all reason that we should acknowledge him; nor shall
we show our selves reasonable men, unless we adore him. He is (...), John 1. 1.
and therefore Isa. 46. 8.
it is the most Divine Reason to believe in him the light which inlightneth
every man that comes into the world. v. 9. and therefore let the Prince of
darkness shut his eyes to this light. But did he for us men and for our
salvation come down from heaven, and become incarnate, etc? O let us that shall
at last be caught up into 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
the Clouds, to meet him in the air, be caught up in the spirit, even now
whilst we are on earth, with Steven to see and enjoy him in Heaven, seeing we
have such a fair rise for it as we are men.

2. Especially as we are Christian men, in the clear mirror of the Gospel of
Christ, it is expected that with open face we at least should come to a more
full view of the beauty and glorious excellency of the knowledge of Christ. Are
ye also yet without understanding? was our Savior's sharp check of his dull
Disciples. Matthew. 15. 16. And have I been so long time with you, and have John
14. 9.
thou not yet known me Philip? was a quickening Item for his unproficiency. And
have not we need of the like Goads in our sides? Has Christ been so much
taught, and so little learnt? sol mane fenestras, and are our eyes yet shut?
Nay does the Gospels Noonday sun shine? and are we yet in darkness? like
Austins. Caeci in sole positi! what a terrible thunderclap is that, and which
may awaken us out of our deadest sleep, and make us open our Eyes, and our Ears
tingle. If our Gospel be hid, its hid in them that are 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5.
lost, whose Eyes the God of this World has blinded. As men, especially as
Christian men ours had need to be enlightened.

3. And yet more particularly as University-men if younger, it is the age in
which we use to learn other things, and why should we not then begin to learn
Christ in this morning of our lives, which, if a friend to the Muses, should
not be a Stranger to Christ. Perge Seneca Ep. 77.
and propera, ne tibi accidat ut, senex discas. It Is ill beginning to learn
then, but then better than never. At least let the old man when his sight grows
dim begin to put on his Spectacles; and if it were no shame to some of the
Philosophers in old age to go to School to learn that which they had not before
studied, let it not be deemed a disparagement to the gravest, even then to
become Scholars to Christ, with the ancient is wisdom, says Job Cap. 12. 12.
but no saving wisdom unless they truly know Christ, and Multitude of years
should teach wisdom says Elihu. Job 32. 7. and no shame even then to learn
wisdom, especially this we now speak of. But whether young, and so have but few
years past, or old and so have but few behind to number, it concerns us all so
to number them, that both sorts apply our hearts to wisdom. Psalm. 90. 12.
whether young or old, as University men, as learned men it especially concerns
us (as such) to learn Christ, that we may be made wise to salvation: for is it
not pity that they who know so much of other things should know so little of
Jesus Christ? to be among those great wise men of the world. Psalm. 2. 10. and
yet for want of kissing the Son to perish from the way, v. 12. periti but
perituri: a thousand pities that such rare polished pieces, such curious carved
Mercurial Statues should have their end to be burnt in Heb. 6. 8. Mark 9. 43.
the fire that never goes out.

But I hope better things of you, and things that accompany salvation; that
your other learning will be an introduction to lead you as the Star did the
wise men to Christ. Matthew. 2. an under-step to lift up your desires and
endeavors to this (...), this eminently transcendent knowledge of Christ Jesus
our Lord.

AND for helps hereto. St. Mary's Jan. 2. 1652/3.


1. (From what has been before said) Be humble if you would be wise, and learn
to know your selves, if indeed you would Christ. The Laodicean Angel, when he
thought and said he was rich, was poor and blind, and stood in need of Christ's
eye salve. Revel. 3. 17, 18. By not knowing the plague of our own heart we come
not acquainted with the Physician. But by being sensible of our own darkness we
come better to see how mavelous the light of the Sun of righteousness is,
that can illuminate it. The knowing of our own vast emptiness helps us to know
the infinite fullness of Christ that can fill it. Thus the Lord fills the
hungry with good things, but the rich he sends empty away. Luke 1. 53. In a
broken glass you cannot so well see your own face, but in a broken heart you
may best see the face of Christ.

2. Take heed of grieving the spirit of Christ; for though there be a spirit in
man, yet it is the inspiration of the Almighty that gives understanding in other
things. Nor is it any other than the spirit Job 32. 8.
of Christ, who is a spirit of wisdom and Revelation in the things of Christ.
Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Now whilst thou dealest kindly with thy friend, he will unbosom
himself to thee. and Turn you at my reproofs, and I will pour out my spirit
unto you, and will make known my words unto you says Wisdom. Pro. 1. 23. But
how can that Spirit breath which we stifle? If thy friend, when offended with
thee will not speak, then wonder not if thy Comforter grieved by thee be silent.

3. Solomon supplies us with a third help. Prove. 13. 20. where he says, He
that walks with wife men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed. A fruitful conversing with them Augustine. Tract. 2. in Joann.
that are acquainted with Christ by what we shall both see of him in them and
hear from them is a great advantage to our better knowing of him. As in
Universities there is an air of learning, and in them Colleges and Societies
founded and erected, that by the Lumen conven^us honestissimi as Quintilian
calls it. l. 1. c. 3.
Conferences and Lectures of learned men we might gain more knowledge in
several Arts and Faculties, or at least with more speed than by our own
studies; so in the Church of God where he is so much known. Psalm. 76. 1. in
that School of Christ the Communion of Saints; if rightly ordered and improved,
there is a strong breathing of the spirit, where, by others knowledge and
experiences conferred and communicated, we may come to know much more of him
than (it may be) we should ever have done by our own. Thus the wisemen of the
East, that they might prove yet wiser, come to Jerusalem to enquire of him.
Matthew. 2. 1, 2. and the Spouse asks the Daughters of Jerusalem of him when she
is at a loss for him. Cant. 5. 8. and he himself when his Parents had lost him,
was found amongst the Doctors, hearing them and asking them questions. Luke 2.
46. It Is not a little that he gains who hears much and asks often, and that not
only of Doctors or others of the highest Form, but even of Punies in the School
of Christ; for if we be sent to learn of the Ant. Prove. 6. 6. and other
inferior Creatures. Job 12. 7, 8. then a mighty Apollos may profit Act 18. 26.
Vide ejus vitam a seipso scriptam.
by an Aquila and Priscillae's instruction, and the poor Country-mans
Conference may help on learned Junius his Conversion. You know who Ben. Zoma.
said it, (...). He is a wise man that can learn something of every man: and
there is no such Idiot amongst all those that are made wise to salvation, but
in some thing or other by what he is, says, or does, the ablest Christian may
learn. Saepe olitor, etc. Agur says, there are four things that are little
upon the earth, and yet very wise, and none of so little esteem Prove. 30. 24,
25, etc.
in the Church, but may teach the best of us wisdom. The little finger may in
some posture reach that which the greatest cannot. If thou would be rich,
thou would receive a Jewel from a weak hand, and therefore if either thou
be wise or would be wise, Converse with them that are made wise to
salvation, with them most, of whom we may gain most, even with the poorest and
meanest, because there is none, of whom thou may not learn something.

4. Nay learn by teaching, and get by giving, for that is one way better to see
and know Christ and our selves, by showing and holding him out to others. The
Master while he teaches his Scholar improves himself. It Is so in the nature of
the thing; but over and besides by reason of Gods Blessing. As the Nurses
Breasts grow bigger and fuller by giving suck, and we use to feed them well
that our Children might fare the better.

And therefore.

1. In private converse let all Christians be imparting something of their
knowledge of Christ, that they may receive it back again with advantage. Here
(...), is a Christians commutative justice. In this kind to lend, that we may
have our own with interest is honest usury. At such meetings when every one
brings his Symbol, all are feasted, and he that invites and entertains others
is himself a gainer. It Is but putting a little water into the Pump that brings
up more. When we are most free and communicative, we drive the best trade; are
never more helped of God than when we help our Brethren, (...). Prove. 11. 25.
holds as true in spirituals as temporals. The liberal soul shall be made fat,
and he that waters, shall be also watered himself.

2. In public administrations let such as God has fitted and called, as they
are more desirous to know, be more careful to preach Jesus Christ. They have
his promise for their encouragement (...). They that are wise, or (rather) that
make others wise, shall (themselves) understand.

And therefore although I am very far from either countenancing the
Lay-Preachers of our days, who pretending most to the knowledge of Christ, are
such Ministers of the spirit that they have all good letters in abomination.

Or, from hastening others that are of themselves too hasty to fly from the
University before they be fledged, whom not God's call but their own
self-conceit and oftentimes penury makes Preachers, and speak Paul's words, but
far from his meaning, Necessity is 1. Car. 9. 16.
laid upon me, and woe to me if I preach not the Gospel.

Or, from the least undervaluing of the Blessed Advantages which by continuance
in the University, such as wait for a call from God, do in the mean time enjoy
of storing up knowledge as of other things, so especially of Jesus Christ, that
when called forth, like good Scribes instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven,
they may bring out of their treasure things both new and old. Matthew. 13. 52.

Yet are we not to stand here all the day idle and scarce at the eleventh hour
go into Christ's Vineyard. Though we should be Concha, not Canalis, yet not mean
while let the water corrupt in the Cistern, and the well-fitted weapon rust for
want of using, and all upon pretense of furnishing our selves with a greater
measure of knowledge.

But God forbid that we should be able to learn to know Christ only in the
University. The Ministers of Christ in this kind have also their advantages in
the Country.

1. They there meet with many exercises and afflictions, which whilst here in
the nest many of us are not exposed to, and so vexatio dat intellectum, (...),
that some could then say with Ignatius, (...), whatever I learnt before, I
began then to be Christ's Disciple.

2. Thereby they are the more driven very near to God in Prayers and it is the
Key of this Treasury: and hence come to more near views in those nearer
approaches.

3. They have there much to do with men's Souls and Consciences, which much
advantageth their experience, and advances their skill in that spiritual
Anatomy.

4. They have in that their great work (for which none is sufficient) frequent
occasions of seeing and acknowledging their great weakness and emptiness, and
thereby an advantage of discovering 2 Cor. 12. 9.
Christ's greater strength and fullness.

5. And lastly (to return to the thing in hand) they are engaged in teaching of
others, and thereby Christ is engaged to teach them, as Paul was therefore
comforted of God, that with those consolations he might better comfort his
people. 2 Cor. 1. 4.

Teach that you may learn.

But study that you may do both, for however now adays every fool will be
babbling, yet unstudied men are but bad learners, and worse Teachers. For wisdom
must be searched and dug for as silver. Prove. 2. 4. and although our poring,
of it self, will not find out such a treasure, yet God is ready to show it when
we are earnest to seek it. Philip was sent to preach Christ to the Eunuch when
he was at his Book. Act 8. 26, 28. and when Mary is weeping and seeking, Christ
appears to her, John 20. 13, 14, 15. Seek Hebr. 3. 1.
therefore if you would find; and study Christ if you would know him, view him
as you use to do him whom you would know, and as the stung man did the brazen
serpent.

Many have laid down Rules for your better profiting in other studies. Give me
leave to point at a few directions for the more sure attaining to this
excellent knowledge in your studying of Christ.

1. Lay aside all vain and unlawful studies which do not only take up the time,
which should be better spent in the studying of Christ, but do so either
entangle or debase the Soul, that they keep out the light of the sun of
Righteousness. Such are

1. All black Arts, which the Children of light have no insight into. The sun
of Righteousness its beams, when they break out, burn such books. It Is no right
course by digging in Hell to find the way to Heaven, or to have acquaintance
with Christ by having (as you are wont to call it) a Familiar.

2. All Arts of Love, all profane and lascivious speculations, and studying of
such Books which are incentives of Lust, and by which the Student becomes
ingeniosissime nequam; a snare which youth is frequently taken with; and it
were well if some that were more gtown up were wholly freed from. But this is
one kind of having fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness: and which
leads Ephesians. 5. 11.
off from acquaintance with Christ. For the Books which for the present we read
are wont to leave a tincture and impression upon the spirit of the Reader,
especially if his judgment be weak, as ours in younger years are not very
strong. And of this make this trial, whether when you have been greedy in
reading such Books you have thereby any great mind to read the Bible. I am sure
that when you have been seriously reading it, you will have as little delight
in reading them, as Paul had in the thorn in his flesh, when he had before been
caught up to Paradise, as Hierom says, Ama scientiam scripturarum, and vitia
carnis non amabis.

3. All vain and idle studies, such were those sciences falsely so called. 1 Timothy 6. 20. about Genealogies and questions, and those old Wives Fables in the
Apostles times, answerable to which are our Romanza's, too many of our silly
Pamphlets, and (let none be displeased if I add) not a few of our Critics
minutiae and argutiae, no better than as Elian called some of the great Artists
pretty little curious knacks, (...), which shallow and light heads take up as
Jet does straws instead of what is more solid and substantial like Solomon's,
(...). Prove. 21. 6. a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death, very
feathers which we break our arm with, by throwing them with our whole might,
make our spirits vain if not profane, and so far from helping us to this,
(...), Prove. 2. 7.
this substantial knowledge of Christ, that many of the plainest and strongest
Scripture-proofs of the Doctrine of Christ are attempted to be evaded and
enervated by these bold Criticisms.

4. All over-bold and curious prying into the Ark of Gods secrets, measuring
his Counsels by our thoughts, and his wisdom in them by our reason which
instead of studying to know Christ has stretched many men's wits into wild and
tedious disputes, and quite cracked others brains into blasphemy and
distraction; as men grow mad having their eyes long set open against the Sun.
This tree of Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
knowledge, a forbidden fruit, which yet we have an itch and licorish appetite
after, whilst by being thankfully content with what Judge. 13. 17, 18.
God in Scripture reveals of Christ and his will, we should be wise to
sobriety. Romans 12. 3. But for Gods secrets, Eorum fides salutem affert,
Periculum Inquisitio, as Hesychius speaks. To which let me add that of
Scaliger. Nescire velle, quae magister maximus te scire non vult, erudita
inscitia est.

1. Let this be the first Caveat in our learning to know Christ, that we lay
aside these and such like studies that either in their own nature estrange us
from him, or at least as we handle the matter hinder us in our search after him.

2. Let the second Caveat be this, that as to this end, we must lay aside all
unlawful studies, so we must take heed that we do not overdo in our studies
that are lawful. Not that I would have you study them less: but Christ more.
Nor them so much as Christ less.

And this.

1. Either for time, in spending it so wholly on them that there is none left
for those duties in which we should more immediately acquaint our selves with
Christ. Many a close student who has stinted himself to study so many hours a
day, has (it may be) forgotten to put into the account one half hour to pray
and read the Scripture, which is such a leaning to our own understanding, that
we acknowledge not God. Prove. 3. 5, 6. a proud Atheistical self sufficiency, as
though of themselves they could study it out by their own Candle, whilst they
shut their window against the light of Heaven. Which therefore God may justly
so blast and cross, as that

Either they never come to attain that knowledge they are so eager upon: they
had no knowledge that called not upon God. Psalm. 14. 4. Such hardest Students
have not always proved the best Scholars, but have only studied themselves
blind, and put out their Eyes by their own Candle light:

Or, if often they prove Scholars, it is as often that of all others they are
furthest off from being Christ's Disciples. It has been no news in the World
both in present and former times to find greatest Scholars greatest Atheists.
The wisest of the World by their wisdom knew not God. 1 Cor. 1. 21. The
Creature terminated their sight which should have been a transparent glass, in
and through which they should have seen God, and so by poring on it they lost
him, even there, where he was to be found, when our other studies so wholly
take up our time, that our addresses to Christ are either wholly excluded or
curtailed, he who is thereby so much undervalued cannot but be very much
offended. It Is a sad story that you read of Origin, who in his Lamentation
confesses that he fell into Satan's Snare by his not saying out his Prayers.
Do not therefore so over-study other matters that Christ be wronged in point of
time.

2. Nor in point of intention of mind and heart by being eager on them, but
remiss toward him, wearing out the body, and beating our brains in boulting out
some nice subtilty or knotty difficulty in other Arts, and mean while never
know what Paul's (...) in the fourteenth verse of this Chapter means, never
acquainted with that giving all diligence which the Apostle Peter calls for in
clearing up our interest in Christ, and making our Calling and Election sure.
Solomon indeed would have thee whatever (in thy ordinary calling) thy hand
finds to do that thou do it, (...) with thy might, but (...). All thy might
Moses would have thee reserve for God as his due. Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Such Holocausts
are God's Royalty only. Such an one David offered to God. 2 Samuel 6. 14. where
it is said, that (...) and v. 16. (...), words that both in their rise signify
strength, and duplicated words to express his double diligence and earnestness,
putting out all his strength, when it is before the Lord, according to the
Apostles general injunction, though we should not be slothful in any other
service, yet we should be then especially fervent in spirit, when it is in
serving the Lord. Romans 12. 12. This (...), might justly challenge an (...) in
our diligence, to be as much more intent in studying of him, as the
contemplation and knowledge of him exceeds both in its sublime excellency and
profitableness all other speculations. However it would be well if we did study
Christ but as hard as many a close student does other Arts and Authors. But to
devour them without any hungring appetite after him is a (...), a false
appetite, is extreme unworthy and ill in it self, and shows that we are very
ill affected.

For our better help herein, to these Caveats let me add these 3. directions.

1. Study other Books, but especially the Scriptures, for they are they which
testify of me, says our Savior. John 5. 39. other Authors may afford thee
some light: but it is the law of God that issues forth the light of life to
convert the soul. Psalm. 19. 7. other Books may help to make us wise for the
World, but the Scriptures only wise to salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 15. David was a
very wise man; but he acknowledges himself beholden to Gods Testimonies for
it. Psalm. 119. 98, 99. and Solomon, who is accounted the wisest, sends us to
his Books for it. Prove. 1. 1. to 6. he says, it must be dug for. Prove. 2.
4. but the Scripture is the field which you must dig in, if ever you find this
Pearl. Matthew. 13. 44. His was too bold a word when he added. Non in flore
Patrum aut Carry Scholasticorum: for whatever rotten stuff there may be in some
of the latter, yet I am sure there is much of Christ to be found in the former.
But yet as I would not have Abulensis dispute so long as to forget his Creed,
so nor other greatest Students in their well-furnished Libraries to want a
Bible, as (they say) some have; or to study either Fathers or Schoolmen more
than the Scriptures as it may be too many do. One said, that Aristotle's Ethics
was the Schoolmans Body of Divinity. How truly I say not; but it is too true,
that time was when skill in a Romish Missal, and some old Liturgy was more in
request than readiness in the Scripture: but sure Christ was less known both
then and now too, when by our Anti-Scripturists their spirit (not Gods) is so
cried up that the Scriptures are decried, and H. N. his blasphemy revived, with
whom to be Scripture-learned, is a terminus minuens, or title of disgrace. But
for us that would not be so over-wise, but wise to sobriety and salvation, as
the wise men had their Star, Matthew. 2. so let the holy Scriptures be ever ours
to lead us to Christ.

And for this purpose let us be careful and conscionable in a constant reading
of them, as also in a diligent attendance upon the Ministry of them. For wisdom
is by instruction. Prove. 1. 3. Asaph was in a mist, till he got into the
Sanctuary to know his way. Psalm. 73. 16, 17. and the Spouse is directed to the
Shepherds Tents if she would find her beloved. Cant. 1. 8. And this though we
be never so able and wise. For wisdoms Proclamation is not only who so is
simple, and he that wants understanding, let him turn in hither, as Prove. 9.
4. But Hear my words, O ye wise, and hearken unto me ye men of understanding.
Job 34. 2, 10. The wisest may hear and increase knowledge. Prove. 1. 5. 9. 9.
especially in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, the oldest and wisest may yet live
and learn, it being the fault of those foolish women, not that they were always
learning but that they never took out their Lesson in coming to the knowledge
of the truth. 2 Timothy 3. 7. learn out of Scripture though we our selves be never
so learned.

And this even of those that are weak and it may be in respect of our selves
unlearned, who yet in some things may be better informed and experienced. Thou
who in a strange place wilst sometimes ask and learn the way of a simple man or
a young Child, disdain not to learn more of Christ of the simplest, though thou
be a man of God, yet herein according to that in the Prophet, let even a
Child lead thee. Thus study other things, but the Scriptures most. Isa. 11. 6.


2. Study much but pray more: for this wisdom must be got by asking, James 1.
5. as it must be dug for. Prove. 2. 4. so it must be cried after v. 3. (...).
Thou must give, or (as some render (...). Philosophare coelum intuens.
it) consecrate thy voice in loudest cries and earnestess prayers for such a
Boon. Solomon the wisest man that ever was came to it this way, 1 King 3. 9.
And David that was little short of him, at least in this part of Divinest
Learning: (Psalm. 119. 98, v. 12, 13. 64, 66, 68, 108, 124, 135. Ps. 25. 7. 27.
11. 86. 11. 143. 10.
99, 100.) yet how often in that and other Psalms does he pray and beg for
teaching! Daniel must not lie grovelling. Dan. 8. 18, 19, 10. 9. but Zechariah
must look up. Zech. 1. 18. and Ezekiel must be lifted up. Ezekiel. 8. 3. 40. 2. if
he would see a Vision, and John must come up to Heaven if he would have a
Revelation. Revel. 4. 1. Brightman prayed much when he commented on that Book,
and I believe they that pray most have most of Christ revealed to them. All
here is not gotten by poring on a Book, but more by looking upward.

God is the Father of lights. James 1. 17. Christ the true light. John 1. 9. 8.
12. (Ille lux, nos lumina dicimur, ut oculi lumina) and the Holy Ghost is the
spirit of wisdom and Revelation. Ephesians. 1. 17. It Is he that sometimes blinds
and hides, and that can alone Romans 11. 7, 8. Job 17. 4.
open. Luke 24. 45. and enlighten. We want it, and it is in his hand alone to
give it. And therefore because it can neither be wrested, or bought, it must be
prayed out of it. Study much, but Psalm. 51. 6. Exodus 36. 2. 2 Chronicles. 1. 10, 11,
12.
pray more.

3. Lastly, Study well, but live better. And that is the best course to know
most of Christ in a saving way. Aristotle could say, (...). In foul water you
cannot see your own face; nor the face of Christ in a foul Conscience. The Sons
of Belial knew not God. 1 Samuel 2. 12. nor do they desire it. Job 21. 14. nor
shall the wicked understand. Dan. 12. 10. and so they leave off to be wise and
to do good together. Psalm. 36. 3. but as in one place Augustine in Joan. Tract.
2. John 6. 69.
its said, Nisi credideritis non intelligetis, so in another its added, Nos
credidimus, and cognovimus, we know by believing, and as Jonathan did, we see
by tasting (1 Samuel 14. 29.) Psalm. 34. 8. And so knowledge and sense are joined
together. Phil. 1. 9. Non enim haec lectio docet, sed unctio, non litera, sed
spiritus, non Eruditio, sed Epist. 108.
exercitatio, says Bernard. The Romans were filled with goodness and knowledge
together. Romans 15. 14. And therefore would we know Christ?

1. First, make sure to be in Christ (as in the Text Christ Jesus my Lord) we
are in him, and then we have understanding, 1 John 5. 20. when in the light,
then enlightened, when betrothed to him, its then promised that we shall know
him. Hos. 2. 20.

2. When once in him, endeavor with all Care and Conscience to walk on in the
fear of His Name, in obedience to his Will, in a course of Holiness and
Righteousness before him, and that is the best and nearest way yet further to
know him.

Fear in Nature is one of the most quick and apprehensive affections; Fear.
and the Prophet says of Christ Himself, that he was of quick understanding in
the fear of the Lord. How often in Scripture is Isa. 11. 3. Psalm. 111. 10. Prove.
1. 7. 9, 10. Job 28. 28, Robinson.
it called the Beginning of Wisdom? as both having the promise of it. Psalm. 25.
12, 14. and being ever careful and solicitous in using and improving all the
means of it. And where Gods promise and our endeavor meet, something is ever
made of it.

For Obedience. Keep and do, for this is your wisdom and understanding
Obedience. Psalm. 111. 10.
says Moses. Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7. and if a man will do, he shall know says our
Savior. John 7. 17. Here, as in other things, we learn by practicing, and come
to know by doing. Let not our Scholars be like the Athenians, of whom its said,
Scire quidem quid deceat, sed negligere. For Theologia vita est; non scientia.
They Erasm. Adag. page 456.
knew righteousness, in whose heart was the Law. Isa. 51. 7. for Lex Lux, and
therefore where that light is, there will be the less darkness.

For Holiness, Piety, and Purity, you may please to hear what Holiness.
St. Austin says whatever is in the World, yet for the City of God, In hac
nulla est hominis sapientia, nisi Pietas. Piety there is the best De Civit.
Dei. lib. 14. cap. 28.
Policy. I know you will believe our Savior when he says, Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matthew. 5. 8. And so Aquinas, you know,
makes the Donum Intellectus to answer to this fifth Beatitude.

And lastly for righteousness. The secret of the Lord is with the Righteousness.
Righteous says Solomon. Prove. 3. 32. Seminate justitiam, and illuminate vobis
lumen scientiae. So the LXX. would make the Prophet speak. Hos. 10. 12. As
light is sown for the Righteous, so the light Psalm. 97. 11.
of this saving knowledge of Christ is sown in a way of righteousness. So David
ends his Psalm and I my Sermon. Psalm. 17. ult. As for me I shall behold thy
face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.

And thus the Eminency of this saving Knowledge of Christ II. Part.
should raise up our hearts in the use of these means to endeavor after it.

NAY to account all else as loss in Comparison of it. At St. Mary's April 3.
1653.


Which is the second part of the Text, and the highest pitch of our duty, which
our Blessed Apostle had here attained, and as it were standing upon the highest
round of this Jacob's Ladder, by this his example he says to us, as the voice
from heaven did to John. Revel. 4. 1. Come up hither. And therefore Sursum
Corda, that our Souls were indeed on the Wing, because it is an high flight that
we are to take, above all outward Eminencies, or inward Excellencies. She that
is clothed with the sun, has the Moon under her feet. Revel. 12. 1. And if
ever we would savingly know Christ, we with our Apostle must account all things
loss for this excellent knowledge of Christ: and ex animo, even from the heart
say, (...). Yea doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. All of them very great words and magni
animi. Blessed Noble Soul, to which a despised Christ is of so great worth, that
in comparison of him all other greatest things are less than nothing! This is a
strain above the Grandees of this Worlds greatest Gallantry: which yet the
least in the Kingdom of Heaven can truly say: and the less he is in his own
Eyes, the more truly and affectionately he can say it, as he here in the Text,
who accounted so meanly of himself as the least of the Apostles, and less than
the least 1 Cor. 15. 9. Ephesians. 3. 8.
of all Saints: yet so highly of Christ, that he accounts nothing of worth
without him, nay all loss for him. And that you may not conceive him herein to
brag and vapor, confider a little his particular words and expressions, which
I have in part touched before, but must here again take them into further
consideration, that by the pregnancy of his words we may see how full his heart
was of the love of Christ, and at how high a rate he valued this invaluable
transcendent excellent knowledge of him. And to this purpose Consider we.

1. The Emphatical significancy of his words in themselves. 2. His doubling and
multiplying of them. 3. How he rises in his expressions, when you compare them
one with another.
1. The words are Emphatical and strongly significant, as you will see if you
will run over them as they lie in the Text.

1. (...)] Behold! a troop comes! Here Is such a cluster of words, as we cannot
grasp, or the best Grecian well tell how to express in English, as Tully said
the word (...) could not be expressed in Latin. No fewer than five Greek
Particles crowded together, the more fully to express not so much the strength
of the asseveration as of his affection.

2. (...) I account] upon his serious and diligent casting up the account. He
sets this down at the foot of it. (...). Non dubito; Duco, Judico. An Act of
his deliberate judgment which he Certo duco Zanch.
made no doubt of, but was clearly led on to, and was fully settled in.

3. (...), All things. That Is a great word and contains many particulars, as we
shall see hereafter. But does he not over-lash? as he called his Book Jesuitica
liberalitas in their full mouthed Vniversalis, Jacobus Laurentius.
Omnis, Nullus, Semper, Nunquam, etc. or is he not a careless inconsiderate
Prodigal that will thus venture and lose all at one cast before he had viewed,
and weighed, and considered what a great and massy sum this All came to? No, he
had weighed Christ in the one balance, and All things else in the other, and
they in comparison proved lighter than vanity it self, and therefore he calls
them

4. (...) loss in the very abstract, (in which is no gain, and so Grotus H.
Stephan.
(...) and (...) are opposed.) That is: Not only that which he would willingly
lose for Christ, but which (some of them in themselves and all of them in point
of confidence in them) would be loss with a witness, if to keep them and his
trust in them he should lose Christ. The word signifies a loss, a mulct, a
punishment. And by it he tells you it would be the sorest mulct and punishment
that could befall him for him to lose Christ for them: but none at all to lose
them all for Christ.

5. Nor has he yet given them a title low enough: and therefore to (...) he
adds (...). Not only loss but dung. Things in a storm though in themselves very
precious, may be lost and willingly cast overboard to save our lives. But if
it be nothing but dung that is so lost and cast away, there will be less fear
of repenting of the bargain. And yet such in his esteem are all things in
comparison of Christ, (...). I list not read a Greek Lecture upon the word, or
to spend time in telling you what Grammarians See Constantini, Hesychii,
Suidae, Stephani, lexica.
say of it. Some rendering it Quisquiliae, some Retrimenta, some Stercora, some
(...), fit for those Dogs, v. 2. (as Zanchy) suffice it for us to know, that on
all hands it signifies such things as are, if not most loathsome, yet most
vile and contemptible. (...) of (...), as (...) of (...). Andr. Downs in
Chrysostom. See Piscators Analysis loci.
And yet such does the Apostle account all things in comparison of Christ. They
are (...), loss, dung. To which he opposes two expressions, in the

6th. Place, holding forth Christ's comparative incomparable worth, and his
answerable estimate and valuation of it in his (...): and (...). An (...) to
(...), and (...) to (...), other things base dung; but there is an (...), a
supereminent excellency in Christ, and if they be loss, then though he should
lose them all and win Christ, he accounts himself to be a wonderful gainer.

Thus first we see how wonderfully strong and emphatical the words are as they
are singly taken by themselves.

2. But secondly, the strength and earnestness of his spirit further appears in
his doubling and multiplying of them. I touched before of that Congeries or
heap of five Particles, (...), which he poured out together. Sure his heart was
full that out of the abundance of it his mouth speaks, and so runs over, and,
besides; all the other three words we have twice in this one verse; and if you
will take in the seventh verse, you have them thrice in two, to express that as
when the dreams were doubled, the thing was certain, Genesis 41. 32. So when his
words here are doubled and trebled, and multiplied, you may certainly believe
he spoke his heart, and hereby expressed no double-dealing, but the singleness
and affectionateness of it.

3. To this purpose is likewise further to be observed, ut crescit, surgit
oration, how he rises in his speech by six steps one after another, till he
come to the height of both expression and affection together.

1. From an (...), yea but v. 7. to an (...), quin etiam certe, yea but verily
in this verse, not veruntamen, as the vulgar, which is corrigentis, but qui
nimo, quod est amplificantis; He Lapide.
is risen to a greater certainty and setledness of resolution.

2. From an (...), v. 7. those things to a (...), the indefinite is proved an
Universal. Those things are proved All things.

3. From an (...) (in the 7th verse) in the time past to an (...) twice
repeated in this verse in the present tense. I did and I do. I do yet so
account of them, as not altering my judgment, or repenting of my bargain.

4. From (...) to (...). He did account them loss, and which is more, he does
account them dung, that there is no loss in the losing of things so vile and
contemptible.

5. From an (...) to an (...). I did account them loss, yea and I have lost
them. What in our judgment we may undervalue, that by reason of our lust we may
not be willing to part with. But his judgment and practice, his hand and his
heart went together, he had actually lost that which his judgment told him in
comparison of Christ was not worth keeping.

6. From a (...) to an (...), what sometimes was gain, was now become loss, v.
7. and on the contrary, Christ who was before accounted loss is now become the
only gain; And that although won with the loss of all that was formerly
accounted gain. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung, that I might win, and these winnings were clear gains; for the
words are, (...), that I may gain Christ.

So that as our Apostle 2 Cor. 6. when he had before poured out a whole torrent
of most Divine and Pathetical Eloquence, and as it were spoken seven or eight
verses with one breath, he adds v. 11. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open to
you, our heart is enlarged: so he here tells you how enlarged it is toward
Jesus Lib. 8. c. 4.
Christ, that whereas Quintilian reckons up but four kinds of amplification,
Incrementum, Comparatio, Ratiocinatio, and Congeries, of these four the Apostle
spends at least three in this one verse, in which he expresses the
incomparable excellency of Christ, both in himself and in his esteem above all
things that may come in competition with him.

In which he has set us a very fair Copy to write after him, that we with him
in our deliberate judgment and practice, may account all loss and dung that we
may gain Christ. And that we may do so the better, it will be best for us to
consider what particulars are contained under this Universal (...), what these
All Things are which he so undervalues in comparison of Christ Jesus his Lord.

They were.

1. All privileges that accrued to him by his being born in the Church of Godly
Parents. Of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews, v. 5.

2. (Which followed upon the former) the outward enjoyment of God's Ordinances.
Circumcised the eight day.

3. All his moral, best works, and legal performances, though with all zeal and
accurateness, as touching the Law, a Pharisee: Concerning zeal persecuting the
Church: Concerning the righteousness which is in the law, blameless. v. 6.

Now, all this he had lost, v. 7.

And this All came to a great deal. The loss of it would quite have undone an
hypocritical Pharisee; who had nothing else to live and subsist on: and
therefore if stripped of all these would have cried out with Micah. Judge. 18. 24.
Ye have taken amay my Gods and my Priest, and what have I more? But Paul now no
longer a Pharisee, but become an Apostle of Jesus Christ has something more
besides all that, which he is willing to lose for Christ.

And that is.

4. (...) all things; which includes more than all that was beforementioned.
If you ask what? I answer according to our Divines (whom I am not ashamed of,
or of their judgment.)

1. All his own inherent righteousness, and best works after Conversion; his
laboring more abundantly than them all; his Conversion of so many Souls, his
most holy and unblameable Conversation. Omnia, quae and nunc Christianus and
Apostolus ago and habeo, as Zanchy upon the Text, which he sufficiently makes
out to be here included, both from the universal (...), as being intended to
express more than was before expressed in his moral unblameableness and zeal
before Conversion, and from the present tense (...), now that he is converted
he judges so of all that he was and is. (...), as Chrysostom. And he further
explains himself on the ninth verse following, that in this (...) he contained
his own righteousness of the Law, which he rejected for the righteousness of
God by Faith. Nor by that righteousness of his own which was of the law, did he
mean only his Pharisaical righteousness; that which by the power of the Law,
and his free will before Conversion he did attain to, and so might call his own
(as our Adversaries contend) but all that even by the power of grace he
attained in obedience to the law; and what was inherent in him, and in that
sense was his own, as our Divines fully prove, and I may have occasion
hereafter to show. But what? are these to be accounted (...)? Bellarmine here
cries out of our blasphemy. De Justificatione, l. 1. c. 19.
And are they to be accounted loss? or are they to be lost, that we may gain
Christ? No, not in themselves; but in regard of our confidence in them, as to
pardon and acceptance with God: not in point of sanctification, but of
justification, which the Apostle is here speaking to. Non necesse habuit Paulus
se abdicasse a tribu sua, and a genere Abrahae, fierique allophylum ut fieret
Christianus, non debuit ex casto impudicus, ex sobrie intemperans, etc. as
Calvin speaks. He kept the staff in his hand to walk with, but it being cracked
he did not lay his whole weight on it. Paul did not quite cast away diverse of
the other things mentioned which were of less value, much less inherent
righteousness and good works in a gracious conversation: he did not profanely
renounce his Birthright, or Gods Ordinances: nor instead of his former
unblameable carriage proved debauched and scandalous, as many of our high
pretenders to Gospel-Perfection do now adays. Those things might consist with
Christ, and some of them are necessarily required of all that are in Christ. But

Partly in way of comparison, (...) Chrysostom. Theodoret Photius.
(as the Greek Fathers speak) he undervalues them in comparison with Christ,
(...), he as it were coutemns the less in comparison of the greater, (...), as
Theodoret expresses it. In compare with Christ the Bread of Life, all else are
but (...)

And this especially in point of Justification, for so to rely upon them for
acceptance with God would not only comparatively but positively be the greatest
loss, as keeping us from Christ, who is the greatest gain, which the Apostles
words plainly speak, when he says, that he had suffered their loss, (...),
that he might gain Christ, intimating that such a loss of them, as to
confidence of acceptance by them, is such a means by which he might and without
which he could not gain Christ.

2. In this super-additional (...) he includes (and as Chrysostom (...).
thinks, especially) all outward excellencies and advantages whatsoever; his
ease, credit, profit, and all other worldly greatness, and conveniences: which
yet he might have bidden as fair for as another, as being born in Tarsus of
Cilicia, no mean City, so Act 21. 39.
himself of no mean esteem and accomplishments, (...), one of the most
exquisite sect. Act. 26. 5. and in it a prime Scholar, and of the highest form,
(...). Gal. 1. 14. he had got the start of many of his Schoolfellows, so that
his rare abilities occasioned the High Priests before his Conversion to make
use of him. Act. 22. 5. and after his Conversion, made the Heathen his Enemies
envy him, and even Porphyrie pity him that such a rare piece should be (as he
conceived) cast away in such a foolish way as he thought Christianity was.

So that we see that he had something, nay much to lose, and which actually he
had lost and parted with, so that instead of his former ease and liberty,
nothing but bonds and imprisonments and all misery abode him. Act. 20. 23. 2
Cor. 11. 23, 24, etc. and instead of his former singular esteem, he takes part
with the rest of the Apostles to be accounted the filth and offscouring of the
World. 1 Cor. 4. 13.

So that whereas (in the former head of things) only his confidence in them was
lost, here both Confidence and the things too were lost, and yet he no loser:
for in them all he had lost nothing, but what he accounted dung, and either
comparative, or Luke 10. 37.
positive loss, that he might gain Christ. From whose example our watchword
is, Go thou and do likewise; To be alike affected to all these things in
comparison of Christ, and that we may gain Christ, to account them all loss and
dung, and accordingly when God calls, actually to lose some of them, and all
confidence in all of them as to our Justication, or Acceptance with God by
them: whether they be 1. All outward worldly excellencies and advantages. Or 2.
All Birth-right-privileges. Or 3. The outward enjoyment of God's Ordinances. Or
4. All moral virtues and performances. Or 5. Even best good works and inherent
graces: All in themselves good and may be enjoyed, diverse of them so necessary,
as that they must indissolubly be cleaved to and not parted from. But none of
them to be relied upon for acceptance with God and Salvation; however good and
useful and profitable soever otherwise they are or may be, yet in this case
they are (in the sense before explained) to be accounted loss that we may gain
Christ.

I. All Worldly Excellencies and advantages.
(...), 1 Cor. 6. 3, 4. (...). 1 John 2. 16. such as the Apostle there calls
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, i. e.
Pleasure, Profit, Honor, and the repute of great place, learning, wisdom,
ease, liberty, health, life it self. Of all which all that I have now to do is
to show.

1. That Paul and all the faithful of his spirit ever de facto did, and do
esteem them all loss and dung in comparison of Christ. 2. That de jure, there
was and is very great reason so to do. 3. For application, that it is our duty
to be answerably affected.
1. That Paul was so, the Text speaks aloud in the forementioned particulars.
Nor was it only for a good mood here once; but his deliberate judgment, and
constant frame of spirit at other times in all his writings. For Christ's sake
his profit was lost, whilst he served him in much Poverty, Hunger and thirst,
cold and 2. Cor. 11. 27.
nakedness, that he was fain to send from Rome as far as to Ephesus 2 Timothy 4.
13.
for a Cloak to cover it. His pleasure exchanged for weariness and painfulness,
stripes and imprisonments, so that he had had a very unpleasant life of it, but
that for Christ's sake he took pleasure in infirmities. And as for honor and
repute he had learnt in the cause of Christ to digest evil report as well as
good, to be accounted amongst the filth and offscouring of the World: one, who
for his sect was a learned Pharisee, and for his personal abilities eminent
above his fellows; whilst he desired to know nothing but Christ Jesus and him
Crucified, he is content that the Corinthians shall account him a fool and that
Felix shall call him a mad man, such a dunghill was the world to him, whilst
Christ was the only Pearl. And although he was herein eminent, yet not so
singular as to be alone in this estimate, for Christ was, The desire of all
Nations. The Apostle speaks indefinitely, but means universally, (...). 1
Pet. 2. 7. To you, to all you that believe he is precious, or, as the word
(...) imports, the price it self, by and in reference to which every true
believer prizeth all things, and it above all. Hence even in the time of the
law, and before, when the Beauty and worth of Christ was seen at a further
distance, and through darker shadows nothing in the whole City could (...).
prove a Cordial to the Spouse sick of love, as long as she met not Hebr. 11.
13. Cant. 3. and 5.
with her beloved. Nay Asaph had none either in Earth or Heaven but him. Psalm.
73. 25. so that it seems all besides him was nothing. Israel thrice a year left
all to come to the Temple a type of Christ, and yet never lost by it. It was by
the faith of a Messiah, Heb. 11.
that Abraham left all; Isaac and Jacob, and the other Patriarks proved
Pilgrims, that Moses so undervalued the Court, Honor, and the Treasure of
Egypt. But especially in the times of the Gospel, when the unsearchable riches
of Christ were more revealed, in the very dawning of the morning this
Phosphorus shined so bright, that the Magi came from a far Country, took a
tedious and dangerous journey and ran the hazard of proclaiming him King under
the Tyrants Nose. But when this Sun of Righteousness was got more up; how
willingly does the wise Merchant sell all to buy this Pearl. Matthew. 13. 46.
their garments are made his Foot-cloth, their hair his Towel, the precious Box
of Spikenard broken, and none but a Judas accounted it too costly to anoint
even the feet of the anointed Messiah. What an honor did they account it to
suffer shame for Christ? Act. 5. 41. How ambitious of disgrace? How greedy of
gain by losing all for him? They loved not their lives unto death. (Rev. 12.
11.) is but a (...). He that loves his life accounts nothing more precious than
life: and therefore on the contrary, he that is said not to love it, is
prodigal of it, and so Beza there renders it.

And this not only with those Apostles and first Disciples, and other Primitive
Martyrs and Confessors. Not only with a Galeacius or Pizzardus, or other such
more noble Heroes, who

When bribed with all the World could promise to be drawn from Christ, could
readily return answer and say. Thy money perish with thee, valeat vita, pereat
pecunia, veniat Christus.

And when threatened and pursued with whatever the malice of man or Devil could
invent to drive them from Christ: yet a Polycarpus could not speak an ill word
of his Master, whom he had served so long, and never had hurt from.

When called upon but to think what they did, an holy Cyprian will not take
time to deliberate; and in the midst of the flames to a holy Lambert. None but
Christ, None but Christ. Blessed Souls! we envy them not their Aureola, who on
those higher stilts could thus easily stride over the highest Mountains in this
World to get to their Savior in that other.

Its our Crown of Rejoicing if haud passibus aequis, we can but follow them in
this way. And truly the poorest, weakest Infant-Believer, who can but creep,
yet can go thus far, as to be able from the heart to say, Christ is All, and
All in Comparison of Him is Nothing.

1. Its the first word that the infant can speak, and this it can and does
speak at its first renewed Birth and Conversion. This self-denial the first
Lesson then taught in the School of Christ. The voice of the Crier in the
Wilderness that first proclaimed Christ, blasted as so much withering grass all
the glory of the Creature. Isa. 40. 6. That eye and heart that (as the Prophet
speaks) before Jer. 22. 17.
was not, but for Covetousness, etc. is now so unmoveably fixed on Christ, that
then at least it overlooks all else, and eyeth him only.

-- ipsum ipsum cupido tantum spectare vacavit. As Statius of himself, when
invited to Domitians Feast. It was Lib. 4.
not his rich furniture or costly provisions, but himself only that his eye
pored on. That was the Poets flattery to a Domitian; but this is a true
Converts real respect to Christ.

However it is with any of us now (and I know not why after our more
acquaintance with Christ we should less love him) I am sure if any of us ever
savingly knew him, there was once a time, and that was in the day of our
espousals and Conversion, before we came fully to enjoy him, that we then above
all did most highly value him. One drop of his blood; one smile of his
Countenance was then worth a thousand Worlds. It was then, that as in the
entrance into Canaan. Joshua did hang up all those Kings before the Josh. 10.
26, 27.
Sun, so we all Competitors with Christ before him the sun of righteousness;
loftiest thoughts, pleasingest lusts, choicest contentments were mortified for
part in a dying Savior. And, as Elisha when 1 King. 19. 20, 21.
(upon a Call) he followed Elijah, and Matthew, Christ, they left all, its said
in both places that they then made a feast: but it was a Luke 5. 27, 28, 29.
Funeral and a Marriage Feast in one: so, as Sanctius applies it, when we are
married to Christ, we are dead to the World.

2. And so much the more it is, or (at least) should be in after more full and
glorious enlargements, upon communion with Christ the new born babe that upon
hungring and thirsting has once tasted that God is gracious, more gladly
lays aside all else, and then Christ to the Believer is indeed precious. 1
Pet. 2. 1. 2, 3, 7. What are all the treasures of the World to those
unsearchable Riches which we there find in Christ? what dull, insipid, sour
stuff are all the Earths sweets to the least taste of the sweetness of Christ in
peace of Conscience, and joy of the Holy Ghost? most glorious and unspeakable?
All the glazing light of the Worlds splendour is mere darkness to the least warm
bright beam darted into our Souls from the sun of righteousness.

3. Or in case upon our playing the wantons in that Sunshine, we be before we
are aware gotten into the gloomy shade of some uncomfortable desertion, Christ's
worth is most sadly felt and seen in the dark, and our want of sensible
enjoyment of it. With what a sad weeping eye does the poor Israelite look on
the brazen Serpent, when the fiery Serpent has stung him. Truly light is
sweet, and its a pleasant thing to behold the Sun: but especially to the
Prisoner, when now cast into the dark Dungeon; and the sick man (though he then
has but a weak head) can best judge of the worth of ease, sleep, health, when
he lies restless on the bed of languishing, and the deserted Spouse when
looking besides all else so sadly, asks, But saw you him whom my soul loves?
as plainly tells you at what rates she would again recover her now lost
beloveds presence and Company. Now, if ever, with Paul in the Text she accounts
all loss, and dung, that she may gain Christ.

And there is great Reason why a Believer should so account always, if we
consider what Christ and all that is in the World are in themselves and to us,
and what faith is, and what estimate it makes of both. I must but only name
particulars.

1. All the Worlds enjoyments are in themselves (and so the more we experiment
them the more we find them to be) lying, yea vexatious vanities (as one said)
the matter of them Nothing, and the form a lie. But do you all think, and let
them that have had most and longest experience say, Is there not fullness in
Christ? John 1. 16. Col. 1. 19.
And is not a full Fountain better than a broken Cistern.

2. They cannot supply all our wants and necessities, and least of all our
greatest, and never less than when we are in most need. In death they fail us,
and in a day of anguish and wrath instead of Pro. 11. 4.
relieving they often most vex and wound us. But Christ is All unto All. Col.
3. 11. The Root and Branch. Isa. 11. 1. 10. Revel. 22. 16. The morning Star and
Sun. Murus and antemurale; Prora and Puppis, all in all; and therefore in
Scripture expressed by all things that in all kinds are most desirable and
eminent. As the looking toward the Temple which was (as I said) a type of
Christ, was a remedy against all maladies. 1 King. 8 against plague, famine, v.
37, 38. war. v. 33. 44. So Christ's Robe is large enough to cover all our
nakedness, and the Plaster of his blood able to heal all our wounds: heart
wounds and those that are most deadly; and can take the fire of Gods wrath out
of them. He is a precious Diamond that shines and sparkles in the darkest
night: a Cordial that can fetch us again out of deadliest swound, and which in
death it self can make our heart live.

3. As they cannot supply all our necessities, which are many and great, so
much less all our faculties and appetites which often are far greater. A beast
may have a belly full. But its he who is Psalm. 17. 14.
greater than our hearts that can afford an heart full of satisfaction. Its
true, that the more the Worldling takes in of the World, and the more a
Believer receives from Christ, they both of them still thirst for more. But yet
so far as Christ flows in to the one, so far he fills and satisfies,
whereas the more the other drinks in of the World, the more he is filled with
wind and emptiness; and from thence it is that the hydropick thirsts yet the
more: when you have shown a Worldling all that the World can afford, he, as
unsatisfied, still, asks, who will show us any good? and so, like the Be
flutters from one flower to another. But let a Christian be shown the glory of
Christ, he sets up his rest, says with Peter. Let us here pitch a Tabernacle,
nay make it our mansion, for it is good to be here. Christ by being born at
Bethlehem Ephrata, in those two words tells you, what fruitfulness is in him,
and how good an House he keeps to your full satisfaction.

4. Add hereunto, that whatever poor little faint content it be which they may
sometimes afford, or rather we take in them for the present, yet it will not
last long, (it would loath and weary us if it should, and therefore one half of
every four and twenty hours God allots to the night, in which we rest our minds
and senses wearied with the cloying surfeit of the most delightful object,
wherewith the foregoing day presented us) to be sure it will not last always.
The Tow lighted and presently extinguished with this said, sic transit gloria
mundi, at the Popes Inauguration, is a good Memento. (...), 1 Cor. 7. 31. are
two very diminutive words, but yet do very greatly express what poor slight
and fleeting things this World and all the Contentments thereof are; but a
fashion, but a noise, but a shadow whilst they Jer. 46. 17.
last -- Stat magni nominis umbra. Vanity even when consistent. Psalm. 39. 5.
But the worst is, the shadow will not stand still, but proves (...) Psalm. 102.
11. a shadow that decliueth; a fashion that passes away, the noise cease;
the sandy foundation sinketh, the grass of it self withers, if not before cut
down. But Blessed be God that his word endures for ever, that Jesus Christ is
that (...). Prove. 8. 21. solid and substantial for the present, and over and
besides, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. Hebr. 13. 8. A Precious
tried Cornerstone, (...), founded, founded, Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27.
a sure foundation. Isa. 28. 16. And it is to be taken notice of how that
sixteenth verse is brought in as it were in a parenthesis, between the
fifteenth and seventeenth, in which is threatened the overflowing and washing
away of all other high Towers and refuges of lies, to which is opposed this
unmovable foundation of this rock of ages, (that stone before whom the Iron
and Brass, Silver and Gold, the most solid and massy metals are but as the
light chaff of the Summer, -- threshing-floor, Dan. 2. 35.) the Lord Jesus, who
instateth us in those sure mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3. invests us with that
durable clothing, and riches and righteousness, Isa. 23. 18. Prove. 8. 18. which
neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and so they do not wax old or decay of
themselves, nor can any thief break through or steal, that we may be shipped of
them by any others violent hand. (...), said Stilpo. Romans 8. 38, 39.
For (...) the Christian writes, (...), and so makes both the sense and
sentence more complete and perfect. And then (as the Prophet querieth) will a
man leave the snow of Lebanon that Jer. 18. 14.
comes from the rock of the field, or shall these (...), these cool flowing
(ever-flowing) waters be forsaken? Let others sit down by their fading Brooks:
but let me ever drink (...) of that ever following Rock, 1 Cor. 10. 4. which
(as the Chaldee Paraphrase says) did climb up the Hills, and run down into the
Valleys, and accompanied Israel then, and does as much for the Israel of God
still all along our wilderness-wandring here, till we be at last filled with
Canaans milk and honey in Heaven.

5. That we should judge to be of more worth that an All-Wise and a most
merciful God and Father bestows on his best friends, and that as their
portion to live on But are all the best of the Worlds enjoyments such? which
Scripture and experience frequently teach us are the portion of the greatest
Strangers, and Psalm. 17. 14. 73. 3, 4, etc.
his worst Enemies: which a Cain and a Judas may have with Gods Curse here, and
(with the rich man in the Gospel) fry in Hell for ever when he and they are
gone. But whatever such gifts the Sons of the Concubines may have, Christ is
the only true heirs portion. His precious elect ones only have bequeathed unto
them this Cornerstone elect and precious, as their inheritance and portion, to
pay their Debts, to live on, and therefore to be stood for: whilst for this
outward trash they either are denied them, or if they enjoy them, have them
only cast in as an auctarium, or overweight above the bargain. Matthew. 6. 33.

6. That is the best good which makes the possessors of it such. Now although
in the Worlds perverse dialect Riches are called Goods, and rich men good men:
yet not only Solomon's, but even Eccles. 5. 13.
their own experience plainly convinces them that they are often the worse for
them, even for the outward man, but to be sure never a whit the better for the
inward man; in point of true worth as base and sordid as any, and for matter of
inward peace and satisfaction oftentimes more vexed and unquiet than those that
conflict with greatest wants and necessities.

But how good is our God in Christ! who is both (...) and (...), is good and
does good; and makes all those good Psalm. 119. 68.
whom he bestows Christ upon, by him alone quieting their minds, rejoicing
their hearts, enriching, ennobling their Souls, as the Diamond does the ring it
is set in, making them wise unto salvation: (without whom all our wit and
learning unmortified is but like quicksilver not killed, which poisoneth
rather than does any good) Gracious, spiritual, heavenly; in a word, like
himself, holy here, and happy hereafter. And shall Christ and the World then
ever come in comparison or competition?

7. Especially, seeing he has done and endured more for us, than all the whole
World either would or could; satisfied Divine As he said, will the Son of Jesse
give you etc. 1 Samuel 22. 7.
Justice, pacified revenging wrath, reconciled God, purchased Heaven: and what
could all the wealth of the World have done to any one of these, which in a day
of distress cannot ease one pain of body, or pang of Conscience? And shall
these then be named the same day with our Savior?

8. He has valued us more than himself, preferred our ease and peace before
his own, for our sakes became poor, that we by him might be made rich, 2 Cor.
8. 9. that great rock in a weary land, Isa. 32. 2. that intercepted the
scorching Suns beams, that we might with the more refreshment fit in the cool
shade. I may not suspect, you will be so unworthily ungrateful. I appeal to
your ingenuity. Has Christ thus valued us above himself? and can we do less
than prize him above all?

9. And yet this the rather, because the World generally is so prodigiously
unthankful, that Christ, whose visage once was marred more than any man's, Isa.
52. 14. is to this day slighted more than any thing else. This was the stone
which the builders once rejected. Psalm. 118. 22.
And so still, whilst we are building our Babels of Riches, Honor, and
Preferment upon the Earth, and find that this stone will not square with those
buildings, we choose rather to reject him than ruin them. Some more moderate
deal with Christ, as Boaz his Kinsman with Ruth, would be content to have her,
but not upon such Ruth 4. 6.
terms as to mar their inheritance. Others more profane and malicious, will
kill the Son that they may have the inheritance, do not Matthew. 21. 38.
only slight him, but from their souls loath him, as Zech. 11. 8. as the Jews
who out of scorn and despite would not vouchsafe so much as to name him, who
yet has a Name above all Names, and Matthew. 12. 24. 26. 61. John 9. 29.
Judas like, will sell him for 30 pieces of silver (Matthew. 26. 15.) no more
than in the law was the mulct or price for the death of a Bond servant, Exodus
21. 32. a goodly price which such base spirits Zech. 11. 13. Philip. 2. 21.
prize Christ at: either simply sleighting him, or comparatively undervaluing
him. The common mixed multitude (still, as of old) whilst they long for Onions
and garlic, account this Heavenly Manna but light food: with those brutish
Gadarens, preferring their Swine before their Savior, thereby expressing
themselves more Swinish than their Hogs, as in Luthers fable, when Colloquia
mensal.
the Lion entertained the rest of the Beasts with dainties, the swine asked for
grains: and, as he there adds, what should the Cow do with Nutmegs? Such husks
and draff do such Brutes feed on: and so little do they desire, and so lightly
esteem of the bread of life. The Jews, Turks, Arrians, Socinians, blaspheme
Christ: Malicious, Profane, Worldly Sinners, fleight and oppose him, as he is
King, Lawgiver, Judge, in his word, ways, grace and servants.

You will say, this is a strange argument to persuade to prize Christ, who is
so generally despised and undervalued; and yet such as with every true
Christian heart is very cogent and effectual, whilst they thus argue: Though
others slight him, who know not the worth that is in him, yet this should not
hinder me, who am acquainted with it, from honoring him. The wise merchant
prizeth not the gem less because the Dunghil-cock undervalueth it, or the
Scholar learning, because a fool derides it. For all Michals scoffs David by
his handmaids was never the less had in honor. 2 Samuel 6. 22.

Nay because others undervalue Christ, we should the more highly prize him,
that so we may vindicate his wrongs from a profane wicked world, that it may
appear that Christ has some friends in the world who will and dare appear for
him, wherein he has so many Enemies that rise up against him: And that others
cannot have so low, as they have high thoughts of him; unless we mean again to
crucify him, if all his followers (as once) shall forsake him, and he have
none to plead for him, before men, who alone makes intercession for us to God.
To come to his own, John 1. (...).
11. and for his own not to receive him most unnatural and unworthy. Let others
therefore at their peril tread under-foot the blood of the Covenant, Hebr. 10.
29. But therefore let every true Israelite who desires the destroying Angel to
pass over, strike the Paschal Lambs blood on the side-posts and lintel, and not
on the Exodus 12. 22.
threshold, so to be trampled on.

10. The last ground of this Doctrine and duty is taken from the Consideration
of what Faith is and does. In the former particulars, Ex part objecti has
been presented Christ's merit and worth, the Worlds meanness and baseness: and
yet the Worldly man's perverse thought and estimate of both. Now, Ex part
subjecti, it is faith that sees all this, that has an Eye to see Christ's
beauty, and a taste to relish his sweetness, is a self-emptying grace, casting
out all else to make more room for Christ; has sadly ex^erimented the Worlds
emptiness, and experimentally has been convinced of Christ's fullness. And
therefore it cannot be but that to you who believe, and so far as you believe,
Christ is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Fides ementis est incrementum mercis. It Is
faith that Ambros.
sets a due price and value on Christ, by reason of the sense it has of its
own want of him, and that worth and beauty which it sees to be in him, so that
when others hide their face from him, and despise him, and the daughters of
Jerusalem less acquainted Isa. 53. 3.
with him, ask the Spouse, what is thy beloved more than another beloved? She
readily answers -- Nescis temeraria, nescis. You Cant. 5. 9.
would not say so if you had mine Eye, for in it he is white and ruddy, the
chiefest of ten thousands. It beholds his glory as the V. 10. John 1. 14.
glory of the only-begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, though
besmeared and covered over with blood and spittle. So that with Paul in the
Text she can from her heart say. Yea doubtless and I count all things but loss
for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and count them but dung that I may win Christ.

But (for Application) Can we say so and say truly? what bleating of the sheep?
to allude to 1 Samuel 15. 14.

I shall not here deal with open professed Enemies and despisers of him, as
with Jews, who in their wretched Devotions, pray that his name may rot and be
blotted out from under heaven; or with Turks that blaspheme him, or profane
Worldlings who prefer every thing, the meanest outward contentment, yea the
basest lust before him; as they who although they believed, would for outward
respects not profess him; and that Theodosius which Suidas John 12. 42:
tells the story of ad vocem (...).

But with many visible Professors, who, though they say they highly prize him,
yet when put to it are very hardly persuaded to deny any thing of their profit,
ease, or other convenience for him, and stick not daily for the least
halfpenny gain to lie and cheat and so to dishonor him. Desperate madness! as
he said, Quantum pro quantillo! Think what it is thou gettest, and what thou
partest with, actest over again Adams sin; for an apple losest thine interest
in the tree of life. Thou wilst never live and thrive upon such gains: such
miserable exchanges at last will certainly undo thee. It Is not (...), but Gold,
and the only pearl of price for very dung, if thou will stand to Paul's
estimate. O fools, Psalm. 94. 8.
when will ye be wise?

And when will even those that are made wise to salvation prove wiser than in
their practice so to undervalue Christ as they do, whom in their deliberate
judgment and inward frame of heart they value above all? To say and profess
that he is so, and in a notional way so to judge of him, is an easy matter:
but to say Paul's words of the Text with Paul's heart, out of an inward working
sense and experience of Christ's incomparable worth; constantly to carry along
with us such actual worthy thoughts of it as may have a real directing,
over-powering influence into the general course of our lives, and our
particular actions; that our lives may proclaim that God only is exalted, and
Christ Jesus is Isa. 2. 17.
with us indeed above all: this is a matter which the best of us may well
blush, and our hearts bleed to think how exceedingly we fall short of. When
Peter and other weak ones in time of persecution, to save their lives or
liberties, deny him: when the Spouse so values her ease and rest, that she will
not be at the pains to rise up and open the door; we, our sloth, so as not to
set open the door of our hearts in more busy Meditations and more earnest
Prayers to enjoy him: when he so little in our thoughts, raises no more Divine
flames of love in our hearts, when his glory, and interest, and service is so
over-looked and waved, neglected, betrayed in our lives.

But (as he said) is this thy kindness to thy friend? Or (as 2 Samuel 16. 17.
Isa. 23. 7.
they) is this your joyous City? Is a Christ so little heeded and thought upon,
so much slighted and neglected our joy and crown, our all and more than all?
Is outward ease, liberty, and advantage, Dung, that is so overprized? and do we
count all things loss for that Christ for whom we will lose nothing? O sin! O
shame! should we not blush at such disingenuity and unworthiness?

And let it shame us into more high and honorable valuations Barabbas, a
Robber, and a Murderer, that murders us and robs us of him by being made choice
of and preferred before him. But God the Father Act. 5. 31. Phil. 2. 9. Col. 1.
18. (...).
has written us a fairer Copy, who has highly exalted him, and given him a
name abov^ ^ll names, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. And
therefore let him have it in our hearts. It Is but reason that he should be
advanced infinitely above all that is on earth, who himself is ascended far
above all heavens. We know Ephesians. 4. 8.
not what trials in this kind, in these dangerous times we may possibly be put
upon. The Question may be which shall be preferred in our choice, whether
Christ or life? It certainly will be, whether Christ or a lust? Happy therefore
it will be, if in a way and practice of holy Asceticks, we now hit right in the
one, that if God shall please to call us to it, we may not miss or fail in the
other: But in both remember, that as it is Gods first Commandment in the Law,
that we should have no other Gods in Competition with him, so it is the first
Lesson in the Gospel that we should deny our selves, yea and comparatively hate
father and mother, and Luke 9. 23. Luke 14. 26. 33.
whatever is of dearest and highest esteem, yea and (...) to bid adieu, and
utterly to forsake all for him; that whatever straits and losses we may meet
with, yet if we can but escape as Aeneas, with his father in his arms, so we
with our Savior in our bosoms and Consciences, our bulk will not be broke; our
portion (which we most prize, as that which we may live on) will remain whole:
and so long we shall not be utterly undone. Indeed we shall if with other
losses, yea with other greatest gains Christ should be lost. Dona Dei, sine
Deo, will be (...). If we break with Christ for any thing, it will break us; It
will at best prove but a dead Contentment, if not a deadly torment. But shall
he please to enable us so to undervalue as to lose all for him; if he do not
restore it again in kind, we may be sure in a better kind to find all in him;
and this the sweeter because more immediately from the Fountainhead, and never
so sweet as then, because we thereby plainly show, that we in all those losses
and sufferings would own and make him our God and Savior; and therefore his
goodness and faithfulness are engaged for him as plainly to show (if not to
all, yet) at least to our selves, that he is so.

O therefore, that our Eyes were enlightened to see his beauty, and our hearts
raised up to a more answerable valuation of his unvaluable worth.

A more constant exercise of repentance would much conduce to it; whilst it
sees sins ugliness it would help the Soul more to admire Christ's beauty, and by
feeling of its deadly bitterness, would make it more sensible of his
incomparable sweetness.

But more lively and vigorous actings of faith in this kind are most useful;
for it has an eye seriously and busily viewing the vanity of the World, and
the excellency of Christ, and so easily discerns the difference.

It Is it that tastes and sees, and (as Jonathan did) by tasting sees that God
is good.

It was an hand of faith that lifted up our Apostles Divine Soul here in the
Text far above all earthly enjoyments, as high as Christ in Heaven, and there
so fastens. He believed, and therefore he thus speaks: Yea doubtless, and I
account all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord.

II. All Birth-right-Priviledges.
THE second sort of things which he does particularly name St. Mary's. November.
28. 1658.
and insist upon, and yet in compare with Christ, most gladly suffers the
loss of, are all his Birth-right-Privileges, which (verse 5.) he thus
expresses,

Circumcised the eighth day: of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin,
an Hebrew of the Hebrews.

And as we have it added 2 Cor. 11. 22.

Of the seed of Abraham.

Which let us a little consider in particular.

1. In that he says he was Circumcised, he tells us he was not born of the
uncircumcised Gentiles.

2. And because Circumcised the eighth day, that he was not a Proselyte; for
they were not circumcised the eighth day, as the Jews were: but when at any
time they took upon them the Jewish Religion.

3. He further adds, that he was of the stock of Israel, which was a further
privilege, and preferred him before the Ishmaelites and Edomites, who being of
Abraham's and Isaacs Posterity, were Circumcised, as also the Sons of the
Proselytes, which were circumcised the eighth day; yet were not born
Israelites. And which added much to the nobleness of his birth, in which they
much gloried; as being so born in the right and holy line, and of the Church,
of which all Jacobs Children were, and therein his blessing exceeded the
blessings of his Progenitors. Genesis 49. 26.

4. He adds, of the tribe of Benjamin: in which he coucheth many Privileges
and Prerogatives, as the certainty of his being a true Israelite, when
(according to their manner) he could design the particular Tribe he was of, as
also the nobleness of his Parentage, in that being a Benjamite he was not born
a Son of the Handmaids as some of Jacobs Children were, but of Rachel, not
only the lawful but also the beloved Wife, and of Benjamin, who as he was the
beloved of his Father, Genesis 44. 20. so his Posterity was the beloved of God,
Deuteronomy. 33. 12. Of this Tribe also was The Jasper, Benjamins stone, is the first
foundation. Revel. 21. 19.
Saul the first King of Israel, which that Tribe much gloried of, and therefore
used much to name their Children by his name, as our Apostles Parents did him.

Add to all this as the honor of this Tribe, that in the Schism and Apostasy
of the ten Tribes from the House and Kingdom of David and from the Temple and
Gods true worship, this Tribe was faithful and kept close to both.

Yea both Jerusalem, and the Temple, and (...), fell within this Tribes lot (as
Chrysostom observes) which made it to be (...) (as he speaks) in both
Ecclesiastical and Political consideration more honorable.

And in these five particulars, Benjamins Mess was five times as much as others.

And yet the Apostle stays not here, but adds

5. An Hebrew of the Hebrews, to express these yet further preheminences.

1. That both his Parents were of Abraham's race, and neither Hammond.
of them of Strangers.

2. That he was not born of the Greek Jews, or Hellenists, that in their
dispersions had forgotten their native Hebrew Language, and were unskilful in
the Scripture: but that although he was Estius in locum and 2 Cor. 11. 22.
born at Tharshish, yet that not being far from Jerusalem, and his Father not
having long before removed from Jerusalem thither, and being himself a
Pharisee, was ambitious to retain himself, and train up him his Son in the
Hebrew Language: in which we have him preaching to the Jews, Act. 21 40. and so
he did, (...), retain his native Character, as Theophylact expresses it, and
in that respect as such an Hebrew was more honored, as on the contrary the
Greek Jews were subject to be neglected. Act. 6. 1.

3. But especially this he adds to express the antiquity of descent; Calvin.
Beza.
whilst he calls himself an Hebrew of the Hebrews, he rises up as high as
Heber, as some Interpreters conceive, but rather Cajetan.
as high as Abraham, who in the Scripture is the first that we find called an
Hebrew, Genesis 14. 13. of (...) from his passing over Euphrates into Canaan, and
so an Hebrew of the Hebrews is much one with the seed of Abraham, of whom they
most gloried that they were his Children, John 8. 33, 39. who was the Father of
Romans 4. 12.
the faithful, as it were the head of the Covenant to whom it was first
solemnly renewed and sealed, and settled in his Seed.

4. Which might be added as a fourth Prerogative couched in these words, namely
the privilege of the Covenant and Promise, as Aquinas notes not unfitly.

Now what a long Bede-roul, or large Charter of privileges and Prerogatives,
and Titles of Honor, does the Apostle here produce to check the proud boasting
of the false Apostles, and to show that he did not undervalue them out of envy
of them that vaunted themselves of them because he had them not, as many
oftentimes contemn those things in others, quae ipsi nesciunt vel Aquinas.
non habent, which themselves fall short of; But to show that although in all
these he did equal, or exceed them, yet as to his acceptance with God he had no
confidence in them, but in Christ and his righteousness only.

We have here a large Field, in which in these many forementioned particulars
we have scattered as many stalks with full ears, which for our use and benefit
we may either gather up in some few maniples, or bind up in one sheaf and
bundle thus.

That it is not, 1. The Antiquity, nor 2. The Nobility, Riches, Greatness, no
nor 3. The Piety and Godliness of our Parents and Progenitors; or (if you will
take it in one whole bundle) It Is no Birthright Privileges whatsoever, that
without Christ can commend us to God for acceptance to Salvation.

This one contains the general sum of that whole verse, and those three the
chief heads, which all the forementioned particulars may be referred to.

But before I particularly consider them, to prevent mistake, let me premise,
that Paul did not here play the Leveller, and jumble Kings and Queens, and
Peasants all together, as in a Chess-bag. God who is not the God of confusion,
1 Cor. 14. 33. would have us observe order: and when he makes a difference,
would have us take notice of it. And so according to the three forementioned
particulars of the ancientness, honourableness, and godliness of men's
Ancestors, his will is that they should be esteemed of accordingly.

So for the first, of Antiquity; Ancient things, 1 Chronicles. 4. 22. ancient
people, Isa 44. 7. Nations, Jer. 5. 15. Landmarks, Prove. 22. 28. Rivers, Judge.
5. 21. Paths, Jer. 18. 15. Mountains, Deuteronomy. 33. 15. are in Scripture spoken of
with honor; as ancient and honorable are joined together, Isa. 9. 15. And
truly if ancient Monuments be venerable, then to be the Sons of ancient Kings
in Scripture Phrase, Isa. 19. 11. may well go for a Title of Honor, and not to
be vilified by upstarts of yesterday.

And for the second, of Noble and Honorable Parentage; He that enjoineth
Honor to whom Honor, Romans 13. 7. and says, that Land is blessed, whose King
is the Sons of Nobles, Eccles. 10. 17. and when their Nobles are of themselves,
Jer. 30. 21. and threatens it as a judgment when such are pulled down and taken
away, Isa. 43. 14. 3. 3. when he makes the ancient and the honorable, the
head, Isa. 9. 15. he would not have them rudely kicked and trampled upon by the
inferiors foot of pride.

And for the third, of what unvaluable worth and use the godliness not only of
our selves but of our Progenitors is, we shall by and by see more distinctly.

But notwithstanding the true estimate that is justly to be had of all these,
and the improvement we should make of them, yet in the case of the Text, as to
our acceptance with God and assurance of salvation, in comparison with Christ,
especially if (as often it falls out) we bear up our selves upon them (as the
Jews did, John, 8. 33.) so as not to submit to him, it is not all the privileges
that in any kind we can have by our Parents in general, or their either
Ancientness, Honourableness, or Godliness in particular that will bear us out;
nor did the Apostle offend against the Laws of Heraldry, in this his
Emblazonry, when he calls either his own or Parents riches and greatness (...)
loss, or their Nobility (...), or dung, as the Psalmist speaks of some Nobles,
which perished as dung for the earth. Psalm. 83. 10, 11.

For the first, The ancientness of his Pedigree, the Apostle expresses 1.
Antiquity.
it when he says, he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews. In which words he derives
his Pedigree, a prima and antiquissima usque (...).
origin, as Beza glosseth it, and carries it up to the Springhead; to Heber
say some, at least to Abraham the Father of the faithful, and the fountain of
Israel; and yet this his ancientry which the Jews so gloried of, in compare
with Christ and his descent in the Golden line from him, he valueth at a very
low rate, even as loss and dung. And so should we.

For although Antiquity be venerable, even annosa quercus, an old
fair-spread-Oak, that keeps the sap in it be a goodly sight, and therefore much
more an old Disciple, as Mnason, Act 21. 16. especially if of an ancient family
that in many descents has continued in a constant succession of men of worth,
and honor, and virtue, and piety, be most honorable in it self, and conveyeth
down a greater blessing upon posterity, retaining the same sap and verdure (as
the stone, the higher it comes down from the Mountain, descends with the
greater force) yet, notwithstanding the greatest Antiquity of our Ancestors, if
we cannot show our descent from, and interest in the Ancient of days, the
everlasting Father, and do not walk in the old Commandment, and in Dan. 7. 13.
Isa. 9. 6. 1 John 2 7. Jer. 6. 16. 18. 15. Ephesians. 4. 22. Romans 6. 6. 2 Pet. 1.
9. Luke 12. 33.
the good old way, and ancient paths, if we do not put off the old man, and be
not purged from our old sins, make bags that wax not old, as the Scripture
speaks: I must tell you,

1. That the greatest ancientry, though you be Atavis editi Regibus, See Sir W.
Ralegh, 1 Book Cap. 9. Sect 4. Quid prodest, Pontice, longo sanguine censeri?
Juvenal. Sat. 8. (...); Menand. Non domus antiqua, etc.
is simply and abstractly in it self, as to intrinsic value and personal
worth, of very little avail. These fumosae imagines (as Tully calls them)
will not much adorn thy house, much less set thee out of obscurity. And thy
boasting of them will be but like disputes about Evander's mother, or those old
wives Fables which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 4. 7. ridiculous in
themselves, and will make thee so to every one that will tell thee, that the
meanest man as well as Thou had the same Adam for his great Grandfather.

2. If thy ancient Progenitors were good, it may be thou and the rest of their
Posterity are shamefully degenerated, so long since that all good is forgotten;
as often it falls out, that man being in honor abides not. Ab Augusto in
Augustulum, from the Psalm. 49. 12.
eminency of Ancestors worth, they may be sunk into the depth of all baseness,
and then (as he says) they are highly descended Fuller.
indeed, when tumbled down from that height of Progenitors Eminency into such
depths of unworthiness, as old Trees use to bring forth, but little, small, and
sour fruit, and at last none, and then die and prove an unpleasing sight, till
last of all they be made fuel for the fire: or the ruins of an ancient Castle,
which beget more pity than veneration in its beholders; and a Robe of honor
transmitted from Father to Son, when once worn threadbare and ragged, looks
very poorly on his back that wears it, whilst a plain homespun new garment
would be more handsome. The Scripture speaks of retaining of honor, as well as
of gaining it, Prove. 11. 16. If therefore Ancestors gained it, their posterity
must look to retain it, if they would be the better for it. For a worthless Sot
or beggar to boast of his ancient extraction which he is a shame to, is a very
ridiculous thing. It Is but veneranda rubigo, venerable for antiquity, but
debased, because now grown rusty. It Is not bare succession in places and
persons, unless also in life and doctrine, that is a mark of honor, to either
Churches or particular men. Let not therefore the Papists prove Veteratores
with the Gibeonites, to impose upon us with their old Shoes. No. These we now
speak of deceive themselves, as though these old rotten rags would help to pull
them out of the pit of disgrace here, or Hell hereafter, as those Jer. 38. 11,
12. did to draw Jeremiah out of the Dungeon.

3. But it may be those thy so Ancient Progenitors which thou (...). Menand.
so boastest of were very bad. Thy blood of old was tainted: and then, to make
much mention of them were to rake their unsavory Carcases out of their Graves,
which it would be more for thine and their honor if they were kept buried, and
former things (as the Scripture speaks, though in another sense) were not
remembered. Isa. 43. 18.
And yet they will, if their posterity prove (as very often they do) heirs more
of their sins than of their lands: for some sins are oftentimes hereditary
Diseases, entailed on a Family, and run in a blood, as amongst the Romans, some
Families were prudent, sober, just in constant successions: others on the
contrary foolish, proud, luxurious: And all the Herod's in their several
successions were crafty Foxes and Blood-suckers. And the longer such Blood
runs, See Brugins in Matthew. 2. 1.
the more corrupt it grows, proves an old leprosy, which was more incurable.
Levit. 13. 11. Of some families as well as persons it may be said that they are
old in adulteries, Ezekiel. 23. 43. retain the old hatred against the people of
God, Ezekiel. 25. 15. which is the very venom of the old serpent, which the older,
the ranker Revel. 12. 9.
it grows: and such a stain in our blood is not to be washed out but by the
blood of Christ. And therefore when it may be said to such as Isa. 43. 27. Thy
first Father has sinned, instead of glorying in being born of such ancient
Parents, they had need rather to pray with the Psalmist, O remember not against
us, (...): Psalm. 79. 8.
former iniquities, or (as it is in the margin, and as A. Ezra and Kimshi
render it) of those that were before us. For

4. (Which may yet help more to prick this swollen bladder) God may visit the
iniquities of forefathers upon their Children to many generations. Exodus 20. 5.
Levit. 26. 39, 40. Numb. 14. 18. Deuteronomy. 5. 9. Isa. 14. 21. Jer. 32. 18. Nor can
Antiquity prescribe with Some of old ordained ^o destruction. Jude 4.
God for immunity, who spared not the old world, 2 Pet. 2. 5. but prepared
Tophet of old and that for the King, Isa. 30. 33. who threatens to bring down
into the pit the people of old time, Ezekiel. Si quis paterni vitii nascitur
haeres, nascitur and poenae.
26. 20. and to measure both theirs and their forefather's former works into
their bosoms. Isa. 65. 7. And the sore the older it has been, the more
incurable it has grown, and the Debt the longer it has been on the score,
with the multiplied interest of it, is likely to fall the heavier on them who
at last pay for it; as a great old House, the longer it has stood, comes down
more suddenly, and the fall thereof is great; as it has been observed, that
the ruins of some great ancient families have proved the more eminently
deplorable, and according to the Proverb, they get an old House on their heads.
Thus first the Ancientry of our Progenitors is not to be relied on.

Nor secondly their Nobility, Riches, or any other outward 2. Nobility and
Greatness. Of Paul's, see Perer^^ Disput. 1. in Romans
greatness. This the Apostle touches upon well-nigh in all the forementioned
particulars.

Of the stock of Israel, and so of the right line. Of the Tribe of Benjamin,
not of the Handmaid, but of the lawful Wife, and of the Royal Tribe, an Hebrew
of the Hebrews, and so of the seed of Abraham, who (his servant said) was rich
and great, Gen 24. 34. and the Children of Heth acknowledged him to be a Prince
of God, or a mighty Prince amongst them. Genesis 23. 6.

And yet again all this our Apostle accounts as loss and dung in comparison of
Christ. And so again should we. For though this may somewhat difference us
amongst men, yet as to Christ and Salvation it gives us no precedence. One
Hill here on Earth may be higher than another; yet as to their nearness to
Heaven, there is no considerable difference. All the Saints sit about Christ in
circulo. Revel. 4. 4. As to this none are nearer to him than another; where
there is neither Greek nor Jew, Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11.

1. Whereas our interest in Christ is amongst those sure mercies of David, of
which none can divest us, on his head his Crown Isa. 55. 3. Psalm. 132. 18.
flourishes, and can never be blasted. The Nobility and Greatness which we
have by birth from our Ancestors, we hold but by the courtesy of the Times.
When they frown and the wheel turns, (...), and you may see Servants on
Horseback, and Princes lackying it on foot. Eccles. 10. 7. And the taller such
Cedars grow, Isa. 23. 7, 8, 9.
the more exposed to be stormed and blown down. How often of Nobles especially
do we read that they have been brought down? Isa. 43. 14. Nahum 3. 18. bound in
chains, Psalm. 149. 8. Led Captive, Jer. 27. 20. Slain, Jer. 39. 6. Famished,
Isa. 5. 13. Jer. 14. 3. Thus we see man being in honor abides not: and Psalm.
49. 12.
therefore seeing this Glory (as the Prophet says) is so ready to fly away as
a Bird, how much better is my Christ, who will be sure Hos. 9. 11.
to abide with me for ever?

But you will say a Pearl is a Pearl though trod down in the dirt; and a noble
spirit or family may hold its own, and continue truly noble under all outward
abasement.

True. But then consider,

2. Secondly, That, Not many mighty, not many noble are called. 1 Cor. 1. 26.
That true worth is not always found in those that in the Worlds ordinary
Nomenclature are called Nobles and Gentlemen. One of this latter rank of ours
very lately has very piously Mr. Mosely in his (...).
bewailed their debauchery, that they had put off not only the Gentle, but the
Man; for which he fears in our late Wars the storm has most heavily and
eminently lighted on that rank and order. I like not to play the Critic in
God's Judgments on others: but it were well they on whom they fall would
observe them. Nor is this the distemper of our times only, for of old we find
the Prophet, Jer. 5. 4, 5. complaining, that when he found all amiss in the
inferior rank and said, I will get me to the great men and speak to them, as
hoping something more worthy and noble in them, he found that of all others
they had altogether broken the yoke and burst the bonds, as Psalm. 2. 2, 3. they
were the Kings and Rulers that said, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast
away their Cords from us; (as some now profanely say, what is a Gentleman but
his pleasure?) So Schechem is said to be more honorable than all the house of
his father, Genesis 34. 19. and yet guilty of a rape. And they were the Elders and
Nobles of Naboth's City, who 1 King. 21. 8. 11.
out of fear and base compliance with Jezabel's wicked Commands acted his
murder; as the Nobles of Tekoab's necks were too fine and tender to put them to
the work of the Lord, Nehem. 3. 5. -- Now sin ever debaseth when ever it
prevails, is a reproach to any people, says Solomon: and so to any family or
person how great Pro. 14. 34. 5. 9. Hos. 13. 1. Genesis 49. 3, 4.
soever. Ephraim the royal Tribe exalts himself in Israel; but when he
offended in Baal, he died. Reuben, as the firstborn, was the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power, but because he defiled his Fathers Bed,
he must not excel, and so he was divested of his dignity, his primogeniture
translated to Judah, and in part to Levi who was taken into his stead of
firstborn, and his double portion bestowed upon Joseph; and that Tribe set not
on the right hand but on the left, not upon Mount Gerizim to bless, but on Ebal
for the inferior and less desirable office to curse. Deuteronomy. 27. 13. For Naaman
to be said that he was a great man and an honorable, and yet to have it added,
but he was a Leper, 2 King. 5. 1. that marred all. And so still to be in the
rank of Nobles, and Gentles, and yet defiled with a worse leprosy of Pride,
Cruelty, Luxury, and the like; as it stains the blood, so it may well prick the
bladder. With how much more right might the Bereans be said to be more noble,
Act. 17. 11. and Jaboz to be more honorable than his Brethren, 1 Chronicles. 4. 9.
who (as the next verse shows) was more devout and religious! and how more
noble is it to be a vessel Romans 9. 21. 2 Timothy 2. 20.
of honor of Gods making! To be of the Blood Royal of Heaven, Brethren of
Christ the Son of God, the Lord of glory, to have the honor that comes of God,
to be partakers of his righteousness and grace which truly ennobleth the Soul
that has it, as Hierom said of Paula, that she was nobilior sanctitate quam
genere! Epist. 7. Juvenal. Satyr. 8. (...). Euripid. (...). Phaleu.
The Heathen Poet could say, Nobilitas sola atque unica virtus. Christ (I am
sure) made Bethlehem, that in it self (Micah 5. 2.) was amongst the least, not
to be the least among the Princes of Judah, (Matthew. 2. 6.) because he was born
in it; and the more he will do to any of us if he be born in our hearts. And
such honor have all the Saints. And therefore saving to all their Civil Titles
and Privileges, we may say (as he did) those that are truly godly are in a
spiritual and so a truer sense, the truly Right Honorable. So I find in
Scripture the devout styled Honorable, Act. 13. 50. and Deuteronomy. 26. 19. Exodus
28. 2. Isa. 58. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4 Prove. 21. 21.
holiness and righteousness often joined with honor, as making such truly
honorable; because God has undertaken it, that they which honor him shall be
honored. 1 Samuel 2. 30.

3. But thirdly, Though inward worth may be conjoined with outward dignity in
Progenitors, yet that is not always entailed on and transmitted to Posterity.
However the outward trappings may. Indeed the S^n sees not a more glorious
sight than is Greatness and Goodness continued in a Family from Father to Son
to many Generations. When primo avulso non deficit alter, Aenead. 6. (...).
Plut. (...). Lam. 4. 5.
Aureus and simili frondescit virga. metallo. But the true Nobility of Parents
is not thine unless thou imitate it. And that often does not hold, that fortes
creantur fortibus. Children are not always like their Parents, especially in
their worth and virtues, but prove woefully degenerate; and then, for them that
were brought up in scarlet (in this kind) to embrace Dunghills; for Children of
Parents of greatest worth and honor to betake themselves to base manners and
practices, is greatest baseness; which very much dishonours their Parents, and
themselves more: which (were Scripture silent) the light of Nature in Heathens
cries shame of. Quam te Thersitae similem. -- for Achilles his Son to be like
Thersites, Juven. Satyr. 8. (...). Eurip. (...). Eurip.
how unsightly did they account it! And the Greek Tragedian will call him that
is unjust, base, though he had one better than Jupiter for his Grandfather. And
when a degenerous Son of a valiant Captain, asked of Antigonus his Fathers pay,
he returned him this answer, (...), that he rewarded not Parents but personal
worth. Thou who challengest thy noble Parents esteem, imitate their virtues,
and no body will grudge or envy it. Otherwise the Poet Juvenal. Satyr. 8.
tritoque trahunt epirhedia collo, etc. (...).
will tell thee that the Horse though of a generous breed, if he prove a Jade,
instead of richer trappings must expect the Cart-gear, or Pack-saddle. If thou
be sick and poor, art thou the healthier or wealthier because thy Parents
were rich and healthy, and not rather even therefore the more miserable? And
therefore whilst thou art vicious, can thou think because thy Ancestors were
virtuous, that thou art therefore the better man, or not rather the more
unworthily degenerous? Let Socrates in this instruct thee, that we judge not of
the goodness of Corn from the field in which it grows, but from its own
intrinsic goodness; nor must thou judge of thy true worth by thy extraction,
but thine own personal worth, which only can truly innoble thee.

But this particular of Ancestors Nobility is much akin to the former of their
Antiquity, and both of them come in the rank of those (...), or outward worldly
excellencies and advantages which in the former head we had largely spoken to.

And therefore I pass on to the third Birth-right-Privilege here 3. Godliness
of ^^^^nts.
specified, and that is being born of Godly Parents. For this also is contained
in all the former expressions.

Circumcised the eighth day, and therefore not a Proselyte born of a Stranger.

Of the stock of Israel, who prevailed with God, was of the holy line, and all
his Children of the Church and Children of promise.

Of the Tribe of Benjamin, beloved of God and of his Father, and whose
posterity kept close to God and his worship, when the ten Tribes fell off to
Idolatry.

An Hebrew of the Hebrews; If meant of the Seed of Heber, he also kept close to
God, and joined not with others in the attempt to skale Heaven by Babels
height; or if Abraham, he was the head of the Covenant, and the father of the
faithful; and so his feed the seed of promise.

And yet even all this also he accounts loss and dung in comparison with
Christ. -- And so should we do, though we could vie it with Paul in regard of a
long series of most godly Progenitors.

Not but that this in it self (especially if duly improved) is a great
blessing, and highly to be valued, above being born Sons of Kings and
Emperors. For unfeigned faith to dwell in a Grandmother Lois, and to descend
to the mother Eunice, and so by descent to come to Child and Grandchild
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 5. how happy and honorable! Great are the Blessings (if not
hindered in the descent) which come down from godly Parents (by means of their
Institution, Prayers, and Covenant) to their succeeding posterity.

1. Oft-times outward blessings and prosperity. Ishmael and (...) See M. Ben.
Israel Council. q. 43. in Genesis
Efau came by their greatness, the fatness of the earth, and dew of Heaven by
this Title, Genesis 17. 20. 27. 39. as we after find it again and again signally
expressed, that both Abijam, 1 King. 15. 4. and Jehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21. 7. had
peace and establishment for their Fore-father David's sake and Covenant, as the
Moabites and Ammonites escaped the better for Lots sake, Deuteronomy. 2. 9, 37. and
Solomon for David's sake, 1 Kings 11. 12, 13, 32, 34. Godly Parents do not
usually leave their Children Beggars, if they prove not Prodigals, Psalm. 37.
25. I have been young, etc.

2. Right to God's Ordinances. When the Covenant was once made with Abraham,
Ishmael his Son though by the Bondwoman had the seal of it stamped upon him in
Circumcision, Genesis 17. 4, 23. and Peter infers the like for Baptism from
this promise made to them and their Children, Act. 2. 38, 39. and not only to
them Jews, but to us Gentiles that were afar off, but now are Ephesians. 2. 13.
made near by the blood of Christ, and the seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. 29. and in
their stead grafted into the same Olive to partake of the like privileges, Romans
11. 17. and as they were federally holy by reason of their Root, v. 16. so in
the like kind the same Apostle says, our Children are holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and
(as to this) to have no more privilege than the Children of Pagans, is the
Anabaptists liberality: But most unworthy is he of this choice blessing that
does not highly value it, and accordingly improve it. For,

3. By this right to the Ordinances and means of grace we come to have a fair
advantage, and are set in a nearer proximity. Christ said to the young man
(probably born of Religious Parents, and virtuously educated) that he was not
far from the Kingdom of God, Mark 12. 34. Such (as the impotent people of old)
are set in Christ's walk, and are thereby in a fair way to gain healing by it,
non indigni qui vocentur ad fidem, as Ambrose (a little too boldly) in Romans 11.
16.
expresses it. And if to be near to a Curse be so sad, Hebr. 6. 8. then such a
nearer probability of grace should be esteemed and improved as a great blessing
by all wise men, who even in point of Worldly advantage, usually do highly
value their very possibilities.

4. Children of godly Parents, if through Grace themselves also prove Godly, in
the improvement of this Birthright Privilege oft-times prove eminent as in
other gifts, so in saving grace. Deum ampliora dona confer non dubitandum
est, says P. Martyr. in Romans 11. 16.
Jacob upon this advantage says, his blessings exceeded the blessings of his
Progenitors. Genesis 49. 26. As the Snow-ball, the further it is rolled, the
greater it grows, and the Child set on his Fathers shoulders is lifted up
higher and sees further. How eminent in holiness did Timothy prove who had the
advantage of a godly mother and Grandmother in a continued succession?
Observation of what we may find in this kind frequent in our days, would make
this good. But the story of the people of Israel, and what the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 87. 4, 5. puts it out of question, that whereas of Rahab, Babylon,
Philistia, Tire, and Ethiopia it was said, Behold (as being almost a wonder)
that this man, i. e. some one single man of note and eminency, Rara avis in
terris, was born there, as one Anacharsis in Scythia: yet of Zion, of Israel it
might be said, (...), man and man, this and that man, i. e. very many men,
multi pietate, doctrina, ingenio, rerum bellicarum gloria, aliisque virtutibus
insignes (as Muis glosseth it) were born there: That little spot of ground
where then God planted his Church, and so where there was a Godly seed of Godly
Parents, affording more eminent men for holiness and many other noble
accomplishments for their proportion than all the whole World besides; And that
not for the goodness of the air there, (as the Jews Fable, that Aer terrae
Israelis sapientem reddit) for the air of that Country is the same still, but
we find 1. no^ producing any such thing now: But because the spirit of God
breathed there then, and so many Godly men and Parents breathed in their holy
Prayers, Conferences, and Counsels, by which (through the blessing of God)
their Children and Posterity came to be so nobly and heroically spirited with
that (...), that (...), which David prays for, Psalm. 51. 12. and that (...),
that Spiritus principalis. Spiritus amplior.
(...), that singular spirit, which Daniel was endued with. Dan. 5. 12.

5. I do not insist on that which may be added, viz. the salvation of the
Children of godly Parents dying Infants: of whom, (leaving others to God) we
piously believe, that they are wrapped up in the bundle of life by virtue of Gods
Covenant with their Parents to be their God, and the God of their Seed, till
they live to reject that Covenant.

6. Or if they live longer, and very long in a sinful way, yet Godly Parents,
Covenant and Prayers may at last reach them and recover them. Gods Covenant
endures to a thousand generations, Psalm. 105. 8. and that is longer than the
World will last. He means for ever, as the former part of the verse
expresses it. And this in a constant succession from Father to Son. Exodus 20.
6.

The Prayers, Faith, and Covenant of a godly Parent recovereth, and proves
efficacious in two very unlikely Cases.

1. When it seems (and in part is) interrupted by the intervening of some
degenerate person in the line, as in David's; after a Jehoshaphat, a Jehoram,
and after an Hezekiah, a Manasseh, etc. Then, as Picolomineus says of Honor
in such case of intercision, Ethic. grad.
it passes over per saltum, so the Covenant leapeth over such an unworthy
person, and recovers it self in those after-succeeding, as the river damned up
in some place, either swells over, or creeps about, and then runs in its
former Channel, and so the godly Grandfathers Covenant, though broken off in
the ungodly Son, recovereth it self in the Grandchild, as Hezekiah in a Josiah,
and Romans 11. though the Jews have been broken off for many hundred years, yet
because of God's Covenant, made several 1000. of years since (the Apostle makes
account) will recover them toward the end of the World. And that leads to the
Romans 11. 28.


2. That this efficacy of recovery it has a long long while after the Godly
Parents are dead and gone, as Abraham's beforementioned some thousands of
years after his Death. And so, as I said, Abijam and Jehoram had the benefit of
David's Covenant, though he long before deceased.

And therefore although it be a great comfort to godly Parents to see their
Children clothed with their graces before their death, So among Heathens,
Epaminondas was wont to say, that he reaped this as a special fruit of his own
virtues and praises, quod ^^rum spectatores haberet parents, as Isa. 29. 23.
as L. de Dieu reads it.
as Aaron did Eleazer his Son, Numb. 20. 26. yet if not, the case is not
desperate, but there is life at root, as Job expresses it, Cap. 14. 7, 8, 9. to
which I only allude.

In these and the like particulars very many and great are the Blessings that
come to Children from godly Parents, were it their Covenant only if duly
improved: and it is the great sin of some Children that it is not improved at
all, and of the best, that it is not more than usually it is. God, I am sure,
has much respect to it in his bestowing of mercy. I will for their sakes
remember the Covenant of their Ancestors, Levit. 26. 45. And they in those
former times (who were older and wiser) in all their wants and straits,
quickened their Prayers and Faith by it, whilst still and upon all occasions,
The God of their Fathers, they were still thinking and speaking of, and
pleading and having recourse to Genesis 31. 5, 42, 53. 32. 9. 46. 3. 49. 25.

But notwithstanding all this (to return to my purpose) as in Gods Covenant
with Abraham to be a God to him and his seed Christ was included, and
principally intended, Gal. 3. 16. so in the best Parents Covenant conveyed to
their Children, if Christ be left out the entail is cut off, and all this
comes to nothing. What is it to be the Sons of the best men, if we be not also
the Sons of God, which we are only in and by Christ? so that in compare with
him, and as to our justification and acceptance with God, we may, nay should
with Paul, count even this happy privilege also loss and dung. For

1. THis being born of most godly Parents does not free us from St. Mary's
April. 10. 1659. 1. Psalm. 86. 16.
that original guilt and sin which is conveyed to us from our first Parents.
David under the Law, though he could say he was the Son of Gods Handmaid,
confesses himself born in sin. Psalm. 51. 5. And Paul under the Gospel says,
we are by nature born Children of wrath as well as others. Ephesians. 2. 3. Our
next best Progenitors cannot cut off this sad old intail of our first great
Grandfather. The winnowed Corn brings forth that which springs from it with
the husk, and the circumcised Parent begets his Son with his foreskin, yea and
with natural sinful defilement, which was signified by it.

2. Nor does it infuse or propagate positive holiness. Their begetting of
Children is an Act of Nature, but holiness is from Grace. It Is Christ the
Everlasting Father, who in this sense of his own good will begets us, James 1.
18. P. Martyr conceives that for the Godly Parents sake, God may do much to
their Children, at least in a tendency hereto, ut ad fidem adducantur, and
donis spiritus i^ Romans 11. 16. Minime sanctitatem ur a cum semine transfundi^,
imo potius peccatum and naturae vitium.
instruantur. And I deny it not: but yet so as that he there confesses that
they do not propagate grace with nature, but sin rather. Such a propagation of
holiness had been by the first Covenant in the first Adam if he had stood; but
in the second Covenant it is not so derived by Parents, but infused by Christ
(the second Adam) immediately from himself. So that although it be sometimes
called the holy seed: yet that is meant of federal holiness, or of the Mal. 2.
15. Isa. 6. 13.
former advantages to true holiness, not of any necessary or constant
bestowing; much less of any natural propagating it to their posterity. (Though
the mother was an elect Lady, yet it was only (...), 3 John 1, 4. not all, but
well that some of her Children walked in the truth) For,

3. Very often good men's Sons prove as bad as others: indeed sometimes very
good, and it was Jacob's pre-eminence above his Genesis 49. 26.
Progenitors, that all his Children were taken into the Church. But Josiah was
a very good man too, and yet whereas he had but four Sons, 1 Chronicles. 3. 15. they
all proved stark naught. A just man Of three of them, See 2 Chronicles. 36. of the
fourth, See Jer. 22 Anonym. Annot. Cantabrigiae.
begets a robber and shedder of blood, Ezekiel. 18. 10. as we read Judge. 20. 16.
there were seven hundred men left handed of Benjamin, who had his name from the
right hand. Upon which, one not more argutely than truly and piously, Ita non
raro scaevolae nascuntur a Benjamin dextrae filio, and imitate them rather in
their deformities and sins, than in their graces and beauties.

4. Nay too often best men's Sons prove the very worst. Adam had a Cain, Noah, a
Cham, Abraham an Ishmael, Isaac an Esau, 1 Samuel 2. 12.
Hezekiah a Manasseh, Elies Sons the Sons of Belial. Many of David's Sons proved
notoriously wicked, and the unworthy base Nabal, is 1 Samuel 25. 3. registered to
have been of the most noble and generous Caleb's posterity. The Jews who
claimed Abraham for their father, John 8. 33, 39. our Savior Matthew. 3. 7.
calls a generation of vipers, and says they were of their father the Devil,
V. 44. Nati de amico Dei Abraham, vitio suo facti sunt quasi filii Cham, as
Hierom says on Jer. 2. 14. A sad truth! so notoriousl known, that it came to
be a Proverb, both with the Jews, (...) Acetum vini proles, Wine begets
Vinegar, and with the Greeks, (...), Heroum filii noxae. And I wish that our
sad experience here in the University of many promising blossoms cankered in
the bud, of very many godly men's Sons if not woefully debauched, yet much
degenerated, did not prove this too true, and that the Papists had not such
occasion to condemn our Ministers marriages by reason of the frequent,
abominable miscarriages of their Children, as of old the seven Sons of Sceva
the chief of the Priests, proved Vagabond Exorcists, Acts 19. 13, 14. Thus
Corruption optimi est pessima: and best men's Sons prove often the worst of
Sinners, whilst pinning their faith on their Parents Sleeves, they do not only
thereupon not accept of Christ, (as the Jews upon this account rejected him,
because they were Abraham's Seed, John 8. 33.) but also think it will bear them
out in their grossest impieties.

5. And as thus they are often most enormously sinful, so of all most extremely
miserable.

1. For a Godly Parents Covenant will not in this secure and exempt their
ungodly Children, when by their degenerateness they cut off the entail of those
mercies which would otherwise follow upon it.

Not from temporal Judgments here. Sad is that word of such, that they that
found them devoured them: and that, because they Jer. 50. 7.
had sinned against the Lord, the hope of their fathers. Because God had been
the hope of their Godly Fathers, therefore it made their wicked Childrens Case
desperate. So that (as Ezekiel adds) even Noah, Daniel and Job, three men
eminent for piety and for protracting or diverting of God's judgments from
others, should not be able to deliver either Sons or Daughters. Ezekiel. 14. 16,
20.

Nor from eternal at the last day. And here Consider,

1. With what face will thou then look upon thy godly Parent, A sad last
meeting.
who wilst remember what Prayers he made for thee, what counsel and admonitions
he gave thee, and what care every way he took about thee to keep thee from that
place of torment, and all in vain? It was a piercing word of that man of God on
his Deathbed Mr. R. Bolton.
which he charged his Children standing about him, that they should not dare
then to appear before him (much less before Christ) in an unregenerate
Condition.

2. Again, think what sinking overwhelming grief and confusion A sadder last
parting.
it will be then as our Savior said, to see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
(and so your godly Parents and Friends) in the Luke 13. 28.
Kingdom of heaven, and your selves thrust out, and so vast a gulf set between
them that were by nature so nearly united. Parting of friends though but for a
time, and for necessary and good occasions do now oft-times occasion tears, and
at parting at death, or by some heavy outward judgment, very sad ones; when one
is taken, and the other left, Luke 17. 34. though they be taken away to heaven,
whither we have hope to follow after them. But such a sad parting as this is,
when we shall go away into everlasting punishment, and our godly Parents into
life eternal, never, never, Matthew. 25. 46.
never to enjoy or see them more, unless it should be, as the Rich man that saw
Abraham afar off, he himself being in torment. The Luke 16. 23.
thoughts of this should sink into our hearts now, else it will sink us into
the very lowest depths of despair and Hell then. Unless,

3. This prove yet a lower, that those Godly Parents of thine, And the close of
all, saddest of all.
who whilst they did not know whether God would have mercy on thee, as David
for his sick Child, 2 Samuel 12. 22. fasted and prayed, and wept over thee: when
they see the issue, and the good will of God accomplished upon thee, they will
then quietly acquiesce in it. Nay as then God will laugh at thy destruction,
and mock when Prove. 1. 26.
thy fears then are come; so that godly Woman when she had used all means to
reclaim her rebellious Son, out of anguish of spirit broke out into this deep
expression, sinful wretch, I have used all means for thy good in vain: but look
to it, I that have done all this sorrowing, if thou do not amend, shall
rejoice one day to see thee frying in hell. A harsh word you will say, and it
may be, not so safely imitable: but yet (they say) was blessed to bring home
that Prodigal; and it may be to do as much to thee. This only I will say, that
as David's fear of Absalom's sad Estate made him so sad at his death; so it was
something yet that he died lamented, and that he had a Father to say, O my Son
Absalom, my Son, 2 Samuel 18. 33.
my Son Absalom. But this is yet more sad, that if thou be once lodged in
Hell, thou must not then expect from most tenderhearted Godly Parents their
Prayers, no not so much as their pity for thee in that everlasting undoing
misery. I dare not say they will or can rejoice in it: but their wills being
wholly melted into Gods, I am sure they will fully acquiesce in it, yea and
rejoice in that glory which he shall gain by thy misery, from which not their
Covenant, but Christ and the free mercy of God in him only can deliver thee.
And therefore even that (as the Apostle here does) is to be accounted loss and
dung in comparison of him.

For Application. From what has been spoken on this argument, Plato thanked
Nature that he was born an Athenian and not a Theban, how much more cause have
we to bless the God of Nature and Grace too, that we are born Christians, not
Pagans, especially if of true and godly Christian Parents, from whose Covenant
we have right to and interest in so many happy privileges; that the Patent was
granted not only to our Parents persons, but to descend to their posterity, for
a great while to come; which David speaks of as an unparalled mercy, 2 Samuel
7. 18, 19.

First, I say, Bless God for it.

2. Take heed of neglecting, rejecting, and so forfeiting it, as it is said of
them, 2 King. 17. 15. that they rejected the Covenant which God made with their
fathers, as Esau sold his birthright for Genesis 25. 33, 34.
a mess of pottage, which the Holy Ghost calls a despising of it; and the
Apostle counts him a profane person for doing it, Hebr 12. 16. and we shall be
as profane if upon less straits than he was then in, for the satisfying of our
vainer sinful lusts we part with such a blessing, for he that sold the
birthright lost also the blessing. But Naboth was more natural, who upon no
terms, no not to gratify a King, would give away the inheritance of his
fathers. And Solomon 1 King. 21. 3.
would have us more ingenuous when he gives this in charge, Thy own friend, and
thy fathers friend forsake not, Prove. 27. 10. much less our own God, and the
God of our Fathers, and our Fathers Covenant forsake not, reject not.

3. But as a very precious talent let us make much use of it and improve it, as
a portion and stock left us by our Parents, which, if we be good husbands with,
we may grow rich of.

The Ordinances which by their Covenant we have right to, should not fail to be
improved to our greater edification, which it is expected we that have the
advantage of godly Parents, private Catechizing, instruction and Prayers should
the more thrive by.

And the more (as we showed) it sets us in Christ's walk, the nearer we
should be to the saving touch of Christ's garment; and therefore even whilst we
are not as yet converted, we should be less disorderly, nor so far run away
from Christ in sinful courses, as others are, but nearer to the Kingdom of God.

And when brought home and converted, God expects such should be more eminent
in grace and serviceableness, as having besides their own care and endeavor,
and the immediate workings of Gods Spirit upon their own hearts, the happy
advantage of their godly Parents Faith, Prayer, direction, encouragement and
Covenant; as the Boat or Vessel, which besides the wind filling its sail, is
helped on with the Rowers Oars, uses to go much the faster. Godly Eunice her
Son, and Lois her Grand Child, should prove a Timothy, a grown man when young.
If thy father were good, thou should be better: but if thy Grandfather too,
it is expected that thou should be eminently godly. He that can say not only,
O Lord, truly I am thy servant, but also the Son of thy Handmaid, should more
fully pay his vows, and the vows of his Parents, Psalm. 116. 16, 18. and ever,
when tempted to sin, should think he hears his godly Mother saying to him, as
Bathsheba to her Son Solomon; what my Son, and what the Son of my vows! Give
not thou thy strength unto women, etc. Prove. 31. 2, 3. It is not for Kings, O
Lemuel, to drink Wine, etc. What thou, a Son of such a Parent a son of so many
Vows and Prayers, for thee to devote thy self to sin and destruction? Sure
whatever others may do, or will do* it is not for thee to be wicked and profane,
nay it is not for thee to come lagging behind, but to outgo others who have such
helps and furtherances to make greater speed and progress in the ways of
godliness. It Is not for thee to make it thy aim and pitch, only to be and do as
others, which would be not only ungracious, but even unnatural, to desire
rather to be like your neighbors, than your Parents, whose examples and other
helps should advance you to a more eminent degree of holiness. In these and the
like kinds our godly Parents Covenant should he improved. But

Fourthly, (Which is more to my present purpose) This Covenant is not wholly
and only to be relied on, and rested in. Indeed Israel was brought low, because
they relied not on the Lord God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 13. 18. we are to
rely on the God of our Fathers, but not only on our fathers and their Covenant
(to think, that because our Parents were good, therefore we shall do well) for
this without further care of our selves will fail us; as the Jews who built
upon this, that they had Abraham to their father, John 8. 39.
notwithstanding they were sunk into the depths of sin, whilst our Savior
said, they were of their father the Devil; as the rich man V. 44.
was sunk into the depths of Hell, though he had Father Abraham much in his
mouth, as you have him thrice repeating it. Luke 16. 24, 27, 30. And therefore
it was that our Savior (to prevent or meet with this fallacy and delusion)
expressly says, Matthew. 3. 9. Think not to say within your selves, we have
Abraham to our Father, as though that would be able to bear them out, for he
adds, that God even of these stones could raise up children unto Abraham: so
that he had no need of them to maintain an holy seed or Church upon the Earth,
as was afterward made evident in the Jews rejection, God taking the outcast
Gentiles into their room, as God to this day upon their rejecting of him, casts
off the posterity of many godly Parents, and yet proves not Childless, adopting
other Families into that relation which otherwise were most unlikely. Indeed
the Child whilst an infant is carried in the Parents or Nurses Arms, but yet
when grown up must go on its own legs: and so whatever the faith of Parents may
do for the benefit and salvation of their Children that die infants, yet if
they live to riper Age, every one must live by his own faith, Hab. 2. 4.
Otherwise to live, and to be Children of disobedience, and yet for our
justification to say, we have Abraham to our father, is but a piece of
ridiculous and blasphemous nonsense: which foolish Plea, when the Jews made
use of to our Savior, he fully answers and refutes by replying, if ye were
Abraham's Children, you would do the works of Abraham: but now you seek to kill
me; this did not Abraham, John 8. 39, 40. and the like may be still said to
such vain pretenders, you bear your selves much upon this, that you are such
godly Parents Children: but if you be their right born Children, where are
their graces? as he said, -- (...), Sophocl.
(...), if you are of the holy seed, show so much by your holy lives. You drink
and drab, live vainly and scandalously, and even hate the ways of God (for such
often prove bitterest Enemies of Godliness.) But this did not Abraham; this did
not your godly Father or Mother, as God said to Jehojakim, Jer. 22. 15, 16, 17.
thy Father Josiah did judgment and justice, he judged the cause of the poor and
needy: but thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy Covetousness, etc.

At non ille satum quo te mentiris Achilles,
Talis in host fuit Priamo, etc.
You that bear the Name, and plead the Covenant of such a Father, are proud,
and filthy, and profane; but remember, he your Father whom you so boast of, and
rely on, was not so: he loved those ways and people which you hate, and
abhorred those courses which you delight in. And then as the Prophet Ezekiel
said, Cap. 33. 25, 26. ye lift up your eyes to your Idols, and shed blood, and
shall ye possess the land? ye stand upon your sword and work abomination, and
shall ye possess the land? so here. You profane and reject the Covenant of your
Fathers, and shall you possess and enjoy the benefit and blessing of it? No, as
the same Prophet said to the same degenerated people, that God would bring the
worst of the heathen, and they should possess their Houses, Ezekiel. 7. 24. so
even the worst of other Families and Kinreds shall rather be brought into the
bond and blessing of the Covenant, than you that have so wickedly and perversely
broken it.

And therefore take and follow these few other directions if ever you would
come to have the benefit and blessing of it.

1. Labor to follow them in all their holy walkings, and to be more like them
in their graces, than in faces and persons. If you would have their blessings,
walk in their blessed ways; that as they survive in you, so their graces may
in yours, and stand up in their steads to do their deeds, as to enjoy their
estates and inheritances, as God promised to David, There shall not fail thee a
man to sit on the throne; but it is (...), Only if, or So that thy Si tamen,
Jun. ita tamen, Vulg.
Children take heed to their way, and walk before me, as thou have walked
before me, 1 King. 8. 25. It is with an If and an Only, If, as it was said to
Solomon also in the following Chapter. And Cap. 9. 4, 6.
therefore, as David in his solemn-blessing and charge given to Solomon, said,
And thou Solomon my Son, know the God of thy Fathers and serve him, 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. so let it be said to the Children of all Godly Parents, Oh know and
serve the God of your Fathers as they did, as ever you would enjoy the blessing
that they had.

Indeed to imitate our Parents we are naturally prone, and in some Cases,
especially in their sins, perversely set upon. As is the mother, so is the
daughter, Ezekiel. 16. 44. and if Vzziah will go into the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.
Ahaz his Grandchild will shut up the doors of it, Chap. 28. 24. Here we
account it a piece of our piety to our Parents to imitate their impieties; as
they Jer. 44. 17. resolvedly said, we will certainly do as we have done, we and
our fathers; and how foolish soever Ancestors have been, the Psalmist says,
their posterity will approve their sayings, Psalm. 49. 13.

Which continuing, Ezra. 9. 7.
and repeating, and perpetuating of their sins, is but Cham-like to uncover
their nakedness, to deface our Ancestors Jer. 44. 9.
Statues, and mingere in patrios cineres; and dishonours them whom the law of
God commands us to honor.

But withal is the readiest way to bring down the heaviest judgment on our
selves, whilst we stand up in their steads to fill up the measure of their
sins, and so to augment the fierce anger of the Lord, Matthew. 23. 32.
Numb. 32. 14. whilst he visits on us both our own and our fathers sins
together, as our Savior said, that on you may come all the Jer. 3. 25.
righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the
blood of Zecharias, Matthew. 23. 35. or as Nehemiah said to the Nobles of Judah,
Did not your Fathers thus? and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and
upon this City, and yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel, Cap. 13. 18.

And therefore as in this worse kind of imitation, the Scripture forbids us to
be like them (be not like your fathers, 2 Chronicles. 30. Psalm. 78. 8.
7, 8. Zechar. 1. 4. Ezekiel. 20. 18.) and reproves and condemns us when we be,
Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredoms after
their abominations? Ezekiel. 20. 30. and therefore if we would not add fuel to
the fire, and more enkindle and increase the heat of Gods wrath, we should
imitate their graces, but not their sins, (as it is signanter said of Jotham, 2 Chronicles. 27. 2. that he did right in the sight of the Lord according as his
father Uzziah did: Howbeit he entered not into the Temple of the Lord, as he
did. He followed him in a fair way, but balked him in a foul.) we should what
we can (as it were) revoke and reform their sins, by a quite other, yea
contrary course, as the son that shall surely live, sees all his fathers sins,
and considers, and does not the like, Ezekiel. 18. 14, 17. So good Asa removed
all the 1 King. 15. 12.
Idols that his father had made; and Nehemiah could say, that his Predecessors
the former Governors, had done evil so and so; But he adds, But so did not I
because of the fear of God, Nehem. 5. 15. It Is not in their sins that we should
imitate them; as the Sons of Korah, not joining with their father in his sin,
escaped that woeful pit-fall (Numb. 16. 32, 33. with Numb. 26. 10, 11.) and were
Levites in Gods service. But in their Graces and well-doings, and herein labor
to express them to the life, that when they are dead, they may yet live in
thee. Here above all things, take heed of degenerating. That the Heathens
should complain,

Aetas Parentum pejor avis tulit nos nequiores, etc. that of the Egyptians it
should be said, another King arose, that knew not Joseph, Exodus 1. 8. is a less
wonder: but that of the people of God it should be said, Judge. 2. 10, 17. their
fathers obeyed the Commandments of the Lord, but their Children did not so; how
sad! if after godly Parents and Ancestors (it may be) in some successions are
gone to their rest, such prodigals should arise as not only to wast all that
estate which they had gathered, but also quite extinguish all that luster of
holiness which they had so long continued; to have the head of gold, and the
feet of clay, although it expressed what degenerous successions there are in
the World, and as at this day we may see in many, both greater and meaner
families amongst us, yet we must needs judge that they are very sad changes;
when posterity proves so degenerate, that God may justly disinherit them, and
Godly Parents not own them; as the Prophet speaks of Abraham's not knowing his
degenerous posterity, Isa. 63. 16. as Augustus would not acknowledge Julia for
his daughter, but accounted her rather as an Imposthume broken out of him; as
on the contrary we read the effect of John Baptist's Ministry was to turn the
hearts of the fathers (to whom he Brugens.
yet preached not) unto the Children (so as to own them as (...), legitimate
and not spurious) when it was withal to turn the Mal. 4. 6.
hearts of the children to their fathers, viz. in following them in their godly
ways; dum in id quod senserunt illi, consentiunt and isti. Augustine de Civ. D.
L. 20. c. 29.
Which therefore Luke renders by turning the disobedient to the wisdom of the
just, Luke 1. 17.

Thus Godly Parents and Children should mutually reflect a luster upon one
another, as Abner's name may be taken both ways, either Pater Lucerna, or
Lucerna Patris, either the father was the 1 Samuel 14. 50.
lamp or brightness of the Son, or the Son the brightness of the Father. Indeed
both should be mutually according to that of Solomon, Prove. 17. 6. Childrens
Children are the Crown of old men, and the glory of Children are their Fathers:
but that is, if both be virtuous Dod in locum.
and gracious, for else Blessed Hezekiah was in no sort dignified by his wicked
father Ahaz, nor Ahaz any whit graced by his godly Son Hezekiah. But therefore
it (in part) was (as some observe) that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are usually
named Idem in Proverb. 5.
together as mutually reflecting a luster on each other, the Root giving life
and sap and verdure to the branches, and the flourishing branches back again,
commending the lively root, that it may be said they are the seed of the
blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them, or, as it is Isa. 59. 21.
the word and spirit of God may not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed from henceforth and
for ever. What a glorious resplendency is it when such bright beams from Father
to Son, (as of Basil's Parents, that they were such, that if they had not had
such blessed Children of themselves, they Nazianzen Orat. 20. p. 322.
had been renowned, and their Children such, that if their Parents had not of
themselves been so famous, yet they would have been most happy in so blessed an
offspring) what a glorious resplendency, I say, is it, when such bright beams
from Father to Son and back again are thus mutually reflected! and when both
are conspicuous and eminent. How comely and glorious a sight is it to see
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, hand in hand, going up to the Mount of God, striving
which should be foremost!

At least when there is a failure on the one part, greater care should be taken
that the supply may be made up of the other, as that when the Child is bad, the
Parent may be good, ut ramorum sterilitatem radix foecunda compenset, as Hierom
ad Demetriadem, or as he elsewhere expresses it ut quod in virga non poterat
in radicibus Ad Oceanum.
demonstraret: as in some plants in which the branches are useless, the root is
of Sovereign use.

Or (which is nearer to my present purpose) when Parents are bad, the Children
need be good to keep up the Family, ut radicis amaritudinem dulcedo fructuum
compenset, as the same Hierom* speaks in his Epistle to Laeta, as in some
plants, when the root is good for nothing, the fruit is admirable, both for
Meat and Medicine, and as he there shows of Albinus Laeta's Father, that by
reason of his Childrens and Kinreds Piety, was himself a Candidate of Heaven,
and adds, that he thought even Jupiter (the father of all Ego puto etiam ipsum
Jovem si habuisset talem cognationem, potuisse in Christum credere.
Idolatries and impieties) might have believed in Christ if he had had such
Children and relations; as our happy experience has sometimes found sinful
Parents brought home to God by the Prayers and helps of their godly Children,
and so they proved means of their spiritual birth, which were causes of their
natural, at least have been a means to keep off judgment from them, and so
bring honor to them, though they continued bad.

But if good, did double, yea multiply it, whilst they were multiplied Copies
and Portraitures of their Parents Beauties, as Tully said of Sextus Sulpicius:
Nullum unquam monumentum Philippic. 9.
clarius S. Sulpitius relinquere potuit quam effigiem morum suorum, virtutis,
constantiae, pietatis, ingenii filium, the happiness of the Son being one great
part of the blessedness of the Father, they being a part of their Parents, and
as dear, nay often dearer to them than themselves. And therefore it is, that in
Scripture as we find God cursed Cham in cursing hi^ Son Canaan, Genesis 9. 25. so
he is said to bless Joseph in blessing his Sons Manasseh, and Ephraim, Genesis See
Ainsworth in locum.
48. 15, 16. as elsewhere he is said to promise to give that to the Fathers,
which he promised the Fathers should be received on^y by their Children, Deuteronomy.
19. 9. as Genesis 46. 4. God promises to bring up Jacob again into Canaan from
Egypt, which he never was alive, and only when he was dead, but fully made good
to Grotius in locum.
his Posterity. And thus Children may bless their Parents, who are wont to ask
their blessing, and though I do not say fully requite them who were authors of
their beings, yet they may pay this tribute of honor to them in imitating, and
expressing, and equaling their virtues and goodness.

2. Nay they should labor, not only to imitate and equal them, but if it may
be to exceed them.

Not in sin, as it is not only said of Antiochus, that he should do that which
his fathers had not done, Dan. 11. 24. but also of Israel, that they did worse
than their fathers, Jer. 7. 26. corrupted themselves more than their fathers,
Judge. 2. 19. and above all that their fathers had done, as in the story both of
Israel and Judah, and their Kings, as Omri, worse than all that were before
him, 1 King. 16. 25. and yet Ahab that came after worse than he, v. 30, 33. as
drawing down more to the dregs and like winter-ways growing deeper and deeper.

But thus to add more sin is only to increase more wrath, Nehem. 13. 18.

But I mean exceeding them in grace and goodness, as Nazianzen (Orat. 20.)
says of St. Basil's father, (...), that however he exceeded all others, his
Son only hindered him from being chief of all. Nor is this precedence and going
before the father contrary to the duty and subjection of a Child. We are not
wont to be angry with our selves or others for desiring that our Son may be a
better man than his father, as when David's Servants in his presence prayed
that God would make Solomon's Name better than his Name, and his throne greater
than his, we do not find he was displeased at the Prayer, but (it is said) he
bowed himself upon the bed, 1 King. 1. 37, 47. as saying Amen to it. Indeed
Elijah (whether in humility I cannot say but I am sure he was in a passion when
he said it) Non sum melior patribus, I am not better than my fathers, 1 King.
19. 4. But I remember too that Bernard says, Recedant Epist. 93.
a me and a vobis qui dicunt, Nolumus esse meliores quam patres. It Is but a
profane modesty and slothful humility, more neglect of God than respect to our
Parents, that when we have greater advantages we make not greater progresses,
and being set on their shoulders we do not see and reach further, if we labor
not to be more godly, that we may be more blessed, as Jacob says, his
blessings exceeded the blessings of his Progenitors, Genesis 49. 26. and as God
promised his posterity, that in case they obeyed him he would do them good, and
multiply them above their fathers, Deuteronomy. 30. 5. Your Parents that lay up and
get Estates for you, and envy you not if you prove richer than they, will not
take it as any undutifulness in you, nor dishonor, but a glory to them, if you
prove better than they; and therefore in this at least labor to exceed them.

3. However make sure of Christ and interest in him, which the Text tells you
is a (...), infinitely better in it self, and far more advantageous to you than
all the relations you can bear to them; for if Children have this benefit by
Godly Parents, that in a federal way, if the first fruits be holy, the lump is
also holy, and if the root be holy, so also are the branches, Romans 11. 16. then
how much rather, and that in a saving way, if Christ be to us (by our
implanting into him) both First fruits and Root, as he is said to be, 1 Cor.
15. 20, 23. and Revel. 22. 16. and the whole Covenant, Isa. 42. 6. And
therefore if we must leave father and mother to Psalm. 45. 10. Matthew. 4. 22. 19.
29.
come to Christ, then who or what should keep us from Christ when we may with
advantage enjoy both him and them, the benefit both of his Covenant and theirs
too, as the Prophet speaks, of receiving their sisters, Ezekiel. 16. 61. if they
be godly, or in Case they be not, yet Christ will be able to supply that
defect, that when father and mother in this respect fail thee and cast thee
off, yet then God in Christ may take thee up, as David speaks, Psalm. 27. 10.
And so either ways, every way there is a blessing and matter of comfort to
godly Children, whatever their Parents are.

If godly, they have all the former blessings of their Covenant, and Christ
above all to sweeten and heighten them, without whom the Text tells us such
birth-right-privileges as to Salvation profit nothing.

Or in Case Parents should be ungodly, yet if their Children be godly, one
Christ may be more than all Parents, and prove all when they are or do nothing,
but it may be what rather might hinder than further them, as when the father
was an Amorite, and mother an Hittite, when in our birth -blood, he may say
unto us live, Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5, 6.

And when thou art deprived of any benefit by their Covenant, thou may take
hold of Gods Covenant, as upon this ground God comfort the Sons of the
strangers that feared they were utterly separated from his people, Isa. 56. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. And this may further comfort such, that (as the very Heathens have
observed) It is more praiseworthy to be good when born of bad Parents, (...)
(...), Isocrat. Epist. ad Tim.
(...), and that although they want the benefit of a godly Parents Covenant,
yet if they be the first godly of that line, they may in some sense be the head
of the Covenant; and although they fall short of that happiness of continuing
the holy line from their Ancestors, yet they may have the both happiness and
honor to begin it to their posterity, as Sostratus and Iphicrates when
upbraided by their mean descent and obscure Parentage, they returned answer,
they should rather be honored and admired that they were the first raisers of
their Houses, (...), as one of them said, and (...), as the other, that they
should first begin to ennoble their Kindred and Families, as Abraham born of
idolatrous Parents, should himself prove the father of the faithful.

And indeed what matter both of honor, comfort, and thanksgiving is it to
such! that

Not only for themselves they should first be so good when Parents Egregia est
soboles scelerato nata parente.
before them were so bad, so beautiful when Children of such black Moors.

Thou (sure) had a watchful Eye, and a blessed helping-hand of an Heavenly
Father, when thy natural Parents dealt with thee as the Ostrich with her young
ones, (against which she is hardened as Job 39. 14, 15, 16.
though they were not hers, leaving her Eggs in the Earth, and forgetting that
the foot may crush them, and the wild beast break them:) did nothing to help
thee, but (it may be) much to hinder thee: If thou thrivest, Heaven sent thee a
good Nurse and Benefactor, when Father or Mother did not bear thee up in their
arms, but it may be did what they could to cast thee down to Hell.

But secondly matter of further comfort and praise, that it is not only so well
with themselves, but that also by their means it may be better for others, even
all their ensuing posterity: that God should of all their Lineage first own
them, and then wrap up their posterity in their Covenant, and so an Isaac be
hewed out of Abraham, as an hard rock, Isa. 51. 1, 2. and a David spring up out
of Jesse's dry root, Isa. 11. 1, 10. especially if a Christ arise from both;
that they who of themselves were so unworthy should be so accepted as to convey
their Covenant-blessing to their Issue, and Christ be formed in their and their
Childrens hearts, without whom (as we have now at large shown) all
birth-right-privileges signify and effect little as to salvation.

And thus much of this second sort of things which the Apostle compares Christ
with, and prefers him before them, viz. All Birth-right-Advantages.

THE Third sort is, All outward Church Privileges and enjoyment St. Mary's,
September. 25. 1659.
of Ordinances. This the Apostle couched in that he said he was

Of the stock of Israel who was a wrestler and prevailer with God in prayer.
And this was the Jews (...), or advantage, that to them were committed the
Oracles of God. Romans 3. 1, 2. And

Of the Tribe of Benjamin, in which the Temple and Ark stood, where God's
worship was solemnized, and in that he was

An Hebrew of the Hebrews, or of the seed of Abraham, who was a Prophet, Genesis
20. 7. and taught his family, Genesis 18. 19. and so they wanted not that
Ordinance. This may be possibly couched in these expressions. But however it is
plainly expressed in that of his being

Circumcised the eighth day. Now Circumcision was an Ordinance, Locus a
Religione, cujus circumcisio tessera distinguens Hyperius in locum.
their initiating Ordinance, from which therefore the rest of their pedagogy
is, and they themselves are denominated, when they are called the Circumcision,
by which they were distinguished from others, and which they very much gloried
in (An uncircumcised Philistine, a term of reproach, but Circumcision a title
of honor.) So that it was a choice, and chief, and prime Ordinance, and
therefore here set in the head of all his excellencies, as being the prime; and
being to him administered on the eighth day, so it was administered in the most
regular and purest way; and so it holds out and signifies chiefest and
choicest Ordinances, and them most regularly and purely administered and
enjoyed. And yet even this in point of justification and acceptance with God to
Salvation, to Paul was but loss and dung; and so in the like case should be to
us also.

Chiefest, choicest Ordinances, and most purely and regularly administered Paul
counts them loss and dung for any Confidence in them, and so willingly suffers
their loss that he may gain Christ.

A truth (may some perhaps think) in it self wholesome but scarce seasonable now
to be urged, when Ordinances are by so many so much vilified, when the Socinian
so much blancheth both the Ministry and Sacraments, and so many Enthusiasts
think themselves above Ordinances. Are they now at least to be lowered by us
when so unworthily trampled upon by others? Is not this on the one hand to help
the ungodly? which was reproved in Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.
and on the other, to add affliction to the afflicted; which God expresses
himself so highly displeased with, Psalm. 69. 26, 27.

I answer, God forbid that I should undervalue them at any time, Sol.
especially when others so much slight them: But I take it to be no
disparagement to the best persons or things to be placed in their own rank, or
for best Ordinances to be set under Christ. And for the time, although some now
pull them down too low, yet others wind them up too high; as the Socinian
doctrinally takes too much from them, so the Papist, (whom at present we are as
much in danger of) in his opus operatum gives too much to them: Nor does the
Enthusiast more vilify them, than the ignorant carnal, both Protestant and
Papist, rest in them, and the outward enjoyment of them. All I shall here add,
is, that this Truth (by Providence) lies in my way, and therefore I may not
well balk it, especially seeing the Text gives me occasion to treat as well of
their positive worth in themselves and to us, as of their undervalue in
comparison with Christ; for it being the Apostles intention to advance the
worth and esteem of Christ by preferring him before other things, it was
congruous to that design to compare him with, and prefer him before such as
were of some, nay of greatest worth. For else, for him to have said that Christ
was better than some of the meanest things, had been a very mean and low
commendation, indeed a disparagement rather than a commendation; for that which
is but a little bigger than the least, is almost next to nothing. They are
therefore great things and greatly esteemed, which Christ is here preferred to,
and amongst the rest before the best Ordinances; and therefore according to the
true sense and series of the Apostles arguing here, if we would make it to be
rational, and honorable for Christ.

I have two things incumbent on me.

1. To show the true worth of Ordinances, and what answerable esteem we should
have of them.

2. How much Christ exceeds them in true value, and should so much in our
valuation, as that however otherwise we ought to value them, yet so as to
account them loss and dung in point of justification, in compare with him.

1. The first, because they are here made but as a foil, the better to set off
the transcending beauty of Christ; I shall the less insist on.

However Ordinances are here supposed to be in themselves of great worth, and
therefore by us to be highly valued, and that deservedly.

1. Because they are Gods Institutions, and therefore called Ordinances, as
ordained by him: and therefore also it was that when our Savior had instituted
them, Matthew. 28. 19. go and teach and baptize, he adds, v. 20. that he would,
and that to the end of the world, have all observed that he had commanded, etc.
because he had commanded them. And if the Rechabites did so adhere to Jer. 35.
6, etc.
their fathers commands, the several Sects of Philosophers to their Masters
Dictates, and others to their Institutes, should it not shame us Christians to
slight our Fathers, Our Lord God and Saviors Institutions? If he who
resists a civil Ordinance of God receives damnation, Romans 13. 2. then he who
sleights a spiritual and more Divine Ordinance will not go scot-free. Were we
not too proud in over-valuing our own fancies and conceits, and too
disingenuous and undutiful to slight that which we ought most highly to
reverence; This only, that they are the Institutions and Ordinances of our
Sovereign Lord and dear Savior, might make way for their best esteem and
welcome without any Letters of recommendation, because his Ordinances.

2. Because ordained for all, for the best, to be brought on and to be carried
on to everlasting life by. No, says the Enthusiast, either only for the
Nonage of the Law, in which they were to be taken heed to as to a light
shining in a dark place, until the day dawn and the day star arise in our
hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. then they shall no more teach every one his neighbor,
etc. Jer. 31. 34. nor need they that any man should teach them, when they have
an anointing which teaches them all things, etc. 1 John 2. 27. Or, if for any
under the Gospel, only for Babes and Punies who have need of milk, of such
festukes in their hands, that live by faith, which must have the hand-hold of a
word, or for darker times, or at most (as Epist. Anno 1529.
Swenkfield and Free Grace, page 150. B^ight. Star, Cap. 11. 12.
Saltmarsh say) for the flesh, the outward and old man of a Christian; which is
to be dealt with by Preaching and Symbols: But to the inward and new man, all
means and ordinances are annihilated, and he sees God without means; whatever
faith may require, yet under the Regimen of the Spirit no such need, as no need
of Starlight when the Sun is up; as in the New Jerusalem no Temple found, Rev.
21. 22. nor need of Sun or Moon to shine in it, when the Glory of God does
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, v. 23.

This in a more full audience lately has been discussed and determined, In
Comitiis 1659.
and therefore needs less now to be said to it. Only (if you please) this

1. As to the difference between the time of the Law and the Gospel: It was
indeed then darker than when under the Gospel the day star was risen: But, I
pray, Remember, It arose in the Ministry of the Gospel, and therefore did not
disannul it. And although not so great need of teaching now as they then had,
and so in that comparative sense only the Prophet said they should not teach
one another; yet (I hope) Christ under the Gospel appointed Pastors and
Teachers, and them to continue teaching to the end of the world, till we all
come to a perfect man, Matthew. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

2. Although some Gospel Times may be more illuminate and perfect than others,
yet the Scripture Word and Ordinances are for the most perfect; as long as we
live by faith, it must be by a word; and the Apostle intimates to us we shall
live here by faith till in heaven we do by vision, 2 Cor. 5. 7. And if by the
new Jerusalem be meant Heaven, it is true there will be as no Temple, so no
Ordinances. But if a more glorious Constitution of the Church upon Earth, No
Temple signifies no humane Constitutions, nor legal Ceremonies, no Jewish
Temple, which they yet expect, but pure Divine Worship and Ordinances, which
Ezekiel (according to the times he prophesied in) foretold and expressed by
Temple-worship Chapters 40, 41, etc.
and Ordinances.

3. And for Persons. Although in Gospel Times some may attain to a greater
comparative perfection than others, yet when I read that the Scriptures are
able to make even the Man of God perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
I shall not aspire here to any higher perfection, I hope the most sublimate
and perfect here will not (I am sure they should not) be wise above what is
written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. And whatever men talk of the Regimen of the spirit; the
spirit of God himself has foretold and fore-prophesied (and that of best
Gospel Times) that the Word and Spirit shall go together, Isa. 59. 21. and
although they that have received the Spirits Unction, need not that any should
teach them, (...), but as that anointing teaches 1 John 2. 27.
(that is) they by the Spirit being enlightened and established in the
Gospel Truth (which they had heard from the beginning, v. 24.) that had been
preached to them, they were antidoted against the poisonous Doctrines of
Antichrists and Seducers; of which the Apostle there speaks (v. 18, 19, 22,
26.) So that they needed not theirs (no more than we that are by the Spirit
rooted in written and preached Gospel Truths, stand in need of Enthusiasts)
contrary Doctrines or inspirations, yet not but that they still needed further
illumination and confirmation by the Gospels dispensations. Else why should the
Apostle in that very Epistle So Bellarmin de verbo Dei lib. 3. cap. 30.
still further preach to them and instruct them? And (as Beza well observes)
He is so far from by those words annulling either Ministry or Ministers, that
he could not well more highly commend them; in that he shows by the assistance
of the Spirit and the Blessing of God upon them, their hearers were secured
against all the Stratagems of Seducers, which we also might be if we kept close
to such Ordinances.

4. Which have their operation not only on the outward and old man of a
Christian, but (as the Apostle says, and Gods people by frequent and happy
experience feel) reach the Soul and Spirit, Hebr. 4. 12. and build the whole
man up to an everlasting inheritance, Act. 20. 32. It Is well they will
acknowledge an old man in them, so it seems there is some flesh, and they are
not all spirit. But however it is by the word that we are sanctified, John 17.
17. and sanctification reaches soul and spirit as well as body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
23. This is and has been the good old way in which the most eminent
sober-hearted Christians have gone before us to heaven, far exceeding our high
flown sublimates in real godliness, who ever acknowledged Gods Word and
Ordinances, not only milk for Babes, but strong meat for strongest Christians,
and therefore should be highly prized, as being first of Gods own appointment,
and that secondly for all, for the best, and

3. Thirdly, for their good and bettering. This God said of his Commandments,
Deuteronomy. 10. 12. and it is true of all His Ordinances: whatever our sins make them,
yet in themselves and Gods primary intention, they are Soveraignly useful for
our good every way, whether as to all temporal or spiritual blessings in Christ
Jesus, conveyed to us in the right use and improvement of them.

1. First as to temporal prosperity and security. The Ark going before led
Israel into Canaan at first, Josh. 3. 6, 13. and it brought a blessing with it
to Obed-Edoms House afterward, 2 Samuel 6. 11. and David hearing of such a
blessing by it, rested not till by bringing it nearer to him he might have a
part in it, v. 12. which he failed not of; for Psalm. 132. speaking of it, after
the settling of it (in the beginning of the Psalm) you find all blessed and
settled in the State (in the latter part of it) which tells us that the right
settlement of Gods Worship and Ordinances, is both first inlet into and
after-establishment of our outward peace and security: as on the contrary, the
unsettlement or removal of them sets open the Sluice, and pierces the Bank that
all outward judgments may come flowing in upon us, as Jordans waters did as
soon as the Priests feet were lifted up out of it, Josh. 4. 8. so when Gods
House lay wast, (...), the word is, Hagg. 1. 9. it presently follows in a
conjugate word of the same root, (...), that God called for a drought and
desolation upon the land, v. 11. David considered this well, and therefore to
prevent it you read thus of him, 2 Samuel 6. 1, 2. Again David gathered Israel
together to (...).
bring up the Ark of God to its place. That word Again relates to a former
first gathering of them in the former Chapter to make him King, and so to
settle the State, and thereby to fasten his Seaffold; but you see the very next
meeting was to settle the Ark that he might be at his work, as it was afterward
the very first work both of Hezekiah and Josiah to order the Temple, as the
best 2 Chronicles. ^9. 3. and 34. 3.
means to settle the Kingdom. And therefore Senacherib took a very unfit time
for his purpose to invade Judah in the days of Hezekiah, when it was (as it is
remarkably expressed, 2 Chronicles. 32. 1.) after the establishment of Gods house,
for that so fastened the State, that he could not unsettle it. I confess it is
very sad that we read of a quite contrary event of the like care of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. 20. that after he had prepared the Temple, Pharaoh Necho came up,
and when Josiah would needs fight with him, he was slain by him: But this
weakneth not the Truth I am now upon, for that was from his own wilfulness, and
if a man will frowardly poison his wound, it nothing impairs the healing
efficacy of the plaster, so that, That instance only holds forth this to us,
that Gods Ordinances will not secure us from the danger of our own sins and
frowardness, though they will from other men's malice: and therefore although a
bloody Joab may be slain whilst he takes hold of the horns of the Altar, yet a
more innocent David, 1 King. 2. 28. 34. Exodus 21. 14.
even when Hosts of Enemies encamp against him, Psalm. 27. 2, 3. takes Sanctuary
in Gods Temple, v. 4. and there you find him as in a secret and safe Pavilion,
v. 5. And if legal Ordinances proved so beneficial, it would be strange if
Gospel Ordinances should come behind them, and prove a less blessing when the
Apostle calls it (...), the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ,
Romans 15. 29. He could appeal to his Corinthians, that they had received damage
by him in nothing. But when he comes 2 Cor. 7. 9.
to the Romans with a full blessing, he makes account that he should be
beneficial to them in all things, in temporals as well as spirituals. For
although it suits best with the adult age of the Gospel to have our chief
portion by it in spirituals; yet such is the bounty of our Savior as to
encourage and reward the kind entertainment of it with temporals: so that
although very heavy outward judgments have often followed the preaching of it,
which Heathens have observed and were wont to object against it, yet both
Austin himself and Orosius his Scholar (whom he set on De Civit. l. 1.
work to answer that Cavil and Blasphemy) have fully shown that those outward
judgments came not by men's having and enjoying, but their neglecting and
abusing of such mercies; for otherwise it was an experienced truth, that valles
florent cum Evangelio, and the Gospel of Peace, which holds forth the riches of
Gods grace and bounty, were it but answerably received, would bring along with
it (if we would but try God in this as Mal. 3. 10.) the increase and
continuance of outward peace and plenty. But that is but wisdoms left hand
largess in outward mercies.

2. But her Right Hand reaches out better, even spiritual and eternal
Blessings. And how should the Word and other Ordinances upon this account be
valued, when they are the Golden Pipes that convey the Golden Oil of light and
life to the Church, the sanctified Zech. 4. 1^.
ordinary means and instruments of grace and salvation, the immortal seed that
begets us, 1 Pet. 1. 23. James 1. 18. and faith in us, Romans 10. 17. the milk
and bread of life which feeds and strengthens us, Hebr. 5. 12. the highest
cordial to revive us, Psalm. 119. 92, 111, 143. in our first conversion, as God
works in us in a moral way, the active instrument by which he persuades us, 2
Cor. 5. 20. and as a Physical agent he infuseth a principle of grace into us, a
passive instrument (if I may so call it) ad praesentiam cujus, he puts a new
life into us, as he quickened Lazarus whilst he bad him come out of his grave,
John 11. 43, 44. as in the beginning there was light when God said, Let their
be light, Genesis 1. 3. or as whilst Peter was speaking, the Holy Ghost fell on
all them that heard the word, Act. 10. 44. and afterward it proves the word of
his grace, which is able to build us up, and to give us an inheritance among
all them that are sanctified, Act. 20. 32. in a word, the power of God to
salvation, Romans 1. 16.

And must then the Childrens bread (these dainties) be cast to Dogs, whilst
they are here called (...)? Must we, nay May we account these Ordinances as
loss and dung, which we have seen are so soveraignly and every way useful and
beneficial?

Not as in themselves; not, as they are the happy means of so Non fecit taliter
omni Nationi, Psalm. 147. 20. It was the (...) of that (...), the chief of that
much every way advantage which the Jew had, that to them were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3. 1, 2. a prime sign of Gods love, and therefore set
first, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. he loved his people, and then it follows, they sat (as
Scholars) at his feet to receive of his word, and his law was their
inheritance, v. 4. and therefore they are heavily distempered Souls which call
this Heavenly Manna Numb. 21. 5. 1. Cor. 1. 21, 23.
light food: right out mad that judicially account and call it the foolishness
of preaching. Were these Ordinances of so little worth, ungodly men should not
pay so dear for their neglect and abuse of them, as the Asian and other Eastern
Churches in their present desolation, and Capernaum of whom Christ upon this
account said, that it will be more tolerable in the day of judgment for Sodom
and Gomorrah, than for them, Matthew. 11. 24. Now it does not consist with the
Justice, at least with the sweetness of God, to take great forfeitures, or to
inflict great punishments for small offenses.

And were Preaching such Foolishness, why then are they who so much declaim
against it such fools as so frequently after their fashion to practice it? By
that it seems they have so much wit as to understand the usefulness of it, at
least to uphold and increase their party, as the Seekers for that purpose will
have their Ecclesiam Hoornbech in summa Controv. lib. 6. p. 429, 430. etc. and
in Apologia pro Ecclesia Christiana, etc.
Conniventiae, as they call it. It Is not preaching therefore, but the preachers
that they are so much against, whom they would have to be none but themselves,
who in this further most foully mistake, that they take their Cursing and
railing to be the only Gospel-Preaching, than which nothing is more contrary to
the spirit of the Gospel Ordinances, therefore are not to be slighted, even
our Enemies being Judges.

But on the contrary, to be desired, loved, attended upon, delighted in,
improved and profited by. It will be a very guilty taking of Gods Name in vain,
if when there is so much in them we gain nothing by them, carry away empty
vessels from these full wells of salvation; as I might show at large.

But that which suits most with my present purpose, and which

The first is our very high esteem and valuation of them, next

1. For the enjoying of which we should part with the choicest outward
Conveniences (the hunger-starved man will give gold for bread) as the Priests
and Levites, and others, who set their 2 Chronicles. 11. 14, 16.
hearts to seek God, left all they had to come to the Temple at Jerusalem, like
him that sells all to buy the field, in which was the treasure, Matthew. 13. 44.

2. The enjoyment of which should counter-vail the greatest wants and losses,
as the keeping of my treasure may bear out the casting-over-board my timber in
a tempest, as bread of adversity and water of affliction was good fare as long
as their eyes saw their teachers, Isa. 30. 20. brown bread and the Gospel good
cheer.

3. The loss of which should be the greatest and most punishing loss, as
starving, hunger, the greatest torment. This of the Soul more than that of the
body. It was not only an Idolatrous Micah that cried he was undone when he had
lost his Priest, and his Teraphim, Judge. 18. 24. but an holy David, that when
in a barren wilderness cried out of a dry and thirsty land, especially in
regard of his spiritual thirst, because he could not there see the power and
glory of God as he had seen him in the sanctuary, Psalm. 63. 1, 2. and there
envieth the sparrow and the swallow for having a nearer approach than he could
have to Gods Altar, Psalm. 84. 3. In other respects it was very sad with Israel:
but amongst and above all, the taking of the Ark brake Elies neck, and his good
daughter in laws heart, 1 Samuel 4. 17, 18, etc.

4. The want of which should imbitter our sweetest other contentments, as David
though he had a Palace, yet whilst he had no Temple to go to, he had no heart
to come into his house, nor go up into his bed, Psalm. 132. 3, 4, 5. Haud grata
unquam futura mansio M^is in locum.
in domo, vel dormitatio in lecto, his Palace could not content him, nor his
Couch ease him; as they story it of R. Joseph, when for his great advantage he
was urged to go to a place where there was no Synagogue, refused and excused
himself, returning that of the Psalmist, The Law of thy mouth is better to me
than thousands Psalm. 119. 72.
of gold and silver.

5. For so (in the last place) the enjoyment of them should like Oil swim
aloft, be accounted the highest and sweetest of all our other enjoyments, as
the Psalmist expresses it. For proffer and advantage, more to be desired than
gold, than fine gold, and much (...)
of it; and so with the Apostle he says, (...), he gives his vote for the
value of it, sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb. Romans 7. 16.
Two words, and either of them singly in the Proverbs are used to (...)
express the Honeycomb, but both here put together by the Psalmist to express
a double sweetness as of the live-honey flowing Ainsworth.
from the dropping Honeycomb, which of all is the sweetest; And so with the
same Apostle he adds to his (...), his (...)* Romans 7. 22.
(...), whilst he accounts it his choicest pleasure and delight as well as his
greatest profit and advantage, even the very end why he desired to live, that
he might vacare Deo, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
temple, Psalm. 27. 4. and therefore Muis in locum.
it was that he accounted a day in his Courts better than a thousand, Psalm. 84.
10. Etiam ea lege ut postridie moriar, as Muis very well notes upon the place,
to be the Psalmists meaning, that but one days enjoying Communion with God in
his Ordinances, though it were but one day and he should die the next, was more
to him than a whole life without such a blessing. So highly should and do Gods
people value Gods Ordinances in the enjoying of them and other mercies
together. Especially upon the restoring of them after that their sins had
deprived them of them. The men of Bethshemesh were at their Wheat-harvest, and
that of it self was a merry time: but it was their chief Harvest-joy when they
saw the ark of God brought back to them, 1 Samuel 6. 13. though through their
undue entertainment of it (as I shall show hereafter) their mirth was turned
into mourning, and their harvest (as the Prophet speaks) became a heap in the
day of grief and of desperate sorrow. And so afterward you may observe, how the
Jews having Isa. 17. 11:
in their Captivity learnt to know the worth of Ordinances by the want of them,
as several Nations make their account of years from some high prized matter and
occurrence, as the Israelites from Abraham, or their deliverance from Egypt,
the Greeks from their Olympiads, the Romans ab urbe condita: So they from the
restoring of Gods Ordinances. And so Ezekiel begins his Prophecy, Ezekiel. 1. 1.
Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, etc. which very good Interpreters
expound of the thirtieth year since the book of the law Junius Grotius.
was found, and the Covenant thereupon renewed, and Gods worship restored by
Josiah after the sad vastation, which had been made by foregoing Kings, and
especially by his Father Manasseh. Such a price did they then set on such a
prime mercy; as afterward in Judas Maccabeus his time, upon the dedication of
the altar, which Antiochus had profaned they instituted their (...)* 1 Mac 4 5
9. John 10. 22.
(...) [which Castellio (qui ex Scriptura Ciceronem facit, as In John 10. 22.
Maldonat says of him) affectedly translates Renovalia] and which our Savior
seems not to dislike but by his presence to approve of. It was an anniversary
feast kept eight days with great gladness, as 2 Macc. 10. 6, 7.
in the feast of Tabernacles (and of the solemnities of that feast, Authors
write great matters.) The Author of the second of the Maccabees tells us of
this, that (as in the feast of Tabernacles) they bare branches and fair boughs
and palms also, and sang Psalms, etc. which feast (as Josephus tells us) they
called (...) light, because of their burning lights all those whole eighth days
to express their greater joy; and so he says of Judas, (...) Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 12. cap. 11.
(...), that in this festival entertainment of his Citizens he omitted no kind
of pleasing delight, but with joyful Hymns and Psalms and costly Sacrifices he
honored God, and delighted them. So highly did they esteem of the restoring
and enjoying such a mercy: and oh that once we of this Nation might upon the
purging of the Temple and reforming of Gods now woefully profaned Ordinances,
have the occasion and opportunity of such Encaenia, of such a joyful
thanksgiving-festival! Meanwhile in our want of it let us be learning to take
out this first part of our lesson and duty: which is highly to value and esteem
of Gods Ordinances.

2. And the second is, when and while we enjoy them, in our being with his
Ministers to the end of Matthew. 28. 20.
the world to apply our selves to him in his Ordinances is, as our duty, so a
promising pledge and effectual means of a blessing by them. Here, as well as in
other Cases, according to thy faith be it Matthew 9. 29.
unto thee. In an humble dependence on God, and good thoughts of him hope much
and have much. Open thy mouth wide, and God will fill it. Thou can not
out-think Gods infinite goodness, or the power of his good word, which has
done very great things: whereas on the contrary like them, Mark 6. 5. we weaken
(as it were) Christ's power and hinder the efficacy of his Ordinances by our
unbelief. Because we have but little faith, we receive little, and if none, we
get nothing. But the Patients good hopes and persuasions help much to his Cure.
It would certainly do very much to ours if we had better thoughts and
persuasions of God and his Ordinances when we apply our selves to either,
whilst infidelity applies the Medicine cool, and so renders it less useful;
and it is but just that whilst through despondency or neglect we cannot or will
not give God the praise of his being able or willing to help us, he should be
as unwilling to make them able to bless us. But therefore as it is said of
Jehoshaphat, that his heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord, and
accordingly he prospered, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. so in our use of Ordinances, we
should labor by faith to get our hearts raised up to high expectations of
blessing by them; for great expectations are great obligations with God as well
as with ingenuous men; as when the Creeple gave earnest heed and looked on
Peter as expecting to receive something from Act. 3. 4, 5, 6. etc.
him, though he had not silver or gold for him, yet he got an Alms much more
precious and useful. When therefore we go to hear, think and say in faith with
them, Isa. 2. 3. Let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he will teach us
his ways: and so in Prayer say with them, Micah 7. 7. I will look unto the
Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation, my God will hear me. I will go
to the Sacrament and hope, that I (as well as other hungring Souls have) shall
find there a feast of fat things and of wine on the lees, at least Isa. 25. 6.
some Crumbs, some drops, as God shall see it best for me to refresh me. And
this is the both easiest and surest way to come by them. God delighting, not to
discourage by disappointing the faith and Psalm. 147. 11.
expectation of his people, but to honor them that honor him; and therefore
it is that (upon this ground) he honors faith above all other graces, and
believers above all other men. And thus as they are institutions of God, and
means of our best good in subordination to Christ, it is our advantage and duty
highly to value Gods Ordinances, which was the first part of my task.

BUT how then did Paul, and may we so undervalue them as St. Mary's, Jan. 29.
1659/60.
to account and call them (...) loss and dung? Is not this Blasphemy to call
the Bread of life (...) (as some expound the word) Dogs-meat? and that loss,
which is the means of the saving of our souls? Yes, if they be so deemed and
called as considered according to the former particulars. For which (as we have
seen) they are to be so highly prized and valued. But Paul was no blasphemer,
though he so judged and spoke; but set a Copy for us to write after him, and
therefore there is a sense, in which we should so judge of them also: and that
is double.

1. If upon any terms especially in point of justification and acceptance with
God they be equalled with Christ, or preferred before him.

2. If in a way of opposition they be set against Christ, as Circumcision was
by the Jews, who in comparison of it and their other Jewish Ordinances did so
undervalue him, that rather than they would let (...) go or their confidence in
them, they proved professed Enemies and Persecutors of him and of his Gospel;
for which opposition and in opposition to them whom he called dogs in the
second verse, he calls their Ordinances which they desperately adhered to (...)
here in the Text, for such dogs to feed on; who did so snarl and grin, and
tread under-foot the Childrens bread, even Christ the Bread of life.

Now in the prosecution of this we are

1. To show wherein we come to be guilty of their sin.

2. The unreasonableness of it; where, on the contrary, we shall see what
reason we have with the Apostle here to account the enjoyment of Ordinances but
loss and dung for Christ.

3. To press all home by a word of application.

1. For the first, we then with the Jews equal Ordinances with

1. First, we set or hold up Ordinances of our own, instead of, or in
Conjunction with Christ and his Institutions. Such were now Circumcision, and
the other Jewish Ceremonies; though before (under the Law) they were Gods Holy
Institutions, and such as led to Christ, yet now that he was come being yet by
the Jews retained instead of accepting him, and by the Judaizing Gentiles taken
up in Conjunction with him, became their own devices, and made Christ
unprofitable to them, Gal. 5. 2. Yea they cried, Not Christ, but Barabbas; and
for them they rejected and persecuted Christ and his Gospel, and so they made
them their own in opposition to Christ, so that the Apostle might well call
them loss, that occasioned them to lose Christ, and dung, when they proved but
beggarly Gal. 4. 9.
Elements, and no better than very dunghill Idols. -- And the like now may
truly be said of all Heathenish, Popish, humane Worship and Ordinances, which
men take or hold up in Conjunction with Christ, but indeed (as in the
Event-they prove) against Christ; and in this respect the worse, because of
Satan's or man's invention, not at all, never of Gods Institution, as
Circumcision and the other Jewish services sometimes were: which yet men lovers
of themselves and of what is their own, hug and hold fast, 2 Timothy 3. 2.
will needs join with Christ, and prefer before the Institutions of Christ: for
here also that of the Apostle holds, All men seek their own, not the things
which are Jesus Christ's, Philip. 2. 21. more zealously and eagerly press them
than the Ordinances of Christ, so as for them fiercely to persecute the
Servants and grace of Christ, because they cannot comply with them; witness
Popish Inquisitions, Massacres, and other Fana^^^^ outrages. But is not this
the very same with the Jews sin? And may we not with the Apostle well call such
excrementitious superfluities, dung and loss? By which the suffering Church
has in all ages lost so much rest and peace, and the imposing taskmasters
have gained nothing but more guilt and wrath: But leave we these Ordinances of
men.

2. In the second place we repeat this sin of the Jews whilst we pervert Gods
own best Ordinances; when in point of Justification and acceptance with God
(for that was the point which the Apostle here spoke to) we put them in the
place of Christ, and rest in them, and the outward enjoyment of them without
Christ. This the Jews did, which we are the more to take heed of, because
naturally and generally we are very prone to be guilty of it. So Israel of old,
whatever their danger was, might but the Ark be brought into their Camp,
accounted themselves shot-free, 1 Samuel 4. 5. though their being smitten and the
Arks being taken, soon and sadly confuted that vain confidence, though (as the
first verse of that Chapter tells us) they pitched in Eben-Ezer, which by the
signification of it is name seemed to promise them better help and success, and
so afterward, Jer. 7. 4. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are these. They made (...)
account that the three parts of the Temple (which the Prophet stood in the
gate of, v. 2. and here pointed at when he said these L. de Dieu Grotius Calvin.
words) were as a threefold Wall or Moat about an impregnable fortress, which
kept God in from leaving them, and judgments out from rushing in upon them: and
so they rested secure in it and their costly devotions, which they tendered in
it. So the same Prophet tells us, that Bethel was their confidence, Chap. 48.
v. 13. And Micah when he had once got a Levite for his Priest, thinks Judge. 17.
13.
himself as safe as a Church-Mouse (as you say in your Proverb) and at the very
day of judgment some are brought in saying, we have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets, Luke 13. 26. as if in the
security of that they both lived and died, and hoped at the last day to appear
before God with it.

This because natural is very usual with us, something we would have to quiet
our selves and Consciences with, but we would not be at any great cost for it,
nor trouble our selves with the inward and vigorous actings of faith and grace,
in mortification of lust, and the strenuou; exerting of the power of Godliness;
and therefore are ready to take up with what is next at hand and will least
disturb our spiritual sloth or beloved lusts; and therefore because in
Ordinances is the outward face of Religion, we are willing to put on that
visard, and because it may cover our bosom sins which we mean not to part with
(as they Ezekiel. 3. 33. 31.) on them we will diligently attend, and in our
outward gestures and postures be as formal and punctual as the most devout, as
you may have seen the most debauched Drunkard and uncleanest Adulterer in a
whole Congregation; and then stroke our own head, as having done God fair
service, which he cannot sure but accept of and of us for; as the Harlot, when
she has presented her Peace Offerings, and made her vows, Prove. 7. 14. Pro.
30. 20*
wipes her mouth, and she has done no wickedness; but rather as having thus
befriended God she makes account ^he has obtained a License to pursue her
dalliance, as your devout-profane Papist after he has been at Mass or shrift,
thinks all so well with him that he may fairly step out of the Church to the
next B^othel-House, at least rest in opere operato; a sin which many better men
are in part too often overtaken with, whilst they too much rest in the duty of
praying, hearing, receiving, though they meet but little with Christ in them.
The very sin of the Jews, in 1. taking up Ordinances of our own, and 2. taking
up with the outward enjoyment even of Christ's Ordinances.

2. Which (for the second thing propounded, to show the unreasonableness loss
and dung. And well he might upon these following Considerations, if they be
equalled with, preferred before, or set in opposition to Christ.

1. And the first is taken from the uncertainty of their continuing gained
Christ by them) they will abide with us for ever, as the Cordial will be to
cheer us when it may be the Cup is taken away from us, and that is only because
Christ lives and abides by us. But they will not so always.

Not in Heaven, no Ordinances there, where it will be our happiness most fully
to enjoy his presence to Eternity. Thou wilst say no need of them there, but
there will here.

And art thou sure thou shall enjoy them here always? May not the Ark be taken
from thee as once from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.? or thou from the Ark, as David was
often?

The Priests were not suffered to continue by reason of death, Hebr. 7. 23.
Your fathers where are they? and do the Prophets live for ever? Zech. 1. 5.
That Minister under whose Ministry thou sometimes satest with great delight,
and, it may be, restedst too much in, may die, or be taken away. The Shepherd
may be smitten, and the sheep scattered, and then whither will thou cause thy
sorrow to go, to find sustenance to live on? when thy life (as Jacob's in
Benjamin's) is wrapped up in his life, how sad will the cries of the famished
infant be when plucked from the dead Nurses Breast? which sometimes it sucked so
sweetly, and in this famine of the word as in that of Jeremiah, in his
Lamentation, the tongue of the sucking Cap. 2. 11 4. 4.
Child cleaves to the roof of his mouth, and the sucklings swoon in the midst
of the streets of the City?

Or should the Minister live, and thou too, the ark not taken, yet thou taken
from the Ark by sickness with Hezekiah, imprisonment 2 King. 20. 1, 8.
with Jeremiah, Cap. 36. 5. by banishment as David, and then if he then envieth
the sparrows that might Nest by the Altar, whilst himself sits alone as a
sparrow on the housetop, or like a Pelican Psalm. 84. Psalm. 102. 6.
in the Wilderness, or an Owl in the desert, pants like the Heart Psalm. 42. 1,
2, 3, 4.
after the Water brooks, whilst his tears are his drink, and he pours out his
soul when he thinks how sometimes he had gone with the multitude to the house
of God from which he is now banished, and in that distance with a long look
looks toward it from the Mount Hermon and the Hill Mizzar, i. e. from every
higher Mountain and little lower Hillock, that he might get a look thitherward
from, and this only for want of the Ordinances, when yet by his former
improving of them he had with him the God of Ordinances: How sad and sinking
will thy moan be in the like (or indeed far worse) Case when through thy former
negligent non-improvement of them thou want both them and him too? Will they
not then be loss when they are now lost and with them Christ also, who
(otherwise than best Minister) never dies but ever lives, Heb. 7. 24, 25.
otherwise than best Ordinance, would never have left thee, or suffer thee to be
plucked from him; who would in the most barren Wilderness (as he did Israel)
have fed thee with hidden Manna, Revel. 22. 17. and (as to David) Psalm. 42.
made even thy tears thy bread to comfort thee, in the darkest Prison shone
into thee, as to Paul and Barnabas, Act. 16. 25, 26. in Banishment have more
than preached to thee, as to St. John in Patmos, Revel. 1. 9. and on thy
Deathbed instead of the Sacrament been thy viaticum.

2. But secondly suppose Ordinances should be continued to thee loss because at
least at best thou wilst be no true gainer by them, if (as the Apostle here
speaks) thou do not gain Christ with them.

At best they are in themselves but means, and media habent amabilitatem a
fine, they have all their desireableness and goodness from the end, without the
enjoyment of which by them frustra omnia, they are wholly vain, useless, idle,
or rather the use of them is a trouble and not a benefit; for what is Paul and
what is Apollos, but Ministers by whom you believed? 1 Cor. 3. 5. and if but
Ministers, it was but to minister Christ to you, and what was John Baptist,
than whom there was none greater that was born of a woman, says our Savior,
but a friend only of the Bridegroom? John 3. 29. Not to woo for himself, but
to bring Christ and thy Soul as his Spouse together? And what are best
Ordinances at best but the Bed of loves? (as some expound that in the
Canticles.) Cantic. 1. 16. 3. 1.
But what is the Bed of loves, if the Spouse find not her beloved there? For
all that she goes up and down as a desolate Widow, saying, But saw you him
whom my soul loves? Cant. 3. 1, 3. It is Christ in a word, in a Sacrament, in
any Ordinance that the chaste Spouse desires to meet with and seeks after, whom
if she finds not, though she enjoy them, she has but the Casket without the
Jewel, the Field but not the Pearl, and if he be all in all, then Col. 3. 11.
Philip. 3. 2.
all these and all else without him are nothing, (...) is but (...)
Circumcision, but a cutting and mangling of the flesh, and that is all. Prayer
without Communion with Christ in it but a mere lip-labor; Sacraments but empty
Ceremonies, and hearing, listening to as empty a sound. The less is Grace
beholden to Pelagian See Dr. Wards Clerum.
and Arminian Divinity which places all the efficacy of it in the bare
proposal of Doctrine, which without the Spirits inward teachings will prove
wholly ineffectual, for it is not the breads touching of the skirt of the
Priests Garment, that will make it holy, but on the contrary any unclean bodies
touching it makes it unholy, Hagg. 2. 12, 13. and so any unsanctified Souls
conversing with holy Ordinances, rather pollutes them than receives
sanctification or other blessing by them. Without Christ they are loss, because
thou losest that which thou should especially desire and expect from them.
It Is no good thou gainest by them. But on the contrary,

3. Much hurt and damage, for if not for the better, it will for the worse, 1
Cor. 11. 17. and that every way; both in point, 1. Of sin. 2. Of misery.

1. Of Sin: and hence it is that we often find worst men under best Ordinances.
Sowrest grapes brought forth where most cost has been spent, Isa. 5. 2, 7.
strong Physic if it do not Cure, strengthening and enraging the Disease, and so

1. For more spiritual or rather devilish sins, seldom shall you meet with more
keen anger and rage, or more invenomed malice and hatred against God and
Godliness than in such men, who having enjoyed means of Salvation, not being by
all Christ's entreaties prevailed with to be reconciled friends, prove most
inveterate Enemies. So we find the men of Penuel, Judge. 8. 8. yea the young
Children in Bethel, 2 King. 2. 23. to have been virulent scoffers; and from the
Scribes and Pharisees downward, greatest pretenders to Gods worship, most
malicious persecutors.

2. Nor are sensual lusts (though 2 Samuel 12. 4. expressed under the notion of a
traveller) wont to be strangers to those whom we now speak of. Paul writes of
such fornication to have been among the Corinthians (with whom he had stayed
and preached longer than in most other places) as was not so much as named 1
Cor. 5. 1.
among the Gentiles: And Peter and Jude speak of false Prophets 2 Pet. 2. 10,
12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20. Jude 4, 8, 10, 16, 18, 19.
and Professors in the Church, as in this kind abominably guilty, whom we
should never have so well understood if our Libertines and Ranters in the
former and present age, had not imitated and out-acted in their loathsome
practices; to the most impious defiling of the Church, and scandal of the
Gospel; God in his just judgment revenging their rejecting of Christ and his
Holy Spirit by suffering them as the Gentiles of old, to give themselves over
to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness; yea with Ephesians. 4
19.
the blasphemous pretenses of Gospel-liberty and holiness.

I do not now insist on all that either open or secret uncleanness, either of
profane sinners, or close Hypocrites amongst us, which God and their own
Consciences, and it may be other men are privy to. This that I have said is
sufficient to have showed that dead Trees grow the more corrupt and rotten by
being often rained upon.

3. I only add a third sin, which they who gain not Christ by the enjoyment of
his Ordinances take occasion to lull themselves asleep in, and that is carnal
security, and presumption and obdurateness, that they are not only Sermon and
Ordinance-proof, (can rebel against the light, Job 24. 13.) but think they have
by them gotten a protection, and plea which will hold at the last Judgment-Bar
to secure them against the accusations of all their other abominations, that
Christ has preached in their streets, as you heard out of Luke 13. 26. and
those other forementioned instances: and so it comes to pass that these
blessed helps prove their greatest hindrances and diversions in the way to
life, whilst taking up with outward attendance on Ordinances as the way, they
sit down and rest in it, and so never come to their intended journeys end, or
rather most dangerously mistaking the way to Hell for that to Heaven, before
they be aware come to a sadder end of it, than they ever thought of, and so, as
I said, they find best helps to prove greatest hindrances of their peace and
salvation.

And heaviest aggravations both of their sin and condemnation.

Of their sin, when at an higher rate, because against greater light.

And of their Condemnation, which will be exceeding heavy when Gospel Grace
neglected pronounces the sentence, and the wrath of the meek Lamb proves
heavier than rocks and mountains, Revel. 6. 16. But this leads me to

2. The second thing propounded, that by Ordinances without temporal,
spiritual, and eternal.

I confess the Case is very sad when our Physic proves poison. It was one of
the saddest Curses that David could imprecate against his worst Enemies, that
their table should become a snare, and what should have been for their welfare,
a trap, Psalm. 69. 22. and yet that is sadder which the Prophet expresses, that
the acceptable year of the Lord should become the day of vengeance of our God,
Isa. 61. 2. and yet another Prophet fore-tells it will so be, that very day in
which the Sun of Righteousness would shine upon some, should burn like an Oven
to others, Mal. 4. 1, 2. and a third assures us, that the Lord God is a
witness against Sinners, even out of his holy Temple, Micah 1. 2. not only from
Mount Sinai, Calvin in loc.
but even Sion too. God thunders in judgment against such that make not sure of
Christ for their shelter; And that Earth is nearest to a Curse, and its end is
most sure to be burnt, that drinks in the rain from heaven, and yet brings
forth nothing but briars and thorns, Heb. 6. 7.
which make fuel for the fire, even the savor of life, proves to such the
savor of death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. A surfeit of Bread, some say, is most dangerous,
but how deadly will it be, if a surfeit of this Bread of life! The Cure is
desperate, when, as Austin speaks, ipsa medicamenta convertuntur in vulnera, if
my Medicine wound De Temp Sermon. 55.
me, and the word of life kill me. And yet so it does; if Christ be not gained
but rejected, Ordinances though enjoyed will be so far from proving means of
Salvation, that they or rather our abuse of them will be the inlet and means of

1. Heaviest temporal judgments both to persons and nations. Scripture for this
is pregnant and instances too frequent. In the giving and instituting of
Ordinances, Passover, Law, Gospel, Lords Supper Promises are joined with
Threats. The burden of the valley of Vision, Isa. 22. 1. The Controversy of
Zion, Isa. 34. 8. the quarrel of God's Covenant, Levit. 26. 25. and the
vengeance of his Temple, Jer. 50. 28. are very reverend and terrible, and speak
loud to this purpose. Holy Ordinances are sharp-edged tools, and we had need of
great care how we handle them; as being in great danger to wound our selves
with them if we do it not dexterously. (Such showrs that should quench the fire
prove Oil to kindle it.) This in part made the Elders of Bethlehem tremble at
the Prophet Samuels coming to them, and the Widow of Sarepta in a passion to 1 Samuel 16. 4. 1 King. 17. 18.
say to the Prophet Elijah, what have I to do with thee, O thou man of God, Art
thou come unto me to call my sins to remembrance, and slay my Son? This the men
of God by accident often do, as the Prophet Jeremiah was set over Nations and
Kingdoms, as well to root up and pull down as to build and to plant. As soon as
ever Jer. 1. 10. Matthew. 3. 10.
the Gospel began to be preached to the Jews, then was the axe laid to the root
of their tree, if they brought not forth fruit, to hew them down, and the
sharper the Axe, the sooner it cuts the barren tree down, and the more powerful
the Ministry is, the speedier it does the same to an unfruitful and rebellious
people, as the purer the air, the sooner sometimes it dispatcheth a corrupt
Consumptive body. This was sadly exemplified in the destruction of the Jews,
their City and Temple, when, as Nazianzen faith, (...), their defiled Orat. 1.
filed Altars, first burnt their City, and their blood was (not only mixed with
their Sacrifices, but) shed instead of the blood of their Sacrifices. The
present state of that forlorn people in this kind is most sad; and so of the
other Eastern Churches. The death of seventy thousand of the Bethshemites; for
their rude entertainment 1 Samuel 6. 19. Hos. 4. 15. 5. 8. Jer. 7. 12. Isa. 29. 1.
of the Ark. That Bethel became Beth-Aven, that Shilo was forsaken, that a Woe
was proclaimed to Ariel, to Ariel the City where David dwelt, That that peoples
abuse of Ordinances brought them to such a pass, that they must perish without
Remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. and without pity, for so (v. 15.) when God out of
compassion had afforded Ordinances and they abused them, he (v. 17.) sends
Enemies which would show them no mercy; nor have any compassion. These are sad
instances of this Truth, and strong proofs, that (as the Prophet says) Gods
fire is in Zion and his furnace in Isa. 31. 9.
Jerusalem, to consume Enemies as well Domestic as Strangers, though the
latter there especially meant. For although the usual Psalm. 128. 5.
word was, The Lord bless thee out of Zion, yet it has proved as true, the
Lord curse thee out of Zion too: for in the Revelation we shall find, the seven
Angels that have the seven Plagues, and pour out the seven vials of the wrath
of God, upon the Antichristian State, came out of the Temple: and that the
Angel took coals of Revel. 15. 6. 16. 1.
fire from the Altar, and cast them upon the Earth, from which came such
thundrings and lightnings, and Earthquakes in the World. Revel. 8. 5.
Temple-Ordinances if profaned and despised, nay if not walked worthy, of,
bring down heavy judgments; and it were well if it were sadly considered,
whether this amongst and above other sins of ours, did not cause our present
Earthquakes and unsettlements, and so repented of as to prevent future and now
impendent heavier judgments, which so sorely threaten us: for so we find it of
old, when Israel was so stupid and obstinate, that like to dull and froward
Scholars, line must be upon line, and precept upon Isa 28. 9, 10, 11, 17.
precept to them, that God laid judgment to the line, and righteousness to the
plummet; and because he was fain to lisp (as it were) and stammer and speak to
them with another tongue, and they yet would not understand and obey, therefore
he would bring Strangers and Enemies upon them of a deep speech and a
stammering tongue, which they should not understand. A most heavy judgment!
which Isa. 33. 19.
the Lord keep us from, that such vexation do not make such froward dullards as
we are understand doctrine as some read and interpret Margin. English Annot.
that 19th verse of the 28th of Isaiah. To conclude this, we may certainly
conclude upon it, that (as in the former part of this point we showed) as God's
Ordinances duly entertain^^^^ (...) walked worthy of, use to bring in outward
mercies wi^^ (...) if abused, they will as certainly pour in upon us heavi^^^
(...) judgments; for as Gods way is in the Sanctuary, Psa^^ (...) in the sea
too, v. 19. as to conduct Israel into Canaan, (...) overwhelm Egyptians, even
with heaviest temporal miseries.

2. But with more heavy spiritual judgments (they are judgments, (...), Jude v.
4.) and such are the permitting and giving over to stupid senslesness, most
enormous, outrageous sins, obstinate obdurateness and final impenitency in
them. But of these we spoke before. Only consider them here in genere poenae,
as judicially, but most justly inflicted as the recompense of men's ingrate and
impious neglect and despising of God in the profane abuse of his holy and
blessed Ordinances. Sion sinners usually are the greatest Sinners, and
Ordinance-despisers, as of all most obstinate, so their case most desperate,
and it is a righteous thing with God to leave them so. The very Remonstrants who
will not allow God the liberty and freedom of his Decrees, do yet freely
subscribe to the equity and justice of this dispensation, that when means of
Salvation have been non-improved and despised, men may by God be judicially and
irrecoverably hardened; that he may by his Prophets justly say, we would have
healed Babylon, but she is not healed, therefore forsake her, Jer. 51. 9. Nay
we read him saying it even to Jerusalem, Because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, Ezekiel.
24. 13. Nay it is a Gospel-Sanction, and we read it in the very end and close
of the New Testament, in the two and twentieth of the Revelation, after all the
foregoing Revelation in that Book, yea after the full manifestation of the
will of God in the whole Scripture, when he now comes to seal the Canon of it,
v. 18, 19. if any, notwithstanding all this, will still continue ignorant and
obstinate, he seals him up under this most heavy doom, He that is unjust let
him be unjust still. He that is filthy let him be filthy still, v. 11. God with
such has as a Physician gone through all his methods of Physic, and if by
none of them the Cure be wrought, it is given over as desperate (as in that
place of Jeremy, 51. 9.) Or (as in Isaiah) as an Husbandman he has been
planting and dressing, and watering his Vineyard, if after all, nothing but
sour grapes; (...), what could I have done more, or rather (as some otherwise,
and (it may be) better, render it) what is (...) to be done, in so desperate a
Case? (Isa. 5. 4.) but what he adds and answers (v. 5.) but to take away the
hedge that it may be eaten up and trodden down.

Or as a founder of metal he has been about melting and refining, and purging
their dross from them, but the bellows are burnt and the lead is consumed, and
the dross not taken away, Reprobate silver then call them, for the Lord has
rejected them. Jer. 6. 29, 30. Ezekiel. 22. 18, 19, 20.
The saddest judgment that in this life can befall a man, and no sadder sight in
the World than to behold such a triste bidental, such an Heaven-struck
forlorn-Sinners grown blind by seeing the light, and deaf (as they that dwell
near the out-falls of Nilus) by hearing a more pleasing sound, even the word of
life, more filthy for washing, more barren (or rather fruitful of poisonous
weeds) for watering, and more desperately and irrecoverably sick, by the best
Physicians greater care of the Cure, so that it cannot be written on his door,
The Lord be merciful to him. It Is pity, you say, that fair weather should do
any hurt: but a thousand pities to see a miserably blinded sinner to go into
everlasting darkness by the light of the Sun shine of the Gospel; to see an
unruly stray Sheep that would not be kept in the Shepherds Fold, in the Wolfs
or Lions mouth, dragged through all mire and dirt into his Den, and there to be
devoured. See thou this? thou see a miserable forlorn Sinner, whom the good
Shepherds Rod and Staff could* not keep in to be fed in green pastures, and led
by still waters, now forsaken of God like another Cain or Judas, made senseless
and obdurate in sin, and dragged into the pit-fall of Hell to his everlasting
destruction.

3. Which is the third and last particular before mentioned, that eternal wrath
and judgment, that irrecoverable loss which such Sinners in another World
procure to themselves by their abuse of Ordinances, when they have not gained
Christ by them. Of all others the Sinners in Sion shall be most afraid, when it
shall once come to dwelling with devouring fire and everlasting burnings, Isa.
33. 14. Then Capernaum, that in enjoyment of Ordinances was once lifted up as
high as heaven, shall be thrown as low as hell, Matthew. 11. 23, 24.
nay to the lowest depths of it, where Sodom and Gomorrha's fire shall be more
tolerable; this furnace being heated seven times hotter whilst the breath of
the Lord as a stream of brimstone shall kindle it: Isa. 30. 33. Mark 9. 43. 45.
that Tophet intolerable, that fire unquenchable, when the sometimes sweet
breathings of the Gospel Spirit, and Word and Ministry shall blow it up, and
keep it burning to Eternity. Oh! No Condemnation to Gospel-Condemnation. No
wrath so fierce as that, when after grace turned into wantonness, patience
shall be turned into fury. How low low will that for-ever-lost Soul be sunk,
that in those unsupportable torments shall everlastingly have time and cause to
think and say, How shall I ever escape that have neglected, abused, despised,
so great Salvation! That of all other aggravates and perpetuates such men's
damnation. Gospel Grace and Ordinances, which are the Key to open Heaven to
Believers, lock up neglecters and despisers in the Prison of Hell; and roll the
heaviest stone upon the mouth of the bottomless pit: the unsupportable weight
whereof will not only prevent all removal or escape, but above all things will
pinch, and press, and sink them down to Eternity. Then they will be fully
convinced of the truth of the point in hand, that all things are loss and dung
in comparison of Christ, when they shall sadly but unprofitably and
despairingly say, Oh of how much greater worth is Christ above all other
comforts, even best Ordinances, when notwithstanding them for want of him, we
are now everlastingly lodged and tormented in Hell, whereas had we by the
enjoyment of them come to have gained and enjoyed him, we had with him in
Heaven been happy for ever.

Which in the Application of it should most seriously advise and

1. And first for Ordinances, as the former part of the point called upon us
highly to prize them and diligently and constantly to attend upon them, so what
has been said in this latter should with all sadness warn us

1. Not to rely on, or to rest in the bare enjoyment of them; 1. They may do us
no good, therefore rest not in them.
for, (as we have heard) as they may be, so, should we thus do, certainly they
will be empty, and at best we shall get no good by them. Circumcision is
nothing, 1 Cor. 7. 19. The Letter without the Spirit signifies little, and the
best Ordinances without Christ, as to our Salvation, will prove just nothing.
They are indeed in themselves, and by God's Institution, Wells of Salvation;
but to us in the issue they will prove but dry empty Cisterns, if this water of
life be not conveyed to us by them: and therefore in this our journeying to
Heaven, let us not take up and dwell in our Inn; and although the way of
Ordinances lead thither, yet if we sit down in our way we shall never come to
our journeys end. In this therefore follow the Psalmists example, Psalm. 121.
who, when in the first verse he had said, I will lift up mine eyes to the Hills
(of Zion and Moriah the seat of God's Ordinances, as Interpreters expound it)
from whence comes my help; as though he had said too much of them or any
Ordinances that his help should come from them, as it were correcting himself
in the second verse, he presently adds, my help comes from the Lord which has
made Vide Augustinum. Tract. ^. in Joannem, mox ab initie.
Heaven and Earth. It Is God and Christ only who made Heaven and Earth, that can
create the fruit of the best Ministers lips to be peace to his people, Isa. 57.
19. and therefore some Expositors read that first verse of the Psalm
interrogatorily, should I lift up mine eyes to the Hills, as though from them
should come my help? The lifting up of eyes and soul in Scripture Phrase
expresses not only delight and desire, but expectance and dependence, and then
(although we should come to Ordinances with encouraging expectations of help
from God in them, yet) should we thus lift up our Eyes to the Hills themselves,
to the highest towering Eloquence, or most raised abilities, or most sublime
piety of the Ministers that we most admire, so as to expect saving help from
them? No. Alas, Either They, or at least the Event will tell thee, that they
are but empty Cisterns and dry Breasts, which cannot afford the least drop, but
what Christ the fountain has put into them: and it may be out of thy
experience thou may be able to say to thy self, that thou never wentest away
more empty and less satisfied than when (not making out after Christ) in way of
a Carnal-Creature-confidence thou expectedst most from them. Though thou be
therefore on the Mount of Transfiguration (where Christ was Matthew. 17. 4.
transfigured, but they were not) Do not sit down with Peter and say, It Is good
to be here, unless Christ be there, and in such pure glasses thou see the
face of Christ, and art changed from glory to 2 Cor. 3. 18.
glory into the image of Christ by the spirit of Christ, sit not down
satisfied, That Is the first. Rest not secure in the bare outward enjoyment of
Ordinances, for so they may prove empty, and at best do thee no good.

2. Nay secondly, Rejoice with trembling. Cheerfully and thankfully 2. They
(without Christ) may do us much hurt, therefore with all holy care and fear
converse with them.
receive and entertain them, yet with much awful reverence and solicitousness,
for we may so handle the matter, that (as has been shown) by them we may come
by much hurt and disadvantage; as the Israelites and Bethshemites received the
Ark with much joy, 1 Samuel 4. 5. and Chap. 6. 13. but by their Carnal confidence
in it (in the former place) and their too bold, and rude usage of it (in the
latter) their joy was soon damped and extinguished with their tears and blood,
Precious Ordinances being like great cheer and high fare in an Inn; which
though it please whilst eating, yet at last it brings in a great and heavy
reckoning: and some have paid very dear for their abuse of God's bounty and
cost in these spiritual entertainments. The Devil entered into Judas with the
sop, as many take their Bane in the Sacrament, John 13. 27.
are blasted by the breath of the word (Never fruit grow on thee hereafter) and
by their guilt and frowardness make the very Gospel, though it be not the
Ministry of Condemnation, to 2 Cor. 3. 7.
pronounce the sentence of their Condemnation, like the mad man that strangleth
himself with the Cord that is let down to him to draw him out of the Dungeon,
as if Jeremiah had put that Cord about his neck, and not under his armholes.
How sollicitous Jer. 38. 12.
therefore should we be instead of rushing into God's presence, according to
Solomon's advice, Eccles. 5. 1. to take heed to our foot when we go to the
house of God, lest we tread awry, and wrench it, to be of the number and temper
of those who tremble at his word, Isa. 66. 5. not to weaken faith, but to
quicken our care and such awful thoughts as these are: God now though upon a
throne of grace, is yet upon a Judgment Seat, so that when I go to his word I
go upon my trial, and if I look not better to it, this Letter that I read, if
it be only a letter without spirit, may kill; this word that I hear may be the
matter of my guilt, and 2 Cor. 3. 6.
sentence me to death: This Sacrament that I receive is a seal, but may seal to
me my damnation. I had need therefore pray, and read, and hear and receive for
my life, draw near to God as an holy God, who will be sanctified in all them
that come nigh him, Levit. 10. 3. entertain and converse in holy Ordinances
with all care and reverential fear; as by which, through my neglect and abuse
of them, I may make them loss and damage by procuring to my self much hurt,
but shall be no gainer at my last account, unless (with the Apostle here) I win
and gain Christ with them and by them.

2. Which leads to the second part of the Instruction which this point
teaches us in reference to Christ, and so it calls upon us for two things.

1. To prize Christ above all Ordinances the choicest, and when most purely and
regularly dispensed, such was Circumcision on the eighth day. And yet that with
Paul was but loss in compare with Christ. And so they should with us. Honor we
our Ministers as the Ministers of God, and as the Galatians sometimes did Paul,
even as Angels of God, even as Christ Jesus; but that Cap. 4. 14.
As must be only of Similitude, not of Equality. It must be under Christ. Their
affection was so great to Paul, that he says, they were ready to have plucked
out their own eyes, and have given them V. 15.
to him, but not thereupon to prove so blind, as not to give their hearts to
Christ. Prize also all God's Ordinances, Word, Sacraments, and the rest very
much, and you cannot over-prize them if it be kept in a subordination to Christ
and his Grace, which they are instituted as means to administer and convey and
lead to, as the great end of our endeavors and their appointment. Let him
therefore be ever (after Paul's example) prized above Ordinances.

2. Desired, made after and made sure of in and by Ordinances. This also the
Apostles sense and expressions fully hold out, (...), v. 7. and (...), v. 8.
All was For Christ, and That he might gain Christ, as the main end he aimed at,
and the chief good which either with them or without them he looked after, and
so Go thou and do likewise. In the use of Ordinances it is thy duty, as Zacheus
did, to set thy self in Luke 19. 4.
Christ's way and walk, but on purpose that thou may meet with him in it, and
so receive him into thy heart as he entertained him in his house, into which
salvation that day came with the Savior, V. 9.
so that he lost nothing by his invitation and entertainment. So it was the One
thing which David desired of the Lord, and which he would still seek after,
that he might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life: But that
was, that he might so behold the beauty of the Lord, and enquire in his Temple,
Psalm. 27. 4. And elsewhere when now an exile in the Wilderness, his Soul
thirsts, and his flesh longs for God to see his power and his glory as he
had seen him in the sanctuary, Psalm. 63. 1, 2. It Is a choice mercy highly to be
prized and earnestly to be thirsted after all our days to dwell in Gods house,
and peaceably to enjoy his Ordinances in the sanctuary. But that is not all that
a David or any of his Spirit seeks after and takes up with. He desires to go
into, yea to dwell in the Temple, but it is to enquire after God, and to meet
with Christ there (as God was wont to meet with Israel at the door of the
Tabernacle, and at the mercy-seat) to see his power and glory in Exodus 29. 42.
25. 22. Mark 13. 1.
the sanctuary, not with the Disciples to gaze on the goodly outward structure
and Ornaments of the Temple, no nor so much to be taken with the solemn and
stately outward worship and service of it (which in its costly and precious
Vessels, and other Utensils, the luster of the Priests Vestments, and the royal
sound of so many Trumpets over their Sacrifices was very magnificent, and a
part of the Beauty of Holiness which the Scripture often speaks of (which yet
the more simple but more spiritual form and order of Gospel Worship far exceeds
in glory) but it is the power and presence 2 Cor. 3. 9.
of Christ in them that exceeds both that and this and all with a true Gospel
Spirit. The Gold glistered, but it was the Altar that sanctified the Gold, and
it was Christ that sanctified the Altar, that sanctifies and blesses all, and
which in all and above all most precious Ordinances a sanctified heart most
highly prizeth and most earnestly looks and seeks after, and in comparison of
which (as the Apostle here) accounts all as loss and dung.

1. All outward Excellencies. 2. All Birth-right-Privileges. 3. The enjoyment
of all Church-Ordinances. And fourthly, All Personal moral qualifications which
the Apostle expresses in those words:

V. 5. 6. (...).

A^ touching the Law, [or the order and Religion of my sect] a Pharisee:
Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness which is in
the law, blameless.

IN which three expressions the Apostle proceeds further, and rises St. Mary's
May 13. 1660.
higher in his comparing of all things with Christ, and preferring him before
them all. The foregoing Privileges, that (...), etc. Chrysostom. in locum.
Postquam de generis nobilitate dissert it, nunc descendit ad do^es personae
peculiares. Calvin. Estius v. 5. laudavit se a genere, v. 6. a proprio studio
and factis in Judaismo, Corn. a Lapide.
he was circumcised, an Israelite, a Benjamite, an Hebrew were 1. More common
to him with others. 2. More external, as pointing at his relation to others,
and what he had from others. 3. Or if more inward and innate, yet more natural,
and having less of his will and choice in them. But these of his being by his
chosen Profession a Pharisee, and so zealous and unblameable, were contrarily
1. More proper and peculiar, and personal to himself. 2. More inward and
expressing the frame of his mind. And Thirdly, More voluntary and of his own
choice, (...), as Chrysostom expresses it, quae sunt propriae electionis,
ideoque plus habere videntur commendationis, of his own more free Election, and
therefore matter of greater Commendation.

And in these you may observe this gradation.

1. In these words as touching the law, a Pharisee, and it being (as he
elsewhere tells us, Act. 26. 5.) (...), the accuratest and strictest Sect of
the Jewish Religion: he tells you that for the particular Order and Sect of
his profession and Religion which he had made choice of (as the word (...)
signifies) it was most choice, strict, and exact, the Pharisees of all other
Jewish Sects being reputed by themselves and others the most learned, strict,
and religious; being therefore called Pharisees, because either by reason of
their greater knowledge and ability, they were the chief Interpreters of
Scripture, or because of their greater professed sanctity (or pride rather)
they separated themselves from others as more profane.

2. But yet although this might be the Character of Pharisaism in general, yet
because some Pharisees in particular might be more dull and cool in their
Religion, to show that he was none of them, he adds, Concerning zeal,
Persecuting the Church. He was a Zelot, so fiery hot in it, as to burn up all
(even the Church of Christ) that he thought did any way in the least oppose it.

3. But yet thirdly, because a man may in his way be zealous, and yet withal
scandalous, (...), says Chrysostom. He might have been so hot and furiously
zealous out of that fervidum ingenium, that natural quick spirit that is
observed to have been in him; or from a mad brainsick boldness and
venturesomeness, or from an ambitious aspiring thereby to rule and greatness.
Therefore to show that his both profession and zeal were not hypocritical but
according to his light really honest and serious; He adds, touching the
righteousness of the law, blameless. All which we may have occasion more
particularly to explain as we go along. At present we are only in general to
take notice, that all these he accounts loss and dung for Christ, and the
special particulars herein contained, and to which Christ is and should be
preferred, are, 1. The being of any particular Sect or Profession in Religion.
2. Though never so learned. 3. Or seemingly strict, pious, and devout. 4. Or
zealous, or 5. Though in reality never so morally unblameable, and virtuous. If
without Christ or contrary to him. All these are contained in these expressions
of the Apostle, and all of them by him called and accounted loss and dung in
comparison of Christ. We shall briefly run over these particulars.

And the first is of being or maintaining of any particular Sect and Profession
of Religion, besides or without Christ, or in opposition to him.

This is held out in the first expression, (...). Legis S^ctum, Calv. Aquin.
Estius, (...) Scholiastes (...) hic vocat specialis instituti (...). Grotius.
Beza.
Touching the Law. He means not the Law of God, but specialis instituti
(...), or praescriptum Religionis institutum, the special instituted and
assumed form, order, rule, or sect of his religion, and touching that he says,
that he was a Pharisee. And that the Pharisees were one of the chief Sects of
the Jewish Religion in our Saviors time is so commonly said and known by all,
that I need not mispend time, or misuse your patience to clear it to this
Auditory. Their very name betrayeth them, which in the true E^ymon of it
signifies (...), Separatists. But Paul puts it out of doubt, when Act. 26. 5.
he calls it (...), exquisitissimam haeresin, the most exquisite, exact s^ct
of their Religion, which Josephus thus expresses, (...) De bello Judalco lib.
1. cap. 4.
(...), an Order among the Jews that was accounted the most godly, and best
Interpreters of the Law of all others, most gracious to the multitude, although
the Sadducees were more favored by the great ones: and the Essens in truth
exceeded them in virtuous conversation, Hessenorum Joseph. l. 13. cap 18. and
lib. 18. c. 2. Scultet. Exer. Evang. l. 1. c. 20. p. 57.
(...), as my Author expresses it. However the Pharisees were the Jewish
Jesuits, who both in their own and the ordinary peoples account exceeded all;
so that when Paul in the Council, Act. 23. 6. said, that he was a Pharisee and
the Son of a Pharisee, he could not more takingly commend himself to that
Auditory. And so if Paul here in the Text accounts his being a Pharisee as loss
and dung, as to acceptance with God in comparison of Christ: it will be a
sufficient groundwork of what I shall observe from it.

1. That it is not the being of any sect, party, or faction, though Note.
never so seemingly holy and exact, that can commend us to God, but it is to be
accounted loss and dung in comparison of Christ and his righteousness. For if
there be neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Bond nor Free
(Differences of Gods own making) but Christ is all in all, Col. 3. 11. then
(sure) there is not this or that Sect or Order of our own devising in this case
considerable; but it is Christ that must be All in All, in this Case
especially. And it must be his discriminating. Grace only that must make us
innocently to differ from others, and not our saying. I am 1 Cor. 4. 7.
of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas; that should make us sinfully divide
our selves, and so make us more highly displeasing to God than any ways commend
us to him. Such sinful Divisions and fractions are far from justifying us that
so deeply condemn us. And it would be a strange means of reconciling us to God,
which makes us at odds one with another.

But for the better dispatch of this point, I shall endeavor to show.

1. What Sects they are that so little commend us to God. 2. That we are very
subject to think otherwise. 3. That yet in truth they do not so commend us, nor
should we them, but rather judge them loss and dung for Christ.
1. For the first I lay down these particulars.

1. That it is not always a Sect in this bad sense, which the World often calls
so: for Paul could find a great difference which he intimated, Act. 24. 14.
when he said, (...), and thereby shows, that there may be a way (even the way
of Faith, Grace, and Christianity) which the Jews then called, and many now
call Heresy: but they only call it so in their corrupt Nomenclature, which is
far from being so in truth and reality. And so Christians by Mahumetans, and
Protestants by Papists are called Sectaries; and some amongst us are bold to
jumble Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, and Socinians together, and to make
Sectaries of them all: and so indeed they may be as they may handle the matter,
as we shall see by and by. But yet if the truth be with any of them, it is not a
Sect, nor they Sectaries for maintaining it. The Reformed Churches are no
Schismatics for breaking off from Communion with Papists in their Idolatries,
nor those that are sound in the faith, and holy in practice, for declining or
decrying other men's errors or impieties. It Is neither Sedition in the State to
disown factions, nor Schism in the Church to keep the whole Cloth from others
patches. We must adhere to Christ and his Truth and Grace, though we be called
Sectaries for it: and Paul after the way that they called Heresy, worshipped
the God of his Fathers; and he was never the worse man for their calling him
so, but the better for his doing so. They are guilty of the Schism which hold
and do that, in which others according to the word in Conscience cannot join
with them, and they that depart from the truth are they that in truth make
parties. Not they that take part with Christ, and manage it according to
Christ. I say both, because

2. On the contrary we may indeed make a Faction of our Profession, and our way
a by way, not tending to Christ, but from him, and that two ways:

1. When the ground, aim, and very materials of our Sect and Religion is
nothing of Christ, but indeed contrary to him. Whither we may refer the various
Sects of the Heathen Philosophers as well the more moral Stoics, and the more
refined contemplative Platonicks, and the more rational Peripateticks, as the
more brutish Epicureans. Hither also the opposite Factions of Hillel and
Shammai among the Jews, their three more famous Sects in our Savior's time, or
the seven which In Dial. cum Tryph.
Justin Martyr, Lib. 1. c. 4.
Eusebius, and Epiphanius variously reckon up.

As also the numberless number and rabble of Popish Seculars and Regulars
Votaries: that swarm of Locusts in their several Orders and Religious (as they
call them) of their Monks and Friars, and other Ecclesiastics, from the first
to the last of the Jesuits and Oratorians set up on purpose to invent and hold
up their several Idolatries, Superstitions, and Will Worship, not according to
Christ, or the simplicity that is in Christ, but to vitiate and corrupt 2 Cor.
11. 3.
it with their unclean mixtures. These and such like are properly Sects, whilst
of their own heads they divide themselves, and that oft-times to great enmities
and alienations from others and from God himself, whilst they set their
thresholds, (as the Prophet speaks) Ezech 43. 8.
by his threshold, and their post by his post, whose Ark cannot 1 Samuel 5. 3.
endure to have a Dagon stand by it. These Divisions are indeed Sects and
fractions, whose materials and essentials are sinful and against Christ.

2. Nay it may be a Sect, when the groundwork is good, and the part we take to
in the main right; but all spoiled by our ill managing of it.

Thus 1 Cor. 1. 12. Christ himself is perversely made the master of a Sect; nor
were they more Sectaries that said, I am of Paul, and, I of Apollo, and, I of
Cephas, than they that added, and I am of Christ, which (as too many now do)
pretending Christ, and yet rejecting the Ministry, parted Christ from his
Ministers (with whom he promised to be to the end of the world) and so made a
Party. Mat. 28. 20.


And that place affords another way of Sect-making, and that is when instead of
making Ministers or others helpers of our joy, we 2 Cor. 1. 24.
set them up as Masters and Lords of our faith, when one is as much for Paul,
and another for Cephas, as a third for Christ, when men are idolized, and
persons had in admiration, an (...) of any of them is sufficient to make an
Article of our Faith, and because all men will never be of one mind, we come to
what the Apostle says of the Corinthians (...), to be puffed up 1 Cor. 4. 6.
for one against another. For that Master which we follow, and plenis buccis
extol and admire, against another whom we reject Chrysostom. in locum.
and vilify, as in a diseased body some parts are swollen up, whereas in a
sound all parts keep their due site and proportion, as in all Sects usually
they make their Leaders the Cynosure of their judgments and practice, and so
Calvin (whom I must needs ever honor) may be set up as the head of a Sect, and
Paul himself against his will may be made a chief Sect-master. But one is our
Master, even Christ, and we all should be as Brethren, Mat. 23. 8.

And this further in the third place is advanced, when these divisions and
following of parties are managed with strife and contention, hatred, rage,
calumnies, and evil speakings and doings against opposite parties, as it was in
that place of the Corinths; when it was for one, it was against another. So
betwixt Hillel and Shammai, Pharisees and Sadducees, Guelfs and Gibellines,
Dominicans and Jesuits, Seculars and Regulars amongst the Papists, and too much
and too often between several dissenting parties amongst our selves. So
Chrysostom on that place to the Corinthians joins (...) and (...),
inflammations and tumors usually go together as well in corrupted Churches as
diseased bodies. These are Sects indeed, when there are such cuttings and
slashings, and mutual woundings of other men's esteems. It has too often gone
further to their estates and lives too. God heal the one, and in these
exulcerated times prevent the other. But is this according to Christ? or any
thing like his meekness? let the Apostle herein better instruct us, when he
says, If you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts (much more if in
our mouths and hands) glory not and lie not against the truth. This wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, d^vilish: though set off
with the Title of New light and Revelation, is but the smothered glowing of
Hellfire; the smoke that ascends from the bottomless pit, For the wisdom which
is from above is indeed first pure, but then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, etc. Jam. 3. 14, 15, etc. Here are opposites, Heaven and Hell: But
you may discern Heaven by its screne light, and Hell by its fierceness and
darkness -- These and such like are the Sects I now speak of; of which Paul
stiffly maintained one, when for his Rule, Religion, and Order he was a
Pharisee. And this was the first thing propounded in this point to our
Consideration.

2. The second was, That men are very apt to rest in these, as such high
matters which commend us to God: which the Text also proves; for Paul reckons
his being a Pharisee amongst those other things, which sometimes he accounted
gain; by which he V. 7.
purchased Gods favor, as the Popish Votaries, by being of their Religious
Orders, conceit themselves gotten into an Estate of greater Merit and
Perfection, as too many amongst us by being of this or that party or
persuasion, will needs pretend to, and so monopolize Saintship to themselves
and their fraternity, the others with them are but strange and without, if not
without interest in Salvation, yet at least so as that they shall go without
their Brotherhood and Communion.

I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, began very early in the
Church, and has continued ever since, but never more prevailed than now. An
ill Weed (it seems) that is too natural to our Soil, that of it self sprouted
out so soon, and grew so fast, and spread so far as we now find it. And this
for the ground of it.

1. In some (I cannot but in Charity believe) out of a better mind. I mean
diverse of their deluded, more single-hearted Scholars and Novices, who in a
pious zeal striving after that which Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 31. calls, (...), a more
excellent way, which their Masters promise to teach them, and not having 2 Pet.
2. 19.
sound and felt comfort, and sealing, and settling, and liberty, in their former
course and way, are very ready to catch at any other that is new; as a sick man
in pain would fain have present ease, and therefore has not patience to wait
for his Cure by attending upon that course which his able Physician prescribes
him, and so makes trial of every Medicine that every Empirick will give him,
till having gone through all, and at last finding them Physicians of no value,
at length through the Indulgence of God, with the Prodigal return and come home
to God, and their more sober minds and care together; as the woman that had
spent all on Physicians, came at last to Christ.

2. But others, especially their Sect Masters upon design, and from worse
Principles.

Sometimes out of a base self-love, and fear, to bear witness to the truth,
which it may be dangerous to profess, as those Gal. 6. 12. who because they
would (...), and not suffer persecution from the Jews, sided with them against
Christ and his Apostles.

Sometimes out of Covetousness, which the Scripture often notes in factious
Seducers, that they teach things which they ought Romans 16. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
not for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1. 11. that through Covetousness they make
merchandice of their followers. 2 Pet. 2. 3. and have an heart exercised with
covetous practices, v. 14. and in Jude, v. 11. most emphatically expresses it
by (...), like Balaam with a full and violent stream they poured out themselves
for a reward; which Cyprian afterward complains of in Novatus, who, he
says, was, Avaritiae inexplebili rapacitate furibundus, too visible in our
modern Sectaries.

Generally from vanity and emptiness, and wanting of true solidity, and
therefore the Apostle styles them, (...), 2 Pet. 2. 14. to which (Chap. 3.
16.) he joineth (...), unlearned and unstable souls, for parts, and age, and
sex, usually of the weakest, as we see in most of the seduced in our days; and
so, whilst the solid grane abides on the floor, such light chaff is blown away
with every wind of doctrine. And like themselves is usually what they trade in.
Pharisee-like, whilst they omit, (...), the weightier Matthew. 23. 23.
things, like Children that blow and follow after feathers, they eagerly
pursue, (...), some one or two, or a few things of less moment, and so fluctus
in simpulo, make a blaze in the straw, by the light whereof they make their own
folly too visible, but withal set the places they come to in a combustion. It Is
made the great Diana of the Ephesians, which puts the whole City into an
uproar, Acts 19.

But always out of Pride: in affectation of Novelty, and singularity; as the
Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. (...), that they may not be like other men. But as
Palsy-members have an Eestatick motion different, from that of their
fellow members: so to be of the more remark who otherwise for any true worth
would otherwise not be taken notice of but with Saul lie hid in the stuff, they
in obscurity, when by this means they affect and hope to prove like him, higher
by head and shoulders than their Neighbors, Captains, and Leaders of their
Maniples, whom else you might have looked for, and found inter Calones and
caculas. To be a (...), was the aim of their first Ringleader, Simon Magus,
Act. 8. 9, 10. as ambition has been the brand of Novatus, Arius, Aerius, and
many of the former Heretics; and is apparently visible in chief Sect-Masters
to this day.

But in all, both Masters and Scholars whether of worse or better minds, in all
it springs originally from the bitter root of our first sin and fall, whereby
after God had created us upright, we came to find out many inventions, Eccles.
7. 29. falling from verity and unity together, and now gotten into a wild
Wilderness, and having lost the right path we irrecoverably lose our selves,
and are ready to seduce others in numberless by-cross-ways, and like so many
crooked lines drawn off the Center cross and cut one another, or a routed Army,
run either singly or in some small parties this way and that way, justling and
treading down each other as well as others who come in their way: but yet think
that the course which they take is the only way to their own and others safety.

And thus from these and other such like grounds too many do, and we are all
too apt to betake our selves to such Sects, and to think to commend our selves
to God in so doing. Which was the second thing I propounded. Paul sometimes
counted this to be gain. But now that he is grown wiser, he reckons it as well
as other things but loss, yea and dung, that he might gain Christ.

3. Which was the third thing propounded and chiefly intended Sect or Party, is
not that which we should take up with, or rest in. Whatever vain men say or
think, it is not the being wrapped in a Friars Cowl that will either Cure the sick
man's Body, or save his Soul, not being of this or that Sect or Party, that will
dub or Canonize thee a Saint, or make thee meet to be partaker of the
inheritance of the saints in light: that we must be beholding to Col. 1. 12.
Christ only for: in compare with whom this especially had need be accounted
loss and dung, and indeed it is no less than a dishonor to Christ that such
dung should come into comparison with him. And therefore I must say less in
this kind of this particular than of all that hitherto I have compared with
Christ, or hereafter shall compare with him: for in those other particulars
there is otherwise much, at least some good: but in this of following and
maintaining of Sects, nothing that is pleasing to God, and that therefore
should please us. And what comparison should we then make of Light with
Darkness? of Christ with Belial? will this sect-following justify and commend
us to God, or may it be compared with Christ? which

1. Is so directly opposite to Christ the Prince of Peace, and the spirit of
Christ, and the Gospel of Peace; one body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in you all. So many unities; and yet universals, that it comes to one
and all, makes a Catholic Union, which therefore the Apostle calls for in the
same place, whiles he exhorts us to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. More in so few words could not be said, nor more
Emphatically. And must Christ then be divided into Parties? 1 Cor. 1. 13.
and his seamless Coat rent into pieces? (...), as Clemens Romanus piously
Cant. 6. 8.
bemoaneth; however we may pride our selves in it, yet it is truly filthy and
unworthy of Christ and a true Christian conversation. Though there be fourscore
Concubines of such as do not so sincerely profess Christ, and Virgins without
number, that make no Cant. 6. 8.
profession of love to him, yet his Beloved is but one: And that one should not
prove many. Straight lines drawn from the center to the circumference never cut
one another: and therefore if we so part as to cross and clash, the cause must
needs be, that either we do not truly center in Christ, or that there is some
lesser or greater obliquity, that we are not right either in heart or life,
judgment or practice. Such secting (I may without affectation say) is a
dissecting and mangling the body of Christ; and therefore very much against
Christ and the Spirit of Christ.

2. Contrary also to God and his Law, and that many ways; for if where strife
and division is, there be (...), every evil work, as the Apostle says, Jam. 3.
16. in this one offense (as it is usually said of the first Adam's) there is at
once a violation and breach of Gods whole Law. I insist not in particulars, as
idolizing our selves, or others against the first Commandment, and setting
altar juxta altar, our threshold by God's against the second, etc. In general
I say, If love be the fulfilling of the whole Law, this is so destructively
opposite to love, that it is a perfect evacuating of it. By which we are at
odds, not only with God and our brethren, but oft-times even with our selves
and our own judgments and consciences: which men often cross, that they may
comply with a party to which they are captivated, as Lactantius said of Tully,
Verum haec non Ciceronis culpa est, sed sectae -- Thus Lib. 2. cap. 9.
such breaches at once snap all asunder.

And whilst they cry up their own opinion and way, if that be Tom 6. de Haeres.
haeres 54. ut asseveraret, quod nihil cuique obesse^ quoruml^^er perpetratio
and perseverantia peceatorum, si hujus quae ab illo docebatur fidei particeps
esset.
but believed and followed by themselves and their followers, a broad way is
set open, and liberty indulged to trample upon all other Commandments, as
Eunomius in Austin gave out, That the commission of or perseverance in any sin,
could not hurt that man that would but entertain the faith which he taught: as
our later Libertines and Antinomians make the worst sins none, but only the
sense of them, and sorrow for them. Hence Arch-Hereticks (though some few, as
Pelagius, (especially at the first) were more sober and seemingly religious,
yet have been observed usually to be very abominable and scandalous in their
practices, exemplified, if not exceeded in our Ranters, and other Sectaries
railings, cursings, starknaked obscenities, which Grace could not name, and
even Nature would cover and blush at. A manifest heavy judgment of God upon
them, written with a Sunbeam, had they not unmann'd themselves, putting out
their own eyes, and debauched their very natural consciences. But, Lord,
whither do we not run, when thou leavest us!

As this is another manifest Judgment of God upon them, that as by these Sects
they cut themselves off from others, so very often they cannot keep long
together amongst themselves. O Lord, divide their Psalm. 55. 9.
tongues, prays David against his enemies: and it is that which God most
justly inflicteth on these Babel builders. What divisions See Socrates l. 5. c.
21, 23, 24. Graec
and subdivisions are they mouldred into? and what deadly irreconcilable feuds
and animosities amongst themselves do they often fall to? Thomists with
Scotists, and Jesuits against Dominicans, Seculars and Regulars, and one Sect
against another, till at last See Watsons Quodlibets. Judge. 7. 12. 1 Samuel 14.
20. Ezech. 38. 21.
(when others could not do it) they destroy each other, whilst Midian-like,
every man's sword is sheathed in the bowels of his brother. So in the Psalm
before-cited, Divide, O Lord, and destroy. Division and destruction go
together, or one follows upon the other. Brethren in evil, Genesis 49. 5. are
scattered asunder, v. 7. on which Matthew. 24. (...), a fit punishment for
dividers. See Boyse. in locum.
Grotius well notes, Mala coitio divisione punitur by Gods hand, or the
Magistrate's, or rather than fail by their own.

Or whatever they do to one another, I am sure the Church and people of God
deeply suffer by them, as by these their impieties, furies, and divisions
partly grieved and offended in themselves, and reproached by others. (...),
says the former Page 61. 1 Cor. 1.
Clemens to the Corinthians, whom Paul had before much blamed for their
divisions, and it seems they yet continued in them, that Clemens after him
upon a new breach saw cause to take up the same complaint; and we now as much
as he, that our Sects and divisions give Papists, Atheists, and Infidels too
much cause to laugh and blaspheme, that either our Christ is not that Christ
which the Gospel holds forth, or that we are not true Christians, and so make
some to fall off, others to doubt, and therefore cannot but make all that are
truly grounded grieve and mourn in secret. And good reason:

For unless God please timely to heal these breaches, they will not stay here;
but division will end in dissolution. A Church as well as a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand. Planks Mat. 12. 25.
joined together make a ship; but if once dis-joyned, they make a shipwreck.
Julian knew this too well; and therefore that he might the easier undo
Christianity, he not only tolerated, but somented Ammia^. Marcellin. lib. 22.
the differences of Christians. These Lib. 8. c. 1.
Eusebius observes were the inlet of Persecution upon the former flourishing
Primitive Churches from enemies without. God keep such from us without, whilst
we are so bickering within amongst our selves; and so dum singuli pugnant,
omnes vincuntur. The Devil and his Instruments are not grown so drowsy as not
to watch such advantages -- But should they sleep, these intestine Convulsions
and Ruptures within our own bowels may be likely to prove deadly. For Faction
uses to be fierce, and enmities and scuffles upon the account of Religion most
bloody, and the Scripture joyneth such ugly pairs as these are together: Whose
mouths are full of cursing and bitterness (as you know whose now are) their
feet are swift to shed blood, and destruction and misery are in their ways, and
the way of peace they have not known, Romans 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. The Jews after
their Captivity in Babylon were much cured of their former Idolatry, but then
especially sprung up their several Sects of Sadducees, Pharisees, and their
several Schisms and Parties, and so at last it was the Sectary, not the
Idolatrous Jews that crucified our Savior. God grant that whilst we are, or
have been reforming Popish Idolatry, Christ and his Church do not suffer by our
Schisms: and that whilst all Parties are tolerated, all at last come not to be
utterly ruined.

Oh therefore that once we might be taken off from that which Sects and
Parties, which make us so ridiculous to Enemies, so displeasing to God, (...).
Nazianzen. Orat. 14. page 218.
and all that are truly Godly, so unlike, yea contrary to Christ, and the
Spirit of the Gospel, and the holy and happy Communion of the Saints, the true
Professors of it: that once there might be no divisions amongst us, but that we
may perfectly be joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
This is that which Christ begged of God in his most divine prayer before his
Passion, Joh. 17. and on which he so much insists, v. 11, 21, 22, 23. Paul for
the Romans, Romans 15. 5, 6. and most passionately beseeches the Corinthians for
in the beginning of his first Epistle to them, Chap. 1. v. 10. and calls upon
them and God for in the close of his second Epistle to them, Chap. 13. v. 11,
12, 14. as the both Alpha and Omega of his desires and their happiness. That
which he injoyns and commands with most conjuring perswasives. If there be any
consolation in Christ, (Oh how sweet!) If any comfort of love, (how great!) If
any fellowship of the Spirit, (how intimate and obliging!) If any bowels and
mercies, (how large and tender in Christ to us!) and should be in us one
toward another) Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. -- That which he chides for the want of, 1
Cor. 1. 11, 12. etc. which he takes pains to heal between a Master and a
fugitive servant in the Epistle to Philemon, and between Euodias and Syntyche,
two weak women, who were fallen out either between themselves, or both of them
with the Church, Phil. 4. 2. and was the breach between two such sorry women,
or a master And his untoward servant, so great a matter as the great Apostle
thought it not below him, and that when he was writing the Canonical Scripture,
to take pains to compose? as it were on purpose to leave it upon record, that
it might lie before us as the Canon and Rule of our practice, and that the most
spiritual amongst us might not think it unworthy of them to restore such
dislocated joints in the spirit of meekness: And shall the best of us then
think Gal. 6. 1.
our selves too good to stoop to such a service? Oh remember, that whereas we
have but two Sacraments, they are both tesserae and vincula unitatis, and
therefore the Apostle puts both together in one verse. Whatever we are, or
however otherwise differenced, whether Jew or Gentile, (and they were at odds
enough) Bond or Free, (and they are at a sufficient distance) yet (...), We are
all baptized into one body, and all made to drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.
13. Baptized and made to drink, there are the two Sacraments, and when once and
again he says, We all, he tells us, that by both we all are but one, yea made
one, (...), concorporated into one body, and as it were identified into one
spirit by an happy unio animarum; and shall we be divided, between whom there
is so inward and so firm an union of the same spirit that animates and enacts
all? Oh no, let it never be; or if it have been too long, let it never be more.
But as in the body of the Universe, though there be various multiplicities of
creatures, yet because spiritus intus alit and magno se corpore miscet, all
Aeneid. 6.
are kept in a perfect harmony, and as Macrobius out of Plato observes, S^mn.
Scip. l. 1. cap. 6.
though the four Elements be diverse, and have opposite qualities, and so are at
odds one with another, yet God in his wisdom has so ordered it, that every one
of the four Elements have two qualities, and so although with one they fight
against each other, yet by the other they are linked together to a likeness and
consistency: as water being cold and moist, and the Earth cold and dry, though
in moisture and dryness they are opposite, yet both agree in coldness, and so
in the rest of the Elements, ut per tam jugabilem competentiam and (...)
foederari possint: so and much rather in the Body of Christ, though there be
much variety in the members, and that if not better looked to may be occasion
of too much opposition, yet in that they are by one spirit united unto one
head, and by reason of many other ties and ligaments, they have much more to
unite and keep them together than there can be to disunite, and pluck and keep
them asunder: It should make us do our utmost to endeavor to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace. But because it is the God of Peace and Love,
who only can make us to endeavor, and then make our endeavors successful to
so glorious an end; and because he may be sooner entreated than froward man be
persuaded, I end this particular with Noah's wish and prayer, Genesis 9. 27. The
Lord persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem, that our many Sects and
Schisms being abandoned, and all our rents and breaches made up, once at last
our Jerusalem may be builded as a City that is compacted together, even a Psalm.
122. 3. Isa. 33. 20.
quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that neither shall be taken down, nor any of
the Cords thereof broken.

SERMON X. ON PHILIPPIANS 3. 5, 6.
THIS is the first Particular, which from these words, As Touching the Law (or
the Sect I was of) a Pharisee: That it is not the being of any Sect or Party
that commends us to God, or is to be rested in; no not though never so learned,
for such was that of the Pharisees, who had their name of Pharisees from their
greater skill in explaining the Law, (...), as Josephus expresses it; and
therefore were accounted De bello Judaico, l. 1. c. 4.
amongst their chief Doctors, and opposed to the rude ignorant multitude, as
John 7. 49. Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? But
this people, who knows not the Law, are cursed. The Jewish Jesuits I called
them, as for their pretense of greater sanctity, so for their either real or
pretended knowledge and learning above others. And Paul had been one of these:
and if you consider what is said of him in Scripture, or what even Porphyrie
thought of him, or what he speaks of himself, Gal. 1. 14. (...), that he
profited in the Jews Religion, that is, as some expound it, in the study and
knowledge of the Law, and Jewish In Judaicae Religionis notitia, sive legis
studio. Grotius.
Religion, above many his equals in his own Nation; that he was Acts 22. 3. 5.
34.
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, the great Doctor of the Law, (...),
institutus accurate (as the Tigurine renders it) most exactly instructed in
the Law of his Fathers, yea and in other humane literature above all the rest
of the Apostles, as his disputes and writings testify. I say, If you consider
all this, you will conclude, that as he was a Pharisee, so one of the highest
form amongst them for parts and sufficiencies. And therefore when he was but a
young man, made use of by them as a fit Act. 9. 1, 2, 3, 14. 22. 5. 26. 10, 12.
and choice instrument for their purpose. And yet though he was a Pharisee, and
such a Pharisee both for his Order and his personal accomplishments, so knowing
and eminently learned, yet this he valueth not himself by, nor rests in, but
counts it also loss and dung, that he might gain Christ. Whence

This Note arises, That it is not our greatest parts or learning, Note 2.
either natural or acquired abilities that can so commend us to God, that we
may rest in them: but they also are loss and dung in comparison of Christ; and
are so to be accounted by us that we may gain Christ.

And of this now I cannot say, as I did of the former, that it is of little or
no worth; No. Next under Christ and his Grace above all things in the World of
greatest Excellency. Solomon who had most of it can best tell us the true worth
of it, and he says, that Fools indeed despise wisdom, and hate knowledge, but
Pro. 1. 7, 22.
he calls them fools for it. But for his own judgment, it is positive that
Wisdom excels folly as far as light excells darkness, both Eccles. 2. 13.
in its own nature, and for the admirable usefulness of it; which the ignorant
fool whilst in the dark perceives not; but when he once comes into the light
is made sensible of, as the^ frantic or deadly sick man, as long as such feels
not his malady till he begin to recover out of sickness and madness, and then
he begins to discern the difference. Scientia Deorum vita. They accounted it
the life of their Gods, and it is indeed a bright beam of heaven. This
transcendent worth of knowledge and learning, learned men usually know too
well, whilst they little know themselves, and therefore (as the Apostles word
is) swell in pride, and are puffed 1 Cor. 8. 1.
up with the conceit of it, that like Saul they are higher by the head than all
their Neighbors, and so do tanquam ex alto despicere, 1 Samuel 10. 23.
all others as their underlings, nay lift up themselves against Christ himself,
his Truth, ways, and Ordinances as poor low things, too inferior for their
Altitudes to stoop to. A Psalm of David, a dull piece to an Ode of Pindar. A
Believer an half-witted, cracked brain Simplician. To such, Preachers (as to the
Athenians) are but vain bablers, Act. 17. 18. it is the foolishness of
preaching, and therefore they think they more wisely spend their 1 Cor. 1. 21.
time in reading of a Book than in hearing of a Sermon. Yea Christ himself,
though the Wisdom of God, to the learned Greeks is no better than foolishness,
1 Cor. 1. 23. as to the Jews he was a stumbling block. And therefore they
thought their saying, Have any of the wise Rulers, or the learned Pharisees
believed in him? laid a sufficient block in the way for any that had wi^ in
their heads ever to have a purpose in their hearts to come to him. And such
thoughts it is likely enough our learned Paul had of Christ, whilst he continued
a Pharisee. Which not only set him off from embracing him, but set him on more
fiercely to oppose and persecute both him and all that believed in him, as ever
since none either more hardly brought on to Christ than such worldly wise men,
or more forward to malign, hate, oppose and persecute his truth and people than
Porphyries, Julians, and such other learned Adversaries, their acuteness
setting a keener edg on their malice, and their greater knowledge furnishing
them with greater abilities to cavil and inveigh and to find out ways to do
them more mischief.

But Paul after that once a brighter light from Heaven had shone round about
him, though he forgot not his learning (for Festus Acts 9. 3.
thought he had so much of it that it made him mad) yet by it he saw that he
had cause to lay aside such thoughts, and became of Acts 26. 24.
another (of a quite contrary) mind and judgment. Christ was now no longer to
him foolishness, but The Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. And if the Preaching of
Christ were accounted foolishness, he was so wise as to become such a fool
himself, and to call upon every other man that seems to be wise, to become a
fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. even made wise to salvation: and
accordingly here in the Text 2 Timothy 3. 15.
as all other his great excellencies, so amongst them this of his being a
learned Pharisee he accounts loss and dung, (...), for the more transcendently
excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord. For as Moses when set on the rock
came to see Gods back parts, Exodus 33. 21, 22, 23. so by our being set upon
this rock of salvation, it is that we come to behold the Countenance of God in
the face of Christ, without which, he that increases Eccles. 1. 18.
knowledge does but increase sorrow; partly here in wearying himself in
oftentimes fruitless studies of other matters, as he compared the Schoolmens
pains about knotty questions, to a man R. Gallus.
gnawing and breaking his teeth on an hard stone, whilst he had bread by him to
have fed on. But the greatest grief will be at last, (if with all our learning
we have not savingly learnt Christ) our Books and we shall burn together; and
all our learning will Quid prodest esse peritum and periturum.
be so far from teaching us how to escape everlasting wrath, that it will much
increase it, and serve only to enlarge and widen our faculties that they may be
made capable of greater torment. (...), says our Savior, Luke 12. 47. and so
Clemens, (...). More light now may then meet with more heat in those
everlasting burnings.

But this particular, though fit to be further pressed in this Auditory of
Learned men, has been already handled in the first part of the Text, when we
spoke of that, (...), of the super-excellency of the knowledge of Christ above
all other knowledge and learning whatsoever. And therefore leaving it I shall
proceed to another excellency which Paul as he was a Pharisee sometimes gloried
of, and rested in, which now he accounts loss and dung in comparison with
Christ, and that was a glittering outside of a glorious Profession, and outward
appearance of greatest Piety and Devotion, in which the Pharisees, which (as
some say) came of the Hasidaei Saints, would fain outstrip all, and be most
conspicuous and remarkable; from which (as best Hebrew Grammarians conceive)
they had their names of Pharisees, quasi (...), as separated from others by
their greater sanctity, and therefore said to others, Stand by thy self, Come
not near me, for I am holier than thou, Isa. 65. 5. To which time (and not
first to the time of Ezra) some refer the first out-looking of Pharisaisme.
L^ghtfoot Horae Hebraicae.
And for aftertimes, Josephus tells us, their Sect was, (...), that it was an
Order of men among the Jews that seemed and was esteemed more godly and
religious than all the rest. And if you will measure Religion by exact
Tithings, frequent Alms deeds, Fastings and Washings, long Prayers, and Broad
Phylacteries and the like, and take notice what our Savior spoke of them in
his time, Matthew 6. 15. 23. and other places, they might be Canonized for the
holiest Saints, for their trumpet sounded very loud, the outside of the Cup and
Platter was made very clean, those Sepulchers were curiously whited and
garnished, their Countenances demurely mis-figured, the antic garbs, gates,
postures, of their seven Orders (which others write of) exactly or rather
ridiculously composed, they were perfectly dressed Stage Players, or
Hypocrites, as our Savior very often calls them, and almost as often says, Woe
to them for it. Well therefore might our Apostle account this Sepulcher
Painting, and out side varnish loss and dung that he might gain Christ. And so
should we. And so hence

The Note is, that no bare outward Professions, or outside appearances Note 3.
of Piety and Religion can so commend us to God as to be relied upon or rested
in for acceptance with him, but to be accounted loss and dung that we may gain
Christ. It Is not a fair stamp on a slip that will make it current.

Not that simply and in themselves as in the former particular Sects and
Factions, so all outward appearances and Professions of Religion and Godliness
are to be reproved or under-valued.

Indeed some are such as are of our own devising, especially in Gods worship,
as most of the Pharisees Gayes were, and the Papists are. Let all such be at
the same rate with the forementioned Sects and Factions, which they help
either to make or uphold, and are alike sinful breaches of the second
Commandment. And the like we may say of all, either superstition, or
affectation, in all even the most lawful, yea necessary outward appearances and
professions of godliness; they are not only loss in the want of true piety, but
in their own natures dung indeed; the dressing up or rather the foul dawbing of
a Dunghill-Idol: a Whorish hearts garish, but withal sluttish dress, not
covering, but setting out its inward filthiness by such outward, open,
barefaced, ill-complexioned appearances, though looked at by us as gay
brouches, yet for the very materials and ingredients being made up of
Superstition, Hypocrisy, and Vainglorious affectation. They are but like
dirty colors laid on a rotten Post or Mud-Wall; or an ugly vizard put on a
foul face, according to the most proper sense of the Apostles words they are,
(...), species mali, an appearance of that 1 Thessalonians 5. 22.
which in its kind is evil, a foul skin of a more foul body, and the bad
outward Complexion of an inward distempered Soul. Such were the Pharisees
mis-figured faces, which they accounted Beauties; and such are not only the
ridiculous antiques in the Popish Mass, with all the rest of their fine
trinkets in their Idolatrous service, costly Processions, affected mock
penances and mortifications, with their several Orders, Habits, Garbs, Modes;
but also, all our own self-invented will-worship-finery in Gods service, and
our affected niceties in our ordinary Carriages. Such ugly outward shows and
outsides of Religion, so little pleasing to men, are more displeasing to God,
and are so unworthy of Christ, that it were blasphemy to compare them with him.
Let all such therefore go for loss and dung. And what loss can it be to part
with such a Dung Hill?

But let us come to consider such outward appearances and Professions of
Godliness, which in themselves for their kind, are holy and genuine, approved
by God, yea and required in his Word: And for them according to my former
method I am to do two things.

1. To show their true worth in themselves, that they may well come into Paul's
Inventory here of his choicest movables.

2. But secondly, that they are but loss and dung if compared with Christ,
especially if rested in and so set in opposition to him.

For the first, The outward profession and appearance of Godliness

1. It is under Command. Let your light shine before men that they may see,
etc. Matthew. 5. 16. not to be seen our selves, but to show forth God's Grace,
and give light to others. So (...), Phil. 2. 15. we must appear, yea shine as
lights in the World, as the luminaries in Heaven; nor must Sun or Moon always
muffle themselves up in a Cloud, but shine forth, though Dogs bark at them. We
must not be ashamed here to look out, The like 2 Samuel 17. 11. See L. de Dieu
and Grotius.
but with them, Jer. 50. 5. have our faces Zion ward, as it is said of our
Savior, Luke 9. 53. (...), whether you read it, his face was Proficiscentis
with Beza, or more near to the words with the Arabic, Proficiscens, it comes
all to one, I say as Christ's face was of one going, or it self going to
Jerusalem, so ours to heaven: sicut oculi loqui dicuntur, qui innuunt quod
dictum velis: ita facies ire dicitur, quae praese ferat iter aliquod destinatum
esse, as Erasmus well notes upon the place, our eyes should speak, and our
faces go, and not be ashamed to tell all that look on us that we are going
thither. It Is not to be neglected, because under command.

2. And that as of such moment, that it is as much as our Salvation is worth.
With the mouth Confession is to be made to salvation, Romans 10. 10. And
whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words, though in the midst of an
adulterous and sinful Generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, says
our Savior, Mark 8. 38.

3. And therefore much less are we to value our esteem, liberty, yea or life
for it. The Lions Den shall not make Daniel shut his Dan. 6.
window: and although David will hide Gods word in his heart, Psalm. 119. 11.
yet so as not to be ashamed or afraid to declare it openly with his lips, v.
13. and that before Kings (v. 46.) by whom he might be shent for it. And
although Nicodemus at first for fear came to Jesus by night; yet both he and
Joseph of Arimathea, John 3. 2.
grew up to more boldness in the faith. Nicodemus cap. 7. 50. begins a little
to recover himself, and though timid yet something appeared for Christ, cum
adhue saperet noctis tenebras, as Calvin upon the place, but at last both of
them in a more dark and dismal night in that hour and power of darkness, more
openly and boldly appear for him, cap. 19. 38, 39. ut qui vivo debitum honorem
propter metum non detulerant, quasi mutati in novos homines accurrant ad
cadaver mortui, they which before through base fear durst not openly own him
whilst alive, with an heroic courage and fortitude do appear for him now that
he was dead. How much more should we in worst times and in greatest dangers,
now that he is risen and is at the right hand of his father in glory? and
therefore however such fearful ones (who with the Gnostics and other ancient
Heretics, and with David George, and the Silentiarii, Tacentes, and Fratres
Liberi, amongst the Anabaptists of late, hold it not necessary to profess
Christ) plead Nicodemus his example for their subterfuge, yet it would be well
if as they imitate him in his former sinful dastardliness, so they would in his
after-courage and boldness. To whom in one thing (as Calvin well observes) they
are like, quod Christum quantum in se est sepultum curant, that with him they
take care to bury Christ; he to bury his body, these his truth and grace: but
Christ is to be buried now no more, now that he is risen and reigns in glory,
that we should be ashamed of him: and truly if they adventured to bury his body
when dead, then turpis and pudenda ignavia est (as he says) si regnantem in
coelesti gloria fide and confessione fraudemus. If the Primitive Martyrs and
Confessors had been of this mind, where had been our Christian Religion? No.
They signed themselves with his mark, in part ubi signum pudoris est, as
Austin expresses De verbis Apost. Sermon. 8.
it: and when Knox his Corpse was put into the Grave, Earl Morton by way of
Epitaph said, There lies the body of him who in his lifetime never feared the
face of man. It was the great sin of the Jews confessed by the Prophet, Isa.
53. 3. that they hid their faces from Christ as ashamed of him, and ours is
like to it, when with David now got into Abimelechs Court, we change our
behavior; when got into bad Company, we say with him, Amos 6. 10. hold thy
tongue, for we may not make mention of the Name of the Lord; like Snails that
put out the horn to try if the way be clear, and pluck it in at every touch;
and in nights to ring the Curfew. But we should think of the sad doom of such
fearful ones, Revel. 21. 8. and therefore when sin and profaness is so
barefaced and impudent, Grace and Godliness (which has sure a more amiable
Countenance, and if managed with modesty and wisdom, such a Majesty as is able
to daunt the most obstinate) should not s^eak, but dare to look out in open
view, confession, yea and profession of Christ and his ways, as the
efflorescentia and the out-beamings of inward light and life, sincerity and
reality; for although all is not gold that glisters, yet all gold should
glister, and the more by how much the more it is rubbed upon by the profane
Worlds Calumnies and Oppositions. The word (...) which in Hebrew signifies to
cover and conceal, in the Chaldee and Syriack Henifii exercit. Sacr. on Luke
21. 16.
is to deny; and to deny is to betray, as Ambrose makes it his Title, De
proditione Petri, cum de negatione agitur. Peter became an half Judas, the
denier little better than the betrayer of Christ. But the chaste Spouse makes it
the matter of her grief and complaint, that she should be (...) as one that is
veiled, Cant. 1. 7. (...)
(the garb of an Harlot, Cen. 38. 14, 15.) but would kiss her beloved in the
open street, Cant. 8. 1. you would almost think beyond a Woman's modesty. And of
the true Israel which God has chosen, Isa. 44. 1. one shall (freely and
openly) say, I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of
Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname
himself by the name of Israel, v. 5. as not ashamed of their best Parentage and
Kindred, but with their own hand enrolling themselves in their chief Captains
Musters, not only in word and open profession with the Primitive Christians
proclaiming Christianus sum, but also in their practice and conversation,
showing forth the virtues 1 Pet. 2. 9.
of him that has called them, so that they may thereby be known to all they
converse withal, and all that see them may acknowledge them that they are the
seed which the Lord has blessed, Isa. 61. 9. Thus in these and the like
respects, outward appearances and professions of holiness are not to be
undervalued, which was the first thing propounded.

2. But the second more near to my present purpose is, that these are not to be
rested in, as able in themselves to commend us to God, but are to be accounted
loss for Christ. For notwithstanding the Pharisees were herein conspicuous and
indeed over-glaring, our Savior for all that even when he speaks of these
their outward formalities, Matthew. 23. does again and again cry Woe to them, Woe
to you ye Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: and when God and Christ in
Scripture pronounces a Woe against any, it speaks them in a most deplorable
lost condition. I do not remember any one instance, where it was not
irrecoverable. It Is Woe even to Scribes Matthew. 3. 7. 23. 33.
and Pharisees, if they be Hypocrites, if a generation of vipers, as John
Baptist, and our Savior calls them foris pictae, intus venenosae, as he
glosseth it. If it be but a bare form, it is but a thin lank thing, and may well
be counted loss in comparison of Christ who is substance: as

1. These bare forms and shows are only outward. But Christ is within us.
Christ in you, the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. Sodoms apples. See Chrysoft. Hom.
8. in 1 Thessalonians.


When it is called A form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. that expression holds
forth two things. First, that nothing is wanting on the outside, but secondly,
that there is just nothing within. Should there be any thing wanting without,
it would not be a complete, but a defective form. And therefore Pharisees,
Hypocrites, herein use to be elaborate and accurate to complete the Pageant,
(...), Matthew. 6. 1. as on a Stage in a Theatrical ostentation, See Hammond
Annot. 6.
(...), v. 16. that they may appear. And for that purpose, the outside of the
Cup and Platter is made very clean, and the Sepulcher very fairly whited and
painted, Matthew. 23. 25, 27. But now a Jew is not one that is outwardly, but is
one that is inwardly, whose praise is not of men but of God, Romans 2. 28, 29.
Now the Lord sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance,
but the Lord looks on the heart, 1 Samuel 16. 7. and therefore is not so taken
with outsides, as to be imposed upon by them. His Spouse as her outward
raiment, is of needle work, so she is all-glorious within, and the inside of
Gods Temple was all Gold and Psalm. 45. 13, 14. 1 King. 6. 18, 21.
Cedar materials, precious and incorruptible. True worth is modest, and like
the Windows of the Temple, is narrowest outward, takes up with privacy and
retirement from the World, and delights not to make too great a noise and
glaring in the World: think it enough that oftentimes God sees it in secret
now, and for rewarding it openly, is content to stay till the last pay-day: and
therefore looks at the Pharisees open praying in the streets, as a trivial
devotion: and esteems him who sets out all on the bulker, without any thing in
the Warehouse within, a very poor man, and next door to a Bankrupt; is so wise
as to set a due price and value on Christ, who is the treasure hid in the
field, Matthew. 13. 44. and therefore esteems all these gayes but loss and dung
in comparison of him, because first but bare outsides, and therefore at the
very best

2. Empty of all substantial reality as in themselves, so in any comfort and
support we can have by them. Of all others fearfulness is ready first to
surprise Hypocrites in a day of evil, Isa. 33. 14. when men hate them because
they have a show of Godliness, and God more abhors them because they have but a
show, who will not be put off with words though they swear to them, Jer. 5. 2.
But his eyes are on the truth and reality, v. 3. And must this then come in
competition with Christ, in whom God is well pleased? How great soever the
sound was, yet how hollow, when nothing within but emptiness? How faint will
that poor man's heart be, who has indeed a rich and costly suit on, but is
within deadly sick and wounded? Like your Flowers which spindle up all into
Flowers usually die at the root; so these outside men that are all for the
Gay-Flower, with Nabal, then have their 1 Samuel 25. 37.
hearts die within them for want of an inward substantial support. Suh
unsavory salt, though it retain its whiteness, is good for naught, but to be
cast to the dunghill, and therefore may well be accounted dung. But then how
infinitely more worth is Christ, who is substance, Prove. 8. 21. And the
Comforts of his spirit real and substantial. It Is

Compositum jusfasque animi, sanctique recessus,
and -- in^octum generoso pectus honesto.
firm interest in Christ and solid substantial sincerity and reality of his
grace only that will then support them; when such neat woven Cobwebs will fail
us: and such shadows fly away.

3. Especially, if they be not only thus hollow and empty, but (as often they
prove) Covers of a great deal of under-hidden impiety and all other
abomination, as the Pharisees painted Sepulcher Matthew. 23. 14, 27.
was within full of uncleanness and rottenness. And their long Prayer was but a
pretense the more cleanly to devour Widows Houses. In Tertullian's Language,
Impietatis secreta superficialibus officiis obumbrant.

We delight in the artificial resemblance of the thing which we hate and fly
from, as in the imitation of the hissing of a Serpent, and the lively pourtrait
of a venomous Toad; and so too often in the Counterfeit of Grace and Holiness,
which from our Souls we inwardly loath. And how often may we find a fair glove
put on a very fowl hand? a hoary whiteness covering blackest ink? whilst
Religion is made a stalking Horse to men's designs and lusts; a very Sedan in
which they may be carried covertly to their most filthy or mischievous
practices, like the royal sound of a Trumpet which you may sometimes hear made
before the fight of some Monster or a Puppet-play.

-- Quoties vis fallere plebem
Finge Deum -- The ancient guise or disguise rather of Hypocrites, as Ambrose
of the Manichees, which did aliud agere, aliud In 2 Timothy 3.
profiteri, sanctimoniam defendunt, and lege sua turpiter vivunt; which of all
is most abominable to God, and in some respects worse than Pagan Idolatry; they
lifted up the Devil into the throne of God: but these put God down to the
Devils drudgery; which therefore Bernard might very well account to be that
Daemonium meridianum, a Devil in the shape of an Angel of light; which by the
light of Nature the very Heathens discovered to be the highest and grossest
impiety. Malus, ubi bonum se simulat, tunc pessimus Publius. Officior. 1.
est, says one; and Tully is express and serious. Totius autem injustitiae
nulla capitalior est quam eorum, qui tum cum maxim falluntid agunt ut viri
boni esse videantur. But he said well who said that Religion is the best armor
in the World, but the worst Cloak, Terry. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 16.
especially if it be a Cloak of Covetousness or maliciousness, as the Scripture
phraseth it, when to such (...) (as Chrysostom elegantly calls them) God may
say as Solomon once to Shimei (though he had thrust himself into the Company of
David's Friends, and was amongst the foremost of them) thou know all the
wickedness which thy heart is privy to, 1 King. 2. 44. But 2 Samuel 19. 16, 20. 1
Cor. 4. 5. 2 Cor. 4. 2.
what think we? when God either in this life or at the last day shall bring to
light these hidden things of darkness and dishonesty, and shall have uncased
these Cloaked Hypocrites: will not all these vain shows prove loss? when, as
Solomon says, they shall lose all their sweet words, and all their care and
pains to palliate their Prev. 23. 8.
wicked devices with specious pretenses. Will they not then indeed appear to be
dung in comparison of Christ, when they will then make them more abominable
before him, men, and angels? which leads to the last particular, which is that,

Fourthly, These vain shows (because such) will not last nor 4. 1 Cor. 7. 31.
hold out. For (...). The Scheme of this World passes away, says the Apostle,
and so will the Scheme of Religion too if it be but a Scheme. It will sooner or
later discover it self, or be discovered by others.

1. Of it self, for fruits forcibly soon ripe, are as soon rotten: the bl^ze in
the lamp of it self will go out, if not fed with oil in the vessel. The Stony
ground though it springs up fast, yet is by and by offended: and although the
thorny ground holds out longer, Matthew. 13. 5, 6, 7, 20, 21, 22.
yet it at last withers: when either they fall short of what they aimed at in
taking up that profession, they lay it aside as unserviceable to their ends, or
have once gained that which they made use of it for; when the fish is caught,
the net is laid by. They that made use of Religion for a stalking horse, are
wont to deal with it as with a Post horse, switch and spur till they come to
their Stage, but then turn him up, and never more look after him. Rusty Iron
may be gilt, but the rust will at length work through. All such gilt and paint,
in time at least, will of it self wear off.

2. Or at least will be rubbed off. If they do not discover themselves, they
will be discovered by others. Every breath will dim such paint, and such chaff
(specie religionis nitidi, inanes virtutibus, Matthew 3. 12.
as Brugensis paraphraseth it) will easily be blown away with every puff of
doctrine, or blast of persecution, as white ice is brittle and soon breaks, so
most glittering Hypocrites soonest prove Apostates, Luke 8. 13. and then their
fair shows vanish, and end oftentimes in greatest heights of sin, and depths of
misery. For sin, they often end,

1. In open and fiercest malice and opposition of what they before prosessed.
Such Wells without water proving clouds that are carried with a tempest, 2 Pet.
2. 17. none more fierce and tempestuous: as none keener Enemies to Christ, than
the seemingly devout Pharisees; renegade Julians and Porphyries, the bitterest
Persecutors.

2. In downright Atheism: and so they that in Matthew. 24. 51. are Hypocrites,
Luke 12. 46. are called Unbelievers or Insidels, (...).
have dallied so long with God, as though he had not seen them, till at length
they come to think there is no God that can see them. I wish our days did not
afford us too many instances of such prodigies of men that have gone through so
many Religions, that they have out-gone all and so at last sit down in none.

3. And so of all men prove most impenitent and irrecoverable. You read of a
(...), a heart that cannot repent, but it is to be found in the bosom of such
censorious pretenders, v. 1, 3. Publicans and Harlots get into the Kingdom of
heaven before such dissemblers, Matthew. 21. 31. having so profanely imposed on
God, in his just judgment they are more hardened by him, and taking Sanctuary
under such Coverts they think themselves safe, and of such Fig Leaves make
shields to beat off such blows, which otherwise might have driven them into a
better way, as the Jews, because Children of Abraham could not be brought to
accept of Christ, John 8. And therefore of all sorts of Sinners you read or
hear of fewest Hypocrites converted, fitly compared to Foxes as for their craft
and other tricks, so also that nunquam cicurantur, never made so gentle as to
take upon them the Yoke of Christ. Thus in point of sin here is a foul end of
such fair shows.

And it is but fit that in the punishment of it it be as much notorious; God
delighting to assert his allseeing justice and holiness, to draw such out of
their holes to open execution.

Oft-times in this life, when an over flowing shower does wash down such
untempered mortar, so that the very foundations are discovered, that ye may
know that God is the Lord, as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 13. 13, 14.

Or should the Hypocrite make a shift to sh^ffle and ruffle it all his life by
that day light, yet God sometimes speaks of searching Zeph. 1. 12.
with Candies. And truly oft-times the watch-light by a Death-B^d makes great
discoveries of him to others, especially to himself, when his h^pe proves then
like the Spiders Web, Job 8. 14, 15. It and he give up the ghost together, Job
11. 20.

Or should he even then be asleep, yet at the last bright morning he will be
awakened and discovered to himself and all the World too, for as strong-hearted
as any of them can be, yet fearfulness Isa. 33. 14.
will surprise and shake the Hypocrites, when it once comes to everlasting
burnings. And our Savior seems to make Hell fire the Hypocrites free hold, and
other sinners but as Inmates and Vndertenants Dignum hypocritis supplicium, ut
qui duplici sunt cord in duo dissecentur. Boisius in locum.
to them, Matthew. 24. 51. where he says, (...), And he shall cut or divide him
asunder (a fit punishment for a double divided heart) and give him his portion
with Hypocrites.

And may then all Pharisaical shows and professions of Religion come to this at
last? so vanish and come to nothing unless it be to greater sin and heavier
punishment? Then well may they be loss and dung to me (may the believing Soul
say) in comparison of Christ, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever. Hebr. 13. 8. who lives ever and is able to save me to the end, to the
uttermost. Whose both grace and peace like solid gold retain their luster, and
the more and longer rubbed or worn, shine the brighter. I shall be no loser, if
I lose all these, at least all confidence in these, (...), that I may gain
Christ.

And so much for that Particular. Only instead of further Application,

First, Is outward appearance and profession of grace and Religion of such use
and worth, and necessity? as was said on the one part.

1. Then fie on that profane soul mouth that will spit in the face of it. I
mean such profane Sinners that from their Souls hate, with their mouths revile,
and with an hand of violence to their utmost might lay at any out-looking
appearance of Jesus Christ in his people. No greater eyesore to an ungodly man
than to see the first eyelids of the morning, most of all if a
noon-day-brightness, any lesser, especially any greater appearances of Jesus
Christ and his grace in his servants hearts and lives, which if they cannot
smite with their fist of wickedness, yet they will be sure to malign in their
heart, and as Jeremiah's enemies would do him, to smite it with their tongues,
calumniating it to be nothing but Jer. 18. 18.
base dessembling and hypocrisy. And no wonder if these men like some, curse
the Sun, when the dog will bark at the Moon. If the greater luster of Christian
graces trouble such fore eyes which were offended at the dimmer light of the
Heathens moral virtues, for so you may know whom you find complaining.

-- virtutes ipsas invertimus, atque Her.


Sincerum cupimus vas incrustare. -- No wonder I say if Christian Graces which
are more distastful to a carnal heart meet with the like or worse measure, as
Hierom complains of the Heathens, Ad Furiam.
as soon as ever they saw a Christian, then statim illud de trivio: (...)
Behold! a Greek Impostor, which Nazianzen also much complained of in his time,
(...) Orat. 14. p. 219.
(...), that Grace was counted but an artifice, and a Christian must needs be
an Hypocrite, and every professor a masked Stage Player, which how unreasonable
it is he there shows. And let all such know, that as it is the Panthers hatred
of the Man that makes it tear his picture, so it is their Enmity to Christ that
makes them so fly at his image looking out in his people. In so doing they
Jew-like spit in the face of Christ. And how will they be able to look him in
the face one day? Outward appearances and Professions of Religion are not such
things as foul mouths should spit at.

2. Nor secondly that holy hearts should be ashamed of, though they do, but
should with our Savior be able to say, I hid not my face from shame and
spitting, Isa. 50. 6. And David will be more vile, though Michal say he
shamelesly uncovers himself as a vain fellow, 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21. Although the
inside of the Tabernacle and Temple was most glorious, yet the very outside was
a goodly sight. The form of godliness is no such deformed thing, that we need
blush at it, nor true Christianity so despicable a thing but that in worst
times and companies we should dare, nay we should glory in our both words and
carriages to call and proclaim our selves to be Christians. This on the one
side, because (as we have shown) the outward appearance and profession of
Godliness is of such worth and necessity.

But secondly on the other side, Is it (as we have seen) in it self, if without
inward reality and in comparison of Christ of so little value? then be we
advised,

In all our shows and appearances of Piety and Religion take we care that they
be of the right stamp: of Gods own image and superscription and not our own
invention. There was much of the Pharisees devotion of their own devising, and
more of the Popish holy Churches Idolatrous, superstitious will worship of
their own pageantry, and too much it may be of false-hearted weaker Christians
additions, or Mimick affectations; which in Solomon's account is to be righteous
overmuch; which, because not from Eccles. 7. 17.
the word, Christ will not own, nor thank you for any thing you suffer for it,
and the very Devil will be ready to say to such Exorcists, Jesus I know, and
Paul I know, but who are ye, or whose are Act. 19. 15.
these?

Though they be of the right stamp, and have Gods own image and superscription,
yet take heed of a too timely precocity. The Stony ground's (...) immediately
springing up was a bad Matthew. 13. 5. v. 21.
Omen, and forerunner of its (...) of its as hasty after-withering. Such
should have first made sure of depth of earth, and stayed for faster rooting
before their sudden flourishing. So Elizabeth upon her Conception hid her self
five months, Luke 1. 24. not out of distruct and doubting in her self whether
the thing were real, for that she was sure of v. 25. but partly out of a
shame-faced modesty that an aged woman should be with child, and partly that
she might by her concealing her self Calvin.
prevent meanwhile profane men's cavils, when now at the five months end the
thing proved manifest, and there might be the less wonder at an old woman's
conception when (which was more strange) by this time a Virgin had co^^eived.
And this her Maldonat ex Orig. Beda. Euthym. Theophylact.
Son John Baptist (it may be) learnt of her, who we find in the last verse of
the same Chapter whilst he was young kept himself private in the deserts till
the day of his showing himself to Israel. Budding and blossoming in such early
springs are pleasant and promising: but full blown flourishing will be
afterward, when they are more confirmed, more seasonable. And although we do
not confine Christians to a Pythagorean five years (...) or any set time (which
according to several more or less growth and confirmation of grace is various)
yet a modest young Timothy is an amiable sight, and on the contrary an over
bold opining, and a too hasty putting of punies into higher forms is neither so
seemly nor useful, oftentimes hurtful and prejudicial in the School of Christ.

3. Even when more rooted and confirmed; as to outward shows and appearances,
our serving of God, (...). Hebr. 12. 28. should not be out of fashion with us,
not as being ashamed of Christ or his Grace, in which, Nil turpe, nil
indecorum, nothing is filthy or unseemly; yet sometimes times may be so
perilous that they may persuade in some things and Cases a more circumspect
retirement, that the prudent man keep silence, Amos 5. 13. and the family of
the house of David mourn apart, and their Wives apart, the family of the house
of Nathan apart, and their Wives apart, etc. Zech. 12. 12, 13. Enemies malice
and readinels to catch, and Hypocrites falseness, yea and the most sincere
Christians weakness (of which he is conscious) so apt to give offense may well
make him cautious not to betray Christ by unworthy dissimulations, or
simulations and outward compliances, yet to be circumspect and wary of both
time when, and company and place where, and manner how he expresses himself in
regard of outward manifestations. Highest Stars make the least shadows, and in
the day time though their influences are useful and felt, yet they are not seen.

4. But however in all our outside-appearance make sure there be not more show
than substance, that men do not see more openly than God does in secret, that
(as Painters use) let there be a good ground to the color you lay on: and oil
in the vessel at least proportionable to the light in the lamp. Be sure to be
as good as you seem to be: (...), when it was pronounced on the Stage, Plutarch
says, all the Company looked on Aristides, as the man, and that man be every
Christian. For of such Hierom well said, venientium ad nos non ora
contemplemur, In Jer. 5. 26.
sed manus. I^'s not our looks and shows, (but the reality of our hearts and
actions) that God and his Servants look after; nor should we rest in.

No nor in our greatest zeal in such a way which leads to the next
particular, which the Apostle here reckons up.

SERMON XI. ON PHILIPPIANS 3. 6.
(...).

Concerning Zeal, Persecuting the Church.


IN which Clause the Apostle rises higher than he did in the former; for
although in that he was a Pharisee, he was very high and hot, for in hoc
praecelluerunt Pharisaei, the Pharisees above all Zanchy in loc.
other Sects were most zealous, as appears in their strict observances, Matthew.
23. 15, 23. Luke 18. 12.
their busy compassing of Sea and Land to make Proselytes, and their hot bouts
and bickerings with Christ and his Disciples, yet all of them were not of the
like hot temper; Gamaliel one of them, and Nicodemus another, we read to be of
a more cool and moderate temper, John 3. 1. with 7. 50, 51. Acts 5. 34, 35,
etc. But our sometimes Saul was an hot-spur, (...), a fiery zelot, exceedingly
zealous, Gal. 1. 14. even to madness, (...), being exceedingly mad against them
I persecuted Acts 26. 11.
them even to strange Cities, as here in the Text, his zeal was shown in
persecuting the Church, as not being able better or more fully to express his
burning zeal for the Law, than By breathing out threatenings and slaughter
against the Professors of the Gospel, who (he Acts 9. 1.
thought) would destroy and abrogate it. Neque zelus legis melius Zanchy.
ostendi possit quam persequendo Ecclesiam, quae legemjam irritam voluit. And
this no doubt but as it got him great glory with others, so he himself then
much gloried in. Yet now (it seems) he is become of another mind, and gives
us an example to account Note 4.
even this also, as well as the rest, loss and dung in comparison of Christ.

In the handling of which particular according to the true sense and intent of
the Apostle in this place, I shall endeavor to make out these three things.

1. That this zeal simply in it self is very valuable. 2. So that we naturally
are very apt to applaud our selves and to rest in it. 3. That yet in point of
our acceptance with God, it is to be accounted loss and dung that we may win
Christ.
First, That zeal in Religion in the General is very valuable. So Pharisaical
excellencies, and elsewhere he positively makes this appraisement of it, (...),
It is good to be zealously affected, Gal. 4. 18.

1. Zeal, and zeal for Religion are two very great words, and very
considerable, as frigidum in Religione pectus (as Gualther in Apologia speaks)
is nauseous and abominable.

For zeal in its own nature, it is not either a single, or weak faint affection.
No. It is a compound of more, partaking both Lud. Vives de anima l. 3. cap. de
indignatione
of concupiscible and irascible: made up especially of love and anger, as
Luther very happily expresses it by amor iratus, Love made angry. And they are
two very active passions.

Indeed (according to the sense and notation of the word Zeal) (...) a (...)
ferveo, intensio amoris, Aquin. 1. 2 ae. q. 28. art. 4.
it is the heat and fervor of them both: nay the top, and cream, and vigor of
all the affections boiled up to their full height, the (...) of the whole Soul,
Deuteronomy. 6. 5.

Thus vigorous is zeal in it self, but if it become once Religious zeal, a zeal
for Religion, which (as some think) is formally characteristical of a man, much
more of a Christian; how much more spriteful and sublimate!

If not rightly guided, proves an inflammation in the spirits; if pro aris and
focis, sets all on fire. Vbi de Religione, ibi quoque de vita agitur, says
Philo Judaeus. Men act for life. Our meek Jesus never spoke more angerly, nor
dealt more roughly than in this Case, John 2. But if it be (as it was always in
him) rightly guided, it proves (...) Cant. 8. 7. the flame of God, in which
the Soul like Elijah mounts up to heaven in a fiery chariot, 2 King. 2. 11.
Judge. 13. 20.
or the Angel that appeared to Manoah, in the flame of the Altar. It Is the fire
on the Altar, a live coal whereof we find the glorious Seraphim, having in his
hand, Isa. 6. 6. all the holy Angels being a flaming fire, Hebr. 1. 7. but
those Seraphims have in a special manner their Name from Burning, and are
thereby in the upper rank of those Celestial Hierarchies, and proportionably
zeal makes us God-like, Angelical, sets such divinely inflamed Souls far above
the ordinary forms of Christians, as the fire is above the dull earth and other
inferior Elements.

2. And yet (as essential to a Christian) is inkindled in the breast of the
weakest and youngest Christian: for there is warmth even in conception (...)
Psalm. 51. 5. my mother did conceive me, or as the word is, did warm me; and in
the very first kindlings of our spiritual conception and new birth in our first
conversion, when there was otherwise so much smoke, there was some of this
Divine fire, yea very much of it, yea and then usually more lively felt glowing
and working for God and against sin than (it may be) afterward. What a fire
did it make of those new converteds conjuring books, Act. 19. 19. Had it then
been a dilute flame and not more than ordinarily hot, it would never have so
burnt asunder those strong cords of sin and Satan, which till then we were
bound with, as while frigus does congregare bomogenea and heterogenea, calor
does congregare bomogenea and segregare heterogenea: So necessary is this
natural radical heat, and so unseparable are life and warmth, that we cannot
first ascend to the highest pitch, no nor secondly reach the lowest degree of
true spiritual life, without some greater or lesser measure of it.

3. At least not to any degree of lively activity. How nimble and active is the
fire, whilst the torpid dull earth either sinks down or abides still and stirs
not? How listless are we to move, and unable to do any thing to purpose,
whilst frozen and benumbed with cold? but when well warmed how pliable and
active? The warm wax then works and the melted metal runs. And when the Prophet
had his lips once touched with a live coal from the altar, Isa. 6. 6, 7.
then instead of his former woe is me v. 5. you hear him presently saying here
am I, send me, v. 8. like the Seraphim that touched him with it, who had Six
wings v. 2. to express the greater readiness and swiftness of those heavenly
Ministers, as in Ezekiels vision we find their appearance to be like lamps and
burning coals, Chap. 1. 13. and accordingly we find they had wings to their
hands, and their feet sparkled for heat and have, v. 7, 8. They ran and
returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning, v. 14. and so we must be
fervent in spirit, if we would serve the Lord to purpose, Romans 12. 11. be
zealous if you would repent or amend, Rev. 3. 19. as John Baptist the Preacher
of repentance was a burning and shining light John 5. 35. And hence it is that
God uses to inkindle this Divine flame in the hearts of those of his Servants
whom he raises up to any more extraordinary and heroic service and
employment. We read of Baruch as a special repairer of Jerusalems wall, but we
read then withal that (...) flagrante animo instauravit he did much, but he was
warm at his work and hot upon it, Nehem. 3. 20. Apollos, Acts 18. 25. was
fervent in spirit, and then he spoke and taught diligently the things of the
Lord. Fervet opus. Phineas, Elijah, Jeremiah, Numb. 25. 7, 8. 1 King 19. 14,
14. Jer. 20. 9. Luke 1. 17. 2 King 19. 31. Isa. 9. 7. 37. 32.
John Baptist, Luther, Knox, all noted to have been very active in their
generations, and that they were very zealous too. In Scripture, when some great
thing to be done is spoken of, it is said the zeal of the Lord shall do this,
and it is the zeal which he inkindleth in the hearts of his more eminent
servants, that must go through with any such more noble achievements, whilst
it either breaks or burns through all difficulties and oppositions, as whilst
the man that creeps or slowly goes up the hill is wearied before he goes to
the top of it, another that putting to his strength runs up, with more ease
ascends it; or as whilst a cold blunt-pointed iron cannot enter, if sharpened,
especially if made red hot, makes its way easy. In the cold winter and cool
night we freeze and sleep. It Is the warm day and summer when we are abroad at
our work, and the heat of harvest that ripens and Isa. 18. 4.
brings in the crop. The Palm Trees which are the ensigns of victory delight
to grow in hot soiles, on the contrary Bernard well observes that Adami
voluntas non habuit fortitudinem, quia non habuit fervorem. Great is the
proportion of activity in the hotter Elements above that which is in the more
cool and heavy. And proportionably there is a far greater riddance made of God^
work by them that are warm, than by them that freeze at it. When God washes
away the filth of the daughters of Zion and Jerusalem, it is by the spirit of
burning, Isa. 4. 4. It Is hot water that washes out such souler stains and
defilements.

And accordingly it adds much to the valuableness of zeal that God so highly
valueth and esteems of it, that as he makes it the end he aims at in mercies
bestowed (he redeems us to make us a people zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14.)
So when angry he is pacified by it. So he professes that the heat of Phineas
his zeal had quenched the fire of his wrath against Israel, Numb. 25. 11. that
he accepts it, and is prevailed with by it. The effectual fervent prayer of the
righteous man avails much, James 5. 16. and without some measure of this
lively warmth best duties avail nothing. The richest sacrifices if not burnt
with this altar-fire, and Berengosius. Bib. Patr. Tom. 2. page 550, 551, 552.
the finest flowr and sweetest oil if not baked in this frying pan (as some of
the Ancients apply it) have no relish, make no sweet savor in Gods nostrils.

No, are very distastful. He that is a spirit therefore will be served in
spirit and in truth, had rather you would let his work alone John 4. 24.
than that you should freeze at it. He will have the dull asses neck rather
broken than offered to him in sacrifice, and the slow creeping snail is among
the unclean creatures. His infinite transcending excellency he makes account
may challenge the utmost extent and height of our endeavors, and his zeal for
his servants good (which the Scripture often mentions and we more often reap
the benefit of) he expects should warm our hearts and set them on a flame for
him, and therefore cannot endure that this fire should go out upon the altar,
nay that it should but cool: and therefore it is that he so loathes
lukewarmness: that the Church of Laodicea to whom, if she prove zealous and
repent, Rev. 3. 19. he will come in and sup with, v. 20. if she continue
lukewarm, he will even spue out of his mouth v. 16. (as tepida are vomitoria)
and that signifies both a loathing aversation and an utter rejection, for God
forbid that the Holy one of Israel should Valefit Philosoph. Sacra. cap. 90.
return to his vomit. No he had rather have them quite cold than thus lukewarm,
v. 15. it being more dishonorable to him; the key-cold never having been made
partakers or sensible of his Divine Rays, which it seems had been darted on
these lukewarm ones, and had in some measure warmed them, but yet so as that

Either they never rose higher to be warm at heart indeed; but stayed at an
indifferency like Israel halting between two opinions, and so never came up
fully to him:

Or if sometimes more heated, yet now grown cool again in their affections to
him, like the man in the law, who after marriage found some blemish in his
wife, for which he less loved her. Either, Both, of which are blasphemously
derogatory and dishonorable to his infinite Divine excellency: as though
either he

Were not incomparably good, so as any thing else might come in competition
with him; and so they were in doubt whether they should not wrong themselves by
accepting him -- Or that either since they knew him he was grown worse than he
was or than they sometimes thought; and therefore their affections grow cooler
to him, which is the next step to the going far from him, and rejecting him as
unworthy of them, Jer. 2. 5, 31.

So justly provoking and therefore so highly displeasing is the want of zeal to
God, which infers the presence of it the more highly grateful to him -- and
this the more, in that it is so ungrateful to ungodly men, nimis vehementes
impetus odere cives. Dogs will be sure to bark at those that pass by them with
more speed than ordinary: nor can wild beasts more endure the fire than a
profane heart zeal in professors. Their fervor does inflame the others rage,
as much as the red cloth does the Elephant. At the first appearance of such a
fire kindling, tanquam ad commune incendium extinguendum, they presently cry
out with them, Acts 21. 28. Men of Israel, Help. The whole Parish is called out
as it were to quench a common scare-fire. But by its being so displeasing to
them you may well understand how pleasing it is to God; for it cannot be bad
that Nero dislikes, and it is best which he dislikes most. -- And so from this
and the former Considerations we may gather how truly valuable zeal in it self
is, that Paul might well put it into his inventory of those things which made
him somebody in the World.

2. Which leads to the second particular propounded, that zeal in matters of
Religion being of this remark, we are naturally very subject so to please our
selves in it as to think we are pleasing to God by it, and so to rest in it;
and like the Idolater, Isa. 44. 16. merrily to say, Aha, I am warm, I have seen
the fire. So our Paul some while pleased and satisfied himself in his fiery
persecution of the Church, when he verily thought that he ought to do Acts 26.
9.
many things against the Name of Jesus, as they who killed his servants thought
that in so doing they did God service, John 16. 2. Where there is warmth we
conclude there is life, and every feverish heat we take to be natural and
kindly, nay oftentimes the fire of hell for heavens warmth and influence. And
so not only with the Priests of Cybele and other (...) amongst the Heathens,
the Sibyls, the Jewish Zealots, and many of our Enthusiasts; but it may be many
a hotheaded fancy, yea or inflamed lust sometimes, if but pretending to
Religion is that which many please themselves in as the Coruscations of some
Divine Flame; and whilst in their cursings and blasphemings, their tongues are
set on James 3. 6.
fire from hell, they account them as representations of the Apostles fiery
cloven tongues; and as some place the element of fire next to Acts 2. 3.
heaven, so they in these fiery raptures conceit themselves with Elijah to be
caught up to heaven in a fiery Chariot. Some such self-pleasing 2. King. 2. 11.
dream I doubt our Paul formerly had, when he was in the Paroxysm of his high
fever and heats against the Church of Christ, and that he merited much of his
Countrymen the Jews, yea of God himself for his great zeal of that Religion
which he knew he had sometimes instituted.

But after he was once converted, humbled, and caught up into the third heaven,
he there learnt another lesson, so that we find him here in the Text of another
mind. His zeal indeed was yet continued, but now so turned out of the former
Channel, that That his former zeal he now finds instead of commending him to
God had very much provoked him, so that he accounts it loss and dung that he
might gain Christ, whom by it he had so fiercely persecuted, which leads to

The third thing propounded and principally intended, That renounce all
confidence in it, that we may win Christ: and that upon several accounts. For
this zeal may be, and often is

1. Ill pitched as to the object, and so it is fire, but besides the hearth, and
so instead of promoting our peace and salvation may do a great deal of mischief
both to our selves and others. As

1. If it be about trifles or matters of less moment, and so prove a blaze in
the straw, which often sets the house on fire. Such was the Pharisees zeal, the
heat whereof was spent and evaporated in tithing of mint, anise and cumin, the
Papists in the quisquiliae, Matthew. 23. 23.
and trash of their Ceremonies; and much of many of ours in sorry minims and
punctilioes, in which we break our arm in throwing a feather with our whole
strength, as usually it falls out that what is wanting of the substantialness
of the matter, is made up by the impetuousness of our passion. But would a wise
man lay his whole weight on a rush? or should the furnace be heated seven times
hotter to burn a straw? or dare we think God to be as unwise as we are, to be
taken with such trifles? Our Apostle tells us No; that Meat commends us not
to God, nor does his Kingdom 1 Cor. 8. 8. Romans 14. 17. Prove. 8. 21.
consist in meat and drink, but in those (...), Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost. It is Christ who is substance that must make us
substantially happy, not zeal for trifles, that can afford solid comfort.

2. Sometimes our zeal is pitched upon that which is intrinfecally and
sometimes notoriously bad and sinful. So the smith sweats with making an Idol,
Isa. 44. 12. So the Jewish Zelots Joseph. (...). lib. 4. cap. 11. Hammond on
Matthew. 10. Annot. c.
under that name committing all riots and bloudiness imaginable. And you will
think Paul's zeal here was not very well placed when it was so hot upon it in
persecuting the Church. Oh the hellish heat of many Sinners in their hot
pursuits of revenge, malice, lust, etc. But will zeal (not against sin but) for
sin commend us to God who hates it perfectly, and punishes it in Hellfire
Eternally? No, they must be the sweet spices burnt that make the Exodus 30. 34,
35, etc.
holy sweet perfume in his nostrils. (...). It Is good to be zealously affected
always, if it be in a good thing, Gal. 4. 18. (...), zealously affect the best
gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 31. and if we would be a peculiar people to God, we must be
zealous, but then it must be of good works, Tit. 2. 14. It was not for sin but
against sin, that Lot, David and Paul were so zealous, that 2 Pet. 2. 7. Psalm.
119. 139. 2 Cor. 11. 29.
gained Gods approbation. And when it is only sin that condemns us, surely zeal
for sin cannot justify us.

3. Our zeal may be against sin, and yet not rightly pitched, when it is only
against other men's sins, and not our own. So Judah was all fire and tow against
Tamar for playing the Harlot (bring her forth and let her be burnt, Genesis 38.
24.) till by the staff, signet and bracelet he came to know that it was himself
by whom she was with Child, and then we hear no more of it, the fire was
quenched presently. And it is said, that David's anger was greatly kindled
against the man, whilst he knew not that he was the man, 2 Samuel 12. 5, 7. and
our Paul as exceedingly Gal. 1. 14.
zealous (as he says he was) yet it was against Christians and their sins (as
often it falls out, that what we are so zealous against in others in not sin,
but what we conceit and make to be so) whereas there was enough in himself, and
rather than fail even that his misguided fiery zeal for him to have been
zealous against, which he rather applauded himself in. But this makes such fire
of our zeal to be like some scare-fires in which the fire leapeth over the next
Houses, and seizes on those that are further off; whereas in nature fire warms
and burns that first and most which is nearest, and so in Grace. God
over-heareth Ephraim bemoaning himself most bitterly, Jer. 31. 18. And David
when more awakened, cries out of himself, Is it not I? even I it is 2 Samuel 24.
17. 1 Chronicles. 21. 17. Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
that have sinned, let thy hand be against me, and against my fathers house.
And Levi, when he was zealous for God, acknowledged not his brethren, nor knew
his own Children. The righteous man, who is accepted by God, as he is justified
and lives by his own faith, so he has most indignation against his own sins,
not as some, who (as the Lamiae) have their eyes in their pocket while they are
at home, and only put them on when they go abroad to see and to be hot and
angry against other men's sins; and (as I said) such often as they will make to
be sins, but indeed are not, -- and let me add, though they be indeed sins, yet
out of a natural proud and pettish frowardness in our selves, and want of love
to others, that which makes us so angry (and as we think zealous) in other men's
sins, is because it displeases rather us than God, and rather thwarts our
touchy humor or it may be outward design or interest than Gods holy Nature and
will. But this is a distempered heat and no true zeal; Passion without
Compassion which our Saviors zeal was ever happily tempered with, as we read,
Mark 3. 5. when he looked upon the Jews with most anger, that he was withal
grieved and that for the hardness of their hearts. And thus in these and the
like respects our even Religious zeal may be far from commending us to God, if
first thus misplaced, and mis-pitched upon wrong objects.

Secondly, if ill grounded for the inward cause and principle. To which let me
add, and as ill guided in the undue management of it; if not principled and
managed with knowledge, sincerity and love.

First, If principled and managed without knowledge. For this sharp knife need
be in a wary hand and wisely handled. So our Apostle tells us, the Jews had
(...), a zeal, and that of Act. 21. 20.
God, a religious zeal, but it was not according to knowledge; as also Act. 22.
3.
he himself had and acted acordingly, but he says he did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy
1. 13. but therefore oftentimes the more headily and furiously, as the mettled
blind horse runs headlong. Sedulius on Romans 10. did minus dicere when he said,
Non multum prodest habere zelum and non habere scientiam, that zeal without
knowledge did little good. No, rather knowledge without zeal does little good;
but zeal without knowledge is in danger to do a great deal of hurt. The one is
like a Ship that has a good Card and Pilot, but without Sail and so stirs not,
the other has a large sail, but wants Compass and Pilot to steer it aright,
and so soon runs upon the Rock; and here oftentimes the more blind the more
bold, and the less light the more heat: more ignorant men are usually the more
zealous. This sometimes hitteth right, as it has been observed of the Martyrs
in Queen Mary's days, the more unlearned men, and the weaker women were more
courageous in the cause of Christ than the greater Scholars, the spirits of the
one being more in their heads, but of the other more in their hearts. And here
we may use Bernards words, Bonum erat tibi si ignifer magis esses quam lucifer.
But most commonly it falls out otherwise, Sermon. 3. in Isaiam.
that zeal without knowledge (as in the Bores wars in Germany, and our
combustions at home) proves most tumultuous and pernicious, when he is most
cried up, as Calvin says, sometimes he was chosen as the best Preacher, ut
quisque clamosissimus erat and stolido furore praeditus, quem illi zelum vocant
quo nunquam arsit Helias.

To this ignorant zeal referr rash zeal, when without due consideration of
particulars on the sudden men engage and rush upon action. Moses anger we read
waxed hot when upon his coming Exodus 32. 19.
down from the Mount he saw the golden calf, and the people dancing, and though
his sudden breaking of the tables upon it was ordered by God to convey a good
Moral to us, yet that passionate hastiness, it may be, had a touch of this
Rashness, or if not, as some See Calvin in locum. Chrysestom, Hierom, Ainsworth.
conceive it had not, yet that of Isreal's sudden resolution of going to war
against the two Tribes and half, Josh. 22. 12. and against the Benjamites,
Judge. 20. 8. had in it too much precipitancy.

Hitherto refer also all indiscrete zeal when not managed with sobriety and
wisdom (as Psalm. 112. with zeal v. 1. is joined discretion v. 5.) but so weakly
and indiscreetly, with such antique looks and gestures, such foolish attempts
and actions, as makes all ridiculous. And can that which is so justly unsightly
to men, be in it self, or make us pleasing in the sight of God? No, remember
the four beasts, Revel. 4. 8. had alas oculatas, their wings full of eyes,
which zelum cum scientia ac fide conjunctum designavit, Mede.
as one well upon that place. The wings expressed zeal, but the eyes in them
wisdom and knowledge to guide it, as John Baptist was not only a burning, but
also a shining light, John 5. 35. But yet more burning than shining. Fervor ei
quodammodo substantialior videtur, as Bernard says of him: and this withal,
Sermon. 3. de verbo Isaiae. p. 68.
Lucet Joannes, tanto utique clarius quanto amplius fervet, tanto verius quanto
minus appetit lucere; as when David^ heart was hot, yet his tongue was silent,
Psalm. 39. 2, 3. there had need be light as well as heat: else there will be
more of the smothered heat of hell, than of the kindly warmth of heaven in it;
especially if,

Secondly, It wants sincerity as well as knowledge for the groundwork, and
carrying on of it: as when in hypocrisy and out of design it is wholly or in
part counterfeit, for our own sinister ends, worldly advantage, vainglory and
applause, and accordingly managed with pride and ostentation. In all which
Jehu's zeal was grossly faulty, when pretending God his eye was on a Kingdom,
and yet would have men's eyes on him as a great zealot, Come and see my zeal for
the Lord, 2 Kings 10. 16. This the Pharisees zeal was also deeply guilty of,
that they might be seen of men, and Matthew. 6. ^, 5, 10.
have glory of them: of which also Luther accused the Monks and Friars of his
time that were very loud and seemed to be exceeding zealous: but it was rather
for their Paunch than the Pope; whilst he said of himself, At non eram it a
glacies and frigus ipsum in defendendo Papam, his zeal for his then-Religion
was more plain and honest hearted, whilst theirs was selfish and counterfeit.
-- which is so far from commending us to God, as it justly makes us abominable
both to God and Man. Too costly a paint to be laid on so rotten a Sepulcher:
that zeal, that noble spark which is the flower, vigor, spirit and
quintessence of all the affections should be so debased as to be prostituted
and made a stalking-Horse to such poor and low projects: that divine flame to
be only a torch to give them light more speciously to go about their works of
darkness. The Apostl^ gave it too good a Name, when he here called it dung, not
only to be lost, but with detestation to be cast away, that we may win Christ.

3. And the like we may say of our zeal if it be not principled and guided with
love, pity, meekness, and moderation. For how should love be absent from our
zeal, which is the chief ingredient of it? It being intense love of God and our
Brethren that should make us zealous for him, and against any practice or
person; so that it should not burn up our compassion and meekness, even toward
them against whom we are so zealous. The fine flower of the meat offering in
the law was to be baked, we heard, in the drying pan, which the Ancients (I
told you) said typed out zeal, but it was to be mingled with oil, Levit. 2. 7.
by which the same Authors would have us understand meekness and gentleness,
which should always go with our zeal the better to temper it, as the hot heart
(in nature) hangs in water the better to cool and moisten it. And as our
Savior sent forth his disciples by pares, so he suited them when he joined a
zealous Luther and a meek Melanchthon together; and so the hard stone, and the
soft mortar built up the wall the sooner, as before a zealous Elijah, and a
meek Moses were speaking with Christ in the Mount. It Is into the Mount (to a
great height) that we then get when such a Moses and an Elijah Matthew. 17. 3.
meet, if we be meekly zealous, especially if they meet and speak with Christ;
if they be truly Religious and Christian, not only with whom but in whom a
Moses and Elijah fully and transcendently met. Highest zeal (you will say) when
you see it eating him up whilst he whips the buyers and sellers out of the
Temple, John 2. 15, 17. But you must say too, and most compassionate pity and
meekness at the same time, when you read, Mark. 3. 5. that whilst he was most
angry, (and you never expressly read him angry Exodus 32. 19. Levit. 10. 16.
Numb. 12. 3. Berengosius in Bib. Patrum. Tom. 2. p. 556.
but there) yet even then and there you read too that out of compassion he was
grieved for the hardness of their hearts, as Moses we sometimes find very angry
in the cause of God, and yet the meekest man upon earth, as the same spirit
which appeared upon the Apostles in the resemblance of fire, Acts 2. 3.
descended upon Christ in the likeness of the meek dove, Matthew. 3. 16.

If therefore on the contrary our zeal instead of love be imbittered with
hatred and malice, it is (...), bitter zeal, as the Apostle calls it, James 3.
14. zelus amaritudinis non amoris, as Divines speak, the one of which is to be
blown up, but the other to be put out, and quite extinguished. --

Or if it be inflamed into discontent (a touch whereof David had when his heart
was hot and glowed, Psalm. 39. 3. and Ezekiel when he went on God's errand but
in the bitterness and heat of his spirit, Ezekiel. 3. 14.) or Rage and Fury, that
like Solomon's mad Prove. 26. 18.
man it casts fire brands, arrows, and death, Boanerges thunderclaps, all
devouring words and actions, as zealous Jehu used to drive 2 King. 9. 20. Luke
13. 14. Act. 5. 17, 33. 7. 54. 13. 45. 22. 23.
furiously: and those whom we read of in the Gospel, and the Acts that were
filled with indignation against Christ and his Apostles, were cut to the heart,
gnashed with their teeth, contradicted, blasphemed, laid hands on them, and
persecuted them. -- In this case we must say, that as Moderation without zeal
is but a benumbed cold palsy, so zeal without moderation is but a distempered
frenzy, a feverish distemper, the glowings of Hell fire, hot poison, which is
more quick and deadly, as the Scripture's comparison is, a clear heat upon
herbs, that scorcheth and burns them up: Isa. 18. 4.
as Readiness zeal did to the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. 2. and our Saul's here in the
Text to the Church of Christ, mere Wildfire, that such hot-spurs prove
Ardeliones, the Worlds Phaetons, set all on a combustion, as the Zelots did in
Jerusalem, and their Successors See Hammond on Matthew. 10. Annot. c.
in Germany. And the Lord cool such spirits among us, that it come not to an
universal conflagration. And shall this then that thus destroys men lives be
compared with Christ that saves them? I pray let us be willing to suffer the
loss of this, that we be not all lost. We may well account it worse than dung
that we may win Christ. Yea and of all more substantial, civil, or moral
virtues and performances. For these also Paul puts into his Inventory.

SERMON XII. ON PHILIPPIANS 3. 6.
(...).

Touching the Righteousness which is in the Law, Blameless.


IN which words our Apostle rises yet higher to a more desirable
qualification than those that went before: for he might have been a Pharisee
and yet a scandalous hypocrite, as most of them were, and he might have been
zealous too, and yet he might have been (...) (as Chrysostom notes) rash, and
all that might be (...) out of an ambitious aspiring to rule and dominion, as
it was with the Priests, and other of their zealots, but he was more
single-hearted, and in his carriage innocent, As touching the righteousness
which is of the law, blameless, i. e. quoad externam coram hominibus
conversationem, for his Calvin, Zanchy, Hyperius. Luke 1. 6. Aquinas.
outward carriage before men, he was (as it is said of Zachary and Elizabeth)
sine querela, not blamed or complained of by his neighbors, and so not guilty
of any thing, for which, according to the course of their law then in use, he
might justly and legally be accused before the Judgment Seat, and sentenced by
the Judge, as Grotius expounds it [Nomen legis hic accipit pro illis praeceptis
secundum quae judicia exercebantur; dicit ergo se nihil fecisse ob quod
tribunali sisti debet] So that his zeal in persecuting Grotius.
the Church was not upon an humane and selfish, but a Divine interest, as
Theophylact observes. Nor was it stained with a vicious life, but (quod
praecipuum erat, as he says) this was C. a lapide in loc.
the top and crown of all his other excellencies, that he was a sober, virtuous
(in a word) a complete moral Man, zealous in his mistaken Religion, and a just,
civil, fair man in his outward conversation, not only of the most exact sect,
Acts 26. 5. but also of a most exact life; which in real worth was more than
all his forementioned privileges, which he sometimes thought he might well
esteem gain, seeing that thereby he gained so much repute from abroad with
others, and so much inward content and satisfaction in his own mind. And yet
upon his conversion, even this as well as all those other things that were
before gain, he now counts loss for Christ, v. 7. And so should we. And so the
Note hence is

That it is not Morality nor the (...) most unblameably virtuous Note 5.
either inward habits, or outward performances in an estate of irregeneracy,
which can so commend us to God as that we may safely rely on, or rest in them
for our acceptance with him, but even these also (as to that) are to be
accounted loss and dung that we may win Christ. In handling of which I shall
follow the same method that I did in the former particulars.

1. Show the true value and intrinsic worth of this virtuous unblameable frame
and outward carriage. 2. That it is so great, especially in many men's esteem,
that they think it safe, and best quietly to rest in it. 3. That yet so it
should not be, but that in comparison of Christ it should be accounted loss and
dung for him and his righteousness, by which only we are justified and
accepted.
For the first, That a moral, civil, virtuous, and unblameable life and
carriage is of great worth, and very highly to be valued, the Apostle fully
intimates in that he does not only reckon it up amongst his former choice
excellencies, but also sets it on the top and head of them all, as chief and
most eminent, as Interpreters observe, whilst dum surgit, crescit oration, in
this his heaping his excellencies one upon another, this is set inter (...),
because last named, it is to be understood to be first in place and diguity,
and that most deservedly.

And therefore I desire that no man's quickness, as soon as he has heard the
Doctrine, may either prevent my future discourse, or prejudge my present
meaning, as though I intended to decry morality, as I have heard from this
place some pretty sharply inveighed against for it with reflections as though
they were defective in that which they so speak against. For our carriages,
it is best that every one would look to his own. For the Doctrine that now I am
upon, I desire that I may not be so mistaken, as though I meant to un-man him,
whom I would have to be a Christian, or that I forbad him to get up the lower
steps, to whom I say, Friend you must ascend higher, or else you will never
reach heaven. He that desires you to add to your virtue faith, does not either
bid or permit you to be vicious; but when the Apostle Peter in a contrary
method commands you to add to your faith virtue (if by virtue 2 Pet. 1. 5.
there be meant that which we now speak of) he seems to me to hint that

1. As faith should not be without virtue, so

2. That virtue should not be without faith: when he would have them so joined
together.

3. And this further, that faith should not be an additament and superstructure
to virtue, but rather the foundation of it, that so it may be true virtue, for
(as Austin says) Absit ut in aliquo sit Contra Julian. lib. 4. cap. 3.
vera virtus, nisi fuerit justus: absit ut sit justus, nisi vivat ex fide:
justus enim ex fide vivit. And so indeed I desire that Christ (and faith in
him) should be laid as the foundation, (for no other foundation did Paul know
that any man can lay) of all our moral 1 Cor. 3. 11.
qualifications and performances, but so as to be the Cornerstone too to go up
to the top of the building, that so our foundation may be laid surer, and our
building raised up higher. For sine Christo omnis virtus in vitio est, and so
in getting up to heaven by Hieron. in 3 ad Galat.
this Jacob's Ladder, let the foot tread the rounds, let us work and walk in
Gods way: but withal let the hand before lay hold, (as it usually does in going
up a Ladder) the hand of faith, I mean, withal first lay hold of Christ and his
Righteousness for our justification. That the principle may be more noble, not
the Spirit of a man, but of Christ; as a man sees and hears as a bruit does,
but not from a brute but a rational Soul, which rises higher than a bare
sensitive Creature can attain to, so I would have a Christian be sober, just,
temperate, as the most complete Moralist can be, but this from the spirit of
Christ, and not only from a bare spiritless dull morality, and so (as according
to his higher wellhead and principle) to rise higher to those more noble
spiritual operations of Gospel-faith and love, which such a pure moralist is so
far from attaining to, that he does not so much as think fit to desire or
endeavor after, but rather to despise and hate.

This premised, I come more particularly to show the true value and worth of
morality in a virtuous and blameless Conversation.

1. It Is the honor of humane Nature, a chief part of our humanity, whereby we
are men, yea (though not the chief yet) the more visible part of the image of
God wherein at first we were created, and what of this kind is in any of us
since our fall are (as usually they are taken) some of the rudera and broken
pieces of that first goodly building. Which were they wholly demolished and
quite rased out of us, we should cease to be our selves, to be men, and
degenerate into the sensuality and ferity of brute Wild-beasts, immanitate
omnem humanitatem repellente, as Tully Offic. lib. 1. Notanda est Dei
humanitat. Calvin. in Dan. 10. 13.
speaks: for humanity in the true sense and common use speaks something of
erudition, gentleness, virtuousness, and that not only in Heathen, but even in
Scripture Language, in which (...) virga hominum and plagae humanae, the rod of
men, and the stripes of the Children of men, 2 Samuel 7. 14. have something of
gentleness and moderation, i. e. of humanity, in the true sense of that phrase.
Premunt ita ut non comprimant. And therefore I Sanctius in loc.
must needs say to you, be sober, chaste, just, virtuous, if you would be men,
not Beasts, not Devils.

2. But secondly, there is more than humanity, something Divine in it, as being
the product of a more common and inferior working of the spirit of Christ,
some dimmer and cooler rays of the sun of righteousness as he is the light
which enlightneth every man that comes into the world, John 1. 9. as he said,
nec Hieron. in Gal. 1.
quenquam sine Christo nasci. How often does Austin call these lower workings
the gifts of God? and if Polemon by hearing of Xenocrates of a drunkard prove
sober, ne id ipsum quod melius in eo factum est, humano operi tribuerim, sed
Divino: He accounts it a Divine work to make only a moral change and
reformation. It Is a special gift of God, qui dona sua, prout ipse judicaverit,
hominibus and magna magnis and parva largitur parvulis, as Bede In 1 Cantic.
speaks. Gods largess. Some kind of fruit of the death of Christ. (...) to
restrain sin as the word signifies, Dan. 9. 24. part of the preventing
restraining grace of the spirit of Christ. And therefore such a gift of God is
not be slighted. Nay such a part of the purchase of the blood of Christ, and
the work of his spirit is duly to be valued.

3. Thirdly, As being absolutely necessary for humane Society, and our quiet
and orderly living and conversing in the world: for were not men hereby
civilized, and the rage and violence of lust restrained, take away once justice
and temperance, morality, indeed humanity from humane Society, how would it
come to homo homini lupus, and in stead of a Society of men, what herds of
brutes and wild beasts, even of Devils in an hell let loose should we see in
the world? What some Romanists unhappily R. Thomson. Elench. cap. 2. page 18,
19.
made the Emblem of Bellarmine, a Tiger held in a chain with this motto, Solve
me, and videbis qui siem: Let me but loose and you shall see what an one I am,
would be too sadly verified of us all if once by God or Man let loose, and it
should be said of us as once of Ephraim, Ephraim is joined to idols, let him
alone, Hos. 4. 17. it would not come to so good as was said of Naphtali, that
he was a hind let loose that gave goodly words; there would Genesis 49. 21.
but few good words and fewer good deeds proceed from us, no nor so good as
what was said of Ephraim that he was a wild ass alone by himself, Hos. 8. 9.
(though that would be wild enough, Jer. 2. 24.) but yet with less hurt and
mischief to others and our selves than when we should see what horrid
metamorphoses of creatures in the shapes of men into brutes for sensuality,
ravenous beasts of prey for blood and violence, yea incarnate devils for pride,
malice and blasphemy, partly of our selves and partly from Satan's temptations
this would come to; and as in our days we see our Ranters and other
Enthusiasts devesting themselves of all morality, civility, yea even humanity,
are fast posting to. For the preventing of which, God the most holy and wise
Governor of the world, as sometimes in a way of outward afflictions he hedgeth
our way with thorns, Hos. 2. 6. to keep us from treading down all bounds and
running into all excess of ri^t Ephesians. 4. 19.
with greediness, so also by inward common workings of his spirit he does not
only lay checks and restraints upon our unbridled spirits and lusts, but also
composes and regulates our tempers and carriages, that we may live at least
like men, civilly and orderly one with another.

This Austin in several places, especially in his books contra Julianum Epist.
5. lib. 4. c. 3. hujus tantum temporis vitam fteriliter ornavit. de voc. gent.
c. 7. Epist. 130. Prosp. contra collatorem cap. 22. 26. Fulgent. de incarnat.
c. 26.
observes in the virtues of the Heathens, the Romans and others, that they
attained to a moral and virtuous deportment, ad mores civitatum, concordiamque
populorum, and temporalis vitae societatem, praesentis vitae honestatem, as he
and Prosper express it, to maintain and promote peaceable and civil converse,
and humane society in the world, which he that does not value deserves not to
live in it.

4. And which yet is more valuable in Christians as being a choice ornament of
the Gospel and credit of their Religion, when they do not only far exceed them
in spirituals, but even out-go them in morals which is their highest
perfection, in which they therefore use to excel, as because sense is the
highest perfection of brutes therefore usually they excel man in it; But it
should not be so here, that because morality is the highest attainment of an
Heathen, therefore they should exceed a Christian in it. But on the contrary,
if Christians out-shoot them in their own bow, if a Paul with his (...), Ye are
witnesses, and God also how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our
selves, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. can outvie the Greek's Socrates or Aristides, and all
the Fabii, Reguli, and Fabricii, so famous amongst the Romans, oh! this is to
walk, (...), so as is worthy of the Gospel, so as becomes it, and is an honor
to it, when Clement writing to the Corinthians, can congratulate, (...) page 2.
(...), their sober and gentle piety, when Christians are sober and just, godly
men, godly, but righteous, meek, merciful, and every way virtuous withal, that
whilst the Heathen, the Hypocrite, the natural man does but turkess an old
suit, which makes it only look handsomely, with the true Christian, All 2 Cor.
5. 17.
is made new, and so is more comely; the one is like him that by ointment
drives in the itch, the Christian takes inward physic and purges it out; the
one rubs in the spot, the other washes it out, but so that as we exceed them
for inwards, so we should more than equal them in an outward, seemly, virtuous
carriage. This, This would much redound to the honor of Christ and the Gospel,
and therefore if his Glory be to be esteemed, this that makes so much for it is
truly valuable.

5. And lastly yet the more, because as it so much conduces to the glory of
Christ, so also to our own inward satisfaction and peace. So the Apostle takes
notice of the Heathens thoughts excusing Romans 2 15.
of them when innocent, and if Epicurus his placing happiness in pleasure meant
only that joy and satisfaction of mind which follows a virtuous temper and
action as a sweet air after the stroke of a well tuned and touched instrument,
it was not so much amiss, as his Scholars afterward perverted it. Surely a
sober, especially a Christian, sober, just, and unblameable temper and carriage
prevents, as many unquiet disturbing brabbles and contests with others, so,
many tumultuous hurries of unruly passions within our selves, and the many sad
reflections even of a natural Conscience, when the bluster of the passion is
over; as Abigail said to David, 1 Samuel 25. 31. that it would be no grief, nor
offense of heart to him afterward that he had not causl^sly shed blood, or
avenged himself: so it will at the last be no sorrow of heart or inward
wounding, nay much satisfaction and joy of heart, for which we shall (as David
there did, v. 33, 34.) bless God that we were kept from such outrages, which
after we should have dearly paid for; and saved those many sad sighs and groans
for the pains and smart of those brushes and wounds, which our former
miscarriages gave us, and then rejoice in reflecting upon that sober and
orderly deportment which we at least by restraining grace were trained up to.
Now these and the like particulars fully show that a virtuous unblameable
course is truly valuable, (which secundum Austin. de Sp. and litera c. 27. v.
Philip. 4. 8, 9.
justitiae regulam non solum vituperare non possumus, verum etiam merito
recteque laudamus.) And truly so valuable, that we are very apt so to
over-prize it, as

(Which is the second thing) Even as to our Acceptance with God to build our
hopes on it, and to rest in it. That he was no extortioner, unjust, no
Adulterer, or like the profane Publican, was that which the proud Pharisee,
Luke 18. 11. gloried of and looked to be justified by, for there justification
is spoken of, v. 14. And to be justified and saved for our good works is that
which not only the most ignorant people, but our most complete Moralists build
upon, and these latter more than the former, because more out of judgment, from
a self-flattering intuition of their virtuous qualifications and performances;
their justice, sobriety, temperance and good neighborhood, so glister and
glare in their eyes, and are such realities, that Christ and faith in him they
look at as Notions; and being whole in themselves, they need not the Physician,
Matthew. 9. 12. And so Austin on Psalm. 31. shows that In praefatione.
many of the moral Pagans would therefore not become Christians, as being by
their good life self-sufficient, and therefore bring, them in thus speaking,
What would Christ enjoin and command me? to live well? why, I do that already,
and why then is he necessary? Nullum homicidium, nullum furtum, nullam rapinam
facio, etc. I neither murder, nor steal, nor commit Adultery. Let any of these
be found in my life, and qui reprehenderit, faciet me Christianum, and he that
finds it shall make me a Christian. And the like are, if not the words, yet the
thoughts of our exact Moralists. They are, they think, got high enough, that
they need not ascend higher, nay so high in themselves that they look at faith,
at least at true believers, as much under them. But however their Morality they
rest in,

1. As first more suiting with the Law of Nature, and so with their natural
light, whilst Christ and Faith in him is only and wholly from Divine and
Supernatural Revelation, an hidden mystery, which they therefore neither are,
nor desire to be much acquainted with: and especially for this cause that this
diviner light discovers motes in their brightest sunbeams; many defects and
blemishes in their most refined purgative virtues, pride, and self and many
spiritual lusts, which such Moralists please and pride themselves in, and so
they rather hate the light than come to it, lest their deeds should be
reproved, John 3. 20.

2. Secondly, They yet the rather suit and close with it because that hereupon
it is more within the reach and sphere of their activity. Which upon a double
account works in them a complacency and acquiescence in it.

1. Because it is more easy, far more easy to forbear a vice from a selfish or
moral consideration, than upon a spiritual, to deal justly, and give an alms,
and carry it fairly, than to deny carnal, natural, moral self, to repent
Evangelically, in case of straits and temptation to believe savingly. It Is
indeed a very easy thing to opine, and presume, but nothing harder, than when
heart and Psalm. 73. 26.
flesh fails to make God the Rock the strength of our heart, when sense is at
a stand, and carnal reason contradicts, for faith to depend and cut these knots
which they could not untie, and with Abraham in hope to believe against hope,
Romans 4. 18. It Is easier to be virtuous than truly gracious, and we naturally so
love our ease, that if the one we think will serve, we have no mind needlessly
to trouble our selves in advancing further to the other.

2. Being within our reach, as thereby it is more easy, which pleases us well,
so there is more of self in it, and self is that which we hug and love most of
all. To have only an empty hand of faith to receive all from Christ is
naturally and to a carnal heart too poor and beggarly, we would herein be some
body, and do something, as Pharaoh said he made himself, Ezekiel. 29. 3. Ego feci
memet ipsum. Vulg.
So we would fain be able to say I have saved my self. Something it is that we
would bring to God by which to commend our selves to him, which too often the
true penitent sinner has an hankering after, and therefore sufficiently smarts
for; but the moral self justitiary is chiefly for, and therefore for that most
which gives him a hand in it. And therefore because in these morals he has an
(...), and a liberum arbitrium, and so can see in them much of a
self-efficiency, he has from what to applaud himself, and with hand on his
side to say with Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 30. Is not this great Babel which I
have built by the strength of my power; than which nothing is more pleasing to
proud Nature, or a self sufficient Moralist, which therefore he gloryeth of and
rests in.

3. And yet the rather, because this outward Civil deportment is more visible,
and so more taken notice of and taking with other men, with whom he converseth;
which, as the Pharisees of old, Matthew. 6. 2, 5. he is carried away with,
whilst faith, which is seated in the heart, and grace being of a more
spiritual nature and less outward garish luster, is by him not at all looked
after.

Upon these and the like grounds bare morality is too often rested in, which
was the second particular.

But the third and last is, that so it should not be; but that after Paul's
example here in the Text, this as well as the former as to our acceptance with
God should be accounted loss and dung, that we may gain Christ, To a Soul
wounded with sense of sin, and languishing and dying away for want of Christ,
it will be no (...) much less any healing Medicine to say, But why are you so
trou^led that have lived so virtuously and unblameably, that have been so sober
in your carriage, so just in your dealing, so fair in your converse? for this
will be but a faint cordial, and you prove but a miserable comforter, when it
can look on all this but as a fair suit put on a dead Carcass: nay on all this
kind of righteousness, as Isa. 64. 6.
so many menstruous rags: And woe to him, if he have nothing better than such
Fig Leaves to cover his nakedness; and woe to me, if when it comes to trial, and
I shall be set at the Bar of Justice, I be found in my own righteousness, and
therefore passing by Philip. 3. 9.
all these, But saw ye him whom my soul loves, says the Spouse now sick of
love, Cant. 3. 3.

And there is great reason for it.

1. Because this Morality may be found in them who never savingly knew Christ,
and so are far enough from Salvation, for as Austin observes (de sp. and lit.
c. 28.) you shall hardly find the life of the worst without some good works, so
in such as are not so bad you may sometimes find many. So it was in many of the
Heathens that knew not God, in our Paul when he was a stranger, nay an Enemy to
Christ, and how hopeful and safe we may think our selves or others to be
whilst in that State, yet he now by grace brought into a better, would not for
a thousand Worlds be in the former. And hence it is that Austin gives it such
homely Elogies, sometimes of a terrena, carnalisque justitia, and sometimes
Babylonica dilectio; of an earthly carnal righteousness, of a Exposit. ad Gal.
3. contra Julian. l. 4. c. 3.
Babylonish Love, such as may proceed from nature (sed aliud est quod
impenditur naturae, etc. says Gregory, Homil. 27. in Evangel. Naturali bono
motus fecit bonum, non propter Deum. Chrysostom. hom. 7. ad pop. Antioch.
I^'s one thing that Nature yields, and far another which Grace (...): Or if
not only from Nature for the Cause, yet such ^s mere natural men may be capable
of for the subject. But as trim as Nature may look in some men's eyes, yet
sordet Natura sine Gratia in Prosper's judgment, that which is highly esteemed
among men may be abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. and if by nature
we be children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. that sure cannot pacific God's anger,
which we may have, whilst we are in a mere natural condition.

2. Which also may consist with the full power and dominion of diverse,
especially spiritual lusts, wholly inconsistent with Christ and his Grace, and
instead of giving check may give suck to them, and feed them.

1. One is Domineering Pride, which arises from nothing more than a conceited
self-fulness, an (...), which of all others our complete Moralists are most
full of. So you find the Stoics the most moral of all the Philosophers, most
turgid and swollen with pride and self-conceit of all others. How full and
self-sufficient their wise man was, let but one Seneca inform you, who equals
him with God, and in many things prefers him, Epist. 73. And with little less
haughtiness and pride do our complete Moralists applaud and almost adore
themselves, and with greatest scorn and disdain, either overlook or set their
eyes on the poor puling penitent, that mourns for sin, and the crack-brain'd
Fantastic believer, as he esteems him, who is looking out of himself for
righteousness by another, whilst he does domi habitare, has a better and
nearer at hand at home of his own: which Plethora and proud self-fulness

As intus existens, leaves no room for Christ, who as upon conceit of their
freedom was not accepted by the Jews, John 8. so from this proud conceit is
rejected by these our self-justitiaries, the full soul loathing the honey comb,
Prove. 27. 7. I say it admits not of Christ.

Directly crosses the main design of the Gospel, which is to exalt Free Grace,
which our Free will-vertuous ones think would disparage their better deservings.

And lastly, is diametrically opposite to the true notion and nature of faith,
which as to justification is only on the receiving hand, John 1. 12. takes all,
gives or brings nothing to God, but faults to pardon, and debts to discharge,
and an empty hand to receive all of Gods free largess. Christ shall be All in
All, says faith. Nay, says Pride, if I be not all, I must at least be
something. Pride fills us with our selves: but faith wholly emptieth us of
our selves. Pride which at first aspired to make us like God, would have us
speak like him, I am that I am, i. e. in and of my Exodus 3. 14.
self; but although faith may say too, I am that I am, yet ever remembers to
add, by the grace of God I am that I am, 1 Cor. 15. 10. And can any things then
be more contrary?

2. Another sin inconsistent with Christ, which yet exactest (if it be but
bare) morality breeds, at least bears with, yea usually runs out in, is a
contemptuous dislike, hatred and opposition, yea oftentimes (as occasion
serves) persecution of the grace and ways of Christ, and the spiritual
Professors of both; for such thinking goodly of themselves as best and highest,
cannot endure to be over-top'd, out-vied, eclipsed by any, and therefore cannot
so far deny themselves, as not to malign and oppose that way, and those persons
that do or seem to exceed them. So the Pharisees did Christ. Simon Magus, that
(...), Peter. And some think that Stevens eminency, and his face shining like
an Angel's, was an eye sore to our Saul, heated his hot young blood, and
natural fervid spirit into an inflammation against him, and proved such
Wildfire, that catched as it went, and bred a further combustion in the whole
Church, which he here confesses that out of his zeal he persecuted. So the
grave virtuous Philosophers proved the greatest opposers and persecutors of
Christianity, so that what was said of him, sobrius ad evertendam Rempublicam,
may be said of them and others, sobrii ad evertendam Ecclesiam, so we find Paul
at Athens encountered with by their Philosophers: but it is worth considering by
which Sects of them especially: and for that it is said, Acts 17. 18. that they
were the Epicureans and Stoics, duo genera Philosophorum maxim alienorum a
Christiana Religione, as Grotius well notes upon the place, two sorts of
Philosophers that were most averse from the Christian Religion, and what were
they? not only the more loose Epicureans, but also See Gatakers Praeloquium ad
M. Antoninum.
the most sober Stoics, whose discipline some conceive came nearest to
Christianity, and Hierom seems to be of that mind when he says, Com. in Isa.
11.
Stoici nostro dogmati in plerisque concordant. But by this appears the truth
of that saying, Quae minime differunt maxim opponuntur. The less they
differed, the more they opposed, for so we do not only find here the Epicureans
opposing Paul, and afterward Crescens the Cynick persecuting Justin Martyr to
the death, Porphyrie the Pythagorean, a professed bitter Enemy to Christianity,
but the grave Stoics also here in a passion, as your so famed Hierocles See
praefat. in Hieroclem.
of that Sect, a cruel persecutor. It seems this Enmity to Christ and his
Gospel was an Epidemical Disease of all the Tribes of the Philosophers, and
that the most most sober and dispassionate Stoics escaped it not; It were well
if they were not most deeply infected with it, as to this very day many of our
most sober moralists are the most bitter Enemies to the power of Godliness. And
can that then make us pleasing to God which entertaineth and nourishes such
displeasure against his grace, ways and servants?

3. And as such bitter Enmity against the ways of grace seldom goes alone, but
by God's just judgment is usually accompanied with some outwardly foul and
filthy miscarriages; so the more accurate morality if rested in (God delighting
to stain the glory of all that we think so goodly of) is by him permitted to be
oftentimes foully blemished with some filthy vices and practices; for so it is
observed, that those that lifted up themselves (as Miriam, Vzziah, and Gehezi)
were wont for their greater debasement Numb. 12. 10. 2 Chronicles. 26. 19, 20, 21. 2
King. 5. 27.
to be smitten with the filthy and loathsome plague of Leprosy. So the more to
debase the pride of these self-admiring, and self-exalting Moralists, God
suffers them oft-times to be loathsomely defiled with some more filthy
leprous blemishes. It seems our Readiness unblameableness could consist with his
persecuting the Church, and however his being besmeared with the blood of
Saints made him seem beautiful in his own and some others eyes, yet surely it
looked ugly in the sight of God and all good men; and as grave and demure as
the Philosophers looked, yet they are belied by their own (and why should
they?) if the very best of them, their very Socrates and Seneca were not soul
enough, the one for unnatural defilements, and the other for unjust pract^ses.

I shall not insist on or now inquire after the like miscarriages of the like
persons in aftertimes, or in our days. Which yet may be found out without
secret search, as the Prophet speaks of the blood that was openly to be seen
in the skirts of Judah; and the Jer. 23. 4.
like without any strict or prying observation may be easily taken notice of in
the lives and practices of the men we speak of, and if so, then as the same
Prophet in the words immediately going before, said to Adulterous Judah, why
trimmest thou thy way to seek Jer. 2. 33. V. 22.
love? for though thou wash thee with nitre and take thee much soap, yet thy
iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord. So I may say to such, why think
you by your outward modes and composures to impose upon God, when you cannot so
delude men? But sorex suo indicio perit. For what means this lowing of the
Oxen; 1 Samuel 15. 14.
and bleating of the sheep? If you be so entirely blameless and virtuous, as
you pretend, what mean those ugly bleaches and deformities? Think not by wiping
of your mouth with the Harlot to Prove. 30. 20.
woo God, when your inward abominable pride and enmity against the ways of
God, show that your purgative virtues have been so far from making you clean in
his eyes, that they could not keep your inward corruption from breaking out
into loathsome practices in the sight of men, and if so, your other sober
composed deportment will not so much cover those defilements with a Robe of
honor, as those foul blemishes render both you and your garish beauties
deformed and ridiculous, as the more neat the man is, and his clothes are, the
more conspicuous are foul blashes upon him, and the more unsightly do they make
him.

But oh then how much more glorious and desirable is that (...), that Garment
of Jesus Christ (the Lamb without spot) which reaches down to the foot,
covers us all over, and has not one Rev. 1. 13.
speck in i^. Woe to all such as cover with a covering, but not of my Isa. 30. 1.
spirit, says the Lord. Besides the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, all other
coverings of the best suits of your moral virtues have spots and rents, at best
are more narrow than that a man can wrap himself Isa. 28. 20.
in them, so as perfectly to cover his nakedness. Oh therefore that we might be
all found in him, not having our own righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.
but that which is through the faith of Christ.

And seeing that now at last we have gone through all the forementioned
particulars, and seen the comparative nothingness of them all in comparison of
Christ; what remains but that we should with our Apostle so esteem of them, and
labor for our justification and acceptance with God, so to be found in Christ,
as to be able to say with him, Christ Jesus my Lord. Dominus meus, Deus meus,
Christus meus, Amor meus and omnia. He may well be All, when as by an induction
of particulars we have proved all else besides him as to this are nothing, nay
less and worse than nothing, when but loss and dung. Nor need we be puzzled with
Photius his question; if they be (...) loss, how could he add, (...), omnibus
istis meipsum multavi, I have suffered the mulct of all Beza.
these. Could it be a Punishment, or Mulct to escape a loss? The answer is
easy. To natural and carnal self they were gain, v. 7. and therefore the losing
of them was loss; which flesh and blood coun^ed an heavy mulct and punishment.
But to Paul now better informed, confidence in them would be a loss indeed in
the loss of Christ and our selves together and so according to the phrase, Act.
27. 21. we may (...), gain a loss, be gainers by such See Grotius in locum.
losings, if by a lesser and only a conceited loss we escape a greater, and
that a real one. Though we lose much for Christ, yet sum up all, and we shall
not be losers by him, by renouncing all confidence in every thing else which
will either make or at least leave us miserable, ^o lay hold of Christ, and his
righteousness, which alone can justify us and make us happy. And therefore
what according to the sense of flesh and blood was (...), he presently checks
and t^^ns into a (...). By suffering the loss of other things he proved a great
gainer by winning of Christ. Oh! had we but Paul's eyes we should discern this
incomparable beauty and excellency in Christ Had we but his sense of Christ's
fullness and Alsufficiency, we should see a (...), a transcendent Excellency in
the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, above all other knowledge, and
with a free and joyful heart should readily and roundly come off with his
(...). For whom Tu satis es nobis and sine to nihil est.
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may
win, or gain Christ.

To God by Jesus Christ be all glory. Amen.
SERMON XIII. ON PROVE. 8. 21.
That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill
their Treasures.
THey are the words of Wisdom v. 1. and that by Wisdom At St. Mary's Jan. 6.
1655/6. At St. Paul's Apr. 6. 1656.
in the beginning of this Book of the Proverbs, especially in this Chapter is
meant Jesus Christ the Essential Wisdom of the Father is so plain, and the
Arguments to prove it are so pregnant, that we need not to doubt of it,
whatever the Socinians plead to the contrary. But it will serve my purpose (in
what I intend in my handling of this Text) to take it complexively See Arnoldus
in Catech. Racco. qu. 22. page 212, 213. etc.
for Christ and his Grace, which is true saving Wisdom, as sin and iniquity in
this whole Book is commonly called folly, and Sinners fools. And so the Text
(without further Preface) commends Christ and his Grace to us by a fourfold
excellency, which in all other things that we account good, we are wont to be
wonderfully taken with, and why should we not be more taken with in Christ, in
whom they are to be found in greatest Eminency? They are

1. Reality, and therefore called substance.

2. Perpetuity. No such things as we use to call Movables, but a lasting,
everlasting inheritance. That I may cause to inherit, etc.

3. Fullness. I will fill their Treasures.

4. Freeness of the conveyance, for heirs and inheritors are not wont to be
purchasers of what they inherit. All this in Christ, and all promised to those
which love him. That Is the qualification of the persons to whom all this is
promised, which I shall take notice and make use of in the application.

The first particular affords us this instruction, That there is a that love
him; for so the words are (...) That I may cause to inherit. But what? Is it to
inherit the wind? (for such a kind of inheritance some come to, cap. 11. 29.)
some empty airy vanity?

No (you may say) it is here meant of outward riches, which

And so not only in our ordinary speech Rich men are called substantial men,
but also in Scripture phrase (at least as we translate it) our possessions,
riches or treasures are called our substance, Jer. 15. 13. and otherwhere very
frequently. Nay (as some conceive) this Hebrew word (...) translated here
substance is given to Gold and Rubies, Pro. 20. 15. and therefore accordingly
here in the Text by substance in the beginning of the verse is meant nothing
but that which is expressed by treasures in the end of it, and by neither of
them any other thing meant, but outward wealth and riches, which in those days
God frequently promised to his people, and they whilst they walked with him
more usually enjoyed.

In answer to which I only hint these few particulars. Sol.


1. That if Godliness then have the promise of this life as well as of that
which is to come, it will be the more desirable. And if Christ the wisdom of
the Father include outward riches in this his promise, I hope he will be more
valuable, when he is as an aple of gold thus set in a picture of silver.

2. I add that although God in that non age of the Church did more frequently
promise and bestow on his people outward mercies and riches, yet never so as to
be their true inheritance and substance; but only so as Christ and his grace
and Salvation was typed out by them and wrapped up in them.

3. I do not find that in any place of the old Testament this Hebrew word (...)
is necessarily to be understood of outward riches or substance; or they called
by this Hebrew name, sure I am they are not in that place mentioned, Prove. 20.
15. (...) does not say that (...) is (...) that gold is substance, but the word
(...) there is a verb substantive in the ordinary sense of it, Est aurum, there
is gold, as our Translators render it.

4. Should outward riches any where else be called by that or any like name
which may signify substance, we must necessarily conceive and grant that it is
(according to the Apostles phrase) spoken after the manner of men, according as
they are wont to judge and speak of them, which manner of speaking the Holy
Ghost in Scripture disdaineth not sometimes to stoop to, and to make use of, as
when he calls the Moon one of the two great Genesis 1.
lights because common people ordinarily think so, and the heathen Poets
Prophets because they esteemed them so. An usage Tit. 1.
not to be condemned in Scripture, when usually prectised in other most
approved Authors, with whom loqui cum vulgo was no Solecisme, nor did they
think they abused their hearer or reader if they made use of the common
Nomenclature and of words (...) if but ordinarily though abusively taken.

5. But if outward riches sometimes in Scripture be called substance in the
worlds sense, yet (to be sure) it is never in Gods and the Scriptures own sense,
for according to that it speaks of them at a quite other rate, and makes a
direct contrary estimate of them, and instead of judging them to be solid
substance, or as (as our Savior calls it) the true treasure and our chief
substance, esteems Luke 16. 11.
and calls them (...) the least things, and instead of making v. 10.
them our own proper inheritance, (...) another man's. v. 12.


And therefore when Jesus Christ here promises to them that love him to make
them inherit substance, we should much wrong both him and ourselves if we
should interpret it only or chiefly of these poor little Nothings and
Non-entities. No, whether with them or without them he means something
infinitely better and more substantial, though more spiritual, in and from
himself, which must be included and is chiefly intended in this his promise,
and which such of his servants as do indeed love him, do as really and
substantially find made good to them in his performance. That there is a
substantial reality in Christ and his Grace, in himself and to them that love
him, that is the point.

And so several Interpreters render the word (...) in the Text by (...)
Essentia, substantia, id quod est, and esse perpetuum and the like, by all
endeavoring to express that true solid permanent reality, which is in and by
christ, that real substance that is in Him, and that solid alsufficient
subsistence, which his servants have or may have by him.

And therefore in Scripture up and down, and frequently in this book of the
Proverbs compared to several things, but especially to such as are most solid
and substantial.

To pearls and precious stones, such as are not more precious Prove. 3. 15.
than solid and durable.

Of metals, to silver and the finest gold. My fruit is better than gold, yea
than fine gold, v. 19. of this chapter. (...) the latter of which words has
strength and solidity in its signification; so solid and compact as fire it
self can very hardly work upon and Job 22. 25. Grotius. Isa. 55. 2. Psalm. 104.
16.
not at all waste: sometimes compared to food: but to bread, not to frothy
kickshaws, but to bread, which is solid nourishment and the staff of man's life,
nor that bread which perishes, but which endures to everlasting life, John 6.
27. sometimes to Clothing, but it is (...) not a Cobweb Tiffany but durable and
substantial clothing, Isa. 23. 18.

And in the 18th verse of this Chapter this Wisdom says, that with her is
(...) Durable Riches. The word translated Riches signifies substance; but as
though that were not enough to express how substantial this wisdom was, the
Epithet (...) is added, which signifies durableness and strength, because
things that are solid and strong are durable. So here, as though the word
substance were not enough to express the substantialness that is to be found in
Christ and his Grace, the word (...) is added, which renders it hereditary and
so more durable. Durable Riches there, and here substance, but durable and
hereditary as the Apostle calls it, (...), Hebr. 10. 34. a better and enduring
substance. In the beginning of that verse you read that those Hebrews for
Christ's sake had endured (...), the loss of their goods, and they are there
called (...), as though they had some subsistence by them; against which (...),
he sets this (...), this real substance, which they have in and by Christ,
which he calls (...), a far better substance, because enduring to everlasting
life. The durableness of it we shall consider in the third point, and only the
substantialness of it in this.

And (for more particular proof) that must needs be accounted such, which is so,

1. In it self and its being. 2. In its effects and operations.
But thus both ways is Christ, and that grace and bliss which he brings with
him.

First in himself and his own being and essence. He is Jehova. Hos. 12. 5.
Exodus 3. 15. a word which signifies his being in and of himself, and who gives
being to all his words and works. A Noun Substantive which has part of all the
Tenses of the Verb Substantive in it, Present, Preter, Future, and so is in the
New Testament spoken out more at large by (...), He that is, and was, and is to
come, Revel. 1. 8. which, as it tells you that he reaches to and infinitely
exceeds all times, so that he is substantial in all. The Hebrews will have
that name to be (...), they dare not, they cannot utter it, I am sure none of
us can comprehend it and rise up to that transcendent Entity which that name
points at. It was Christ the second person of the sacred Trinity that appeared
and spoke to the Fathers of old, and when he was asked his Name, he answered, I
am that I am, Exodus 3. 14. many blessed and Divine Truths that expression may
hold out unto us.

I am has sent me unto you. But what is that I am? or what art thou? why he as
it were subscribes a blank, and bids you write what you by faith and according
to the promise would have him to be, or what you stand in need of him to be to
you. He is (...), Col. 3. 11. He is All to your faith and wants.

And yet nothing, or stands in need of nothing out of himself. I am that I am.
Logic Rules do not circumscribe God, nor should our Reason. An Identical
predication is not here absurd, but most Divine. Nothing is in God out of his
Essence. Totus Deus est tota Essentia. All in God is only Essence, and All
Essence: so that have we but Him, in Him we have all things.

But to pass by these and such other as may be added, to my present purpose,
from thence I observe what I am now treating of, Col. 3. 11. omnibus instar
omnium, super omnia.
That in Christ (who there spoke to Moses) there is a substantial reality for
the supply, and that in solidum of all the wants of the Israel of God. I am.
The Verb Substantive expresses how substantial and real he is, that as God he
is (...). What difference there is between Entity and Reality, let the
Metaphysicians dispute, but our more Divine Metaphysics assure us, that both
meet in our Savior, that there is a real substantial Being in him, and that as
he gave all things at first their natural being, so he is the fountain of all
spiritual being to his people, and that is no less but more real because
spiritual, as we shall see hereafter. Here Ens, Vnum, verum, bonum
convertuntur. There is a real true being and goodness, and all in one Christ,
and all this infinitely transcending whatever is in the Creature. He is and had
been in himself God blessed for ever, although he had never by any operation or
other manifestation of himself made it known to the Creature. In Himself He is
a most Real and substantial Being.

And the more real, because spiritual; in this I speak Reason and carnal lusts
of dull, ignorant, sensual, brutish men, who are of the Sadducees Religion, who
held that there is neither Angel nor Spirit because they can see neither, Acts
23. 8. and of Thomas his belief, who unless he might see in Christ's hands the
print of the nails, and thrust his hand into his side would not believe. John
20. 25. nor can they any thing (no not of God and Christ) but what sense can
see, or sensuality relish. Like lips like Lettice, as grosser bodies feed
heartiliest on grosser food, and would be pined with dainties, and relish that
drink best, that is thick, and strong, and heady. Of these I shall again speak
a little in the Application. But for the present on the contrary to those that
are drawn off from these more gross Lees and dregs, either by more refined
natural speculation or spiritualizing grace, this gross corporeity has more of
matter and so of Potentiality, and less of Entity; But the more spiritual any
thing is, the more of form it has and so more of essence and activity, nay a
more likeness and nearer approximation to God who is a spirit, John 4. 24. and
therefore the more spiritual any thing is, the more Reality and Being there is
in it, because more likeness to God, who is the most perfect and supreme being,
and therefore the Exemplar of all others. I say the more spiritual the more
real, and therefore whatsoever grosser heads and hearts think, yet the two most
spiritual things that we as men and as Christians are capable of (and they are
learning and grace) are the greatest realities, and therefore the word (...)
which properly signifies substance, Essence, or Being, is in the Old Testament
often put for Wisdom. Job 6. 13. 12. 17. 26. 3. Prove. 3. 21, 8. 14.
Micah 6. 9. (...) in the Hebrew our Translations render the man of wisdom: and
therefore well may Jesus Christ the Essential Wisdom of the Father and that
saving Wisdom which we have by him be here called (...) substance, or id quod
est, as Junius translates it, because so much the more substantial, as it is
spiritual. And this first in themselves.

2. But so also in their effects and operations, for so your rule is. Prout se
res habet in esse, ita in operari, and e converso: such as the effect is, such
is the cause also when it works per se, and from its own nature; so that if
fire really heateth other things, we may safely conclude, that it is hot in it
self, and accordingly if Christ and his Grace put forth real operations on and
in us, they must be greater realities in themselves.

Faith is no fancy, but an (...), Hebr. 11. 1. gives a real spiritual
subsistence to things that are not, a subsistence and firm footing to a
believer, who as to all other props and supports is utterly sinking.

Nor are his hopes (...), not as a Spiders Web, or giving Job 8. 14. 11. 20.
up the Ghost, as some others are called: poor thin conceits and notions. No.
They are as an Anchor sure and steadfast, Hebr. 6. 19. at which he rides safely
when others are overwhelmed.

Nor is his Love an empty Complement with a Depart in peace, be you warmed and
filled, etc. James 2. 16. but that (...) that labor of it which the Scripture
speaks of, 1 These. 1. 3. Hebr. 6. 10. that (...) of it by which faith is
actuated, Gal. 5. 6. shows that it is in deed and in truth, 1 John 3. 18.

The Imputation of Christ's righteousness to us in Justification, is not
putative, or putatitious, as some of us lisp, and the Papists speak it out. But
an Imprisoned Debtour would not so judge of the imputation of his friends
payment made over to him. It Is no dream when (with Peter, Acts 12. 9, 10. now
fully awake) he sees the prison doors opened, and himself set at liberty. He
will say (because he finds it) to be a happy reality. And so does every
pardoned sinner; when he finds sin pardoned, person accepted, a reconciled
Father smiling, and the Comforter witnessing his peace, he cannot but with much
comfort and thankfulness say that these are greatest realities. Indeed
Justification is a Relative Grace, and we are wont to say that Relationes sunt
minimae Entitatis; but where both Termini and Fundamentum are real, as
Chemnitius shows it to be so here, though Bellarmine laugh at it with scorn,
yet a true Believer that feels the benefit of it rejoiceth in it with humble
thankfulness. There is greatest reality in Gods giving, and in faiths
receiving. Christ has really satisfied for us, and this is really conveyed and
applied to us. In this first step (of justification) we are brought to be
possessed of Christ, and then sure we are made to inherit substance.

And if such reality in Justification, then it is much more evident even to
reason and sense in sanctification, and what follows it, till we come at last
to Glory. As for instance.

1. They work very real changes in the hearts and lives of men, so that it
comes to the Apostles (...), Romans 12. ^. to a transformation and renewal, or
new molding, and that not only of the outside looks and gestures and carriages
in an outward form of goodness, but even of the mind, yea of the very spirit of
the mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. of the very inmost and chiefest of the inward man: so
that although the convert be no such changling as not to be the same man in his
natural individuality, and so the change in that sense is not substantial, yet
in a true moral and spiritual sense it is eminently real. Though it be the same
string, yet it is quite otherwise new tuned, ^ll old things being past away and
all things become new in this new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. When the spirit of
the Lord (which was only a spirit of Government) came upon Saul, it is said he
was turned into another man, 1 Samuel 10. 6. But when another kind of spirit (a
spirit of real sanctification) came upon another Saul (or Paul) he was much
farther from being the former man he was, and therefore says, (...), Gal. 2.
20. which Beza and Grotius paraphrase, Is qui fueram non sum, I live, but not
the same man I was, or if you say that be not the sense of the Apostle in that
place, and indeed I doubt it, yet I am sure it is that which many happy converts
find in their hearts and lives, so that they may say with that convert in
Ambrose, Ego non sum ego, I am not my self, no^ (...) former sinful self, I am
not more the same man that I was, than the new man is the old man, Ephesians. 4.
22, 24. or light is darkness, Act. 26. 18. when the Lion is become a Lamb, Isa.
11. 6. and Ephraim, who was bid let alone as inseparably joined to Idols, Hos.
4. 17. says, what have I to do with Idols? Hos. 14. 8. when Paul of a
persecutor is become a Preacher, and Luther a zealous Protestant of a monachus
insanissimus (as he calls himself) of a mad monk ready (as he confesses) to
kill Praefat. in Tom. 1. suorum operum.
any that in una syllaba should detract from the Popes obedience; when the
proud are made humble, the froward, meek, the cruel, merciful: yea and such as
by their natural tempers and accustomed practice were sometimes most unclean,
sensual and profane, afterward become eminently holy and spiritual and
heavenly. Such great changes Lactantius undertakes by the word of Christ to
make: and such, Christ and His Grace has made in all ages: indeed so great
that none else could make them, and so visibly appearing not only to themselves
and friends, but to the eyes and consciences of their worst enemies, that they
could not be only notions and phansies, juggles or outside hypocritical shows
and visards, but greatest realities, and so clearest evidences that Jesus
Christ is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, and Revel. 3. 14.
these are the real and actual putting of his servants into possession of part
of that inheritance, which he here in the Text bequeathes them; where he
promises them that he will cause them to inherit substance.

2. A Second great work which Christ and his Grace work, and thereby sully
manifest their true and eminent reality, is the quieting of Believers hearts,
and this triple. 1. In satisfying their desires. 2. In comforting them in their
griefs and anguishes in this life. 3. In most fully and eminently perfecting
all in glory.

1. In satisfying the desires of our Souls, and they as we are men This is all
my desire. 2 Samuel 23. 5.
are very large, but as Believers, and so far more enlarged by the Divine
spirits breathings, are in a manner infinite. Now painted viands will not
satisfy a real appetite, nor will a man that is hungry indeed, though he dream
of eating when he is asleep, be Isa. 29. 8.
satisfied with it when he is awake.

Indeed corporal food may satisfy bodily hunger: a beast may have a belly full;
but that must be solid not frothy trash, else you will soon again be hungry, as
some of late have told us of the Gage.
luscious fruits in America; or they are very much distempered bodies and
appetites, which such stuff can sa^^^.

Fancy may be satisfied with phantasms as children may be quieted with toys
and rattles, but the intellectual appetite is more both curious and serious,
and in some things is not quieted without solid demonstrations, and yet in some
other things takes up in very thin and empty notions, especially (such is our
self love) if they be our own, as Casaubon some where professes that he In
Athenaeis.
was fully apaid for all his labors in his studies with the content he took by
one poor Criticism; and Hadrian the Cardinal when he meets with an Aliud, or
Aliter or such like particle well De modo lat. loq p. 19.
set, he thinks he has found a Jewel.

But those more divine hungrings and thirstings, which the spirit of God really
raises in the hearts of his people, are not satisfied with such husks and
puff-pasts, which do rather feed esuriem animae than esurientem animam.
Wherefore do you spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for
that which satisfies not? says the Prophet, Isa. 55. 2. It must be bread the
staff of man's life, which upholdeth the bodily life, and it must be the true
bread of life which came down from heaven, John 6. 32, 33.
which only can satisfy the truly hungring soul and feed it to everlasting
life. And that Christ and his grace both is and does. His flesh is meat indeed,
and his blood drink indeed, John 6. 55. (...), nay (...) panis
supersubstantialis, as some translate and expound that in Matthew. 6. 11. Christ
is substantial, supersubstantial bread, that really and more than substantially
feeds and satisfies the hungry soul, his grace, his peace and the light of his
countenance do abundantly fill and feast its longing desires and appetite. As
for me I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness, says David, Psalm. 17. 15. I have all and abound, I am
full, says Paul, Phil. 4. 18. when he had tasted of Christ's sweetness in a
small present which they had sent him: and therefore he appears to be substance
whilst he thus substantially satisfies our vastest desires. But of this more
in the second point; in which we shall consider of his fullness, which in the
latter part of the verse he promises shall fill our Treasures.

2. By affording solid comfort in our most pressing, pinching, smarting griefs
and anguishes of inward or outward man. He is a substantial real friend indeed
who can and will help at a dead lift. The true God puts counterfeit Idols upon
this trial of their being God by doing good or evil, Isa. 41. 23. and bids
their worshippers go to them to deliver them in the time of their tribulation,
Judge. 10. 14. It Is but an hollow reed which breaks, and rather Isa. 36. 6.
wounds than supports when such weight is laid on it: but it is a solid
foundation that then will be able to keep us up from sinking. Such is Christ
and his Grace, cures Peter's wives mother in the Matthew. 8. 15.
height of a fever: and when Peter himself was now sinking, immediately
stretches out his hand and saves him, eases and quieteth Matthew. 14. 30. V.
27.
the heart in outward sufferings, (he then said (...) ego sum, when in a storm
he said (...)) and reviveth the Soul now dying away in sense of God's anger,
and other inward anguishes, Job 33. 18. to 26. These real felt Cures plainly
evidence how able and substantial a Physician Christ is, (not as they Job 13.
4. (...) Physicians of no value) and how sovereign physic his grace and peace
are. And withal it preventeth or answers an Objection which a profane heart
may be ready to make against all this that has been said, viz.

That these we speak of are silly, frantic, or at best moping troubles are but
fond and weak imaginations, and therefore their both deliverances and
deliverers may be answerable, not real, but only imaginary, and so the Child's
pin-prick because he is silly and it is nothing may be blown whole, and the
melancholic man's Incubus whilst he is drowsing may feel very heavy and seem
dreadful; which as soon as he opens his eyes vanishes. Like to these some
may conceive all the wounds and burdens of Christians troubled Consciences but
melancholic fancies, and gloomy shadows, and as little substantialness in
their Cure, tied with a straw and loosed with a feather; and therefore may look
at Ministers as so many juggling Mountebanks, who to gain more repute or to make
a living of it with fleight of hand, tie such false knots, which are as easily
untied and loosed, and then cry out, Digitus Dei hic, or as they of Simon Exodus
8. 19. Acts 8. 10.
Magus, (...), This is the great power of God.

To which I answer,

That it is too true, that too often the maladies of many of God's people do
arise from ignorance and from melancholic mistakes, and like imaginary causes,
which with Gods blessing sometimes by a very little light and help may be
cured, as the Bugbears which the frighted man thought he saw in the dark, by a
little candlelight brought in are driven away.

1. But yet sometimes the effects of those weak and imaginary causes may prove
very real and strong: such as sometimes pose the ablest Physician's skill to
Cure what they work in the Body, as in some real Diseases and distractions from
frights caused by some vain Bugbears. And none but Jesus Christ our Phoebus,
and only Physician, can remove the sad effects of them in some men's Souls, so
that he shines out to be the true sun of Righteousness, in that he can bring
healing to them in his wings, Mal. 4. 2.

2. Nor are all their maladies melancholic fancies. When the Arrows of the
Almighty-stuck fast in Jobs heart, and the poison Job 6. 4.
thereof drunk up his spirit, they were more than the Child's pinprick that was
before spoken of: not to be blown whole, but only by the spirit's breathing.
And when God's wrath lay heavy upon the Psalmist, and his hand pressed him
sore, it was more than Psalm. 88. 7. 38. 2.
the melancholic man's conceited nightmare.

Nor was Ananias a Jugler sent by Christ to play tricks with Paul, when he was
sent to support and comfort him in that agony Acts 9.
he then was in. The wounds of many a poor Sinner's Conscience have been real
and very deep, nor were they painted fires that the Martyrs have been broiled
in. Real transcendent anguishes in both kinds they have been, that many of
God's people have been exercised with, when nothing but realities could
satisfy or comfort, and both Scripture and Church-story all along, and the
manifold experiences of God's people in all ages have abundantly testified,
that in the worst of them Christ has stood by them and supported them, and
thereby proved himself a real friend. His Grace, and Peace, and Joy, have been
real Cordials to their sad hearts, so as to enable them to endure those
torments, not only with patience, but with joy and glorying. Sure faith was the
substance of things not seen, and when the wind or breathing of the spirit did
blow them on and lift them up so strongly, it was something fully felt by them,
when not seen by others.

3. Nor lastly let us conceive them as so many frantic or silly dull men, more
obstinate than honest, like Heretics that will rather part with their life
than their opinion, or more honest than wise to harden themselves against
sufferings, and prodigally to have thrown away their lives which they might
have saved and have been no losers. David in Scripture-account was a wise man,
and 1 Samuel 18. 14. 1 Kings 4. 31.
Heman is there reckoned up amongst the wisest, who underwent these anguishes,
and the Martyrs (whatever the wise men of the world think) were no fools,
needlessly to cast away their precious lives that they might save their more
precious souls; No dull thick-skinned fools as not really to feel those
tortures, nor such silly fools as to conceit themselves into a fools paradise
of fancied comforts and joys. No, as their sufferings for Christ abounded, so
their Consolations abounded by Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5. both were very real and
eminent, and thereby Christ really and eminently manifested to them and to all
the world how solid and substantial that comfort is which he, his grace and
presence brings, and that in the estimate of wisest men, and that when they are
fit to judge most wisely, and that is in trial of afflictions, for vexatio dat
intellectum, in death it self, and hora mortis is hora veritatis, then the very
Heathens (as some dispute) were wont to divine, and therefore there is more
hope that true Christians might better then understand what is truth. The night
the Greeks call (...) as the fittest time for men to apprehend and judge aright
of things, and in this late evening of a Christians life, he (as well as some
other worse men) see truth more clearly than in all the former brightest day of
their life. Then it is that wisest Christians when they have had their best
wits most about them, have most fully found, seen and felt most real comforts
and joys from Christ and his Grace in the midst of most really felt anguishes,
so that when with Job they are made to possess months of vanity, Job 7. 3.
and wearisome nights on such sick deathbeds, even then from what realities
they find in Christ and his grace and peace they can feelingly and joyfully say
in the words of the Text, that they inherit substance. This bread of life is
the staff of life in a weak man's hand, when he is fainting, and strengthens
his heart when now dying.

3. And if Christ be found to be thus real and substantial to us in this our
vain life and in the worst of it, then doubt not but that when he has once
gotten us into Heaven, we shall then find that he has there caused us to
inherit substance. Whilst we are here, we are all the while but in our nonage,
and the best that we possess here, is but the earnest of our inheritance which
we are there to enter upon, Ephesians. 1. 14. and then if the earnest be so great,
what will be the inheritance? The Apostle says that it is incorruptible,
undefiled, that sadeth not away, but reserved 1 Pet. 1. 4.
in heaven for us. And all that, speaks it to be solid and substantial. And so
we read that the New Jerusalem lies apiece, Revel. 21. 16. and the wall
has twelve foundations, v. 14. and the building of it of Jasper, v. 18. all
the gates so many pearls, and the street, pure gold, v. 21. all so solid, that
they plainly show how substantially there Christ provideth for us. Oh how massy
will that Crown of Glory be? what will not that (...) 2 Cor. 4. 17.
(...) weigh down? Here I may speak much, but never enough fully to set out the
reality and transcendency of that bliss, which Heaven affords, and what Christ
and his presence will be there to us to eternity. Deus and coelum non patiuntur
Hyperbolen: and therefore I forbear, and only say, make us but sure of Christ
whilst we live, and of Heaven when we die, and so both now and then we shall be
able to set our seal to this truth, and to the truth of Christ in it, that this
his promise in the Text is yea and Amen, faithfully promised, and both here and
especially in Heaven fully and substantially made good; when Christ shall at
the last day say, Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom. His hand will perform
what his mouth here in the Text promises, that he will make them that love him
to inherit substance.

And then happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee? as Moses spoke, Deuteronomy.
33. 29. For ever and thrice happy are they who (as the Text describes them)
love Jesus Christ and that really and in sincerity, for whom this substance,
these substantial sure mercies of David are provided for an inheritance. Whilst
others in the worlds vain Dialect are called the substantial men, be you well
satisfied with this substance, and although others deride you for satisfying
your selves with thin empty notions (as they count them) of spiritual joys and
comforts (which they cannot see) in a crucified Christ which they cannot skill
of, yet if the coverous man (one of the words substantial men) when others hiss
at him can yet applaud himself when he looks on his Populus me sibilat, etc.
money in his Chest, how much more may they who only covet Jesus Christ and his
grace, bless themselves or God rather, when they find this solid true treasure
in their hearts? He that should fill his barns with the gayes and flowers of
the field, would have but a pining crop of it, whilst he that is stored with
solid grane will have wherewith to subsist when all that chaff is blown away in
a windy day. Give me therefore the Oak, which when the winter frost or the
violent storm has made it cast its leaves, has yet its substance in it, Isa.
6. 13. And whatever other matters the men of this world may have and I want,
yet let Jesus Christ (according to the former particulars) make a blessed and
real change in my heart and life, in my greatest wants satisfy my desires,
which their fullness increases, and quiet my heart in my inward or outward
anguishes, which the thought of their former plenty aggravateth: will he please
to be but my comfort in death, and my portion in heaven, these will be true
solid realities, and I will both here and for ever in heaven with humble and
cheerful thankfulness say, that whatever circumstantials I have wanted, yet he
has made good this his word to me, that he has caused me to inherit
substance. There is substance and reality in Christ, and therefore if thou
love and enjoyest him, as Solomon says, Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy,
and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for thou art really a most substantial
happy, blessed man.

But yet more blessed, if thou be and carriest thy self answerably.

SERMON XIV. ON PROVE. 8. 21.
AND this leads to The second Application of this point, which discovers to
At St. Mary's April, 27. 1656.
us a double miscarriage, and presses upon us a double contrary duty. For if
in Christ there be such real and substantial worth

Our first and great miscarriage is in our choice, that it is not of 1 Sin.
Christ and his grace, in whom there is such real and substantial worth; but of
sin, and the content of the creature, in which there is at the best so much
vanity and emptiness.

1. For sin. It Is a very painted harlot without the least true and real beauty.
Indeed it looks and speaks big and promises The Devil promises and seems to
give Gold which proves but leaves and trash, false in what he promised
(content) but real only in what he concealed and that is misery.
very fair, even all precious substance. Prove. 1. 13. What! substance! precious
substance! and all precious substance! they are very great words and promises,
as great as Christ himself could make; as the foolish woman in the latter end
of Prove. 9. inviteth followers with the same words that wisdom did in the
beginning of it. And as Christ calls himself I am, Exodus 3. 14. so the false
Christ's they say (...), Luke 21. 8. But they are herein false Prophets, for the
Scripture of truth speaks far otherwise of them, and calls them by other truer
names, as deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. and lying vanities, Jonah 2. 8. So far
from any substantial goodness in them, of which they are such privations, as
that they fall short of any true real entity. For certainly sin is no substance.

2. And for all Creature-contents how unsubstantial they all are we may learn
from the Names, which the Scripture gives them.

1. (...) Psalm. 39. 6. Images, Pictures, which use to flatter and at best (as
they are called) are but counterfeits, have only a resemblance, but no reality,
if (as you call it) to the life, yet not to truth.

2. Schemes and Fashions, 1 Cor. 7. 31. though in fashion, yet vain, fickle,
and which soon pass-away.

3. Shadows, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. which indeed often show greater than the body, but
are only from the intercepting of heaven's light, and so have nothing of
substance in them, fly as we move, yea and decline, though we standstill.

4. Fumi umbra the shadow (not of a great rock, as Christ is, Isa. 31. 2. but)
of a fleeting cloud, and of smoke presently scattered.

5. Nay (...), not only a shadow, but which is more vain, the very dream of ^
shadow.

6. And so the Scripture often expresses our content in them by dreams, Job 20.
8. Psalm. 73. 20. than which (though sometimes pleasing, yet) nothing is more
confused and empty, and at the first opening of our eyes quite vanish.

7. To this purpose also it is, that they are called Phansies, Act. 25. 23. as
indeed of all our needless superfluities, what is more than for supply of
necessities and moderate delight, is it any thing but mere fancy? And is any
thing more vain and empty? Is there any substantial reality in that which is
only fantastical and merely imaginary?

8. The Scripture goes yet further, and calls them nullities, Non-entities,
Nothings (...) ye rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos 6. 13. (...) That which is
not, Prove. 23. 5. that are either nothing in themselves, or in case we lay our
stress on them, to us will prove nothing, or worse, a very spiders web, Job 8.
14, 15. which if laid hold on will be sure not to uphold, but it may be will
poison the hand that grasps it, (in Titulo pharmacum, in pixide venenum.)

9. A very lie that has no reality and truth in it, Psalm. 62. 9. belie their
Names, as in those elegant Antonomasies in which the Prophet much delighted,
Micah 1. If they speak evil, they will make them good. Aphrah in the dust, v.
10. and Achzib will in this speak true, it will be a lie, v. 14. but if they
promise good, they will lie to purpose and perform the quite contrary. Sapher
beauty naked and ashamed. Zaanan will not go forth though it be Bethezel a next
neighbor, v. 11. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, Ezekiel. 31. 18. but a
noise, Jer. 46. 17. that makes an hubbub in the world, but ends in silence. O
quantum est in rebus inane! How much vanity is there in all such things! And
yet how much more in our vainer hearts? light flies to be so caught in such
cobwebs, to build all our present comforts and all our hopes for eternity upon
no more substantial but upon these sandy foundations of sinful or bare outward
pleasures, profits, and such like enjoyments, that we should be such fools as
to exchange (...), to part with that massy tried gold which our Savior
profers, as the rude Savages do for glass beads, or such gay nothings. Mittamus
animum ad illa quae aeterna sunt, contemnamus omnia quae adeo pretiosa non
sunt, ut an Seneca Epist. ^9.
sint omnino dubium sit.

Are they but shows, pictures, and counterfeits? then as we laugh at children
for taking pictures for live men, so even children may pity us for these more
childish mistakes, even senseless Idolatries; for so Idolaters are condemned in
the Scriptures for worshipping painted Idols, Ezekiel. 23. 14, 15. Alas! the whole
world is now like their Chambers of imagery, Ezekiel. 8. 12. hung round about with
such painted Idols, Nothings (...), which all sorts from all quarters fall down
to and worship, and have not so much knowledge and consideration as to say, Is
there not a very lie at our right hand, Isa. 44. 18. to 21.

Are they shadows, and how hard do such deluded fools as we are grasp them? Pro
Junone nubem, (...) the dream of a shadow. They afford the shadow, and our vain
hearts bring the dream, as Psalm. 39. 6. the vain world was a vain show, and the
vain man (...) constantly instantly walks and trudgeth on it.

That what we use to say of a man dreaming, that he is gotten into another
world, a world of fancies, may be too truly affirmed of a world of men most
waking, if we do but think of our fantastical garbs, fashions, behaviors, our
whimsical opinions and practices, and (which is worse) in the things of God,
and (which is worst of all) whilst we place our Religion and the power of God
himself in them, do we not live in a world of phansies? like men that look
through a triangular glass, what pleasing orient colors do they see? and
whilst we look through these false glasses, what gayes and brouches do we
fancy? And thus with the foolish woman Akko talk so long to our selves in the
glass that we prove Fairy-Queens, or enchanted Knights: and then whatever
Tragelaphi, Chimera's or the most prodigious crack-braind Fancies are greatest
Realities and most Divine mysteries; but no part of this substance in the Text,
which Christ the wisdom of the Father promises to make them that love him
possessors of.

Thus are we deluded and gulled with vain shadows and fancies, and as sometimes
all Egypt was scattered over with Israelites gathering of straws, Exodus 5. 12.
so the whole World is now spread over with such as are no better employed, with
Boys running amain after Bees or painted Butter-flies, that have either a wing
to fly away from him, or a sting if caught to wound him. And thus whilst they
trust in vanity (as Eliphaz says) vanity is their recompense, Job 15. 31. and
vexation to boot.

But that is not all. Besides this vanity there is this further vexation, that
whiles these superficial vanities are thus pursued, that which is substantial
and real, Christ and his Grace and Peace are undervalued, neglected, it may be
opposed and hated, as those sick of the Pica whilst they feed on trash,
forsake more solid and wholesome food, and the Prodigal when he came to his
husks had run away from his father's house, where there was bread enough to
satisfy him.

And the Reason is because they that are after the flesh mind or savor only
the things of the flesh, Romans 8. 5. but skill not of the things of the spirit,
because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Christ and his Grace are
of such a spiritual Nature, and therefore are not fit provision for sensual
lusts, which are taken with gross, corporal, sensible objects. To such eyes
Christ had no beauty in him to be desired, Isa. 53. 2. As the hungry Plowman
must have something that has cut in it, you pine him with dainties, so here
these spiritual dainties that we partake of by feeding on Christ by faith,
living on God by hope, looking up to heaven in prayer, especially if joined
with repentance for those things which a carnal heart rejoiceth in, and
reformation and mortification, and denial of those lusts, which all the comfort
of his life is wrapped up in, and if the Kingdom of God consist in righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, these are (as to Gallio) but words and
Acts 18. 15.
names; too thin notions for such cross gross apprehensions. A heart that is
sensual and carnal, cannot skill of things that are so spiritual.

But are they therefore the less substantial? was Christ's, and shall our
Bodies after their Resurrection be less real Bodies, because more spiritual? 1
Cor. 15. 44. Are Angels and our own Souls no real Beings, because they cannot
be seen with bodily eyes? A substantive may be such, if understood, though not
felt or heard. Is there nothing to be had in Heaven, because no bodily meat and
drink, sleep or such like pleasures that we here delight in? God is most
blessed without all these. And our Savior speaks of drinking of the fruit of
the Vine new in his Father's Kingdom, and he told Mat. 26. 29.
his Disciples that he had meat which they knew not of, John 4. 32. and he has
such even here for his, that such strangers think not of. Joh. 14. 27.
(Things maximae Entitatis are least comprehensible.)

And therefore seeing there is no defect in Christ, let us be the more sensible
of and humbled for this woeful sinful defect in our selves, in thus wronging and
undervaluing him, whilst we thus prefer these empty vanities and fine nothings
before him, committing th^se two great evils, which God is doubly and bitterly
displeased with, in forsaking the living fountain, and sitting down Jer. 2. 13.
by the broken Cistern, grasping shadows, and letting hold go of that
substance, which the Text here speaks of. In which dangerous mistake let us
sadly take notice

1. Of our original miscarriage which has begotten this in its own image. Our
first slip in that great Fall began here. Eve was Genesis 3. 6.
taken with the seeming beauty of the forbidden fruit, and with an imaginary
conceit of becoming like God in the eating of it; and so turning away from the
God of Truth, both she and we have been naturally pursuing vain shows and lying
vanities ever since, like the Prodigal in the Gospel, who leaving his Father's
house where was bread enough. was brought to his empty husks, and we that were
created (...) in the image of God, Genesis 1. 27. to have kept close with him in
an uninterrupted union and communion, are now the men that do (...) walk in a
vain show, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 39. 6. and (as the Prophet says) in
the light of our own fire and the sparks which we have Isai. 50. 11.
kindled, which like ignes fatui, in these wild vagaries lead us into
precipices, end in darkness, and so we lie down in sorrow. Which leads to the
second thing it should put us in mind of, as of our first fall, to be humbled
for it, so

2. Of our last irrecoverable ruin unless we take the better care to prevent
it, without which taken, this pidling with these toys and trifles will be a
sad foregoing sign and means of it.

The sick man draws fast on to death when he begins (...) floccos vellere
to be picking and plucking the flocks of his covering, and no surer way to
drown the man that is fallen into the River than for him to lay fast hold on
the weeds or such like trash that are at the bottom of it. By catching at the
shadow thou losest the substance, and by building on the sand thou fallest
short of the City which has foundations.

This therefore being our great sin, and the inlet of all our misery, 1. Duty.
our contrary duty is, seeing man thus walks in a vain show, seriously and
heartily with the Psalmist to say and pray, And now Lord what wait I for? my
hope is in thee, Psalm. 39. 6, 7. my hope is in thee, my desire is after thee,
thou art my choice and portion. I have none in heaven but thee, and there is
none on earth that I desire besides thee: My flesh and heart fails (as all
Psalm. 73. 25, 26.
vain outside comforts will) but thou art the strength, the solid rock of my
heart, (...) and my portion for ever. Count Gold as dust, and then God will be
(...) silver of strength to thee, See Grotius in locum.
Job 22. 24, 25.

And therefore to all poor deluded souls, that are gulled and cheated with
these shining shells, these painted Sepulchers that Matthew. 23. 27, 28.
seem to be what they are not, but what they are (as our Savior said of them)
they appear not; be that message sent which Elijah Luke 11. 44.
did to Ahaziah, Is it because there is no God in Israel, that thou 2 Kings 1.
3, 6.
have sent to Baalzebub the God of Ekron? Is there not that in the true God
which can really and substantially satisfy you, that you betake your selves to
Baalzebub, such Gods of flies, such vain nothings? oh knock at the head of such
empty vessels, and hear how hollow they sound; set down ciphers at the foot of
the Account under all such Items. Leave off to feed on wind, and to fill Hos.
12. 1.
our bellies with the eastwind, which will rather gripe and wring Job 15. 2.
than feed and satisfy us, and for any substantial real good to be had by them
they are but Tanquams, are but as if they were what they seem to be.

And therefore let our carriage to them be accordingly, Rejoice in them as if
we rejoiced not, and use them so as though we used them not, for else we shall
abuse them, 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.

But on the contrary, really and in good earnest betake we our selves to Jesus
Christ, that what others have in the shadow we may have in the substance, as
what Nebuchadnezzar saw in a dream, Dan. 2. Daniel saw in a vision, Dan. 8. 1,
2, 3. And therefore as you may observe when other Countries traded with Tyrus
in other commodities and many of them superfluities, Ezekiel. 27.
Judah and the land of Isreal's trade with them was in the staples commodities
of Minnith and Pannag, honey and oil and balm, in the substantial necessaries
for man's life. So whilst others seek shells and cockles on the Seashore, let
the wise merchant seek (...) goodly pearls, Matthew* 13. 45. and when he has
found (...), that one of greatest price, v. 46. even Jesus Christ, let him deal
for That, and rather sell all than not buy it. So he himself counsels the
Church of Laodicea, which was taken too much with glittering outsides, to buy
of him gold tried in the fire, Revel. 3. 18. that is to be had in him, which is
solid in it self, and which we may substantially live of. Oh when shall we be
so wise as to lay aside our false sick appetites to other flashy poisoned
Cates, and once to hunger after and to feed heartily on the bread of life; on
that which is really good, that so our souls Isa. 55. 2.
may delight themselves infatness, to be no longer flitting from one temporary
empty contentment to another, but by fully closing once with Christ we may (as
it is in the Text) inherit substance.

But this is not all: there is a further sin and contrary duty, 2. Sin and Duty.
in Christ there be such real and substantial worth and excellency, our sin and
miscarriage will not only be in our mistake of the object, in our making choice
of other empty vanities before him or instead of him, but also in our not
answering this his substantial reality in our heart and life, though we should
have pitched upon him, and made our choice of him.

And the contrary Duty in the General is, that as Christ is substance, so we
look to it that we answerably be substantial Christians, i. e. really,
seriously, and in good earnest godly: not contenting our selves with a form of
godliness, and mean while wanting, or denying the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
that we be as solid grane, and not light empty chaff on Christ's floor, not
bare Nominals, but Reals, that what the Apostle says of Love, may b^ 1 John 3.
18^/3
be said and made good of our whole Christianity, that it be not in word and in
tongue, but indeed and in truth. Again I say it, that our care must be that as
Christ here promises to make us inherit substance, so we prove real, solid,
substantial Christians. And for further discovery and direction herein, I shall
briefly touch upon some particulars in reference to

1. Our understandings and Judgments. 2. Our hearts and affections. 3. Our
outward Conversations in our words and professions, behaviors and actions.
And first as to our Understandings and Judgments, I name only two particulars,
which come cross to that solid reality which should be in a substantial
Christian, and is really in Christ.

1. A weak doubtful hesitancy, and especially a more loose and profane
Skepticism in the things of God and Christ. The former is to be more pitied in
weak or young Christians, upon whom the sun of Righteousness is not yet risen
to any considerable height, or not shined out in more full brightness, and then
it is the early dawning or darker day: tanquam in re crepera, they are doubtful
and stumbling in the dark, have not their senses exercised to Hebr. 5. 12, 13,
14.
discern, so clearly to apprehend, or so solidly and resolvedly to judge and
conclude, and so are subject to waver and doubt with those two Disciples,
(...), we trusted that it had been Luke 24. 21.
he: These, I say, are to be pitied and helped.

But as for Pyrrh^es Scholars who abound every where in this loose age, those
(...), who will resolvedly affirm or determine nothing but to doubt, and query,
and question all, not only in Ph^losophy, but in Divinity, and that in the most
solid and s^bstantial points of it, as the Sovereignty of God in his Decrees
and Providence. God's free grace if it seem in the least to entrench on our
free will, the imputation of the first Adam's sin to our guilt, and of the
second Adam's righteousness to our Justification, and the like, in which the
true Believer has the most solid foundation of his most established peace, and
therefore with him are amongst those (...), most surely believed, and most
firmly built Luke 1. 1.
upon; for such I say, as do thus, (...) and question and dispute all into
uncertainties, and so draw fast down to flat Atheism, we should reject them and
abhor their attempt, which would sever Ens and verum, and despoil Christ, in
whom the Text says, there is substantial Entity of his infallible verity.

And therefore on the contrary our duty is, if we would be answerable to him,
to stand fast on so firm a groundwork; and as he (...) a founded founded
stone, Lapis fundatissimus, a most Isa. 28. 16.
founded Corner stone, and a most firm foundation, so he expects that we should
grow up to that (...) both (...), Col. 2. 2. and (...), Hebr. 10. 22. and
(...), Hebr. 6. 11. the full assurance of knowledge as well as hope, and faith,
that we be not carried Ephesians. 4. 14.
away with every wind of Doctrine; or be led away with the error of the
wicked, falling from our stedfastness; but be firmly built on 2 Pet. 3. 17.
so substantial a foundation, and especially in fundamentals to be confirmed,
resolved, solid Divines as well as Christians.

2. A Second particular as to our understandings which suits not with this
substance in the Text, nor that answerable substantialness that should be in
every true Christian, is when the whole or main substance of all our Religion
is in taking up and maintaining some Notions and Opinions, and it may be some
new lights and high speculations, concerning which we are not (as the Scepticks
were, in the former particular) at an indifferency, but press them with utmost
intention, as if in them were the marrow, kernel, the very heart and substance
of all godliness, as in truth it is the whole of many of those who now most
pretend to godliness, who by being of such or such a Sect, opinion or
persuasion do measure their own and others Saintships, like them, 1 Timothy 1. 4.
who gave heed to fables and endless genealogies, doubting about questions, and
oppositions of science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 20. which is far enough
from that laying up a good solid substantial foundation, which the Apostle
exhorted to in the verse foregoing. Were the bare knowledge and confession of
most solid truths sufficient, Satan may go for a Saint. But if the whimsies,
and airy or fiery fancies of weak or hot heads may go for sound and solid
Religion, it would be a very thin empty frothy thing, not this substance which
the Text speaks of. The Astronomers Phenomenon in heaven may be of some good
use, but such in our brains will never light us thither. Let therefore such
Spanish Alumbradoes or English Illuminates please themselves Casaubon
Enthusiasme p. 131.
in such fantastical seize. On the contrary let it be the care of every
one that would prove a substantial Christian, by all good means to attain to a
solid judgment of saving truth, and not rest there neither, but because
Theologia is not scientia speculativa but practica, and because in
Scripture-use verba sensus affectum and effectum connotant, words of knowledge
and sense imply affection, and Divinity is an art of living, and not only of
bare knowing, as many of us as would be solid Divines and substantial
Christians, (as the lamenting Churches eye affected her heart, Lament. 3. 54.
so) let our knowledge effectually press on to earnest affection, and real
action, which leads on to the other two Heads before mentioned.

2. And as concerning our hearts and affections, two things inherit substance.

1. The first is a weak faint listlesness and deadness in the outgoings of our
souls to Christ, an heartless velleity, a wishing and a woulding, rather than
any true and hearty willing: Balaam's wishes, Numb. 23. 10.
the sluggards desires, half desires, which in Gods account are Prove. 21. 25.
none; as Gods people when with a weaned remisness they close with the things
of this world, they rejoice as though they rejoiced not, 1 Cor. 7. 30. So when
our desires and affections to Christ do so freeze in our bosoms, they come
short of this (...) this Est in the Text; they are, and they are not. When we
say and profess that Christ is such solid food, his flesh, (...) meat indeed,
and we bring such flashy desires and such faint appetites to him, what do we
but make men believe that either he is not found food, or at least that we have
but sick stomachs? He not substance, or we not substantial Christians?

2. But Secondly, There is another distemper in this kind, which wants not
for strength, but yet in substance. The wind no solid substantial body, yet may
be very violent and impetuous: such a flatulency there is in many men's spirits,
which makes a show of a great deal of real zeal and strength of affection for
God and Christ, and yet is nothing but an empty swelling tympany, an impetuous
violence to prosecute our own desires, opinions and ways, and to bear down
whatsoever rather displeases us than what offends God. Such was Jehu's zeal,
and 2 Kings 10. 16. Luke 13. 14.
the Ruler of the Synagogue his indignation, and the more to discover the
unsubstantialness of it, it is usually not about the (...) the weightier things
of the law, and such as concern the substance and power of godliness; but about
circumstances and externals, or other less and lighter matters, as it was with
the Pharisees about their Mint and Anise and Phylacteries, and so now is with
the Papists about their Ceremonies and Traditions, and with many amongst us
about some niceties in Church government and outward forms and other curious
Punctilioes, which are at a great distance from the heart and soul and
substance of Religion. Here we have heat enough and too much, a feverish heat
but not kindly and natural, fire, but such as proves wildfire, making a blaze
in lighter straw, but such as puts all into a combustion. Oh beware of such
a dangerous mistake, as to take the violence of an unmortified passion for the
power and substance of saving grace.

And therefore if ever we would attain to solid and substantial evidence of it,
our contrary care and effectual endeavor must be

1. Contrary to that coolness and indifferency of our affections to Christ to
rise up to more strong and earnest outgoings of our Souls after him, such as
the Scripture expresses by hungrings and thirstings, and longings, breathings,
breakings, pantings, and faintings after God; not a faintness of indifferency,
but a fainting upon our being spent in eagerest pursuits of what we cannot
fully overtake, that it comes not to I am and I am not, but as Christ named
himself I am, so with truth and reality I can echo back Exodus 3. 14.
again and say, Lord I am, I am; really and in good earnest with strongest b^nt
of my Soul, I am for thee, and so indeclinably and earnestly move toward thee,
that I shall not be quiet till I rest in thee. I do not measure substance by
quantity, nor judge of truth of grace by the degree; though some now will needs
wholly place it in it. There is the true essence and substance of a man in a
weak Child, and weak desires after Christ may be true and serious, if this
weakness be occasioned from other hindrances, and not from an indifferency,
but still giving Christ the Sovereignty. But yet such weakness should not be
rested in, but overgrown, and more strong and earnest workings of the heart to
be grown up to, if we would have more real and substantial, at least more
sensible evidences of the life and power of godliness.

2. Nor must we satisfy our selves with this. There was strength enough and in
some respects too much in that impetuous flatulency of some men's spirits,
which was the second miscarriage before noted. But therefore contrary to it our
care must be, if we would have evidence of true, solid, substantial godliness,
that this strength of passion do not only bluster toward others, but that it
produces real and substantial effects in our own hearts, and that we find and
feel it so doing, for as they are wont to say, that Tactus est fundamentum
vitae sensitivae, so real felt inward effects in the Soul, are surest evidences
of a true spiritual life also; such as were beforementioned in the doctrinal
part of this point as substantial and real effects and operations of Christ in
us, are to this purpose to be really felt and expressed by us.

A serious and hearty making out after Christ, indeed and in good earnest;
working that really in us which Nature cannot effect, and hypocrisy but ill
favouredly counterfeit: which may evidence to others, as least to our selves,
that God is in us, (...) of a truth, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14. 25.
really changing our hearts, and powerfully mortifying our lusts, that we may be
(not as that (...), 2 Pet. 2. 18. but) (...), free indeed, as it is John 8. 36.
substantially satisfying the vast desires of our Souls, and thereby evidencing
that Christ is to us (...), not only sauce (as he is to Hypocrites, and many
Politicians) but meat indeed.

And as substantially supporting and comforting us in greatest exercises and
faintings, either in life or death; a friend in such straits, as we are wont to
say, is a friend indeed. And such we express and proclaim Christ to be, when we
can experimentally know him by his Name I am, and find him to be All, when all
else is nothing, though with them, Hebr. 10. 34. we be spoiled of all other
goods, yet then Christ makes good this his word, To those who so love him, he
makes them to inherit substance.

3. For our outward carriage and Conversation, contrary to this substance, is
empty outside formal Ceremoniousness and superficial Hypocrisy.

1. For the first, What a glaring show did the Pharisee make in his
Phylacteries and Tephilims, the Pope in his Pontificalibus? What a Pageant and
Puppet play is their Mass; and what an heap of light chaff is their Corpus
Juris Canonici? And yet as of old, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these, in these and such like outward services
and circumstances such weight laid as though they had been the very heart, and
life, and substance of godliness, whilst those who most pressed them were the
most real and bitter Enemies of the power of grace, and many of the people who
most doated on them were most debauched and furthest off from the least show of
it, but (that I may use Tertullian's words) did impietatis secreta
superficialibus officiis abumbrare, and although they did drink and drab, and
live in all abominable filthiness, yet if they could take Sanctuary in such
Church-Formalities, which could let them alone in their lusts (missa non
mordet) if they could bow and cringe, and be ready at their postures in the
Church, and on their Deathbed receive their Maker and be absolved, and when
dead be buried in a Friars Cowl, all was safe enough. All this only the Whores
garish dress, far from the Spouses substantial and durable clothing as it is
called, Isa. 23. 18.

But I forbear now to speak further of this, because although little do we know
how soon our giddiness and Romes Emissaries, through God's just judgment may
again bring us to such vanities, for the present we are gotten to a quite
contrary extreme of all rudeness and irreverence in God's outward service, as
though there were no mean between affected finicalness and right down
sordidness. The Apostles (...) might make up this 1 Cor. 14. 40.
(...), this great gulf, and keep us from sinking either into Idolatry and
superstition on the one hand, or Profaneness on the other. But again I must
say, Now no more of that superficial Ceremoniousness in God's service.

2. And rather let me speak a little of the vizard of hypocrisy in our outward
profession and carriage, directly opposite to substantial Christianity: a sin
which (as he says) is the worst of all to be accused of by God, but the best
by men, who too often would pin it on the sleeve of all profession and most
odiously of sincere professors. So Job with his friends is an hypocrite, and
Christ with Matthew. 27. 63.
the Jews but a Deceiver, and as soon as ever a Christian was espied, statim
illud de trivio, (...), and I wish we might not have not only in the streets
and other places, but too often also in the Pulpit, the power of godliness
wounded through the sides, and under the name of hypocrisy. But yet this false
sin may be too truly charged on too many by better men, and I fear never on
more than now in this false age, in which there are not more slips minted in
our Coin than in Religion; and none cry out more of Forms than those that are
greatest Formalists. If not totus mundus exercet histrioniam, yet in our little
World too too many prove Stage Players, that act parts in Masks and Visards
with a great deal of the form but a very little of the power of godliness; all
show, and no substance; such shadows using to be most in brightest Sunshine,
and in Bernard's judgment make up that Daemonium Sermon. 6. in Ps. 91.
meridianum. But I must not here enlarge on the many ugly deformities of such
men's sins, and how monstrous such visards make them. All that I have occasion
from the matter in hand to touch on, is, what contrariety they bear to this
substantial reality which is in Christ, and should be in all the true solid
members of his Body; whereas on the contrary these men may be fitly compared to
Sodom's trees and fruit, which Chrysostom says, Hom. 8. in 1. ad Thessal.
are Trees and no Trees, fruit and yet no fruit: all in show, but nothing in
substance. And therefore would we write according to the Copy in the Text, and
according to the exemplar which we there have in Christ, our care and endeavor
should be in our whole course and carriage instead of these vain shows and
non-significant overtures, really to express so much of Christ as may declare
him to be substance, and our selves substantial Christians; that Religion and
Grace is not an Idea or a vain frothy Notion, but a real, vital, energetical
principle: and therefore to every one that names the name of Christ, and makes
profession of his grace, I must say, Loquere ut videam, ut sentiam. Say and do,
appear and be, as Christ said to his Disciples, Luke 24. 39. Behold my hands
and feet that it is I, handle me and see me, for a spirit has not flesh and
bones as you see me have: so the true Disciples of Christ may be able to say to
all beholders, and to most quick-sighted and most suspicious Enemies. Come near
and look, and mark diligently that it is I, that I am really my self and what I
seem for, that I am not a Ghost or a Phantasm, or a Counterfeit, which has not
such real Evidences, and solid demonstrations of Christ and his Grace, which
you see I have.

That my heart is right, when my life expresses righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.

That my profession is sincere, when my Conversation really makes it good, and
so the Gnomon and the Clock go both together.

That in my words and promises (with the Apostle) I do not use lightness, that
with me there should be Yea and Nay: but according 2 Cor. 1. 17. Matthew. 5. 37.
See Grotius in locum.
to my Savior's Precept, my Communication is Est, Est. That although I do not
swear, yet I am a substantial man of my word, that upon it any man may know
where to have me.

And in the constant tenor of my life and carriage I am a square man, a solid
Christian, that notwithstanding some lesser variations (which the best
Lodestone has) I in the general point right, pretend to no more than my life
makes good in a stable frame, and way of down-right-godliness.

Whilst I can really, vitally, vigorously act for God in general and
particular calling.

And if he please to call to it, am enabled as courageously to suffer for him,
and steadfastly to hold fast, (...), the beginning of my confidence (or
substance, as the word is, and Ambrose renders it) and that unto the end, Heb.
3. 14.

This, This is to be a Christian indeed and in good earnest, which really and
actually instateth us in this bequest in the Text, in which Christ promises to
cause them who love him to inherit substance.

SERMON XV. ON PROVE. 8. 21.
(...).

That I may cause to inherit.


WE have hitherto in the first particular treated of what At St. Mary's August
10. 1656.
Christ is in himself, and to them that love him. And that is (...) substantial
reality.

In the second we are now come to consider the Tenure and Title in which they
are promised to be seized and possessed of him, and this that other word (...)
expresses. It is by way of free and perpetual inheritance: so that what
Solomon elsewhere says, that wisdom is good with an inheritance, that he
avoucheth to be found in Eccles. 7. 11.
the wisdom here spoken of, both substance, and Inheritance, (...), that I may
cause them to inherit substance. And that holds forth to us, as I even now
hinted,

1. The freeness of it, our claim to it not being merit, or purchase, or
self-procurement, but only free gift and inheritance; for however to inherit
often signifies in general to possess, and so Haeres and Dominus, or Herus are
the same, and an inheritance may be said to be gotten (by the father) Prove. 20.
21. yet the Child that comes to enjoy it, neither purchased it by his penny,
nor procured it by his labor. Inheritances were wont to be divided by lot,
Ezekiel. 47. 22. which speaks God's allotment, and are now usually either born to
or by favor adopted to, and so are of the Father's, Prove. 19. 14. not of the
Child's procurement. In Ravenell ad vocem Haereditas. Schindler in (...).
a word both from Scripture, and common use an inheritance is in part described
to be that, quod gratis cedit in possessionem.

And so it is here. Christ and that Grace and Glory which comes to us by him
are only and altogether of mere grace, by none of our merit or purchase, and
therefore in this sense are all said in Scripture to be conveyed to us by way
of inheritance. He that overcomes shall inherit all things, Rev. 21. 7.

To have all things is a great possession, but yet all by Inheritance. So we
are said to be heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ, Gal. 3. 29.
Romans 8. 17. to inherit promises, Heb. 6. 12. to be heirs of righteousness,
Heb. 11. 7. of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. of the Kingdom, James 2. 5. which the
Elect shall at last inherit, Matthew. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of the Father,
Inherit the Kingdom. That word inherit tells us by what Title we come by it, as
also those that follow, prepared for you from the foundation of the world, that
if so early provided for us before we were, it was not of our purchasing, but
of God's preparing, as here in the Text (...) that I may cause them to inherit
substance. If it be an heritage, it is God's causing us to inherit it, not any
thing in us that may procure or merit it.

Away then with the proud doctrine of Merit: and let every free gift and
inheritance. And if you say that, Col. 3. 24. we read those words (...), as
though this inheritance were a reward, I only say that they are strangers in
the Scriptures, that know not that there may be a reward of grace and not of
merit, and that the Psalmist spoke not contradictions when he said, Psalm. 62.
12. Unto thee O Lord belongs mercy, for thou rewardest every man according to
his work, non quod mereantur, sed quia Deus misereatur, as Austin speaks, and
therefore (as Basil observes) that this (...) is (...), Retributio, Donum. Gods
In Psalm. 7.
reward is his free gift. So in other places and in that mentioned the Apostle
speaking of Christian servants, he tells them for their comfort that such
servants are by adoption made Sons, and See B^za, Piscator in locum.
so instead of the reward or the wages of servants they shall receive an
inheritance of Sons, so that their inheritance is not so much a reward, as
their reward an inheritance: and therefore as the word reward does not imply
merit, so that other word inheritance does exclude it. Our reward is our
inheritance, and our inheritance is from our Birth and Sonship, and that is
merely only from our Father and his love. We never made our selves heirs, John
1. 13. Ephesians. 1. 5. 1 John 3. 1.
but (as the word in the Text is) He causes us to inherit. Here is no free
will, but free grace, no merit, but mere mercy.

Indeed David often in his prayers pleads both God's righteousness and his own
righteousness. But when Gods, it is either for his righteous taking vengeance on
his enemies, or his righteous fulfilling of his promise, and both these speak
free mercy.

When he pleads his own righteousness, it is either the righteousness Vide
Contarenum de Justificatione, page 594. edit. Paris.
of his cause in reference to unjust men, or the integrity of his heart before
God.

But there is no merit in all this, for our righteousness is our duty, and it is
but righteous for us to perform it; and in that respect our very mercy is
justice: (...) as some read that, Matthew. 6. 1.

And on the contrary God's righteousness in those places is all one with his
Benignity and Mercy, unless you will (with some) Mui^ in Psalm. 36. 12.
thus distinguish them, that his righteousness is in vouchsafing as much as he
promises, and his mercy, in giving more, and such it is even to them who may
seem to be most deserving. So David, when he had thankfully acknowledged that
God had recompensed him according to his righteousness, Psalm. 18. 24.
immediately in the 25. verse he adds, with the merciful thou will show thy self
merciful. He does not say just in giving him what he deserves, but even with
the merciful, who might bid the fairest for merit, thou will show thy self
merciful, i. e. in giving what thy mercy freely vouchsafes, not what even his
mercy can justly challenge. And therefore (to put an end to this particular)
let us all, the best of us all pray and say with the same Psalmist, show us thy
Psalm. 85. 7.
mercy O Lord, and grant us thy Salvation. Whatever we are, God shows us his
free and great mercy if he grant us his salvation, so here in the Text, this
causing of us to inherit holds forth to us first the freeness of the
conveyance.

2. The perpetuity of the enjoyment. That was sufficiently employed in the
former particular, for the more substantial things are, the more lasting they
use to be. But if withal it come by way of inheritance, that speaks it to be
more than an ordinary gift, or the portion of the sons of the Concubines, more
than spending-money, or what perishes in the use of it: more than a moveable
or an Annuity, it is a perpetuity, an Inheritance being that which descends
from Father to Son, from one generation to another, Firma possessio.
that which a man lives on, abides by, of all else can least endure to be
thrust out of, as we see in Naboth's example, 1 Kings 21. 3. and find by our
own experience. So the law was Isreal's inheritance, which they should always
observe, Deuteronomy. 33. 4. and so was the land of Canaan, out of which they should
not remove, 2. Sam. 7. 10. Indeed by reason of their sins that good land has
Levit. 18. 28. 20. 22.
spewed them out, so that according to that threat, Jer. 17. 4. they now
discontinue from their heritage, such prodigals were they, and so are many more
like them, and so vain and unstable are all outward enjoyments that even
inheritances prove not perpetuities. But this in the Text does: And therefore
Mercer thus renders the words, Vt haereditare faciam esse perpetuum. This
substance here promised is an enduring substance, Hebr. 10. 34. This
Inheritance is for ever, Psalm. 37. 18. is (...), incorruptible, undefiled, and
that fades not away, that which cannot be corrupted from without, nor decay
from within, and so every way incorruptible, and moreover is reserved in heaven
for us, and we by the power of God through faith preserved and kept to it, 1
Pet. 1. 4, 5. More could not be said for its stability in it self, and for our
sure and indefeizible estate and interest in it. An inheritance settled upon us
by God the Father's Eternal Decree, Matthew. 25. 34.

Purchased for us at a very high rate by Christ, who himself is Heir of all
things, Hebr. 1. 2. and therefore if we claim under him, our Title to it is
strong and sure.

And we kept in possession by the spirit of God, and this as he is the Power of
God, 1 Pet. 1. 5. and therefore no fear of an Ejectio Firmae. No cause of a
distrustful desponding fear, either of the decay of what is so substantial, or
of being cast out of this inheritance so purchased, settled, and maintained with
all the security of Heaven, and the distinct and yet joint care and work of all
the Persons in the Blessed Trinity.

Away then with that uncomfortable Doctrine of the Saint's Apostasy which
would make their Inheritance movables, and disinherit the heirs of life. But
Blessed be God, who (according to the former particulars) has so settled this
inheritance, that the intail can by no craft of man or Devil be cut off. Though
the servant abides not in the house for ever, yet the Son (the heir) abides
ever, John 8. 35. what is ours (as duties and performances) may be intercepted:
what is of God's common bounty (as good things of this life, and common graces)
may be lost: what are his special largesses as accessories, (as feelings and
enlargements) may fail: but the substance and inheritance abides and remains
inviolable. When leaves fade or are blown off, yet the substance, Isa. 6. 13.
the root, Job 19. 28. remains. But not to go out of the Text, to inherit
substance, are two very great and strong words. Substance and inheritance speak
Perseverance.

But it were well if our lives did speak as much too, and that on the contrary
the desperate Apostasies (after profession) of some that were never sound, and
the woeful decays of others that were more sincere, did not afford men of
corrupt minds a Topic head of arguments to impugn and shake the settled
stability of God's Peoples Inheritance. Such Asahel's and Amasa's, wallowing in
their 2 Samuel 2. 23. 20. 12.
blood, make many stand still, not knowing what to say. Woe to them by whom such
offenses come, which should make us the more watchful and careful to maintain
this our best inheritance. Young Heirs want not usually such as would either
gull or thrust them out of their inheritance. We live in such times of error
and danger that the heirs of life had never more need than now to look to it
that they be not wiped of theirs; whose care therefore should be to take view
of their goodly inheritance: and if it be Psalm. 16. 6.
Christ and his Truth, and Grace, and Heaven, then to look to it, that neither
by fair means nor foul they be either cheated or more violently thrust out of
their freehold, or any part of it. The Ephesians. 4. 14. Col. 2. 18. 2 John 7. 8.
Revel. 3. 11.
Lord forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee,
was Naboth's answer to Ahab, who spoke and offered fair to get it from him, 1
King. 21. 2, 3. And let it be ours to any (whosoever they be) that with fairest
words, promises, or pretensions, would cheat and bribe us out of this our
Interest. Now the Lord forbid it to us to sell our birthright with profane
Esau, to part with that inheritance which our Heavenly Father has purchased
for us with the blood of his dear Son.

And for outward violence our times are not so secure, but that although this
our inheritance cost us nothing in one kind for the purchase, yet it may cost
^s much to keep possession. And what Contests, Suits, yea riots and tumults,
often are there to keep possession of earthly freeholds and inheritances? I am
far from endeavoring to raise or foment outward stirs and tumults, but yet I
am sure this inheritance I now speak of is of infinite more value, and
challenges proportionably more standing for in a way of God, and therefore
(...), Heb. 12. 28. (...), Hebr. 10. 23. nay (...), Tit. 1. 9. if we have, let
us hold, and that fast, and that against all violence that would wrest out of
our hands such a treasure. Whatever else we lose, be it estate, liberty, life
it self, which are but circumstances, accessories, yet let us not part with
Christ, his Grace and Truth, which is substance, and Inheritance. And therefore
(as Ambrose observes out of Genesis 2. 15.) Adam had De Paradiso Cap. 4.
a double task in Paradise, operari and custodire, to work and keep: so let it
be ours in managing this our inheritance to which we have a better Title upon
better promises, that we both get and keep possession. Let no man beguile you
of your reward, says Paul to his Colossians, Cap. 2. 18. Hold fast (says
Christ to the Church of Philadelphia) that which thou have, let no man take thy
Crown, Revel. 3. 11. Let no man gull or thrust thee out of thy inheritance say
I. It is God in Christ. And therefore resolve with Asaph when heart and flesh
fail, that He shall be the strength of thy heart, Psalm. 16. 5.
and thy portion, and that for ever, Psalm. 73. 26. It is his word and Truth,
and therefore Contend for it, Jude v. 3. with David take it an heritage, and
that for ever, Psalm. 119. 111.

It Is his Grace, and therefore stand to it, persevere in it, (...), Revel. 2.
3. how elegant the expression! But how much more pleasing to God is the thing!
In vindicating and securing this inheritance to labor without fainting: to
continue the suit, and to hold on the conflict without ceasing. So two of the
best of Gods servants in either Testament express their practice and resolution
by their, I have done, and I do, I have and I will. I have suffered the loss of
all things for Christ, and I do count them dung, says Paul, Phil. 3. 8. and
one thing I have desired of the Lord, and that which I will seek after, says 2 Samuel 6. 21, 22. Hos. 6. 4.
David, Psalm. 27. 4. Oh that our goodness were not as the morning-cloud, but as
the morning-sun, that, as Christ and his Grace is inheritance, an everlasting
inheritance, so we might cleave fast Pro. 4. 18.
to him, and enjoy him everlastingly. An Inheritance, when had, do not part
with him.

And upon the same ground, as such, let us prize and choose him. Job 17. 11.

The thoughts and desires of the heart are called (...) the possessions of the
heart, i. e. that which the heart is possessed with. Such possessions Job there
tells us may be broken off, and we from them. Such thoughts (though (...) gay,
glittering ones, as the word signifies) may perish, Psalm. 146. 4. and such
desires (though impetuous ones) may fail, Eccles. 12. 5. And all such things
which we have so firmly fixed our thoughts and desires on, may either fade of
themselves or be taken away by the violence of others. Such inheritances we may
easily be cast out of, as the Prophet speaks of some who oppress a man and his
heritage, Micah 2. 2. and the lamenting Church complains that their inheritance
was turned unto strangers, and their houses to aliens, Lam. 5. 2. The most
ancient Manor houses may not prove Mansions; but time or violence may ruin
them. The Houses of Ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end,
says the Lord, Amos 3. 15. We have need therefore of some better foundations,
of a building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2 Cor. 5. 1.


Pleasures, especially of sin, are but (...), last but for a season: flowers
that soon wither in our hand. And although in our Hebr. 11. 25.
vain wanton youth whilst we enjoy them, we promise our selves ver perpetuum:
and if we might but continue to enjoy them, so brutish are we that we could be
content to have no other, no better inheritance; yet a summers scorching heat
of many inflamed lusts of youth often on the sudden burns them up, or an
Autumns decay in aftertimes withers them, or to be sure old ages winter frost
will at last quite kill them. We had need therefore of something that is more
solid and lasting, and which will afford us strong and everlasting consolation.
Hebr. 6. 18. 2 These. 2. 16.


Should honor and esteem and applause in the world be that which we would make
a portion of, this were but to inherit the wind, as Solomon's phrase is, the
wind of another breath or Pro. 11. 29.
applause, and such wind continues not to blow from the same quarter always.
Unstable would that house be which is turned about like the fan or weathercock
on the top of it, as several nay contrary blasts of wind blow it. Indeed
Solomon speaks of the wise man's inheriting glory, Prove. 3. 35. and the honor
and fame of some prudent pious men continues longer than themselves, and
descends as an inheritance sometimes to their posterity. But how often is it
buried with them or before them? or afterward obscured by their offsprings
baseness? Such an inheritance is soon spent, unless by taking hold of Christ
and Gods Covenant we so gain an everlasting Name that shall not be cut off,
Isa. 56. 4, 5.

Riches also are not for ever, but make to themselves wings to fly Pro. 23. 5.
See Cart. wright in lo. cum.
away like-Eagles, so that either we never with all our haste overtake them, or
when once had and enjoyed and afterward flown away, we are never able to
recover them, so that we have no reason to c^use our eyes to fly on them (as
the word there is) which so f^y from us.

And does the Crown endure to every generation? Prove. 27. 24. Remove the Diadem
and take off the Crown, (...) this shall not be the same, I will overturn,
overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, says God by his Prophet, Ezekiel.
21. 26, 27. Our knowledge and experience has told us that even hereditaty
Crowns and Kingdoms may be removed and alienated.

And how should this therefore alienate our affections from such movables, and
make us lay more sure hold on Christ, upon whom His Crown flourishes, Psalm.
132. 18. is not a withering garland; is substance, and an inheritance that will
abide by us, will live, and on which we may live for ever. As therefore he is
said to choose the inheritance of his people for them, Psalm. 47. 4. O that he
would once teach us all to choose right by making choice of him; that we had
fixed everlasting thoughts and desires of this everlasting inheritance, as it is
called, Hebr. 9. 15. These are the sure mercies of David. We that are wont to
be so Isa. 55. 3.
careful to make sure other estates and inheritances to ourselves and children
and friends; O that we were so good friends to our selves and them, as to take
more care to ascertain this which is incorruptible, undefiled, and which fades
not away.

Which if once secured, Happy, for ever happy we because we made for ever.
Substance and inheritance (as I said) are two great words, which may prove very
strong supporters of the most broken arms. How well and comfortably do some
live on Annuities that last but for a time! but how much more contentedly and
joyfully does the heir on his inheritance, which if he do not prodigally waste
but husband, will prove a perpetuity!

But what abundant satisfaction may this be to the heirs of life, that whereas
all other earthly inheritances will be certainly consumed if not before, yet at
the last day, when the whole earth and all the works that are therein shall be
burnt up: yet in this their 2 Pet. 3. 10.
everlasting inheritance they are provided for to eternity. Eternity, whether
you look on the black or bright side of it, is a matter of saddest
consideration. To go at last either into everlasting punishment, or life
Eternal, Matthew. 25. 46. On the one side the worm that never dies, and the fire
that never goes out, may startle and affright the most senseless and obdurate
sinner; but the sure possession and everlasting inheritance of everlasting
righteousness here and everlasting life hereafter, is that which cannot but
administer strong and everlasting consolation to the poorest weakest believer.
In this vast wide common of eternity which they can find no end of, they may be
lost as to their thoughts, but it is well that they are saved (though) because
it is in their own inheritance. Well may they say with David, the lines are
fallen to me in pleasant places, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 6. What
content do men use to take in their inheritances, continued to them in so many
and so many descents from their great Ancestors! Salve haerediolum majorum
regna meorum Quod proavus, quod avus, Ansonius.
quod pater excoluit. Though not Regna, but haerediola, though not Kingdoms,
but far less matters, yet if our fore-father's inheritance, it is that which as
we much set by, so we take very great content in. And how much more may every
heir of life in his? whether continued in his earthly Progenitors several
descents or no, yet an inheritance provided for him by his heavenly Father from
eternity, Matthew. 25. 34. and continued to him to eternity, v. 46. that he shall
never outlive his means as the Prodigal did, nor out-last his inheritance:
because it is Christ, who is yesterday Heb. 13. ^.
and to day and the same for ever. Substance! there is solid comfort.
Inheritance! There is everlasting consolation. He may now add and say with the
young man in the Gospel, What lack I yet? Is there, Can there be yet any thing
wanting? when the Commodity is so 1. substantial, 2. so lasting? No. If you add
but a third to those two, That there be enough of it; and that the following
part of the Text adds. In Christ there was (we have seen)

1. Solid Reality. He is (...) substance. 2. Perpetuity. It Is (...). In him we
inherit substance. To both which is added in the close of the verse. 3. Perfect
fullness and plenty.
(...)
And I will fill their Treasures.
Two very full words. Treasures speak Plenty, and Fullness fills up to the Brim,
and leaves no vacuity: and therefore well might the Apostle say, (...), Col.
2. 10. that we are complete in Christ. If this here in part be meant of the
supply of outward mercies, it is that (...), Luke 6. 38. the overmeasure running
over, that by him we may have always all sufficiency 2 Cor. ^. 8.
in all things, as the Apostle speaks: but that which abundantly suffices a
godly heart, and is here chiefly intended, shall suffice me now to treat of,
and that is, that (...) Ephesians. 1. 3.
(...), that All of spiritual blessings in heavenly places, which are in
Christ: which he most plentifully imparts to them that love him. Concerning
which he does not here speak over when he says, he will fill their treasures.
The more full clearing whereof will be too great a task for me to dispatch in
the remuant of the hour. Suffice it therefore for the present, Digitum ad
fontem, to show you in how full a current the stream is likely to (...): or how
full the Cistern will be, showing you how full the fountain is. And so it will
be a Demonstration, a priori, of Christ's being able perfectly to fill us; by
declaring that he is absolutely, completely above measure, full in himself,
there is no doubt but that he will be able to fill our treasures; In whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, as the Apostle from his own
experience bears witness, Col. 2. 3. In Christ are hid (from Strangers) but
most safely laid up (for believers) Treasures, and that is a great deal, but all
treasures is as much as can be, especially if it be not only of wisdom and
knowledge, but of all grace, and whatever may fill and enrich us. For that the
Apostle had said in the foregoing Chapter, v. 19. (...). It pleased the Father
that in him all fullness should dwell. And more could not be said, nor more
fully to make our joy full.

1. Here is (...) Fullness, no emptiness; nothing wanting.

2. An indwelling fullness. Not (...) but (...), not as sojourning in a
moveable tent, but ever abiding as in an everlasting mansion: not as the
Prophets who in those extraordinary illapses were full of power by the spirit
of the Lord, as Micah speaks, cap. 3. 8. which yet lasted not always, but
like the sea, which is now up in a full spring tide, and ere long sinks down
into a dead low water. But this sons perennis, this everliving spring retains
its constant fullness in the dryest summers. This following Rock goes along
with the Israel of God in the 1 Cor. 10. 4.
droughtiest wilderness. Hagar's bottle now full ere long may be empty, Genesis
21. 15. Elijah's brook now overflowing may after a while dry up, 1 Kings 17. 7.

The Creature like Naomi (and that name signifies pleasantness) the most
pleasing and promising creature (like her) may go out full, and return empty,
Ruih. 1. 21. But as in Christ's presence there is fullness of joy, so at his
right hand there are (...) Psalm. 16. 11.
pleasures for evermore. 1. Fullness, 2. an indwelling, an everlasting fullness.

3. And this from an (...) from the good pleasure of God the Father, which
never fails in what it designeth.

4. And to make all complete, There is a Note of universality added, (...), All
fullness dwells in him. All for kind, and All for degree. Nothing wanting, no
measure defective in him to whom the spirit was not given by measure, John 3.
34. It Is otherwise in the most complete creatures, The head may be full of
notions, and the heart empty of grace, and the same Christian who is eminent in
one grace may be very defective in another. In nature, eminency in one kind is
but to compensate the defect in another. But in Christ, who is All in All, is
All fullness. Col. 3. 11.


Plenitudo fontis, the fullness of a fountain, which notwithstanding all the
water it pours out, is still always full, though not of the same individual
water, but of what flows in a continual succession.

Plenitudo solis, the fullness of the sun, in which the same light abides
always, which though it may be over-clouded and eclipsed, yet not extinguished;
but so as after such overshadowings shines out in more full brightness: as Mr.
Peacock after a sad hour of darkness that had been upon his spirit broke out
into that Divine expression, the sea is not so full of water, or the sun of
light, as God is of goodness in Christ.

Nay, Plenitudo Deitatis, the fullness of the Godhead, Col. 2. 9. of the whole
Divine nature and all its properties and Attributes, which being infinite
cannot but infinitely more than fill up our greatest vacuities and emptiness.

But this leads me to a more particular view of this fullness of Christ: which
may be considered either, 1. in regard of his person, or, 2. of his offices.

1. For his Person, if we consider it either quoad gratiam unionis, or gratiam
habitualem, either the Divine Nature assuming the Humane into the same personal
subsistence, or that Grace, which thereupon is from that Divine Nature
communicated to the Humane for its complete accomplishment, there can be no
less in one Christ than All fullness and perfection, in himself and for all such
as are united to him.

1. For his Nature, The fullness of the Godhead dwells in him, and that Bodily,
Col. 2. 9. i. e. not as in the more empty shadows of the law, but
substantially, personally, that the same Person who is Man is God also, and
that Manhood assumed into the subsistence of the Godhead, John 1. 14. The word
was made flesh, and then we beheld his glory as the only begotten of the Father
full of Grace and Truth; that it is God who laid down his own blood as a price
of redemption for us, Acts 20. 28. and that every way makes a supply to us. And
then, how full must that needs be? He would have us hungry: But he is too
greedy, whom an Alsufficient Christ cannot satisfy. That want is more than
infinite, which an infinite God cannot make up. Do not I fill heaven and earth?
says the Lord, Jer. 23. 24. And cannot he fill thy heart? For certain Jesus
Christ, who is God over all, Romans 9. 5. All in All, Col. 3. 11. is able to fill
all in all, Ephesians. 1. 23.

2. And this leads to that Fullness of habitual Grace which from the Divine
nature flowed into the Humane: Not as though the essential properties of one
Nature were communicated to the other, and so his Humanity were infinite,
omnipotent, or omnipresent (as the Vbiquitaries would have it) but that the
spirit was given to him so above measure, John 3. 34. that he became such a
Fountain of Grace, as was not only full in himself, but overflowing to the full
supply of all believers. And this Grace in him (though but a created quality
and therefore not properly infinite, yet) so as not limited to any kind, or
degree, and in that sense in a manner infinite.

And this grace was full not only in reference to Him, and His state and
condition: for in that sense Mary is said to have been full of grace, Luke 1.
28. and Stephen and Barnabas, full of the Holy Ghost, Act. 7. 55. 11. 24.
namely as they were filled so far as was requisite to that condition and
service, to which God called them.

But Christ who is said to be full of the Holy Ghost, Luke 4. 1. and full of
grace and truth, John 1. 14. was full also in reference to the Grace it self,
in that it was in him in the greatest extension both for Kind and Degree, which
the Blessed Virgin, and the perfectest Saint fell short of, as not necessary to
their place and employment, as it was to Christ's; who as he was in himself,
God-Man, so he was to be Head to all Believers, and Fountain and common
principle of all Grace in them all; which necessarily required it to be a
complete overflowing fullness. And this leads me off from this fullness of
Christ in reference to his Person, to

2. That (in the second place) which concerns his Offices. To which, as God
called him, so he fully furnished him, that he might as fully execute them, and
so fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15. as Bezaleel when called by Name was
filled with the spirit Exodus 31. ^, 3.
to prepare all the work of the sanctuory: and amongst the ^e^t this was one,
in cutting of stones, (...) to set them, or fill ^^th V. 9.
them, as the word signifies: which were therefore called (...) Lapides
impletionum, Exodus 25. 7. because such preciou^ stones so set by him did fill
up the Pales and Ouches which they were set in. Even such a Bezaleel was our
Emmanuel, completely filled with all grace for the rearing up and perfecting of
God's Sanctuary: and his so many offices were as so many Pales or Ouches of
gold, in which were set all those most precious graces and abilities of the
spirit, as so many (...) most precious filling stones: by which he most
completely fulfilled the whole work of his Mediatorship and of all his Offices.

They, you know, were three, of Prophet, Priest and King* and he abundantly
furnished with suitable Grace perfectly to fulfill them all.

1. As Prophet. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col.
2. 3. whereby he is most fully able to enrich our empty Heads and Hearts with
that saving wisdom which is able to make us wise unto salvation. And if Timothy
by being much in Paul's Company, came thereby fully to know his Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3. 10. how much infinitely more must the Son by being in his Father's
bosom come to know his will? And as by a faithful John 1. 18.
Treasurer what in this kind was laid up by him, though hid from others, yet is
brought forth and imparted by him to his Servants, Matthew. 13. 11. This full
fountain is dispersed abroad, as his peoples occasions require. And if Paul
could say that he had fully Romans 15. ^^.
preached the Gospel, how much more fully does Christ both in his own Ministry,
and in his Servants, both commissionated and enabled by him? Oh! None teaches
like him, Job 36. 22. None so convincingly, clearly, inwardly, savingly. There
is an abundant overflowing fullness in him as our Prophet, to fill us, even the
most empty and ignorant, with the saving knowledge of his will. How eminently
wonderfully have Idiots, men of weaker parts and Romans 1^ 14. Psalm. 19. 7.
Making wise the simple. Act. 6. 10.
women of the weaker Sex, not only been made wise to Salvation, but also to
silence and confound subtlest and most profound opposers, which have not been
able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which they spoke, both Scripture and
Church Story fully evidence.

2. As Priest; according to the Hebrew Phrase his hands were filled in his full
consecration to that office: which he as fully executed, as is fully cleared in
the Epistle to the Hebrews.

In his Censer we find (...). It Is full of much sweet incense of his
Intercession to be offered up with the Prayers of all Saints, to make them
accepted as they go up out of his hand, Revel. 8. 3, 4.

And his Sacrifice most fully expiatory of all our sins. Solomon's Sacrifice of
two and twenty thousand Oxen, and an hundred and 1 Chronicles. 7. 1.
twenty thousand Sheep, was but an imperfect type and Epitome of the
infiniteness of our true Solomon's one all-sufficient oblation. And the
Priest's sprinkling of the blood seven times before the Lord, See Ainsworth in
losum.
Levit. 4. 6. but a dark shadow of that full ablution and perfect cleansing,
which our High Priest made by his own blood.

By which also he has fully quenched the flaming Fire of his Fathers wrath. To
which purpose you find him with a Rainbow on his head, Revel. 10. 1. to assure
and secure us from that overflowing deluge: which (it may be) was shadowed out
by Joshuaes building an Altar, and offering Peace Offerings even upon Mount
Ebal, (Josh. 8. 30, 31.) upon which the Curse was wont to be denounced. By our
Joshua, our Jesus, even where a Curse might have been expected, we meet with
the Blessing of Peace. The Psalmist calls it the great and wide Sea, in which
are creeping Psalm. 104. 25.
things innumerable, both small and great beasts. And may not we say it is a
deep full Sea of Christ's Blood, in which are drowned such an innumerable
Company of lesser and greater sins, even Mountains as well as Mole-hills. It Is
(...) Plentiful (Multiplied) Redemption, as it is called, Psalm. 130. 7, 8. which
redeems Israel, even all the Israel of God from all their iniquities; and that
so fully, that as some Pictures although they look upon all in the room, yet
seem to every particular man as though they eyed him only; even so, although
the extent of Christ's Merit See Aqui^. part 3. q. 5. 6. 4. 3. and ad tertium.
reaches to all Believers in common, yet so fully to every Believer in
particular, as though it had been designed to him only. How full is this
wellhead which does so fully serve both common Conduit and every private
Cistern?

3. As King. The Apostle tells us he is now ascended up for above all heavens
that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4. 10. full of power and glory, fully
able to overcome all our spiritual and bodily enemies, and to supply us with
Grace and Peace, with all inward and outward mercies; In a word, and in the
words of the Text, every way able to fill our Treasures.

For being both as to his Person and Offices so fully furnished with all
sufficiencies, as Solomon says of the Clouds, if they be full of rain, they
empty themselves on the earth, Eccles. 11. 3. So Christ being thus every way
full in himself, he is of God made unto us a full fountain of wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. all on purpose
laid up in him, that he might supply us, and that out of his fullness we all
might John 1. 16.
receive grace for grace. And so we read of him, Revel. 8. 3. (...). All was
given to him, that he might give to all his. And therefore it is that what the
Psalmist calls his receiving of gifts, Psalm. 68. 18. the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 8.
translates his giving of gifts to men; because as Mediator he received that he
might give, he was filled that he might fill. As in an inexhaust treasury all
was laid up in him, that as a good householder he might upon all occasions bring
forth out of his treasure things new and old, (Matthew. 13. 52.) and fill ours.

SERMON XVI. ON PROVE. 8. 21.
AND he is as good as his word. He bids us open our mouths At St. Mary's
November. 23. 1656. (...)
wide, and assures us he will fill them, Psalm. 81. 10. And never did any
hungry soul go from him empty. I have satiated the weary soul, and I have
replenished every sorrowful soul. Jer. 31. 25. That double expression of a
weary and a sorrowful soul signifies a very great want and emptiness, but
those other to words (...) Abunde irrigavi, potavi; explevi, I have abundantly
refreshed, nay completely filled, express a most full supply. And when this is
to (...) not only to one or two, or some few, but to every such empty soul, it
speaks an overflowing fullness.

1. First in that it can fill so many. Every sorrowful soul there; and their
treasures in the plural number here in the Text. There can never be so many of
them that Christ should not be able to fill them all, who fills all in all,
Ephesians. 1. 23. And therefore as Elisha bad the widow go and borrow vessels of
all her neighbors even empty vessels, and not a few, and there was more oil
than vessels to receive it, 2 Kings 4. 3, 6. so bring we to Jesus our Elisha,
our own vessels, yea go abroad and bring our children, friends and neighbors,
be they never so many, and never so empty, yet as long as there is a vessel to
receive, there will be oil to fill it. What Aristotle said of virtue, is most
eminently true of Christ, Rhetor. l. 1. c. 9. part 6. Gulson.
he is (...). He does good to many; as it is the greatness and magnificent
munificence of great men to have many to depend upon them, and receive from
them, so of Jesus Christ the great God to have infinite numbers to be sed and
filled by him, who gives liberally, and that to all, James 1. 5. and is
ascended so high above all heavens, that herein he infinitely transcends the
greatest sufficiency and bounty of the highest here on earth, in that he is
able to fill all things, Ephesians. 4. 10. and yet himself not emptied. Xerxes army
may be so numerous that it might drink up great rivers, and as Senacherib
boasted, dry them up with the soles of their feet, Isa. 37. 25. But Jacobs well
then is very full and deep, of which he himself drank and all his children and
cattle, John 4. 12. But how inexhaust is this fountain of Israel, of which
Psalm. 68. 26.
all the Israel of God have all drunk and that abundantly, and that in all ages
from the first Adam, and so shall to the last Saint on earth? Truly that last
(...) and general assembly of the firstborn, when they shall appear before
Christ at the last day and be with him in heaven for ever, will be a goodly
company; so great Revel. 7. 9.
a multitude as none can number. It will be a Royal sound which that whole
Chorus shall then make, when they shall sing and aloud proclaim this truth,
that one Christ has abundantly filled them all. Them all? when there were but
four thousand men to entertain, his disciples asked the question, and knew not
how to answer it, whence shall we have bread in the wilderness to fill so great
a multitude? Matthew. 15. 33. Now blessed be God that our Christ is no such
barren wilderness; but that in other greatest wildernesses he can and does and
will feed far greater companies.

And not one of them, not the least, meanest, poorest neglected or sent away
empty. Such in other crowds are often overlooked. But our good Householder comes
in to see his Guests, takes notice of all, that none may be without their
dimensum. You heard that he fills every sorrowful soul; a little Benjamin's
mess may be the greatest. To be sure, whatever the man be, he will have the
best and fullest meal that feels himself most empty, and therefore hungreth
most, and feeds heartiliest. The poorest Christian that knows not what
other treasures mean, in Christ has them, and filled too, and that with the
fullest. In that entertainment of Christ even now mentioned, his guests besides
four thousand men were women and little children. His Provisions therefore must
needs be full which could welcome so many.

But it may be you will say, though they were many, yet it was not much that
they received. Philip indeed then spoke of every one of them taking a little.
John. 6. 7. But I am sure It was as much as they would, v. 11. and the next
verse says (...) they were filled; and that is the word in my Text; other
Matthew. 15. 37. Mark 8. 8.
Evangelists say (...) and that word signifies a more full repletion.

2. Which is a second proof of the Point; that there is full provision in
Christ, in that as he gives to many, so that it is so much. Not only to all,
but to all liberally, James 1. 5. The same Lord over all is rich unto all, Romans
10. 12. which argues infinite, both sufficiency and Bounty. For man's, that is
bounded: The more it gives to, the less it is that every one of them receives;
but this heap is so great that one man has not the less because another
carries away the more from it. This Ocean so vast and full that one Vessel is
never the emptier because another is filled by it, whilst both are full. O the
bottomless abyss of God's Bounty in Christ! that notwithstanding the vast
multitudes of persons and capacities, however some receive more than others,
yet all so much as they are all filled, and that so fully, as if it were for
them only. In Christ there must needs be a full supply, when so much for so
many. Much; very much.

1. Because indeed all things. So the Apostle styles him, All in All, Col. 3.
11. And therefore might well say, All are yours, when he could add, And ye are
Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. And elsewhere, I have all, says Jacob, Genesis 33.
11. and I have all, says Paul, Phil. 4. 18. Mark what Bills of Receipts his
Servants bring in. And truly if by knowledge the Chambers be filled with all
precious and pleasant Riches, Prove. 24. 4. then it is no wonder if the Eternal
and Essential Wisdom of God here in the Text be able to fill our Treasures with
all varieties and fullness of whatever is more substantial. To him that
overcomes, he promises that he shall inherit all things, Revel. 21. 7. It Is
very much, when in the general first it is All.

2. More particularly; fully able to supply all our wants, and that in the
greatest extremities of them; as Bethsaida's Pool cured every patient, (...),
of whatever disease he had, John 5. 4. so truly in Christ there is a salve for
every sore. He is (...), All and in All, both persons and wants. And ours are
very great and many. Our Souls and selves without Christ are a very Tohu and
Bohu, wholly empty and void, a vast emptiness; and every Creature though in its
kind never so useful and helpful, though never so full, as we think, of comfort
is but empty; And emptiness put to emptiness will not make up any fullness. At
best is but bonum particulare, helps but in part. Our meat satisfies our
hunger, but does not cover our nakedness: and our garments cloth us, but do
not feed us. But Christ as God is Bonum Universal, is All, does All. There is
no pit of destruction so deep which he cannot fill, nor any want so great,
which he cannot supply. And that in their greatest Extremity.

3. So full as to satisfy all our desires, and that in their utmost capacity.
You heard of a mouth promised to be filled when wide open, Psalm. 81. 10. And
this is more than the former. Your ordinary plain saying is, that you may
better fill a wantons belly than his eye. Truly such wantons often are many
foolish men. The Psalmist speaks of their bellies being filled, Psalm. 17. 14.
when yet the Preacher says, the eye is not satisfied, Eccles. 1. 8. So
naturally capacious are the rational Souls of men, and so sinfully and
unreasonably greedy are their desires and lusts, that nothing in the World can
fill them. But it is well that God and Christ can. As God, He satisfies the
desire of every living thing, Psalm. 145. 16. and as Mediator he says, Drink,
yea drink abundantly, O beloved, Cant. 5. 1. Spare not my cost but enlarge your
appetite. Man's desires may be large: but God's Goodness and Bounty in Christ
is infinite, able to supply all our wants in their extremity, and all the
desires of our Souls in their utmost capacity. But of this I spoke something in
the first Point, and therefore here forbear.

4. Yet let me add this in the fourth place, as an (...), not only good
measure, pressed down and shaken together, but also running Fons est qui vincit
sitientem.
over, that Christ does not only fully answer our wants and desires, but
abundantly infinitely exceeds them, (as a full wellhead does not only feed the
Conduit, but has a slaker.) When he is the Entertainer, though his Guests be
never so many or hungry, there will be a (...) when all are filled, and have
received Matthew. 14. 20. 15. 37. John 6. 11, 12.
as much as they will, there will be so many baskets of what remained, more of
the fragments than the first provisions came to. He being able (...), to do
abundantly above all we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. David's Cup is so full
that it runs over, Psalm. 23. 5.

Some of his Servants have been so filled with spiritual joys, that they have
desired him to hold his hand, as not being able to receive or hold, or bear any
more.

Yea so full and exuberant is this fountain of life, that it runs over in many
common bounties even to Strangers and Enemies; so that not only the Children
are fed, but even the Dogs gather up the crumbs that fall from this full table.
O full-handed Father! O bountiful Housekeeper! Here Is God's Plenty, Enough and
to spare. Ruth found it in Boaz's field. But the truly hungring Soul Ruth. 2.
4, 18.
more abundantly in Christ's. Tastes, Pledges, earnest-pennies here are very
satisfying. What then will the full meal, and payment, and portion in Heaven
be? If he so satisfy us here, he will there for certain fill our treasures.
They so satisfy, that they would not have any thing else: but only are
unsatisfied, that they have no more of them.

5. Add hereto, if you please, in the fifth place that this filling
overflowing fullness of Christ appears yet further, in that he can thus
completely fill us by himself alone when there is so little (it may be nothing)
else to bestead us. A little spring, if it have many rivolets falling into it
as it runs along, may at last swell into a great stream, and all Rivers meeting
may make a full Sea and vast Ocean: but it is a full fountain indeed that of it
self alone fills all the Cocks, and sets all the Mills a going. No great matter
for a confluence of all outward comforts to fill a man, and that rather with
pride and self, than any solid satisfaction. But

Either when we have but little else, to have fully enough whilst When they
showed him two Swords, he said it was enough. Luke 22. 38.
we have the more of Christ; when so many thousand are fed to the full, and so
much to spare, when the Provision was but five barley loaves (that was but
sparing and course) and two small fishes, (but two and they little ones too)
made the miracle the greater, and tells us that Christ was the entertainer.

Or when there is nothing else, and yet nothing wanting, when Christ is not. To
have nothing, and yet to possess all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. as it has been with
Christ's Martyrs and other his destitute and persecuted Servants, when
destitute, yet not desolate. This (...). Hebr. 11. 37.
is only from that little stone cut out without hands, that became a mountain
and filled the whole earth, Dan. 2. 34, 35. As it is the Air which is not seen
that fills up that vast space betwixt Heaven and Earth: so it is nothing else
but an hidden, unseen, unknown, unconceiveable Fullness of Christ that fills
such Souls with Grace, Peace, and Joy, when all else is nothing, or nothing but
vacuity and vanity, and that the Prophet says is less and worse than nothing.

In a word Christ here in the Text when speaking of substance, says it
emphatically and exclusively, I will fill their Treasures, I and none, nothing
but I. A solid and satisfying Repletion is from this Bread of life only. All
besides it satisfies not, Isa. 55. 2. It swells rather than fills. Or if it
fills, it is with emptiness, with Job 15. 2.
wind and east wind, with Pride, or Pain rather than with any solid and
substantial satisfaction. That Is Christ's Royalty which he here appropriates to
himself, when he says that He will make those that love him to inherit
substance, and that He will fill their Treasures.

In the Application of which, that which in the general I God is Alsufficient,
and that Christ alone is able and willing and ready to fill our treasures, it
would be of admirable use to us in our whole course for our instruction and
direction and establishment in matter both of doctrine and practice. As in
particular

It would cut off all those Assumenta, or Patches with which Papists would eke
out Christ, to make him complete, or us in him; as his Prophetical office, in
their Traditions, or Kingly, in the Popes Head-ship, or Priestly, in their own
merits, or Popes Pardons and Indulgences. That Treasure of the Church (as they
call it) is exhausted, and their Purgatory (or purses rather) quite emptied by
this of Christ's filling of his peoples treasures. It was in this sense that the
Apostle said that we are complete in him, Col. 2. 10. And whereas cap. 1. 19.
he had said that (...) It pleased the Father that in him all fullness should
dwell, it cannot but much displease, that quite cross to the (...) the good
pleasure and design of the Father, and the Glory of Christ, any thing should be
taken away from his sole jurisdiction, or added to help to fill up his plenary
satisfaction and full redemption. Indeed the Apostle in the 24. verse of that
chapter speaks of (...) what was behind (which the vulgar too boldly renders
ea quae desunt, what was wanting) of the afflictions of Christ for his bodies
sake the Church. But that is meant of Christ Mystical, not Personal, and for
the edifying of the Saints, not for the satisfying for their sins, which Christ
had done fully, and by one offering for ever perfected them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. So that in it alone is the Churches treasury, to be
freely taken out by the alone hand of faith, and not sold by the Popes
merchants to fill their purses, not Gods peoples consciences with peace and
joy. It Is Christ alone that fills those treasures. The Popes Bulls (whether
Plumbeae or Aureae) are Bullatae Nugae Bubbles full of wind, which will leave
the soul full of anguish and despair, but empty of all solid and true
satisfaction. But we leave them, and come to our selves.

As to our practice it condemns our stuffing and filling our After the
Tradition Col. 2. 8.
of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. Vain man would
be wise; and empty man, full; so vain empty souls! Full we would fain be. But
it is with the world, with self, with sin but not with Christ; full of poison,
or trash. Such kind of fillings the Scripture often speaks of, Either with what
is simply and sinfully evil, and will certainly undo us, and fill us at last
with the wrath of God, and sinking grief and horror. So the wanton fills
himself with unchaste love, Prove. 7. 18. the drunkard with drink, Isa. 56. 12.
the violent oppressor (as the Lion does his den) with prey, Nahum 2. 12. their
houses with spoil, Prove. 1. 13. their eyes with adultery, 2 Pet. 2. 14. their
mouths with cursing, Psalm. 10. 7. and their hands with bribes, Psalm. 26. 10.
and blood, Isa. 1. 15. their hearts full of wrath and fury, Esther 3. 5. Dan.
3. 19. But where is Christ in all this? He does not so use to fill his servants
treasures. This is the filling up of the measure of our sins, Matthew. 23. 32.
not the growing up to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 13. Satan's filling our hearts, as Acts 5. 3. and not Christ's filling
our Treasures. The treasuring up of wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5.
and not the laying up in store of a good foundation, that we may lay hold of
eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 19. What James says of the tongue, that it is full of
deadly poison, will at length prove true James 3. 8.
of all those kind of fillings. Such a Plethorie will be sure to end in some
deadly sickness. Like a foolish Mariner that overlades his Ship with that
stowage that will be sure to sink her: or the unwise husbandman that fills his
barns with such stuff, which will certainly set them on fire if not better
looked to.

Or if not so bad, yet at best and most ordinarily we fill our selves if not
with that which is poison and simply evil, which will certainly destroy us, yet
with that which is not bread, this substance in the Text. No substantial
lasting Treasure, which we may live on in a dear day. Such are all outward
profits, pleasures, honors, and such like enjoyments, as the Philistines filled
up Abraham's wells with earth: so it is earth and earthly Genesis 26. 1^.
contentments that we usually stop and fill up our hearts with. Belly-treasures
(as they are called) which God fills worldlings with, Psalm. 17. 14. Not like
these in the Text which he fills for those that love him. The Body full fed,
and the Soul starved. The belly filled with meat, and the purse and coffers
with coin, and it may be the head with notions, and the heart empty of grace
all the while. We treasure and heap up honor and wealth, and Pelion Ossae.
learning and are here insatiable, as the Prophet says, There is no end of
their treasures, Isa. 2. 7. nor of our desire of them. In the multitude of our
thoughts and deep studies these do utramque paginam implere, whilst God not in
all our thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. No room for Christ, whilst the Inn is filled
with other strangers. No hungring after the Bread of life, when thus filled
with other Cates. Nay, the full soul loatheth the honeycomb, Prove. 27. 7. None
more fully loathing Christ than such as are thus filled with other dainties.
And yet what do all these Tympanies fill us with, but wind and the east wind,
with anguish, or at best with emptiness? To have our barns filled with such
gayes and fine nothings, when a dear day comes, will prove but a pining crop,
and leave such a storer but a very poor empty man.

Which therefore on the contrary calls upon us to rest fully satisfied with
nothing that falls short of Christ, that we be sure that it is he that fills our
treasures. Let nothing fill us but Christ, no nor in part conduce to it further
than Christ is in it, or with it. Christ, his Spirit, his Presence, Grace, and
Peace only should fulfill our joy. The best duty or ordinance so far as Christ
in it: else it will be but empty and leave us so. Word, Sacrament, Prayer,
Christian Communion, so far as this water of life is contained in them and
conveyed by them, are full wells of Salvation, Isa. 12. 3. Otherwise we too
often find them but dry empty Cisterns. If the spouse find not her Beloved in
these Beds of love, she is wholly at a loss, and in the midst of other crowds
like a lonesom desolate widow cries out, Saw ye him whom my soul loves? Cant.
3. 1, 2. And so Paul, in enjoying Communion with the Saints at Rome speaks of
being filled with their company, Romans 15. 24. yet his word is (...). It Is only
in part, or as our English render it somewhat filled, and this so far as Christ
according to his promise, Matthew. 18. 20. is in the midst of them. The fullest
ordinances can only so far fill our hearts with joy and gladness, as Christ is
in them.

And therefore so much more for the most delightful outward contentments. Poor
broken empty cisterns indeed they are, unless we have Christ with them. The
Egyptians take measure of the fruitfulness of their land by the rise and
overflow of their River Nilus: and so may we of our joy and comfort in any
thing by the more full communications of Christ in and with all. So far as he
fills, all is full. Else it sounds hollow, and we find it empty. To this
purpose it is that he in Scripture is wont to be compared to all sorts of
things that are useful and contentful. He is Husband, Father, Friend, Bread,
Light, Life, etc. to show that the satisfying fullness of all these is in and
from him, and that without him if he be not in and with all those, they are but
empty. He is All in All these, and therefore without him all these and all else
are nothing. Unless we enjoy Christ in a friend, our friendship is not every
way full. Till we taste something of Christ in our food, an hungring soul rises
up from the greatest feast empty. Till he dwell in our hearts, Ephesians. 3. 17.
the House is but empty, and till he take more full possession of it and more
fully manifest himself, it will not be full. It was by declaring Christ to
them, 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3. whereby their joy might be full, v. 4.

And therefore, as our Savior, when he sent his Disciples abroad, he bad them
where they came, to enquire whether the son Matthew. 10. 11. Luke 10. 5, 6.
of Peace were there: so, the like enquiry after the Prince of Peace we should
make in all persons, Companies, Ordinances, Providence, Mercies, Enjoyments.
But is Christ in them? Have I Christ? or something of Christ with them? Less
than Naphtali's blessing will not be to me a full portion. O Naphtali,
satisfied with favor and full with the Blessing of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 33. 23.
It Is nothing but Christ that can, that must fill up my treasures.

2. And does this Text assure us that he is both able and willing to do it? It
does then suggest further matter of Complaint and Duty. For is Christ in
himself so full, and so able and willing so abundantly to supply us, as to fill
even our Treasures, then how is it that we are so poor and empty? that as
positively, we are full of other matters, so privatively, so empty of Christ? O
curvae in terras animae, and coelestium inanes! What! The fountain so full, and
runs with so full a stream, and yet runs 1. either wholly wast to the most, and
2. to the no more full watering and enriching of those that make use of it!

I shall not insist on those who either carelessly or wilfully do altogether
neglect or refuse all saving participations of Christ's fullness. He disdains to
feed such full stomachs with the bread of life; and therefore although such
deserve to be slighted that so slight Christ and his fullness, yet this out of
pity let me say to them: If you be poor for the outward man, and poor for the
inward too, how miserably poor you? want daily food, and the bread of life too,
how hunger-starved? what! full of wealth, and honor, and days, and yet wholly
empty of Christ! How woefully empty of peace and comfort will you be at the
last, when you will be emptied of all these, and Christ, who only can then fill
you with joy, be wholly then to seek, because never before seriously and
savingly looked after?

Nay, which is worse, Are you instead of being filled with Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17.
and by him with all the fullness of God, Are you full of the World, of sin, of
self, of pride, of malice, etc. unless you be speedily empty of such Stowage as
this, it will be like that of a Fire-ship, which when the train once takes,
besides what mischief she does to others, will most certainly shatter and sink
her self. This will end with being filled with wrath and curses. These
Treasures will prove Treasures of wrath. Such full Harvests will be an heap in
Isa. 17. 11.
the day of grief, and of desperate sorrow. This may confound such:

But may very much shame others, even those of us who have been it may be for
many years filling out of Christ, and yet to this day are so empty. What
narrow-mouthed vessels we, that fill so slowly? that when the fountain is so
full, the Cistern is so empty, what stops the pipe? that when there is such
fullness in Christ, we do John 1. 16.
not receive Grace for Grace? Grace in us answerable to that in him? when he so
full of grace and truth, we should be so empty of both? V. 14.
of all that which Christ is so above measure full of, and so ready according
to our measure to fill us with? Which therefore methinks should naturally put,
even force, us upon our duty. And that is, seeing Christ is so full, and we so
empty,

1. That the empty pitcher be carried to the full well; that by faith we go to
Christ, that (as the Apostle said of the Saints mutual suplies) (...), that the
abundance of one should be a supply for the want of the other, 2 Cor. 8. 14. so
(much more) that our emptiness may be made up by his fullness. As Creatures, we
depend upon the opening of Gods hand for the filling of our desire, Psalm. 145.
15. As Christians, Quicquid mihi deest usurpo mihi ex visceribus Domini mei.
Augustine.
we are directed to Christ as the hand by which God gives all; the Door at
which all good comes to us. Ite ad Joseph, Go to Joseph, was Pharaoh's word to
the Egyptians when they cried to him for bread, Genesis 41. 55. Ite ad Jesum, Go
to Jesus is God's direction to us when we come to him for a supply of our
wants, in whom alone as in the Wellhead are laid all those Pipes which must
convey all that must fill our empty Cisterns. And therefore as Boaz would not
have Ruth glean in any other field but his, Ruth 2. 8. So it is the will of God
that there should be no other Name under Heaven, which we should betake our
selves to for salvation, but Christ's only, Act. 4. 12. And therefore out of
this full-stored Magazine let us fill our Treasures. And to this end,

1. Let us be very sensible of our own emptiness, whilst full of Sui plenus,
Christi vacuus.
self we are empty of Christ. Yea the full soul loatheth even the honey comb,
Prove. 27. 7. whilst they are the poor in spirit, and Matthew. 5. 3, 6.
such as hunger and thirst, that make the full meal; and who are promised to be
filled and satisfied, according to that, Luke 1. 53. He has filled the hungry
with good things, but the rich he has sent empty away. If well, what need of
the Physician? If Rich, what need of further Treasure? or of filling, if full
already?

2. Take heed of being full as of self, so of sin, the World or whatever else
it may be that intus existens may keep out Christ, and obstruct the passage,
and hinder all conveyance from his fullness. What that is in every one of us,
experience may best inform us. But what ever it is, that rubbish must be cast
out if we would make room for these treasures. And for this purpose mark the
coherence of the Text with the Verse foregoing. There Wisdom says, I lead in
the way of righteousness, and adds in the Text, that I may cause them that love
me to inherit substance, and fill their treasures. That righteousness is the
way that leads to this fullness. As the Psalmist in a Parallel place says, I
will behold thy face in Psalm. 17. 15.
righteousness, and then I shall be satisfied with thy likeness.

3. Be sure to get a Vessel to draw with. For this Well of Jacob, (thouge full,
yet it) is deep, and therefore requires such a Vessel, and that is Faith, and
the prayer of Faith. Faith is the hand, and Prayer the Bucket that setcheth up
all from this full well of salvation. We have not, because we ask not, and we
ask and receive James 4. 2, 3.
not, because we ask amiss, because not in Faith, and so come to receive
nothing. It Is little it may be that we pray, and less that James 1. 6, 7.
we believe that Christ will and in some Cases can fill us, and so we go away
empty. But were we full of faith, and were a spirit of supplication more fully
poured out upon us, surely with it Zech. 12. 10.
and by it fuller measures of the fullness of the blessing of the G^spel Romans
15. 29.
of Christ would be poured on us. So we read of Stephen, that he was full of
faith and of the Holy Ghost, Act. 6. 7. and again v. 7. full of faith and of
power. And so may we be of grace, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, which
is unspeakable and full of glory. Thus in the first place our duty is, in 1
Pet. 1. 8.
this way to go to Christ and his Fullness to make up ours: that as the
Egyptians drew Trenches from Nilus to water their grounds, so we only from
Christ to fill our pools. He takes it as Psalm. 84. 6.
a dishonor to him if we seek it any where else. He will be All or Nothing. Is
there not a God in Israel, that we go to Baalzebub? 2 King. 1. 3.
And therefore to him in all our poverty and emptiness let us go, and to none
else, to God in and by Him, and to none other.

2. But secondly, seeing it is for no less than for filling of Treasures, see
we to it that it be with enlarged desires, and full and great expectatious,
that our fullness in that kind may in some proportion answer his. We should here
labor for an enlarged heart, and when others enlarge theirs as Hell, Hab. 2.
5. we should ours as the expansum of Heaven, Christ and Heavenward. The more
we move toward the Earth, the more we are straightened. He that here promises to
fill our Treasures, would not have us spare his cost, but bids us open our
mouth wide, Psalm. 81. 10. even widen and enlarge our hearts to their utmost
extent and capacity, that we may not only taste of his Goodness, but take in as
much of it as we can; As the Prophet bad the Widow borrow Vessels and not a
few, 2 King. 4. 4. and the water-pots were to be filled up to the brim, when
Christ was to work the miracle, John 2. 7. Let the everlasting doors of our
Souls be set wide open, when it is this King of Glory who is to come in. He
that has received most of Christ, Psalm. 24.
has not enough, and he who here thinks he has received enough, has as yet
received nothing. Our largest draughts are but tastes; and those tastes should
but quicken the appetite. Indeed our Savior says that he that drinks of the
water that he will give him shall never thirst, John 4. 14. But that is, Not
after other things, but yet the more after more of himself: not with a feverish
hellish thirst, as the rich man in those flames, and as some Souls here in an
hellish anguish: but yet with an heavenly enlargement of desire after that
which he finds so sweet, and has not yet enough of. After fullest in-flows
here our emptiness is not perfectly filled, nor his fullness exhausted: but
after fullest communications the thirsty Soul says, Lord one drop, one draught
more: and Christ, as the Widow, 2 King. 4. 6. says, Bring me yet a Vessel, and
prove me if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour you out such a
blessing that there shall not be room to receive it, Mal. 3. 10. Let not the
thirsty Earth cease gaping, the thirsty Soul craving yet more and yet more,
till it be filled with all the fullness of God, till that (as it is in the Text)
he has filled our Treasures. Ephesians. 3. 19.


3. How fully should we rest satisfied with Christ alone! Will he fill us? And
would we have any more? Does he fill our Treasures? and that with himself? and
can we desire any thing better or more precious? O Naphtali satisfied with
favor, and full with the Blessing of the Lord, said Moses in his blessing of
that Tribe, Deuteronomy. 33. 23. and O blessed Soul (say I) though thou be a
Naphtali, a Wrestler, and in never so great conflict (as that name signifies)
how full may thy joy be? How full of comfort, if full John 16. 24. 1 John 1. 4.
of Christ? Though never so empty of other comforts, nay, though never so full
of outward miseries, though (as it was with the Psalmist) thy body be filled
with loathsome Diseases, Psalm. 38. 7. and thy soul exceedingly filled with the
scorn and contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123. 4. yet if thou be (...) (as the
old word was) Plenus Deo, Full of God and his Spirit, if Christ do but fill thy
treasures, how should thou rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the Hab. 3. 17, 18.
God of thy salvation? though there be no herd in the stall, nor meal left in
the empty barrel, no nor oil in the cruse; yet what a feast of fat things full
of marrow art thou entertained with Isa. 25. 6.
whilst thou feedest on Christ? How does thy Cup with David's run over when he
fills it? When God had said, I have replenished every sorrowful soul, Jer. 31.
25. the Prophet in v. 26. immediately adds, Upon this I awaked, and behold my
sleep was sweet to me. If God please but to undertake from himself in Christ to
fill up whatever our dish, cup, purse, or heart wants of full; should it be in
the darkest night of all wants and miseries (and we know not how dark ours may
yet prove) yet truly our sleep in them might be sweet, and our Souls brim-full
of comfort.

And therefore it is our duty as well for our own comfort as for the more full
manifestation of his Glory, to make up all our wants out of him; our emptiness
with his fullness. Whilst led by sense and not supported by faith, this is a
very hard Lesson, as it was for Moses to believe that Israel's whole Camp
should be victualled and filled with flesh for a whole month in a Wilderness,
and for Philip Numb. 11. 21, 22.
to conceive how so many thousands should be fed in a desert place with five
barley loaves and two small fishes. In such straits, wants, John 6. 5, 7, 8.
desertions we cannot believe that Christ will, that he can relieve and supply
us. But O fools and slow of heart to believe, where is our faith. Is it Christ
the Wisdom and Power of God, the Amen, the faithful and true witness, who here
promises that he will fill our Treasures; and can he not, or will he not fulfill
his word? Though we wrong our selves, let us not wrong Christ too. If thou
can not believe that he can fill thee, thou make him an empty Savior. If
not to fill thy treasure, thou say he is but a poor Christ. If not a friend
in the want of a friend, and habitation when thou art thrust out of Doors, if
not all in the want of all; thou indeed make him nothing, and he will be
nothing, Gal. 5. 4. at least not what he truly is, and what he here truly
promises thee, and that is to fill thy treasures.

4. This might call upon us to follow God fully, Numb. 14. 24. and to stand
perfect and complete in all the will of God, Col. 4. 12. Numb. 32. 11. 1 King.
11. 6.
that our duty and his mercy may hold some proportion.

5. But I end all with that which the Text affords. And in it we find that all
this of Christ's making us to inherit substance, and to fill our treasures, is
promised only to them that love him.

The love of Christ.

As it is the condition of the thing promised, or rather of the persons to whom
it is promised; so it is and should be the effect of it when enjoyed. For if
Christ do all this for us, then to love him for it is a very easy demand; I am
sure but a very poor requital. The things promised fall nothing short of
perfect happiness. Perfecta beatitudo. Cartwr.
They were solid substantial reality, an everlasting perpetuity, and
overflowing fullness and plenty. And what is Heaven more? Did they all meet in
any earthly commodity, that it were a solid staple commodity, and such as would
last, and were there enough of it, we should not wish more, it would not want
high prizers and many buyers. Christ (we have heard) is all this. And therefore
(methinks) it would be very hard if he may not be very highly prized and much
loved for it. I pray let our love be real to him, who is substance, constant to
him who is an everlasting inheritance, and full to him who here undertakes to
fill our Treasures.

Even so Amen Lord Jesus.
SERMON XVII. ON 2 PET. 1. 4.
Preached at St. Mary's Cambridg, March 8. 1656/7.
That by these you Efficiamini, vulg. fieretis, Calv.
might be partakers of the Godly, Prior. Translatio. Tyndal. Estius contra.
Pindar. Olymp. Od. 6.
Divine Nature. Should, Genev.

THis Verse most Interpreters take to be part of the Apostles Preface to his
Epistle; wherein, according to the old Rule, (...), as a skilful architect
prefaceth a magnificent Palace with a stately Porch and Front, so he his after
discourse with a glorious Entrance. It being the manner of the Apostles in the
Proems of their Epistles to put together a Summary of the Gospels Mysteries, so
Paul usually in his, and so our Apostle Peter in the entrance into his former
Epistle, and the same course he takes in the four first Verses of this: in
which the various readings are so many, and both the words and connexions of
sentences so dubious, that it makes the sense difficult, which Camerarius
observes to be more in this Epistle than in most other Apostolical Writings.
However it is plain, that being in the sequel of the Epistle to exhort to true
piety and a Vt neque brevius nec divinius poterit Christi officium, omnisque
nostra salus per parts explicari, in verse. 3.
gracious conversation, he does in this Preface lay down (and Beza says it
could not be more briefly and divinely) as a foundation of it, the true causes
of our Salvation, and (as Beza notes) especially of Sanctification.

As in particular.

1. For the causa (...), the first original cause, it is free grace by lot,
(...), v. 1. and gift, (...), v. 3. and to make sure of it the same word (...)
is again repeated, v. 4.

2. The procuring meriting cause is made the righteousness of Jesus Christ as
our God and Savior, v. 1.

3. The immediate working cause is assigned to be (...) a divine power, v. 3.
working in us a communication (...) of an answerable Divine nature, v. 4.
namely in our effectual vocation, wherein we are called to glory and virtue, or
rather (because the words in the original are (...)) Camerarius.
by glory and virtue, that is, (...) most gloriously and powerfully, so that it
is (...), or (...) as the vulgar it is likely found it, and therefore rendered it
by his own proper glory and virtue, v. 3.

4. For the instrumental cause, we have it twice expressed to be (...) the
knowledge, or acknowledgment of Jesus Christ, v. 2, 3. which is nothing else
but that precious faith v. 1. which lays hold on precious promises in this
verse, or the word being (...), which here signifies promissa rather than
promissiones, the benefits or things promised rather than promises, and
therefore are said here to be given, whereas promises are rather said to be
made (so, 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise which he Promissa, vel
promissiones, i. e. pretiosa and maxima beneficia, quae per Prophetus olim se
daturum promiserat, etc. Estius in locum. See also Bellarmin de justif. lib. 2.
cap. 5. sect. Quomodo autem, etc.
has promised, even eternal life) though with reference to the promises, the
promises as moral causes alluring and attracting us to all Divine Purity [Dr.
Hammond] and the things promised, faith, repentance, holiness, grace, glory,
mean by these (...) all those things which pertain to life and godliness in the
beginning of the third verse, and as some conceive [Piscator, Beza and our
Translatours] that glory and virtue in the end of it. All these great and
precious things promised, as proper and Physical causes do formally make us
partakers of the Divine Nature. And that is the Truth expressly laid down in the
words of the Text, and more particularly to be made out in our handling of them.

That they who are effectually called, are by the divine power partakers of the
Divine Nature.

The subject persons are such as are called to the faith and acknowledgement of
Jesus Christ, v. 3.

The effecting cause is (...) a most divine power, in the same third verse.

And the most happy and blessed effect is answerably a (...) a divine nature,
in this verse.

It Is neither what nature in its utmost energy can produce, nor what any mere
natural man, or Philosopher as such (whatever they talk of their (...) and
(...)) in the highest Apogaeum of their most sublime seize can arise up
to. It Is only a Divine Power that can produce this Divine Nature, and precious
faith in Christ, which alone instates the Christian believer in this most
precious promise, or promised mercy of being made partaker of it.

In the handling whereof two things I shall especially intend.

1. Explication, by endeavoring to show what is meant by it and contained in
it. 2. Application, and what improvement we are to make of it.
For the first, what is meant by this Divine Nature, and our communicating,
Explication.
or being made (...) partakers of it, diverse men according to their different
apprehensions and persuasions determine diversely. They may be reduced to these
three. They interpret it either, 1. to God simply, 2. or to Christ, 3. or to
the Holy Ghost.

1. They who are most corrupt understand it of a real participation of the
Divine Essence, as Osiander will have us justified by Gods and Christ's
essential justice, and Scruetus to his very death Beza in Text. Epist. ad
Barthol. Carthusiensem.
maintained that the essential Godhead is transfused into the Godly, as the
Soul is into the body by which it is animated and inacted, and Gerson's
Contemplativi and some high flown Platonists of our times take but a little
lower flight, whilst they (with their (...) 2 Pet. 2. 18.) say that by their
divine contemplations they are abstracted from their own dark personality,
their humanity annihilated, and they swallowed up Miro and incognito modo a Deo
rapitur and in Deo suscipitur, tota Deo plena fit, tota in Deum transfunditur,
ita ut essentia Dei ejus essentiae and substantiae intime and absque ullo modo
creato uniatur. Vide Casaub. Enthusiasm. page 113. Mores 2. lash of Alazon.
page 43. Psalm. 73. 28.
in the profound abyss of the Divinity into which they are wholly transported.
Which also the even Ranting Enthusiast-Gnosticks of this and former ages, who
of all men by reason of their abominable filthiness partake least of God and
most of the beast and the Devil, make yet greatest pretensions to, whilst they
give out that they are Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, such is their
blasphemous gibberish. Whatever either Fantastical or Diabolical trances such
may have, and divine illapses, unions and communications they may vainly boast
of, yet I am sure that no evil dwells with an holy God, Psalm. 5. 4. and that
Christ is separate from such sinners, Heb. 7. 26.

What diviner raptures and heavenly ravishments (I do not say a Platonic
Philosopher in his speculations, but) an holy humble believing Soul may
sometimes have in its holy meditations and devotions I neither envy, nor now
dispute; only say with the Psalmist that it is good for me to draw near to God,
and that they are happiest, who in a spiritual union and communion can get* and
keep nearest; but to pretend to get so near as properly to participate of the
essence of God, flies higher than Lucifer's pride, Isa. 14. 14. and is
Antichristian Blasphemy, 2 These. 2. 4.

I acknowledge, some of the Fathers, especially the Greek, in their Rhetorical
Hyperboles and desiring to express that lively image of God which his children
have instamped upon them, do indulge themselves a sufficient liberty, as Orat.
4. in Arrium.
Athanasius in his (...), and Orat. 42. p. 680. Basil orat. 3. de sp. Sanct.
Nazianzen in his (...), but not as though they ever meant any such abolition
of our nature, and transformation of it into God's, or participation of his
essence, which being in it self infinite, is therefore to the finite creature
incommunicable; if Christ's hypostatical union did not confound the natures and
their properties, much less will this mystical union of God and the soul work
any commixtion, or tranfusion of it into the Godhead.

1. The three consubstantial persons of the Sacred Trinity only in common
partaking, (if I may so call it) of the Divine nature essentially (...).

2. Christ's humane nature, (not only (...) and (...) as Nestorius blasphemed,
for so we partake of it, but) (...) and personally, which is his alone
prerogative.

3. It Is our highest honor and happiness that we may be made partakers of it
by a participation of Divine Grace and image, which is wrought in us by him,
and by which we are made conformable to him, so far as the image of his
infinite, holiness is expressible in a limited and restrained being, as the wax
receives the impression of the Seal, not the essence, and that in a picture is
called a face, or hand, which has the likeness of it, as he well expresses
it, and as truly adds, that he who raises it Dr. Spurstow upon the Text.
any higher must have swelling and lofty thoughts of the creature, and low and
most unworthy and dishonorable thoughts of God. (Thus Divines say) we partake
of the Divine nature accidentaliter per donum gratiae sanctificantis, as we
have Divine Grace wrought in us by the spirit of God, which makes us like God.
But as for Cornel. a Lapide's substantialiter which he adds, as we are
partakers of In Textum.
the spirit of God himself, we shall speak of that by and by, we are now
dealing with Enthusiasts, who (as the Manichees of old held that by nature we
are ex traduce Dei orti, drops, and And so (as Caelestius said) without Sin; as
God is. Augustine. de gestis Pelagii cap. ult.
beams and particles of the Deity, so they) conceit that in the way of their
high seize they are partakers of the very Godhead, Godded with God, and
Christed with Christ, as their blasphemous gibberish blunders it. But how much
more soberly and piously does Cyprian express it! Nostra and ipsius conjunctio
nec miscet personas, nec unit substantias, sed affectus consociat and
confoederat voluntates. This (...) in the Text is not (...), This Divine nature
is not the Divine Essence as they conceit it.

I acknowledge that Tractat. de foedere, and in Gangraena doctrinae
Anabaptisticae.
Clopenburgh and de In Textum.
Dieu after him conceive otherwise, and that as, Jam. 3. 7. (...) the nature of
beasts signifies Beasts, and (...) the nature of man, a man, so here (...) the
Divine nature, or nature of God may O^thodoxally enough be taken to signify
God, as considered in his own nature and being; but then that by (...) or
partakers is not here meant a transfusion or communication of They understand
Communion rather than Communication.
the Divine Essence, that in that sense we should be (...) partakers of the
Deity, but only as Heathen Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10. 20. are said to be (...) to
have fellowship with Devils, so true believers have not only a real
communication of Divine Grace infused into them, but also a true and blessed
Communion with God himself, and truly our fellowship is with the Father and the
Son, as the Apostle asserts it, John 1. 3. Nor has this exposition any thing
in it which is contrary to piety or sound doctrine; but yet this (...) seems
(...) is (...).
to sound a more inward and inherent communication of something, and not only a
bare communion and fellowship, as one friend has with another, though that be
included, and of it some good Interpreters expound it.

2. Others therefore interpret these words in reference to Christ, as Ambrose,
and Oecumenius of his incarnation in which his humane Epist. 38.
nature was made partaker of the Divine, because hypostatically united to it;
But

1. Therein the Son of God did more properly take part of our humane nature, as
is expressly said he did, Heb. 2. 14. than we of the Divine.

2. Besides, that partaking was already in act, ever since our Savior's
Cyprian says, divinae naturae communicamus per spiritum, and humanae per
corpus. de Nativitate Christi, sect. 7.
birth and conception, whereas this which the Apostle here speaks of was in
part yet to be accomplished to believers, in their several successions and
further participation.

3. And withal, Thus all that have an humane nature might be said to be
partakers of the divine, which the Apostle here restrains to believers only.

4. And therefore Cyril although he interpret it also with reference Catechis.
to Christ, yet of our Symbolical partaking of him, and so of God in the
Eucharist. This the Papists greedily swallow down, as making (they think) for
their Transubstantiation, by which (as they say) they come to eat the very
material Body of Christ, and so become Christiferi, and Christo concorporei,
Christ being concorporated with them, as the food is with the body, for so they
will expound those words of our Savior, John 6. 56. He that cateth my flesh,
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.

But although in the due receiving of that Sacrament, we spiritually by faith
are made partakers of whole Christ, and so far as saving grace is conveyed to
us in the use of it we may be truly said by it (as by other Ordinances) to be
made partakers of that which the Apostle here calls the Divine Nature, yet

1. He speaks more generally of it here, than to be restrained to the effect
only of that Sacrament.

2. And more spiritually than to understand any such gross, absurd, and
blasphemous commixture and concorporation of Christ's Body with ours, so as to
be this partaking of the Divine nature.

3. Others therefore more rightly and properly interpret it in reference to the
Holy Ghost, and so C. a Lapide says, we are made partakers of the Divine
nature, not only accidentaliter, as we are by the spirit of God and the work of
his grace endued with Divine Qualities and Graces, wherein especially the image
of God consists, and so by those Divine Lineaments drawn by the finger of God
(which are a shadowy representation of his glorious being and holiness) we are
made conformable to him, and, as Children, like unto our Heavenly Father:

But he would have it also understood substantialiter, that we Bonavent. 1.
Sent. did. 14. a. 2. q. 1. Thom. p. 1. q. 43. ar. 3. 6. Vasquez, Valent
Suarez, de Deo, etc. l. 12. c. 5. n. 11, 12.
are substantially also made partakers of the Divine nature, in that the very
person of the Holy Ghost is united to us, and dwells in us as in his Temple,
substantially and personally novo modo, and so in a manner deifieth us. This he
proves out of others of their Authors. Nor do I deny but that some of our own
Mr. Downham, Mr. Cotton. Vt in perfectis. sima amicitia necessaria est amici
praesentia.
Divines (though I know none of them that expounds this Text of it) do yet hold
that not only the grace, but even the person of the Holy Ghost is in an
especial manner in Believers who is therefore (as they conceive) said to be
given to them, 1 John 3. 24. 4. 13. Romans 5. 5. to be, and to dwell, and to
abide in them, John 14. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 6. 19. and such like. But although I
fully believe these Scriptures, and therefore subscribe to what Lombard lib. 1.
did. 14. proves out of Antiquity, that the Holy Ghost himself is given to and
dwells in believers, yet as concerning that novus modus which they speak of,
I must confess my own ignorance, as not knowing how the Holy Ghost being God,
and so in his Essence, substance and person alike every where, should in that
respect be more present in believers than elsewhere, but only in a more
gracious and glorious presence of manifestation of himself to them, and
operation in them, unless they would have the third person hypostatically
united to believers, as Christ's humanity was to the second person, which
Lapide's words seem something to sound like to, when he says, that the Holy
Ghost personally dwells in the righteous Soul, which I suppose he meant not of
a personal union, but only an union of persons, of the person of the Holy Ghost
dwelling there, not as though it were so personally that the spirit and the
believing Soul were one person, as it was with Christ's humanity in its
hypostatical union with the second person of the Blessed Trinity, which yet he
there compares this to, and to my apprehension does but nicely distinguish it
from it, whilst in that personal Union in Christ of the second person with the
humanity he makes the bond and tie to be modus substantialis, but in this
personal Union of the third person with a believer the tie is grace as a
quality. But I leave these niceties which many a gracious Soul, in which the
Holy Ghost dwells by his grace, cannot conceive, and therefore troubles not it
self with. It Is sufficient for my present purpose that he confesses this grace
of the spirit to be the medium, vinculum and causa of this personal indwelling
of the spirit in us: and therefore it is, that as the spirit by his grace
dwells in us, we are made partakers of the Divine nature. And this fitly
leads me to that which undoubtedly (and if not only, yet) is most fully and
properly intended and held out by this Expression. Partakers therefore we are
of the Divine Nature, See Forbes of justification, Cap. 8. p. 23, 24, 25. Id
praestant Christi beneficia, illud maxim, quod sumus filii Dei. See Bellarmin.
de justific. l. 2. c. 5. Quomodo autem, etc.


1. In and by the grace of Adoption and Sonship, for by Adoption being called
to the fellowship of Christ in his Sonship, what he is by nature, we are made
by grace, viz. the Sons of God, and so Christ's father is our father, and his
spirit our spirit, and consequently the nature of all three (being but one) is
in this relative sense communicated to us, we as Sons having our subsistence
from the Son, who is one with the Father, and we in our manner and measure one
with them both, even the Children of God, and so partakers of the Divine
Nature. So Athanasius, Orat. 4. contr. Arrium.
(...), by being partakers of the Son of God (members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 5. 30.) we become
thereby partakers of God, and of this he adds this Text is to be understood.

But as we are the Sons of God upon a double Title, both of Adoption and
Regeneration (for whom he adopts to be Sons, John 1. 12. he begets as Sons, v.
13.) so we are made partakers of the Divine nature upon a double interest, as
relative in adoption, so

2. Positive and inherent in Regeneration, and it carried on in sanctification,
and this I conceive here especially understood. So Nazianzen, (...) Orat. 4^.
Deiformes effecti. Cyprian. de singul Cleric. Deiformi conversatione. Idem de
unctione Chrismatis S. 3 Deifico studio Idem de aleatoribus. S. 10. (...)
Basil. Tom. 1. de lib. arbitrio. Vt in his nos filios ejus, vereque Deos
praestemus. Bucer in Romans 2. Council. 2. page 120. Calvin, Beza, Piscator,
Lapide, Amesius.
(...). We are made partakers of the Divine nature by partaking of the Holy
Spirit; as Athanasius in another place express^th it [de S. Trinit. dialog.
Tom. 2. p. 164.] whilst by the operation of the Divine Spirit in heart and
life we are made like God, in the one bearing his image, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3.
10. and in the other showing forth his virtues and graces, 1 Pet. 2. 9. made
one spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6. 17. not by any Partnership of his Essence and
substance, but of excellent graces, holy as he is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. pure as
he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. merciful as he is merciful, Luke 6. 36. perfect as he
is perfect. Matthew. 5. 48. grace for grace, John 1. 16. as the Child to the
Father, member for member, or in the Wax to the Seal, stamp for stamp, or in
the glass, face to face, being changed from glory to glory as by the spirit of
the Lord, 2 C^r. 3. 18. This likeness to God and imitation of him in hatred of
sin, in holiness, righteousness, and all other graces, is as a transcript of
what is in God originally and infinitely. A new Creature is this Divine nature,
when from an inward Divine Principle and energy (as in the Glossary (...) is
rendered Ingenium) in word and deed we do (...) express God as well as our
selves, and in many things God and not our selves, or God more than our selves,
we are (...) (as Ignatius and others Deo pleni. So gratia habitualis est Divina
natura participata. Aquin. 12. q. 110. See Gibicuf lib. 1. cap. 17. page 108.
of old were styled) (...), like God; and as Adam at first having God's image
in holiness and righteousness stamped upon him was (...) as God, Genesis 3. so a
true Saint having this image renewed in him is as God, vir Divinus, which is
even the highest Title, which the Socinians will vouchsafe the second Adam our
blessed Savior. In a word, when (...), as Hierocles expresses it, or as
Calvin, quantum modulus noster feret, sumus unum cum Deo, as far as our measure
reaches we are like God, one with God, we are here said to be partakers of the
Divine nature.

Which is evident from the words foregoing and following.

1. The Text, that you might be partakers of the Divine Nature, and immediately
follows (...) having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust,
added on purpose by way of exposition to tell us what it is, in and by which we
are made partakers of the divine nature, not of God's divine essence, so as to
Hoc ipsum indicat cum definit naturae divinae participem fieri idem esse ac
mundi corruptionem effugisse. Beza.
be Godded with his Godhead, for whosoever should ascribe to it the escaping of
pollution would thereby most unworthily and blasphemously disparage his
infinite and essential holiness; but only a participation of his heavenly
grace, whereby in a way and frame of sanctification we escape worldly
pollutions.

2. Again immediately before the words of the Text, it is said, there are given
to us exceeding great and precious promises whereby we are made partakers of
the Divine nature. It seems the^^fore we have it by promise, so has not God,
it being his essence and nature, nor should we if we had his very nature, of
which there is no one promise made us in the whole book of God, unless that of
the Devils, ye shall be like God, Genesis 3. but of Divine grace and
sanctification very many.

3. And lastly that which in the Text is called a giving to us that whereby we
are made partakers of the divine nature, in the foregoing verse is called the
divine powers giving to us all things that pertain to life and Godness, and (as
many expound that which follows) a calling of us to glory and virtue. The
divine nature then is in that which pertains to godliness and virtue here in an
estate and way of grace, and to life and glory in the other world, which leads
to the

3. Third and last particular of our being partakers of the Divine Nature, and
that is the perfecting of grace in glory, when God Beza, Diodat. Estius,
Lapide, and so Calvin expounds this place. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 11. sect. 10.
showing himself face to face shall so fill us with his light and life, that
then we shall be most fully Deopleni, most perfectly like him, when we shall
see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2. And if by beholding him in the glass of the
Gospel in the face of Christ we are here transformed from glory to glory as by
the spirit of the Lord into a most divine and heavenly conformity, 2 Cor. 3.
18. what a far greater tran^figuration will it at last be, when we shall be
once got up into the holy mount, and there see God and Christ face to face? Oh
how shall we then be changed from glory to glory when made 2 These. 2. 14.
partakers of the glory of Christ, John 17. 22, 24. and the glory of God, Romans
5. 2. when we shall (as much as we are capable of) Romans 15. 7.
transire in Deum, be transformed into his likeness in the immediate fruition
of himself, there where all old things and whatever See Calvin in
Psychopannuch. page 558.
we were before more unlike to God in shall pass away, and God only shall be
all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28.

Thus at last in these particulars we have seen what it is to be made partakers
of the divine nature, and in the explication of them there has gone along with
it a sufficient proof that true believers are so, and by truly being God-like,
do make good their name, while they are called Godly. And because the main
thing I intended in the choice of this argume^^ was the due improvement of it
in heart and life,

Let us first with all humble reverence and thankfulness to God On bended knees
with hands and hearts lifted up to God let us say, now thanks be to God for
this unspeakable gift.
unspeakable gift, inenarrable, that cannot be uttered or declared
sufficiently. The Apostle 2 Cor. 9. 15. used that phrase of God's mak^ng the
Corinthians willing and ready to communicate of their outward and temporal
goods to the Saints; but by how much greater right may we apply it to Gods
giving himself, and (in the sense before explained) communicating of his own
nature to sinne^s? The poor Scholar when he had nothing else, he gave himself
to his master; and the great God, as having nothing greater, swears by
himself, Heb. 6. 13. so having nothing better, he gives himself to his
servants. It was Peter's poverty that made him say to the Cripple, silver and
gold have I none, but such Act. 3. 6.
as I have give I thee. But it is the unsearchable unvaluable riches of Gods
grace, who though he could say the silver and gold is Psalm. 50.
mine, Hag. 2. 8. when all the silver and gold in the world is his to bestow
upon the heirs of life; yet as when among all the other creatures there was not
a fit help for Adam, he gave him Genesis 2. 20.
a wi^e, so when all the world and the riches and glory of it (the greatest
boon that the Devil could offer to Christ) are not worth giving or taking to be
a Christians portion, the great God gives himself to be that to his children.
It was the high honor that God put upon Adam that in regard of his rational
being and dominion over his creatures (which was one part of his image stamped
upon him) he made him like him, and this was as the ground upon which that
other part of his image was drawn, which (as the honor of our nature) is in
part yet continued, in which sense the Apostle approved the Poets (...) for we
are his off spring, Act. 17. 28. (not as though we were his natural sons and as
creatures made of his essence, as the Manichees and other Heretics of old, and
Weigelius and other Fanatic Crocii Antiweigel. part 1. c. 2. q 1, 2. c. 17.
q. 4.
Enthusiasts of late have blasphemed, for so we are by way of creation, not of
generation, which is his essential sons property) this prerogative of our
nature I acknowledge is our great honor and priv^lege, as we are reasonable
men, and of this St. Ambrose sometimes expounds my Text, Dedit enim de
cognatione sua, rationabilis scilicet naturae: but were this all, we might be
base and miserable enough, for of such as were in this sense God's off spring,
our Savior said they were the Children of the Devil, John 8. 44. Adam in
innocence had a^ higher honor put upon him, and a far nobler part of God's
image stamped on him, which was in righteousness and true holiness: this by our
sin and fall in him we have Ephesians. 4. 24.
defaced and lost. But oh the infinite condescending Philanthropy and love of
God to mankind, especially to Believers, that to recover it and us, he has
sent his only begotten Son into the World, Cogitandum enim est unde nos Deus in
tantum honoris culmen evehat. Scimus quam abjecta sit naturae nostrae conditio.
Quod ergo Deus ita se nostrum facit, etc. Calvin in Textum. Disp. private. These.
45 n. 8. C. a Lapide.
for him to be made partakers of our humane nature, and (which next to it is
the greatest gift that he ^ould bestow) his own spirit into our hearts, that we
thereby might be made partakers of the Divine Nature. What cannot omnipotent
mercy do that makes these meet? Consider we but seriously how infinitely
glorio^^ and holy God is, and how woefully base and sinful we are, and we shall
not be able but in an holy ecstasie with the Apostle to cry out, (...), O
height and depth! (well might Arminius say, that it is Relatio disquiparantiae,
cujus fundamentum Christus nulla re indigens, terminus fidelis omnium egens)
that on God's part it is the lowest condescension, and on our part the highest
exaltation imaginable, truly above all that we could ask or can think, adeo
sublimis est ut omnium Angelorum naturam superet nec altius assurgere potest
homo, as he speaks of it, Man can be raised no higher, and the Angelical nature
of it self cannot rise so high. Well might they (in the words foregoing the
Text) be called (...), exceeding great, superlatively great and most precious
promises, if by them we may be made partakers of the Divine Nature. We so vile
and filthy, by nature Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. to be made partakers of
that Divine nature, which is Hebr. 7. 26. Matthew. 8. 8.
so glorious and holy, and separate from Sinners! If the Centurion thought
himself unworthy for Christ in his estate of humiliation to come under his
roof, how infinitely more unworthy we that the God of Glory should come into
our Souls? That he should ever draw so nigh to us, and take us so near to
himself, to be Friends, Sons, Heirs, not only to be made meet to be partakers
of the inheritance of the Saints, but also of himself and his own nature, is as
much as God could give, and infinitely more than the heart of man could think
that he should ever receive: and can we then do less than adore and bless him,
(nay give up our selves to him, who has given his Son himself to us, and be
willing to be partakers of his sufferings, 1 Pet. 4. 13. who has made us
partakers of his nature and happiness) if we find it in our selves?

But what shall we do then when we meet with it in others? but

1. We do not malign, hate, oppose and wrong it, (...), lest happily we be found
to fight against God, as Gamaliel warned the Council, Act. 5. 39. It Is not
happily but most certainly we shall so do in so doing: for we hear that the
faithful are partakers of the Divine nature, and therefore hate them as such,
and you are (...), haters of God, Romans 1. 30. fight against them, and you are
(...), fighters against God, you persecute not them so much as Christ, Act. 9.
5. you touch the apple of Gods eye, Zech. 2. 8. whatever good or evil we have
done unto them, he takes as done unto himself, Matthew. 25. 40, 45. As at that
last day he will be glorified in his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. so now he is
opposed and persecuted in his Saints, and this not only consequenter, and
interpretative, but proprie and formaliter. It is the face and appearance of
God in the Saints, which the malice of ungodly Enemies directly strikes at, and
would wound him through their sides, as David said, the reproaches of them that
reproached thee have fallen upon me, Psalm. 69. 9. Their natures are oftentimes
so sweet and amiable, that otherwise they could not but love them, but it is the
Divine nature in them, the bright luster whereof angers their sore eyes, and
shames their filthy nakedness, and that is the reason why they so hate them.
Cajus Sejus was otherwise a good man, but only evil in evil men's eyes because
he was a Christian.

Had only an austere John Baptist lost his head, or were they only harshly
dealt with, whose natural tempers and converse were more rigid and harsh, we
might think the cause of it were only in them; but when Paul loses his head
too, who even in Porphyries eyes was a man so full of worth and desirable;
when David was so cruelly persecuted, who was so amiable; when Christ himself
who was sweetness it self was so bitterly hated and at last crucified; and to
this day when we shall see that Christians though otherwise in their carriage
and temper never so sweet and pleasing, yet if zealous and eminent in holding
forth Gods truth and grace against other men's errors and lusts, are therefore
cried out against as austere, and rigid, and sour, and accordingly sowrly dealt
with (as sometimes the frost is very sharp when the day is still and serene)
the case is plain, that (whatever is pretended) persecution is raised for the
words sake, Matthew. 13. 21. For thy sake are we slain all the day long, could
they say, Psalm. 44. 22. and to this day may others say, it is for Gods truth and
holiness sake that some are so maligned and opposed by Strangers and Enemies,
whose dislike of them is truly grounded on this, that they are more God-like
than they would have them. It would therefore be very well that such would
think what they do, and what at last will be the issue of it, for certainly he
that will spit against the wind will spit in his own face, and he that dasheth
against the Rock, will be dashed in pieces. Matthew. 21. 44.
If it be the Divine nature in them which thou opposest, it is but Devilish
malice that proves the Satan, the adversary. It will be wisdom therefore here
to forbear. Take heed thou speak not to Genesis 31. 24. Acts 5. 38. Matthew. 27. 19.
2 Chronicles. 25. 19.
them good nor bad. Refrain from these men and let them alone. Have nothing to
do with those just men. For, as Joash said to Amaziah, Why should thou meddle
to thy hurt? Iron of it self may be handled, and if you will, roughly; but if
it have fire in it, touch it and it will burn your Fingers. In themselves they
are poor men and you may do your pleasure with them, but if God be in them,
take heed, touch not mine anointed, Psalm. 105. 15. as (Esther 6. 13.) Haman's
Wife told him that if Mordecai were of the seed of the Jews, he should not
prevail against him, so if they be the seed of God, in fighting against God,
either in himself or his Children, thou will never prosper. If it be the Divine
nature that is in them, be never so either unnatural or ungracious, as to hate,
despise, or oppose it. But

2. On the contrary let us own, love and honor it wherever we find it. Let us
own God and his image in his poorest servants. Let it be evident to us that we
our selves are partakers of the divine nature, when (...) even naturally and
from a divine natural instinct and (...) and sympathy we close and clasp with
it, love and honor and cherish it in others, both it and them for it, how mean
and abject and despised soever they may be otherwise. That the dunghill-cock
should preter the barly-corn before the Gem, that a stranger should ask the
spouse what is her beloved above another beloved, is no wonder; no more is it
for an ignorant Cant. 5. 9.
carnal worldling who knows not the spiritual worth of the things of God to
undervalue the children of God, or to account 1 Cor. 2. 14.
them the filth of the world and the offscouring of all things. 1 Cor. 4. 13.
But for professed Christians to think goodly of him that has a gold ring on,
and gay apparel, and mean while to tread under James 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.
their footstool a Saint rich in faith, as a child of God partaker of the
divine nature, and heir of the Kingdom because of his poor raiment and mean
outside, is most unworthy. Let me ever value a diamond though in the dirt above
a pibble or clott of earth though set in gold; a poor Christian all glorious
within, though with them, H^b. 11. 37. clad with sheep skins and goat skins,
above all the Sattins and Velvets and ^uffling gayeties of other bug men who
have little or nothing of God in them. Introite nam bie Dii sunt. Any
appearance of God is glorious, but this of saving grace in his Saints (which
renders them most precious and honorable) next after that which appeared in
Christ, is most glorious as Christ of John Baptist, What went you out to see, a
man clothed in soft raiment, or a Prophet? Yea I say unto you more than Matthew.
11. 8, 9. In Ignatii martyrio.
a Prophet, more than a bare man, one that has much of God in him, a (...) as
Ignatius explained it to Trajan, (...), or as we read of those Christians in
Justin Martyr which had (...), even God himself (may I say?) inshrined in their
souls and consciences, and what is then due to them?

No divine worship, as would be if Weigelius and other Enthusiasts conceits of
our being of the very essence of God were true, and which some of our
Blasphemers have of late given and received, which an Angel refused, and
therefore it is Luciferian Devilish pride to entertain; though the godly be
partakers of the Revel. 19. 10.
divine nature, yet they may not be of divine worship.

But yet upon this ground there is due to them

1. Great Honor and reverence, for if we ought so to reverence the image of
God looking out in Magistrates and Superiors (who are therefore called Gods,
Psalm. 82. 6.) in regard of their greatness, is there none due to the Saints who
resemble him in his holiness and goodness? The hollow of a Paphnutius eye put
out for Christ's sake is worthy of the kiss of an Emperor.

2. Singular and transcendent love, and this in the fruits and effects of it,
in bounty if they need; for if they be partakers of the divine nature, what we
give to them we lend to the Lord. However in most ardent affection, let this
divine nature inkindle this divine flame, and more to them than to other men,
and to them most, in whom most of God appears. Good is to be done unto all:
(...) but especially unto them which are of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.
Be reconciled (as your phrase is) to the whole creation, and let your love be
as universal as you can to all mankind; to brotherly kindness we must add love,
2 Pet. 1. 7. Be we not so prodigal of our love to the Saints that we prove so
niggardly that we have none for others; but yet on the contrary, although our
love should be universal, yet it should not be equal; extended to all, but yet
so as more intensely set on such whom he bestows his peculiar love upon, and
ours should imitate his, be discriminant as his is. The Arminians in their
doctrine so enlarge Gods saving love to all, that they lessen it to those whom
God will have the greatest sharers in it, and so whilst they divide the river
into more channels make it more shallow, where he will have it run in a more
full stream. Let not us be Arminians in our practice, so to love all as in a
manner to love all alike. Let a (...) a love of mankind go always along with
us, but so as this (...) may ever have the upper hand. Prefer Jerusalem above
our chief joy, Psalm. 137. 6. Love all men as men (as the Prophet says, Hide
not thy self from thine own flesh, Isa. 58. 7.) but yet so as to love them
most, with whom we have one and the same spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Honor all men,
but especially Love the brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Let at least humanity
prevail with us to esteem and love all that with us partake of humane nature,
for so far we love our selves, but so as to put more abundant honor on them
who are made partakers of the divine nature, for so we shall love God in them.

SERMON XVIII. ON 2 PET. 1. 4.
BUT that We may have this honor and love, it will be Preached at St. Mary's,
June 21. 1657. Use 3.
required that we examine our selves whether we have attained to this true
ground of it, this truly honorable state of being made partakers of the divine
nature.

Wherein that consists, has already in the general been declared in the former
doctrinal explication; the main of it was, that divine grace was this divine
nature.

Pelagius heretically called humane nature grace; we may piously and truly call
saving grace divine nature; to be Godly is to be God like. God is holy, just,
wise, good, spiritual, heavenly, and it is his very nature to be so. And he
that is of such an heavenly spirit and carriage, although nil humani a se
alienum putat, yet totus divinitatem spirat, though otherwise he be a poor weak
man subject to humane infirmities, yet by this his conformity to God he is
raised to divine perfection. As the eye of faith under all that blood and
spittle saw on our Saviors face his glory as the glory of the only begotten
Son of God full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. so the same eye under the mean
outside of him who has filled out of Christ's fullness his measure of grace and
holiness, even grace for grace, beholds with awful reverence and
complacential love bright rays and reflections of divinity. In his heavenly
discourse, it says Non vox hominem sonat, there is more than a man; God speaks
in him, as Junius thought In ejus vita.
of that poor godly man, who was one means of turning him from his Atheism. And
when it beholds his holy and heavenly conversation, though it do not say with
the Lycaonians, Acts 14. 11. that Gods are come down to us in the likeness of
men, yet though but an Idiot, he will report that God is in him of a truth, 1
Cor. 14. 25.

But enough of this in general: Let us rather for our better direction consider
some particular properties of this Divine Nature by which it may be discovered
and manifested; some from that it is called Nature, and some from that it is
styled a Divine Nature.

1. Nature is an inward inbred principle. In natural bodies it is ordinarily
defined to be principium motus and quietis, and so this Principium motus
intrinsecum. Aquin. 1. 2 ae. q. 10. a. 1. corp.
divine nature in a gracious spirit is an inward principle of power and act,
the spring that in this divine (...) sets all the wheels a going like the
spirit of the living creatures in the wheels, Ezekiel. 1. 20. In this sense our
Savior says that the water which he gives to the thirsty (...) shall be in
him, (...) it shall be in him; but what? a well of water springing up to
everlasting life, John 4. 14. not a Cistern, which has all its water from
without put into it. It is so indeed as it has all from God, but in regard of
outward supplies such a well it is that has such a spring in it, as from it
self is continually bubbling and springing up to everlasting life. It Is no
artificial engine to spout out that water which it had not of its own, but a
true natural fountain that pours out of what springs up in it self, Jer. 6.
7. as in the creation the herb brought forth seed and the tree fruit after its
kind, Genesis 1. 12. from its innate seminal virtue, its inward natural,
temperament and constitution, and the stone moves down to the center and the
sparks fly upward from their Job 5. 7.
natural propension, nature being that ingenita rei vis and potentia, qua ipsa
a seipsa movetur; so in this new creation, where there is a Divine Nature,
there is something within, not only a blaze in the lamp, but also oil in the
vessel, Matthew. 25. 4. an inward principle, which sets the soul in motion to God
and heaven, these divine sparks naturally fly upward, as it is said of Timothy,
Philip. 2. 20. that (...) he did genuinely and naturally care for the things of
God and his Church: and Job said of himself that the root of the matter was in
him, Job 19. 28. contrary to what is said of the stony-ground hearer, that he
had not root in himself (...), Matthew. 13. 21. which is the broad difference
between a true born child of God and a formal hypocrite: the one flutters and
makes a great stir in the things of God, but God knows and he himself knows and
feels there is no inward vital principle that sets him on work, nothing from
within, unless vainglory or other finister ^imes and intentions, which are
only corrupt nature, but usually all is from without, either the applause or
frowns of men; and the one as the wind drives about the millsails which else
would stand still, and the other as those Trochler^ or waterworks force the
water upwards which else would lie below or fall downward. But O friend (...)
(as he laid of Plutarch.
the dead statue which he could not make stand by it self) there must be
something within that goes to a divine nature, an inward principle of Divine
life and love, which without these pullies and plummets sets the wheels of the
soul on going Godward. Does not even nature it self teach you? says the
Apostle in that case, 1 Cor. 11. 14. and does not the Divine nature it self,
wherever it is in truth, from an inward principle and pondus animae prompt and
incite and carry you out toward God in communion with him, and obedience to
him? as, Act. 18. 5. it is said of Paul (...) he was pressed in spirit,
occasioned by the Jews obstinacy, but there was a spirit within him that
pressed him to it.

But here take a double caution, when I speak of this inward principle, it is
not with our Enthusiasts so to cry up a Christ within them as to cry down a
Christ without them, indeed without them, because never truly in them. Christ
indeed dwells in our hearts, but it is by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and that is both
br^d and fed by his word and ordinances, Romans 10. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 2. Nor is it
to strike down such poor Christians as are already sinking by reason of inward
faintness. I acknowledge that in the newborn babe through weakness of nature
this pulse may be weak, and in the grown Christian through accidental
corruptions and temptations there may be obstructions and interruptions; but
then the man is the more sick for it, and nature thus oppressed (if it be
Divine) struggles and groans the more under it; when the man of God cannot do
the good that he would, he cries out of himself as a wretched miserable man
for it, Romans 7. 18, 24. though the root of the matter be in him, as it was in
Job, yet sometimes it may be underground, and as seed sown under a great
weight of earth that keeps it under, but it works and works and at last peeps
out, and then sprouts and springs apace, such an inward principle there is in
nature, and such also in the soul that is made partaker of the divine nature in
its outgoings to that which grace has made connatural to it.

2. Hence in the second place from this inward principle natural motion of it
self is ready and free, not forced or violent. With what inward freedom does my
heart go out to him whom I naturally love? and with what a free source does the
fountain cast out, or (as the Hebrew word (...) in the active form signifies)
empty her waters that naturally flow from it? And A free spirit, Psa. 51. 12.
how willing a people are God's in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. and our
Savior shows that as free a current flows from this fountain of life, when
in the place before quoted, he John 4. 14.
says that his Spirit and Grace shall be as (...) a well of water, so (...)
aquae salientis of water springing, freely fully spouting, yea leaping up to
everlasting life. No need of pumping and pulling. How naturally does such a
Soul fall into thoughts of God and desires after him! O! never more free than
when it can run in this Channel most freely! Or if at any time (as too often it
is) this current be hindered or dammed up, what a complaining murmur may you
hear, though without murmuring against God? and how may you see it, though not
rising and swelling in discontent and pride, yet running over in tears of true
repentance? And therefore for trial know, that a constant As Hos. 11. 7. bent
to backsliding from God.
and total averseness from God and the things of God speaks plainly, either a
Devilish temper, or (at best) corrupt nature. And although, as in some cases in
a man's body, there may be listlesness where there is life, so an auk
backwardness may and often does consist with the Divine Nature, yet it is but as
life in such a weak sick body, in which nature is oppressed: Grace is but weak
or weakened: the man of God in such a case stands in great need of cure and
relief that his Soul may freely breath, and go out to God, as David's did
naturally to his Son Absalom, 2 Samuel 13. 39.

3. As natural actions and motions are free, so thereupon they are not irksome
and grievous, but pleasing and delightful. How merrily does the wheel run down
the Hill, from its natural propension? And with what delight does the Scholar
plod even on those harder studies to which he is naturally affected? The
generous Wine with a kind of jollity and tripudium, mantles and sparkles
upward, when, in Solomon's phrase, it moves it self Pro. 23. 31. Psalm. 19. 5.
Psalm. 119. 32.
aright, and the Sun in its natural course rejoiceth as a mighty man to run his
race: but not so much as the man of God when his heart is enlarged to run the
ways of Gods Commandments. The generous spiritual Christian never thinks he
mounts so right or with more delight than when he sparkleth and moves upward.
How merrily does this sweet Bird sing when it moves upward, and soars aloft in
Divine Meditations, Prayers, praises, and such like more pleasing uninterrupted
outgoings of the Soul to God! yea what melody in the heart does it make both to
God and it self, in its sweet sad notes, whilst it is tugging in the snare
below! (...) (...), I have a complacency and take pleasure in infirmities,
reproaches, persecutions, distresses for Christ's sake, says Paul, 2 Cor. 12.
10. it is the same word that God the Father said of his Son, when he said he was
well pleased in him, Matthew. 3. 17. as though with the like natural complacency
that the Father embraced Christ, the same does his servant from the instinct of
this Divine nature welcome even heaviest sufferings for Christ. With what
delight does this Scholar in Christ's School (who is (...)) read these hard
Chapters with which he is so naturally taken? for all delight and pleasure
arises from the sutableness of the faculty and the object, and therefore where
a law of commands without does so naturally suit with a law of love within us,
how does it hug and embrace? Then (...), I consent and approve for my judgment,
Romans 7. 16. and for my affections, (...), v. 22. I delight in the law of the
Lord after the inward man: and when it is so within the heart, then I delight
to do thy will O my God, Psalm. 40. 8. then it is meat and drink to do the will
of God, Matthew. 11. 30. 1 John 5. 3.
John 4. 34. the yoke is easy and the burden light, and no command grievous:
no task but a recreation; no distastful Medicine but pleasing food, which the
palate relisheth, and the stomach naturally closes with.

I confess the Child is weak and may not be so well able for the time to digest
so strong meat; and the man of God may be sick, and then it may not go down
with so much delight. Weakness or distemper may sometimes weaken and hinder
this actual complacential rejoicing, as sickness or a cut finger may take off
the Musician from actual playing on his instrument, wherein yet he habitually
much delights; but then that sickness makes him more sick to think of it.
Where there is habitual delight, such actual indisposition causes actual and
hearty grief for it; and so this grief for the presence of the contrary
impediment proclaims aloud what love he bears and what delight he has in that
from which he is hindered.

And this sufficiently enough distinguishes in this Case the true Divine
Nature from a counterfeit form of Godliness: the one says with them, Mal. 1.
13. Behold what a weariness is it? But the other cries out, oh how weary am I?
A genuine Child of God cries out of himself and his own uncomfortable
weariness in that which he so naturally loves and delights in, bewails his
being so weakened and hindered as the sweet Bird mourns when it has such a stone
hung at its leg, which keeps it from being upon the wing to which it has such
a natural propensity.

But the hireling thinks much at the work it self, which he has no inward
delight or complacency in, and that when not otherwise hindered, but by his own
wilful averseness; and hence it is, and from want of an heaven-born inward
principle which might naturally mount him thitherward, whilst for fear or shame
or natural conscience or the like extrinsecal motive he is forced to it, all is
up the hill, and then as weak and unsound bodies climbing up the mountain
(...), as they, so he pants and blows fast but gets up very slowly and
untowardly, till at last he tumbles down headlong into deepest gulfs of sin,
which naturally he delights to swim in, and so with Judas goes into his own
place, Acts 1. 25.

4. From this freedom and delight, in natural agents proceeds frequency in
their operations. That which I delight to do, I do often, and what is natural,
is frequent. How reiteratedly does the heart and pulse beat? the fountain
bubble, and one wave in the Sea come on in the neck of another? Nature is no
slug, but like the good housewife is up every morning and afresh resumes her
task, and perpetuis vicibus turns about her wheel (...) as S. James calls it.
So the sun does not, like Jam. 3. 6.
the Persian King or great Mogul to keep state appear abroad but seldom on some
high days, or great Festivals, but every morning as the bridegroom comes out
of his chamber, and every day Psa. 19. 5.
repeats his race, and for the wind (...) as Solomon, Eccles. 1. 6. most
elegantly expresses it, it whirleth about continually and returns again
according to his circuits, or (as Broughton renders it) the wind whirleth
whirleth, walks, and into his circuits returns the wind. Nor are the
breathings of the Divine spirit less restless and uncessant where he breaths
freely. God in his own nature is a pure act, and therefore continually acting.
My Father works hitherto, and I work, says our Savior, John 5. 17. and so
does his spirit too. The Divine Nature is continually acting in the government
of the world, nor is it less operative in the believers heart, being (in the
place before cited) a well of water (...) in the present tense expressing a
continued act of springing and bubbling up, and so working out sin as the
troubled fountain does defilement. The Divine Nature is continually offering up
a judge sacrificium a daily sacrifice to God, David morning, and evening and at
noon, Psalm. 55. 17. even seven times a day, Psalm. 119. 164. Paul had (...) no
rest or relaxation, or intermission either in his flesh or spirit, 2 Cor. 2.
13. but would spend and be spent in the service of God and his people, 2 Cor.
12. As of Baruch, Nehem. 3. 20. (...)
15. There was much of God, and of an heavenly Divine Nature in those worthies
who (as the heavens) were in a perpetual motion. And although this height and
degree many that are truly godly according to their lower seize and less
participation do not (it may be shall not) here rise up to till they arrive
there where they rest not day and night, saying Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. yet
wherever this Divine life is, the man is breathing, Rev. 4. 8.
and the pulse beating, though in some sick fits sometimes too slowly and very
weakly; even when asleep the heart is waking and Cant. 5. 2.
silently working. But if on the contrary, instead of this frequency such
intermitting pulses and Syncope's be frequent, the case is very dangerous: but
if always stone-still, or but very seldom, and only in some few good moods at a
Sacrament, or a searching Judgment on our selves or others, we faintly move God
ward, here is dead nature, no quickening spirit; an ominous Comet, that
sometimes in an Age appears to be gazed on, and forebodes some evil: no Sun
of Righteousness here which arises every morning to run his daily course like
a mighty man that faints not. Which leads to

5. The fifth Particular. For Nature, as it is frequent and instant in its
work, so it is also constant, nay grows stronger and quicker toward the end
of its motion. The stone in its natural motion downward, if not hindered,
stays not till it come to its center, and the nearer it comes to it, it
moves the faster. This Divine Nature is heavenly, and therefore moves amain
heavenward up the hill, and yet finally stops not; is a spring of water (...)
springing or leaping up, and that (...) even to everlasting life, in the place
now so often mentioned, and which has helped us in most of these Particulars.
I deny not but this well by earthly cares and other occasions may for a time be
stopped, that it flows not so fully out, as the Philistims stopped Abraham's
wells with earth: but that it did not so dry them up, but when Isaac dug
them, again they gave out their water as formerly, Genesis 26. 18. Hindrances and
stops from within and without the man of God may have in the way of God, but no
total intercisions, no final Apostasies; but when at liberty, he mounts up with
wings Isa. 40. ^1.
as an Eagle; runs, and is not weary; walks, and does not faint. And
therefore (for trial) as the clock which for a while goes right, but when
weights are taken off, stands still and moves not, shows that it is not
natural, but an artificial piece of workmanship: so, seem we to move never so
fast in the ways of God, if when outward compulsion and motives cease, we stand
still or go backward, it plainly shows that all was but an artifice, and
nothing of this Divine Nature, which as in God is eternal and unchangeable, so
as it is in his Children (as the seed it is begotten of, 1 Pet. 1. 23.) is
incorruptible and immortal.

But yet in us it may have its stops for a while and partial intermissions, as
when there is life, yet in sickness and fainting fits the pu^se may be very
weak and sometimes intermitted. But even in that Case

6. In Nature there is a principle of recovery, as Eutychus though Principium
as constitutionm, so restitutivum.
taken up dead, yet because life was in him, came again to himself, Act. 20. 9,
10, 11. The Seed though corrupted underground, yet at last sprouts out again,
and the live-spring though for the present defiled with filth cast into it, yet
by little and little is still working out that pollution, and rests not till it
has wrought it self into its former clearness. Such falls and defilements may
a live Christian, a Saint sometimes fall into, as David, Peter, and others, but
as you read of their falls so of their recoveries. The Sheep may fall in the
dirt, but it is the unclean Swine that continues to lie and wallow in it. The
seed of God may sometimes be 1 John 3. 9.
underground; but if it abide in us (as the Apostle speaks) it will at last
get up and out again. As there is hope of a tree, though when cut down the root
thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground, that
through the scent of water it will sprout again and bud, and bring forth boughs
as a plant, as Job speaks cap. 14. 7, 8, 9. So, even a plant of righteousness
may sometimes be so nipt and blasted that all may seem to be dead, but being
planted by the river, implanted into Christ by the scent of water from this
Divine nature and supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ, after such a nipping
Winter does recover again its verdure in the spring. (...) says the Apostle of
his Philippians, Cap. 4. 10. I rejoiced in the Lord greatly that now at last
your care has flourished again. Not like Jude's trees, twice dead, and plucked
up by Verse 12.
the roots, and so even dead without possibility of after-growth. Till Nature
be quite spent and extinct (which the Divine Nature never can be) it has an
inward natural Balsam in it, which helps on its cure and recovery: and as long
as there is any breathing of the Divine Spirit, it will at last (...), stir up
that 2 Timothy 1. 6.
grace which seemed to be raked up under the dead ashes, and blow it up into a
brighter flame. And therefore after such falls and stumbles, labor we to
express this Divine nature by these happy As corrupt nature breeds these
decays, so let this Divine nature work these recoveries. (...). Plut. advers.
Colot. as Cyprian Ep. 2. ad Donatum, Quod sentitur antequam discitur.
after recoveries.

Nor does it only play such after-games, but is much discovered by its forehand
quickness. Grace is preventing as well as subsequent. And this adds

A seventh particular. Nature has its (...), sympathies, antipathies, its
hints, instincts and impetus, which antevert the Acts of Reason, prevent
discourse and deliberation. At the first blush the heart closes with this
thing or person before it can think why, and rises up in abhorrency and
loathing of that other when it cannot tell wherefore.

Non amo te, Volusi, nec possum dicere quare.

It Is so with the Divine Nature. It does abstain, and on the sudden start back,
(...) from the very first appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. quicquid male
fuerit coloratum, as Bernard phraseth it. Some expound it of matters of
Doctrine, De Considerat. lib. 3.
and so the good Woman's Spirit rose against false Doctrine preached, though she
could not say it was so: some understand it of practice, and so the chaste Soul
hates even the garment spotted with the flesh, Jude v. 23. is troubled, sweats
and faints at the first appearance of it as some naturally do at the presence
of that against which they have a secret Antipathy: On the contrary at first
sight or speech (by an unio animarum) closes with persons of the same spirit,
and things that are as it were connatural, before it has time or leisure to
give a rational account of it. I know the word of God must be the standing rule
both of our Faith and practice, and am far from indulging the wild phansies and
the sudden violent impetus of rash inconsiderate men; and yet in some cases
give much to the (...) and propendency, as also to the aversation of the
spirits of sober godly men, especially if of all or most, as having in them
(...), something of the workings of this Divine Nature in them, which
anticipates their discourse, and (as John outran John 20. 4.
Peter) is got out before they can come to any deliberate resolution. By its
nature the Lamb dreads the Wolf, when so young, that it cannot discern him: and
we should discover more of this Divine Nature, if by the divine instinct of it
we can loath sin, when we are otherwise so weak or surprised, that we have not
time or Nature does act always as high as it can, and then how high should this
Divine Nature carry us?
ability to make a deliberate judgment of it.

8. As Nature sometimes anticipates Reason, so this Divine Nature always
exceeds and goes beyond that which is only humane. Divinity is above Humanity,
Grace above Nature. A Christian is not (...) a bare man, but more than a man.
And therefore to have or express no more than what Nature can work, or natural
men by other helps can attain to, (...), to walk as men with the Apostle, 1
Cor. 3. 3. terminus minuens, or (as Cap. 6. 7. he calls the like) it is (...) a
defect, in which we fall much short of, and below that which a man or God that
is made partaker of the Divine Nature, should arrive at, and come up to. For as
man by nature and kind is and acts above other creatures, so a Christian man
should even above himself, as a man, and above other men that want that Divine
Principle. The widwives once said, that the Hebrew women were not as the
Egyptian women, Exodus 1. 19. And truly the men of God should not be as other
men, I mean not more proud, and froward, and worldly, but more holy, and
humble, and unblameable than other men. Samson the Nazarite became then only
like another man when his locks were shaved off, and the Spirit of God departed
from him, Judge. 16. 17, 20. But as long as the sanctifying Spirit acts and
abides in us, we are true Nazarites, as by our holy Vows separated to God, so
we should be (though not wholly separated, yet) very much distinguished from
other ordinary men. Christ expects from us a (...), Where much is given, much
is required, and more than a Divine Nature could not be given, and therefore
there he requires most.
Mat. 5. 47. something singular, eminent, and transcendent, a proportionable
distance from others in our lives, which may answer that (...) which we expect
to be fixed between them and us after our deaths, Luc. 16. 26. Contarenus (de
Justificat.) makes the comparison of the manners of a Rustic and of a Citizen
or Courtier: and a like difference he says there is between the carriage of an
earth-born sinner and a Saint made partaker of the Divine Nature. The Sons of
Princes should not be in the garb of Peasants children; but that comparison is
too low. Between Nature and Grace there should be a more vast distance. A Child
of God should be as much above a natural man as heaven is above the earth, and
as much above a fouler sinner, as heaven is above hell. But how then comes it
to pass, that the roof of hell should be so nigh (as I may so speak) to the
floor of heaven: that there should be so little difference between the Apogaeum
and highest of moral Heathens, or other natural men, and the Epigaeum or lowest
of a collapsed or go-by-ground Christian? Does not this puff up proud Nature,
and if not debase the Divine, yet make our Philosophical Christians think low
and meanly of it? Make it in these men's esteem but a name, a thin fine notion,
and them that are partakers of it, some Eutopian fancies which Preachers talk
of, but the world sees little of?

SERMON XIX. ON 2 PET. 1. 4.
AND therefore that we may either prevent or refute these Preached at St.
Mary's, Jan. 17. 165^.
their misprisions and blasphemies, and convince them that this we speak of is
a very reality; be we exhorted to 3. things.

1. To aspire and endeavor really to attain to this high dignity this divine
nature. 2. Then to walk answerably to it and worthy of it. 3. Because both will
be here imperfect, to long for heaven where both will be in their full
perfection.
1. First (I say) let us with our whole might aspire to this highest dignity,
and not rest till we arrive at this Divine Prerogative of being the Sons of
God, and so partakers of the divine nature. John 1. 1^.
And to quicken us hereto, consider,

1. How studious and ambitious men have always been of nearness to great
Princes, and (for that purpose) of an imitation Camerar. med. cent. 1. cap. 66.
Eunomius cum impeditae linguae erat, hoc facundiam fuisse dixit Philostorgius
Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 29. Epist. ad Laetam.
and likeness of their deportment, fashions, gestures, and oftentimes even of
their both moral, yea and natural vices and deformities. Poppea's yellow locks
a beauty in the Court, Leonides his gate and manners Alexander could not
forbear to imitate, as his Courtiers did many things in him. A wry neck or a
long hooked nose much doted on because it looked like an Emperors. And for the
minds complexion Hierom from experience could say Quorum virtutes assequi
nequeas cito imitaris vitia, when we cannot reach their virtues, we are very
prone to take up in imitating their vices, like foolish wanton children when we
cannot stride their steps in fair way, we will follow them through the dirty
puddle. Exempla exemplaria, so that the imitation As Lactantius observes, lib.
5. c. 6. mores ac vitia regis imitari, genus obsequii judicatur.
of their manners and vices their subjects account to be a piece of the homage
they owe to them, which therefore made Tully say that plus exemplo quam peccato
nocent [3 de legibus] they do more mischief by their example than by their sin.
Great men's examples (I say) are Laws, and holy men's tempers and carriages have
a kind of necessitating cogency in them to imitation, (...), said Paul to
Peter, Why compellest thou the Gentiles to Judaize? Gal. 2. 14. So like do we
desire to be to good at least to great men; but how much rather should we
aspire and endeavor to be like to him who is Optimus Maximus, to the great
King and most holy God, even God blessed for ever? whose nature is most holy,
whose works are truth, and his ways judgment, Dan. 4. 37. in whose Divine
Beauty is no deformity. And therefore as our Savior said to his D^sciples, Ye
believe in God, believe also John 14. 1.
in me: I may well say to all, Do you imitate man? shall we not imitate God and
Christ rather? If foolish men glory in an Apish symbolizing with men like
themselves, and that in their humane infirmities, how glorious, and therefore
desirable should it be to us to partake with God in his Divine Nature and
perfections?

2. And this the rather, because this high honor and happiness But you will
say heaven is high and we cannot reach it. God infinitely higher; and therefore
no possibility of imitation.
is attainable. The happy event puts it out of question. Many in all Ages of
the Church have arrived at this height, who have shown forth the virtues of God
who has called them, 1 Pet. 2. 9. who by emanations of Divine Grace in heart
and life, have expressed a participation of the Divine Nature, and what in this
kind has been in some by the same Grace, may be in others [Ab esse and posse,
etc.] did we but put forth the strength and activity of Paul's faith, who could
be and do all things through Christ strengthening him, Phil. 4. 13. The Text in
hand (had we nothing else) does sufficiently clear this possibility; for it
does not only say that precious promises were given to them, that they may be
partakers of the Divine Nature (and Gospel-promises do at least assure us of a
possibility, and when by faith laid hold on, of a certainty of their
accomplishment) but withal adds the happy event in their having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust. In which this actual
participation of this Divine Nature in part consists, and by which (according
to the true sense and intention of the Apostle in his adding of those words) it
is evidenced. Well then, it is hence plain, that such a participation of the
Divine Nature may be had, and truly then, such a may-be of such a mercy should
be enough to any awaekned spirit to employ and improve its utmost endeavors
for the attaining of it. It encouraged the Widow of Tekoah to make a great
petition to David, because she said in her self, It may be the King will grant
it, 2 Samuel 14. 15. And, It may be the Lord will look on mine affliction, said
David himself, and upon that ground patiently endured it, 2 Samuel 16. 12. Who
knows? says the Prophet Joel 2. 14. and, Who can tell? said the people of
Nineveh, Jonah 3. 9. whether God will turn and repent, and so the more
seriously they set upon their duty, that he might. Truly Gods may-be's are
better than man's shall-be's. A may-be of salvation is one of the first casts of
faiths eye to justification. In matters of outward estate we much value even
our possibilities; and they set the whole world upon busy action. What crowds
of poor, where a doal may be had? What tr^dging over sea and land for a may-be
of profit? And if such an height of honor or place may be got up to, what
creeping up, though upon hands and feet, as Jonathan 1 Samuel 14. 4, 13. V. 6.
between sharp rocks to come at it, upon this very ground, it may be the Lord
will work for us? As it was enough for Jacob to hear that there was corn in
Egypt to be had (though he was not assured to have any of it) to say to his
sons, Why do you look one upon another? get you down and buy for us, that we
may live and not dye, Genesis 42. 1, 2. And why then should we look here and
there, and like fools have our eyes in the ends of the earth to find out other
vanities, when Pro. 17. 24.
did we but lift up our eyes and hearts to heaven, we might both see and get
that which will make us like the God of heaven. I say not therefore as Jacob
there of Egypt, Get you down thither, but get we up hither, though it be with
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer on our hands and keens, with humblest prayers
and earnestest endeavors, though (as with them up sharpest rocks) through
greatest difficulties and dangers. But is it possible, that a child of wrath by
nature may become a Son of God, and by Grace be partaker of the Divine Nature?
One in himself so much the Beast and the Devil, be made like the blessed God?
And so I that am so vile and sinful, may I become holy as he is holy? perfect
as my heavenly Father is perfect? Then sure the happiness of it would not be
more inconceivable, than our neglect of it unexcusable. Let us therefore up and
be doing. 1 Chronicles. 22. 16.


3. And this yet the rather upon consideration of what others, even Heathens,
have attempted in this kind, and when they have been so mantling the wing this
way, let them shame us if we take not a further and an higher flight. How does
Plato up and down define the chiefest good of man to consist in a full
conformity to God! and what a noise do they make with their (...) and (...)? of
their being God-like whilst they lived, and Deifi^d when dead? Oh that what we
read in their Books we might find in our hearts, and others may see in our
lives, that we might really be and do what they talked of. At least for shame
let us exceed what they did or could attain to: whilst we do so much exceed
them both for pattern and principle.

1. Our pattern is more fair, and our Copy far more clearly and legibly written
before us in the word of truth, than theirs in the dim light of nature. It did
more darkly discover to them the footsteps of God, that by following him
therein they might grope after an Unknown God, and so they fumbled about a poor
conformity Act. 17. 23, 27. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
to him. But upon us the day has dawned, and the day star is risen in our
hearts, and the Sun of righteousness shines forth, which has more fully
discovered to us the image and nature of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
unvailed and clearly discovered to us in the glass and bright beams of the
Gospel; the Deity in its nature, persons and properties evidently manifested,
nor ever could the holiness, justice, power, truth and mercy of God be more
fully declared than they are by Christ, and as they are held forth in the
Gospel. In Christ God is manifested in the flesh, He being 1 Timothy 3. 16. Heb.
1. 3. ^ol. 2. 9.
the Brightness of His Father's glory, and the express Image of his Person, in
whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, and all grace (which is this
Divine nature in the Text) em^nently and without measure for our participation
and imitation. So that our better Abimelech (our King and Father) in his grace
and life says to us all, as the other Abimelech did to his followers, Judge. 9.
48. What ye have seen me do, make haste and do like me. The word was made flesh
and dwelt among us, that we might at a nearer John 1. 14.
view behold his glory full of grace and truth, and walked among us on purpose
that we should follow his steps. In a word, he being 1 Pet. 2. 21.
God, took upon him the nature, and was made in the likeness of man, that the
like mind might be in us, and that whilst Phil. 2. 7. 5.
we have such a perfect pattern so near our eye, according to our measure (in
likeness and conformity) we might be made partakers of the divine nature. And
if the rich man thought that one coming from the dead would work so great
matters with his brethren, Luke 16. 30.
what a transformation in our hearts and lives should Christ make who for this
very purpose came down from heaven? Our pattern in Christ is very fair.

And it very openly and clearly held out to us in the Gospel. Whether by
Christ's own ministry; he being the only begotten Son in his Fathers bosom could
best declare him, John 1. 18. And should we only consider his sermon on the
Mount in the 5, 6, 7. Chapters of S. Matthew, we may understand so much of
God's nature and will, that were our hearts and lives answerable, we should
therein very much partake of the Divine nature, and in our measure be perfect
as our Father who is in heaven is perfect, as our Savior there speaks, Matthew.
5. 48. Or should we consider the Gospel of Christ as dispensed in the writings
or preachings of his Apostles or other servants; Paul in the general speaks
very full to our purpose, 2 Cor. 3. 18. that we all with open face as in a
glass beholding the glory of the Lord are changed into the same image from
glory to glory as by the spirit of the Lord. In which Text every clause is very
strong and emphatical. We all not only Apostles and Ministers, (as some would
expound it) but all true Christians; for they are not only such as we call
Divines, that are made partakers of the Divine nature.

With open face (...), not through Moses his darker veils.

(...) beholding the glory of God; that is, the glorious nature, wisdom,
justice and mercy of God, most fully and perfectly expressed, and exposed and
manifested in Christ.

And accordingly most clearly reflected and held forth in the glass and most
clear mirror of the Gospel. This ex part objecti and medii.

But what ex part subjecti is or should be the effect of it?

(...) we are or at least God expects that we should be changed into the very
same image, not only there to see and behold him, but so as to represent him,
in speculo repraesentantes, as Erasmus translateth it, and so are transfigured
into the same likeness tanquam secundariae quaedam imagines, as Beza well
expresses it.

And that from glory to glory, that is, not only from one degree of glorious
grace to another, as most interpreters expound Beza, Lapide.
it, but as some add from the glory that is in God and Christ, from this
reflection of it, to a proportionable glory according to our manner and measure
communicated to us by it.

And all this as by the spirit of the Lord; that is, so really and gloriously
that nothing but the all powerful spirit of God could effect it, for so that
particle (...) As by the spirit of the Lord signifies causam congruam and
dignam tantae transformationis, as C. a Lapide rightly observes.

All comes to this, and all fully to my present purpose, That now when God is
in Christ so fully (as I may say) exhibited and exposed to our view, and in the
Gospel so clearly manifested and held forth to us: He expects, and where
grace prevails he thereby effects such a change and transformation, that we
are not like our former selves, but are molded into his likeness, and having
laid aside our corrupt nature we are made partakers of his Divine Nature. This
is (or should be) according to Paul's doctrine there, the effect of the Gospel,
and (as Calvin observes upon my Text) according to Peter's doctrine here, when
he says that the exceeding great and precious Gospel-promises are given to us
(...) that by them we should be partakers of the Divine Nature. He tells us
this is the end of the Gospel (Notemus hunc esse Evangelii finem, ut aliquando
Deo conformes reddamur, id vero est quasi Deificari) that at last we may be
conformable to God, which is, as it were, to be Deified, or, as our Apostle
phraseth it, to be made partakers of the Divine Nature. Which whilst we are so
plentifully partakers of the Gospel, we should be exceedingly ashamed of, that
we so far fall short of it, which yet the very Heathens so much aspired to, who
fell so short of us: as thus in pattern, so

2. In principle; for as our pattern is more clear, so our principle is more
high. This conformity to God in true Christians (you heard from 2 Cor. 3. 18)
is from the spirit of the Lord, whilst by the spirit of Christ inlightning and
regenerating we are renewed after the Image of God, Col. 3. 10.

As also from faith in Christ laying hold of th^se exceeding great and precious
promises of the Gospel, and on Christ in them, from whose fullness alone God
would have us receive grace for grace, grace in us answerable and conformable
to grace in him, and so to be partakers of the Divine Nature. Now this faith,
these promises, this Christ, and this spirit of Christ those Heathens and their
most ^^^limate Philosophers were utter strangers to, him they knew not, to him
by faith they went not, nay out of themselves they went not; but to their
Philosophical moral considerations, and their purgative virtues, to which they
ever joined their heathenish idolatries and superstitious lustrations and
sacrifices, With Porphyrie to his (...).
and sometimes to their (...) and (...) charms and sorceries, as utterly
inconsistent with the Divine nature as the true God is contrary to a vain idol,
and therefore it is no wonder that it was so woefully deformed a deiformity
which they arrived at, how trimly soever their admirers do trim it up and
turkess it.

And therefore when there is so much more light and power in the Gospel, when
our both pattern and principle so far every way exceed theirs. Surely God
cannot but expect that it should be another-kins likeness to him that we should
attain to, than what they arrived at. And on the contrary, let us sadly think
what a shame it is to us and to the Gospel too that when there is so much of
God in it, there should be so little in us who profess it.

That when we read David's Psalms, and the other Prophets writings in the old
Testament, we should find so much light and life, that they both breath and
express so much of God in them, and we so little, so that in truth although (as
Eusebius observes) they were not called, yet indeed they were the true
Christians, and many of us are really as much without God as we are strangers
from that Commonwealth of Israel.

Especially that even Heathens should herein exceed us, that they should so
honorably speak of that God whom we so blaspheme; that they should express
more of God by the twilight of nature, than we in the sunshine of the Gospel;
that Erasmus should so hardly forbear to pray to Socrates as a Saint, whilst
many who are named Christians may (without breach of charity) be called
Atheists; that any of us should have upon us such black marks of the Devil,
when on many of them we may discover (though ruder, yet) very lovely characters
and lineaments (by the help only of their natural Divinity) of the Divine
nature, which we who have better means in all reason should be more possessed
of.

SERMON XX. ON 2 PET. 1. 4.
AND should it be here asked what those means are which

I must answer, that all that we of our selves can do as to any men of God; can
less concur to the producing of this Divine nature, than we did to our humane:
both are a Creation, and therefore the work of God only: but yet so as we are
to make our addresses to him for the one now that we have a natural being,
which we could not for the other when he had none.

And here as the Divine nature essentially considered in God is common to all
the ^hree persons, so this communicated symbolical Divine nature in us is the
common work of them all, and therefore to them all we are to make our
applications for it.

1. To God the Father, who as he is Fons Deitatis, and communicates Means.
that Divine nature to the Son and the spirit, so he is Fons Gratiae, and
through the Son by the Spirit imparts this Divine nature to all his children.
It was his breath that breathed into Adam at first that soul in which
especially was his image, and it must be his breathing still that must breath
into our hearts that divine grace in which consists that his image renewed and
this Divine nature. God our Creator is the Author of this new Creature.

And here the means of it on our parts is by humble and earnest prayer to
breath after him for it, as the dying man gaspeth for breath that is going
away, or rather as the dry earth gapeth for heavens rain and influence which it
wants, and so in this systole and diastole upon the out-breathing of our
souls and desires follows in God's way the breathing in of this Divine breath
of life, the quickening spirit by which we are made spiritual living souls. In
this case it was said of Saul, Behold he prays, Acts 9. 11.

For, although it be true, that the prayers of the wicked, whilst they purpose
to go on in sin, are an abomination to the Lord; Prove. 28. 9.


And as true that the prayer of any in an estate of corrupt nature, as it
comes from such is so defiled, that in regard of any worth in it instead of
meriting an answer it justly deserves a denial. Whereupon our Antinomians and
others do wickedly forbid such to pray:

Yet in such sinners that lie under the burden of sin and misery and are
looking out for help and mercy; to look up to God in prayer for it,

A it is the homage which is due from the creature to its Creator, and so to
be tendered to him;

So it is the way ordained by God, in and by which the creature in want and
misery may come to receive mercy. Which therefore God commands, and that to a
Simon Magus, and that upon only a Perhaps to receive mercy, Act. 8. 22. pray
God if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

And which therefore in obedience to such a command to perform, is (both in
God's intention and ordination on his part, and as to the happy success and
event on ^ur parts) the direct suitable and successful means of our obtaining as
all other mercies, so of this which is one of the chief of all, of being made
partakers of the Divine nature, and that upon a double account.

1. As in a way of moral causality it prevails with God, and through his
indulgence procures of him the grant of this inestimable gift of the new
creature, this divine nature, as Manasseh in this case by his prayer prevailed
with God for his return both from his sin and captivity together, 2 Chronicles. 33.
12, 13. and so still, the child is born crying:

2. So also in a kind of physical efficiency (as I may call it) In the very act
of praying we so nearly converse with God that by looking up to him we are made
like him: as the stung Israelite by looking to the Brazen Serpent was healed,
and Moses by near approaches to God and communing with him on the Mount had
irradiations of his glory reflected on him; so in near and frequent addresses
to God by prayer there is much communication of God by such close communion
with him. Papists are wont to picture their Saints praying with a Glory on
their head; but true Saints that are much with God have much of God and his
glorious grace on their hearts, and none more than those that come into his
presence oftnest, get nearest and keep closest. Our Savior when he was praying
in the Mount was transfigured, Luke 9. 29. Nor are we ever more transformed
into the image of God and Christ, than when we have got up our hearts highest
and nearest in that duty. Be much therefore with God our Father in prayer for
this mercy.

2. Make nearest applications to Christ the Son and our Savior by faith in his
promises, for

By the promises (we read in the Text) we come to be partakers of the divine
nature: which when sealed to us, there is an impress of Christ stamped on us.
And Christ is wrapped up in those promises, who as in his Incarnation was made
partaker of our nature, so by him and his grace alone we are made partakers of
his.

And faith is the eye and hand which sees and takes hold of Christ in the
promises, and so by beholding him in that glass, as intellectus fit idem cum
objecto, we come to be changed (as we heard) into the same image from glory to
glory. There is an image of the thing seen in the eye that looks on it, and we
by faith wistly eying of Christ have his image so imprinted on us, that we
prove no longer like our selves. As the wise men, Matthew. 2. when they had seen
him, turned back another way, v. 12. So they that by him are made wise to
Salvation, never savingly saw him, but went away with another heart, not their
former selves, but changed into another, that is to say, this divine nature.

To these promises and Christ in them apply we our selves; for it is from his
fullness (as before we heard) that we must only receive grace for grace, grace
in us answerable to the grace in him.

And content we not our selves with moral and Philosophical considerations as
able to work such a change. Gehazi may lay 2 King. 4. 31.
the staff on the child's face, and no life come: the water will not rise
higher than from whence it descended. Nature in its highest elevations will not
be able of it self to rise up to saving grace, nor will any moral speculations
or qualifications lift us up to a divine nature. Christ is the fountainhead.
He came down from heaven to work it, and therefore to him in heaven by faith
must we rise up, if ever we would have it wrought in us.

3. And to the spirit of Christ, for this changing into the same image (as we
also heard) is by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. It was this spirit that
breathed the image of God into us in Genesis 2. 7.
our first creation, and it must be the same spirit that must breath into us
this new life, the finger of this spirit, that only can draw upon us these fair
and lovely characters and lineaments of this Divine image; the spirit of
regeneration that must beget us to this new nature.

And therefore here again rest not in highest either natural or moral
considerations; they are but airy, and their birth will be answerable, prove
abortions, or like that of the Spanish mares which (they say) conceive by
breathing in the South Wind, but their Foals (they say too) presently languish
and die, and so (at last to be sure) will all such births of our own begetting.

Especially take heed of grieving and resisting the spirit in these his Divine
workings. If the child would be born, if it cannot further its own birth, let
it not hinder it by working backward; because it is God that works in us both
to will and to do, let us Phil. 2. 12, 13.
not mar his work, but in and by his strength work out our own salvation, by
not being flints to God, but as wax to yield to, and to receive his Divine
impressions. Thus applying our selves to God this happy work may and will be
wrought, and rather than fail, God can make even afflictions a means to effect
it, that what are in themselves (...) common to men may further this Divine 1
Cor. 10. 13.
nature, and (as the ball) struck down to the earth in the rebound rise as high
as heaven. So by them we are made partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. (and
that is no less than to be partakers of the divine nature) and whilst we so
suffer, Peter says, the spirit of glory, yea and of God rests upon us; and
so most happy participations of the divine glory and nature are communicated to
us. Never was more of God seen in any, than in the Martyrs by the light of the
fires they were consumed in.

Thus upon these considerations and in the use of these and the like means, our
first duty is to endeavor to come to be partakers of this divine nature.

2. And then secondly walk worthy of it, and answerable to it, that we show
forth the virtues of God, as our Apostle exhorted chap. 2. v. 9. of the former
Epistle, that in our spirits and carriages more of God may appear than of our
selves; as in redhot iron there is more fire seen than iron. Otherwise whilst
the As every thing in the first Creation brought forth fruit according to its
kind, Genesis 1. 11, 12. so in this new Creation, let us in our kind. And as
thorns bring not forth grapes nor thistles figs, corrupt nature nothing that is
good; so let not the good fig tree bring forth bad figs, or the vine sour
grapes, but such as becomes its kind and Gods planting.
Sons of God walk like other children of men, express as much corruption, and
as little grace, whilst (according to the Text) we say and preach that they are
partakers of the divine nature, men will be ready to think that the Citizens of
Zion, and of Plato's Commonwealth are much akin if not the same; but Ideas and
fancies, and like as the Painters pictures of Angels, and the Papists of the
Virgin Mary, in which they intend not to make them like, but only brave and
beautiful: so we say rather what they should be than what they are, but (it may
be) the quite contrary, as Polydor Virgil observes that their Popes had usually
names given them which were quite contrary to their temper and practice: but
although Art may paint, yet Nature is real, and therefore if thou say that
thou art partaker of this divine Nature; loquere ut videam, say, and then do
and be what may really and substantially prove and manifest it, otherwise an
Ape will be an Ape though with a child's coat put upon it, and (as it is in the
story) will show as much when almonds are cast before it. Naturam expellas
furca licet, etc. Nature may be disguised and dissembled for a while and for
ends, and upon design thou may mask and keep it in, but it will out; so will
corrupt nature, and so will the Divine too, which we should labor what we can
to exert and manifest, and that so evidently and fully that both our selves and
others may be convinced that what we are or do can proceed from no lower a
principle. By wallowing in sensual lusts and pleasures we take part with the
beast: to be proud, envious, blasphemous and malicious, is to partake of the
Devil; that is brutish, this devilish; to be kind and courteous is indeed
humanity, but if there be no more, it falls exceeding short of the Divine
Nature and our walking up to it and worthy of it.

That in general is a more full imitation of God and Christ, and Imitatores
Divinae bonitatis, nam (...) vox ad Dei proprietates pertinet. Grotius in
Textum.
of his more peculiar properties. When the same mind is in us as was in Christ,
Philip. 2. 5. When humble and meek as he was, when spiritual and holy as God
who has called us is holy, Christianismus est imitatio Divinae Naturae (Nyssen
adv. Ennomium) Christianity in its proper formality is nothing but the
imitation of the Divine Nature, and fully to imitate God and Christ is in the
general both to be partakers of it and to walk worthy of it. In particular I
name only three things.

1. Abound in those fruits of the spirit, Love, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. Gal. 5. 22, 23. for whereas the Apostle, 1
John 4. 16. says that God is love, it tells us that love is of his nature,
and that therefore he that abounds in love does abundantly partake of it, even
dwells in God, and God in him. What they use to say of forma augusta, of a
goodly Majestic Personage, is much more true of a loving heart and carriage,
multum de coelo trahit; it has much of Heaven in it, and partakes much of
God's Divine Nature and Majesty, whereas on the contrary, wrath, strife, envy
and malice, though sometimes miscalled ingenious, the Apostle James assures us
if it be wisdom, it is earthly, sensual, and devilish, Chap. 3. 14, 15, 16.
instead of Heavens serene light, has much of Hells smothered fire in it, much
of the Devil, who since his fall is of all other of Gods Creatures the most
troubled and discontented himself, and is so mischievous thereupon, that his
main endeavor is to make others like him, and in nothing more than in these
hellish heats, and these devilish sour distempers. Have therefore, and express
much of this grace of love if we would evidence that we partake of the nature
of God, the God of love.

2. Labor to get and keep above the World, for Heaven is high above the Earth,
and God above the Creature: were we aloft in Heaven what a poor little point
would the Earth be in our eye? To God it is less than nothing and vanity, Isa.
40. 17. and were we more like God, the World would have less both room and
esteem in our heart, and the greatest and goodliest enjoyments of it
(especially in compare with God in Christ) would be exilia, vilia, poor little
worthless nothings, as he says upon the Text Qui C. a Lapide.
semel se in Divinitatem immersit animus, non nisi Deo and Divinis pascitur.
Were we once as it were swallowed up in God we should not be so immersed in
these miry puddles below: if fed with this Heavenly Manna, we should not
surfeit on these Leeks and Onions of Egypt. This one Meditation (says Calvin
on the Text) would abundantly suffice, ut mundo renunciantes toti in coelum
feramur, to make us overlook and despise the World, and to have eye and heart
up to God and Heaven. Were we partakers of the Divine Nature, and so up in
Heaven with God, we should be far above the Earth and Worldly contentments.

3. But far higher above Hell in sinful defilements, which is the third
particular of our worthy deportment, answerable to so high a grandeur and
exaltation. This the words immediately following the Text hold out to us, when
having said that we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, presently telling
you wherein that consists and appears, he adds, (...), etc. Cum aufugeritis,
or, as Pagnin renders it, si refugeritis, when you have escaped, or if you
shall fly from the corruption that is in the World through lust, with the like
speed and earnestness that you would fly from fire, sword, or pestilence, as
the word imports it, and some interpret it. Sin is strong and we are weak, and
therefore our safety is by flying. That is one strong argument for us to fly,
but this we Fugiendo Victoria. Estins.
now speak of is stronger. Are we made partakers of the Divine Nature? and what
Communion then has light with darkness? or 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15.
Christ with Belial? or God, or those that are godly with the Devil? Sin makes
us like the Beast or Devil, and I would not that you should have fellowship
with Devils, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 20. Sinful lusts are sensual, low,
base, filthy, but God is a most pure and holy spirit: and truly therefore those
that profess themselves to be partakers of his spirit and nature, should in
this labor to be like him.

Otherwise,

Either with Enthusiasts to pretend not only to Divinity but even to a Deity,
and yet to wallow in all loathsome filthiness with the (...), Gnostics, and
our abominable Ranters, what is it else but a piece of Atheistical nonsense
and blasphemous contradiction? to make Gods of incarnate Devils, and men
believe (what he Psalm. 50. 21. thought) that God is like us whom in such a way
we so far pretend to?

Or as others sometimes do, when they have no mind to leave their sins, to
plead that they are but flesh and blood, not Saints and Angels to be able to
abstain from such lusts, or to be so holy as you would have them be; is also in
a proportionable measure alike vain and senseless, and to such I only say, that
if they be but flesh Ex ore tuo, serve nequam, out of thine own m^uth will I
condemn thee.
and blood, they are not as yet partakers of the Divine nature, for that is not
carnal, and if they continue such, the Apostle tells them they shall not
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven (1 Cor. 15. 50.) where the holy God is. If thou
be so far from the grace of an holy Saint, thou art much farther off from
the nature of an holy God: and if thou can contentedly say that thou can
not perform such duties or abstain from such sins, it is but little, it is
nothing that thou partakest of this honor and happiness: for where there is a
(...), a Divine Nature as in the Text, there is (...), as it is in the
foregoing-verse, a Divine Power whereby through Christ with Paul thou will be
able to do all things, Philip. 4. 13. in his strength to grapple with Sin, and
Satan, and the World, and through him to prove at last more than Conqueror.
Romans 8. 37. De Not. Sermon. 1. Dep^^amus veterem h^minem cum actibus suis, and
adepti participationem generationis Christi, carnis renunciemus operibus. Leo
ibid. Confiderent peccatores quantum gratiae bonum ob vilem voluptatent
amiserint. Chrysostom.
And therefore here let me make use of Leo's words. Agnosce dignitatem tuam (O
Christian) and Divinae consors factus naturae noli in veterem vilitatem
degeneri conversatione redire. Heaven born Christian, but art thou indeed made
partaker of the Divine Nature? walk then answerable to thy birth and breeding,
and best nature, and by a sinful life do not degenerate into thy former
baseness.

When tempted to sin, Divine Nature should look at the first blush of it as
from a natural instinct, with an holy Antipathy and abhorrency.

A^ least when thou think of it, reason it out of countenance with such
thoughts as these, shall such a man as I do this? with Nehemiah, Cap. 6. 11.
Shall I that in my kind and measure partake of the nature of God, do the Devils
work? Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
harlot? 1 Cor. 6. 15. Nay this Nature of God in me formally forbids it. Does
not even nature it self teach you? So Paul argued against men's wearing of long
hair, 1 Cor. 11. 14. and does not this Divine Nature much rather teach men to
abstain from more foul deformities? Sins against common nature were the
abominations of the Heathens, Romans 1. 26. and therefore sins against this
Divine Nature should be esteemed more unnatural and abominable to Christians.
Thus let the consideration of this Divine Nature antidote and prevent sin that
it infect not.

But if through our carelessness it have, let it however strengthen the heart to
expel and eject it, that it kill not. How will nature (till it be overcome) be
sick of bad humors, and thrust out corruption as a fountain works out
pollution? Nature (I said) is a principle of recovery: and so will this Divine
Nature be also from those peccant humors which it is sometimes oppressed with.

But because, as long as we live here, that will be too much and 3. Vide
Calvini Instit. l. 3. cap. 25. S. 10. ita sane ut in hac vita quantuscunque
profectus sit, long absit ab illa perfectione similitudinis quae idonea erit
ad videndum Deum, sicut dicit Apostolus facie ad faciem. Augustine. Epist. 6.
Quam majorem dignitatem accipere poterit adopt atus quam ut sit ubi est amicus?
non aequalis factus Divinitati, sed consociatus aeternitati. Augustine. Tractat.
51. in Johan. id ipsum innuit Petrus, etc.
too often, this should make us weary of the World, and sigh and breath after
Heaven, for it will not be till we get thither, that this will be made perfect.
Blessed be God, that we have any tastes and beginnings of it here, that in any
degree and measure we partake of God in grace and holiness, are any whit like
to God; but alas all that is done here is but first rude draughts, poor
imperfect lineaments of that Divine Image, and they too often and too too much
blotted out by our sins, it is not till we come in Heaven to see God as he is,
that we shall be most fully like him, 1 John 3. 2. it will not be to the life,
till we live with him in glory. How ugly in our own eyes mean while should our
present disconformities to God be? How weary should we be of them? oh how happy
will that day be, and how earnestly should we breath after it, when we shall be
fully transformed into Christ's Image, most perfectly be made like God, and as
far as our finite nature is capable of, become partakers of the Divine Nature,
when God shall be all in all? Lord Jesus come quickly.

Amen.
Salus non aliter consistere potest, nisi illi qui salutem consequuntur, Dei
fiant. Deificatio antem est Dei quoad ejus fieri potest, imitatio, and cum eo
commixtio, and (ut ita dicam) unitio. Dionys. de coelest. hierarch. Cap. 1.
SERMON XXI.
PHILIP. 1. 27. Only let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
MInisters of the Gospel Gregor. Nyssen compares to March 19. 1625/6.
Schoolmasters, who as they have different natures and tempers to deal with, so
they should have Wisdom to observe it, and accommodate themselves accordingly.
Sure our blessed Apostle had, and therefore knew when to comfort and encourage,
and on the contrary, when he had just occasion durst both chide and strike. So
he had a Rod for the unruly Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4. 21. and if the Galatians
will play the Truants in Christ's School, slide back from the Truth of the
Gospel, he will not be Tongue-tied. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched
you? Chap. 3. 1. But let the Thessalonians receive the Word with joy, and
practice it so as they become Examples to others, 1 These. 1. 6, 7. Then instead
of chiding, you shall hear him boasting of them. What is our hope and joy, or
Crown of rejoicing? Are not ye? etc. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. And for our Philippians,
let them at the first entertain the Gospel, Act. 16. and continue steadfast in
that Fellowship, Philip. 1. 5. at the first when he parted from Macedonia, let
them communicate to his wants, Chap. 4. 15. and once and again, when he was at
Thessalonica, v. 16. and now again, when he is Prisoner at Rome, let their love
flourish again (v. 10.) in sending to him by Epaphroditus, (v. 18, 19.) their
(...), something to sustain their Ghostly Father, who could not now provide for
himself (which was the occasion of his writing this Epistle) and then he cannot
mention or remember them, but he must thank God for them, Chap. 1. 3. Yea then
they are his (...), Chap. 4. 1. His dearly beloved, and longed for; his Joy and
Crown. And therefore though he cannot for the present come and bring his
thanks, yet he hopes he shall ere-long, and meanwhile from Prison (which the
Church of God is beholden to for most of his Epistles, as Beza well observes)
he writes and sends this as an acknowledgment of their love, and as a token of
his own. But lest any should say (...), or think that their Gift was like a
Schoolboys Nosegay which he gives to his Master to save him from a whipping,
and his Gain the Cause why he was so indulgent, as in particular he professes
against it, Chap. 4. So the general carriage of this Chapter plainly shows,
that for all their bounty he would not make them wantons, and therefore affer
the Inscription and Congratulation in the 11 first Verses of this Chapter,
which is the first part of it, and a Narration of the success and event of his
affections from the 12th to the 27th, which is the second part; there is a
third part begun in the Text, and continued in the sequel of the Epistle;
wherein he calls for something else, which would be far more acceptable to
him than their former beneficence, in general set down in the words I have
read. (...). Only let your Conversation be such, as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ.

The first word (...) being a corrective, and a transitive Particle, may
accordingly have a double reference: either to his coming again to them
immediately before spoken of, which whether it did afterward come to pass I say
not, because I find the Judgments of Interpreters different about it. His own
words are (...), v. 25. and they sound a confident assurance; and yet here, as
correcting himself, or rather as passing it by, as though he had said, verum de
me viderit Dominus, etc. as Calvin expresses it; Whatever becomes of me, I
leave that to God, only do you your duty, Only let your Conversation be such as
becomes the Gospel: or if we take it transitively, whereby he passes from the
Preface of his Epistle to the Body of it, as diverse Interpreters think, and
refer it to all that went before, then it would plainly mean thus much, That
whereas God has done great things for you (which are set down in the former
part of the Chapter) has brought you to the fellowship of the Gospel, and so
has begun a good work in you, and will perfect it to the day of Christ, has
turned my afflictions (which otherwise you might have stumbled at) to the
furtherance of the Gospel, and has purposed to free me from my Bonds for the
furtherance of your Edification and Comfort; seeing, I say, that God has done
so much for his part, Quod reliquum est, etc. that which is now wanting lies
upon you to look to, and that, only that you have your Conversation so as may
become the Gospel of Christ.

But to leave that relative consideration of the words; in them absolutely
considered we have these particulars.

1. Something to be ruled; That Is their Conversation, (...). 2. The Rule, and
that is the Gospel of Christ. 3. And thirdly the Agreement, which must be
betwixt their Conversation and this Rule, in that word (...) only let your
Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ.
For the first, the thing to be ruled, their Conversation. The word (...) here
used properly signifies to govern a City or Commonwealth, and thence comes
to signify a man's governing himself, whether in public or private. And though
I confess the word (...) in the Greek Fathers commonly signifies a Man's
behavior and carriage in general, as likewise this Verb (...), Acts 23. 1.
Where Paul says, Men and Brethren, (...), and therefore translated, I have
lived in all good Conscience before God; yet I cannot say, but that both here
and in other places it has some reference to Men we converse with, and
therefore though not excluding our inward and spiritual service to Godward, yet
especially intending our carriage toward others, our Conversation (as ours
translate it) in civil and Christian Society.

2. Now the Gospel of Christ is the Rule our Conversation must be squared by,
that second and better Covenant, which Christ is both the Preacher and Subject
of; and therefore here called His Gospel.

3. Which they and we all must walk worthy of. So the words sound (...). Nor
would some proud Justitiary stick perhaps hence to ground the worth and merit
of his good works and meanings. Nor do I deny but this word signifies so much
in some other cases, but not in this. No, Beloved: In this sense we are not
worthy of the Crumbs that fall from God's Table (as our Church confesses) and
therefore much less of these dainties, which we have before prophesied of, Isa.
25. 6. (...), then, is as much as ut convenit, as Beza, quemadmodum decet,
according to the Syriach Interpreter, convenienter and competenter, as
Musculus, or pro dignitate, as others have it; that is, as is convenient, and
fitting, as becomes and will be for the honor of the Gospel; that our lives
and the Gospel should be like two Tallies agreeing in every thing, or (as the
word (...) as it comes of (...) signifies) as though our lives and the Gospel
being put into two Balances were in aequilibrio not for equality of worth or
weight, but for fitness and correspondency. And so I take it includes these
two, both which our English word becomes here used includes.

1. That our lives should be answerable and agreeable.

2. And thence (in the second place) such as will not disgrace and dishonor,
but become and adorn the Gospel of Christ, which we profess. And that is the
duty which the Apostle here commends to his Philippians, and I now to your
consideration and practice.

A duty, we might think, which every ingenuous temper would be soon molded to,
that calls on him for no more, than that he would walk worthy of himself and
his Profession; especially our complete Moralists, who often strive more for
good carriage than a good Conscience, and we above all, who labor (perhaps
some times too earnestly) to be dignified Men; I wish it were always in the
Apostles sense, when he calls on us to walk worthy of the Gospel. But
something sure there is in it that he so urges it, makes it his only thing
here; and elsewhere becomes earnest suitor for it, (...), I beseech you that
you would walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith you are called, Ephesians. 4. 1. is
so earnest for it, that he uses all means to effect it by Exhortations,
Consolations, Obtestations, (...), that they would walk worthy not only of the
Gospel, but of God himself, who had called them to his Kingdom and Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. And therefore for the further opening of it, give me leave
briefly to show,

1. Wherein this worthy behavior especially consists, and then, 2. The
Arguments couched in the Text, which may move all to endeavor after it, that
so we may better urge it in the Application.
For the first therefore in general; The Scripture often makes mention of a
certain (...) and (...), which is ordinarily translated Honesty, but signifies
(generally) that (...), that decent and holy carriage of a Christian, which the
Apostle not only here, but again in the fourth Chapter of this Epistle points
at in his (...) etc. Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on these things. A sufficient
commentary upon this (...).

But yet more particularly; As the Spouse has both an Eye and a Chain,
wherewith she ravisheth the Heart of her Savior, Cant. 4. 6. so I conceive one
part of this Conversation consists in that outward grave sober and amiable
behavior, which becomes all, but especially a Christian, which the Apostle
brings the Corinthians to Epist. 1. Chap. 11. 13. Judge in your selves, is it
comely, etc. which goes through all both Virtues and Graces, and gives a
splendour to all: nor yet only that which Ethics help the Moralist to, but a
Christian decency made up of gravity and amiableness; the one arising from a
serious and settled course of Godliness, and the other from inward peace of
Conscience, there being a Calm within, and therefore there must needs be a
Serenity without. And truly why should the Gospel only make Men untoward? or
why should professors of it be especially blamed for bad natures and harsh
carriages? Seeing Plato's Divinity was, that Pulchrum and Bonum were the same,
and the same word signifies both; why should they be severed in us that
profess more Divine Philosophy? Not that I doubted that many such imputations
are false of many Men; accounting it unmannerliness and frowardness, when the
Godly will not run with them into the same excess of Riot; Nor that I condemned
all, whose natural dispositions are more rough, and so their carriage in this
respect less amiable. No, I know the Lord had use of John Baptist's more
retired and austere, as well as of our Savior's more amiable and pleasing
behavior; Nor did he that first preached in that regard at first blemish the
Gospel.

And yet I must needs say that the Lacedaemonians prayed well, when they desired
of God, ut pulchra cum bonis iis tribueret; and it would be well if Christians
now would join both. For if it be that, by which an Animal exceeds that which
is Inanimate, that together with bonum it can appetere pulchrum, which the
Inanimate skills not of; let it never be that, in which a Christian shall be
inferior to another, that whatever care he has for the lawfulness, yet he
should have none for the decency of his behavior. If Aristotle's happy Man is
always attended upon with his Pulchritudo and Gratia, It Is pity that our
blessed Man should want either. But this is only the Chain about the Spouses
Neck; the Fringe of that Garment that makes a Christians Profession and
behavior comely and glorious. And indeed were this all the Grace that could
commend him or the Gospel, we might well say of it, as some of them did of
theirs, that it were eburneum detrimentum; the painting only of (perhaps) a
foul Face, not a vital fulgor, by which they use to define true Beauty.

2. And therefore, as they use to say, that Gratia est vitale, quid and
spirituale; so (in the second place) there is a more spiritual and live Beauty,
which adds luster to a Christian's both Life and Profession. I mean true
sanctifying Grace, which makes both himself, and whatsoever proceeds from him
in this sense truly Gracious. And that this becomes the Gospel of Grace, we
may be assured it is not the Pope's triple-Crown, nor the Cardinal's Scarlet,
nor the Papist's excessive pomp in their service, no nor their speaking and
writing for the honor of it, that commends it to the World so much as the
faithful expressing the Life and Power of it in our Lives and Carriage; for,
before most of these w^ere heard of, what was the reason that a few mean
Fishermen and others of the like condition could ever have been able to lead
the whole World Captive, even compel all to come in, and to subject themselves
to the professed obedience of the Gospel? Was it not, because that Christ and
his Spirit (as he had promised them) was with them? not only in their
Preaching, but also in their Carriage and Behavior, so that they who otherwise
were contemned as base, and accused as deceivers, could yet commend themselves
to Men's Consciences though not to their lusts; that they could appeal both to 2
Cor. 4. 2.
God and Man in this case; Ye are Witnesses, and God also, how holily and
justly and unblameably we have behaved our selves among you that believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. So that though in other respects men looked at them as the filth
and offscouring of the World, yet in this they were the Glory of Christ, 2
Cor. 8. 23. In a word, so many Graces are as so many Jewels that adorn the
Gospel, and make the Spouse of Christ glorious. So there is a Beauty of
Holiness, Psalm. 29. 2. yea, a Majesty, and that is more. Thus by Faith the
Elders received a good Report, Heb. 11. 2. And by true saving Wisdom, Solomon
assures us, we shall receive (...), as the Septuagint, a Crown of Glory, as
ours read it, Prove. 4. 9. Every particular Grace is part of a Christians
Beauty. But as they use to say Pulchritudo non est partis, sed compositi; so
the perfection of Beauty arises from all Graces, and a Perfetion in all.
Which, though we cannot here attain to, yet if we strive after it what we can,
we shall surely procure either love or reverence. If the Amiableness of
Holiness will not allure; the Majesty of it will daunt the proudest Scorner;
and why may it not allure the most obstinate, seeing it wins Grace in God's
Eyes, and therefore may justly challenge it in ours? And here now I might open
such a Cabinet of precious Jewels, I mean so many several Graces, as were they
put on, and worn by us, would so beautify every part of a Christian, that you
should not see a Mordecai riding on Ahasuerus Horse with his Imperial Robes and
Crown, or another Joseph with Pharaoh's Ring on his Hand, and a Chain of Gold
about his Neck, with the People bowing the Knee, and crying Abrek; but a Man of
God, partaker of the Divine Nature, and well-nigh already glorified, and so
both himself and his profession glorious in the Eyes of God, and Angels. But
all these curious pieces I have not now leisure to view; many of them you may
in the following Chapters of this Epistle. I shall content my self with two;
which the Apostle unfolds in the latter part of this Verse, in which he uses a
Metaphor taken from an Army, in which two things are required for the
comeliness and safeguard of it; Unity amongst themselves; and Valor in beating
back the adversary. Proportionable to which, two things he tells us will
become us in our warfare.

1. Mutual Love, that you stand fast in one Spirit with one Mind. 2. Constancy
and perseverance in the Profession of the Truth; striving together for the
Faith of the Gospel.
In the first place therefore for Love and Unity. How well it suits with the
Gospel we may conceive, in that it is called the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6. 15.
And therefore agrees not with our Heart-burnings and Dissensions: Brings us
glad tidings of our reconciliation with God, and therefore, as Joseph to his
Brethren, bids us take heed we fall not out by the way. Thus we see, it fits
well; and would it not be as comely as fitting? Yes, surely. And therefore our
Savior makes one part of his Spouses Beauty, that her Teeth are like a Flock
of Sheep, whereof every one bears Twins, as well to express Love as
Fruitfulness. And was it not this true-hearted Love, in having all things
common, in continuing ((...)) with one accord in the Temple, in eating their
Meat with gladness and in singleness of Heart, and the like, which made those
first Christians (Acts 2. 46, 47) have favor with all the people; that,
because the multitude of them that believed were of one Heart and one Soul,
therefore great Grace was upon them all, Acts 4. 32, 33? And the same, believe
it, would be upon us all, if we, as they, according to the Apostle's
Exhortation here, would now stand (...) in one Spirit; that is, having one and
the same spirit of Grace dwelling in us, and thence with one Mind, Will and
Affection; or, in one Spirit, (as some expound it) in one Judgment: not one
Paul, and another Apollos, not some Lutherans, and others Calvinists, not some
Remonstrants, and others Contra-Remonstrants; but all of one mind in Christ:
for as they use to say of an unnatural Birth that has two Heads, if it have
but one Heart, though it be to be taken for one Man, yet it is a Monster: So as
long as we have one Heart, and agreeing in the main we may grow up into one
Man: yet, if as many Heads, there be so many Opinions and Judgments, it will
be, if not unnatural and monstrous, yet, I am sure, ungracious and unseemly.
For we should stand (...), and withal (...) with one Soul and loving affection
to each other, without hatred and variance, and strife and seditions, in the
Bowels of Mercy and meekness, and tender affection, forbearing and forgiving
one another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us; which if we did, and
were thus knit together in Judgment and Affection, how much it would adorn and
advantage the Gospel, I say not, because I cannot sufficiently. Yet this I can,
that however bodily and outward comeliness may be called (as it is) Concors
discordia, and amica inimicitia, yet in this inward and spiritual Beauty
Plato's Divinity is again true, that makes Vnum and Pulchrum the same; a chief
part of it consisting in this Holy Unity and Uniformity.

2. Which adds strength likewise to that other Grace of constancy and
Perseverance in the Profession of the Truth, when we do not only stand
together, but stand fast, and fight for the Faith of the Gospel, as our Apostle
adds. Which how answerable it is likewise to the Gospel, this only were
sufficient to manifest, in that it shows what Christ endured for us, and
therefore may justly call on us to endure something for him; and truly if it
bring to us the sure mercies of David, we should not be answerable to it, if we
should prove Flinchers. If it be an everlasting Gospel, Revel. 14. 6. It would
be very unfit that we should be like those (...), Matthew. 13. 21. which for a
while believe, and in time of tentation fall away. Nor can we more dishonor
the Gospel, than if by falling off in harder times we proclaim to the World,
that we find not so much good in it, as at first we thought for; as on the
contrary, we cannot otherwise bring more credit to it, than whilst we do (...),
take part (and happy afflictions, in which we have such a blessed Partner) with
the Gospel in its afflictions (as the Apostle's phrase is 2 Timothy 1. 8.) we let
all Men know, that we indeed account it (...), good News, which we will
willingly dye for. This is that for which Justin Martyr and Eusebius for the
honor of Christ set him before the chiefest of the Heathen Philosophers, that
he had so many thousands ambitious of shedding their Blood in the defense of
his Cause and Gospel: which none of them could say of their followers. Yea this
Glory reflects upon our selves likewise. So Peter assures us, that if we be
reproached for the Name of Christ, a Spirit of Glory remains upon us, 1 Pet. 4.
14. yea, though we dye for it, yet Stephens Face will even then shine as an
Angel's: So that however some indeed, like our nice Dames that would (...),
cannot endure Persecution, Galat. 6. 12. would not have their Heads cut off in
Christ's Cause, for spoiling their Beards, would profess the Gospel, but it
must be (...), as thinking Blood and Dust would spoil their effeminate Beauty;
yet, believe it, a noble Christian-Souldier is most glorious (as the Scripture
says of his Savior, Isa. 63. 1.) in his Clothes died red, in his own and
Enemies Blood. Such resplendent Stars shine brightest in such Frosty
Winter-Nights. There be three things, says Solomon, which go well, yea there
are four which are comely in going (and that comeliness for kind, is that which
we now speak of) a Lion, which is strongest amongst Beasts, and turns not
away for any; a Greyhound, an Hee-Goat also, and a King, against whom there is
no rising up, Prove. 30. 29, 30, 31. I may add one more to those four; and yet
add nothing to Scripture, viz. a resolved and settled Christian, which indeed in
this kind exceeds them all. For if a valiant Knight bravely mounted be one of
the three most glorious sights in the World, how glorious a spectacle will it
be to see the Man of God armed with that Heavenly Panoply, riding in triumph,
more than conquering, trampling under foot both frowns and favors of either
flattering or persecuting World, and all the Enemies of his Salvation so
gloriously, as that Death, which takes away his Life, adds to his Glory! Thus
those noble Heroes, those Christian-Worthies, I mean those blessed Martyrs, lie
now in honor, not only with Swords under their Heads, which was the Heathen
Worthies honor, Ezekiel. 32. 27. but, as they say at the Head of Mahomets Tomb
there is such a Carbuncle that lightens all the Room (though otherwise dark)
where it is; so truly this Crown of Martyrdom, is so beset with such sparkling
Rubies, that still they shine like Stars in the Firmament; their constancy
lightens their Graces, and the red dye of their Blood was the best Vermilion to
adorn their Tombs: the Blood of them long since dead yet speaks, as
condemning the ungrateful World, who so used them; so to the Eternal Renown
both of them and the Gospel.

And thus we have seen the way how we may walk worthy of the Gospel. If now we
enquire after Arguments to persuade us to endeavor after it, the Text affords
us three. The first in the word (...), because our Life is a Conversation. And
secondly, because it is the Gospel. And thirdly, the Gospel of Christ, which we
must labor thus to adorn.

First, our life is a Conversation, we live amongst others, and they either
good or bad: and in regard of both, we have need, what we can, to be careful.

As, first, we should consider, that we live in the Bosom of the Church
amongst the faithful, are Citizens of the City of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem;
and therefore it stands us in hand that ut Coelorum municipes nos geramus (as
some read the twentieth Verse of the third Chapter of this Epistle) so as may
be for the honor of our selves and Country. For let Rome be (...), Revel. 18.
10. and (...), Revel. 14. 8. Let Venice pride it self in being called the Rich,
and Milain the Famous, and Bononia the Learned, etc. Yet Jerusalem is ambitious
of no greater Title, than to be styled (...), Matthew. 4. 5. to tell us that are
true Denisons there, what we should be, that, however, if we lived in the Land
of Cabul (as Hiram called the Cities that Solomon gave him) I mean, in Sinks of
Superstition and Profaneness, 1 King. 9. 13.
we might have some pretense for putting in practice that Divelish Proverb, Cum
lupis ululandum, as if in the old Lacedemonian Commonwealth Theft might have
beseemed us, or if in Plato's Polity, shameless Community, or if in Epicurus
his School, brutish Luxury and the like, yet that the Church of God will be no
Pander for our Lusts: and therefore whosoever by his bad Life shall stain its
Beauty, however he may be reckoned in the outward number, yet in truth is but a
Stranger from the Commonwealth of Israel.

2. But besides the Faithful, there are others worse affected: which, as long
as we are here below, we must sometime converse with. Wicked and unreasonable
Men more than enough, that at our least slips will be ready to say, as they,
Ezekiel. 36. 20. These are the people of the Lord, these are the devout Professors
of our times, and the like or worse. If the kindred of Christ will say He is
mad, the Pharisees will be animated to say he has a Devil, Cartwright.
Mark 3. 21, 22. And therefore we have good cause to be wary. Some Michals
there will be, that will deride David, when he behaveth himself most seemly;
but will be sure to lay on load when they find him tripping. It Is with a
Christian, as with a Man in the Sunshine; which way soever he turns himself,
he will have a black shadow either go before him, or follow him; as Tertullian
complained in his time, were he a Sober Wise Man before that he was converted
to be a Christian, then he turned Fool, and his former worth added to his
present baseness: but if before-time he had been lascivious and vicious, no
better Argument against the Christians, that they all were but a company of
such like persons; so that if they could not find a fault, yet malice would
make one. And then, how circumspectly had we need to converse, that, whereas
this way is every where spoken against, our lives may speak for us, when
neither we nor others can; and that whereas we may be sure that there will ever
be some that will speak all manner of evil of us, our carriage may show that
it is falsely, and for Christ's sake rather than our own, and so either win such
as speak against us as evil doers (1 Pet. 2. 12.) or at least not harden them
in their evil courses, but put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men, (v. 15.
of that Chapter,) yea and make such ashamed, that falsely accuse our good
Conversation in Christ (in the 16th. verse of the following.)

A second Argument to persuade us is, That it is the Gospel that we should thus
adorn; which truly may challenge so much at our hands: for if we look at it in
it self, it is the Glorious Gospel of our blessed God, 1 Timothy 1. 11. yea Glory;
exceeding Glory in the Abstract, 2 Cor. 3. 10. Pity therefore that it should
be stained by our foul Conversation, which should be kept without spot,
unrebukable, as Paul exhorts Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 14. Or if we consider what it
is to us, it will require no less at our hands; for it is no other than the
King of Heaven's Pardon, sent to us Condemned Wretches, that brings glad
tidings to us of Freedom and Salvation. And how unfitting then would it be for
us to take it and trample it under foot, or any ways slight and abuse it. And
yet no better do wicked Men deal with it, who, as they are said (in this sense)
to do violence to the Law, Ezekiel. 22. 26. So in a manner by their foul lives
they put both Christ and his Gospel to an open shame. Well: but sure so good
News deserves a better welcome, and what can such Men expect, which do not
only neglect, but in a manner despise so great Salvation? Fearful it will be
when our Physic proves our Poison; and the Gospel, that should speak Peace to
our Comfort, shall witness against us to our Condemnation. How much better
would it beseem and profit us, that whereas God has betrusted us all with the
Gospel, that we would now stand out (...), as the Apostle exhorts in the 7th
verse of this Chapter, in the Apology of it, that whereas it is accused for a
Doctrine of Licentiousness, our lives might show that the Gospel does not
abrogate the Law, but that that part of this second Covenant is true, that
indeed God puts his fear into our Hearts, that we depart not from him: and
again (...), in the confirmation of it, that whereas the Devil and his
Instruments labor by all means to subvert both it and the Professors of it, we
would now, as the Apostle's word is, (...), strive together for the Faith of
the Gospel; in all our Enterprises have this laid down beforehand, ne quid
Resp. detrimenti, etc. that the Gospel be not prejudiced, that our weaknesses
redound not to the weaking of the common cause, yea, with Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 12.
suffer any thing, suffer all things, rather than hinder the Gospel of Christ.

3. But if all this yet will not, yet, seeing, as the Apostle adds, it is the
Gospel of Christ, let him at least prevail with us to give due respect to him
in the Gospel: for him we acknowledge to be our King. And would not our bad
lives make strangers accuse his Laws and Government? He is our glorious Head,
and would not our deformed behaviors make his mystical Body like some
Hippocentaure or Monster, as the Fathers use to urge this against their
semi-Christians? In a word, we profess our selves Christians, so that though we
have riches, and honors, and other such outward dignities, yet we will do
Christ so much honor, as to be named (from none of these, but) only from him
Christians. And does it not then stand us in hand to take heed, lest we only in
truth get the honor by having such a glorious Name called upon us, and Christ
rather the dishonor by having his Name put upon them that are altogether
unworthy? as though our Blessed Savior had not endured shame enough for us
already, that we need now again cast more upon him, and so in a manner again
Crucify the Lord of Glory? No: Beloved, he endured shame enough in that
shameful Death, and therefore we had need live to his praise; shame in wearing
that Crown of Thorns, but it was, that we should be made (...) (as Nyssen
speaks) the Crown of Christ of precious stones, instead of that of Thorns. And
therefore we need look to it, lest whilst we remain ungodly in the Bosom of
the Church, we be no better than Briers and Thorns again platted into this
glorious Crown, and at last he say to us, Friend, how came thou hither? For
be we assured, that however He is our Mediator to reconcile us to God, yet he
will never unite those that are and still remain in their filthiness to such a
Sacred Majesty: and though he be pleased to admit us into his service, yet God
forbid it should ever be said of us in this case, as it was of Shebna in
another, that we should be the shame of our Lords House, Isa. 22. 21.

More shame then for our carnal Gospellers, that by their foul lawless and
profane, and commit the rest of the sins reckoned up, 1 Timothy, 1. 9, 10. which
the Apostle there calls (...), flat contraries to the sound Doctrine of the
glorious Gospel of the Blessed God, and yet would spit in that Man's Face, that
would deny them to be as good Professors of the Gospel as any. It was part of
the Primitive Churches Apology, (...). The Name of a Christian only was their
accusation, quia nominis est praelium: but for other matters they were
proceeded against praesumptis, non probatis criminibus, as Tertullian speaks:
And I would to God it were no more now, that in these happier days, when
through God's infinite Mercy we need not be ashamed of the profession of
Christianity, we were not now a shame to it by our bad behaviors. I confess
Christians in those former times were thought badly enough of. Christianum
omnium scelerum reum, etc. others thought so, and it was well they did but
think and suspect what they could not prove. Now Turks and Infidels think we
are loose and licentious, and it were well they did but think so. Profane
Wretches say that many professors of the ways of Grace are Hypocrites, and it
were well they did but say so. They say, the best of us answer not our
Profession; and it were very well if it were their saying only, and that we
could answer all their accusations, as Paul did Tertullus his slanders, Acts
24. 13. Neither can they prove the things, whereof they now accuse me. Nay,
rather are there not many that instead of living as it becomes the Gospel, (as
the Prophet speaks of the Jews) even separate themselves to that shame, Hos.
9. 10: that betake themselves to such shameful and base practices, as a
barbarous Pagan would blush, a Socrates or Aristides would swoon to behold? and
so even teach Men wickedness, as God complains of the Jews, Jer. 2. 33. or
rather oftentimes do that which they are ashamed to commit, and so justify
them in all their abominations, Jer. 2. 11. I speak not this to disgrace my
Religion, or my Brother that bears the Name of Christ as well as my self; as
though the Turks live like Men, and we like Dogs, as they are pleased to call
us; or that there were more Atheism and Profaneness in England, than in Italy;
or that there were more Villainy committed in our Churches, than in those Popish
Cages of unclean Birds; or as though Campian's Brag were true, Catholicos esse
qui argentum resolvant quod debent, etc. Nor yet favoring those rigid
Censurers, (however other Men bear that blame) that for any unseemly carriage
of Professors cry out presently of Hypocrisy, which in another Man would be
more charitably imputed to Humane frailty: Yet we cannot but conceive how
dishonorable it is to Christ and the Gospel, for the Daughters of the
Philistines to be ashamed of the lewd ways of Gods People, Ezekiel. 16. 27. for
Turks and Pagans (as we know Amurath the second at the Battle at Varna did) to
pray to Christ to revenge the Christians Perfidy. Little do we consider what
Dishonor God has amongst them by our sinful carriage, nor how many bad turns
we do, not only to Turks and Pagans, in keeping them off from embracing the
Gospel, which we so disgrace, but likewise to many poor Christians under their
Tyranny, whilst through the Christians wicked behaivour they think they do God
service, and a great benefit to poor Souls, whilst they constrain them to
Abjure their Faith and Baptism: And so we kill two at one stroke, namely, we
harden the Persecutor, and hazard the Christian's either temporal Life, or
Faith and Salvation. Thus we are an occasion of their denving Christ, and in so
doing do little better our selves. For Tertullian, and those first Christians
thought that there was another way, than by open denying of Christ, to be
excluded from the Name of a Christian, Si faciamus quae faciunt non Christiani,
excludimur, says he. And therefore let us look to our selves in this respect:
for the Jew blasphemes Christ, the Turk prefers Mahomet before Him, and the
poor Indian and barbarous Pagan lives like a Beast in a Man's shape. These
things, and the like, they do: Take we heed therefore lest, whilst we equalize
or exceed them in these or the like, we hazard not the Benefit of our
Christendom.

And therefore, to conclude with Exhortation, we are all to Evangelici,
Professors of the Gospel; that we would not now deal with the Gospel, as the
Jews did with the Law, who carried it along with them in their Clothes, but not
in their Hearts: So we have it only in outward Profession, but express it
neither in Heart nor Life: But as we have a worthy Profession, so let us walk
worthy of it, and let us ever account it as our Duty (with Paul, Romans 1. 16.)
Not to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, so our happiness, if we be not a
shame to it, but rather adorn it by an holy conversation, that our Lives and
the Gospel, like two Glasses reflecting one upon another, may give mutual
luster to each other; that (on the one side) the Gospel may be an Argument of
our praise, as Paul says 2 Cor. 8. 18. of a Brother, that his praise was in
the Gospel: And (on the other) we may add something to its Beauty; That what
Paul said of the Law, Romans 7. 12. all Men that look on our Lives, may confess
of the Gospel, that it is Holy, Just, and Good, when they see it makes us so.
Especially this concerns us that live in these Places and Times: For, if the
Apostle, Romans 13. 13. when this Son of Righteousness was in a manner but new
risen, called upon them to walk (...), we may well think what the Lord expects
of us, upon whom this glorious Light has so long shone in its full Brightness.
However the darknight of Ignorance draws a Vail over the Pagans shame, yet
sure the least mote will be seen in our Sunshine; so that, as what is but
(...), i. e. Folly (or somewhat unsavory) in the Prophets of Samaria, Jer. 23.
13. In the Prophets of Jerusalem, (Ver. 14.) is (...), a Matter so horrible as
might make a Man's hair stand up an end (as the word signifies): So what in a
Pagan's mouth is but an idle word, in a Christians (in a Minister's especially,
as Bernard observes) is well nigh a Blasphemy. Yea, that very (...) (as some
expound it) which in their opinion and behavior is a Virtue, we must look at
as the thing not fitting, Ephesians. 5. 4. Take we heed therefore that we do not
now Contra solemn mingere, (as the Proverb is) that We rebel not against the
Light, as Job phraseth it, Chap. 24. 13. But when we are about the commission
of any Sin, let us bethink our selves where we are, it is holy Ground we stand
on; in Gods House and Temple: And therefore Holiness becomes it for ever: And
therefore would be very unseemly, if we deal with it as Jehu did with the House
of Ba^l (2 Kings 10. 27.) make it a Draught-House, a Sink and Dunghill for all
the Filth of our foul Courses: For if a sin committed in a material Temple adds
to the Abomination, sure the Holiness of this Spiritual Temple makes sin
committed in it, out of measure sinful. Consider, I say, where we are. Our Life
is a Conversation, and therefore we had need look how we behave our selves in
the House of God, (as Paul speaks to Timothy) and that we have Preaching lives,
by which we may speak a word of Comfort and Encouragement to the Godly, of
Reproof to the conviction and conversion of the Wicked, and may be Examples to
all, as Paul said of the Thessalonians, 1. Epist. Chap. 1. v. 7. (...) in the
plural Number, to signify, as Beza fitly notes upon the place, Tot fuisse
veluti constantiae Typos, quot erant Thessalonicensium capita.

Consider likewise what it is we profess; It Is a pure Religion; and therefore,
as a pure Virgin, cannot but blush at the unseemly behavior of her followers.
It Is an high Calling we are called to, Phil. 3. 14. and therefore we should
walk worthy of it, Ephesians. 4. 1. It Is a Glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and
therefore more shame for us any ways to blemish the Glory of it. Unworthy we,
if we walk not answerable; unworthy of Christ, if we trample under-foot his
Blood; unworthy of the Gospel, if we dishonor it, and therefore worthy to be
condemned for that, which we will not be saved by.

Consider, Lastly, What we our selves are, that I may not (because indeed I
cannot) say more, we are Christians. And then (as Nehemiah said) Shall such Men
as we do this great sin, both against God and our Profession? Christians were
wont to be able to challenge all their Accusers, and clear themselves of all
false Accusations, with a Fama sola conscia est scelerum Christianorum. Yea,
Eusebius makes a Christian, and one that excels in Grace, to be Terms
convertible: By which Argument he proves, that Abraham, and the Faithful before
him, (...) (though not so called, yet) in effect were true Christians. And we
may observe in Paul's Epistles, that when he speaks of those sins which other
Men are ordinarily defiled by, he still excepts the Christian. As, whereas
others work all uncleanness with greediness, yet you have not so learned
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20. And, Such were some of you, but ye are washed, etc. 1
Cor. 6. 11. And others are like Ground which bears Thorns and Briers, which
is nigh to Cursing, etc. But, Beloved, we are persuaded better things of you,
and things that accompany Salvation, Heb. 6. 9. All this to teach us, that
whatever other Men be, or do, yet that we should think those sins, which will
stand with another Man's Profession, are notwithstanding unworthy of us that
profess the Gospel; who should shine (...), Phil. 2. 15. Providing for things
honest in the sight of all Men, Romans 12. 17. That they seeing our holy
Demeanor, may glorify our Savior, whom we partly adore and partly imitate;
and reverence His Gospel, which we profess and adorn. And lest any should
think, that thus to live belongs to them that need mind nothing else, and thus
to adorn the Gospel is for such only, whom God has adorned with greater Gifts,
and set in more eminent Places, and so put upon greater Occasions and
Employments. Give me leave to add this, that, as I said before, every saving
Grace is part of a Christians beauty, even the Feet are beautiful, Romans 10. 15.
And the Gospel may not only be adorned by exact looking to the great things of
the Law, but even in the use of things in themselves indifferent. So Paul
speaks of Apparel becoming Women professing Godliness, 1 Timothy 2. 10. And so we
may of the use of Meat and Drink, and Recreations; in all, in the least we may,
we must labor to have our Conversation as becomes the Gospel. And for the
Persons whom this concerns, they are all, none excepted. For though (I confess)
by how much a Man's Place and Gifts are more eminent, he be further engaged in
this Duty; and so the Magistrate especially is bound to look to it, that both
private Carriage and public Government be for the credit and advantage of the
Gospel; and above all, we the Ministers of the Gospel are in a especial manner
betrusted with it, as Paul speaks of himself, 1 These. 2. 4. And therefore as it
is most fearful, when our lives are so Scandalous, that with Eli's Sons we make
Men abhor the Offering of the Lord, even despise that, which they see we so
abuse: So on the contrary, it would be more seemly for us to magnify the
Gospel as well by our Living, as by our Preaching; so that whilst by the one we
labor to beget Men to God, by the other (I mean a Godly life) we might as it
were hang goodly Pictures before them, as they use to do before Women
conceiving, that the Birth may be more beautiful; so that they may conceive (as
Jacob's Sheep did whilst they looked upon the Rods* whilst they look upon us
for Examples of decent and godly Behavior. But though we especially, yet not
we only, but every Christian of what rank and condition soever, is betrusted
with the credit of the Gospel. For proof of which, I refer you only to the
second of the Epistle to Titus, where indeed he begins with him as the
Minister, and for his Doctrine, he must speak such things which become sound
Doctrine, ver. 1. and for his Life, he would have him in all things show
himself a Pattern of good Works, that he that is of the contrary part may be
ashamed, having no evil thing to speak of him, ver. 7, 8. But yet withal he
calls for a Behavior becoming Godliness in old Women, for they must be
(...), ver. 3. And for young Women, whose more wanton Behavior, might have
expected some exemption, yet he tells them that it belongs to them also to look
to their Behavior, that the Word of God be not blasphemed, ver. 5. And
Servants lastly, which perhaps might have thought, they had enough to look to,
if they could procure only their Master's profit and credit; yet in so doing,
he tells them, there is another thing they must look after, (...), That they
adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things, ver. 10. So that the
meanest Vessels in God's House, are Vessels of Honor, and none in the Church
so low, but that as his sins may dishonor, so his holy and decent Behavior in
his rank and condition may bring some Credit to the Gospel.

Now what an happy thing would it be, if we would from the highest to the
lowest, set our selves in good earnest to the Practice of this Duty? What a
glorious sight would it be to see the Magistrate governing, and the Subject
obeying, the Minister preaching, and all of us in some measure living so as
becomes the Gospel? Such a well-ordered Army, where every one did so keep his
Place and Rank, would be a Spectacle fit for an Angel's sight and admiration.
Sure they would not be ashamed then to behold us, (as now oftentimes they are
at our Abominations) but might well look at us as in a manner emulating their
Divine Hierarchies, and practicing that here, which at last together with them
we shall be taken up with in Heaven for ever.

Which I may add as a further Motive to this Duty, and with which in a word I
will conclude.

Beloved, This life of ours should be but a Praeludium to Heaven, which we all
look after. Now there is no sinful or unbeseeming Behavior of any, but all are
and do that which becomes their glorious Condition, and therefore it would be
well, if we would in this respect begin our Heaven betimes here on Earth, and
labor to adorn our selves and the Gospel, with those Graces here, which will
be the greatest part of our Glory there. Indeed, as the Romans were wont to
hang their Bullae about the Necks of their Freeborn children, which, when they
came to Man's Estate and Age, were laid aside: So Chrysostom, in his Preface
to this Epistle observes, that some Graces, that adorn us here, we shall not
need there; not Faith, because the Promise is fulfilled; not Repentance,
because no Sin to cause it; nor Bountifulness, because no Poor to receive it
(which yet in this our Nonage we must in part be adorned with). But besides
there are others, as Holiness and Purity, Love of God and our Brethren, and the
like common to both Estates; here defective, but there made fully perfect. And
in regard of all, even whilst we are here below, we must labor to have our
Conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. Begin to do that now, which we shall do
there for ever: Begin to Tune and Sing that new Song (in the Revelation) here,
which will be turned into those Heavenly Hallelujahs, there to be Sounded out
by us with the whole Quire of Heaven to our everlasting comforts.

SERMON XXII.
PSALM. 119. 96. I have seen an end of all Perfection: But thy Commandment is
exceeding broad.
COncerning this Psalm in general, I must not say much: Yet this, That if St.
Austine had it presented to him sleeping, in the likeness of the Tree of Life,
in the midst of the Paradise (as some say he had) I think it was a Vision, and
no Dream: And if another compare it set Ambrose.
amongst the Psalms to the Sun in the midst of the rest of the Planets, in
some respect the Comparison will suit well. Or if a third tell us that it
contains in it all the Precepts of Faith and Hilar.
Obedience, I think he said true. Quanto apertior, tanto profundior; it was
Austin's Judgment of it; and if we will believe him that said it, if we should
spend our whole lives in studying it (though we should not lose our labors,
yet) we should not fully understand it, for it (as our Text says the rest of
God's Word is) is exceeding broad. If nothing else, yet the Author's
Alphabetical disposing of it tells us, there is something in it more than
ordinary, as being worth his more artificial Penning, and our more diligent
Endeavor to have it as ready in our Memory, as the very Letters of our
Alphabet. The Author is either altogether unknown, or at least as Calvin
thinks, uncertain. Yet methinks, their Opinion is very probable, who think,
that it suits well with the strain of the sweet Singer of Israel, as being one
of the sweetest Songs of Zion. But upon what occasion it was framed, and with
what coherence of parts Interpreters generally say not, nor list I to
conjecture. Only this we may observe for both, that as his chief aim through
the whole is to magnify God's Word and Law (which therefore he makes
honorable mention of under different Titles in every Verse save one, as some
observe, though I think four more may be excepted). Ver. 22.
And for Coherence, whatever reference one Ogdoad has to another, that in
every one of them he speaks to some one thing in general; which is particularly
set out in the several Verses of it: A taste of both which we may have in this,
out of which the Text is taken: In which the Author, whosoever he was, Tanquam
taederet eum mutabilitatis hominum, (as he speaks) as it were now wearied with
the Mutability of outward Occurrences, casts the Anchor of his Soul in the
unchangeable Truth, and Word of God; which he found settled in Heaven, ver. 1.
and in Earth, ver, 2. in all things, ver. 3. in his own Person and Occasions,
(in the four following) and therefore with an heavenly Epiphonema he makes the
first and last Verse sound both the same Note. There he begins, For ever, O
Lord, thy Word is settled in Heaven: And he here ends with the same, I have
seen an end of all Perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

In which words the large Extent, and eternal Duration of God's Word is set
out, by comparing it with the narrow scantness and short continuance of all
other Contentments. He had seen an end of all such Perfections: But none of
God's Word, Thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

For the first words, (in which (though contrary to my first purpose) my
present Discourse must be bounded) this end of Perfection, some make
Martyrdom; many of the Latin Fathers, Christ. The Greek, whom our later
Divines in this usually follow, by this all Perfection understand either all
this inferior and visible World, containing in it the diverse Degrees and
Perfections of things, and therefore called all Perfection: Or Metonymically by
Perfection is meant, whatever particular thing either for Nature or Quality is
most perfect and consummate, the sight of all which Satan thought would have
dazzled our Savior's, and therefore we might have thought would have easily
blinded David's eyes: But by his wise Observation, and piercing Eye of Faith,
he says, he has seen: If you ask, what? The words of the Text answer, but
having a double Emphasis: 1. Not any meaner or ordinary Contentments, but the
top and choice of all Perfections. And, 2. Not one of them, or some, or few,
but all; and yet through them all something beside: He had seen an end of all
Perfection. As though whatsoever he could see, he could see an end of it; and
that end, as I take it, double; of length, of breadth; of length and
continuance, that whereas God's Word is for ever settled in Heaven, ver. 1. He
sees an end, a Period of those lower and fading Perfections; and of breadth
and extent (as we may gather from the Opposition in the end of the Verse) they
are too scant and narrow to cover all our Nakedness and Defects; but God's Word
as for continuance, can reach to all Times, so for breadth and extent to all
Persons and Wants. But thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

The Truth then, which from these first words I am now to

That not any, not all the best of these things below will last, or can help
always.

The first Vanity is, That they last not. I have seen an end of all Perfection,
says David. And sure, what he by the Spirit says he saw, we may believe is
true, for the was a Prophet of God, and they were called Seers; and whatever
ours do in other Matters, certainly their Eyesight in such things as these
never failed them. This our Seer therefore, having as it were got to the Top of
some high Mountain (as Augustine expresses it) from thence, as our Savior,
Mat. 4. 8. had a view of all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory, the
Perfection of them. He saw all this, but withal something beside; and therefore
as that Watchman, Isa. 21. 11, 12. being asked what he saw, answered, Advenerat
mane, sed etiam nox venit, (as Junius reads it): There had been a lightsome
Morning, but ended in a darksome Night. So our Watchman here being asked what
he saw, answers, he had seen much, even all Perfection, but withal an end of
all: I have seen an end of all Perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding
broad. Just the same with a part of the Vision of another of God's Seers, Isa.
40. 6, 8. The Voice said cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass
and all the goodliness thereof as the Flower of the Field. The Grass withers,
and the Flower fades: But the Word of our God abides for ever. In which
words, I have a sufficient Draught of what I need speak in this particular. For
hence we see, 1. That all things are but as Grass. 2. That all the Glory and
Perfection of them, but as the Flower of Grass, and therefore both subject to
decay; either to wither of themselves, or to be cut down, or plucked up by
others.

First, For all things in general, I only say this, that the round World is but
like a round Ball wrapped up of broken Threads, amongst which there may be some
ends of Gold and Silver: So that whilst Men oftentimes (as they think) are
spinning a fair Thread, either it comes to the end, or (as (...) (the word in
the Text) comes of (...), which signifies to cut off,) the Hand of God cuts
either it or us off, as Hezekiah complains, Isa 38. 10, 12. and so we are left
in the Laby^inth, contrary to our former Expectation, and without hope of
future recovery. All things in the Earth, as the Earth it self, are founded on
nothing.

Secondly, But the Text calls me to view rather the Pefection of things, which
is like the Flower of the Grass, and has this above it, that as it is more
beautiful, so more subject to speedy Alteration: For how often have we seen
Wisdom, and Strength, and Beauty, and Riches, and the like Perfections, gone
before the Man that had them? How often have we seen Wisdom decayed, and the
old Man left indeed, but left childishly doting? Riches flown away, as Solomon
speaks, but leaving a Beggar behind them? Strength and Beauty gone too, but
so as leaving Weakness and Deformity in their room? So that if you should
distill the Quintessence and Perfection of all things here, as it would be
contained in a narrow room, so a short time will put a period to it is
continuance. His substance shall not continue, neither shall he prolong the
Perfection thereof upon the Earth, says Eliphaz, Job 15. 29. The word (...)
there, and only there used in Scripture, is by the Hebrew Writers, as by us
generally, expounded Perfection: But the Septuagint there express it by (...),
a Shadow: It may be thereby to set forth what kind of Perfections arise from
outward things. We and they both, like Shadows, may show greater than we are,
and yet shadows still, that last not. And the word (...) used in the Text, and
no where else, seems also to imitate some such thing as coming from (...)
that signifies Deficere, as well as Perficere. Such defective Perfections, and
such spending and decaying Felicities are all such, as he that sees and finds
the most, can find in outward Contentments. Or if a third word (...) which is
used in this kind seem in its signification to promise longer Continuance; yet
Eliphaz cuts it short too, Job 4. ult. Does not the excellency ((...) the word
is) Does not the excellency, which is in them, go away? And truly often so, as
never to return more. But not to trouble you with Grammatical Speculations; in
a word, if you would take the full length and breadth of all these Perfections,
use no better Instrument than that of David, Psalm. 39. (...), Every Man is all
vanity; and that in his best, or most settled estate, as the word signifies.
So that when he is (...) so settled as with David, he thinks he shall never be
removed; even oftentimes then he falls down headlong. For how often after many
dangers past at Sea does a Ship now fairly fraughted sink in Havens mouth? How
often have you seen Men so long in cutting out their Fortune, that at length
they mar all, winding up themselves to the highest Peg, and then crack? And
laboring to frame I know not what Castles in the A^r, and when the whole
Fabri^k is well nigh reared up, and they on the top of it, then one Pin slips,
or one Pillar, on which it stands, is suddenly taken away, and so all prove
Castle-come-downs. Thus finis consummationis, and Interitus, often take one
another by the Heel; or at the best, it is with outward Estates as it is with
our Highways in Summertime, they are then so fair and firm, that we think it
well nigh impossible, that ever they should prove so fowl and deep, as in
Winter we find them. It Is so in our Summer-weather of Prosperity. Our
Perfection so high (we think) as above all Winter showers and Tempests: The
Kings of the Earth, and all the Inhabitants of the World, would not have
believed, that the Adversary should have entered into the Gates of Jerusalem,
Lamen. 4. 12. they would not believe it, nor (which was worst) would she. She
remembered not her later end. But mark what follows: Therefore she came down
wonderfully, Lamen. 1. 9. Such and so brittle are the best of these lower
Perfections, like Glasses shine bright, but even then are broken; like falshes,
give some light for the time, but are soon out; or like so many Bubbles that
are higher indeed, than the rest of the Water; and some remain a shorter, and
some a longer time: But yet it is not long before they all vanish. For I have
seen, says David, the end of all Perfection.

But this universal (All) seems to require an Induction, to prove it by
particulars. In which, that I may not fetch too large a Compass, I follow only
that ordinary division of Perfection, of Mind, of Body, of outward Estate, and
but glance at some of the chief, without troubling you with a full view of any.

Now for the Perfections of the Mind, let them (in gross) be Understanding, and
Wisdom: Which, though I confess, have the start of all that follow, as being
seated in an everlasting Subject; yet, We see that Wise Men die as well as
Fools, Psalm. 49. 10. and sometimes their Wisdom before them. David had seen
Abitophel's Wisdom ending in Foolishness. And we have read of Nebuchadnezzar's
Understanding changed into ^rutishness. God can make the Judges fools, Job 12.
17. Disuse can make the most expert forgetful. The Plague at Athens, and many
Diseases since could deprive the Wisest of Understanding and Memory at once.
And if all fail, yet Old Age (as they fain of Saturn) most commonly devours
that Wisdom, which it begets: Or rather, like an Unthrift, in a short time
spends what his Predecessors were a long time in getting. So that the Ancients
that teach Wisdom, as Elihu speaks, Job. 32. 7. sometimes prove childish: Old
Men often dote before they die, and though their Soul be ready to take its
flight, yet the strength of Understanding takes leave first, and prevents it.
In a word, if it be no more than the Wisdom of the World, or of the Princes of
the World, it (as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 6. tells us they do) will come to
naught, and so you see an end of that Perfection.

And if it fare so with the Soul, we cannot think that the Perfection of the
Body, which comes so short of it in worth, can exceed it in continuance; for
it is but an House of Clay; and therefore all the Paint and Varnish it can have
must decay either with it, or before it. See it in the particulars, which
especially are three, Health, Strength, and Beauty.

For Health, I need say no more, than what St. Austine said before me, Quaenam
est ista salus Corporis, quae morte premitur, quae aegritudine debilitatur,
frivola, mortalis, fluxa? IN a word, let him that never has been sick, and is
sure never shall be, say that Health will last always. But our Experience
teaches us, that the Physician who often restores our Health, cannot always
maintain his own; that there is such contrariety of Humors, such well-nigh
Infinitness of imbred Diseases, so many outward occasions of Distemper, that
few or none in our well days are perfectly free: However, Old Age comes limping
on a-pace, which will bring more Diseases, than we can beforehand provide
Remedies. Or it may be before that, as it was observed, that grievous Plague at
Athens followed upon a most healthful foregoing year; so our most healthful
years may be overtaken with untimely Deaths. And thus one dies (says Job) in
his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet, Chap. 21. 23. And so an end
of that Perfection. And when Health is gone, we cannot think that Strength will
stay behind; for they always stay and go together. The same Disease, that
hinders the one, weakens the other. And so the lusty young Man often comes to
say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 102. 23. He has weakened my strength in the way.
But if not so, be sure it will begin to faint in the end of the Journey. If
Plinies Miracle were true, that one Xenophilus lived one hundred and five years
without any Disease, yet I cannot believe that he was another Moses, that his
natural force was not abated; for in ordinary course that part of Solomon's
description of Old Age is true, Eccles. 12. 3. The time will come, when the
strong Men shall bow: When old Milo may look on his withered Arms, and weep and
say, at hi quidem mortui jam sunt.

Thus the strong Mountains fall and come to naught, Job. 14. 18. etc. Huzzab,
(or that which is most established) is led away Captive, Nahum. 2. 7. And (to
add no more) in the third Chapter of the same Prophecy, at the ninth Verse,
Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite, (...) (that is) and
there was no end: The same word almost both there and here, so that you might
begin to think of a Contradiction, but if we shall read on, we shall find none;
and therefore it is added, for all her infinite strength, she was carried away;
She went into Captivity, ver. 10. And there we see an end of that Perfection.

And if these more substantial Perfections so soon vanish, we may well think,
the least Breath will blow off all the Paint of Beauty, which so many pride
themselves in; and therefore if any shall trust in it, (as she did, Ezekiel. 16.
15.) they shall certainly find that true, Prove. 31. 30. Favor is a lie, and
Beauty is vain: Any sickness can spoil it for the time, and some for
altogether. Or if it miss them, be sure it will consume in the Grave, Psalm. 49.
14. Thou changest his Countenance, and sendest him away, says Job, Chap. 14.
v. 20. And David had seen his ruddy Complexion and beautiful Countenance
altered, and so an end of that Perfection: A poor one, that is only in the
outward Skin, which if flayed off, leaves a deformed Anatomy.

Life is yet behind, a Perfection arising from Body and Soul united; but yet
this Shadow (1 Chronicles. 29. 15.) soon gone, this Post, this Ship, Job 9. 25, 26.
soon past by: This Flower, Job 14. 2. soon withered; this Vapor, James 4. 14.
soon vanishes: This Smoke, Psalm. 102. 3. soon blown away; of it self it would
be gone; and therefore we have those Phrases of God's keeping our soul in Life,
Psalm. 66. 9. And withholding it from Death, Psalm. 78. 50. But if we consider
all that continually either undermine or assault it, the liveliest Man in his
best Health may say with David, 1 Samuel 20. 3. There is but a step between me
and death. Or if he live longer, and it may be longer than he has comfort, yet
Methuselah, that went the fairest of any for Eternity, after he had lived 969
years, yet he died, Genesis 5. 27. And so, as the Lord speaks, Ezekiel. 24. 16. with
a stroke, even with this one stroke God takes away both Life and all besides,
and so with it an end of all Perfection.

So that I need not now speak any thing of that third kind of Perfections
without us, which, as they are of less Worth, so also of less Continuance. If
Riches be the Perfection thou aimest at, let me tell thee, that as it is but
low, so it is not lasting; for the Gospel tells us, that The rich Man died, and
was buried. And, Will thou cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is not?
says Solomon, Prove. 23. 5. A strange kind of Speech we would think, that use
to call our Riches our Goods and Substance. He thinks them to be neither, but
calls them plain Non-entia; or if they have any being, yet so uncertain, that
he would not have us fly so eagerly upon them in our desires, as the Eagle
upon the Prey, (in the beginning of the Verse) which use to make themselves
Wings, and fly away as the Eagle toward Heaven; as he shows in the end of it.
It Is not good therefore to have our Treasure in a Jewel, hanged about such an
Eagle's neck, which may soon fly away, it may be never to return again. Fly
away as the Eagle toward Heaven, and that is most swiftly: Witness that one
Day, that saw Job both on the Throne, and on the Dunghill; for God may blow,
the Moth may fret, the Rust may canker, the Thief may break through, so that a
rich Man lies down, but either through Malice of some, or Carelessness of
others, when he opens his eyes, he is not, namely what he was. Or, there is
nothing, as some read that place, Job 27. 19. Thus the Golden City cease,
Isa. 14. 4. and though in one sense, there be no end of thy Riches, as it is
Isa. 2. 7. Yet assuredly either they will vanish, or, as St. James says, Thou will vanish in them. Only take heed, that the end of them bring not an end to
thy Comfort. Take heed of Simon Magus his Doom, Thy Money perish with thee,
both thou and it together. But it may be thou will say, that Honor and
Promotion will lift thee up, as upon Eagles wings, above all such Disasters.
And I would believe thee, if I were not bound to believe God rather, who has
said it in his Word, that Man being in Honor abides not, Psalm. 49. 12. Or if
the Prophet Daniel had not seen such Wings as these plucked, Dan. 7. 4. and the
Prophet Hosea had not seen them flying away. As for Ephraim, their Glory shall
fly away as a Bird, Chap. 9. 11. If I had not heard that Voice from Heaven to
Nebuchadnezzar, Thy Kingdom is departed from thee: If I had not seen an
Handwriting before Belshazzar on the Wall, Meneh, Meneh, etc. God has
numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it. Thus the Royal City is taken, 2 Samuel 12.
26. Oftentimes those that have been in highest places, after a while have been
cast aside, as a Vessel, in which there is no pleasure: Yea, even Princes
breath goes forth, he returns to the Earth, and then all his thoughts perish,
Psalm. 146. 4. (...), The word is, and according to the signification of the
Verb from whence it comes, seems to signify all those goodly fine Thoughts,
that great Men please themselves in. Now all these perish, and often their
Glory with them. It shall not descend after him, says the Psalmist. Only this
you may find on his Gravestone, (and there the poor Man may tread on him, on
whom before he durst not look) This is Pharaoh, and all his multitude, Ezekiel.
31. 18. Which if you would but take up, and look into the Graves and Tombs of
those Chief ones of the Earth, (as the Prophet calls them) when nothing else is
left, their very Bones would speak and say, We have been something; yea, all
things, (as dying Severus said of himself) but now are nothing: And so you have
an end likewise of that Perfection.

What should I now speak further of multitude of Friends, whose Friendship
usually ends with our Wealth, and themselves often before? Where ever we come,
either a Widow of Tekoah lamenting, that her Husband is dead; or a David
bewailing the untimely death of a faithful Jonathan, or a beloved Absalom; or a
Centurion seeking for the Health of a Servant that is dear to him; but now
ready to die, do all cry aloud, that there is an end of that Perfection.

If it be delicate Fare thou affectest, thou must know that it could not keep
Dives from Hell. Ahasuerus made a Feast, that lasted an hundred and fourscore
days, Esth. 1. 3, 4. yet at last those many days were expired, ver. 5.

If costly Apparel, know that as thou came in, so thou must go out of the
World naked. Or if thy Friends will vainly spend as much on thy Carcass, when
thou art dead, as thou do on it now when thou art alive, yet be sure (as
Jupiter in Plato said he would have it) thou shall be Judged naked.

To add no more, If they be goodly Buildings in which thou seatest thy Self and
thy Perfection, yet (as Luke 21. 5, 6.) the left Ruins of such vast Edifices
do plainly witness, that, if there were no Lightning to consume, nor Wind to
overturn, nor Cannon to beat down, yet Time would undermine the strongest. I
will smite the Winter-House, and the Summer House, and the Houses of Ivory
shall perish, and the great Houses shall have an end, says the Lord, Amos 3.
15. And so an end of that Perfection.

Thus we have seen some of this All; which (that I may return to my first
Draught) are (we see) but as Grass, or the Flower of the Field; and, as they
have a double end, which I must now briefly point at, either wither of
themselves, or are plucked up or cut down by others.

First, I say, Of themselves they will wither; compared to Summer-Fruits, Amos
8. 2. which are pleasant, but last not, represented by Wheels in Ezekiel's
Vision, and therefore ever turning, and by the Moon, Rev. 12. 1. and therefore
often decaying. All that I would say in this particular, we have summed up, 1
John 2. 17. And the World passes away, and the Lust thereof. The whole World.
that is now grown old, shall shortly have an end, (which is the end, as some
think, in the Text, which David by Faith foresaw) and the Lust thereof; whether
you take it passively with Calvin, Concupiscentia for Quicquid concupiscitur,
for that which is most desirable, and so the same with Perfection in the Text:
Or, actively with others for our Desire and Affection after it; though the
World should continue, yet both it is Desirableness, and our Desire of it, will
pass away. This Flower of the Field often loses its sweet Smell before its
Beauty The best of the former Perfections often cease to please and content,
before they ceas^ to be; and that either from a Satiety, which they bring, and
so often the young Man is weary of his Lust, and partly from a Weakness and
Indisposition in us; and so the old Man says, (Eccles. 12. 1.) I have no
pleasure in them. And so we see, if left to themselves, there will be this way
an end of all Perfection.

Secondly, But how often (in the second place) is this Flower plucked in the
Bud, before it be fully blown? And the Grass cut down, before it come to it is
full height? How often are these outward Contentments taken away, before either
they, or our desire, come to the Perfection? For before the Harvest, when the
Bud is perfect, and the sour Grape is ripening in the Flower, he shall cut off
the Sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away the Branches, Isa. 18. 5. Yea, How
often, when these Perfections and our Desires have grown up together, and are
now married, they affording, and we receiving most Contentment, are they
violently plucked asunder? Thus, Isa. 33. 9. Lebanon is ashamed and cut down,
and Sharon is like a Wilderness, and Bashan and Carmel shake off their Fruit.
When Babel is most stately, and Nebuchadnezzar admiring, I know not whether it,
or himself more, and saying, Is not this great Babel? etc. Even while the word
was in his Mouth, there fell a Voice from Heaven, saying, O King
Nebuchadnezzar, To thee, even to thee it is spoken; the Kingdom is now departed
from thee. Thus the Psalmist saw the Wicked flourishing: And that you may think
is not much, because Autumn might be at hand and then such flourishing Trees
left bare and naked; but it is added as a green Bay tree. And that seems to
promise Continuance, against which the Winter-frosts do not usually prevail. He
saw it, but it was but once, for he looked again and sought it, but it could
not be found, Psalm. 37 35, 36. And all that he then saw, was this in the Text,
An end of all Perfection.

And thus, in both these respects, we see plainly, that all the forenamed and
the like Perfections are indeed but like Puddles or shallow Waters, in which
you may, as you think, see the Sun and Moon, and conceive them as deep as the
Heaven is high, which if you shall try, you shall find far otherwise: And that,
as a Shower made them, so the next Sunshine will dry them up. These outward
Conten^ments make a show of having more Depth and Solidity, than upon trial we
shall find in them. They are but Puddles for Swine to wallow in, impure,
unconstant; so that what was said of Elijah's, 1 Kings 17. 7. After a while the
Brook dried up, may be said of all these broken Cisterns, and deceitful Brooks,
as Job called his Friends, At the end of a few days (as the phrase there is).
We all that are present here, all that are any where alive, shall be laid low;
and at the end of some few Years, there will come a last end of all, (take it
as large as you will) an universal end of all Perfection. And so we have done
with the first Vanity; the end of Length and Continuance, they will not last
always.

Secondly, The other end, which David saw, is of Breadth and Extent. Whereas
God's Word is exceeding broad, (that is) reaching to all Persons, and all their
Occasions and Wants; these lower Perfections are but narrow and scant, and
therefore (as I said) cannot help always: And that will appear in these two
Cases.

First, In the want of any one of them. For though (as I shall show afterward)
all together cannot perfectly cover us, yet the Want of any one of them will
leave that part of a Man bare (as they feign of Achilles his Heel) in which a
Man may be wounded, and that mortally, though it be but between the joints of
Ahab's Harness; who though he had a Kingdom, if he have no: Naboth's Vineyard,
is heavy, and discontented. And Haman, though he can make a Business of it to
send for, and tell his Wife and Friends (I doubt not like a jolly Man) of the
Glory of his Riches, and the Multitude of his Children, and all the things
wherein the King has promoted him, well-nigh as large as this all Perfection
in the Text; yet, All this does not avail him, as long as Mordecai sits in the
King's Gate, and will not rise up to him, Esth. 5. 11, 13. So, if a Man have
Riches, but with Disgrace, he is but like a Fool in a Velvet coat: Or if both
without Health, but like a gouty Leg upon a Velvet Cushion. If he have not all,
he has not enough; and to have all, is more than ever any could yet attain to.
One of the Graces ever use to look from us. And therefore, as Ezekiel, Chap.
15. 5. speaks in a like case: Behold when it was whole, it was meet for no
work: How much less when the Fire has devoured it, or any part of it? So let
me here; If all Perfections taken together will not cover all, much less will
they be able, when any one or more of them are wanting.

2. But suppose any Man so happy, that he thinks he can say with the Church of
Laodicea, I am Rich, and increased in Goods, and have need of nothing. Suppose
a Man should have such Skill, as to make up a patcht Garment of all these
outward Perfections; a goodly Suit, I confess, it would seem, and be as highly
esteemed by most, as those party-colored Coats were in former time: Though, I
think, none ever yet wore it; yet suppose, I say, that any should, yet I must
say with the Prophet, Isa. 28. 20. That this Covering is narrower, than that a
Man can wrap himself in it. His Soul is larger than all this can reach to.
There is an inward Man, which all this while they see not, that is yet all
naked and bare. There is a Conscience, which, it may be, they now feel not, but
which one day they will feel, and find fearfully wounded: And to a Man in such
a case, these outward Coverings will be but like a silken Suit to a Body, that
has all the Bones out of joint. There will one day come an Hour of Death, when
all our Riches cannot purchase either Delivery, or Reprieve; and at last there
will be a day of Arraignment and Judgment, which our greatest state now, cannot
then exempt from. At such times all these Perfections oftentimes are as so many
Daggers at our Hearts. Either they, or our bad use of them, wound then deep and
deadly. Then Absolom's Hair is his Halter, and Sampson's Strength his Ruin.
Then Men's former Glory their Shame, and their Riches like a Horse to a
Traveller, which may help in the way; but they now find troublesome and
chargeable at the Journy's end. Thrice happy then the might Potentate, if he
had but Authority then left him, as to command his Conscience silence: And
happy then the covetous Wretch, whose only Perfection here is to be covered and
buried in Gold and Silver; if all the Shillings and Pounds, which he had got by
Usury and Extortion, laid all then together could but cover that one sin, or
buy but One drop of Water to cool his Tongue, when he is tormented in the flame.

And thus at last we have seen these All Perfections, as for Length they last
not for all Times, so for Breadth they reach not to our inward and greatest
Wants; and so in both Senses, an end of all Perfection.

The Application of all is, That we now would labor for David's Eyes, and use
them as he did; that as with one we see these Perfections, so with another we
would look at the end of them: Or rather with the same Eye of Faith, look
through all this seeming Perfection to the end of all. Our Hearts and Eyes
therefore should not be terminated in these Outsides of things. We should not
stand gazing with Achan upon the Wedge of Gold, and goodly Babylonish Garment,
lest, as it was with him, they steal away our Hearts and Happiness together. I
confess it is with many of our Worldly Men, as they say, it is with some of
your devout Pilgrims to Mahomet's Tomb, who after that goodly sight use to pore
so long on hot Iron, till they lose their Eyesight. Ours (I do not say,
Pilgrims and Strangers, unless it be from God and the Commonwealth of Israel)
do use to gaze so long on the Luster of outward Vanities, that they lose both
Eyes and Hearts, by which they might desire and find more divine and lasting
Perfections. Thus did not Job, Chap. 31. 26. He beheld not the Sun when it
shined, nor the Moon walking in brightness: (that is) The Glory of his outward
Happiness, as some from the Context expound it. And though David's Eyes had
once a mist cast before them, when he thought his Mountain so strong that he
should never be moved; yet here he is now gotten, as we heard, upon another
Mountain, and from thence sees further than he did before, or others that lie
grovelling below can, even to an end of all this Perfection. He does not now
admire and adore this Glorious Light; but, as they tell us, they can with their
Glasses discern Motes in the Sun: So he by Faith (the best Prospective) sees
Motes in this Sun, to even an end of all Perfection. And happy sure were his
Eyes, that saw such things, which many other Kings and great Ones (I do not
say, desire to see, but in truth) never saw, whose inward thought sometimes is,
that their Houses shall continue for ever, and their Dwelling-places to all
Generations, Psalm. 49. 11. And it may be, as though they could either
overwrestle, or out-last the Almighty and Everlasting God, in their Hearts, say
with them, Jer. 12. 4. He shall not see our last end. Or if God sometimes make
them to see it, either by others Examples, or the inward light of their own
Conscience, presently they shut their Eyes, and will not: They overlook it, at
least they do not with David here set themselves seriously to mark and consider
it. They do not with him elsewhere pray, that God would teach them to number
their days, Psalm. 90. 12. And that he would make them to know their end, and
how frail they are, Psalm. 39. 4. Unless it be in a Passion, (as some think this
later Speech of David was spoken) thoughts of their end never come welcome. You
cannot do them a worse turn, than by putting them in mind of their Mortality.
But it would be well that we with David here would be continually thinking of
ours. And that

1. To keep us humble; that when we are in this kind perfect in our ways, as we
have the Phrase of the Prince of Tire, Ezekiel. 28. 15. we be not like him, lift
up, and so grow contumelious to God or Man, lest we come to his end, which in
that Chapter is excellently described; that with Jesurun, when we are grown
fat, we kick not against God, or with those Idol-Shepherds, stamp upon and
tread under foot his Children; that now in this joyful time, we do not revel it
with Belshazzar, and with those drunken Prophets, Isa. 56. 12. say, Come, I
will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong Drink; to morrow shall
be as this day, and much more abundant. For We know not what a day may bring
forth. I am sure that very Night, a Hand wrote something on the Wall, that
dashed all Belshazzar's Jollity, and made an end of his Mirth and Monarchy
together. And therefore when thou art the highest, be not high minded, but
fear, that thy Sun may go down at Noon, that even then may come an end of all
that thy Perfection.

2. Labor to see an end of all perfection; that so thence thou may learn a
sanctified Moderation in the enjoying, and patient Contentedness in loosing
any, or all of them: And here truly, we may admire God's Wisdom and Mercy
toward us, in so Ordering it, that these Perfections will not last, or help
always: For if they could, such is the Atheism of our Hearts, that we should
make Flesh our Arm; be so glued to these lower Contentments, as we should never
look after more divine Perfections. But now that the Fashion of this World
passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. we are now to learn another Lesson, to
rejoice as though we rejoiced not, and, to use this World, as though we used it
not; to sit loose in our Affections from these outward things, that sit so
loose from us. And therefore let not our Affections be more constant than the
things, and if they be finite, let not our desires after them be infinite;
let us not hold fast Spiders webs, Job 8. 14, 15. And truly, how incongruous is
it for the covetous Worldling, to have no end of his Labor, Eccles. 4. 8. And,
to enlarge his desires as Hell, for these Perfections, that are both short and
narrow, that help not much nor long? And therefore their end should put an end
to our longing desires, teach us an holy Weanedness from them, when we have
them.

I added a contented Patience in their Loss: For in this I conceive the Stoics
Rule is good, Always to consider what thou admirest and love, (...). If it be
God that thou love, think what God is, and that if thou losest Him, thou
losest thy happiness, thy self; and that will keep thy Soul close to Him. But
if it be a Wife, a Child, a Friend, think what they are, and that thou can
not lose more in their loss, than they come to, and that is but a mortal
Creature. Hence on the contrary it was that Micah's Mother did so fret and
curse, when she lost her Silver, Judge. 17. 2. And that we oftentimes in such
cases are so disconsolate, and sometimes desperate, because we only gaze and
dote on these Perfections, and never look through them to their end: Whereas
David (as Wise Men use to do) looking especially at Issues and Events, is
beforehand prepared for any, and can bid the worst welcome. And therefore when
the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30. had carried away Wives, and Sons, and Daughters, and
all Captives, though he was greatly distressed, yet he could encourage himself
in God, ver. 6. Vide in hanc rem Chrysostom. in 2. ad Corin. hom. (...).


And therefore in the Third place, Let God's Children labor to see an end of
all Perfection for their own comfort: And that in a double respect.

1. Against the Insolency and Fury of all their Enemies, which, I confess, may
last as long as themselves, (and therefore we have Ezekiel. 21. 29. themselves and
their Iniquity ending together): And yet the Comfort is, that they themselves
will not last long: And it may be their Perfection gone before them, and they
remain but like Bees that have lost their Stings, and so would hurt, but
cannot. Thus David comforted himself, when he rejoiced over his Adversaries,
Psalm. 9. 6. O thou Enemy, thy destructions are come to a perpetual end And if
we would but o^serve God's dealing now in this kind, we should often see such
Lions teeth broken; either their Power weakened, or their Counsels disappointed,
or themselves taken away. Or if they continue and prosper some longer time, yet
be sure, as God says, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Their foot shall slide in due time. And so
an end of their Perfection often puts an end to the Church's Persecution.
Presently upon Herod*s being eaten up of Worms, it is added, that the Word of
God grew and multiplied, Acts 12. 24. From which the Church of God in these
troublesome Times, may have one Argument of Comfort.

2. A second from this Ground is, by comparing that Perfection, which God's
Children in their lowest Ebb have, with all that which wicked Men can have,
when their Comforts flow in to them in greatest abundance. The one we have
heard has an end; but against their desire and expectation: But the end of the
other's Faith is their Salvation; and therefore called an Expected end, Jer.
29. 11. And there is hope in it, Jer. 31. 17. The one has an end, and then as
Nabal's, 1 Samuel 25. their hearts die within them. The other have no end, or at
least an happy one; and therefore Psalm. 22. 26. Their hearts live for ever.
Well fare therefore every true Christian, that in his worst takings can yet say
thus much, My flesh and my heart fails me: There Is an end of all outward
Perfection. But God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever, Psalm.
73. 26. (...) was that by which He encouraged his Soldiers to the Fight; and
you have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen what end the Lord made,
says the Apostle James, Chap. 5. 11. so happy, that it is as well worth our
marking, as the end of other things was worth David's in the Text: For Mark the
perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that Man is peace, Psalm.
37. 37.

3. Labor to see an end of all these Perfections, that thou may thereby be
stirred up, to do as much good with them, as thou can, whilst they last; for
we see, if we do not spend them, they will spend of themselves.

And therefore it would be our Wisdom to take them in season, and to put them
over to God, who uses to restore them to us in a better kind. Let us therefore
use our Authority, whilst we have it, for the maintaining of good Men, and good
Causes; our Riches in maintaining our Ministry, and poor Brethren. Sell that
you have, and give Alms to the Poor, and so provide your selves Bags, which wax
not old, a Treasure in the Heavens, that fails not, Luke 12. 33. Such wise
Merchants we should be for our Souls thus now to improve these fading
Perfections, that one day we may have a return made us in the things of a more
durable Substance.

4. And that is the last particular. Let us therefore labor to see an end of
these Perfections, that so we may look out for something, which is more
perfect, and which will abide with us for ever. If we indeed had our ends as
soon, as these Perfections have theirs, we might better terminate our Desires
and Affections in them. But it is an ordinary saying, Homo non habet ultimum
finem in hac vita vel termini vel consummationis. Man has not his last end
here: And therefore whatever else we provide for, let us have some pity of our
Souls, which will last always; that, as the Schoolmen use to say, that two
things do concur to make up the Perfection of an inferior Being, Aliquid
secundum motum proprium, and, Aliquid secundum motum naturae superioris: So let
not all our Perfection be placed only in that, in which we do but equal other
Men, or not exceed inferior Creatures: But let us ascend somewhat higher, that
as we have in us aliquid nihili, so we may have aliquid Dei, something so large
and lasting, as may fully everlastingly content and satisfy us. Now if you
should ask, Where that is to be found? The Text makes answer, But thy
Commandment is exceeding broad. God's Word is the Field, in which this Pearl is
found, which will continue for all Times, and fully comfort thee in thy
greatest Wants. He is never very Poor, in whom the Word of God dwells richly.
But of this in the second part of the Text. For the present, that Perfection,
which we shall find in it, and which will perfectly and everlastingly make us
happy, is (as they use to distinguish it) either Objective, or Formal.

First, The Objective Perfection is God and Christ, whose Nature and Work is
perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. to whom nothing is wanting, and therefore fully Perfect,
and from whom all the Perfection of the Creature is derived, and in whom it is
Eminently, Infinitely, and therefore Eternally perfect. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. He indeed may well be called
the End of all perfection; as you heard, that many Expounded those words of
him. He is that Mountain, on which, I told you, St. Austin placed David, when
he spoke these words, Christus mons est, etc. Christ is the Mountain, from
which only we may with David here descry the end of all other Perfections; for
thou will never see an Emptiness in them, till thou have found a Fullness, and
All Sufficiency in Him. To this Hill therefore let us lift up our Hearts and
Eyes, from whence comes our Help, our full, our everlasting Salvation. And
seeing it is the Perfection of all things, that are ordained to a further end,
when they are brought to the Fruition of it, Noli hoerere in via, and non
pervenire ad finem, as Austin speaks, Stay not below in these inferior and
worse Perfections. Rest not till thou be made partaker of Christ. And
further, when (as the Philosopher tells us, that) Finis quaeritur in infinitum,
media vero cum modo; let our Affections toward this End of Perfection, be
constant and enlarged, as much as we can; if we could, infinitely. But seeing
other perfections that have an end, are sometimes Hindrances, at the best but
Helps; and it is a part of our Imperfection that we stand so much in need of
them, let not our desires be terminated in them. But whether with them, or
without them, let us make sure of Christ, who has an unchangeable Priesthood,
and therefore is able to save us, (...), Heb. 7. 25. that is, evermore, (as you
have it in the Margin) or to the utmost, (in the New) or Perfectly, (in the
former Translation) and indeed Perfectly, because evermore; and to the utmost,
and so supplies what we have seen other Perfections wanted, which did not
always last, and therefore did not save always, and did not reach to our
greatest Wants, and therefore could not save to the uttermost. But Christ does
both. And therefore, to this purpose, what David said of the Blessed Man, the
Father applies to our Blessed Savior, that he is the Tree planted by the
Waters side. The Waters flow, but this Tree is rooted sure, on which if thou
layest sure hold, thou art out of danger of drowning. And therefore let me
speak to thee in his words, Raperis in praeceps? Tene lignum. Voluit te amor
Mundi? Tene Christum. Lay strong hold on Christ, and thou shall have strong
Consolation; for he is a Priest for ever. And so no end that way: And for the
other, whatever others tell us, what a ductile nature Gold is of, and how much
Ground an ounce of it may be made to cover; yet we, that are bought with no
such corruptible things as Silver and Gold, must believe that one drop of our
dying Saviors Blood can and will cover, and purge all ours and all Believers
Souls: And so it, as well as the Word, is exceeding broad. And that is the
Objective Perfection we must aim at. The Formal is double, Grace, and Glory.

Secondly, For Grace: It Is that, which sets the Soul in joint again, and so
makes the Man of God perfect; and being once savingly wrought is so firmly
established, that all the Popish Arminian subtilties, or the Gates of Hell,
shall never prevail against it. And therefore it would be well, if we were so
wise as to reach out for this Perfection; and to know at last, whatever
perfection we may conceive to be in sinful Courses, yet that, in truth, it is
Sin only that dasheth all our Perfection: Thou wast perfect in thy way, till
Iniquity was found in thee, Ezekiel. 28. 15. And for it self, that how ever it may
please for the present, and promise more for the future, yet we shall find them
to be deceitful Lusts; that they deprive us of endless Happiness for the
enjoyment of short and empty Contentments; that there will be a Time, when we
shall hear, as in the Prophet, Jer. 51. 13. Thine end is come, and the measure
of thy Covetousness: The same we may say of other sins, there will one day be
an end of all, and that none of the best; for the end of those things is Death,
Romans 6. 21. And though, I confess, sin and the punishment of it will never have
end; and that is the sinners woe, because they are Sarmenta ad damnationem, non
firmamenta ad salutem: Yet the contentment of sin is soon over, and ends the
sooner, that the punishment thereof may last for ever. Otherwise in Grace,
which as it is that heavenly Panoply of Breadth and Extent sufficient to cover
the whole Man; there being no want, but some particular Grace or other, can
make a Supply: So for Continuance, it resembles the Eternal Fountain from which
it springs, (...), says S. Chrysostom, Love never fails, 1 Cor. 13. 8. The
Fear of the Lord endures for ever, Psalm. 19. 9. This is that Way everlasting,
Psalm. 139. 24. Which either has no end, or a very happy one. Romans 6. 22. You
have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life.

Thirdly, And that is the last Pefection, which is as Immortal as thy Soul, and
as Large as thine Appetite: When the Sun shall no more go down, neither the
Moon with draw her Light, but the Lord shall be thine everlasting Light: And
the days of thy Mourning shall be ended, as the Prophet speaks. This
Perfection, I confess, is not here to be attained to. Paul acknowledged himself
not to be already perfect, Phil. 3. 12. But yet it is good now to prepare our
selves for it, and to make sure of it; that when Death and Judgment shall come,
and we stripped naked of all these fading Perfections, may not then be found
altogether naked, but be Clothed upon with our House from God, Eternal in the
Heavens: That so, when many a wicked Man, that had his good things in this
Life, will be constrained to say, I was, indeed, once rich, and honorable, and
happy, as I my self thought, and others took me. I was, as that perhaps was the
Cause of my present Misery, and the very thought of it now augments it. I had
Wisdom, and Beauty, and Strength, and the rest; but now I see a woeful end of
all such Perfections: We on the contrary to our eternal Comfort, may say,
something we have lost (though indeed no losers) we were sinful and miserable,
but now we see an end of all that with Comfort: But withal something we had,
which we yet have and shall for ever. We were holy, and humble, and thankful,
etc. And so we are now, and so shall remain to all Eternity, never to see an
end of this Perfection And therefore to conclude all in a word; Let us all so
labor, with David here, to see and end of all these Perfections, that we may
have that begun here, which we may have at that day fully perfected, but never
ended.

SERMON XXIII.
PSALM. 119. 96. At Boston, at Mr. Francis Empson's Daughters Funeral.
But thy Commandment is exceeding broad.


IN this Verse we have the exceeding Perfection of God's Word set out, by
comparing it with the fading Shortness and narrow Scantness of all other
outward Perfections. I have seen an end of all Perfection: But thy Commandment
is exceeding broad. Upon a like Occasion I have spoken of the Shortness and
Scantness of other Perfections out of the First words, I have seen an end of
all Perfection.

I come now to speak to that, which is especially intended in the Text; The
large Extent and never-ended Length of God's Word: Thy Commandment is exceeding
broad.

The Point is: That in the end of all other Perfections God's Commandment is,
and a Child of God may find it exceeding broad. In which two things to be
explained. 1. What is meant by God's Commandment. 2. What by it is Exceeding
breadth.

First, For the first, What Is meant by Commandment: You must remember, that
God's Word in this Psalm (in which the Psalmist intended to set out the Glory
of it to the full) is called by diverse Names; all which in themselves have
their distinct Vide Calv. Bucer. Heresback and alios in praefat. suis in hunc,
Psalmum. ite. Tho. Cartwright. in Prove. 19. 20.
Significations, as either signifying some distinct parts of the Word, or the
same Word under different Notions and Considerations. So sometimes it is called
his Law, Word, Truth, Way, Righteousness; his Precepts, Testimonies, Judgments,
and here Commandment.

The distinct Opening of every which word would now be too long; and though
useful even to you, yet so as would hinder Speech about that, which, at least
at this time, may be more seasonable. It will be sufficient for our present
Satisfaction that most agree, that all these Words in the main signify the
same thing, namely, the Word of God in the Extent of it, whether Commands, or
Promises, or Threats: And so in this Text, though called by the Name of a
Commandment, yet he means the whole word, or any part of it; whether a
Commandment, as the word here used properly signifies, or a Threat, or a
Promise, for both are Virtual Commands: God's Threats virtually command us to
Fear, and his Promises virtually command us to Believe. And so God's Word, his
Commandments, his Threats (especially in reference to the Psalmists present
Meaning and Occasion) his Promises are exceeding broad.

Secondly, What Is then meant by this exceeding Breadth? What we translate
exceeding broad, the Vulgar and the Ancients according to their usual
Translation of this word, and not in^legant, read Latum nimis, Too broad. And
indeed it is too broad for us poor shallow weak Creatures, fully either to
comprehend, or fulfill; And so the Hebrew word (...) signifies an Excess in
whatever thing it is added to; and accordingly our Translators, as in the
Comparative, read it exceeding Broad; indeed, exceeding all length and breadth
of other Perfections. But withal we must know, that this same word in Hebrew
Language, which has no such degrees of Comparison (as other Languages have)
expresses not only the Comparative degree; as though God's Commandment were
only exceeding broad; that is, much broader than other Perfections: But it is
one of the ways by which they express their Superlative degree, so that his
meaning is, that it is Vide Martinium, lib. 2. Cum nomine adjectivo efficit
superlatirum. Schinler in voce (...).
not only exceeding broad, broader in the Comparative, but that it is exceeding
broad, broadest of all, in the Superlative.

But still you will ask, But wherein consists this Comparative, Superlative
exceeding; yea, even Exceeding, exceeding breadth of God's Word?

Some Climacus. Talmudici finxerunt quemlibet locum posse 70 modis enarrari.
Bucer.
have conceived, that God's Word is here said to be exceeding broad, by reason
of the multiplicity of Senses that it bears (as they say, and as the Papists
urge) who make it not only to have as many Senses, as there are Differences in
the Hebrew, Greek, and vulgar Latin readings: But (which is worse a great
deal, and no better than Blasphemy) as many (if you will believe their Cardinal
Cusa) as the Church in several Ages and See Bancrofts Sermon at P. Cross.
upon several Occasions, shall be pleased to put upon it, i. e. It shall have
as many Senses, as they Fancies and Fetches; and so justify Pighius his
Blasphemy, who called it a Nose of Wax, which they may draw out or put
together, and alter and change as they think good. I abhor, and so I know do
you all, these Blasphemies. God's Word is not so Broad. But yet I thus far
yield, that it is a safe way of interpreting Scripture, to take it in as broad
and large a Sense, as (all things considered) it will bear. And if I do so in
expounding this place, it self will bear me out in it; for it says, that God's
Commandment is exceeding broad.

Exceeding broad therefore, because every way broad, reaching to all Persons;
in its Commands awing the greatest Kings, and in it is Promises comforting the
poorest Beggar.

Reaching all Conditions, Prosperity, v. 14, 72. Adversity, v. 54. Al^ Sexes,
Times, Places, all parts of body, faculties of Soul, Actions of both, and
Circumstances of those Actions. I cannot exemplify them all. If you will go no
further than this Psalm, and but mark what is said of it in the several Verses,
you shall find more than I say.

It Is Life, v. 93. Comfort of Life, v. 50. End of Life, v 17. the Way, v. 35.
Rule, v. 30. Counselor, v. 24. a chief Gift, v. 29 Better than thousands of
Gold and Silver, v. 72.

It Is our Love, v. 47, 48. Joy, v. 14. Delight, v. 16. Choice, v. 30. Desire,
v. 20, 40. Hope, v. 43. Trust, v. 42. Fear, v. 120, 161. that which he longs
for, v. 40, 82. seeks after, v. 45, 94. cleaves to. v. 31. It Is his All.

And if it be all this, and much more, then sure it is Exceeding broad.

But I cannot insist upon all these particulars: Only for more distinct
Consideration of it, we must remember, that God's Word is here compared with
all other Perfections, and its Breadth with their End.

Now therefore, as we heard before of all other best Perfections, there was a
double End of them: Of Length, they lasted not always:

And of Breadth, they reached not to all our Occasions and Wants:

So now on the contrary, there is an exceeding Breadth of Gods Word.

I. Because it reaches to all Times. II. And to all our Wants in them, as able
to be a Direction, and to make a Supply in all.
1. For the first, Therefore it is exceeding broad, because reaching to all
Times. The place parellel to the Text fully proves it, Isa. 40. 6, 8. All flesh
is Grass, and all the goodliness of it as the Flower of the Field. The Grass
withers, and the Flower fades: But the Word of our God shall stand for ever.
For ever, that is long; but to stand, or to be established for ever, as the word
signifies, is much more, and yet no more, than is true of every Word of God,
whether a Command. I pray you mark that Expression, Heb. 4. 11, 12. Let us
labor to enter into that rest, For the Word of God is (...), quick and
powerful, or, as the words are, living and active. It may be you will ask, What Is
the strength of the Apostle's Reason? Strive to enter into this rest, for the
Word of God is quick, etc. (...) Its from this Ground we are now upon. He had
before spoken of an Exhortation of David's, Psalm. 95. Of striving to enter into
rest; which Exhortation the Apostle urges upon them in his time, Nondum,
inquit, mortua est v^x illa Dei vocantis nos, Hodie, etc. Pareus in locum.
to whom he wrote. But now it might be some would say: But why trouble you us
with a command of David, so long time since spoken to the Men of his
Generation, and now by this time out of Date and antiquated? Which kind of
Objection the Apostle takes away, as though he should say; Nay, but do not
think that David's word is dead with him: For it was not his word, but God's;
and therefore as God never dies, nor grows old, no more does his Word: But it is
quick, or living still: It Is not dead, no nor grown old and weak; but it is as
active and powerful as ever: And therefore as much concerns you now, as it did
them to whom David in Person spoke it. And so we see in this respect, God's
Commandment is exceeding broad, reaches from David's time to Paul's. And so
are hi^ Threats. One reached from Doeg to Judas, compare Psalm. 109. 8. with
Acts 1. 20. Yea, one reached from Enoch the 7th. from Adam to the Day of
Judgment, Jude, ver. 14, 15. And so are all his Promises, which David (as I
said) in the Text principally intends. In the first Verse of this Ogdoad, he
says, For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled in Heaven. A Word of a Promise is
in Heaven, and settled, (...), there, and that for ever; a most strong and full
Expression, that, whereas if a Man look to these outward Contentments, there is
nothing settled, or if settled, yet it is but poorly, not for ever, according to
that as strong Expression, Psalm. 39. 5. Verily every Man at his best estate, is
altogether vanity; or, as the Hebrew is, all Men are all vanity, even (...)
(the same word in both places) when most settled and established, yet he
continues not so long: But when full of Riches, and happy in Children, and so
in a seeming settledness, yet it is soon shaken.

Nay, further, whereas if a Man should look at God's Word and Promise, as it is
in our unsettled hearts, we are ready to think that it is as ready to waver as
our Hearts are; as the shadow of the Sun or Moon in the Water seems to shake as
much as the Water does which it shines in.

Yet for all this seeming shaking here below, the Sun and Moon go on in a
steadfast Course in Heaven. So the Psalmist tells us, that however our Hearts
stagger at a Promise through unbelief; nay, and our Unbelief makes us believe,
that the Promise often is shaken withal, and when we are at our Wits-end, we
are ready to think that God's Promise comes to an end too, as Psalm. 77. 8. Yet
God's Word is settled, though not in our Hearts, yet in Heaven; yea, and there
for ever, as settled as Heaven it self is; yea, more than so, for Heaven and
Earth may pass, but not one jot or tittle of the Law (and therefore of the
Gospel) shall fail, Luke 16. 17.

And thus we see, that God's Commandment and Promise, in this respect, is
Exceeding broad, reaching to all Times. Was a word of Command the Guide of thy
youth? I assure thee, it will be as good a Staff of thine age. And I assure
you, a good Promise is a good Nurse, both to the young Babe, and decrepit old
Man. Your Apothecaries best Cordials in time will lose their Spirits, and
sometimes the stronger they are, the sooner. But has a Promise cheared thee
say, twenty, thirty, forty years ago? Taste it but now afresh, and thou shall
find it as fresh, and give thee as much Refreshment as ever. If it has been
thy greatest Joy in thy joyful Youth, I tell thee, it has as much Joy in it
for thy sad Old Age. That may be said of God's Word, which the Prophet says of
God himself, Isa. 46. 4. And even to Oldage I am he, and even to hoare hairs I
will carry you. Does not the Psalmist say as much in the 160. Verse of this
Psalm, Thy Word is true from the Beginning. It Is well, it begins well. But will
it last as well? Yes: He adds, And every one of thy righteous Judgments
endures for ever. Answerable to which, is that other Expression, ver. 152.
Concerning thy Testimonies, I have known of old, that thou have founded them
for ever. For ever, and founded for ever. O sweet Expression! O grounded
Comfort! Brethren, get acquainted with God's Word and Promise as soon as you
can, and maintain that Acquaintance everlastingly; and your knowledge of it
shall not either go before, or go beyond its Truth. Know it as soon and as long
as you will or can, and you shall never find it tripping or failing: But you
may after long Experience of God and it, say, I have known of old, that thou
have founded it for ever.

And so I have done with the First Breadth of God's Word, reaching to all Times.

II. There is a Second answerable to it, for God's Word and the New Jerusalem,
Rev. 21. 16. in this are like: Both the Length and Breadth of them are equal.
God's Word and Promise as it reaches to all Times, that is the first Breadth;
so also to all Occasions and Wants: That Is the Second. Just like the Israelites
There I shall have full peace to entertain my self, a plentiful store of
Ingredients to every. Malady, to quiet every doubt, etc. as Dr. Hammond
paraphraseth the Text.
Garments in the Wilderness, which waxed not Old for For^^ years: There Is
Length and Continuance. But withal, (...) they must grow too, as their Children
did, or else they would not serve their turn. So truly here, a gracious Promise
will be better than a good Garment, that will keep a poor Soul warm at heart
Forty years together, and much longer than so. And which is the best of all, we
cannot out-grow it. It will serve to lap the tender Babe in, and yet not leave
the tallest Christian in any place bare, if he will but wear it. This is the
Second Breadth. It will reach to all Needs and Wants; which may be further
considered in two Particulars.

1. Some Word and Promise of God, or other, is able to reach to all our outward
Wants and Evils, which no one outward Contentment can do. Health only cures
Sickness, but as many a Man is healthful and poor together, it reaches not to
cure his Poverty: And Riches take away Poverty, but cannot sometimes buy
Health. Honor persumes a Man, and keeps him from stinking in Man's nostrils;
but many a Man that is well esteemed of, may be poor enough. One Contentment
helps usually but one Want, and one Plaster uses not to cover many Sores; and
truly for outward Matters, scarce any Man has a Plaster for every Sore: Say
those of you that have most in this kind, Have you so much as you want nothing?
Now truly, herein especially is seen the Exceeding breadth of God's Word and
Promises. Had we but so much Skill as to go to every Box of precious Ointment
in this Myrotheke, we might find certainly a Salve for every outward Sore: And
had we but so much Faith but as to apply it, we should find it sovereign too.
Here Is a Promise that might heal that Wound, which a slanderous Tongue has
given me; there another, which might be my best Cordial on my Sickbed; in
another the poor Hunger-starved Body might these hard Times meet with a good
Meals-meat, yea, I assure you, and Dainties too. I name not more particulars,
nor have I time to exemplify any. But in general, consider only the 92. ver.
of this Psalm, and think whether it speak not one word for all: Unless thy Law
had been my delights, I had perished in mine Affliction. Affliction is a large
word, and may contain under it many particular Evils: Now where is his Cure for
all? Truly he has one Catholicon, one Receipt for all. Thy Law in the singular
number: But what of it? What can Delectationes in plurali, significans nullum
esse genus doloris, cui non inveniatur in verbo Dei remedium. Mollerus.
one Law do to so many Evils? He tells you it is (...). We read it, Unless it
had been my delight: But the word in the Original is wonderfully significant in
a double respect; its both. 1. In numero plurali. 2. Forma duplicata: In plural
number Delights, and they doubled too. Is my Affliction sickness? In God's
Word, had I but Faith, I might get Health and Health again. Is it Nakedness? I
might get Clothes, yea, and double Clothing: And so of the rest. Brethren, did
we but walk so in Obedience to the Word, that we were fit for Mercies, and then
had but Faith to rely upon the Promise for them; in this one Bible we might
find many Delights, and them doubled too. Health and Health by the Word, is
double Health; Food and Food with and from a Promise, is double Food, both
first and second Course too. So God's Word reaches to all Wants of the outward
Man, and in that respect is exceeding broad.

2. But secondly, It can reach to cover all the Nakedness, and heal all the
Wounds of the inward Man; and if so, then sure it is exceeding, exceeding
broad. In this respect, though a Man were so outwardly happy, that he were
clothed and harnessed Cap-a-pe, as you say, from top to toe in regard of
outward Man; yet for all this, as the Prophet speaks in a like Case, Isa. 28.
20. This Covering may be narrower, than that a Man can wrap himself in it:
Though harnessed from top to toe in this kind, yet truly this is not Armor of
Proof. Brethren, a Man may have a poor naked Soul under all our warm and gay
Clothes, and truly the Arrow of God's Wrath can wound the Soul through all such
Clothes and Armor.

O Blessed then be God, who has given us his Word, which as it can clothe the
Body, so it can Cover the Soul too, that cannot only keep off many a heavy
Stroke from the outward Man, but can keep the Conscience from many a deadly
Wound; yea, and can heal those which we had got, when carelessly we had not it
about us. I, Brethren, herein is seen the infinite Breadth of God's Word, that
one Promise of it can quiet, and heal, and refresh a weary wounded Conscience;
which no finite Creature, not all the Creatures joined together can. Well are
those two joined together, The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul.
You read it Converting in the Text, and in the Margent Restoring: But the same
Phrase in the Original is used, Lam. 1. 16. (...), and it is taken for
Comforting and Refreshing: The Comforter that should relieve, or refresh, or
bring back my Soul, is far from me. If you please, you may take it in all those
senses. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting, and so restoring, and so
refreshing the Soul. Yea, this is a perfect Law indeed, that can thus convert,
and refresh the Soul. It Is a Metaphor taken from one in a Swoon, to whom you
give Hot-waters to recover them; and so that same Phrase, is taken, Lam. 1. 11.
which you may compare with Lam. 2. 11, 12. The poor famished Infants for Famine
swoon in the streets, and pour out their Souls in their Mothers bosom.
Propotionable to which Lam. 1. 11. it is said, they gave their pleasant things
to relieve, or, as the word is, to bring back the Soul; which the other place
said, was gone, and poured out. Just so is it sometimes with a poor
hunger-starved Christian for his Soul, he Faints and Swoons, and you would
think he would never be recovered more; and all his other desirable pleasant
things, though he should give them all (with them, Lam. 1. 11.) will not
recover him and bring his Soul back again. Oh! but God's Commandment is
exceeding broad, his Law is perfect indeed, when its (...) when with some
Promise or other, it can fetch again and refresh a fainting Soul, better than
all your Hot-waters a swooning Body. In this respect I cannot but again say,
The Law of the Lord is indeed perfect, when it can thus convert, and bring
back, and refresh the wearied Soul. In this more than any thing God's
Commandment appears to be exceeding broad.

I have done with the Opening and Proof of the Point in the (...) of it. For
the Reason of it:

God's Commandment in the former Considerations and Respects exceeding broad.

1. Because it is God's Commandment. If thy Commandment, then exceeding broad.
So you have the Reason of it in the very Text: Were it a Man's Commandment, it
would fail in both these Breadths. Your best Parliament-Statutes reach not to
all Times, many antiquated, repealed, and now out of use: And whilst in force,
yet they reach not to all Inconveniences, and so fall short of the other
Breadth also. And this from Man's weakness, who cannot see all present
Inconveniences, much less foresee all that may afterward happen. Well, but
God is Perfect, Mat. 5. 48. and so his Work perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. and so his
Word and Law perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. His both Works and Word have a Tincture of
himself. He an Incomprehensible God, Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching
find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection? The measure
thereof is longer than the Earth, broader than the Sea. He without all
Dimensions, and a proportionable, or infinitely improportionable (shall I say?)
Latitude he has made in his Creature. Have thou perceived the breadth of the
Earth? Declare if thou know it all, Job 38. 18. And here for his Word, David
knows not how broad; but he puts the greatest word he can to it, says in the
Superlative (...) Exceeding, yea Exceeding, exceeding broad, broader than
either Earth or Sea, than any Creature; because it is an Expression of God
himself (and sometimes called God, as some have observed) and so Infinite. God
an Eternal God, that fore-sees what will be in all Times, and therefore his
Word shall reach to all Seasons. And God an All-sufficient God, and therefore
his Word shall reach to all Needs and Wants, and therefore his Commandment in
both respects exceeding broad.

2. As the former Reason was taken from the Author of the Word, so this from
the End of it, expressed ^ Tim. 3. 16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration,
and is profitable for Doctrine, etc. That the Man of God may be Perfect, and
thoroughly furnished to every good Work. I conceive that Man of God is
especially to he meant of the Minister of God, whom the Word of God fully
furnishes for his Work. But if it be able so to furnish him, then also other
Men, because they are furnished from him. Well then, this is the End of God's
Word, perfectly to furnish and supply us all in our righteous, and cheerful
Walking. But were it not now thus exceeding broad in the former Particulars,
this End would not be attained.

Did not a Promise reach to all Times, It might be that I might outlive a
Promise, and so it fail me at the last in some needful time of trouble, when I
stand most in need of it. Should it sustain me all my Lifetime, and but fail
me at my Death, my comfort might die with my Life, and so I should be but
poorly furnished, when I fail in the end of my Journey.

Or again, Did it cover my outward Man, and leave my inward Man bare, I should
be but poorly clothed: And though it provided well for my Soul, but took no
provision for my outward Man, I should not think my self thoroughly furnished.
Did it not reach to all my Needs and Wants, though it should leave but one
place bare, I might be as mortally wounded in it as in twenty. Should it arm me
against Covetousness, and I be struck with the envenomed arrow of Pride; Should
it fence me from Luke-warmness, and I yet be enflamed with Anger and
Frowardness, or the like; One wound if Deadly, may speed me. If it should help
me in many respects, and not supply me in all, I should not be so thoroughly
furnished, as the Apostle there says, the Word is able to do for me. And
therefore that it might attain its end, it is (in the second place) that in
both respects Gods Commandment is exceeding Broad.

Is it so exceeding broad that it reaches to all Times? then sure Moral Law is
not as yet abrogated: Which though it be not wholly meant, yet is a special
part of this Commandment. But against their Error which hold the contrary, I
have already spoken upon another Occasion, and therefore now forbear.

Is it again so exceeding broad that it reaches to all times? then Papists
likewise may be hence confuted, which enlarge our abilities unto Works of
supererrogation; as though we could exceed this Commandment, which is so
exceeding broad: And on the other side they cut short and straiten the Law, in
making some sins no sins, or venial, and some sins meritorious performances. Of
Hell we grant, but of nothing else. But here also I forbear.

Is it so exceeding broad? let it therefore call upon us to study it, Solomon's
(...) largeness or broadness of heart, (as the word signifies) 1 Kings 4. 29.
Had they large broad hearts, even as the sand on the Seashore, as it is there
said, so large and broad, as must needs expatiate into humane and divine
Writers, of either more late or ancient standing, whose vast apprehensions and
readings cannot be terminated in the large Volumns of Divinity, Physic,
Law-studies, or the like; would they but hear me, I should now show them a
Field broad and large enough, in which they might expatiate; En latifundium! A
Sea broad and deep enough, in which even such Leviathans may swim: it is no
other than this Word of God, which the Text says, is so exceeding Broad.

I confess, it would cut off a great deal of that Babel's superfluous Learning,
but this you should be sure of, you should in this Field meet with no poisoned
Fountains, as you do in theirs.

The thing therefore I exhort all, especially such as are or may be Students,
is that of Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 13. To give You that are Librorum
helluones, here is one to be eaten by you, as John did the Roll.
attendance to Reading; even diligently and faithfully to read and study the
Scriptures, a thing which Men of great note in the Church thought not too mean
for them. They tell us of Basil and Nazianzen, that thirteen years together
laying aside all other Studies, they set themselves to study the Scriptures;
and Luther makes it one of the things, which he would require of a Minister,
often to turn over the Bible. These (belike) looked at this 1. Biblia saepe
volvere. 2. Serio orare. 3. Semper esse a^scipulum.
broad Commandment, as new Planters would at a huge broad Continent, which
would require a great deal of both time and pains fully to discover it; I
assure you Gods Word will.

An Argument this is, which I should think necessary to enlarge my self in,
were I in another place, where other Books (and it may be bad ones too) are
more read and studied, than the Scripture. I read of Carolostadius, that he was
nine years a Doctor, before he had read the Scripture. I my self have been
present, Anama in Antibarb.
when one answering his Act for the Degree next to a Doctor, could not find the
Epistle to the Colossians; and was fain to excuse the matter by saying it was
not in his Book: And knew of another, that had been seven years almost in the
University, and had not had all that while a Bible in his study; but he
afterward turned Papist; as indeed it well agrees with Popery, in which by
their good wills, Scripture should be laid aside, and their Schoolmen and
Decretals only studied. A Popish frame it is, to which I wish we even in this
particular were not too much warping. Papists care not for Scripture; and
Familists make Scripture-Learned as a term of Reproach. But the Jews (some tell
us) dividing their time into three parts, would spend Drusius.
one of them in reading. And another says, that they scarce read any other
Book than the Scripture. I would not straiten Christians so in either kind; but
truly I should desire you all to Sands.
enlarge your selves in reading and studying this Commandment, which is so
exceeding Broad. Sure in this broad Field you should find something worth
getting.

Oh then with other Books, Debt-Books, and Law Books, and Physick-Books, and
other good Books you are reading, let God's Book be one especially. Be reading
here, and gathering there; here this word of Direction, and there that promise
for Comfort. And if only one Promise (as I have showed) may be of so great and
manifold use, what encouragement have we to gather, when there are so many? If
that Field be worth going to, in which I may get but one ear of Corn to
satisfy the hunger of my Soul; Oh then it is very good gleaning in a Boaz
Field, where we may glean even among the Sheaves, and have whole handfuls let
fall for us, Ruth 2, 15, 16. I mean in the Word of God, where we may not only
pick by Corns, but gather by Handfuls, even get Bundles of Promises to lay up
against an harder Time: and therefore (as poor Folks you know will) let us
glean and gather hard, especially seeing God hinders us not to glean among the
Sheaves. As God said to Abraham in regard of Canaan his Inheritance, Genesis 13.
17. Go walk up and down in the length and breadth of it: So we, that are Heirs
of the Promises, let us walk up and down in the breadth of this goodly
Inheritance of ours, of this exceeding broad Commandment. As it is Rich, so let
it dwell in us richly.

Is the Commandment exceeding broad? then search into it, as for make room for
it in our Hearts: for it comes with a breadth.

In this broad Commandment much to be done, and more to etc. to be looked to.
And as our Savior in a like case said, Mat. 10. 23. so truly we shall not have
gone over all this broad Field, till the Son of Man be come.

It Is broad, and therefore not straightened: the way is narrow at first Jews, John
8. 37. that his Word (...) did not take place, or as the word is, could not
find room there. Oh, Brethren, we have even strait hearts, God knows, for this
broad Commandment. But oh that we were enlarged! Are we straightened? Sure it is
not the Word's fault: It would enlarge us, did we but receive it, as Paul says
in another case, 2 Cor. 6. 12. We are straightened in our own Bowels, in our own
Hearts. The more the pity, and the more our loss, that so much precious Liquour
runs beside. And let me add that also, and I pray you therefore take heed, and
remember what has been said, that as the Command and Promise is broad, lasting
to all Times, and (as Chrysostom expounds it) bringing the Obedient to eternal
Life: so the Threat can reach as far to bring thee to endless Woe, if thou be
disobedient. The Promise broad, reaching to, and supplying of all our Wants:
And the Curse can be as broad too, to cross thee in all thy Contentments, to
wound thee both in Body and Soul, in every Joint of the one, and Faculty of the
other. See Zech. 5. 2, 3. The flying roll of the Curse was twenty Cubits long,
and ten Cubits broad. Truly, God's Threat and Curse is as broad as all the
miseries of this Life, nay, as broad as Hell. And therefore get not a broad
Conscience, but a broad enlarged Heart in love and obedience, to entertain this
exceeding broad Commandment. Else, as the Lawyers term extreme Carelessness, it
will be Lata negligentia.

But in the next place, it is a word of both comfort and direction in the end of
all other Perfections, that God 's Commandment is exceeding broad.

I say, first, Comfort, that whereas all other imperfect Contentments are but
short and narrow, if I have but my share in God's Word and Promise, I have
that, which in the loss of all them will reach me comfort to all Times, and in
all Wants. Truly, Brethren, all outward Contentments, be they never so glorious
and comfortable, they will not last long, nor reach far; not longer than Life,
not so far as Heaven, no not so far as mine inward Man. Babylon's broad Walls
are thrown down, Jer. 51. 58. they are unstedfast as Waters; and as it is said
in anokind, the face of such Waters is soon straightened. Fair large Job 37. 10.
Estates soon brought into a narrow compass; great Families soon reduced to a
small number. To speak to the present occasion, pretty little Children are like
pretty little Books, in which a Parent sometimes reads much that very well
likes him: But it may be he cannot read long for tears, when the Book is taken
away; and at best he cannot read much because it is but a little one. But
blessed be God, may a Child of God say, who is sure that he has part in God
and his Promise, that I have another Book of a larger Volumn, of a far broader
Page than all these outward comforts come to. They are but narrow Rivers at the
best, and they soon dried up too: But God in his Word, in his Kingdom, has
broad Rivers that you read of, Isa. 33. 21. and they deep ones too, in which I
may bathe, and not be straightened, and out of which I may drink for ever, and yet
they never dried up, but spring up to everlasting life.

This is a Christian's comfort in such cases, and it should be his direction
too in them; that when he sees an end come of this perfection, and of that, to
be still thinking that there will at last come an end of all: and yet in the
end of all even then to look unto this Commandment and word and promise of God,
which the Text says is so exceeding broad. As, Has God straightened me in my
estate? Take that out of the breadth of Gods Word. Has he taken this pretty
little child, this pretty little book, out of my hand, that I cannot read in it
as formerly? Truly let us get a better, a bigger, a broader book into our
hands, God's book, and see what we can read there; if not enough to make a full
supply of all such wants, that whereas other men shuffle and shift, have this
fetch and that reach, and (as they use to say) when the Lion's skin is not big
enough to cover all, they sew the Fox skin to it to make it broad enough, and
yet all will not do, because there will be an end of all perfection; a
Christian is (or at least should be) able out of God's Word and Promises, as
out of a rich Treasury, to make a supply of all such wants. Here he gets a
promise for himself, and there another for his friend. Here one for a live-dead
parent, and there another for himself, though his child be dead. In a word,
that is it I call for; as much as we are straightened in outward comforts, let us
labor to be so much enlarged in God: and as much as he takes from us of
outward contentments, to get as much and more from him in this broad
Commandment and large Promises, and then we shall be no losers.

This one word also, that Gods Commandment is exceeding broad,

1. The first is, They are so sinful and so unworthy, and set so far off and
estranged from God, that his mercy (they think) will never reach them. But let
such think then of this exceeding broad Commandment. There is breadth and
length and height and depth in Gods love passing knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
And there is such a breadth and exent in Gods promises that they can cover our
greatest sores, reach the furthest out-liers if they would but come in. Boaz
has a skirt to cast upon Ruth, though a poor handmaid, Ruth 3. 9. And much
more has Christ to cover the Ne cogitemus ad nos non pertinere promissionem:
sicut enim perpetuo durat et persistit verbum (quod primum erat) ita latum est
valde i. e. undique ad omnia tempora, and aetates and ad omnes homines, qui
fide hanc doctrinam amplectuntur, se extendit. M.
nakedness of his poorest servants. Men's blessings and favors are strait, and
when Jacob has got away the blessing, Esau may cry bitterly, and say, bless
me, even me also, O my father, and Isaac have it not for him. But God has for
all, that will unfeignedly ask and beg of him. He has a blessing for me, and
another for thee, and a third for a third, and even for them that are afar off,
Acts 2. 38, 39. though never so far off, yet if with the like bitterness, but
not the like profanesse that Esau had, thou cryest bless me, even me also, O
my father: If thou can but call him Father, thy Father has a blessing for
thee also: for his Commandment is exceeding broad to reach to all thy needs and
wants and sins.

2. And to all times, and by that a second trouble is removed: for a child of
God, though he has gotten beyond the former doubt, that God has had mercy for
him to bring him at first to him, yet he sees his weakness such, and his lusts
so strong, that he fears, he shall never hold out in grace to heaven, but that
there will be as well an end of this, as of all other perfections: but let such
remember, that however their strength reaches not far, is scant, and soon
spent, yet that God's promise and truth and mercy ne cogitemus fieri posse, ut
nos in medio cursu destituamur. Molerus.
is of a far broader extent, and longer continuance: for God's Word, those that
have had longest experience of it have yet cause to say, as verse. 152.
Concerning thy testimonies, thy promises, I have known of old, that thou have
founded them for ever: and in the end of health and peace and strength and life
to end all with this word last in his mouth, I have seen an end of all
perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad.

SERMON XXIV.
EXODUS 28. 36. August 19. 1634. Before Sir Nathanael Brent Visitor for the
Archbishop of Cant erbury, in his Metropolitical Visitation.
Holiness to the Lord.


VErbum Diei in die suo. A fit time (had it been by an abler hand) to bring
forth the Priests garments out of the Scripture's vestry, whilst the eye of
Authority is present to see them put on: and here the first piece, that in the
very forefront I light on, is Aarons Frontlet in the Text. Thou shall make a
plate of pure gold, and grave upon it like the ingraving of a signet, sanctitas
Jehovae, or sanctum Domino, Holiness to the Lord.

For the literal sense, as meant of Aaron, I find no difficulty: some would,
who doubt whether both words were engraven on this golden plate, or the word
Jehova only. But P. Fagius rightly concludes for both, (...), Holiness to the
Lord: both engraven, to let Aaron know what God was, and what he should be,
especially in his holy Ministrations. God was holy, and he would have him so,
especially when he came before him.

For the mystical signification, as applied to Christ the High Priest 1 Pet. 1.
19. John 1. 29.
of our profession, it agrees fully. That spotless Lamb took away the sins of
the world, who had none of his own: so full of holiness he, that on his very
forehead all might have read this (...) Holiness to the Lord. For, such an
High Priest it became us to have, who was holy and harmless and separate from
sinners, Hebr. 7. 26.

And therefore passing by both these, the moral application of it especially to
Ministers, and partly to all Christians will be the subject of my present
discourse. Which that it may be more orderly, give me leave in this Aarons
Frontlet out of this and the adjacent verses to observe and handle these
particulars.

1. Quid, what is expressed and required; and that is Holiness. 2. Vbi, where
it is to be sought and seen; on his very forehead and the forefront of his
miter, verse. 37, 38. 3. Quomodo, how engraven there; with the ingraving of a
signet. 4. The Finis cui, to whom; (...) all this to the Lord. 5. The Finis
cujus, for what cause; that the peoples holy gifts might be accepted, and the
iniquity of them pardoned verse. 38. And of these now briefly.
1. The thing here engraven on the Priest in the Law, and required of the
Preacher of the Gospel is especially and above all Holiness.

Not outward riches and greatness: they to us, but like wings A Sanctus
Valerius in the Church of God is a better man than a Valerius Maximus.
to the Ostrich, which she cannot fly with, but only flutter, and get the
faster away: By these we only get to outgo other men, but by themselves they do
not help us to fly up to heaven our selves, or to carry others along with us.

No nor so much inward gifts of Learning and such like abilities, though such
polishing necessary to the Priest, yet it is not it, but Holiness that is here
engraven in his Crown; Knowledge without Grace, Learning in the head, without
Holiness in the forehead is but like a precious stone in a Toad's head, or like
flowers stuck about a dead body, which will not fully keep it from smelling,
the less half by much of a Minister's accomplishment. And therefore they that
have it only, at best are but like a ship ballasted only on one side, that
thereby sinks the sooner: Or like David's messengers, their 2 Samuel 10.
priestly garment, which should be talaris, is cut off by the middle to their
greater shame. And yet well were it, if many were not seen daily go so half
naked, and yet not ashamed of it. The Mathematicians observe, that a man that
compasses the earth, his head goes many thousand miles more than his feet,
but in ascent to heaven the feet would have the greater journey. I, so it is,
whilst we rather go about to compass the earth, than to get up to heaven, our
heads outgo our feet, our knowledge our practice: but yet in the Church of God,
although there be sixty Queens and eighty Concubines, and Virgins without
number: yet his Love and Dove is his undefiled one, and she is but one. Cant.
6. 8. And therefore I envy you not your sixty-Queens and eighty Concubines, and
Virgins without number, your numerous numberless perfections of Arts and
Tongues; had you skill in as many Languages as ever Mithridates could speak, or
in as many Authors as Ptolomy's library could hold; had you the life and
strength of Paul, or the eloquence of Apollo's preaching; had you Chrysostom's
tongue, or Austin's pen; had you all the perfections that could be named or
thought of, I should not be like profane Porphyrie, who accounted it pity, that
such an accomplished man as Paul was should be cast away upon our Religion, nor
like profane parents in our days that think much to offer to the Lord a male,
any that have strength of body or mind, but the halt, and the blind, the
impotent of body, and Mal. 1.
it may be more in mind. Cripples and blocks, whom they know not what else to
do with are they, which they think fittest to bestow on the Ministry. [but
cursed deceivers at length learn not to envy God your choicest jewels for the
ornament of his Sanctuary, for can they be better bestowed?] Much less,
brethren and Gospel-Bezaleels, do I envy you your rarest endowments and
perfections, if you will please but with him to employ them in the helping up
of Gods Sanctuary. I envy you not all your such like Queens and Concubines and
Virgins: only upon this double condition, first that you commit not folly with
them; and still that your undefiled one be your love and dove; that whatever
other engravings you have otherwhere about you, yet that holiness be, as here,
engraven on your crown, on your heart and forehead engraven (...) Holiness to
the Lord.

Holiness! But what is that? In general a sequestring and setting either person
or thing apart for God, whether from common or profane use; and in both
respects be we holy that bear the vessels of the Lord, Isa. 52. 11.

1. We Ministers should be holy as separated to the Lord from worldly
employments, not as though I approved the slow-bellied Romish Monkery of our
days, or yet condemned the Monks of old for having honest callings to be
employed in, or least of all found fault with St. Paul for tent-making, Acts
18. 3. and Working with his own hands, 1 Cor. 4. 12. Idleness is unlawful in
all: And Paul's particular case to avoid scandal made his course in that kind
both holy and commendable. But yet this notwithstanding, this first part of
holiness required calls for, 1. a sequestration from such homely and sordid
employments, as will make our selves and Ministry contemptible. St. Jerome
says, that sacerdos in foro is as bad an eyesore, as Mercator in Templo, both
to be whipped out. A Minister and a Market-man are not unisons. It Is not spade or
mattock, but the sword of the spirit that must be seen in our hands, which is
that we should both work and fight with. It had been shameful, if true, that
which Litprandus avoucheth of the Bishops Apud Baron. Anno 968. Number. 11. etc.
of Greece in his time, Ipsi Agasones, Caupones, etc. that they were their own
market-men, and serving-men, yea and stable-grooms too; that they were
hucksters, and kept Taverns and Victualling houses. But the baseness was in
the base slanderer, and not in the Grecian Bishop, which other Historians of
those times show Curopalates.
was far from such sordidnesse. But should such soil stick to any Ministers now
adays; should it be out of necessity and want, I pity them; but if from
degenerous covetousness, I loath it, and so does God too. I wish, I confess,
that the former cause too often held not, for whereas the Scripture speaks of
giving to Ministers, Prove. 3. 9. the vulgar renders it da pauperibus and not
much amiss: for the Priest and the poor man go often in the same clothes. It
might indeed have been a lesson, which those learned Clericks in former times
had taken out: In Ecclesia omnis immensitas est mensura, Anton Rosell part 1.
Monarch. Cap. 70.
as one of their Lawyers complains: But sure, if Wickliff were now alive, he
would not have much cause in many places to complain of the Church now, as he
did then, that Cumulantur temporalia usque ad putredinem. All Church-men's
livings are not like his Lutterworth. If God were not the tribe of Levi's
inheritance, the Priesthood to many an one would be but a poor one. He had need
look to be honest: for simoniacal Patrons, injurious Impropriatours,
sacrilegious Minister-Conseners will take a course to keep him poor; and if
sordid too, now cursed be they of the Lord in so making him base and his
Ministry contemptible, in defiling this (...) (as Aarons miter is called Exodus
29. 6.) his holy crown, by casting it to the ground, and burying it in the
earth. But if he himself so fall a digging, as to bury his talent there, now an
evil servant is he, and an heavier account will he one day without repentance
have to make for it, which yet I wish too many now adays were not liable to. I
have sometimes thought how it comes to pass, that so many Mechanics amongst us
prove Ministers: and methinks I hear them return answer, that they therein do
but agere de repetundis; according to lex talionis it is to cry quit because so
many Ministers incroach on their occupations, and prove Mechanics, that so as
it were according to the schools doctrine in another point so many men may be
brought in, to fill up the number of collapsed Angels: but both are blemishes
to the Church: and well were it if some aqua fortis did eat out such moles from
off the face of it: for on Aarons forehead is Holiness to the Lord, which
should sever as common men from such an holy calling, so those of such an holy
calling from such common employment, 1. First if mean and sordid.

2. Though more ingenuous and liberal, so far as it comes to the Apostle's
(...) viz. so far as to entangle him in the world, to hinder him in his holy
function, 2 Timothy 2. 4. And here I wish our Church were no^ sometimes sick of
Physick-divines, and Gospel-Lawyers, that handle the Code, more than the Bible,
and study the Statutes of the kingdom, more than the ten Commandments; or at
least make account that a Photius his Nomo-canon makes the best medly.

Not that I condemn all Ministers intermedling (if called to it) in secular
occasions, if not to the blemish of the men, or hindering of their Ministry.
That it should be unlawful for a Clergyman to enter into a Prince's Court was a
Canon of the second Roman Synod's making, as foolish as the Synod it self was
forged. Crakanthrop's defense of Constantin. page 11, 12.
With God's leave and blessing let them be for the Commonwealth's advantage, if
it be not with the Church's hindrance. But in case they should clash, let all
Churchmen look first to the Church, whilst others look to the Senate House,
yea and let me add, to the Church in the country, that I have a charge of,
rather than the College in the University that I would live idly in, unless
I would be like elementary fire, that shines not in its own place, or like
Jonah, who, when sent by God to preach at Niniveh, flies to Tarshish, (which
out of Strabo appears to have been an University,) to be a student, or to it as
an Emporium to See Doctor Rai^old, his Sermons upon Oba^iah. See Doctor Albot
on Jonah cap. 1.
play, as some think, the merchant. Sure both ways he made a bad voyage of it,
which should make us steer aright by shaping our course point blank on Christ's
and his Church's service, and instead of Castor and Pollux, Acts 28. 11. let
these two words be the sign of our ship, (...) Holiness to the Lord in this
kind of separation from ordinary employments.

2. But much more from sinful defilements: Thus 2 Chronicles. 35. 3. Josiah's Levits
were not only (...) but also. (...) Holy as well as learned, such as did live
as well as they preached, and whilst now adays some affect one method of
preaching, and others another, sure I am Ezra followed the best, cap. 7. 10. he
first prepares his heart to seek the Law, and then to do it, and not till then
to teach it, just as Paul, that matchless pattern for preachers, that (...) in
regard of his divine contemplations, and for his holy life (...), as St.
Chrysostom calls him) you shall observe that he proves his own fidelity from
his doctrines truth, 2 Cor. 1. 17, 18. there was not in him and his promises
yea and nay, because the word and promises of God, which he preached, were not
yea and nay: as though he had said, my practice is honest and true, because my
doctrine is truth: a good argument in a holy Paul's mouth: but would not many a
plain country man's logic say it were a non sequitur in many of ours: but
sure, it should follow. Ministers holy doctrine and life should follow and
prove and strengthen each other mutually. Not a blemish admitted in a Priest of
the old Testament, and Paul's description excepts against the least blot of a
Bishop in the new: The Priest was to view and to be amongst Lepers then, but
was not wont to be infected with their Leprosy. It is our calling to be
dealing with sinners, but should be our care not to be defiled with their sins.
If our feet be beautiful, Romans 10. 15. sure clean ways become them. If we do
not (...), Gal. 2. 14. as well as (...), 2 Timothy 2. 15. we shall go but halting
before the flock.

And here as Paul transferred all in a figure to himself and Apollos, 1 Cor. 4.
6. so will you please to give me leave to speak a little to my self? nor will
it be time ill spent, if you please to sit and overhear me, whilst I labor to
quicken mine own dullness in this way of holiness by these following
considerations.

1. The first is the nearness of thy calling to God, who will be sanctified in
all that draw near him, Lev. 10. 3. and therefore thou that stand before
God, and as it were beholdest his face, have need of holiness to the Lord on
thy forehead. It Is holy ground thou stand on, need therefore to have shoes
off. They are holy ordinances E^od. 3. 5.
which thou handlest, but what (...)? It was an heavy charge laid upon Aaron,
and which in part lights on thee, Numb. 18. 1. you shall bear the iniquity of
the Sanctuary and of the Preist-hood. And may not that be a great deal? and
had not thou therefore need the more look about thee? This very consideration
amongst others made Nazianzen's Basil defer his entrance Nazianz. Orat. 12. p.
195, 196. Chrysostom Lib. 1. de Sacerdotic.
on this calling, and Chrysostom's Basil by all means labor to avoid it, and
made Chrysostom himself cry out, miror si potest aliquis Rectorum salvari (in
Heb. 13. 17. Homil. 3.) And therefore although thy person be mean, yet thy
calling is holy, so that although thou be but as an earthen vessel, that is,
but poor and homely in regard of outward respects, yet thou should be too as
an earthen vessel, that is, very sweet and clean in regard of inward holiness:
the treasure that is in thee, and the calling that thou art in, calls for it.
Sanctuary-measures were wont to be double to others: and why not
sanctuary-men's holiness too? And therefore however the children of Israel may
go astray, yet even then the Priests and the Levites must keep the charge of
the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44. 15. In a word the color of thy cloth is such, as that
the least mote will be the sooner seen in it: the holiness of thy Calling,
multiplies the unholiness of thy sin; as the clearness of the Glass makes thick
Liquour look the worse in it. What Is but an idle word in another's mouth, is in
thine well-nigh a Blasphemy. In sum, thy Calling should set thee far from sin,
because it sets thee so near to God.

2. And the rather, because as by it thou art nearer to God: so the Devil will
go very near to be the nearer to thee, if thou be not the more watchful. In
the Hill of God, where the Prophets dwell, there will be a Garrison of the
Philistines, as you read 1 Samuel 10. 5. As in other respects, so in this, that
if there be any mischief done, the Devil will want of his will, if one of thy
Cloth be not in it. Thus Dathan and Abiram cannot rise up against Moses and
Aaron, but Korah a Levite, must be of the Conspiracy, and set first as a
Ringleader in the business, Numb. 16. 1. As in Q. Elizabeth's days, scarce a
Treason, but some Priest or Jesuit had a finger in, if he were not chief
stickler. The Devil knows well, that the Priests sin is of greater Guilt, (and
therefore in the Law had a greater Sacrifice, the Peoples a Goat, but his a
Bullock) of greater Scandal, and likewise of greater Consequence; a Goliah's
Sword behind the Priests Ephod, such a Weapon as none like to that, 1 Samuel 21.
9. If he go to Hell, he draws it may be thousands after him. The silly Sheep,
though otherwise fearful and will stand and drown, will yet after its leader,
though in desperate leaps. People, when they see Ministers faults, take it for
a principle, that they may Non modo cum venia, verum etiam cum ratione peccare.
This the Devil knows, and therefore watches, which should make us the more
watchful, with this watchword ever in Head and Heart, Holiness to the Lord.

3. Thou preachest Holiness to others, and have thou not then great reason to
practice it? Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Romans 2.
21. The Coals of which Scripture are heaped upon that evil Servant, that is
condemned out of his own mouth, Luke 19. 22. and goes away with that doom, 1
Kings 20. 40. So shall thy judgment be, thy self have decided it.
Bellerophontis, Vriae literae are all the good Letters that bad Scholars have
learnt, and all the good Sermons that ungodly Men have preached, and so they
will prove another day. Ministers, as Stars, must move as well as shine. Be not
therefore like the Rechabites, who were Scribes, 1 Chronicles. 2. 55. to make
evidences for other Men's Lands, but had none of their own, Jer. 35. 8, 9, But
follow the old Rule Per unumquodque, etc. illud magis. And therefore thou had
need with the Priest in the Law, first Levit. 16. 11. with 15.
to offer for tbine own cleansing, and then for the Peoples. He had a Sea to
wash himself in, as Lavers to wash the Peoples Sacrifices in then; And shall
foul Souls be washed with foul Hands now, which often make them worse for
handling? What? In this like Agricolae, Qui inculti colunt terram? Like the
Whetstone, Dum alios acuit suae immemor hebetudinis? Nay, like the Plaster,
Quod medetur vulneri, ipsum vero cum pure traditur Vulcano? Now fie on such
incongruous nonsense, solecisms in Gods Husbandry and Chrirurgery.

4. Nay, in ordinary course look not for so good a success; for as Holiness
adds strength: so Unholiness weakens thy Ministry. An holy Christ taught with
Authority, and not as the Scribes, Matthew. 7. 29.
who were obnoxious, and therefore feared to speak out, lest, when Sermon was
ended, and others had leave to speak as well as they, they might have that
replied to them, Physician, heal thy self: A good Item for all, for us
Ministers, when our People are froward, not for us to grow impatient, but to
sit down, and think a while, whether some sinful Miscarriage in us has not
been the Obstruction in the body of our People: Whether an Amasa, wallowing in
his Blood, a Leader, a Minister 2 Samuel 20. 12.
in his sin, has not made whole Troops stand still: That so we may mend, and
they with us, and all together.

5. It Is Holiness that honors, as it is Sin that above all disgraceth thy
Ministry. It was a piece of humble Paul's holy ambition to magnify his
Ministry Romans 11. 13. But how? with what? Was it with effeminate affected
Words, or curious speculations in his Preaching, or in a (...) of outward Pomp
or State in living? Was it with the breadth of a Cassock? Or the fat of a good
Preferment? No: These would have been to Paul, as Readiness Armor to David. Why,
with what then was it? He tells you, 2 Cor. 6. 4, 6, 7. by Pureness, by
Knowledge, by the Power of God. Ye are Witnesses, and God also (...) how holily,
and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves, etc. 1 These. 2. 10. I, this
was the Credit of the Gospel, the Honor of their Persons, the Crown of their
Ministry, through which, as mean as they seemed, yet they were the very Glory
of Christ. This Plate with (...) 2 Cor. 8. 23.
Holiness to the Lord, on the Priests Forehead is, (...) the holy Crown, which
adds Majesty to Himself, and Ministry. As on the contrary unholy and unworthy
defilements dishonor this holy Crown, and cast it to the Ground. When Ephraim
speaks trembling, he exalts himself in Israel, but when he offends in Baal, he
dies, Hos. 13. 1. The like may I say of a Minister, let him but hold up his
Holiness, and then he will be sure to exalt himself in the true Israel of God,
and even to others in his Ministry, he may speak trembling: But offend in Baal
once, in sin, especially if foul, and that made a Lord and Idol of, (as Baal
was all that) and then he dies for it; and if he died only, less weeping would
serve for that Funeral: But alack, the power and luster of his Ministry often
dies with him, yea, and too often is buried before him. Yea, so Holy is God,
and so jealous of the purity of his Ministers and ordinances, that Repentance
(which as it were annihilates sin in others) scarce wipes off former foul sins
so far, as to leave the Man fit for the Ministry. Thus the false Prophet's
scars stick by him long, Zech. 13. 6. And Levites once Idolatrous, prove after
irregular, Ezekiel. Calvin in loc.
44. 10, 11, 12, 13. Caeteris quidem non imputatur quales fuerunt antequam
sacro lavacro renascerentur (as he in St. Austins life) Erasmus.
Its not imputed to others what they were before Baptism, but of a Bishop Paul
requires, that he should have a good Report of 1 Timothy 3. 7.
them that are without: And it was a part of St. Austin's commendation in the
same Author, that Talis erat quum ipse foris esset, ut ab his qui intus erant
vir bonus haberi posset in suo quidem genere. A foul stain may not wholly make
the Stuff unfit for ordinary use, but it will from its being ever fit for the
Priest's Ephod. A sometimes-scandalous sinner may prove an eminent * Courtesans
may be good enough to prove their penitenti and convertite, See Hist. Counc. of
Trent. p. 808.
Christian; but it is a question whether such an one may in ordinary course,
though converted, be fit to be chosen for a Minister. And therefore in all
these respects, on the Priests forehead let there be Holiness to the Lord. And
thus I have dispatched the first particular Quid, what is expressed and
required, it is Holiness.

2. The second is, Vbi, where this Holiness is to be sought and found. And
that is said to be on the forefront of his Miter, ver. 37. and on his Forehead,
ver. 38. That is, 1. In his outward holy Ministrations, if without
Superstition. And, 2. In his outward ordinary Carriage and Behavior, if
without Affectation. Besides the inward seal and stamp upon the Heart, the
outward badg and impress even on the Forehead must be Holiness to the Lord.

1. In his holy outward Administrations. Thus the Priests had a Laver to wash
in, when they went into the Tabernacle, that they died not, Exodus 30. 18, 19,
20. It was death to come to the Altar, if they did not first go to the Laver of
the Blood of Christ to have themselves and services cleansed; so unless they
came in an outward cleansing: Yes, you will say, but that was Legal and
therefore abolished. Yes, but so as to hold out an Evangelical not only inward,
but also outward Holiness in our Sacrifices and Services.

Which as they are more Spiritual: (and therefore away with the Papists
theatrical, mimical Mass, and that other Mass of their superstitious idolatrous
services and Ceremonies, as numerous and as carnal and by them made as
mystical, as ever were Jewish ordinances, as Durand's unreasonable Rationale
manifests.)

So it is pity they should be looked at as less Holy, or used with less inward
intention or outward holy reverence and comeliness. And therefore in the
description of the Church of the Gospel, it is forbidden the Evangelical Levite
in his ministration to wear Woollen, or to gird himself with any thing that
causeh sweat, Ezekiel. 44. 17, 18. Not as though a Minister's Coat must needs be
like John Baptist's of Camels hair, and not of Wool; nor that it were unlawful
for him to sweat at his work: But to hold out not only inward, but also outward
purity and holiness, that his Ministering, G^stures, Garments, Actions should
be, though not Mystically or Sacramentally (...) holy (as the Ceremonies of the
Law were, but ours, as the Reverend Prelates of our Church determine, are not)
yet at least (...), that is, every way in a reverend and comely (...) and (...)
becoming the Holiness of God's Presence and Ordinance. Holiness becomes thy
House for ever, Psalm. 93. 5. And if for ever, then even since Jerusalem's
Temple has been down. God has not been without his House, though not such an
one as that was; and wherever it be, Holiness does, and will become it for
ever. For this purpose it was, that in Jerusalem of old the Dung-gate was
removed from the Temple as far as could be, as Junius has well observed upon
Nehe. 2. 13. I grant a great difference between that Temple and ours; yet not
so great, but that this will, I conceive, be a good consequence. If the Jewish
Temple must not be near the Dung-gate, then sure it is no reason that Christian
Temples should be made Dung-hills, unbecoming the Presence of God and his
People. Ours at last begins to be Repaired, which I have often both in public
and private desired, but now I further wish, that the Poor do not pay dear for
it. God would have his Sacrifices brought, but not his Altar (through the
Sacrificer's oppression) covered with the tears of the Poor, Mal. 2. 13. I
desire that the Church may be repaired: But I should be sorry to see the Tears
of the Poor tempering the Mortar of it; or Moses to save his purse hindering
Aaron in his holy Ministrations on his Forehead to have engraven Holiness to
the Lord.

2. And on the Forehead too, in regard of his outward holy behavior and
carriage. If in better Times Holiness should be on the Soldier's
Horse-bridles, Zec. 14. 20. then in the very worst, at least on Aaron's
Forehead there should be Holiness to the Lord. If a comely (...) be required in
the outward behavior of all Christians, much more a reverend (...) in
Ministers carriages. Paul's (...), Vigilant, Sober, of good Behavior, with all
Gravity, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 4. comes up to this holy amiable Gravity in a Minister,
which may either win Love, or command Reverence. Thus our Savior's Sweetness
allured, and John Baptist's Gravity made even an Herod fear. A Minister's care
should be to have a fit mixture of both, that others frowardness may be
sweetened by his amiableness, and yet that the least wantonness might blush
under such a Christian Cato's eye. It was his advice, Vt plebeculae aspectum
fugiat, vel coram plebe se tanquam mysterium adhibeat: He would have him either
not seen, or at least that seen in him by the worst, which may either win them,
or awe them. One required such a Sagacity in a Minister, that Mr. Marbury.
should make him pick an use out of his hearers Forehead; but I should think
such Sanctity even in outward carriage were more necessary, that the beholder
might read a Lecture of Holiness in his Forehead.

In a word, this requires and implies such an holy Boldness, as not to be
ashamed of an holy Way, but therein to have a Forehead as long as Holiness is
engraven on it. As also a greater forwardness both with word and presence to
check sin in whom they see it, more than others may, as having, besides a
common Christian's boldness and zeal, the advantage of a Minister's Calling, to
bear them out in it. And therefore to conclude this; It Is for others to stand
aloft with Adultery, Drunkenness, Blasphemy pinned on their Foreheads; not for
those that in these places (as the Prophets of old, 2 Chronicles. 24. 20.) stand
above God's People. Let Drunkenness be read in other Men's misfigured
Copper-faces, but Aaron's Frontlet must be a plate of Gold with this ingravure,
Holiness to the Lord.

3. There, but Engraven there like the graving of a Signet. This is the third
particular, which signifies not only the Clearness Scriptura ^^ara, distincta,
ver. 27.
of the Character, (so the Chaldee) but also the depth of the Sculpture. And
this for two Causes, 1. To sink deep against Hypocrisy. 2. To last long
against Apostasy.

1. Engraven to sink deep, through the Forehead into the Head, yea, and Heart
too. The Holiness which a Minister must express, must not be a bare outside
Fore-head-paint of Pharisaical Mat. ^3.
hypocrisy, or Friar-like humility, or Pope's holiness forsooth. For so indeed
Rome's high Priest, when in his Pontificalibus, would have that title like
another Aaron on his Forehead, Holiness to the Lord. But St. John unmasks the
Whore, and shows you her true Frontlet, Revel. 17. 5. On her Forehead was a
Name written, Mystery (if Holiness, yet in a Mystery) but in plain terms as
follows, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the
Earth. But not so with the genuine Sons of Aaron: His Garments were not only of
Embroidered, which has only a fair outside, but also of cunning work, of
which, they say, that both sides were alike: Holiness on the Forehead, but so
engraven, that it may reach even that which is within; nay, it should begin
there first, and look out only in outward holy demeanor. Thus engraven to sink
deep, against Hypocrisy.

2. And again Engraven, to last long, to be always on his Forehead, ver. 38.
against Apostasy. Paint is soon rubbed off; but Ingravure is longer in wearing
out, though it were longer, and it may be, brake some Tools in getting in.
Overhasty precocity in this kind has ever been dangerous to the Church, soon
ripe, soon rotten. Some Preachers have been Christian Hermogenes's, Men when
Children, but Children ever after. Some so hasty, that they cannot stay the
time of Engraving and Polishing. A little Painting or washing over with the
Name, rather than the Learning of a year or two's-continuance in the
University, fits too many for the Country, which would have been too deep, they
think, if they had stayed longer; like the plain Countryman, that carried his
Son to Melancthon to have him made a preacher, but if he might not carry him
back again with him a day or two after fully accomplished, he could not stay
longer tuning of the instrument. But what comes of it? too often discords in
the Church of Christ. Ordinarily it comes to this, that either they make
wash-way of preaching, and so their sermons are as shallow as themselves, or
else at first get on some Readiness armor ^ ^n another's borrowed pains) which
after such levis armaturae mili^^s cannot go in, winding up the string to so
high a peg, as i^ cracks ^^e long, as not long since somewhere sad experien^e
has testified. To prevent this Paul puts by a (...) a Novice from holy orders,
1 Timothy 3. 6. as for other things, so for prof^ssion and grace especially. Not
that I dare with them Micah 2. 7. strait^^ Gods spirit, or hinder him to
breath, when and where he pleases and sometimes to ripen some ex^raordinarily:
but only I add that every one is not a Cyprian, in whom tritura sement^m
praevenit, vindemia palmitem, poma radicem, as Pontius his D^acon speaks of him
in his life, for he adds ille fuit primus, and puto solus exemplo, plus fide
posse quam tempore promovere. Sure I am, it is via tuta to stay a graving time
for learning and godliness, and not to content our selves with a paint of
either. The one will last long, whilst the other ere long will wear off. Time
has seen some hot-spurs run out of breath, and the world has shown, whom
preferments have choked and taken off. It has been no wonder to hear of the
Vine and Olive Tree, when once they come to bear rule over other trees, to lose
their former fatness and sweetness: but the more to blame, they who, when they
have better helps and tools, less work is done, or less exactly. Good ingraving
at first would help all this, and when God's Law is within Christ's heart, Psalm.
40. 8. it was such a lasting deep fountain there, as made him grow upon his
work, and (as Divines have Cartwr. Horm. in Luke 19. 47.
observed out of the course of the Gospel) to have been more frequent in
preaching toward the end of his Ministry: and well he might, he being that
stone of which God said, Zech. 3. 9. Behold I will engrave the engraving
thereof. On our blessed High-priest's forehead was thus deeply engraven,
Holiness to the Lord. Thus in these three particulars we have seen that
holiness must be graven on Aaron's forehead.

4. But the fourth must needs be added (...) Holiness, and thus engraven; but
to the Lord and his glory, not seeming holiness for my profit, like a
Jesuitical holiness, ^n excellent pageant, out of which they suck no small
advantage. Nor for my credit, like Pelagius, who they say was a strict
seeming-holy Pelagii, viri, ut audio, sancti and non parvo profectu Christiani.
Augustine. 3. de peccat. merit. and remiss. 1. istum sicut eum quinoverunt
loquuntm bonum ac praedicandum virum. Ibid. cap. 3. Alexander de Alex. lib. 6.
cap. 6.
man, to give the better credit to his Doctrine, and Heresy. Such are but
rightly called Idol-shepherds, that do nothing but only as Idols serve to be
adored; or if active, but like him, that sobrius accessit ad evertendam Rempub.
But such unfaithful stewards must one day give an account of their stewardship,
who will share stakes with their Lord, set down fifty for their Lord, and fifty
for themselves; or if an hundred, if their Lord has eighty, he is well, but at
least they will have twenty, Luke 16. 6, 7. Nay, but let God have all, let our
mouths ever say, non nobis Domine, non nobis, yea let Aaron's forehead ever say
sanctitas Jehovah, holiness to the Lord. Like as the Roman Conquerors in their
triumphs were wont to go up to the Capitol and there to offer up their
triumphant Crowns and Garlands to Jupiter Capitolinus: Even so we Presbyters
with those twenty four, Rev. 4. 10, 11. should take off our crowns from off our
own heads, and cast them before the throne at Christ's feet saying, Thou art
worthy O Lord to receive glory and honor and power; for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created: which place C. a lapide
upon it fitly parallels with my Text: for whilst an humble Minister of Christ
freely and heartily acknowledges and says, my Ministerial dignity and
sanctity, my holy doctrine, life and fruit of both, all is from thee, and all
must be to thee; and therefore I throw down my crown at thy feet, and say, thou
art worthy, etc. It is all one with Aaron to come forth with this engraven
clearly on his forehead, Sanctitas Jehovae, holiness to the Lord. So we have
the finis cui.

5. The last particular is the finis cujus gratia, and that is the peoples
benefit, verse. 38. Holiness must be on Aaron's forehead, that the peoples holy
offerings might be accepted, and the iniquities of them pardoned; for what I
have been all this while speaking of Ministers faults and duties, it has not
been to discover a Noah's shame, that a Cham might laugh; not to display the
Preacher's blemishes, that a profane hearer might point and flear and say, I
there is an hole in the Priest's coat; But rather out of the high-Priest's
frontlet that thou may pick or find rather one in thine own. Holiness in the
Priests forehead says, that there is unholiness in the peoples very best
sacrifice. Christ our Priest had need be the Lamb without spot to expiate the
blemishes of our best duties; and his servants the Ministers need
proportionably be the more holy in heart and forehead, that they may lift up
purer hands for a polluted people; as the Levites of old were given to Israel,
to make atonement for them, that there might be no plague among them, when they
come to the Sanctuary, Numb. 8. 19. And therefore it should be an Item both to
the people; that, must the Priest be holy, then sure they had need be humble,
for this tells them that they are unholy. Joshua's rags were the peoples sins
more than his own, Zech. 3. 3. See Lapide in locum.
and Aarons holy crown holds out, as what holiness should be in him, so what
unholinesse is in his people, and therefore let them be humble.

And withal let Aaron and his sons be careful that their holiness may be to
the Lord and his praise; so for his people, and their help, not to expiate
their sins, that is Christ's: but by their holy life to be their better example,
by their holy doctrine to be their better instruction, by their more holy
prayers better to prevail with God for pardon of their sins and acceptance of
their duties and services. And thus ever on Aaron's forehead, on the Ministers
not only heart, but also outward administrations and carriages let not pomp or
learning so much, as holiness be stamped and engraven, even to sink deep, and
last long, that all may be to the Lord and his praise, and for his people and
their benefit.

And now for close, as Gregory in the end of his Pastoral once said, so I in
the end of my Sermon, Pulchrum depinxi pastorem pictor f^^us, I have
endeavored to present you with a poor portraiture of an holy Minister, which I
must confess I my self cannot attain to; and therefore if any faults have been
pointed at, I have therein desired either to mark, or at least to warn my self
rather than any other. Not that Ministers faults may not be spoken against: for
the Prophet, Zechary when he comes to speak of a foolish shepherd, he puts a
Jod Paragogicum to it (...), cap. 11. 15. to express, (as Brixianus has
observed) that if the shepherd be a fool, he is a fool of all fools: and
therefore Bernard is not to be blamed for being so bold and plain with Pope
Eugenius himself, hic, hic non parco tibi, ut parcat Deus. In this matter I Will
not spare thee, that God may: But yet when I see blessed Constantine in the
Counsel of Nice drawing a vail over the Bishops blemishes, I would not in this
profane scoffing age withdraw the curtain to expose them to a Michal's eye.
Young Timothy, though in place, is yet wished not to rebuke an Elder, but to
entreat him as a Father, and the younger men as brethren, 1 Timothy 5. 1. And
therefore for close, Reverend Fathers and Brethren, suffer a younger Timothy to
do his office, even to entreat and beseech all his Seniors as Fathers, and his
Juniors as Brethren, and to charge himself especially, that we all of us would
labor first to get Holiness into the heart, and then to express it so in our
outward Ministrations and Carriages, that all that look on may see and read in
Aaron's Forehead engraven (...). Sanctum Domino, Holiness to the Lord.

And what remains now? But that after I have thus besought you, all of us now
humbly befeech the Lord, that He would please to sanctify his own Name, and
further his Service by his Servants Holiness.

Now therefore most Holy, Holy, Holy, Blessed Lord God, so fit and furnish (we
pray thee) thine own Tribe with such outward Liberty, and Maintenance, and
Honor, but especially with thine own Saving Grace in their hearts, that thy
Priests may be clothed with Righteousness, and that on their very Foreheads
all may read Holiness, and that not for themselves and their own advantage, but
to thee, O Lord, and thy Glory, that even this Holy Crown, though we do not
debase it by casting it on the Ground unworthily, yet we may ever be most
willing to cast it at thy Feet humbly; and both here on Earth, and for ever in
Heaven, say and sing heartily, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Revel, 4.
10, 11.
Glory and Honor, and Power, for thou have Created all things, and for thy
Pleasure they are and were Created. And therefore, Blessing, and Honor, and
Glory, and Power, be unto Him that Revel. 5. 13.
sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

Tibi Domine Jesu.
SERMON XXV.
MAT. 5. 13. Octo. 11. 1641. At the Bishop's Triennial Visitation at Boston, he
being there present.
Ye are the Salt of the Earth: But if the Salt have lost Her saltness, what can
be salted therewith? Tindal.
his savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing,
but to be cast out, and trodden underfoot of Men.


PRemise but from the first Verse, that our Savior spoke these words to his
Disciples, and in them (if not only, yet) especially to his Ministers, and so
in them you may observe these three particulars.

1. The dignity, utility, necessity of their Ministry Metaphorically expressed
in the first words, (...). You are the Salt of the Earth. 2. A Taint or Defect
therein supposed; in the next, (...): But if the Salt have lost his savor. 3.
Grave and horribile judicium, as Calvin calls it, a most heavy Sentence of a
most horrible Judgment against such denounced, as being,
First, Most hopeless and irrecoverable in those words, (...), Wherewith shall
it be salted?

Secondly, Most useless and unprofitable; in those (...). It Is thenceforth good
for nothing.

Thirdly, Most rejectaneous and contemptible; in the last, (...), but to be
cast out and trodden under-soot of Men.

A word spoken to the Apostles themselves, and therefore may be to the highest
Officers in the House of God: So that S^lmeron's collection from that Clause
[Wherewith shall it be salted?] viz. That their Prelates (as such) may neither
be instructed nor corrected (hand saliuntur) savoureth only of Hoc operculo
tegunt, quicquid abominationum ingerere libet. Non hic effrons licentia data;
sed offici^ monitio, and severa comminatio, etc. Calvin.
Popish Tyranny; otherwise is insipid, and (as Spanhem adds) in regard of them
ominous, portending according to the tenure of the Text, that they are
irrecoverably unsavory. Whatever theirs do, ours will challenge no such
Exemption, nor did theirs in former Times. Or else Bernard much transgressed,
that, when but an Abbot, could so barely propound so many things to a Pope's
consideration, In libris de consideratione ad Eugenium: hic non parcam tibi ut
parcat Deus, lib. 4.
and Stella since, who, though but a Minorite, yet in his Comments upon the
parallel place in Luke (Chap. 14. 34) even pouders the chiefest of their then
Spanish Clergy. But I here profess my self to have neither their Ability nor
other fitness for such a Task; and it is I hope here needless, seeing our
reverend Diocesan comes now this second time, either to cure or cast out our
unsavory Salt, as he did some of it the last time.

And therefore, right Reverend, I being at this time appointed to be your
Mouth, and so to speak for you and not to you; please you to lend your
favorable Patience, whilst in God's Name and yours, I speak not so much to the
rest of my Brethren of the Clergy, as to my self the most insipid of many; and
that Verbum diei in die suo, a seasonable word in a fit time, when much speech
is of an inquiry to be made after scandalous Ministers, as so much unsavory
Salt to be cast out by others. By your care, and God's blessing upon his own
Word, that work may be either furthered or prevented, that when they seek for
Iniquity, they may find none, whilst we all hear and fear; Hear that we are the
Salt of the Earth, and fear the losing of our savor, lest being profitable for
nothing, we be cast out by God, and trodden under foot of Men.

1. I begin with the first part in the first words, You are the Salt of the
Earth.

(...), you]; That is, you Apostles, and (reserving to you your peculiar) in
you, all you Ministers.

Are] many of you really are, and all of you (even Judas himself) Cajetan.
Brugensis.
by your Calling should be: But what? (...), Salt]. No Popish Priest, I hope,
will Transubstantiate himself, as Lot's Wife, into a Pillar of Salt, because of
this phrase, as they will do the Bread and Wine into Christ's Body and Blood
upon a like expression. It Is Propositio impropria disparati de disparato, and
Spanhem.
holds out a Similitude, that what Salt is and does to Flesh and Virtutem
similem, officia analoga. Quod Sal. Carni. Adag.
other Food, that the Ministry is: To what?

The last word (...) tells you, you are the Salt of the Earth;] which is the
same with that in the following Comparison, of their being the Light of the
World, (that is) of all the Earth, and whole World; in which (as Chrysostom
observes, and others after him) was the Apostles Prerogative, whose Episcopacy
was Ecumenical, sent to season and enlighten the whole World, Mat. 28. 19.
when Prophets only to Palestina, and other Ministers now to their Plats and
Angles. But take the Ministers in general; so it is the Salt of the Earth now,
as the Apostles (our Savior here says) were then. Not so much in regard of
their Persons as their Office, Quae verbi propria, etc. As Chemnitius says,
that being transferred to them, which was proper to the Word; they by reason of
it, and it by reason of Jesus Christ held out in it, who as he is the true
Light that lightens every one that comes into the World, John 1. 9. So he is
the true Salt of the whole Earth; which, as of old, had quickly grown corrupt,
Genesis 6. 12. So having been rotting ever since, is now grown far more unsavory:
for if we, as Ministers, are the Salt of the Earth, it follows that the whole
Earth is but an unsavory Lump, that of it self, without us, wants seasoning:
So that although some of us should lose our savor, we have but lost that which
they want; and therefore they may pity us, as being like to them in our sin.
But if otherwise we be the Salt of the Earth, they should honor and reverence
us being far above them in our Office. That Comparison (as Pareus observes)
holds forth Officium and Officii dignitatem, as well our Dignity as our Duty.

First, I say, the Ministers dignity and worth, because withal its profitable
and necessary use. It Is the salt of the earth; and when our Savior in the next
verse adds the light of the world, could he have said any thing more to be
esteemed, as more useful and necessary, than light and salt? If you say bread;
they break it too. But I cannot follow those other comparisons: This of salt is
sufficient, quo nihil utilius, says the Proverb, sine quo vita humana Sole and
sale nihil utilius. Rhodigin. l. 6. c. 1. Plin. l. 31. c. 7.
nequit degere, without which man cannot live, says Pliny: Not keep house in
time of peace, nor hold out siege in time of war; of which the poorest, that
have least, will have a little, and all some: useful to all, and so prized by
all, that the spilling of it with some is superstitiously ominous, and Homer
can give it no less than (...), Divine, for its Epithet, they using (as
Plutarch observes) to honor such things as were of general and necessary
Sympos. l. 5. c. 10.
use with the title of Divinity. Divines we are by our calling, and if we be
but our selves (the salt of the earth) as necessary as they that are called the
shields of it: sine quo (says Austin of our Ministry) non possunt homines vel
fieri vel vivere Christiani, without Psalm. 47. 9. Epist. 180.
which we can as little be, or live Christians, as Pliny said without salt we
can live men; so that take it away, and you take salt off of the board, and
bread out of the house, and horsinan and 2 Kings 2. 12.
chariot out of the camp, even the Sun and light out of heaven: and what then
but fames and faetor, unsavouriness and famine, and darkness and confusion
would be left behind?

Let not therefore our people grudge us our double Honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17. by
whom they have such a multiplied and universal

Of Repute and Respect. Let not us be to your as unsavory, unless you love
your own unsavouriness. Ministers that are salt of the earth should not be as
sale empta mancipia, like refuse st^ff, as they are usually esteemed by the
insipid earth-wo^m qui centum mystas ^urto centusse licetur. To spill this
salt, let it ever be ominous, because it ^ill never be superstitious.

Of Maintenance: if we season you, its but right that you ^eed Salaria dicta
quae Ancus Martius 6000 modia s^l^^ in congiari^ d^dit. P^^n. ubi prius.
us. If Salary, as Pliny shows, has its name from salt, then here esp^cially
by all right its due to it:

From the poor, who of this seasoning may have as great a share as the rich:

And from the rich, whose greatest dainties without this salt will be but like
Job's white of an egg, cap. 6. 6. and greatest estates and honors but like
Jericho's tall palm trees, which grow upon barren earth, and by bad waters, as
long as Elisha's salt is not cast into them, 2 King. 2. 19, etc. whatever your
fare is, it will never make good cheer: fat bodies, but leaness will be sent
into the Psalm. 106. 15.
soul, as long as there is neither bread nor salt on the board, nor word to
bless it, and no Minister to say grace to it.

But it may be we should in both these respects have more of our own, if we
were more our selves, and that is, the salt of the earth: Not Freshmen from the
University which of late have grown barren, as Naturalists tell us the earth,
where salt pits are, usually is: Omnis locu^, in quo sal reperitur, sterilis
est nihilque gignit Plin. Such young Physicians instead of a Church have need
of a new Churchyard. Plin. lib. 31. cap. 7.
Nor Mechanics from the Loom or Last, insipid insulse animals, quibus anima
est pro sale, ut suibus, whose souls are only as salt to keep their bodies from
stinking, whilst they can season neither themselves nor others with either
wisdom, or grace, and yet of these we have too great a sprinkling: like Varro's
salt, which he says in some parts upon the Rhine in his time the country
people made ex lignorum quorundam combustis carbonibus. And so here, carbo
quoque in salem vertitur. It were well if Colliers prove not Salters. As
clothes that are so spotted and spoiled, as that they will not take any other
color, are usually dyed black; which hides the spots; but burns the cloth; so
too often in the Church, when men are so blemished in body, mind, carriage as
that they are fit for no other employment, they are by their parents or friends
or themselves dyed black: for such-coloured salt Theoprastus speaks of, but it
is unsavory, as such are whilst they stain the cloth and defile the
Priesthood, But I would be salt not to fret, but to season rather.

2. And therefore I pass on from our Dignity, which such dishonor, to our
Duty, which I desire we may all make conscience of, which this comparison of
the salt also puts us in mind of, and that in two particulars. 1. What we are
to be in our selves. 2. And what to others. And in both, as we go along, we
shall note the contrary unsavouriness, when the salt has lost its savor,
which is the second part of the Text, that when we come to it, we may the less
insist on it.

1. And first what we are to be in our selves: if salt to others, then its
presupposed we must be seasoned and savoury our selves: Have salt (...) in your
selves, says our Savior, Mark 9. 50. have it and keep it, for the Verb (...)
there signifies both: and this in your selves, as ever you would season
others, for nil dat quod non habet. There must be Oil in the Vessel or else it
will not shine long in the Lamp, Mat. 25. 4. There must be waters in our own
Cisterns, yea living, running waters in our own Well, if we would have them run
over so, as that our Fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the
streets, Prove. 5. 15, 16. Ezra that ready Scribe herein writes us a perfect
copy, who prepared his heart first to seek the Law of the Lord; and then
secondly to do it; and then thirdly to teach it, Cap. 7. 10. This, this is
rectissima methodus concionandi, the right method of Preaching, with the
Priests in the Law to have a Sea, in which they first wash themselves, as well
as Lavers, in which afterward they wash the sacrifices; which we should labor
to offer up as an holy and sweet smelling savor to God in Christ (Romans 15.
16.) washed in the Laver; but then we our selves first should be washed in the
Sea of Christ's blood: salted with salt, Mark 9. 49. And therefore we had need
have the salt of wisdom and grace, of integrity and incorruption in our selves;
be our selves savoury if ever we would season them.

And therefore on the contrary, as our Savior in that place elegantly
expresses it (...), the Salt is unsalted. The Minister is not himself, if
become either insipid or insulse.

Insipid, having no savor of grace, his spirit in regard of any spiritual life
dry, arid. But is there any taste in such a white of an Egg?

Especially if withal insulse and of an unsavory spirit, qui crapulam olet,
that smells strong of vomit, and drunkenness, and uncleanness, as some did of
old, Isai. 28. 8. and such filth is not swept wholly out of the house of God to
this day. But I spare your ears in not nameing that, with which too many
pollute both themselves and all beholders eyes. If Constantine in that Council
would cover such filth with his robe. I may well in this Synod with silence;
and only add with Bernard speaking of the great multitudes of scandalous Clerks
in his time, aliuding to that Isai. 9. 3. Multiplicasti gentem, sed non
magnificasti laetitiam, Lord Jesus, by multitudes of such thy retinue is
increased, but thy Name is no way magnified, nor thy people seasoned, because
they have not salt in themselves, which was the first part of their duty, but
not all.

2. For in that they are the salt of the earth, it is required that they should
have so much savor in themselves, as whereby they may season others. (And
therefore Chrysostom very fitly observes that the graces, which in the
foregoing part of the Chapter he commends to his Disciples, were such as were
of common use, by which not only we are good, but are means to make others
better: Gods Deputies, and in this like him, in being good and doing good,
Psalm. 119. 68.) Oil, not only in the Vessel, but so as to shine forth in the
Lamp to others; Water, not only in the Cistern or Well, but so as to pour forth
Rivers in the streets, as Theophylact rightly paraphraseth this expression,
when he says, a Minister (that must be the salt of the earth,) must be (...).
as Paul speaks in another case, 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18. not only rich themselves, but
so as to be rich in good works, (...) ready to distribute, willing and able to
communicate: Not only Men, but Fathers to beget others to God after their own
likeness: not only living stones, but Builders to edify and build up others a
spiritual house to God: Pipes not to keep the water they receive from the
fountain in themselves, but to convey it to empty Cisterns: Light in the next
verse, not only bright in it self, but so as to make others see: Salt in this,
ut sals^ intus sint, and etiam alios saliant, as Calvin expresses it, to be as
savoury themselves, so to season their people. And this two ways, both in life
and doctrine; both should be edifying, both seasoning.

And here now for both, viz. Wherein Christ means that Morali exemplo and
Doctrina. Albertus Magn. Doctrinis puritate, vitae integritate Calv. Doctrina
crudiendo morum bonitate aedificando. Maldonat.
we should be like salt. When he calls us the salt of the earth, we must not
think he means in the worse sense, that as salt makes the earth barren, so they
should their hearers; which yet too many do. Its (sure) in some good effect and
property of salt in which he makes the com^arison; and now for it we must not
have reference to what Poets in their fancies, or Phiologists in their
Hieroglyphics, or Philosophers in their disputes, or Physicians in their
receipts, or what some Divines in their Friar-like allusions will suggest, that
salt in its whiteness commends to us the candor that should be in Ministers;
or because its made the emblem of Hospitality and Love, that therefore they
should be loving and hospitable; it durable, and therefore they constant; it
obvious, which every one has use of, the poor as well as the rich, and that
therefore Ministers should be equally facile and loving to all, yea to spend
themselves for their peoples good, as the salt does it self on the meat it
seasons, and almost a score more of such like applications, which you shall
meet with in some Postillers and other Interpreters: which playing with
Allegories is only the froth of wanton wits and vain hearts, the mispense of
time, and too often the leading of us quite away from the true meaning and
understanding of most precious Scriptures, which, like some windows, yield less
light for such vain paintings. This be sure of, that Christ here, in calling
his Ministers the salt of the earth here, did not mean all that which deep
Philosophers or learned Physicians Pliny l. 3. c. 9.
can say salt is good for, or Poets, or Critics could resemble salt by: but
what plain Fishermen could understand, and what in ordinary use salt was
commonly known to be put to, and that is to the seasoning of things salted with
it, and that is his plain meaning, that they in their life and doctrine should
be, God therein as it were sprinkling the whole earth and body of mankind,
which was in it self a most unsavory lump, with salt, to season it with his
saving knowledge and grace, and thereby to make it savoury and pleasing to
himself and his holy Angels and to whoever else savoured the things of God. So
Bucer, and after him Brugensis plainly and simply and genuinely, and (I
conceive) Hierom. Gregory. Hom. 17. in Evang. Calvin.
for the main, fully. But yet because this salt will not so season sinners,
unless it withal do something, which both goes before, accompanies, and
follows it, I think I shall not either stretch the Allegory, or strain my
Text, if I take Christ's meaning to be, that his Disciples are like salt in
these five particulars; in its biteing, healing, cleansing, seasoning,
preserving nature and quality; all which are in a conscionable able Minister's
holy doctrine and life, and take up all from first to last, which in his
dispensations and Ministry he is appointed to, even so to wound, and heal, and
cleanse, and season the hearts of his people, as to preserve them to
immortality.

1. First, salt having in it much heat and acrimony, searches and pierces to
the very midst of the flesh, (and subigit totam massam) and if it meet with a
raw wound, or a putrid sore, bites and makes all smart: (...) Chrysostom.
(...). It Is the proper work of salt, to bite and cause smart; and so Coelius
observes out of Plutarch, that sal and lens erant Romany inter (...), that
salt and lentiles were accounted as the bread of sorrow among the Romans.

Which is the very first bread, which the Minister as the Steward of God's
house, breaks to his people, whether by preaching the Arguunt peccata, and
ostendunt veros cultus Dei. Melanch. Doctrina and increpatio. Zuinglius. Certe
oportet doctrinam ver^tatis, quae totius mundi praesentissima est medicina,
mordere, adurere, etc. Brentius. Lex mordicat and sua mordicatione conservat
homines a putredine peccati and mortis. Pareus.
Law, which more harshly frets, or the Gospel, which more sweetly wounds; but
both are salt, that searches to the very quick, and pierces to the very
heart, quovis gladio ancipiti, sharper than any two-edged sword; and such
swords wound both ways, and often are wielded with both hands, and therefore
wound deeper, and yet not so deep as the Word of God: that other sword may be
to the dividing asunder of joints and marrow: but this of the Word, only of the
soul and Spirit to be (...), Heb. 4. 12. to sit as Judge and Critic in the
inward tribunal of the heart, and to take cognizance of all priviest matters
there. This is salt indeed that searches far, pricks some at the very heart
more kindly, Act. 2. 37. and cuts others to the heart, and makes them rage more
desperately, Acts 7. 54. And no wonder, seeing it was salt that was applied
animis crudis to raw flesh, in the one place besmeared with the blood of the
Prophets, and in the other yet reeking with the blood of Christ: And
accordingly whilst the Word, like spiritual Doctrine, is spiritually delivered
(for Spirit passes, where flesh sticks) our sins and Christ's sufferings,
the doctrine of Faith and Repentance, of self-denial and mortification, of
cutting off right hands and plucking out of right eyes (Mark 9. 43, to 49.) is
plainly and powerfully preached, and people told that they must be salted with
such unpleasing salt to flesh and blood here, or else be salted with fire,
namely with unquenchable flames hereafter, verse. 49. This, this is salt, and in
preaching this, Ministers Veritas amara ^st carni. Zuinglius.
are salt, and good salt too, verse. 50. as here also in the Text they are so
called, when called to express Poverty of spirit, Mourning, Meekness and such
other graces in the former verses. Which kind of doctrine is indeed as fretting
salt to proud flesh, invisa putrescenti mundo, as Musculus expresses it.

And therefore no wonder, as Chrysostom observes, nor should we be discouraged,
if in our Ministry we find the World fret, whilst our Word smarts; it is a sign
that it meets with raw corrupt flesh, and that it is good Salt: So that at once
their corruption and the integrity of our Ministry are discovered together;
(for if the Flesh be whole, though you sprinkle Salt on it, yet it smarts not)
as Chemnitius rightly observes, that our Savior having made mention of
Revilings and Persecutions, which they were likely to meet with, in the two
foregoing Verses, Mox subjicit quasi causam, presently adds in this, You are
the Salt of the Earth, as the Cause or Occasion of it.

And therefore on the contrary, for this first Particular, the Salt has lost
his savor, when the Preacher in his Ministrations,

1. Is wholly insipid, so flat and dilute, without the least (...), or
Acrimony, or Spirit, or Strength, that it is altogether Inscitia vel inertia
insulsi. Cartw.
not only toothless, but also to any right Palate wholly savourless: The Iron so
blunt as it will not enter though it strike often, unless it had more strength.
Such kind of frequent Teachers Plutarch compares (...) Praecept moral. page 836.
(...), to such as snuff the Lamp often, but put no Oil to it. In such, according
to the expression of the Text, the Salt (...) without a Trope, properly and
simply Sal infatuatus est, the Salt is become foolish, as the Word signifies,
in such Zech. 11. 15.
foolish Shepherds handling of it.

2. When he is too affected in preaching vain Froth of carnal ^loquence, humane
Learning, Postillers Conceits, Philosophers b^^e Morality, or the Schoolmens
Divinity, who use to make Aristotle's Ethics their Bible: But, Nomen hoc
Philosophorum daemonia non fugat, said Tertullian, this name of Philosophers
Apologet. cap. 46. In them sales, but not this sal. (...): Chrysostom.
dispossesseth not Devils, nor will any such Philosophizing season Souls. The
Apostles, that were the Salt of the Earth (Paul tells us) took another course
in their Preaching, to season it.

3. When he is too base. When for fear or favor, profit or preferment he will
claw and not bite, flatter, and daub with untempered Mortar, and with them,
Isa. 30. 10. only speak placentia. But what is to adulterate, nay, to abjure
the nature of Salt, if this be not? As Sugar is called the Indian Salt in
Rhodiginus, which is indeed Color Sal, but Sapore Mel, as Stenchius says:
Salt only in Color, but Honey in taste; and yet Sugar more like Salt, (for
both cleanse) than these corrupt and corrupting Ministers, like this Salt the
Text speaks of. Sal insulsum est, qui principatum amat, and qui increpare non
audet, says Jerome. He is unsavory Salt, who, that he may have his better In
Marc. 9.
Fee, will apply Lenients to proud flesh, which calls for a C^rrosive. Such
Trencher-Salts are too often found in Kings Courts, and great Men's Houses. But
God (in the Text) cast them out of his, as most unsavory. Salt, if it were
good, should make even an Emperor's cut-finger smart. Objurga montes, and
corripe colles, Contend with the Mountains, and let the highest Hills hear thy
Voice, was given in charge to the Prophets, Mic. 6. 1. And the Apostles this
Salt of the Earth (in the Text) took the like course to season it, (...), not
by clawing and flattering, but by pulling down of strong holds, and bringing
every proud thought into Captivity, to the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10. 4,
5.

4. I might add, when either too negligently careless, or cruelly pitiful, or
sinfully indulgent; as Eli in his gentle breath, Do no more so my Sons, 1 Samuel
2. 23. Which was a sprinkling not of Salt, but of Sugar, a casting Oil rather
than Water on the flame. When we are ashamed to make sinners blush; and swoon
our selves, when we should make others bleed, Crudelis haec misericordia, this
is cruel pity, which will rather let such rot, than make them smart, save the
Salt, and not save the Soul.

A fault which is more ordinary, than the contrary extreme of Ostendit rarius
in excessu peccare, in defectu saepius, insipidos potius quam nimis acres ut
plurmum. Part 3. dub.
too much Tartness, (as Learned Spanhemius judiciously observes) because our
Savior speaks only of the Salts wanting saltness, Mark 9. 50. Yet because in
the excess of sharpness and harshness all may, and some too often do offend;
know we, that as Salt bites and smarts, so

2. It cures and heals; which was the second Particular of the resemblance;
namely, that as Salt after heals what before it made smart, (as we often see in
a cut-finger) it having (...), Theophylact in Marc. 9.
a restringent quality, whereby it makes the wide-gaping Lips of the bleeding
Wound close, and so it heals:

So also a Minister, especially of the Gospel, in this should indeed be like
Salt, never to make any Wound, but with desire and endeavor to heal it; and
therefore, as the Proverb wills that we should, Salem and oleum emere, buy Oil
as well as Salt: And Physicians in their use, are wont to join the one with the
other: And as Pliny shows, how Salt is helped with sweet Water; lib. 31. cap.
7.
So such a temper, a Scribe rightly instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven, should
aim at; that his word may be not more like Salt to pierce and bite a corrupt
Sore, than like Oil to sink into and supple a wounded Conscience: Or, to keep
to the comparison of the Text, not more like Salt for smarting, than for
healing and binding up bleeding Wounds. What unmeasurable abundance of this
suppling Oil was poured upon our Savior in his Ministry, to bind up broken
hearts, Isa. 61. 1.? Which like that good Samaritan, he poured into our deadly
Wounds, Luke 10. 34. And how would he have Salt and Peace, joined in his
Disciples Ministrations together, Mark 9. 50.? which some froward ones would
ever keep asunder. How did Peter ply those with Lenients, whose hearts he had
pricked, Acts 2. 37. with 38. 39.? And how shall you observe (with Austin) Paul
in his Epistles, In Psalm. 101. 6, 7.
joining Paternam authoritatem, and maternum affectum, to a Father's authority
over stubborn wantons, the tenderest bowels of a Mothers pity? Thus when we
have this (...), healing Tongue, Prove. 15. 4. We are indeed as God's Mouth,
Jer. 15. 19. This, this is to be right Salt indeed, not more to prick with a
sense of sin, than to refresh and heal with application of mercy; as Pliny
says of Sal Terentinus, that Physicians most esteemed of it; of which he
withal says, that it was Suavissimus omnium atque candidissimus, of all the
whitest and sweetest. Oh how truly medicinal is this Oxymel, this (...), this
candor and sweetness in this Ministerial Salt, far hereby exceeding the best of
all the natural? For Ille carnem ligat, hic conscientiam; That heals the wounds
of the Flesh, this binds up the bleeding wounds of the Soul.

And therefore here again the Salt has lost his savor, when the Minister in
his Dispensations is,

1. Pitilesly careless: Lets the poor man bleed to death, whilst with the
Priest and Levite, he passes by on the other side, Luke 10. 31, 32. or with
the chief Priests and Elders, puts off a deadly wounded Judas with a (...),
What is that to us? Look thou to it, Mat. 27. 4. Sure, if we will not, for
certain God will look to it one day, and mean while he is Pastor stultus, a
foolish Shepherd, that heals not the broken, Zech. 11. 15, 16. And it is Sal
infatuatus, unsavory Salt, that takes no more care of binding up broken hearts.

2. Passionately froward and furious, when the Spirit is sour and all Vinegar:
Only galling and fretting Sermons, Satyrs and Invectives at all times; but, if
offended, Thunderclaps: With those Sons of Thunder, will fetch Fire from
Heaven at every affront, Luke 9. 54. our Savior tells such, that they knew not
what spirit they were of, ver. 55. Not Elias's, as they pretended, much less of
the Spirit of the Gospel, which came down in the form of a gall-less Dove, and
would have those Ministers, on whom it sits, instruct with meekness, even
Gainsayers, 2 Timothy 2. 25. The wrath of Man here never working the
Righteousness of God, James 1. 20. Ever inflaming the Wound rather than healing
it, and so sprinkling on it not Salt, but Poison.

3. Especially if he fret and gall sound Flesh most: As the guise of some is to
inveigh against the soundest Hearts bitterliest, Making the hearts of the
Righteous sad, whom God would not have grieved, Ezekiel. 13. 22. This is
Carnificinam, non Medicinam exercere. That which thus frets the whole skin, I
must again say, is not Salt but Poison.

3. Salt, that it may thus heal, cleanses; being of an abstersive nature.
Mordet quidem sal, sed purgat, says Brentius, and so keeps from putrefaction;
partly by its heat, and dryness, and acrimony, attenuating and spending
superfluous Humors, and Spanhemius. (...).
so, Pliny says, cures Dropsies; and partly by consolidating the flesh, that
it lie not open to corrupting Air: Therefore the newborn Infant used to be
salted, Ezekiel. 16. 4. And Jericho's corrupt Waters, by casting in of Salt,
though miraculously, yet so as in a natural way (as Vallesius Sacra Philosoph.
c. 34.
shows) were healed, 2 Kings 2. 20, 21.

And so it is with our Salt also. No savoury Ministry ever either wounds in the
Doctrine of Humiliation, or heals in the Doctrine of Justification and
Adoption, but cleanses too in the Doctrine of Mortification; wounds and
cleanses with the Threat of the Law; whilst he tells us, if we live after the
flesh, we shall die, Romans 8. 13. And withal, heals and purges by the sweet
Promises of the Gospel; whilst he makes this inference, that if we have such
Promises, of being Sons and Daughters of the Lord Almighty, we should cleanse
our selves from all filthiness, 2 Cor. 6. 18. with Chap. 7. 1. as not being
fitting, that those, which must sit on the Throne, should be grovelling on the
Dunghill. Thus it eats out the very Core of the Plague Sore, the inwardest
lust of the heart, the original spawn and fomes and first taint of Nature, will
have the Spirit savoury, words seasoned with salt, Coll. 4. 6. cuts off the
unclean foreskin both of heart and lip. In this sense like salt, and that with
a blessing makes the earth barren, Sale sapientiae compescit in terra humanae
carnis luxum seculi aut faeditatem vitiorum germinare Bid. Ministerium ex
faetidis sapidos reddit. Cartw. Vt vel scelera caveat vel exedat. Zuingl.
Though Chrysostom seems to deny this (in locum) but his meaning is, that their
sprinkling of this salt would not do it without Christ, for that (...).
whilst it kills the sinful weeds of our natures and hearts, as Bede observes:
nay herein far above all salt, for it only prevents putrefaction, and does not
recover it; flesh already tainted will take no salt. But this Diviner Salt with
Gods blessing recovers the most corrupt of all flesh; a Manasseh, a Mary
Magdalene, the bloodiest Murderer, the horridest Blasphemer, the uncleanest
Drunkard and Lecher, that has given himself over to all lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness, so filthy as you would be ready to say,
let him be filthy still, and for ever. But yet, as the Proverb uses to say, in
such a desperate case sale perunctus hic adjuvabitur. Nor does Lactantius
despair of that, but that there is enough in this salt to make such a lazer
sound. Da mihi iracundum, etc. Give me whom you will, though as mad and
furious, as though he were possessed with a Devil, I Will tame him with a word;
though as filthy, as if possessed with an unclean spirit, when Exorcists
superstitious salt will do him no good, I Will with this other salt cleanse him.
What admirable cures might this salt work, if it did not lose its savor? By
this Gregory (who might well be surnamed Thaumaturgus) Bishop of Neo-Caesarea
coming thither finding but seventeen Christians, dying left but seventeen
Infidels. What other salt prevents, this cures, and then after prevents the
like corruption (...) Chrysostom.
that in such seasoned flesh, or spirits rather, such worms may never breed
that will never die.

And therefore here again the salt has lost his savor, when in matter of
Doctrine and Carriage putredinem non impedit, sed provocat, it does not hinder,
but rather provoke corruption in both.

1. Suffers worms and vermin to breed in Doctrine, and lets it be corrupted;
in Manners, and lets it be winked at, has lost that acrimony of salt, that
energy of the Spirit, (as Beza expounds it) which might oppose against such
corruptions. Such the Scripture calls dumb Dogs that cannot bark, Isa. 56. 10.
not salt, or sure such as has lost its saltness, for else it would not endure
such taint and rottenness. Although in nature they say salt Plut. Symp. l. 1.
q. 9.
water does not wash so well as sweet, yet in a way of grace and a gracious
Ministry, we see where it comes, it is very abstersive and cleansing.

2. Especially if they be such as breed vermin in both, whilst they sinfully
corrupt both; the savoury Doctrine of God's Truth with Errors and Heresies,
which they broach or maintain; and the holy Way of God with ungodly practices
which they countenance and justify; there being never such abominable Heresies
and Doctrines of Devils, which they had not Chaplains enough to propugne; nor any
so desperate and loathsome practices, which have wanted some Clergymen to
defend them; Korah, Rebellion; The Pope, King-killing; his Valentia Idolatry;
acutely to distinguish and to affirm that some Idolatries are not abominable,
because the Apostle gives that Epithet of abominable indeed to them all; and
his Cardinal, even Sodomy it self, which at least his Humanity might have
blushed at, when his Scarlet could not. How often do some pipe to their great
Master's dance, and their song is an unison to others lusts, that they may glut
themselves therewith with more mirth and security. But if this be to be
cleansing salt, I know not what is to be poison.

4. But in the fourth place (and that which I said our Savior Facit ne cibi in
ventriculo corrumpantur prius quam concoquantur, and ventriculi calorem
excitat. Chemn. Cartw. (...). Plut. Probl. 1. Cibos insipidos reddit gratos and
nutritios. Pa^eus.
chiefly intends) Salt has a special seasoning quality, whereby as it prevents
corruption (it prevents ill savor to the smell); so it makes meats so seasoned
savoury to the taste, and more wholesome to the whole body, as he expresses it
(...), and therefore by Plutarch called (...), the Sauce of all our food, and
of all the pleasingest, by Humanists called even (...) [Col. 4. 6.] quasi
quarta gratiarum; and which therefore the Egyptian Priests, that were severe in
their Asketicks, abstained from; so that for our use of it, what light is to
color, that Salt is to savor, neither without either delightful. Plut.
Sympos. lib. 4. cap. 4. nay not only so, but as Jotham in his parable said of
Oil, that by it they honor both God and Man, Judge. 9. 9. And so Conditura
incensi appellationem habet a sale, Exodus 30. 35. (Chemnit.) so salt by Plato
in his Timaeus is called (...), Deo amicum corpus; so pleasing to God, as that
no sacrifice without salt to him was savoury, Levit. 2. 13. from whence (the
Devil being God's Ape) amongst the Heathens it grew into custom, that nulla
sacra conficiuntur sine mola falsa, that Salt was always in their Sacrifices
also, lib. 31. cap. 7.
as Pliny witnesses.

And the like good office the Ministers of the Gospel do or Sicut sale
condiuntur omnia cibaria: ita discretione praelatorum debent dirigi and
ordinariomnia opera subditorum. Lyra. Parum salis, etc. mundum insipidum,
Deoque ingratum, etc. Evangelica. Doctrina and vitae Doctrinae consentaneoe,
vigore Deo gratum and jucundum reddere. Brugens.
should do in their Ministrations: for in Ezekiel's Evangelical Temple, I find
the Priests sprinkling salt on their Sacrifices, Ezekiel. 43. 24. implying, that
we now are as well to season our Sacrifices, as they did theirs; as Gregory
expresses it, si sal sumus, condire mentes fidelium debemus. If we be Salt,
then, although in our public Ministry or private converse we come to such a
people or company so loathsomly unsavory and profane, as that God's soul
abominates, or so sinfully lukewarm, as that he is ready to vomit out of his
mouth; yet we should endeavor so to besprinkle them with this blessed
seasoning, that they may learn to savor the things of God, and be themselves
savoury and well-pleasing to God in Christ. How much flesh does a little salt
season? and how many many souls before rotting away in their sins with Gods
blessing might an holy savoury Ministry (if we were indeed godly and withal
prudent and diligent) so alter and change, that they may be as so many
meat offerings and drink offerings unto God, which he might relish and take
pleasure in? ut non sapiant modo sed and in deliciis habeantur, whilst in his
Doctrine and Practice he commends to them, yea and works them to Faith, by
which they In public Ministry.
please God, Heb. 11. 6. brings them to Jesus Christ, in whom God is
well-pleased, and with them in him; to obedience, prayer, alms-deeds and works
of mercy and the like, which the Scripture holds forth to be such sacrifices,
in which God is well-pleased, Romans 12. 1. Heb. 13. 16.

And withal, whilst in his private Converse, Conference and In private Converse.
Carriage, he is ever sprinkling of this Salt where ever he comes. I blush at
our negligence in this kind, when I read in Plato's Apology, how Socrates
bestirred himself, and what pains he took to work upon the People of Athens:
And in Peter Martyr, making mention of his seventeen days being at Bucer's
House, Me ab illa mensa vel sanctiorem discessisse vel doctiorem. Epist. ad.
and how savoury he was in his Carriage, and what seasoning he found at his
Table; from which he professes, he every time rose up either more Learned or
Godly. Such Salt in Doctrine and Carriage in public and private Ministers
should be, which may make those they preach to, and converse with, pleasing to
God, and acceptable to Men; even such as may minister Grace to hearers, and
beholders, Ephesians. 4. 29. Col. 4. 6. Cajetan adds, and extends this wholesome
seasoning of the Minister's Word and Doctrine, to Omnia appetibilia terrae;
that they are the Salt of the Earth, by their Word seasoning and making all the
blessings of Vt proles, voluptas, divitiae, etc. indigent condimento vestro ut
sint salubria.
the Earth, Posterity, Prosperity, Estate, Health and Pleasure it self, all
wholesome and comfortable.

The contrary unsavouriness, in a former particular I quickly passed by, and
therefore here now stop my Nose at, and only say; that in this kind (...), the
Salt has lost its saltness: It Is not it self, when though unsavory it self,
yet it seasons not others: But that (...), it is become most loathsome, and
quite contrary to it self; whilst Ministers are not only corrupt, but
Corrupters, of such an unsavory spirit themselves, as that they infect the air
where they breath; and so make the Disease contagious and Epidemical.

5. Lastly, Salt by the former healing, cleansing, seasoning, Salitio siquidem
utrumque habet officium and servandi and condiendi. Cajetan.
has a preserving quality, so that things may be kept as well in saltest
Brine, as sweetest Sugar. And this is another respect (Plutarch thinks) why
Homer called it (...), Divine, from its long lasting: as also why it is made
Symbolum amicitiae, which should last always, Heb. 13. 1. and why in
Scripture Phrase a Covenant of Salt is put for an everlasting Covenant, Numb.
18. 19. 2 Chronicles. 13. 5.

Sure I am such a Covenant of Salt, such an everlasting Covenant Sic verbum
Apostolicum, pactum amicitiae perpetuo duraturum. Spanhem.
of Grace and Love it was, which Christ's Apostles then preached, and his
Ministers yet dispense; in which their care and duty is so to wound, and heal,
and cleanse, and season, as to preserve their Peoples Souls to immortality; So
at first to humble them, and then to comfort them, and then so to cleanse them
from the corruption of sin, and to season them with the sweet savor of Gods
Grace, that they may carry them on in a way of perseverance to everlasting
Glory; so at first to espouse them, as that at last they may present them as a
chaste Virgin unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Sal ad diuturnitatem, Ministerium ad
immortalitatem: Salt makes things last; the Word and Ministry of it, our Grace
and Peace everlasting.

That Salt therefore is herein unsavory, that has indeed lost its savor, for
Life or Doctrine is not himself what he was, and so neither is the one like to
the other: That Ecebolius may well cast himself down at the Threshold, and say,
Calcate me insipidum salem, O tread on me as so much unsavory Salt, when
proved an Apostate. So a Minister, not only when he Apostatizeth himself, but
also when he preaches such Doctrine, as either will admit, or does maintain
Apostasy. If but Morality, it will admit of it; and if Arminian novelty, it
will justify it. Neither of which savours of that Pactum salis, the
everlasting Covenant of Grace, which keeps the Elect of God (...), Ephesians. 6.
24. in sincerity unto Immortality.

Now in all these respects, we should labor to be as the Salt of the Earth,
which was the first part of the Text; and take heed of losing our savor in the
contrary particulars, which was the second: For else, O nos omnium miserrimos!
For how heavy a sentence is denounced against such in the third: Wherewith
shall it be salted? Most useless and unprofitable: It Is thence-forward good for
nothing, most rejectaneous and dispicable, but to be cast out and trodden under
foot of Men. Quod omen avertat Deus per Jesum Christum unicum nostrum
salvatorem.

Amen. Amen.
SERMON XXVI.
ISA. 32. 1, 2. First Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Lincoln, March 16.
1634. Mr. Norton being Sheriff, Justice Hutton, and Crook, Judges.
Behold, a King shall Reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall Rule in
Judgment.

And a Man shall be as an hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the
Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great Rock
in a weary Land.


IF the question be, (as once) Whose Image and Superscription is this? The
answer is now, as then: It Is Caesar's. God's and the King's. That the Lord
Christ is here meant, none but a Jew will deny: But whether Christ only, as St.
Hierom, and Procopius, and Junius conceive, or rather Christ under the Type of
Hezekias, or some other godly King, as Thomas, and Hugo, and Deodate, and
Vatablus conjecture, I list not now to dispute. This all conclude on, that of
Christ all is meant most fully. He, that Melchisedeck in the Epistle to the
Hebrews (and Cuneus thinks there was no other in Genesis) who is here De Repub.
Hebraeor. l. 3. c. 3.
the (...), the King that Reigns in Righteousness; yea, and (as the word is)
for the Righteousness of his People. His Apostles and Ministers, those Princes
that are here said to Rule in Judgment. He, He only (says the poor troubled
tossed thirsty weary soul) that is the safe shelter from the Wind, and a Covert
from the Tempest, even as Rivers of Water in a dry place, and the shadow of a
great Rock in a weary Land. And here -- Juvat usque morari. I should (otherwise
than Peter) know what I said, if I should say it were good to be here, to stay
(as it were) on this holy Mountain, and thence to take a view of Christ's Glory
under these Figures, though not in his Transfiguration. But because it is most
likely that it is here spoken in Type of some King, so as from Christ to be a
pattern of all Kings and Governors; our present occasion will rather require
so to consider it; and so we have in the Text these two particulars.

1. A good Magistrate's good Government. Ver. 1. A King shall Reign in
Righteousness, etc. 2. The good Blessing that comes to God's People by it. Such
a Man shall be as an hiding place, etc.
In the former, three Pairs we have in their several subordination, 1. A King,
as Supreme, and Princes under him. 2. The one Reigns, the other Rules. 3. He in
Righteousness, they in Judgment.

In the latter is promised and elegantly expressed a double Blessing to God's
People thereby.

1. Safest Protection from less, yea from greater Evils. He is not only a
Shelter from the Wind, but also a Covert even from the Tempest. 2. Fullest
Refreshments in lesser, yea in greater greatest Languishings and Faintings, as
Rivers of Waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary
Land.
I begin with the first; and thence in the three Pairs may it please you to
note with me three particulars.

1. That it is here promised as a blessing, that there shall be a Reign and Rule
in the World, else what would become of it? No more a (...), but a (...), if no
Governor, or at least Government. Time was when ther^ was no King in Israel,
Judge. 17. 6. and 19. 1. But when there was none to put them to shame, but every
man did that which was right in his own eyes, would you know how crooked and
shameless it was they did then? Read but over those Chapters, and you shall see
what cursing and stealing and cozening, chap. 17. and 18. yea what most
prodigious and unnatural filthiness, and murder upon it, came thereby, chap.
19. And then come home to my Text, and say whether it may not well be here
promised as a blessing to have a Governor, especially and if with him
Government too. Else better under a Nero, than under a Nerva, sub illo nihil,
sub hoc omnia, under the one nothing was lawful, and under the other any thing,
and the last the worst: for they that have so much liberty, that they may do
any thing, will certainly be so licentious as they will do nothing. Away then
first with Anabaptistical Anarchies, which behead Commonwealths, and make them
walk like spirits without heads.

Away secondly with such dangerous Tenants, that in commands of things
otherwise lawful the interposing of a Magistrates Authority is the intercepting
of a Christians liberty. Such leave heads, but no brains in them as able and
fit to direct the body.

Away lastly with all rebellious murmurings against Government and your more
strict Judicatures as too strait a curb. Corrupters of youth in the University
use this Engine first to bring the Tutor with them into distaste, and so they
know the plaster is poisoned, and therefore will do no good. It Is the foot
swelling that often makes it complain of the shoes nipping of it; and its the
headstrong horse that stamps and fomes and bites the bridle, because it reins
him in from running headlong. But how much better for him to be backed by
Authority? Sober and thankful spirits I am sure will acknowledge this a
bl^ssing, that Reign and Rule is promised to be in the world.

2. Especially, which is a farther blessing, when Kings reign and Princes rule.
Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, said noble King
Solomon, Eccles. 10. 17. Such standing high on the top of the Rock with an
Eagles eye can spy farther, than such Batts that see no danger, or want wings
to fly from it. Such the Hebrews call (...) as ingenuous as great, who can
graciously condescend to a generous ingenuity, which Pesants, though lifted up
on their fellow-bores shoulders, cannot rise up unto. The one's honor is
engaged, which he will not have blemished, whilst the other that has no worth
has little to lose by unworthiness. Plutarch observes that the Judges in
Areopagus were (...), of the chief men of the City: and when Valerian was
chosen Censor, the people's vote was, Is de nobis omnibus judicet, qui omnibus
est melior, which they therefore Optimates.
are as happy that have, as they miserable which are without.

Either in such Democraties, in which the common crowd shall bear the sway, and
the confused noise of the ruder rout shall be instead of Imperial Edicts;
Plebiscita instead of Senatus-consulta; and the bellua multorum capitum is head
without brains, whilst every one that is more eminent either for place or worth
must be cast out by their goodly Ostracismes.

Especially if in such Anarchies and Confusions, in which Princes go on foot,
and Pages ride on Hors-back, Eccles. 10. 7. When Robert Ket, a Norfolk Tanner,
will prove a General, and John a See Speed in E^w. 6.
Leyden no less than a King of Munster, and Goodman Krechting and
Knipperdolling his worthy Counselors; when every sorry Mechanic will be a
(...), and not a Suitor under his bulk but can more freely control Prince and
State, and censure their actions, and tell how they should have done better,
than any either dare or can at the Council Table. Yea, friend, but move before
the (...), unless you would fall into quicksands. Aristotle gives it for one
rule of houshold-ordering in his Oeconomicks, that every thing be set and kept
in its place, that at any time you may readily go to it though at midnight. It
will hold and should obtinere in Christian Politics; In which every one
knowing and keeping his own place would either prevent a midnight, or at least
not be in such darkness and confusion; but to know what to do in it, and then
acknowledge, that its a blessing promised, if Kings reign and Princes rule.

But did not the Prophet forget himself think we, that he did not add by the
Pope's license? No. That is a point of new Learning, which this Seer (it may
be) foresaw not: and which our Ancestors here in England (as well as we)
believed not. One of your late deceased Worthies (Honorable Lords) has fully
reported it; and although F. Parsons has labored after his railing manner to
disprove it, yet the answer was well returned to Sir Edward Coke. 5th part of
Reports. 6th part in Prefat.
him, that his was a Writ of Nihil dicit, for this was but a Crutch to hold up
the Pope's Supremacy, which as it was first helped up by Phocas a Traitor to
his Lord, so it has delighted to be maintained by Treason ever since. But
leave we them together by the ears amongst themselves about his direct or
indirect Power in this kind; Bellarmin and other Jesuits holding the latter,
and Carerius Tit. Libri adversus impios Politicos and hujus temporis Haereticos.
calling them no better than Heretics and impious Politicians for it, whilst
he stands for the former. In the mean while (with the Pope's leave) we shall
bless God, that Kings reign and Princes rule without it.

3. Above all, as it is here added as the top of all, if in Righteousness and
Judgment: of which two, Righteousness is that Point or Port, which such Pilots
are bound for, and Judgment is that which stears to it in a right course. For
Righteousness in the Hebrew Text is Justice: and Judgment in Scripture phrase
amongst other things implies Wisdom, Psalm. 119. 66. 1 King. 3. 28. and
Moderation, Jer. 10. 24. Yea so, when Justice is so maintained, that neither
for want of Strength and Wisdom the Bow is too slack on the one side, nor for
want of Moderation over-bent on the other, is a King's Honor, his Princes and
Judges Duty, and the Peoples Happiness that live under them.

1. First then for the Groundwork of all, and the Magistrates Masterpiece,
it is Justice. If Kings reign in Justice, and Princes rule in Judgment: In
Justice, in Judgment. Nay that is not enough to express all that is here said,
its (...) for Justice, and for Judgment, as though to reign and rule were only
for to do Justice. Thus Prove. 8. 16. Kings reigning and Princes decreeing of
Justice are put as terms equivalent; so that fiat justitia is the fundamental
Maxim of State: and they on whom others wait must themselves attend on Justice
(...), Deuteronomy. 16. 20. Justice, Justice shall thou follow or pursue. What!
Justice, Justice! nothing but Justice? yes, Piety and Mercy, Peace and Bounty
too, and yet Justice Justice especially; because Justice is a general Virtue,
as Arostotle has observed.

(...).

In one branch or other of it as communicative, or distributive, it will reach
and command and regulate all: and so it is Piety's bulwark, Mercy's guide,
Bounties storehouse, and the very sinews of Peace; without stirrage of which
Peace it self would corrupt, as still waters without moving, and the Blood in
the Veins without the Spirits in the Arteries moving under them: yea without
which Peace would be no Peace; for it, (if St. Austin rightly defines it) is
Ordinata hominum concordia, an orderly Concord; but when no Justice, there will
be no Concord, or at least not an orderly one, but such a Peace instead of
Concord would beget War, and instead of Order at last would end in Confusions,
according as it was said of them of old, Pacem vocant, and solitudinem faciunt.
And therefore Justice for Peace let every Justice of Peace maintain and execute.

Justice say you! but what then says Justice? Suum cuique, let every one have
his own. That in general; in particular bonis been, malis male. Let them that
do well have well, and let bad men's doom answer their crime, (...), Matthew. 21.
41. Let them be Conjugates, and drink as they brew. Evil will, evil have. It Is
the brief abstract of God's judicial proceedings, Isai. 3. 10, 11. and
therefore should be the Platform of his Deputies. Bonis been. Let the virtuous
be encouraged, at least the innocent acquitted; for it was but Pilat's vaunt to
Christ, Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee? John 9. 10. But
what Pilate! power to crucify him, whom thine own mouth before verse. 6. had
prounced innocent; dum potentiam tuam effers, justitiae laud teipsum privas,
as Brugensis upon the place, that men may know that thou art a great man, thou
carest not to tell them, that thou stickest not at it to prove an unjust Judge:
and much I wis to thy commendation: He that condemns the just is an
abomination to the Lord: for bonis been: and because malis male, he is no
better that justifies the wicked, Prove. 17. 15. In God's Name and fear let men
at least have Justice: and to this end let it be dispensed without, 1. Passion.
2. Corruption. 3. Acceping of persons. 4. Protracting of time.

1. Passion. Else Pilate, whilst he falsely thinks that Christ slights him, will
be ready to take a snuff, and the Sword together, and in a blind rage strike
him, whom he should have with his dearest Blood defended. But Judges do Sedere
pro Tribunali. Judge. 5. 10. Isa. 28. 6. Dan. 7. 26.
That site of sitting on the Judgment Seat puts them in mind of that sedateness
of mind and Passion which should be in them, notwithstanding all Persons or
Causes that come to the Bar. Else Anger will bloodshot the Eye, that it cannot
discern the Cause, and Fear will put a trembling Palsy into the Hand, that it
either cannot hold the Sword, or at least not strike an even stroke with it. To
prevent this in Areopagus their Judicatures were in the night, that they might
not be moved with the Malefactors sad looks and tears; and their Advocates were
commanded to open the Case in plain simple words, without the fucus of either
Gesture or Speech, that it might not be (...) to blind or mislead them with
Passion.

2. Without corruption of Gifts, or Bribes. For else as Passion would bloodshot
the Eye, so a Bribe will be a Pearl in it; both hinder from seeing clearly,
even the clearest Eye, (it blinds the Wise, Exodus 23. 8.) and is too unworthy
for an honest heart: For methinks Philo Judaeus his distinction here comes
home in his Book de Judice. It Is either (...): A Gift is either to carry out a
bad Cause, and that he justly calls (...), altogether wicked and most
abominable; or to help out a good Cause (which too often stands in too much
need of help) and that somewhat too gently he says is, (...), it is half
Unrighteousness. He is (...) a Mungrel, betwixt just and unjust; nay, it is
downright Injustice; and he is absolutely unjust, that makes an honest Man pay
for that which is his own; and Gifts must be the Key, to open that door, which
God and Right would have stand open, as your free Courts, for every honest Man
to come into freely.

3. Without Partiality and Accepting of Persons, which the Word forbids, Prove.
28. 21. the Judge's seat on the Bench denies, as usually sitting in the midst,
to teach him to carry Matters with an indifferent hand; and ancient
Hieroglyphics, condemn, whilst they paint Justice without hands to receive
Bribes, and Eyes to look upon, and accept Persons; as though an Ear and a
Tongue were sufficient; the one indifferently to hear the Cause, and the other
impartially to pronounce Sentence,

First, Whether upon Friends or Foes: For they are conditions, which come not
into Justice's cognizance. Thy Foe, though without thee, may be in the right;
and therefore, if by Christ's Right he cannot have thy Love, yet by his own he
may exact Justice. And then, in public Causes, private respects are not to be
regarded: And in Justice's quarrel, Friends not to be befriended. Chilo in
Gellius, when upon his Deathbed (Good Noct. Attic. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Man, if you believe him) he could find nothing to repent of: At last, he
stumbled on this, that ^^ in a Friends trial, though he would have Justice
done, yet himself being Judge would not be seen in it; which somewhat troubled
him, and not undeservedly; for Justice should be executed without respect of
Friend or Foe.

Secondly, Or Rich or Poor. Pity of the Poor in a bad Cause may seem to have a
show of Piety: But it is not more unusual than unlawful, and therefore expressly
forbidden, Exodus 23. 3. A thing which Philo Judaeus makes almost a wonder of,
that Moses, who had otherwise and elsewhere filled his Books with provision
for the Poor, should there deny them Pity: But he well satisfies himself from
the consideration of the nature of Pity, that it is (...), has an Eye that
looks with Compassion upon Misery, but winks not at Iniquity. And indeed, it is
not just Pity, when Pity of such is Cruelty against Justice. In this case Job
says, he was Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the lame, Chap. 29. 15. but not a
Staff too, to beat their Neighbor with. In this kind your Laws must not be
like Statute-Nets, so wide as to let little Fishes get out: But more care is to
be had, that they be not like Cobwebs, which great Flies will break through.
For we do not so usually lean upon the left Elbow toward weaker Persons and
Clients; and therefore herein there needs less caution: A greater care is to be
taken, that we lean not too much toward the stronger hand. Jupiter in Plato is
brought in complaining of Judicatures in the World, that Men were now judged
with their clothes on: But he would have a time, he said, when he would have
all judged naked. Such a time will our Jehovah have (Beloved) to judge us all in
one day naked. A fit pattern for his Vicegerents now, as much as they may, not
to consider matters invested with the Persons Clothes, that a gay Coat may
carry the Cause, but that the naked Truth may appear, though it be on the
half-naked Beggar's side: and therefore to this purpose it is, that God in
Scripture takes special care of four sorts of weak ones to be upheld in a right
Cause, which of all were most likely to be born down and trodden under foot, the
Poor, Strangers, Widows, and Orphans.

1. The Poor, which often have but poor Help. It Is usually but a cold Suit
that is in Forma Pauperis; and yet God takes order that his Cause shall not be
perverted, Exodus 23. 6. nay, nor neglected neither, though he be but (...) only
an Asker or Desirer, as his Hebrew name signifies; yet if he do but ask for
Justice, though he have nothing to give for it, it is his own, and therefore we
had best let him have it.

2. The Stranger. Alas, he is far from Home, and it may be farther from
Friends, and yet God would not have him further for it from having Justice.
Judge righteously between every Man and his Brother, and the Stranger also that
is with him, Deuteronomy. 1. 16. Even the Stranger, though he cannot have an
Inheritance, a place in thy Kingdom, yet let him have room to come to thy Bar
to call for, and to have Justice.

Thirdly, The poor Widow. She, it may be, is in somewhat a worse case. Her
name in Hebrew, is (...), which betokens Dumbness. Her Husband, who did once
bespeak her, is now wanting to speak for her; and she cannot speak for her
self, at least cannot call (lowdness not becoming that Sex's modesty) yea, but
when she has not a Tongue to speak, God commands his Deputies to have an Ear
to hear the poor Widows sighing for Justice; whilst he pronounces a Curse,
which all the People should say Amen to, against him that perverteth the
Stranger's, and Fatherless, and Widow's Judgment, Deuteronomy. 27. 19.

Fourthly, And it is well that the poor Fatherless Orphan, which every one
forgets, (you hear) is not there forgotten of God, nor would he have him of his
Deputy: Thou shall not pervert the Judgment of the Fatherless, Deuteronomy. 24. 17.
The Hebrew word (...), as some derive it, signifies such an one as is quite
undone, and all whose Friends are quite consumed: And so the Lxx. in a manner
always translate it by (...), an Orphan. (...)
Now Orphanus and Pupillus the Civilians use thus to distinguish, that Pupillus
is one that has lost his Parents, but yet has a Tutor or Guardian left him:
But Orphanus is one that is deprived of all; that has neither Father, nor
Mother, nor Guardian, nor any to stand for him; yet even such a desolate Orphan
God would have the highest Judge to sit for, so that he that is deprived of all,
should not withal be deprived of Justice. And thus every way God would have it
administered without Partiality, or Accepting of Persons.

4. And lastly, Without Delays and Protracting of Causes. For it must not only
be an Executing, but also a Speeding of Justice: For if putting off a poor Man
but a day, the Scripture notes as a defrauding him of his own, Prove. 3. 27, 28.
though only in a matter of Bounty: What then is it in a point of Justice, which
he may more justly challenge as his due? And it may be, of such importance, as
that one Assizes, or Terms, or Days put off may put him quite beside his Right;
or at least his Surgions long and lingering Blood-letting, long Suits, may as
certainly end him, as his Adversaries more sudden and violent Thrust. Praestat
semel cadere quam semper pendere. Many a Man's sad experience (and it may be,
on both sides) tells him it is too true here; it had been better for both of
them at first to have been cast in the Cause, than to have hung so long in the
Suit. But Christ our Judge and King, gives a better President, of whom it is
said, Isa. 16. 5. (...) Judging, and seeking Judgment, and hasting
Righteousness, without delay. But yet not with more haste than good speed; for
he seeks Judgment. And so I am led from the first and chief White that is to be
shot at, and that is Justice to the right Levelling at it, and that is in
Judgment, which among other things contains,

1. Wisdom and Prudence in a through ability and care of a wise considering and
discerning of Persons and Causes; as it was in Solomon in the case of the two
Harlots, when by his (...) and (...), his quick and sharp discerning in that
cause (by the Sword he called for) he did so dexterously cut asunder that knot,
which otherwise could not be well untied: It Is said that all Israel feared the
King, because they saw the Wisdom of God was in him to do Judgment, 1 Kings 3.
28. And therefore indeed a Judge should have judgment, that so a crafty Knave's
packing of Businesses may not shuffle a plain honest Man out of his Right: But
that he may see he is Sub oculo Catonis, and that Justice's Eye neither winketh
nor is blind: For although indeed (as was said) it was wont to be Pictured
without Eyes, it was only to express, that it was blind only for accepting of
Persons: But yet Eagle-eyed, both for care and ability of discerning of both
Persons and Causes. So Prove. 7. 6, 7. wise Solomon stands watching in his
Casement, to see a Fool and a Harlot meet (for Wickedness will be sure to walk
barefaced in the street, if the Magistrate's Casment be shut) and its
Signanter dictum by Nehemiah, Neh. 13. 15. In those days I saw them that
profaned the Sabbath. It was ill that they did it, but well that he saw it, to
take order about it. Dan. 8. 5. It Is spoken of a bad Man, but yet as containing
an emblem of a very good Governor, that the Goat had an Horn betwixt his eyes.
His Horn is his strength, but it is between his eyes to see that he push down
not Men, but Disorders. In a word, as Aristotle told us, that Justice is an
universal Virtue; so we learn from the same Master, that Prudence is the
general guide, (...): And therefore pity that they should not go hand in hand
together, or the one follow the other, and that in Solomon's order; who was the
best Herald, and exactly knew how to rank them, to recive the instruction
first of Wisdom, and then of Justice and Righteousness, Prove. 1. 3. Then
Justice is a good Judge, when Wisdom as the Sheriff, goes before him to the
Bench. It Is the Wild-fowl that steers its course with its train. Here next
after a good God, and a good Heart, a good Headpiece, must be direction. (...).
So the Lxx translate the the 21 Verse of the same Chapter, Wisdom sits at the
great Man's door. Now happy he, if such a Porter were never from his Gate, to
welcome those that come to him for Justice, that he ever did execute it with
Judgment; that is, first with Wisdom, that Justice might not be blind.

2. With an (...) and moderation that it do not look through P^^sons and Causes
with too keen and sharp an eye, or else we know what summum jus may soon prove:
for Judgment in Scripture Phrase signifies not only severity of wrath, but
also a moderation of it, according to that, O Lord correct me not in anger, but
with judgment, Jer. 10. 24. Such a Judge is God, although absolute Lord over
us, yet his judgment is ever with moderation. He rewards ultra meritum, and
punishes citra delictum. Christ's Scepter is a right Scepter indeed, Psalm. 45.
6. not a Leaden one to bow to every one's humor, and yet not an Iron one,
unless it be to break flinty hearts, Psalm. 2. 9. No, but like Ahasuerus's, a
Golden one, heavy, but healing; and like himself would he have his Deputies,
upright in a golden mediocrity, but if any way (for the general carr^age of
matters) propending rather to the more benign extreme. Even in Areopagus, which
I have often spoken of, and accounted most severe, yet when voices to quit and
to condemn were equal, the accused person ever went away absolved, as indeed in
doubtful cases its better to let a concealed fault go away unpunished, than to
suffer over-veiled innocence to be wronged: and in plain cases its the goodness
of gracious Princes Apud Aegyptios Sacerdos, qui coram populo vota pro Rege
faciebat, illud s^lebat de Rege praedicare ad populi gratiam conciliandam
leviores inflige^e poenas, mejores vero reponere gratias, quam pro delictorum
aut beneficiorum meritis. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1.
to carry the Sword in the left hand, and the Scepter in the right, as more
ready to protect the good than to smite the bad, and them not with a
right-hand-blow, but with a sparing stroke: and therefore are called
Nursing-fathers of God's people, Isa. 49. 23. Cornelius a Lapide expounds the
place of the Spaniards suckling the Indies, Cruel Nurses, when it was with
their own blood, enough to keep them from ever taking the breast of the Church.
But gracious Princes, I say, are Nursing-fathers indeed, that suckle their
people with their own milk; and though sometimes they must take the rod in
hand, yet they give fewer and lighter strokes, than the fault deserves: Forty
stripes may thou give him, and not exceed, that thy Brother may not seem
vile unto thee, was God's command to Judges in those days, Deuteronomy. 25. 3. The
command so strictly observed by the Jews (who were otherwise crabbed enough)
that they always bated one of the forty. Of the Jews five times received I
forty stripes save one, says Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 24. when they made no Conscience
(as too many now adays do not) of abusing a Minister of the Gospel, yet they
would bear show of a conscientious care of the Law, and when so cruel as five
times to scourge an innocent, yet they will be so merciful, as every time to
bate him one of the account: but as the command was superst^tiously observed by
them, so the argument that back's it is to be weighed by all the Judges of
God's people, that thy brother may not seem vile to thee; as poor or bad as he
is, yet he i^ thy brother: and therefore as Pliny to his friend that was too
rigid in his Sons correction memineris and te hominem esse and hominis patrem:
C. Plin. S. Epist. lib. 9. Epist. 12.
thou art but a man that strikest, and he is a man that is stricken, and
therefore a common nature requires a common equity and humanity, especially
seeing he is one that shall with thee stand at the same last Judgment Seat,
where all judgments here shall be judged over again: and then take heed that
just sentence be not then objected, which is already pronounced, James 2. 13.
He shall have judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy. I deny not but
times and cases may be so otherwise irrecoverably corrupt, that the Magistrates
sword must have of necessity a sharp edge on it, to cut off rotten members,
that will endanger the whole body. An Iron Age may call for an Iron Rod, and
malo nodo malus cuneus, a hard knot and as hard a wedge must meet sometime and
in some particular case.

But in general course of proceeding (Honorable and Reverend) I hope God will
be your guide. It was his infinite Wisdom in redeeming us guilty Malefactors to
find out a way wherein strictest Justice and tenderest Mercy might meet and
kiss, Psalm. 85. 10. At your best you will fall short of your Copy, but I
persuade my self that you will do your best to write after it, that so in his
Sacred Majesty's Reign and by your Judicatures this Text may more and more be
fulfilled, a King shall reign in Righteousness, and his Princes shall rule in
Judgment.

And therefore for Application, what a mercy in this kind we Thankfulness.
Ephraim and Manasses Brethren, (that is, plenty begetting forgetfulness) we
should all (as we have cause) acknowledge with thankfulness. I confess although
the Sun goes on in a steady even course, yet the resemblance of it in the
waters seems as much to waver as they do. Multitudes in Scripture Phrase are
Waters, Rev. 17. 15. and yours and other Governors actions and judicatures,
though steady and even, may appear crooked, as a straight staff in the waters,
whilst refracted and perverted in their tumultuous apprehensions: but its your
comfort that been facere and male audire Regium est, to do well and hear ill is
no less than a Royalty. And mean while for my part as long as I consider, how
in other Countries, and now Aceldama's fields of blood, there is it may be no
Magistrate, but an Enemy, and no Law, but Martial, and withal cast mine eye
homeward, and see Justice in our Kingdom ride circuit, and Judges in this
respect prove feet to the lame in coming as it were to their doors, who it may
be could not go out in long journeys to seek for Justice, let ever, what is here
God's promise, be matter of my praise; that as Christ our King does reign in
Righteousness, so Princes and Judges as his Deputies do rule in Judgment.

And in this (Honorable Lords) for the continuance of all E^hortation. Qui
monet ut facias, etc.
commend you in commending to you that, which you are commended and honored
for, Justice guided by Wisdom and sweetened by Mercy (...) Phil. Judaeus ubi
prius.
(...) as he speaks, that from you as from main Streams under our highest
Wellhead such sweet streams of Justice and Equity may flow, as may be for the
refreshing of all that thirst after Righteousness.

Many things I might commend it to you for, and urge it with.

1. A just God, for whom you judge, and by whom your selves must be judged one
day.

2. A gracious Prince, whose person here you represent; so that what violence
is now done to you, his Laws make as Treason against himself. Those Laws that
honor you, I know will be honored by you, nor will you profane his chair, who
in some respect has made you sacred.

3. The worth of Justice and your own benefit by it, a Grace that makes you
like God, and a Virtue, as universal in it self, so has this peculiar to it,
that whereas some other Virtues are distasted by many, this has universal
approbation from all, though most unjust themselves. Every man will kiss his
lips that gives a right answer, Prove. 24. 26. The Scripture makes it your
Diadem, Job 29. 14. Isa. 11. 5.
Robe, Girdle; and so tells you that it is comely, safe, honorable. Your
businesses and distractions cannot but be many, and it may be often tumultuous;
but as Aristotle made Pleasure Virtues, page, so the Conscience of your
steering point blank on Justice through the most troublesome Seas and Tempests
will be as the pleasant air of a sweet Instrument, that sounds well even after
it has been well handled. This for your comfort; and for your safety, it is
wrapped up in the public weal, as particulars are in generals: and therefore
sometimes it is the safest way to lay up our treasure in the common Townhouse,
nor to think that ours will stand, whilst our Injustice ruins others, unless a
man could in wisdom hope, that his house would be safe, when he has set on
fire all his neighbors about him. Thus self-love may plead for another's
right, but yours are more generous and public Spirits. Nor did Pacatus
mistake, when in his Panegyric of Theodosius he expresses his thoughts thus:
Nullam majorem crediderim esse Principum felicitatem, quam fecisse felicem,
Princes and great men's happiness is to make others happy; and this is done by a
wise and moderate executing of Justice, which leads me directly to the second
part of the Text in the second Verse, which, had I time to handle, I should
from those comparisons and expressions show you.

1. What an universal blessing a just Judge and a right Justice of Peace is to
a Commonwealth and State, (...) as he calls him, a common Benefactor. Such are
Abimelech's Patres Patriae, such careful Fathers and Patriots as every way
provide for the peoples safety and welfare. If they stand in a sore blast they
are (...), ut tectum adversus ventum, as a Roof to cover them; if in a storm at
Sea, or in danger of an inundation, they are (...) ut portus adversus
tempistatem, an H^^ven to harbor them; if ^ain^ing with inward thirst, (...)
ut rivus adversus sitim, as full Rivers of waters sully to cool them, or with
outward drought, (...) ut umbra adversus aestum, as the shadow of a great rock
in a weary land to refreth them. The greater the person the greater the shade.
If a Supr^me Monarch, as our Gracious King; he a great rock, under whose shade
we all sit down in Peace: but every Judge and Justice, especially if chief, yea
under officers, Pleaders, Clerks, Jurors, etc. according to their several
places, may be greater or less hills, whose shelter and shade the innocent lamb
may ly in. For although I have spoken all this while to Magistrates and Judges,
yet it was not to spare or neglect inferior Officers, but only in hope that
the great wheels going right would make all the less move accordingly. For you
inferior Officers and Countrymen must not be like the lesser and inferior
Orb^, which, though carried about with the motion of the Primum mobile, yet
have a sly contrary motion of their own. No, you are but as hands and feet,
which must work and go according as the head directs: you cannot be exempted
from this charge of Righteousness and Justice in your pleadings, writings,
verdicts, oaths, testimonies, if your betters cannot plead immunity, but even
Kings must reign in righteousness and Princes rule in judgment, and so prove a
general universal good, which may help at every hand. Which is the first thing
observable from these comparisons.

2. The second expresses what protection they are, in lesser and greater
dangers, to whole States and Kingdoms never so overflowen with misery and
mischief, as long as a stream of Justice runs in a strong and clear current: as
Fens and low grounds not drowned, if their out falls keep right and open; in
particular to bad ones, in stopping up and cutting off their wickedness, which
would else drown them; to good ones, in defending them against their unjust
oppressions, who else would overrun them. Thus an hiding place from the wind,
yea coverts from most viol^nt tempests may you be, First in regard of safest
protection, especially to many a poor man now blasted with the wind of a great
man's breath, and quite born down the stream by him, who has wind and tide for
him; and secondly in regard of that full refreshment, which you may be to them
that thirst after Justice, and are quite wearied out with long suites, you will
indeed prove as rivers of waters in a dry place, and the shade of a great rock
in a weary land. Thus from the Text you may observe, such a Judge is an
universal blessing to others; and that oftentimes though with inconveniency to
himself, the Vine loses of his sweetness, and the Olive of his fatness, that
is for their own advantage, it being spent on others, when they come to rule:
this they lose, and what get they? what the Buckler gets; strokes it self, to
keep the body safe. Agreeable to the comparison in the Text, the Roof of the
house stands in the Blast, to keep him safe that sits under it. The bank
endures the Waves fierce beating, to keep the Land from drowning: the River
spends of its water to quench the thirsty Traveller's thirst, and the rock
intercepts the Suns heat, that he may sit in the shadow of it. Thus is it with
a good Magistrate omnium somnos illius vigilia defendit, he wakes that we may
sleep, his Head is filled with cares that ours may be quiet, and his Heart
sometimes with fears that ours may be more confident. Nehemiah's, a good
Governor, example in this kind is remarkable, Chap. 6. 14, 15. and justifies
An a good Common-wealths-man's answer to him that found fault with him for
neglecting his own occasions, (...), But I (said he) take care of my Country.

Thus (Honorable Lords) you have seen not so much your Duty, as your Honor and
Happiness, your being just in making us happy. And therefore, for close, what
was said of Eliakim, Isa. 22. 20, 21, 22, etc. let me apply to you, and
conclude; You are our Eliakims, as he under their Hezekiah, so you under ours,
whom God and our King have Clothed with the Robe, and strengthened with the
Girdle, have committed the Judicature to your hand, and appointed for Fathers
to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the House of Judah, ver. 21. The Lord
still fasten you as a Nail in a sure place, (as ver. 23.) that, as it there
follows, we may still and still, ever safely hang upon you, not only all the
glory of your Fathers Houses, but also our Offspring and Issue, all Vessels of
small quantity, from the Vessels of Cups even to all the Vessels of Flagons;
that the poor Man may come and hang his little Cup upon you in his petty
matters, and the great Man may come and hang his Flagon, his greater Cause;
whether lesser or greater Matters, yet all may hang safely on you, whilst
fastened as Nails in a sure place; settled in your places, but more settled in
a course of Justice, judging and ruling in Righteousness, and Wisdom, and
Moderation, and so prove a Hiding Place from the Wind, and Covert from the
Tempest, etc. meant of Christ fully, as I said at first. And therefore what I
say now at last, is with all humility, as becomes my place, and yet with all
assurance of your Faithfulness in regard of yours, to desire and hope that what
you would now, and at the last day have Christ to be to you, you will still
please to continue to be to God's and the King's People. The Wind may blow, and
Floods may come and beat against your Houses, and greatest Princes strongest
and highest Palaces, and therefore you and they may then especially stand in
great need of a Covert, and Hiding Place in Christ. Inward and Spiritual thirst
and drought may betide those, that water others with clear streams of Justice.
Sure, at the last day, when the whole World will be on fire, then those (...),
cooling days, or days of refreshment, Acts 3. 19. A River, a Shade, then would
be welcome. Christ both now is, and then, and ever will be, all this to his;
and therefore (I said) what you would desire him to be to you then, I promise
my self you will continue to be to his People. The Lord grant in Christ, for
his Mercies sake, that still long and long our gracious King may reign in
Righteousness, and his Princes, and Counselors, and Judges, may rule in
Judgment; that He above them, and they under Him, may be as an Hiding Place
from the Wind, and a Covert from the storm, as Rivers of water in a dry place,
and as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Even so Amen, Lord Jesus our
everlasting Melchisedech.

SERMON XXVII.
ISA. 32. 1, 2. II Sermon at Boston before Mr. Kirk and other Courtiers.
Behold, a King shall Reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall Rule in
Judgment.

And a Man shall be as an hiding place from the Wind, and a covert from the
Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great Rock
in a weary Land.


ANd so we dispatched the Text as a Platform of other Kings and Princes in
Hezekiah's Type; but behold a greater than Hezekiah, yea, than Solomon is here,
the Lord Jesus Christ, our Melchisedek, the King of our righteousness and
peace; and so in this second brief view of the words, as principally meant of
him, we have,

First, Christ's righteous Reign and Government, ver. 1. He, that King, who
Reigns in Righteousness, and his Apostles and Ministers, those Princes that
rule in Judgment. Of which point, because I have dilated on Psalm. 45. 6. on
those words, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter; therefore I here
now wholly forbear, and only take a short view of the second part, namely of
the blessed and peaceable fruits of his Government, ver. 2. That God-Man
(whatever Hezekiah, or best King is, yet He) above all, is an Hiding Place from
the wind, and a Covert from the storm, Rivers of waters, etc. From which we may
observe briefly,

I. What Christ is to us, and therein see his All Sufficiency. II. What that
cost him, from whence we may more fully descry his Love.
1. He is no less than (...), Col. 3. 11. All, and to all, and so an
All-sufficient both protection to his People, in the two first comparisons, A
hiding place from the Wind, and a Covert from the storm. And refreshment in the
two latter, Rivers of waters in a dry place, and the shadow of a great Rock in
a weary Land.

But that we may as it were more distinctly spell this blessed Truth, take it
asunder into these four, 1. That he is able and ready to help, when greatest
Evils fall on us. 2. Nay, when all meet in us. 3. And yet then be a full help.
4. Most proper for our Malady, and most seasonable for Time and Occasion. Which
all put together make up this full word of Comfort: That when greatest Evils
befall us, and all evils do round about beset us, yet then Christ protects and
refreshes most fully and seasonably.

1. When greatest Evils befall us: For our blessed Eliakim, is such a Nail so
fastened in a sure place, that we may not only hang on him Cups, but Flagons,
Isa. 22. 23, 24. not only our lesser sins and miseries; but if we have but an
hand of working Faith, to hang the greatest and heaviest in both kinds our
Burdens, Psalm. 55. 22. our burdens, though so heavy, as otherwise would sink
our Bodies into the Grave, and our Souls into Hell; yet of him it is said, that
not only Morbos nostros pertulit, that he has born our lesser Griefs, but also
Dolores nostros bajulavit, (...), he has carried the heaviest Burden of our
Sorrows, as the word signifies. Nor does this first particular weigh down the
weight of the words in the Text. (...) here holds out the most blustering
Wind, from which yet he hides us; and (...) the most violent Storm and Stream,
from which yet he covers us. The dry place argues extremity of Thirst, which
has with it acutest Pain: Which yet these Rivers quench and ease. And this
weary Land implies the more weary sweltred Traveller, which yet this Rock
shades and cools. Oh for ever therefore on his Thigh let that Name of his be
written, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev. 19. 16. The greatest Lord and
King, who cures the Grief of our griefs, and Sorrow of sorrows, even our
greatest Sins and Miseries, who eases us when the heaviest fall on us.

2. Nay, when all round about beset and encompass us, (...), all joy when we
fall round about into diverse, into all Temptations, James 1. 2. when Rains
fall, and Floods come, and Winds blow.

Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis
Africus --
and all beat upon the House, yet this Rock upholds it, Mat. 7. 25. When Heaven
frowns, and Hell gapes, when the Earth trembles, and the Sea roars, even then
Christ is (...), All in all of Comforts in a nothing but Misery: Yea, when at
last day, the Elements shall pass away with fervent heat, and the 2 Pet. 3. 10.
Earth and all the Works in it shall be burnt up. A poor Believer, that then
shall have Christ in his Arms, may say, Here Is my All: And whilst he stands on
the Embers of the burnt World, clap his hands over his Head, and say, I thank
God I have lost nothing. This is the second particular. In all our Evils,
Christ is all our Comfort, a Panacea, a Catholicon, for all Diseases; and which
still the Text, without stretching, reaches to, holding out Him as our general
Remedy in all, both kinds and measures of our Malady: Not only a Hiding Place
from the Wind, but also a Covert from the Storm. There Is refuge from lesser and
greater Evils for degree: Not only for a shelter from the Wind, and a Covert
from the Storm, which may be applied to the Afflictions of the outward Man, but
also Rivers of water, and a great shady Rock: Which holds out all sweetest
refreshing, against the most languishing Thirstings and Faintings of the inward
Man: So that in all both kinds and degrees, what they say he spent a whole
night, we may not unprofitably spend our whole lives in, saying, and making it
good when we have said it, Christus meus, and omnia, My Christ, my All. It was
he, that, when asked by Moses what his Name was, answered, I am, Exodus 3. 14.
and added no more to tell you what he was, as leaving that to you, to add what
your desires or wants would make him, that are fit to be fulfilled, or stand in
need to be relived. I am: But say you, What? Even whatever you want, or
whatever in a right way you would have. Is it Grace? Why, I am that. Is it
Peace? And I am that too. Is it outward Comfort and Refreshment? I am more than
that also. Here not so much Money, as Christ, that answers all things,
Eccles. 10. 19. as Christ that answers all things, who is an Hiding Place
from the Wind, and a Covert from the Storm, Rivers of waters, etc. Better than
Ctesias his River, which he calls (...). Some of our Rivers we know, named and
praised for thirty sorts of Fish: But these Rivers in the Text are such, as
bring in all The Trent.
sorts of Comfort.

3. Yea, and full Tides of them too: For that is the third particular. In
greatest Evils, in all, Christ is a full and perfect Defense and Refreshment:
For it is of his Fullness that we have all received, John 1. 16. that his Gift
may be like Himself, both full and Perfect, James 1. 17. Which the Comparisons
here fully hold out: For whilst in the first, called an Hiding Place from the
wind, he is compared to a strong and warm Roof and House, which is Sarta Tecta,
In which the Man sits fully safe and still, amidst all the most whisking and
blustering Winds, that make such a puffing about him, and as it were so hid in
it, that (...) a (...) o^cultavit.
the VVind cannot find him out, or blow his least Candle or Comfort out: And
when in the second, called a Covert from the storm, or Sea-Tempest, he therein
is compared to some House or Receptacle in an high Rock in the Sea, which
highest Tides or Storms reach not; How fiercely does such an one hear the Waves
beat, and the Sea roar about him, and yet he in Latibulo, in his secure Hold?
how quiet does he sit and sleep as in greatest Calms? The third Comparison yet
more full, when called Rivers of waters in a dry place. One River would argue
fullness, and a constant Current too, according to that, Isa. 48. 18. Then thy
Peace had been as the River: But when it is here added Rivers in the plural
Number, it expresses the overflowing Bounty and Grace of Christ, that his
Church need not fear Drought; when like Eden, it has four Rivers to water it.
And the last Comparison as strong as any when called, the Shadow of a great
Rock in a weary Land: In which a threefold Emphasis.

First, A Shadow: How fully contentful to the swelted Traveller or Labourer,
who therefore gapes after it? Job 7. 2. But it may be like a shadow of some
slender Tree, which the Light and Heat gets through, and is wavering it self,
and so its shade more unconstant. No: But

Secondly, Of a Rock, most firm and spiss it self, and therefore its shadow
more opake and cooling. But it may be the Rock is but li^^e, and therefore the
shadow of it cannot be great. And therefore, although it may refresh the
Traveller for a little time, whilst he is in it, and near it; but so as he is
soon out of it, and then never the better for it. No; and therefore it is added,

Thirdly, That it is the shadow of a great Rock, so great as will reach the
weary Traveller afar off, and in which it may be he may with much refreshment
walk a great part of his way, and it may be, all his day-long. Now such a Rock
is our Savior, and such and so great is the comfortable shade of his
Protection and Love, that it will reach a weary Traveller to Heaven, even when
a great way off, in the very shadow of Death, and in the comfortable
Refrigerium whereof he may walk all his way, and all his day-long: Unless he
will run out of it to play the Wanton in Sin, or the World's Sunshine. A
fourth Emphasis there is, that it is a Shade of a Rock, of a great Rock, and
that in a weary Land. But that most properly belongs to

Fourthly, The fourth particular, That, As Christ's Protection and Refreshment
is full, so it is fit and proper: A Remedy fitted for the Malady, and an Help
suited to the Opportunity and Exigence: Like the Manna of old, which, they say,
fitted every Palate. He is the Shadow of a great Rock, and that in a weary Land,
where it is most welcome. Rivers of waters, but withal in a dry Place, where
most needful. An Hiding Place, but from the VVind, which else would overthrow,
and a Covert, but from the Storm, which else would overflow all. Christ so
setting off the Beauty of his Grace with a graceful Foil, and so dispensing his
Mercies that they may not only be great, but also fit and seasonable; and so
thereby he doubles his Praise, and their Comfort by it. Whilst the Apple of
Gold is in a Picture of Silver: Whilst the former and later Rain is sent down
in their seasons: When the Hungry are fed, and the Naked clothed: Not as Men's
favors sometimes, which, because not laid right on, pinch the Back and prove
Burdens; like a Roof in fair weather, and a Shade in VVinter, when the
Sunshine would do better: But the dry Place here is the poor Soul, and the
weary Land is the heavy laden Sinner, weary of Sin and Sorrow, and thirsting
and groaning after Peace and Righteousness; who could best tell you how welcome
the Rivers of water would be to the chased Heart, Psalm. 42. 1. and the Shadow to
the poor laboring Creature, that even Job 7. 2.
pants and gapes after it. Now such a (...), such an All-sufficient H^lp and
Comfort is our dear Savior, who, when greatest evils befall us, and all evils
fall round about us, is even then bringing in fullest and seasonablest
supplies, is an Hiding Place from the Wind, and a Covert from the Storm, as
Rivers of waters in a dry place; and as the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary
Land. And hereby we have seen his All Sufficiency by what he is to us.

2. In the second place we from a second view of the words are to descry his
Love by what this cost him, an enduring of that himself, from which he freed
us. The Roof takes upon it the Wind, and the Bank the Stream, and the Rock the
Sun's scorching; that the Man may be shrouded, the Land preserved, the poor
Traveller shaded. Even thus did our dear Savior interpose himself betwixt us
and his Fathers wrath, in his own body to take that thrust, which else would
for ever have sped us; the right Paschal Lamb himself scorched and roasted in
the fire for the People of God to feast with; who for our sakes became poor,
that by his Poverty we may be made rich, 2 Cor. 8, 9. a faithful Surety indeed,
who makes himself liable to the Debt, and paid it, that we may be discharged of
it, arraigned, that we might be dismissed, there silent, that we might have
something to plead, condemned, that we might be acquitted; that Lamb of God,
John 1. 29. (...). Which word and phrase will indifferently signify the taking
away the sin of the world by himself bearing the punishment of it; for so
indeed by bearing our griefs he he has carried away our sorrows, Isa. 53. 4.
the chastisement of our peace being on him, so that by his stripes we are
healed, verse. 5. In what a blustering Storm of God's wrath should we have been,
blown away by it as Chaff before the Wind, if Christ had not taken it upon him
to shelter us; and how had we thirsted and fainted quite away if the scorching
heat of his Fathers wrath had not lighted on him, and Rivers and Streams of his
Blood had not sweetly flowen from him to have revived and refreshed us? Our
Cure in his Wounds, our Healing in his Stripes, our Life in his Death; even he
thirsts and dies that in our greatest heats and Joh. 19. 28, 29, 30.
straits we might not thirst, but live eternally. So that however our Life and
Peace came to us by free gift, yet he paid dear for it, whilst he became as
the hiding place from the rain, and covert from the storm; as rivers of waters
in a dry place, and the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

And thus from the words, by what he is and has done to us, we have seen his
Alsufficiency, and by what it cost him we have descried his Bounty and Love.

For Application, let the consideration of the first

Call upon us not to rest, till we have gotten sure interest in him, as the
only all-sufficient means and Author of our comfort overflowing Deluge of his
wrath: which is the reason why, Isa. 28. 16. comes in so between the 15, and
17. verses. Though they think, that they have banked it out so high and so
strong, that the over flowing scourge should not pass over to them, verse. 15.
yet, unless God lay in Zion this precious tried Foundation-stone, (verse. 16.)
the truth is, they are but lies that they have made their refuge, and its but
falsehood, under which they have hid themselves: and the Hail will sweep away
such a refuge, and the waters will overflow such a hiding place, verse. 17. For
Christ only is the Covert from the storm. If the streams of his blood quench
not our thirst, the rich man's best wines and choicest drinks will not prevent
his tongue's scorchings in Hell, and out of the shadow of his wings the best
other skreens will end but in the shadow of death in Hell's gloomy Vault,
shading, but not cooling, dark and hot, where the fire burns, but shines not;
and therefore to a Christian with the holy Martyr, None but Christ, None but
Christ; because indeed none but Christ can do all that has been showed in the
former particulars he does. Some may be a means of comfort and help from evils,
but not from greatest: Others from some of the greatest, but not from all; or
if from all, yet never fully, or not always seasonably. The Bed will be too
short, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 28. 20. for a man to stretch his whole
length on, and the Covering too scant to wrap himself all over round about
with; when Lion and Fox-skin both sewed together will not perfectly secure, the
Lamb's blood will. I have seen an end to all other perfections, says the
Psalmist, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119. 96. and his
promises in Christ as broad; in length reaching to all our times, and in
breadth to cover all our wants, and therefore, as St. Austin sweetly, in finem
In Psalm. 55.
cum audis, etc. When thou hear to the end, do thou intend Christ, who is
not only the way, but also the end too; so that quicquid est ubi infra
steteris, antequam ad Christum pervenias, nil tibi aliud Sermo Divinus dicit,
nisi accede, etc. Although in thy pursuit thou should have overtaken all
comforts beside, and as yet fallest short of Christ, God has nothing to say to
thee else, but in finem still up and seek, thou art not yet come to thy rest;
nor as yet lighted on that receipt that will fully and properly heal and help
all even thy greatest Maladies. Now therefore again up and seek; and that where
he may be seen in Providence, Ordinances, in Word, Sacraments; and although
thy case be ill, afflicted and tossed with tempests, scorched with heat, and
spent with thirst, yet leave not seeking, till there you find him to be all
this in the Text, even an hiding place from the wind. So first, as such, seek
him.

As such when found, trust and rest and glory in him, and improve him. Thou
may then cry aloud thy (...), I have found him whom my soul loves; and
that, as these comparisons express it, every way happily, for Christ was born
in Bethlehem Ephrata, Mic. 5. 2. The first word whereof signifies an house of
bread, and the other fruitfulness. There Is therefore no starving or pining
there. In thy Fathers house there is bread enough, yea and physic enough too
for every disease, as St. Ambrose fully on Psalm. 119. 57. those words, Portio
mea Domine, O Lord thou art my portion. And indeed a naked Christ is Portion
enough besides all other Bequests and Legacies. To this purpose it is worth the
marking, that Psalm. 81. 8. God seems to make way to speak of some great matter,
which he would with greedy attention have listened to; Hearken, O my people, and
I will testify, O Israel, if thou will hearken unto me, as though some great
promise were to follow, and so there does: but what is it? see verse. 9, 10.
That there shall be no strange God amongst them besides him, as though he by
himself were all-sufficient enough, and Abraham's exceeding great reward
without them. So happy every way thou art, if thou have him: but more happy, if
every way we could improve him: for, as God would have none of our parts and
abilities lie idle; so neither would he have any thing in him, that we have
interest in, not improved. And therefore seeing Christ and Godliness are
profitable for all things, we should in greater and lesser wants and evils
improve Christ and have recourse to him, that even to us and in our particular,
whether inward or outward blusterings and thirstings and faintings we may find
him as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the storm, that thy
thirsty soul may find him rivers of waters in that dry place, and thy tired-out
spirit, the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

This the Application of what Christ is to us.

For that other, what it cost him.

First, see thy sin in the sufferings of thy Savior: what he did Tua O gulosa
gula, etc. as he says. Drunkard, it was thy sugared cup that made Christ drink
Gall and Vinegar. Proud haughty one, it was thy pride, that hung thy Savior
between thieves: thy gayness, proud Peacock, that crowned him with thorns. It
was the wantonness of thy flesh, that pierced thy Savior's with nails, and
tore it with whips; and therefore when thou see thy Savior's blood arise in
his wounds, let thine in an holy blush arise in thy face, and say, all this
blast and storm, which the roof endured, and all that scorching heat, which the
rock is beaten upon with, was procured by my sins, and had not Christ
interposed, had certainly lighted on my person, and therefore I Will first loath
both.

But secondly, the more love him, yea more than our selves, saying with
Ignatius (...), In Christ as my sins so my love was crucified; and by way of
thankfulness though it never be a requital, I Will interpose my dearest right hand
to save my Head from wounding. The servant shall willingly put his own body
between his Master and the thrust, to save his dishonor, who by so doing has
himself saved his soul, even by being an hiding place from the wind, a covert
from the storm, rivers of waters in a dry place, the shadow of a great rock in
a weary land.

Tibi Domine Jesu.
SERMON XXVIII.
JOHN 5. 14. At St. Paul's, December. 27. 1646.
Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art
made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.


THe prudent Physician's care is not only perfectly to Medicinae parts duae
(...).
cure the present disease, but withal to prevent an after-relapse, which
otherwise might prove more dangerous: and accordingly the Lord Jesus, our
Phoebus Medicus, the Son of righteousness, that has healing in his wings, in
the beginning of the Chapter comes as a loving Physician to the Pool of
Bethesda, as to a public Hospital of impotent diseased people, verse. 2. and of
all the multitude he most graciously visits one that had most need of pity and
help; whose disease Interpreters Dulcis medicus in viset Nosocomium and prae
caeteris maxim laborantem.
conceive was most dangerous, and for time grown Chronical; the Text says of
thirty eight years continuance, verse. 5. (drooping Christian die not of
despair, for thou shall not of thy disease though never so desperate, if Christ
undertake the cure, for) him he healed, verse. 7, 8. for his body: and so much
was wrought on his soul, that from Bethesda's Porch, v. 2. he was now got to
the Temple in the Text, most likely to return thanks to God Vt mos erat, Luc.
18. 10. Act. 3. 1, 8. Grotius.
for his recovery: but his Savior was not as yet savingly made known to him.
And therefore, to perfect the cure in healing his soul, and to prevent a
relapse of both soul and body into a worse malady, he casts about there the
second time to meet him, and after his cure prescribes him a Diet, this Recipe,
Behold thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

In which words two things are implied, and two things enjoined: The first
thing implied in these words, (...), sin no more, was, that after his recovery
without better care taken he was in danger to sin again. The second, this;
that, if he did revolt to his former sin, he was in eminent danger to relapse
into a worse malady, in these words (...), etc. lest a worse thing come unto
thee.

Whereupon the two things prescribed and enjoined (and the first a means of the
second) are, 1. A serious consideration of the Mercy he had received in those
words, (...), Behold, thou art made whole. 2. A studious care that he would
avoid the like sin, if he would not incur a greater danger, in those words,
(...), Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. Like as the Angel
charged Lot, now gotten out of Sodom, to fly for his life, and not look back,
lest Vengeance should overtake him, Genesis 19. 17. Or as if the Physician before
spoken of should say thus to his Patient, whose wantonness or other disorder
had brought him into some dangerous disease, which yet through his skill and
care and pains were now cured: Friend, let this fair escape be a fair warning to
you, that you never play the like wanton, lest you come to be in a worse case,
and then meet not with so easy a Cure; but it may prove to be utterly
incurable.

The two things implied will afford two Observations; and the two other
enjoined will fitly serve for a double Application.

And the first Note from the first thing implied is this: That sin again, as
before, if not worse than ever: For you may be assured that our Savior's
Caveat was no idle word. Sin no more to this recovered sinner was a Watch word,
that spoke his danger of a new Surprise: An Item, that told him, that, if he
looked not to it, he was likely to run into a further Arrear, even after his
old Debt was paid, and he had a new Stock to set up with: And to this purpose
observe in this Instance these three particulars.

First, That Christ contents not himself with his first healing Visit: But
sees that he had need of a second meeting with, to prevent an after-clap. As
the Apostles, whom they at first converted, they after visited and confirmed,
Acts 14. 21, 22. and 15. 32. and 36. 41.

Secondly, And this after-meeting and second dose of Spiritual Physic he gave
him in the Temple, though he were then (it is likely) in a good mind, and
hopefully in a good way.

Thirdly, And this Item and advice (sin no more) beset on both sides with very
forcible Arguments, to make it more effectual. Before it you have Beneficium
acceptum; he is put in mind of the Benefit received, to make his Ingenuity
blush: Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more. After it is set Futurum
judicium, a worse mischief that is likely to follow upon his second miscarriage,
that so he might tremble and fear, and do no more so presumptuously. Sin not,
lest a worse thing come unto thee.

All which three hold forth thus much to us.

1. That after Christ has in mercy visited us, we have need that a second time
he should meet with us. As Manoah after the first message by the Angel, that he
should have a Child, desired that he might come again the second time, and tell
them how they should order it, Judge. 13. 8, 12. After we are raised up, and set
on our Legs, we have need to be taught, how we should walk to prevent an
after-stumble, Psalm. 40. 2. After a (...) of a (...), after a Cordial to
recover from a former Qualm, an Antidote to fortify us against an after-Poyson.

2. And this before we distemper our selves after our Recovery, when in a most
hopeful way to a perfect Cure. Christ after our most comfortable up-risings
need again visit us further, to instruct and direct us, though he find us in
the Temple, though in never so good a temper and posture.

3. And then he had need deal more seriously with us, as here, by representing
both the Mercies we have received, and the return of Judgments, which upon
fresh miscarriages we may fear, on every side to keep us in; and all this,
because (as we have it in the Doctrine) we are then very subject to break out:
When God has tied us with thickest Cords of Love, then most petulantly to
break asunder all Bonds of Obedience. Thus not only Pharaoh upon every respite
grows more hard; and Tire after seventy years Captivity, returns to her former
Hire, Isa. 23. 17. as though they had been delivered only to do all
abominations, Jer. 7. 10. The Madman unbound, that he might be free to do the
more Mischief. But even Jacob's Sons, when reconciled to their Brother, are in
danger to fall out among themselves, Genesis 45. 24. Lot, when snatched as a brand
out of Sodom's burning, then scorcht with unnatural flames, Genesis 19. David,
when at ease, plays the wanton, 2 Samuel 11. Vzziah, when become strong, grows
stiff, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. And Hezekiah, when miraculously recovered (and some
think of the Plague) that swelling being down, his Heart begins to swell, he
grows Proud, and rendered not according to the Benefit done unto him, 2 Chronicles.
32. 25. The story of Israel both under their Judges and Kings at large shows,
what a backsliding People they were, how ready then most to forget their Duty,
when God had remembered them in Mercy, and as soon as ever delivered from their
Enemies Tyranny, to relapse into their former Idolatry: After they had rest,
they did evil again before thee, says Nehemiah, Chap. 9. 28. No sooner got out
of Egypt, and through the Sea, but they fall a murmuring, and tempting, and
going a Whoring from God in the Wilderness: When brought back afterward from
Babylon, if not what returning to Idolatry, yet what closing with Idolaters?
What strange Marriages, what grasping of the World, and robbing of God, what
building of their own Houses and neglecting of God's, did the Prophets that
then lived, complain of? And after all this is come upon us, seeing that thou
our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve, and have given us
such a deliverance as this: Should we again break thy Commandments? Says
blushing Ezra, Chap. 9. 13, 14. That question says they should not, but
implies they did. And after Christ; though for a time in those best Times,
when the Churches had rest, they were edified, and walking in the fear of the
Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied, Acts 9. 31. yet
afterward when in Constantine's time Persecution ceased, then Superstition,
and Ambition, and Covetousness increased; the Voice from Heaven then cried,
Venenum in Ecclesiam: When the Enemy left off to wound from without, the old
Serpent began to poison within, which proved more dangerous.

In this Case:

1. Former sins are wont to be relapsed into. What this Man's sin in the Text
was, is not certain; but though thirty eight years before committed, yet our
Savior's Caveat to him intimates, might long after be returned to, with the
Dog to his vomit before cast up, and the Sow when washed, to her wallowing
again in the mire. After one fit of the Gout and Stone, the Man is very subject
to be sick again of the same Disease; as Israel upon every new deliverance to
their old Idolatry; the River damm'd up for a time, but, as soon as it has its
free course, returns to its former Channel. It Is the besotted Drunkard's Catch,
When I shall awake, I will seek it yet again, Prove. 23. 35. As bad Ground,
when well manured, brings forth the same Weeds, but more rank than formerly,
and it may be some new ones beside. For,

2. So secondly, as old sins are usually returned to, so oft-times new ones are
de novo fallen into. Nadab and Abihu, when newly put into their Office offer
strange fire, Lev. 10. 1. upon new Mercies new sins instead of new ways.
Israel, when but now delivered from Egypt, begins to worship strange Gods,
which their fathers knew not, Jer. 19. 4. new Gods, Judge. 5. 8. And Judah, when
newly returned from Captivity, fall a marrying strange wives, Ezra 10. 2. When
David's at rest from his wonted enemies, then a stranger comes, with whom he
was not before acquainted, 2 Samuel 12. 4. And when the Christian Church was rid
of Heathenish Persecutors their old bad Neighbors, then Superstition and
Idolatry crowd in, who before were strangers. Never are we more in danger of
being foiled with a renewed charge or a new onset, than when we are ready to
cry Victoria. To prevent which, God's care of our safety is very observable in
these two particulars in Scripture.

1. That when he intends a perfect Rescue, to his delivering Mercy he joins
guiding Mercy; his preventing and following Grace keep company. Thy
rigteousness shall go before thee, and Psalm. 40. 2.
the glory of the Lord shall be thy Reward. He both leads the Van, and brings
up the Rear, Isa. 58. 8. v. 10. Thy Light shall rise in Obscurity; there the
Prison door is opened and Light is let in: but he had need be led by the hand,
when he is got out, and therefore verse. 11. it is added, and the Lord shall
guide thee continually: answerable to that, 2 Chronicles. 32. 22. The Lord saved
Hezekiah and Jerusalem, and the Lord guided them on every side; and they had
need of it, for verse. 25. when God did but a little leave him the better to
prove him, you know how desperately he stumbled at the first step; and therefore
in all our Deliverances let this be one of our Prayers, Lord as thou have
delivered us, so do not now leave us, but still lead us: as thou have reached
me thy hand to pluck me out of the Snare, so lend me it still to lead me in the
Way: which, when come out of straits, we are in most danger to go astray from;
as a man whilst in a narrow deep Lane cannot so readily go out of his way, but
when got out to a wide Common, As Hos. 2. 6, 7.
where there are many paths which may deceive him, he has most need of a
Guide: Nor have we more need of Deliverance from danger, when we are in it,
than we have of Guidance, when got out of it, which God therefore in mercy
grants, when he means to complete his Mercy.

2. And secondly therefore also is wont not to perfect a Mercy or Deliverance
at the first, nor, it may be, at all in this life, but leaves a Canaanite, when
Israel is in Canaan, an Hadad, a Rezon, and a Jeroboam, whilst Solomon sits
peaceably on his Throne, to allay the heat of the Pot, which else would boil
over. Few such Mornings like that 2 Samuel 23. 4. in which there is no Cloud, or
if so in the morning, yet not usually so all the day, to keep us the better in,
who else would be running out, and playing the wantons in the Sunshine. Christ
was never lost but once in the Crowd, Luke 2. 43. Nor God ever so often as in
the crowds of his Mercy: and therefore something we shall have, that we do not
pine, and yet not all that we would have, that we do not surfeit: Something he
gives to encourage, but still something he withholds, the better to nurture us,
and to force us still to wait upon him; who else (like ill-nurtured children
when they have got all they desire) should be then most like to run away
farthest from him; some Worm in our fairest Apple, and some Blemish in our
greatest Beauty, some bitter in our greatest sweet, to make all medicinal. In
our greatest enjoyments something shall be wanting, or cross to our desires,
which may be as a constant Memento, and really say, sin no more, because else
we shall be then ready to sin more than ever.

For, first, it is not in the nature or power of Affliction (unless Solomon
speaks of a Fool in the Mortar, and Jeremiah of Dross in the Furnace. This
Cripple in the Text, though after thirty eight years weakness he had been
healed by Christ, did not yet know Christ at the first; and some may never; and
then no wonder, if, notwithstanding all, they prove never the better, but much
the worse.

2. For that Corruption, which Affliction does not heal, it does at most but
curb, and when that Curb in a Deliverance is removed, the Corruption is the
more fully and violently manifested and exerted; as Antichrist, when the (...)
was taken away, was more openly discovered, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. And Jo^dan, when
the Preist's feet were once out of it, (and so that Dam as it were broken down)
runs down his Channel more violently than before. In times of danger and
trouble Conscience often proves a Shrew, and will chide, and God's angry, and
we fear will strike. The Angel stands in the way with a drawn Sword to stop us:
and when seen will make a Balaam stand still. Thus then these pricking Thorns
hedge up the way, and a stormy day shuts the door, and keeps us in: but the
next fair blast that opens it, makes the wanton run out with the more
eagerness. As the hunger-starved Man with his food, the longer he was before
kept from it, the more greedily he now falls to it; as much as he pined before,
he surfeits now: as they are wont to say of Sailers, that they are not more
calm in a Storm, than they storm in a Calm, or when got to Shore.

3. As in this case the Affliction was but a Curb; so the Deliverance and Mercy
proves a Snare, adds Fuel to that Flame, which the former rainy day quenched,
or at least kept down, strengthen's the recovered man's Lust, which Sickness
weakened, affords matter for the rich man's Pride, which his Poverty humbled,
entertains the Wanton and Worlding with other company, whom Straits and Dangers
for that time enforced to seek after God, and made him glad of his
acquaintance. As in Bloodletting, upon the return of the Blood we are then
most ready to faint; I wish that after our Bloodshed, upon the return of
Mercies our former Reformation, that seemed to have some life in it, do not
quite die away, and that Ephraim and Manasseh do not continue Brothers still;
the one's Name signifies Plenty or Fruitfulness, and the other's
Forgetfulness; that in the plenty of restored Mercies we did not forget our
Misery, and our selves and our God altogether. The Lord make good that Promise
Job 5. 24. to us, that when being kept long from home, we may visit our
Tabernacles, and not sin; to which we are very subject. The sick man has not
need of more care and wariness in the depth of his sickness, than of a fair and
safe up-rising out of his sickbed upon his recovery; as nothing more easy in
that case, than to fall into a Relapse, so nothing is more dangerous. Nothing
more easy; There you have this first point, that after healing Mercy we are
subject to return to our former Sins. And in that I said, nothing more
dangerous, we have the second.

That, if upon such Deliverance we do fall back into Sin, we shall Sin no more,
says our Savior, lest a worse thing come unto thee: he says lest it do, but
he thereby implies, and it is his meaning, if thou do, for certain it will.
A Relapse into a bodily Disease after a Recovery uses not to be more
dangerous, than a Backsliding into Sin after a Deliverance often proves
desperate. After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and seeing that
thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have given
us such a deliverance as this; should we again break thy Commandments? would
thou not be angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there should be
no remnant nor escaping? says Ezra 9. 13, 14. As if he had said, if after such
misery to drive us, and such mercy to draw us, we break now with God, Actum,
conclamatum est, we are broken wholly and irrecoverably: the House so on fire,
that it cannot be saved, the Consumption so far gone that it cannot be cured.
It Is the breaking of the Bone, that was newly set after a former breaking, and
that is more dangerous; a new Wound in an old one, and that is hardly cured; like
that Plague of Leprosy broken out of the Boil, which made the Person wholly
unclean in the Law, Lev. 13. 20. Or like the Man in the Gospel, into whom the
unclean spirit after dispossession makes re-entry with seven other spirits
worse than himself; and so his last state proves worse than the first, Matthew.
12. 45. and that place speaks us every way worse, if we prove not better, after
we have been so well dealt with. Worse in point of punishment; and that,
because worse in point of sin.

1. In regard of punishment, (...), says the Text there: his last state worse
than his first, and yet the first bad and sad enough, when he was possessed
with a devil: and (...), a worse thing here (in the Text) a worse Disease or
Mischief is Chemnitius.
coming upon thee, though that, he was now Cured of, had been for nature very
grievous, and for thirty eight years continuance very tedious. The instances of
Jerusalem, the Eastern Churches and others fully make out this, That no people
or persons have been sadder spectacles of Judgment, than they that have been
Mirrors of Mercy and Deliverance when abused; not more eminent in the one, than
remarkable for the other: as the Psalmist. says, that wicked men spring and
flourish, that they may be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92. 7. And as God told
Pharaoh, that for this very cause he had delivered and raised him up, that upon
his Obstinacy he might show his Power in his heavier Downfall, Exodus 9. 16.
Upon our unworthy carriage after mercies:

1. At best we lose a great deal of the Comfort of them. Then we may indeed and
without check delight in Gods great goodness, Neh. 9. 25. when we serve him in
it, verse. 35. but we mingle our Wine with Water, nay put so much Aloes into our
sweetest Cup, as we add Sin to God's sweeter Mercies. It Is pity we should have
Comfort in them, when God from us has Dishonor by them: and, were there
nothing else, if there be any ingenuity De facto.
in us, we cannot but have less joy in the enjoyment of them, when we cannot
but with Ezra chap. 9. 6. blush as often as we think of our abuse of them. As a
Parent oft-times is not so much joyed as ashamed of a sweet Child if ill
nurtured; or as it was with the People of Israel, 2 Samuel 19. 2, 3. of whom it is
said, that in the day of their Triumph they stole away, as people ashamed use
to steal away when they flee in Battle, so that the Victory that day was turne^
unto Mourning, because they heard say the King was grieved for his Son.
Whatsoever or how great soever the Mercy or Deliverance is, we have lost the
Comfort of it, when God by our sins has lost the Honor of it.

There Is more to be ashamed of, than to be rejoiced in, and the greater the
occasion was of joy, the more matter there is of shame and grief. How can the
Child heartily rejoice in the abused favor of his Father, when he hears say
that the King grieves for the undutiful miscarriage of his Son? By miscarriage
after Mercies we make our Candle burn dim, and our Cloud a clear day. We rob
our selves of the comfort of them even in the enjoying of them.

2. Nay, this is the ready way wholly to be deprived of them. If Children would
go to Bed in the dark, let them play the wantons by the Candlelight. This Eli
had, and that he should have had; but because his Sons proved desperate
wantons, God sets a Nonplus on their Heads with an Absit. Be it far from me. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
It Is fitter for them that will know how better to use it: But why should the
Child keep such a Knife in his hand to spoil it, and it may be to kill himself
with it? In this case, Hos. 2. 9. (...) nay, (...) says God: He will take away
his Corn, nay, recover his Wool. The Legatee proves an Usurper, and therefore
Recipiam, Eripiam. God uses with more force and fury, to snatch away such
imprisoned Mercies, when they are abused, and He not acknowledged. And this is
(...) in the Text. It Is worse to loose it, than never to have had it, as coming
from more anger in God, and with greater reproach to us, to be degraded of that
Honor to which he had exalted us, and for God to repent that he had been so
good unto us.

3. And yet worse, because abused Mercies, when they are taken away, are not
wont to go alone, but to take others along with God shoots Case-shot.
them; as the new cloth takes something out of the old garment, and so the rent
is made worse, Mark. 2. 21. If Esau des^^ise his birthright, he shall lose his
Blessing also. If the Gospel of Peace being restored should be slighted, it may
depart and carry away outward Peace with it, as when the Sun in Heaven sets, it
leaves the Earth in night's darkness; and if outward Peace restored should be
abused, it may soon take its flight, and carry Plenty away with it, as Rev. 6.
after the Red Horse of War, that took Peace from the Earth. verse. 4. the Black
Horse of Famine marched after, verse. 5. and the Pale Horse of the Plague trod
on both the other's heels, verse. 8. The Gospel, Peace, Plenty, Health, Life,
all ^^e but as God's Servants sent by him to minister to us, so that in the
abuse of any one of them the Lord of them all is dishonored, and therefore the
same Sin, that calls back one, may make all leave us. When the Gospel must be
gone, because it cannot reform us, we are unworthy that Peace should stay
behind to preserve us, or Plenty to feed us, or any thing to relieve us, but
that all at once may take leave of us; and say, as Jer. 51. 9. We would have
healed Babylon, and she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one
unto his own Country; for her Judgment reaches unto the Heaven, and is lifted
up even unto the Skies: which leads to a fourth particular.

4. And still worse, that upon the removal of abused Mercies, the heaviest of
all contrary Judgments use then to come in their room. It Is Patience abused,
which is then turned into Fury, and then look for those, which the Scripture
calls furious Rebukes, and Ezekiel. 5. 15.
then all sorts of God's sorest Judgments, Famine, Wild Beasts, Plague and
Sword, as you have them in the two following verses, and all this for abuse of
Mercies, as you may see in the 5, 6, 7 Verses of the same Chapter. Look over
all Churches, nay over the whole World, and then say, whether you see not
saddest ruins, where sometimes were stateliest Monuments of God's choicest
Mercies, but, because abused, left as everlasting Monuments of God's severest
Justice with this Text, as it were for an Inscription, written upon them with
Capital letters of Blood, that they that run may read, Sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto thee. But this I have touched upon before, and therefore
do not insist on here, but only add what we all had need sadly think of, that
God's staying of his hand for a time, and intermitting of his strokes is not as
though he had quite thrown away the Rod, and put up his Sword, but only to see
how much we are bettered by former Judgments, and how fit we are with Humility,
Thankfulness and Obedience to entertain and improve begun Mercies, whether what
we have suffered be enough, that so he might inflict no more, which he
earnestly desires and waits for, Jer. 3. 4. But if our distempers and outrages
after all this say no; if not yet ready for the sodering, look for no fastening,
Isa. 41. 7. if not yet kindly melted, and Dross removed, we must into the
Furnace again, and it made seven times hotter. The Physician, after some
Purgative Medicines administered, gives over a little, and stays to see,
whether the peccant Humor be sufficiently evacuated: if no, but it is in a
burry still, he must give more, and then stronger. These lucida intervalla are
but Truces, (not a full Peace) which may break out into a more bloody War, for
which in this interim in that case he is preparing; but an intermission of the
fit of the Fever, which will return with greater violence, as it was with
Pharaoh's intervals, but still succeeded with heavier and heavier Judgments,
which at last ended in his utter Destruction; the Clouds returning after Rain;
as the King of Syria in the end of the year with a greater Force, and God, all
the while that he forbears striking, only lifting up his Hand higher to give
the heavier and deadlier Stroke. Now with what bended knees, and with what
trembling hearts and hands need we receive the returns of Mercies from that
God, who is glorious in Holiness, and fearful in Praises; whose begun Mercies,
if abused, are but the beginnings of heaviest Judgments, which is this (...),
this worse thing in the Text.

5. And yet the last and worst of all is, that as abuse of Mercies brings
heaviest Judgments, so to make them more desperate, it deprives us of the best
help for removing them, so that we are in danger to sink irrecoverably under
them, namely in that it stops both our mouths, that we cannot pray, and God's
ear, that he will not hear, and both held out in that place of Ezra 9. when
after their Captivity and deliverance from it they again break God's
Commandments. And now O our God, what shall we say after all this? verse. 10.
And again; we cannot stand before thee, because of this, verse. 15. he is quite
Non-plust, and dashed out of Countenance, and blusheth to lift up his face to
God, verse. 6. as a condemned Esth. 7. 8.
man his face is covered with shame, that he dare not look up to God, or, if
fain he would, he is afraid that his Father would spit in his face, as God said
to Miriam now grown leprous, and to be put out of the Camp, Numb. 12. 11, 14.
God using to turn away the Ear from such as, when grown fat, dare lift up the
heel, and being ready to put off our mournfullest requests in such cases with a
check, rather than an answer, or rather to upbraid us with what he had done,
and we have ill requited, than to grant us what we then never so mournfully sue
for, as he did in the like case to the children of Israel, Judge. 10. 10, to 15.
I have again and again delivered you, and you have still forsaken me and served
other Gods, I will therefore deliver you no more: Go and cry unto the gods that
ye have chosen, and let them deliver you in your tribulation. Never expect God
in after-straits either at all, or at least not so readily as in former
troubles, to hear us, if we deal frowardly and falsely with him after that he
has had mercy on us. Would thou not be angry with us till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? is all that Ezra
can expect from a God so abused and provoked. And thus every way in point of
Misery and Judgment it is likely to be worse with us, which is very sad, and yet
very just, because it is every way worse in point of sin.

1. It proves so in the Consequents of it: they usually growing the worst of
men, who grow worse after best of Mercies, even most unprofitable and
abominable, whom neither Afflictions, nor deliverances can work upon: as that is
a rotten tooth, that can neither endure cold water, nor hot: and what you
cannot preserve either in Brine or Sugar will be sure to corrupt and putrify.

2. Nay it is so in the cause of it; two of the worst of sins being the chief
ingredients into it, viz. Abominable Ingratitude, and Invincible Obstinacy.

1. Hateful Ingratitude, so to render evil for good: we would not do so with
man, and do we thus requite the Lord, foolish People and Unwise? Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
Is he not thy Father that has bought thee? etc. Thy God and Savior that has
redeemed thee? and does Jeshurun when grown fat begin to kick? to forsake God
that made him, and lightly to esteem the God of his Salvation? verse. 15, 18.
but what follows? verse. 19. When the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of
the provoking of his sons and daughters. It Is an unmanly sin: man loathes it; a
most ungodly sin: God abhors it in all, especially in a Jeshurun, and that
signifies an upright people; it is matter of highest provocation, if he find it
in his sons and daughters. With others this despising of the riches of the
goodness and forbearance and long-suffering of God treasures up wrath against
the day of wrath, Romans 2. 4, 5. And even in the dearest of God's children God
so ill takes it, that if the most upright Hezekiah make such returns, he shall
smart for it, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. compared with 2 King. 20. 17, 18. Let them so
ungratefully abuse such a mercy, the very worst of the Heathens shall rather
have it, than they continue owners of it, Ezekiel. 7. 24. A return in this case
God expects, but it is a return of praise and obedience, and not a return to our
sin; that is most hateful ingratitude.

2. Most desperate Obstinacy, as standing out against God when he has gone
through a full course of all means, of the very last and most likely, and which
usually are wont to be most effectual: for when God has delivered his people
from straits, he has endeavored to fasten on them all obligations to
obedience: besides the tie of the Word in his Command there has been the bond
of affliction in their bypast misery, and the thick cord of love in their
present deliverance: and shall this threefold cord be so easily broken? It Is
not the Heroic Impetus of the Spirit of God coming Judge. 15. 14. Matthew. 8 28.
with Mark 5. 3, 4.
upon us, as sometimes upon Sampson, but from the insult of some evil spirit
more fierce than ordinarily, as in the Gospel, that none of all, not all these
chains and fetters can hold us, nor any thing tame us; a tough bad humor which
strongest Physic cannot purge, and which is the Physicians, last receipt, for
such are Afflictions and Mercies.

Sometimes indeed afflictions are the last; as pinching and pineing Poverty at
last brought home the Prodigal, Luke 15. As a Winter-frost helps to kill these
Weeds, which in Summer sprung up and multiplied. When Lenitives will not do,
corrosives, searings, cuttings off sometimes work the Cure. But what hope, if
after all the Gangrene creep on still?

It may be you will say, sometimes that may be preserved in Sugar, that will
not in Brine, and when God has not been before in the Wind and Earthquake, and
Fire, he may be after, in the still voice, 1 King. 19. 11, 12, 13. And
therefore God, that he may leave no means unessayed, like a careful
tenderhearted Father to a stubborn Child, whom he would not lose, will try
whether mildness, as a Summer-Sun, will not melt that heart, which harshness,
as a winter frost, hardened. You are told of a stone that will move at the
gentle touch of a finger more than with the violent rush of your whole body:
and such stones sometimes are our hard hearts; and therefore God, that delights
not in the death of a sinner, and with the goodness of whose Nature this sweet
way of Mercy most agrees, is willing, as at first, to begin with it; so, after
other sharper means used, at last to end with it. When after the Israelites
want of Food, he in Mercy gave them Bread from Heaven, he says, it was that he
might prove them, whether they would walk in his Law, or no, Exodus 16. 4. So
that, if after Judgments we have a return of Mercies, we had need take heed,
for it may be then we go upon our last and strongest trial. In Afflictions God
indeed strongly tries us, whether we will cleave to him in want of Mercies;
but by Mercies he makes fullest trial of us, whether we will serve and obey
him, whether we will set upon our Journey for Heaven in such fair Way and
Weather, when we have nothing to hinder us; and whether we will build, when the
Scaffold is built, and all Tools and Materials ready, that we want nothing that
might help us. And then, Isa. 5. if after all Mercies, yet sour Grapes, what
can God do more, but quite extirpate? If after trial thus made of all means, of
the last and best, we continue as ill or prove worse than before, then,
Reprobate silver call them, for the Lord has rejected them, Jer. 6. 29, 30.
Meneh, Meneh, Tekel Dan. 5. 25, to 30.
Vpharsin, God has again and again numbered and weighed us, and we are found
light, nay, heavy-hearted and immovable, and what then follows? Peers, thy
Kingdom is divided: the Lord knows, so is ours miserably. And the Lord grant
that which is added do not follow, and is given to the Medes and Persians, that
God give us not up to our Enemies, who after all this variety of powerfullest
means will not yet give up our selves to him in a way of Obedience. For, if
after we are made whole, we sin again, as we are over prone, which was the
first point, it cannot be avoided, but that every way, both in point of sin and
misery, it will be worse with us, which was the second point here employed.

Of both which the Use and Application should have been in

1. A serious and heedful Consideration and Review of the Mercy received,
(...), behold, thou art made whole, says our Savior: he sets an Ecce upon it,
as to set forth the remarkableness of the Mercy, so to put him in mind of his
Duty, and that was to take a diligent and exact survey of the Mercy: and
because being made whole speaks a former Disease and a present Cure, he is
called to think of both of them together, and to compare them together, how
weak before he was, and how well now; before not able to crawl, he can now rise
up and walk: he, that could not before carry himself from the Porch to the
Pool, can now carry his bed from the Pool through the City. He, that for many
years together was made sick with delayed Hopes, and quite cut to the heart
with vexatious Disappointments, has with the speaking of a word his Health
perfectly restored, and his longing Desires in an instant fully accomplished.
All this our Savior would have him wisely behold, and consider, and for ever
remember with all thankfulness. And would he not have us of this City and
Kingdom behold with the like care a greater Cure? Indeed I cannot say to
England, thou art perfectly made whole, we are yet come short of that (...), of
that perfect Soundness, which Peter told the Jews that lame man had attained in
the presence of them all, Acts 3. 16. The Humors in this great and greatly
diseased Body are yet in an hurry: we bleed still, at best our Wounds are but
in healing, and not yet fully whole. But yet, humble and hearty thanks be to
our heavenly Physician, we cannot but see, as it were, this poor Man in the
Text arising, our Sanballats and Tobiahs, (whom our Healing wounds and cuts to
the heart) even they to their grief hear and see, (...) (as the phrase is Neh.
4. 7.) that an healing Plaster is mercifully applied to our bleeding Wounds,
that, unless we be stupid and senseless, we cannot but with the Woman, when her
bloody Issue was stopped, know and feel what is done in us, Matthew. 5. 33. and,
unless lothsomly ungrateful, say, as it is, Ezekiel. 21. 26. (...) this is not
this, we are not what we were; that a great change is wrought in the Patient,
and we hope in a healing way, so that though not wholly, yet in part, though
not absolutely, yet comparatively in regard of what we were, we are made whole.
And therefore O London, O England, Behold, Behold thy former Wound, and thy
present Cure. Behold (...), from what depths of Misery, into which thy sins had
cast thee, to what hopeful and happy beginnings of Health and Peace the healing
hand of thy pitiful Physician has raised thee; thy Religion woefully corrupted,
now graciously begun to be reformed; thy Liberty before inslaved, now
vindicated; a most unnatural and bloody War the other day most eagerly
prosecuted by the malice of Man, more powerfully and miraculously ceased
through the Mercies of God. This poor Man, that had been sick so long could not
have believed that ever he should have been well so soon; nor had we Faith to
believe, that were so hastily dying away in the beginning of the last year, we
should be so happily recovering by the end of this. Let therefore the Voice of
the Crier, and through God's Mercy not now (as that might have been) in a
Wilderness, call out all your heedfullest attentions, and let an unworthy
Minister use the holy Prophet's words, Come and behold the Works of the Lord:
we might of late have added, as it is there, what desolations he has made; but
now what Restaurations, what Salvation he has wrought in the Earth! He makes
Wars to cease, he breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in sunder, and
burns the Chariot in the fire, Psalm. 46. 8, 9, etc. Truly the Lord has so
wrought his wonderful Works, that they ought to be full in our eye and heart
for the present, and to be had for the future in everlasting remembrance. O set
up our Eben-ezer with this impress upon it, Hitherto has the Lord helped us.
Behold thus far, O England, thou art made whole, and what remains? but

2. The second duty enjoined in the following word, sin, O sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto thee. Sin no more! Now the Lord be more merciful, for I
fear many of us sin more than ever. Oppressions in many more aggravated,
Heresies more openly maintained, Christ, the Holy Ghost, and Holy Scriptures
more horribly blasphemed, Factions and Divisions more multiplied, the Scene
only changed, but the same or a worse part acted; the Weapons struck out of the
hands of Enemies, and more taken up by Brethren and Friends: Were Christians
ever so mutually estranged and imbittered? Were your public Church Assemblies
ever so neglected? In your civil Meetings your Elections and other Affairs ever
with such confusion? I had almost said brutish rage (as of late) so transacted,
as though we had put off Christianity, and Civility and Humanity together? But
think in all your hearts and all your souls, Is this to sin no more? Is it not
to revolt more and more? O think that you see God angrily looking upon you, and
saying, but do you thus requite me, O foolish people and unwise? Think that you
see Jesus Christ standing and weeping over you, and saying as once, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if thou had known, even thou, in this thy day the
things that belong to thy peace, thou would have made a better return, lest,
before thou art aware, they be hid from thine eyes. I charge thee once more,
sin no more, serve me thus no more, O do not this abominable thing that I hate,
Jer. 44. 4. at last, be thou instructed O Jerusalem, O England, lest my soul
depart from thee, lest I make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited, Jer. 6. 8.

Do we remember our former fears and troubles? were they not bad enough, that
we now grow worse, that they may be renewed and aggravated?

Do we remember our resolutions, vows and promises that we then made to prevail
with God for Mercy? were they that we would be worse than ever if God would
deliver us, and do we think that upon those terms he would have helped us? Do
we consider to what happiness we have for the present arrived? to an Harbor
after a Tempest, to a day of joy and gladness after the sad times of our griefs
and fears. And shall our sins damp our joys? drive us again into the deep, and
overcloud our Sun in a clear day? unless we be weary of our Mercies, let us not
weary Amos 8. 9.
our God by our sins: Noli gemmam perdere in die festo, is an Arabic Proverb,
O do not that in a good day, which will undo all the comfort of it.

Or lastly do we think what yet we may be? Are we so absolutely cured, that we
are past all possibility of a relapse? May not the wound rankle and grow angry,
and then come to Judab's (...), that there be no remedy? 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. O why
should Israel's stubborness, when come to the borders of Canaan, drive them
back to the Red Sea again? why should we cast poison into the wound that is
healing? O why will we dye? O pity a tender Mother, a dear Native Country,
which beseeches you by the Womb that bare you, and by the Breasts that gave
you suck, that now that she is recovering, you would not be a means of her
death that first gave you breath. If you will not pity your selves, yet pity
the excellency of your strength, the desire Ezekiel. 24. 21.
of your eyes and that which your soul pityeth, your sons and your daughters;
which may do God more service, than ever you have done, when you are dead and
gone. Eat not the sour Grapes, that their teeth be not set on edge, that
instead of rising up and calling us blessed, they do not gnash their teeth and
curse us, that by our sins in this Crisis, when we might have made both our
selves and them happy, have utterly undone both without recovery. I might in
this kind say much, yet when I had said all, I could say no more than the Text
does. And therefore when I have done speaking, let these words of your Savior
be ever sounding in your ears, Behold, you are made whole, sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto you.

Amen. Lord Jesus.
SERMON XXIX.
PSALM. 73. 28. Preached at St. Paul's Febr. 27. 1647/8. After at St. Mary's.
But it is good for me to draw near to God.


THe Text is a Conclusion strongly inferred upon two great Truths premised in
the foregoing part of the Psalm, (summed up Isa. 3. 10, 11. Eccles. 8. 12, 13.)

The first was that notwithstanding all the evils that the godly endure; yet
God is good to Israel, verse. 1. and therefore it is good to draw near to God.
It Is good to draw near to a good God, nay best of all (as the Arabic reads it)
to keep close to that God, who is so good notwithstanding the worst evils.

The second was that notwithstanding the wicked's present flourish, yet their
end is destruction, verse. 2, 3, etc. and in the Verse immediately before the
Text, For lo, they that are far from thee shall perish; thou have destroyed all
them that go a whoring from thee; and therefore again it is good for me to draw
near to thee. Bernard sums up both in his double Quere, Vbi enim been erit
Sermon 1.
sine illo? aut ubi male potest esse cum illo? If it cannot be ill with him,
nor well without him, then it is best to draw near to him. If it be no less than
destruction to go a whoring from him, then the Spouse, that in running away
after her lovers has met with a sharp Thorn-Hedge, had need return home to her
first Husband, Hos. 2. 6, 7. If they perish that are afar off, then it is my
safest course to get and keep near. When they of Pharaoh's servants, that were
in the field, were smitten with the hail, it concerned those of them that
feared God to keep home, Exodus 9. 20, 21, 25. When the sword of man or Angel
will destroy them that are abroad, it behooves Israel, and Rahab's family to
keep within doors, Exodus 12. 22. Josh. 2. 18, 19. If the out-lying Deer be in
danger to be hunted by every Dog, and the stray-Sheep or Chicken to be snatched
and torn by every Wolf or Kite, it is best to keep within the Pale and Fold, and
under the Wing. To get and keep as near and close to God, and under his Wing as
may be. The Psalmist's own comfortable experiences of God's goodness, whilst
he kept close to him, and the sad events of others going and keeping far from
him, made him so wise as elsewhere to resolve, Return to thy rest, O my soul,
and here feelingly to conclude, Redi anima mea in requiem tuam. Psalm. 116. 7.
Mihi autem adhaerere Deo bonum est: but it is good for me to draw near to God.

In which Proposition the Predicate (...) signifies (...). By Good is not
meant any lower degree or kind of goodness, but that (...) that summum bonum,
that chiefest good, in the enjoying whereof man's highest happiness consists.

And accordingly in the Subject of the Proposition are three things observable,

1. Beatitudo Objectiva: that chief Good, in the enjoyment of which our
Happiness consists, and that is (...), God. For so, None good but God only,
Matthew. 9. 17. and so he is the Psalmist's goodness, Psalm. 144. 2.

2. Beatitudo Formalis, our Union with, and Enjoyment of that chief Good,
whereby we are actually made happy and blessed, in these words (...), drawing
near: for the meaning whereof, please to take notice of two things. 1. That in
the Hebrew Text it is indifferent to be understood either of God's drawing (...)
near to us, or of our drawing near to God; the former the cause of the latter,
and the happy meeting of both makes up our blessedness. The Summer's Sun draws
near to the Marigold, which makes it turn to the Sun, and that makes out its
full flourish. God in Mercy draws near to us, and as a Lodestone draws, makes
us draw near to him, whence arises our chiefest, nay only happiness in Union
with him. For that likewise is secondly to be observed for the meaning of the
word (...), that it signifies not only Motum, to draw near, and so by
Apollinarius here rendered Not only to draw near, but to be near and so to abide.
(...), and by some Copies of the Lxx (...): but also it signifies the Rest
and firm Posture of the Soul upon such an advance and approach, not only
appropinquare, but then adhaerere, to keep close and cleave fast, agglutinari,
so Euthymius, (...), as ordinarily as it is here in the Lxx, by which word the
nearest and straitest ty between Husband and Wife is expressed, Ephesians. 5. 31. and
which suits well with the Text, which, to what was said in the foregoing Verse
of the destruction of them that go a whoring from God, opposes the goodness
and happiness of an humble loyal drawing near to him, and an inseparable fast
cleaving to him for ever. Here, O quam bonum! how good is it thus to draw near
and thus to cleave fast, both begun whilst we are here in the way, but
completed in Heaven at our Journeys end.

3. But the third particular tells you the Subject or Person to whom such an
approach is so good: and that, according to the Philosopher's definition of the
chief good, should be every man: (...).
yet the Psalmist does not enclose the Commons, when he more particularly
applies it to himself, its good for me, etc. for although all men are ready to
enquire after it, with a who will show us any good? Psalm. 4. 6. Yet in their
pursuit of it, they start so many false Games, that instead of that unum
necessarium, in Varro's time Luke 10. 42.
Philosophers did so differ, that by ringing the changes of their several
Tenants, as Austin shows, there might be not fewer De C^vit. l. 19. c. 1.
than 288 Opinions about it: but whilst most men mistake, and in the foregoing
Verse account it good for them to keep afar off, and go a whoring from God;
it is the happiness of the Faithful so to be guided as to pitch right, and to
make that his first main Principle and last resolved Conclusion, which the
Prophet here makes the beginning and ending of this Psalm, that God is good to
Israel, and therefore whatever other do (...) Quod ad me spectat, for my part
it is that which I have felt the comfort of, and therefore am resolved to abide
by, Mihi adharere Deo bonum est, It Is good for me to draw near and cleave fast
to God.

A divine Apophthegme, which it seems St. Austin's heart was

Whilst here Travelers in the way,

What Is our Duty? But as in Conversion at first to turn to him, so still to
walk with him; and to draw nearer and nearer to him.

What Is our Comfort? but when in Prayer or otherwise we can get nearest, into
the inner Court, and touch the top of the golden Scepter, or, but the hem of
Christ 's garment? But might we get into the Apostle John's place, into our
Savior's bosom, softest Beds and gloriousest Thrones would be but stones and
dunghills. It Is our Spring and Summer when the Sun of Righteousness draws near,
and our Heaven here when we may draw near, rejoicing, but not playing the
wantons in this Sunshine.

And what is our highest Heaven and Happiness at last? but to be caught up into
the Clouds to meet with Christ in the Air, and so 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
for ever to be with the Lord: In nearest approach, to see him as he is, and in
closest Communion to enjoy him, there always to be experimenting, and yet ever
learning the truth of this Text to all Eternity. It Is the A and O of a
Christian course, in his first setting out Godward bonum est mihi
appropinquare, it is good for me to draw near who am so far off; in his progress
yet better to draw nearer; at death the dying Christian's Swan-like Song is
(...), and the Saints Antiphony in Heaven is (...): so that whether you listen
to the voice of the mourning Turtle here below, or to the joyful Quire of
Heaven above, they in this are perfect Unisons; however in other respects they
have different strains, yet in this one Note they all agree; There Is not a
Saint on Earth, or Angel in Heaven, but the whole Chorus uno Ore, Cord, with
one mouth and heart feelingly heartily say or sing aloud to God's praise, Mihi
autem appropinquare, adhaerere Deo bonum est, It Is good, it is best for me to
draw near and cleave fast to God. Which being the joint vote of Heaven and
Earth, the very natural Heart-Language of the Newborn Convert when as yet he
cannot speak, and of the dying Christian when he now lies speechless, of the
conflicting Martyr at the Stake, and of the Saint Triumphant before the Throne,
it needs less proof, when encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses (...), O
the blessednesses of that man whom thou chusest and causest to draw near to
thee! says the Psalmist, Psalm. 65. 4. it seems he made account it was a
multiplied admirable blessedness. Acquaint thy self now with God, and thereby
(...)
good shall come unto thee, says Eliphaz, Job 22. 21. The very word there
translated Acquaint has profit included in the fignification of it, and well
may, when so much good is (...) proventus (as the word there is) the proper
fruit of it: for here, if ever, Bonum propter vicinum bonum; much good by so
good acquaintance. Good will proportionably come to us, as we come and draw
near to God. Good will come he means universally, all good will, but he
speaks indefinitely, because he cannot define how much. But as the Psalmist
says, Taste and see how good the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 8. So he bids Job acquaint
himself with God, and try how much good will come by that acquaintance, which
they know best who have tasted and tried most, and they are such as have got
nearest, and kept closest. They Will tell you there is so much, that whatever
others mean by their bonum utile, jucundum, honestum, is herein formally,
fully, eminently comprehended.

If we measure goodness by profitableness, O the blessed gainful Vtile. (...) A
Treasure
incomes of Grace, Peace, Glory, yea of outward good things so far as they are
indeed good to us, by our drawing near to God in Christ Jesus! The Summer-Sun
drawn near to us does not so load the Earth with Fruit, as the Sun of
Righteousness does us in his approaches to us, and ours to him, with the Fruits
of his Bounty. Ctesias his (...) is but one of his Fables, but in this River of
Paradise is a real truth; else Paul would not have counted the loss of all
things gain, that he might come so near, as to be found in Christ, Phil. 3. 8,
9. Nor would David have reckoned a day in God's Courts better than a thousand,
Psalm. 84. 10. but that by experience he found in God's Courts what others found
in his, that a Courtier near to the King can get more by a word, than another
at a further distance with far greater pains and industry. When Jacob was near
to Joseph, he was nourished by him, Genesis 45. 10, 11. but not so, as that soul
is feasted and fatted, that sits near to Christ, and lies in his bosom.

And that tells you there is Pleasure, as well as Profit; Light in Jucundum.
such a Goshen, as well as nourishment. In God's presence fullness of joy, and
at his right hand pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. Away with the empty
vanishing pleasures of Sin and the World; here is both fullness and
everlastingness in these joys together, a full cup, which can never be drunk to
the bottom, but only the deeper the sweeter. It Is Christ's presence and our
nearness to him, that makes Heaven it self a Paradise of delights, and not
Mahomet's Crystal Fountains, and pleasant Orchards and Gardens, and Et haec
est maxima merces, and interminabilis. Alcoran Azora 2. 28. 47, 48.
Fruits, and the like, which he like a beast accounts the greatest happiness in
his. When the Sun is set, how dark is the night? and when it is gone far from
us, how cold is the Winter? but when it draws near in Summer, how pleasantly do
the Birds sing, and the Plants flourish, and the Flowers smell? as in those
Climats that are nearer to it is a Ver perpetuum. And all these but shadows of
that solid joy and delight, which the faithful soul feels and enjoys in the
approach of the Sun of Righteousness. I sat down under his shadow with great
delight, says the Spouse, Cant. 2. 3. As it is expressed, Cant. 2. 3, to 14.
and would be loath to leave God's blessing in that shade for the warmest
Sunshine, and to be haled or forced from such sweet Enjoyments by any other
most pleasing delights; would account it as a banishing of it from a Paradise
into the howling Wilderness. Cum inhaesero tibi ex omni me, omnino nusquam erit
mihi dolor and labor, and viva erit vita mea tota plena te, says holy
Augustine. Confess. l. 10. c. 28.
There Is no grief in him, when he is all in God: he has a lively life of it,
when he can sit so near the Fountain of Life, as to be filled with the blessed
inflowes of it. If David cannot tell how good and pleasant it is for brethren
to dwell together in unity, you had Psalm. 133. 1.
need of the tongue of an Angel, and not mine, to tell the unutterableness of
that delight and Joy, when Children and Father, Spouse and Husband, Head and
Members cleave together in closest Union.

And if Honor use to go in the first rank of the World's excellencies,
Honorificum.
then he that is nearest to God must needs herein have the upper hand: Our
blessed Savior is exalted to highest Honor, in that he is at the right hand
of God: and then sure that soul is no base one, that lies nearest to the heart
of Christ. Seems it a small thing to you (said Moses to Korah) that the God
of Israel has brought you near to himself in the Ministry of the Tabernacle?
Numb. 16. 9.
in which respect Nazianzen highly extolls the now despised Ministry, and
Chrysostom lifts it up above Crowns and Scepters: but how much more honorable
is it to draw near to God in saving Grace, than in that Sacred Office, which
sometimes they that are most unworthy climb up to? They were the Grandees of
Persia, who sat next to the King, and saw his face, Esth. 1. 14. May I never
affect greater Grandeur in this World, than in nearest approaches to see the
face of God in Christ, though the great ones of the World set me under their
footstool.

I might add a word of Beauty, which, according to the Hebrew Honestum. (...)
Genesis 24. 16.
phrase, has a kind of goodness in its comeliness. But even that is, when the
parts of the body are joined together amongst themselves, and all united to the
head, which, if parted, or dislocated, occasion horror rather than delight. But
O the ravishing Beauty of Christ mystical, when from him and with him the whole
body is fitly joined together! Ephesians. 4. 16. when met together to meet with
Christ, they are the Beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 110. 3. This made Moses's face
shine when he talked with God, Exodus 34. 29. This encompasseth the Saints in
their approaches to Christ with rays of Divine luster, that they need not be
beholden to the Limner or Painter for a painted glory. Though the Moon be at
the full of her light and beauty, when she is in furthest opposition to the
Sun, yet our Full is in our nearest Union with the Sun of Righteousness.

I forbear further instances. But that you may further see how good it is to
draw near to God, give me leave to propound these two convincing Arguments.

That Is indeed good, and good to me, that makes me better; but so drawing near
to God? Does it not elevate the mind, The soul is then in Apogaeo. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
enlarge the heart, innoble, spiritualize and by a Divine Metamorphosis
transform the soul into the Image of Christ in its nearer approaches and
interviews? Intellectus fit idem cum objecto. The understanding is made one
with him in its Divine Contemplations: and love makes him one with it in its
cordial embraces, not in H. N. his mad phrase Godded with God, but yet in the
Apostles 2 P^t. 1. 4.
divine expression made partakers of the Divine Nature. Here Is cure by coming
near and touching, Luke 8. 44. Healing under his wings, Mal. 4. 2. Life and Joy
in his Presence, Psalm. 16. 11. The Prodigal dare not be so bad as he would be,
unless he run far from his Father's house. And that tells you the good child is
better Luke 15. 13.
for keeping in his Father's presence. When we keep near to God, Heaven is not
only near to us, but Heaven is in us: we then have not only heavenly Joys, but
also heavenly Hearts; and is it not good to be there? and therefore to draw
nearer?

And again good to draw near, because best when nearest, and

1. First, best when nearest.

Angels and Men by nature the best of God's Creatures, because in nature they
are nearest to him, and most resemble him, and are capable of communion with
him.

Of Angels they are the good ones, that continually behold him, Ma^th. 18. 10.
and they the best that are nearest; and therefore the chief of them are wont
to be called Assistentes.

Of Men, as first, when was Adam best, when now created and enjoyed converse
with God? or when fallen and then run away from him?

Of all Men, the Saints that are most honored by him are a people near unto
him, Psalm. 148. 14. their first beginning to be well being when at first in
conversion they begin to turn toward him, and how well are they? never better
than when in the exercise of Grace, performance of service in Meditation,
Prayer, Word, Sacrament, in doing, nay though it be in suffering, they can get
nearest to him; let it be upon the Canon's mouth (says the soul that is truly
touched,) if I may but so make my approaches to my Lam. 3. 25, 26, 27.
God. Let my Father whip me, if, whilst he so does, he takes me into his Arms.
The Child is not afraid in the dark; if then he have his Father by the hand:
nor is David in the valley of the shadow of death, if his good Shepherd be with
him, Psalm. 23. 4. The whole World is not worth a Dungeon's light and a Prison's
enlargement, when Christ shines in, and his Spirit sets the soul at liberty to
go out to him. The Martyr is not bound when tied to the stake, his soul is upon
the wing to take her flight to her Savior. It seems then that it is so good to
draw near to God, that in so doing the Serpent has lost it is sting; the Lion
is become a Lamb; the Gridiron a bed of Roses; Darkness is no Darkness; Psalm.
139. 12.
the worst evils are not themselves. Its good to be afflicted, tormented, to
suffer, to dye: good to be, to do, to suffer any thing, if thereby we ^e set
nearer to Christ who is all in all.

But how good then, when in a better conditon, when once come nearest in
Heaven's full vision and perfect communion there, and so to be with Christ?
what says Paul of it? he wants words, and yet multiplies them, it is (...),
multo magis melius, Comparative upon Comparative, which rises higher than a
Superlative. It Is much more better, even best of all, Phil. 1. 23. which when
Peter in Christ's transfiguration had only a glimpse of, he half translates my
Text, and cries out in an Ecstasy, Lord it is good to be here, Mat. 17. 4. And so
when the elevated soul is got into the Holy Mount, and there having a nearer
stand takes a fuller view of the glory of Christ, is so near that being in the
Spirit it is carried out to him in strongest workings Rev. 1. 10.
and heavenly raptures, as the inferior Orbs are carried about by the motion of
the Primum mobile, and when in inward peace, can quietly ly down in its
Saviors bosom: whilst others are anxiously asking, who will show us any good?
their Corn and Wine is Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
nothing to such a lifting up of the light of God's Countenance, it sweetly
sings its requiem, and knows what it says (which Peter did not) and cries
out, (...), Lord, it is good to be here, Juvat usque morari. Let us here not
make a Tabernacle, but a Mansion for ever.

For first it is best to be nearest.

2. Secondly, many now do, and many more at last will find it worst when
farthest off.

If Devils of all Creatures are in the worst condition, I am sure they are at
the furthest distance, and therefore Satan in ancient Liturgies styled (...), a
far-off stranger to Christ and his Kingdom.

And for Men; our first unhappy step toward misery was in our first retrograde
from the God of our Mercy, whence we came to be estranged from the womb, and to
go astray as soon as we were born, Psalm. 58. 3. So as the further we go, it is
the further from God, and nearer to our own destruction, leaving him, and
forsaking our own mercy together, Jonah 2. 8.

And so at last, when we are furthest run from him, we are arrived at the
lowest pitch of our own misery. So when the rich man is in Hell, it was (...),
afar off that he saw Lazarus in Abraham 's bosom, Luke 16. 23. And accordingly
that infernal dungeon is called (...), outward darkness, Matthew. 8. 12. As
Prisons were wont to be without the City, Acts 12. 10. So those unhappy souls
in this set at the remotest distance from Christ's presence and Kingdom, as
the Apostle describes everlasting destruction to be (...), from the presence of
the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. When the Lord Jesus at the last day shall (...), chide
those undone Miscreants into Hell with those soul-sinking words, Depart from me
ye cursed, Matthew. 25. 41. Then at least the truth of this Doctrine, that it is
good to draw near to God, (though now not heeded) will be by such fully but
most uncomfortably resented, of which truth, had we no other proof, we need no
better evidence ^han this double witness

1. Of an humble soul in desertion, which had formerly felt the sweetness of
Christ's nearer presence, and is now fainting Cant. 5. 6.
and swooning away by reason of his absence; how is it starved with such a cold
blast, when removed out of that warm Sunshine? would not the poor Woman, when
she feels her self fainting and her Issue running, say, it would be well with
me, if I could draw near? would not the least touch of the utmost hem be a rich
mercy?

2. Of a forlorn soul in the estate of despair and damnation. Was it not a
trembling Cain's saddest Note? Thou have driven me from thy presence, and
therefore my punishment is greater than I can bear, Genesis 4. 13, 14. Though
malice, guilt, and horror make such bid God depart from them, and make them fly
from him, yet Job 21. 14.
their own present feelings cannot but make them sensible how good it would be
to be nearer to him, when they find it the extremity of all evil to be utterly
and for ever removed from him.

The ground of all which may be taken principally, 1. From new Creature.

For God: From God. As Omnipresent. Psalm. 139. 7.


1. First he is an Omnipresent God, not far from any of us, Acts 17. 27. but
more inward than our very souls to every one of us: So that there is now no
flying from his presence: And therefore think whether upon this ground it be
not best to draw near to his goodness. When Jacob could not escape Esau as an
enemy, it Genesis 32. Hei mihi quam excels^^ es in excelsis! and quam profundus es
in profundis! and nusquam recedis, and vix redimus ad te. August. Conf. lib. 8.
cap. 3.
was his wisdom so to apply himself to him, as to make him his friend. Because
we cannot meet God as an enemy, be we as suppliants to make him a friend, Amos
4. 12. There is no escaping from God, but by running to him, nor escaping his
W^rath, if we betake not our selves to his Mercy. If we draw not near to the
Throne of his Grace, we shall be drawn to the Bar of his Justice. In a word, he
is an infinite God; so that we cannot avoid him, and is it not then good to make
a virtue of necessity, and so to draw near to him?

2. But that we may not be so much driven by fear, as drawn As good.
with Cords of Love, Consider we, as his greatness, so especially his goodness,
and that is a strong Attractive, has a wonderful Magnetic force to draw the
soul to love, and the mind to assent, that it is so good to draw near to a good
God, that it is a Conclusion above Demonstration. Particularly:

1. As God, he is Bonum Vniversalissimum; All in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28. which
contains all good in him, and so is able to make an universal supply of all
that good, which we stand in need of from him Christus meus and omnia, My God
is my All: my all-sufficient portion; who, as such, sufficienter movet and
implet voluntatem, as Aquinas speaks, like the huge Ocean that fills every 1.
Aq. 105. A. 4. As in Haman, Esth. 5. 11, 12, 13.
Creek; which the shallow narrow Rivolets of the Creature's largest perfections
cannot reach; cannot supply all; and the want of any good thing ministers more
disquiet, than the enjoyment of many Satisfaction. I have seen an end of all
perfection, says the Psalmist, but it is well that he adds thy Commandments are
exceeding Psalm. 119. 96.
broad. One God more than enough to fulfill our desires and wants: And why then
should I not prefer God before my self, as the whole before the part? Why
should I not be nearer to God than to my self? How well would it be to have the
Head of all our Springs ly in this immense Ocean? How good is it to draw near
to that God? when by enjoying of him, who is more than all, we may be sure to
want nothing.

2. As God, he is Summum Bonum and Finis ultimus; the chiefest good and last
end, Psalm. 73. 25. Prove. 16. 4. We Christians must needs believe it, seeing all
the Sects of the Heathen Philosophers Vide Schedium 2.
(except the proud Seneca vid. Heinsis exercit. Sacr. 16. in Act. 17. Est
aliquid quo sapiens antecedat Deum.
Stoic, who thinks his wise man is in some thing above his God) do jointly
acknowledge it. Now it is Austin's true rule, Rei cujusque perfectio est in
adhaesione ad suum principium, that it is the goodness and perfection of every
thing to adhere to its principle, and to be in a tendency to its last end,
which therefore makes God the Load stone of the soul, that it cannot rest till
it point to him; the very Center of it, that it cannot be quiet till it rest in
him as the chief good: our chiefest happiness can consist in nothing but in
nearest Union and fullest Communion with him.

3. As God, he is so Omnipotently good, that either as a (...), whilst he is
near, he can keep evil far from us, Psalm. 91. 7. or so abate it, that it does
not hurt us, Dan. 3. 27. and 6. 22. or so change it, that it shall be a means
of good to us, as Joseph's brethrens bad intention, a means of his and their
preservation, Genesis 50. 20. and Esth. 9. 1. turns Balaam 's curse into a
blessing, Deuteronomy. 23. 5. So that out of the Eater, comes meat, and out of the
strong, sweetness: Grapes are gathered of Thorns, and Figs of Judge. 14. 14.
Matthew. 7. 16. Prove. 16. 7. 2 Cor. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 9.
Thistles: makes my Enemy my Friend, my Wound my Cure, my Affliction my
Consolation, and even my weakness my strength, whilst I being so weak, that I
cannot stand on mine own legs, am cast into my Fathers arms. And was not the
Psalmist then upon a safeguard, when at the same time that in one Verse his
Enemies drawing near made his heart tr^mble, in the very next Verse, his God
being as near made his Faith confident, Psalm. 119. 150, 151. O how good is it
to draw near to this Omnipotent Matthew. 7. 27.
God, who, when the Floods come, and the Winds blow, can either still the
Storm, or make it blow us into the Harbor! is so good as either to cause all
evil to be far away, or when near to be far from burting us!

4. As God, he is purely and only good, so as no evil is either in him, or
dwells with him, Psalm. 5. 4. (...), says the Psalmist in the first words of
this Psalm, and they may indifferently be rendered either, Truly God is good, or
God is only good: and indeed he is most truly good, that is only good, and so
God is a most simple being without the least intermixture of any evil; no evil
in him, none proceeds from him; all is good that God sends. His good Word, 2
Kings 20. 19. His good Spirit, Neh. 9. 20. His Creatures good, as he made them,
Genesis 1. 31. Nay, his very Chastisements good, as he improveth them, Psalm. 119.
71. All good, and as they come from him, only good: with the pure he is pure,
Psalm. 18. 26. A pure heart and way without mixture of sin shall have pure Mercy
without mixture of wrath: Provoke me not, and I will do you no hurt, Jer. 25.
6. But now in all other things, even in our best Contentments by reason of
their and our vanity there is an untoward mixture of evil and good; it may be
of a great deal of evil with a little good, of the worst evil with the choicest
good: a very Polypus head, in which

(...).

Either in them or in our use of them bitterest choler of sweetest Thucidides.
honey; a most infectious Plague (as once at Athens) after a most healthful
year. Worst carriages and best parts in the same See Piccart. Observat.
Historicopolitic. Decad. 1. cap. 8.
man: as in the same Cataline Virtue and Vice were at a Combat, but that the
latter unhappily got the Victory: an Antidote and a Poison in the same Viper:
in the same Toad, in which is (if you could find it) the most Precious Stone,
you may be sure to find the rankest Venom; that you have more cause not to
touch it for the one, than to take it up for the other. Such staves of comfort
are the Creatures, like Moses's: take them at the one end, and they will be a
Staff in your hand to support you: but if at the other, a Serpent to sting you
to the heart: So that instead Exodus 4. 2, 3, 4.
of drawing near to them, you have need with him to fly from them. But how
safely then may we, and how confidently ought we with Humility to draw near to
God, who though of our selves are evil, and only evil, and continually evil,
yet shall find him good, and only good, and everlastingly good? If it be good
marrying that good Wise, which will do her husband good, and not hurt all the
days of her life, Prove. 31. 12. Then, how much better is it in chastest love to
dwell with and cleave to this God, who is so purely and simply good in himself,
that if thou will let him, he will do no hurt, but good, and good only, and
that to Eternity.

5. As God, he is Infinitely good, and Infinitum non potest trans^ri: We cannot
pass over and get through that which is Infinite, or get to the end of that,
which has none: so that though every day we get nearer, yet still there is a
Plus ultra, that thou may still be called on (as the Angel did Ezekiel) to
see yet Cap. 8. 6.
more: We are soon at the bottom of the shallow Creature's greatest depth, and
indeed at the first in our expectation gotten far beyond what we after find in
the possession; so that the beauty of it is best seen at a distance, and the
nearer we come to it, the more blemishes we see in it; and on the contrary in
our approaches to God's infinite goodness, as we cannot think so much before as
we find after, so the nearer we come, the more we meet with; so that when thou
have gone so far and gotten so much of God, as thou do want, and he can
afford no more, I Will give thee leave to sit still, but till then I must advise
thee, that it is good for thee to get nearer.

6. But it may be this Infinite goodness will overpour our weakness, and
therefore the trembling soul with the poor Publican in the Gospel yet stands
afar off, and dares not draw near, Luke 18. 13.
whilst it thinks that as God is Optimus, so he is Maximus, though infinitely
good, yet infinitely great, and therefore although my badness stands in need of
his goodness, yet my ba^sness and guiltiness had need stand off from that
greatness. This bottomless Ocean will drown me, and although the nearer to this
Sun the more warmth and light, yet in such nearer approaches that heat will
melt my waxen wings; and that light will dazzle and put out my weaker eye: True
in our bold and curious approaches Prove. 25. 27.
Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria. But in our humble addresses we shall
find it far otherwise, viz. God to be bonum conveniens atque ita maxim
appetibile, so good as most suitable to our desires and wants.

Partly as in his own infinite sweetness and condescension he stoops so low,
that the lowliest heart may freely draw near, and touch the top of his golden
Scepter, as noblest Princes have given freest access to their meanest Subjects:
His greatness no obstruction to his goodness:

But principally and (to us by our sin estranged from him) only, as in Christ
our Emmanuel, God with us, we come to have near and close Communion with God in
him: an holy God and sinful man were at an unapproachable distance. But
therefore our Savior God-man came between us a Mediator, that we, who were
afar off, may be made near by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13. That as the
same Israelites, whom the brightness of Moses his face drove away, Exodus 34.
30. when he had put a Vail on it, drew near to him, Verse 31, 32, 33. So the
same sinner, who must keep aloof off from his Majesty; especially as he looks
out in a fiery Law, need run far away to escape his wrath and curse, Deuteronomy. 33.
2.
as now he has put on the Veil of his flesh, may safely and comfortably
approach, and have blessed Communion with him, and experimently say with the
Psalmist, that it is good to draw near to him.

SERMON XXX.
PSALM. 73. 28. At St. Mary's, Sep. 9. 1649.
But it is good for me to draw near to God.


THe second ground whereof is taken from the Nature of This (...) in the Text
is alone. (...) God Almighty is only God All-sufficient. (...), and therefore
(...), God of himself, and therefore alone Self-sufficient, (...) that has so
his Being from himself, that all else have their beings from him.
the Creature in General, which at best is but a depending being, not
sufficient in and of it self for its own Happiness, and therefore must go out
of it self, to find it in another; which ultimately, nay, immediately is God
only. Now that it may have it of him, it must be some way or other united to
him; and so from a natural Tendency proportionably to the nature of it looks
and moves toward him, and as it can, draws near and cleaves to him, according
to that of the Psalmist, The eyes of all wait upon thee. Psalm. 145. 1, 15. As
the Vine to the Elm, and the Ivy to the Oak, how fast does it clasp and
cleave? How does it insinuate? Like the Rivers to the Ocean, or Ezekiel's
Cedar-branches to the great Eagle, Chap. 17. 6. The Sovereign Lord and Creator
leaving in the most perfect Creature some defect, either for being, well-being,
or continuing in both, that it may have recourse to Him for a supply; as the
Child that cannot defend, or (it may be) carry it self on its own Legs, when
left, cries to the Father: Well were it if we could cry more after ours, for
that might make God draw near to us, when we cannot to him. What a dark frozen
thing is such a Northern Clime, where the Sun's Light shines not, and whither
its warm Beams reach not? But what a very nothing is every thing without a God
creating and supporting it? The very Chaos could not continue in its imperfect
confused being without the Spirit of God brooding upon Genesis 1. 2. (...)
it: And therefore when we see the Flowers opening to the Sun, and the Birds in
Winter-Season flying away into warmer Countries; they tell us, that (as we are
Creatures) for our being, and well-being, it is good to draw near to God; and
teach Confess. lib. 13. cap. 8.
us to make Austin's Confession, Male est mihi praeter te, non solum extra me,
sed in meipso, and omnis mihi copia, quae Deus meus non est, egestas est, Lord,
without thee how ill would it be with me? And that not only in regard of what is
without me, but also within me. Without thee, my greatest Plenty is errant
Beggary; and therefore such a poor Creature stands in need to dwell near to
such a Good Neighbor, to be warmed by his Fire, and fed at his Table. Lord,
it is good for me to beg an Alms at thy Bethesda; though I creep on my Knees, to
get as near as I can to thee.

And this the rather, if, in the third place, we consider the him, and for him,
and therefore unquiet Fecisti nos ad te, and irrequi etum est cor nostrum doneo
requiescat in te. Augustine. Confess. 41. c. 1. See Dr. Field of the Church.
lib. 1. c. 1.
and restless till it return to him. The right Line is turned into a Circle, in
which the Line is so reflected, that in its return it stays not, till it return
from whence it first came.

Of a Spiritual, Immortal, and Understanding Soul, of vast apprehensions and
desires.

Of a Sociable Nature, pity it should not have acquaintance with God. If not
good for Adam to be alone, without a Meet-help, (...) Genesis 2. 18. as always
before him, with whom he might be made one flesh: How ill to be without a
better help nearer at hand, with whom he may be made one Spirit?

Made after Gods Image, Genesis 1. 26. and therefore best when he can come nearest
to that first and best Copy.

With an understanding Soul, Job 35. 11. And therefore the more he knows, the
more he understands his own Dependency, and therefore sees a greater necessity
of drawing the nearer to the Fountain of his Being and Welfare.

Of a Capacious Apprehension, which nothing but this Primum Verum can fill, and
therefore wearys himself (Eccles. 12. 12.) in an endless search after Truth in
several Arts and Sciences: The World is set in his heart, Eccles. 3. 11. but
it is but little that he can attain, Job 26. 14. and not without a great deal of
difficulty is tired out in gathering up the Rays of Light and Truth, which
Scattered as Israel over Egypt, to gather stubble.
this Sun has scattered among the Creatures; but is not satisfied till he find
them all, and more than all in himself. This is eternal Life, to know thee, and
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, John 17. 3. In the Study of the Creature is
a toilsome task, Eccles. 1. 18. It Is in the near Vision of God, which the
understanding of a Man does fully acquiesce in, and so Intellectus est in
quiet. And as he is of a Capacious Apprehension, which nothing but this Primum
Verum can fill: So he is of a large heart and vast desires, which nothing but
this Summum bonum can satisfy; God only being El Shaddai, Exodus 6. 3. Genesis 17.
1. The God All-sufficient either to his own or our Happiness. Whence it is,
that when the Soul is once put off from him, Per devia errans, like the evil
Spirit in the Gospel, Mat. 12. 43. goes through dry Places, seeking rest, and
finds none; till with the Psalmist, he looks Home-ward to God, and says,
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, Psalm. 116. 7.

Sometimes, as Solomon in Ecclesiastes, he seeks and searches for what may
satisfy him in the Creature; and what content it can afford; and as there was
no Nation and Kingdom, in which Ahab did not hunt for Elijah, 1. Kings 18. 10.
and yet he could not be found: So there is no Creature in or under Heaven,
which in this busy search is not as it were unlapt and ransacked, if possibly
by the Profit or Pleasure of it content may be found lapt up in it. This busy
Be sits and sucks on every Flower, and like a Chemist makes Extractions of all
sorts out of all things, if from any from all he might gain such an Elixir as
may serve his turn. But the deep says, it is not in me. In all the inferior
Creatures Adam could not find a Meet-help, Genesis 2. 20. It Is pity that in any he
should meet with his Happiness. Solomon, when tired out with this wild and
eager pursuit, is glad at last to turn in to God: Let Us hear the conclusion of
the whole Matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole of
Man, Eccles. 12. 13. all one with this in the Text, It Is good for me to draw
near to God.

But before that, when vain Man has been wearied out in seeking that in the
Creature, which will not be found, before he will draw near to God, with Saul
he will rather apply himself to Satan, and dig as deep as Hell to find it,
trying whether that may be overtaken in a way of sin, which could not be met
with in the lawful Content of the Creature, and here he runs counteramain
Hell-ward, till he has quite wearied himself in that Course, Isa. 57. 10. adds
Drunkenness to Thirst, and Thirst to Drunkenness; when he has been most drunk,
yet thirsts the more, and the more he drinks, the more he thirsts; most unhappy
in that he seeks the Living amongst the Dead; mistakes Misery for Happiness,
and Hell for Heaven. But it is this Good that he looks and gropes for; though
now Blind-folded and turned off from God, he goes a quite contrary way: But yet
as Austin well observes, Mali propterea sunt mali ut sint In Psalm. 118. 1.
boni nempe beati: The wickedest Men do ill, that they might fare well. It Is a
Goodness and Happiness, that they make after. It Is (...) to which they
Sacrifice, a Deity which they serve; unhappy in this, that they grasp the Cloud
for Juno in their Hunting after the vain Creature, and worship the Devil
instead of the true God, 1 Cor. 10. 20. in their thus questing with open Mouth
after sinful Contentments; but yet whilst misled with these fowl Errors, they
bear witness to this Fundamental Truth, that whilst they so eagerly, but in
vain, pursue such false Goods, they plainly say, that it is good to draw near to
the True; so that the Man has lost himself when he has lost this Principle,
is rather a Beast, or a Devil, than a Man, that in Profession and Conversation
will not say, that it is good to draw near to God.

Especially if we consider that new Nature, which God works new Creature, the
holy frame of a Godly heart: As those Men, whose hearts God had touched,
followed Saul the Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel 10. 26. So those blessed Souls, which
Christ (that true Loadstone) has indeed touched, whilst it draws, they run
after him, Cant. 1. 4. Such Divine Sparks must needs move upward to their
proper Element, as the Virgula Divina bends that way that the Mine lies. And
this,

1. Partly from the inward Instinct of that Divine Nature which they partake
of, which makes them (...) (as the Apostle's 2 Pet. 1. 4.
word is, Phil. 2. 20.) even naturally care for the things of God, and propend
toward him, which appears by this, that whilst with others

-- Trahit sua quemque voluptas: Ad unum omnes, All of them, though of never
such different Ages, Parts, Conditions, nay, though of quite contrary Tempers
and Dispositions otherwise, yet (...), with one joint consent look, and
according to their several abilities draw toward God as near as they can. The
Swallow does not more naturally fly to the Saladine when hurt, or the Chicken
run to the Hen when in danger, than a Right-born Heir of Heaven to God his
Father. The newborn Babe cries, and the dying Christian now breathing out his
Soul, gasps and breaths after him: The one in the beginning of his Race thinks
it long till he comes at him, the other almost at the end of his, with Paul
Phil. 3. 13, 14. the further he goes, makes the more haste to him [in several
Paths, but all in one Road God-ward]: the one though he has not yet had such
experience of him, yet thinks how good it were; if he could get near him; the
other upon his long experience, thinks it best to keep close to him: when in
Affliction, he accounts his Presence more than all other things that he wants,
and when in Prosperity, he values the same Presence above all else that he
enjoys. I might Instance in many other Particulars: But these may suffice to
show, that amongst never so many Discords, they yet altogether make up this
Harmony, and from the general Instinct of that new Nature all cry out with the
Psalmist in the Text, It Is good for every one of us severally, for all of us
(the whole Chorus) jointly, to draw near and keep close to God.

2. But especially upon their deliberate Resolutions upon long trial and
experience, they thereby come more fully to know what they have found good to
apply themselves to; they cannot but conclude that it is best to draw near to
God.

At their first Conversion, they were sufficiently convinced of Hos. 2. 6, 7.
Jer. 3. 22, 23.
the Vanity, and oft-times of the Mischief of all other Applications, of the
Creatures utter Insufficiency for any saving Good to them. John Baptist, that
made way for Christ in their hearts, cried, All flesh is grass, Isa. 40. 6. The
first saving Breath, that breathed Life into them, blasted the Creature to
them: As soon as they began to live to God, the Flesh was mortified, and the
World crucified.

But further, In their after frequent Experience they have been herein more
confirmed; that, when their Souls have gone out to any Creature to support
them, they find the best so weak that they cannot, or nothing in comparison of
God; not at all without God: Father and Mother cast off, when God alone takes
up, Psalm. 27. 10. (and therefore Cease from Man, whose Breath is in his
Nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2. 22.)

And for others, so bad, that if they could, they would not; so that oft-times
they are the worse, the nearer they come to them. The Reed breaks, and pierces
the Hand, when leaned upon for support, Ezekiel. 29. 6, 7. the Briar scratcheth
and pricks, when gone to for shelter: They get as much good by applying
themselves to them, as Joseph did by going to his Brethren; or the Levite by
turning in to Gibeah. Of all others Genesis 37.
the Godly are deserted by Friends, and pursued by Enemies, and they themselves
a poor shiftless helpless People, and therefore it is good for the Conies, that
feeble folk, and so much hunted, to make their Houses in the Rock, Prove. 30.
26. It Is good for the Vine, so unable to subsist of it self, and so much plucked
by others, to clasp fast to the Elm: For me, that am plagued all the day long,
and chastned every morning, as the Psalmist said of himself, v. 14. for me, at
least, it is good to draw near to God. This by experience they find; and
therefore as Joshua said to Israel, If it seem evil to you to serve the Lord,
choose you whom you will serve; but I and my House will serve the Lord, Josh.
24. 15. So will every right-born Heir of Heaven, however others take offense
and go away, Joh. 6. 66. yet when asked, Whether they also would go away, (v.
67.) with Peter be ready resolvedly to answer, Lord, to whom should we go? Thou
have the words of Eternal Life; and we believe and are sure that thou art that
Christ, etc. ver. 68. We know, and have found and felt, what thou art in thy
self, and what thou have been to us in our keeping close to thee, and therefore
there is no talking or thinking of leaving thee. The faithful Soul from the very
Heart says, what the Psalmist v. 25. expresses; Lord, whom have I in Heaven
but thee? and there is none on Earth that I desire besides thee: And therefore
when others, v. 27. by their dear-bought experience, find at last nothing but
destruction is gained by being afar off, and going a whoring from thee, (...),
Quod ad me spectat, I that know this, and have had experience both of the
mischief of my being estranged from thee, and of the blessing of keeping close
to thee, I must hold to it, and shall ever (by the Grace of God) bide by it,
that it is good for me to draw near to thee.

Which teaches us with all humble thankfulness to think access; and without
which, as we now are, it would be as good for us to draw near to God, as for a
guilty Malefactor to the Bar of an angry Judge, or for Briars and Thorns to a
consuming fire, Isa. 27. 4. for so God is to Sinners out of Christ, Heb. 12.
29. And then; Who among us is able to dwell with devouring fire? Who among us
can dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33. 14. His Majesty is so infinitely
glorious, that (as the Apostle speaks) he dwells in Light unapproachable, 1 Timothy 6. 16.

His Holiness so impatient of sinful defilement, that he cannot endure to
behold it, Hab. 1. 13. so that even the impudent sinner gets as far as he can
out of his fight, that he may more freely commit it, Isa. 29. 15. and the
humbled blushing sinner cannot stand before him by reason of it, Ezra. 9. 6, 15.

His Justice is so strict, and his Wrath so dreadful, as makes Adam, when now
under guilt, hide himself; Cain run out of his Genesis 3. Genesis 4. Luke 18. 13.
Rev. 6. 15, 16.
presence; the poor humbled Publican stand afar off; and the forlorn damned
Souls at the last day desire Mountains and Rocks to fall upon them, rather than
he should see them, and, as Basil thinks, wish rather to lie still in the
Prison of Hell, than to be brought out before him to his Judgment Seat.

How awful is that sad word of God's being sanctified in them that draw nigh to
him, Levit. 20. 3! And how dreadful is that Threat of God's drawing near to
Judgment, Mal. 3. 5! And can it then be so good, to draw near to such a God so
glorious and terrible? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, said the Romans
7. 25.
Apostle in alike case; and so does the faithful Soul in this, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord: Through him my Propitiatory I find my Judge on a
Mercy-Seat: and so it is good to draw near: happy that we may, and more happy if
we will. It was he, that engaged his heart to approach to God, Jer. 30. 21.
That Son of Man, that drew near to the ancient of days, Dan. 7. 13. and so
brings us with him, as Joseph did his Brethren into the Genesis 47. 2.
King's presence. As our near Kinsman taking our Nature into the nearest Union
of his Person, so as in this Glass we see the Glory John 1. 14. Heb. 2. 14.
of God so refracted and attempered to our weakness, that instead of being
oppressed with it, we are changed into it, 2. Cor. 3. 18. By our blessed
Emanuel God is so with us, as that we may have free and near access to him.

Whilst his Holiness and Obedience become a Vail to cover our Defilement.

And his Blood has so fully quenched the fiery Indignation of his Father's
Wrath, that we, who by the Law are kept at a distance afar off, Exodus 20. 18.
and 24. 2. have by the Gospel of Christ brought to us a better hope, by which
we draw nigh to God, Heb. 7. 19.

And what now remains? but that seeing it is so good to draw near to God, we
be all exhorted in his fear to be so good to our selves, as to keep no longer
at a distance. Let Strangers, yea Enemies, draw near, and let Friends draw yet
nearer. Let not our sins any longer separate us, and then let not unbelief
dishearten us. Remember, that as on the one side the Spirit and the Bride say,
came; and he that bears says, come, viz. in the desires and outgoings of
their Soul to Christ; so he on the other side, in his desire of their union
with him, ecchoeth back again, And he that is athirst, come; and whosoever
will, let him take of the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22. 17. And then, as the
Lord says, Jer. 30. 21. Who is he that engages his heart to approach unto me?
So I in the Name of the Lord, whilst I look upon this great Congregation, am
bold to ask the Question; But who amongst you all is such an Enemy to his own
good, as will not now and henceforth ever hereafter engage his whole heart to
make yet nearer approaches to this God, who is so good, and in drawing near to
whom consists our everlasting happiness? Some Interpreters upon that Text,
think that the Question, Who is he that engages his heart, etc. is made by way
of a troubled admiration that so few do. But I beseech you let it not so be,
but that (as others rather think) by way of encouragement, as though he had
said, But who is that blessed Man, that I may see him, and go out to meet him?
And therefore as Jebu in another case said, Who is on my side? who? and it is
added, That two or 2 King. 9. 32.
three Eunuchs looked out. Though I desire not in other things to make any
sidings, (there are too many already) yet in regard of our drawing near to God,
I make no factious question, if I ask of you all; But who will be on the Lord's
side? who? Who of you will now engage your hearts to approach to God? Let it
not, I beseech you, be two or three, but many. O that I could prevail with you
all. Here say one and all, I and I, and (as it is said in the Prophet) I will go
also. Let the forwardest Christian, Zech. 8. 21.
that has advanced furthest, say, I by the Grace of God will make one; and let
the humbled sinner, that is now but first looking after Christ, say, and I fain
would make another. Instead of our present uncomfortable estrangements from
Christ and one another, happy we, if with our faces Sion-ward we could take
hold one of another, the strongest of the weakest, and those that are estranged
of them with whom they have been most at odds, and so go hand in hand together,
saying, Come, let us Jer. 50. 5.
join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten.
This joint drawing near to God in the good old way of the Power of Godliness
(which by our new Devices is now too much out of fashion) would make us leave
off our crooked bypaths, and cross walkings, in which we now so justle, and at
last so quite loose one another.

Loud calls and strong persuasions in this kind are not wanting.

1. In this blessed Motion, the Terminus ad quem is God; who is so good, as
that there is in him vis infinita magnetica, such a wonderful attractive power
and force, as may trahere, nay, rapere animam, draw and snatch the Soul to him,
in a way of a sweet but irresistible violence. Our Savior said, That when he
was lifted up, he would draw all Men to him, John 12. 32. Even so, Amen, Lord
Jesus, thou faithful and true Witness.

Especially as God in Christ looks out, and comes out to us; how earnest is he
to call us? how glad to welcome us? how ready more than half way to meet us?
When the Prodigal began to come, the Father ran, Luke 15. 20. Desperate
Prodigal, when thy Heavenly Father draws near, will thou draw backward? Oh take
heed of it, lest God's Soul take no pleasure in thee, Heb. 10. 38. Think what a
step thy Savior took in his Incarnation to come to thee* Inaestimabilis
dignatio, and penitus inexcogitabilis, Sermon. 1. de Advent.
quod in carceris hujus horrorem descendere dignata est Celsitudo, as Bernard
speaks. When he cannot express it, he cannot think of it without admiration:
Non est Consu^tudo divitum ut ad pauperes veniant, etc. At least therefore,
though we cannot go, being lame and blind, at saltem conetur erigere caput and
aliquatenus assurgere in occursum tanti Medici. And yet besides, in all the
after-travel of his Soul think how he came leaping over Mountains, and skipping
over Hills, that he might get to thee before thou perishedst eternally. By his
Word and Spirit does he not sometimes come very near thee? In the Sacrament,
though there be no Transubstantiation, yet is there not a very near union with
thee? And is not all this enough to draw thee?

2. If not, consider then the Terminus a quo, that estate, which of thy self
thou art in, and think if it may not drive thee. It may be thou art of their
mind, who, when God bad them return, returned this answer, We are Lords, we
will come no more unto thee, Jer. 2. 31. Though God be never so good, and it be
very good to draw near to him, yet we are so well, that we need not trouble our
selves in making out after him. I, so? woeful blind Creature, that have lost thy
self and thine eyes together that thou can not see it; were thou not
deadlily lethargical, thou would be more sensible of thine own wants: were
thou not wholly a stranger at home, thou would see nothing but misery and
beggary there, that would thrust thee out for supply elsewhere. So far as thou
art off from Christ, so far from Righteousness, Isa. 46. 12. and just so far
from blessedness. And what then? so deadly sick, and not so much as to send for
thy Physician! such a Sinner, and not so much as to look out for a Savior!
Does the Avenger of Blood pursue thee, and do thou not fly to the City of
Refuge? to the hope that is set before thee? Does Hell behind thee gape for
thee? and no need, no care of Christ and Heaven to receive thee?

But had we less need in that kind, yet even in outward respects the World is
never so good, but, when at best, it is good to draw near to God: But it is now
so bad, that I think David's Prayer will not sound ill in any of our Mouths,
Lord, be not thou far off, for trouble is near. I delight not to read
State-Lectures out of a Pulpit; I am not of the Privy-Councel, either of God or
our Governors, to tell you what will be: but without me your own hearts will
tell you what very probably may be: though the Weather for the present be
somewhat fair, yet at best it is very doubtful. If we consult our sins, they will
tell us that there is likely to be a Storm; and then if we would consult our
own peace, we cannot but think it good to be provided of a shelter. Our sad
experiences of all that hitherto we have had recourse to fully evidence to us,
that none of them are tight enough, but it may and will drop through, save God
only: and therefore in such doubtful Circumstances, I think it safest to join
with the strongest Party: But mistake me not, I mean not such as Men out of
self-interests are wont to close with; that is falseness and baseness; but I
mean in a way of Faith and Obedience to God, and I am sure that he is
strongest. Neither is it cowardice in such a Storm, to thrust the Head into
such a Corner. David was no Coward, and yet, as the weak fearful Chick, he gets
himself under the shadow of God's Wings, till calamity be over-past, Psalm. 57.
1. Till then, because we may yet live to see and say, as in the Verse before
the Text, Lo, they are perished that are far from thee, let every faithful Soul
conclude in the words of the Text, Therefore it is good for me to draw near to
God.

And if so, it is further matter, 1. Of Comfort to some; 2. Of Reproof and
Humiliation to others; 3. Of Instruction and Direction to us all.

Comfort to such as do draw near and keep close. If it be so be not at a
distance? Though Enemies be near to accuse and condemn, if Christ be but near
to justify and acquit us, Isa. 50. 8. though thou be far from Peace, if not
far from God; though others thrust us away, as Isa. 65. 5. and cast us out, if
Christ will but then draw near and find us, as he did him, John 9. 34, 35. The
Proclamation of old was, Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Zion, shout, O Daughter
of Jerusalem: Behold, thy King comes unto thee, having Salvation, lowy, and
riding upon an Ass, Zech. 9. 9. May there be but an happy meeting of my Lord
and King coming to me, and of my Soul drawing and keeping close to him, I Will
rejoice and shout, to see my Savior so near to me, though upon an Ass-Colt;
whatever outward Meanness, or Wants, yea, or Dangers and Miseries, these nearer
approaches and interviews are accompanied with; yet therein I do rejoice, yea,
and will rejoice; nay, cannot but rejoice, says the Experienced Christian,
that knows what this goodness of drawing and keeping near to God (in the Text)
means. When he says, it is Good; he could not say a better word; and when he
adds to draw nigh to God, he could not, I am sure, mention a better thing. It Is
Good, spoken Indefinitely, meant Universally. It Is so only Good, that nothing
is good without it (though the Torch-light be very great, it is Night till
Sunrise) so universally Good, that nothing with it can be ill; or be things
never so ill, yet he is far from being ill, who has God so near him. It was
Israel's Comfort in a Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. The lamenting Church's Stay when
sinking, Lam. 3. 57. At the last Day, when the whole World shall be on Fire, we
are even then bid lift up our Heads, because our Salvation draws nigh; Luke
21. 28. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
When Christ comes again to us, and we shall be caught up into the Clouds to
meet him, and so for ever to be with the Lord. Visio, amor, gaudium, you know,
make up Heavens Happiness, but all arise from God's and Christ's nearest Union
and Presence. There indeed we shall come to nearest approaches, and they so
near as utterly for ever to drive all evils away as the Noon-day-Sun all Mists
and Clouds. That Is Heaven, which we are not yet got into. It Is well if we be so
far on our way, as to be in the Gate of Heaven; if we that were afar off, be
made near by the Blood of Christ, whilst we here walk by Faith and not by
Sight. Such Morning-Suns may admit of some over-cloudings, but more Light than
Darkness, when the Sun is up and drawn so nigh. I may in other respects, be in
a dry thirsty Wilderness: But I shall not die for Thirst, if I lie so near the
Fountain Head. I shall not be Heart-sick, if I may come so near, as to lay my
aching Head in my Savior's Bosom. Joseph's encouragement to his famished
Brethren was, Genesis 45. 10, 11.
that they should be nigh to him in Goshen: It shall be comfort enough to me,
if my Jesus will but tell me, that I shall be nigh Him, though it be in a
Wilderness; whilst cold Northern Climes (because far from the Sun) have a
desolate horrid Aspect: With what a virdant Flourish do those Countries smile,
and laugh, and sing, that are nearer, and lie more directly under his Beams?
Let frozen-hearted Sinners, that are far from the Sun of Righteousness, be as
far from Heart-melting joys; but such as upon whom He has Risen, and have got
so near as to be under his Wings, let them get so much lively Warmth and
Healing from them, that wherever you read those words, a People near unto
him, the next word may be Halelujah, as Psalm. 148. 14. Let God hear the Voice
of Joy and Praise from them that are near about him; Whilst uncomfortable
Dejections would better beseem them that are estranged from him. Such
Sackcloth becomes not the King of Heaven's Court, nor them that are so near to
him, as to behold his Face, and to be before him. It Is an Aguish distemper, if,
when near the Fire, or in the warm Sun, thou sit shiverring. Leave such
kind of amazed Palsic-shakings to profane Cains, that run out of God's
Presence, Genesis 4. 16. to Stran^^ and Enemies, who know not how good it is to
draw near to him, and justly deserve the worst of all Evils for their foolish
and froward withdrawing of themselves from him. Which leads me,

To the next Application, which speaks Terror to some, Jonah 2. 8.
and Humiliation to us all, that by following after lying Vanities, and
departing from the Living God, we so much forsake our own Mercy. If so good to
draw near to God, then it is an evil thing, and bitter, to forsake him, Jer. 2.
19. This the foregoing Verse compared with the Text suggests to us; there we
read, For lo, they that are far from thee shall perish; thou have destroyed
all them that go a whoring (...) ^^ee: And then the Text adds, But it is good
for me to draw near to God. Just so much Good as comes by our drawing near to
him, so much Evil and Mischief befalls us by being far from him. As much Warmth
and Life, Flourish and Fruitfulness, as the Summers Sun brings in its drawing
near to us; so much Cold and barren Deadness does it leave beind it, when in
Winter it with-draws it self from us. Woe to you when I depart from you, said
God to Israel, Hos. 9. 12. And, Lord, woe to us, say we, that we should have
such evil hearts of unbelief, that we should so depart from thee. For if so
much Good follows upon such happy Approaches and Meetings, then nothing less
than utter Ruin can be the Consequent of a mutual Parting. When thou leavest
the Blessed God, give a Longum vale, and adieu for ever to thine own Happiness:
For just as far from the one, as from the other. And (which is worst) because
by our Out-runnings we cannot get out of his Reach; the further we are from God
in one sense, the nearer we shall be in another; the further from
Righteousness, Isa. 46. 12. the nearer to a Curse, Heb. 6. 8. It will be the
saddest learning the truth of this Point, what a Blessed thing it is to draw
nigh to God, to be chid from Christ's Presence with that Soul-sinking word,
Depart from me, ye Cursed, at the last Day. Matthew. 25. 41.
They are deep and heavy words, (...), 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. It Is everlasting
Destruction, if Expulsi a facie, as Beza renders it, if it be so, from the
Presence of the Lord, and his Glorious Power. And therefore that we may prevent
that Howling then, how tuneable would it be sweetly, and yet sadly, to bewail
and mourn over

1. Our natural Estrangement from God, which the Psalmist Psalm. 58. 3.
says, we were acquainted with from the very Birth? (...), They are Estranged
from the Womb, they go astray as soon as they are Born. Now what Monsters are
we all from the Birth? That before we know to refuse the Evil and choose the
Isa. 7. 16.
Good, by a kind of natural Instinct we can tell how to refuse the Good and
choose the Evil; before we can go, can run away from God. See this in a
threefold Instance.

1. When Nature is left to its Swing without renewing, or some measure of
restraining Grace; for were there none, we should be very Devils to God and one
another, (...), Hos. 11. 7. Even bent to Backsliding: That may express
Suspensi haerent aversioni a me, Jun.
a more stiff bent of a perverse Heart from a further contracted Averseness,
but yet so as (...) the (...), and natural propension of the Heart, Animus
pendulus, dubious haesitat circa conversionem meam, as Grotius renders it: When
(as it is there expressed) called upon to turn home to God, the Heart naturally
sticks, and stops, and hangs off, as you may see some Trees do from others
planted by them, which from some occult quality in Nature agree not with them.
What else mean all these Stirs in our Hearts, and Tumults in the World, but
when called to God, all is its an uproar? Acts 16. 19, 20. and 19. 28. and 21.
28. Wretched Creatures, that have an Antipathy to their Creator! graceless
Natures, that do not more ungraciously than unnaturally start back from a
Savior!

2. Or if any be more ingenuous, and (as you call it) a little better-natured,
that with him in the Gospel they be not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, Mark
12. 34. yet even that, rested in, keeps them from ever coming up to Jesus
Christ. Pity that Rachel should die, when it was now but a little way to come
Genesis 35. 16.
to Ephrath, that an Almost should altogether keep so many a towardly Man from
Heaven: But a thousand pities that my drawing so near the Goal should set me
down as having gone far enough, and so keep me from ever attaining the Prize,
that Ingenuity, because it is so near akin to Grace, should prove so
Disingenuous, as to keep a Man from ever being truly Gracious

3. Even in the Godly themselves, in whom this perverseness of Nature is not
wholly subdued, what is their greatest Burden and Moan? But, as Romans 7. 18, 21,
23, 24. that makes us so listless, and sometimes so averse from drawing near to
God in holy Duties, and especially in those in which nearest Communion is to be
had with him. Rather read than hear the Word, rather hear than pray and
meditate; and rather pray than examine our Hearts. Mourn we therefore over our
bad, nay, our best Natures; that if they walk not contrary to God, yet at best
cannot be drawn up the Hill near enough to him. Mourn, Levit. 26. 23. (...) in
occursum.
I say, over our natural Estrangement from God.

2. Over our actual Out-runnings, and more wild and endless Vagaries in our
sinful Courses and Practices. It Is a wicked departing from God, (...), 2 Samuel
22. 22. And here, as in sin, there is a double Irregularity, an Aversio a Deo,
and a Conversio ad Creaturam; so in this our sinful not drawing near to God,
(...), Jam. 1. 14.
there is a double Miscarriage, which we are to be humbled for.

1. Our inordinate Conversion, and Turning to the Creature; (a hankering after
something else, when a hanging off from God) that instead of God, there are so
many other things which we draw so near, and keep so close to, as Sin, Self,
the World, etc. Indeed any thing rather than God.

Not a sinful Lust, but a corrupt Heart is in the earnest pursuit of it, Prove.
11. 19. rests not till it overtake it, and it then proves a Member, cleaves so
fast, is such a right Eye, and Hand, and Foot, that it is death to part with it;
here the unchaste Soul amplexibus haeret: We are drawn to an Holy God, and off
from an unholy Lust, with the like and very same difficulty.

For Self, Proximus egomet mihi holds here, and holds us so fast, that too often
it withholds us from drawing near to God. Nothing shall come between us and
our selves, when any thing almost can be suffered to put in between our God and
our Souls. We hug Self in the warmest Bosom, and clasp about our selves with
lovingest Embraces: Our own Opinions we do mordicus tenere; our Votes we adhere
to, Our own understandings we lean to; Prove. 3. 5. De Verbis Apost. Ser. 13.
Dicebat Epicuraeus, mihi frui carne bonum est; dicebat Stoicus mihi frui mea
mente bonum est. But for our Psalmist, Mihi adhoerere Deo, bonum est. So St.
Austin.

And for the World, Solomon says, God has set it in Man's heart, Eccles. 3.
11. He means to contemplate him in it; but we pervert his meaning, whilst the
whole desire and bent of the Heart closes with it, and is fastened in it. It Is
the Market which you see all going to. They say the Earth has vim magneticam;
and some think, that if you should dig deep enough into it, you should find it
a perfect Loadstone. Sure I am, some Men's hearts are so deeply buried in it,
that they find a perfect Loadstone of it. It Is not so much the Center of the
World, as of our Hearts, as the chief Good which they move to, and rest in, and
cannot be parted from, instead of accounting it our chief Good to draw near to
God.

The covetous too-good Husband makes his Goods his chief Good. You call him a
near Man, and not amiss, because he desires to be nearer to himself than to
God, Jer. 22. 17. The Idle Drone with Ass-like Issachar, says, That rest is
good, Genesis 49. 15. And the wanton Epicure places his best good in his Pleasure,
and a Turkish Paradise. Haec est maxima merces and interminabilis, is the
highest Point of the Alcoran's Divinity.

I omit to show how in point of honor and preferment (in which the ambitious
place the highest pitch of their happiness) such statelier Plumes lure
high-soaring Spirits, how Beauty draws after it many Men's eyes, the loving
Wife, the pleasant Child, the faithful Friend take our very hearts, and that
too often from God. In company and enjoyment of them our Souls are so snatched
to them, so immersed, do so dwell in them, that we are ready to sit down and
say with Peter, and more inconsiderately than he, it is good to be here, rather
than to advance on, and with the Psalmist in the Text to say, It Is good to draw
near to God.

2. Which is the other part of our sin; namely our Aversio a Deo, our froward
aversness, and awke hanging off from God, as from the greatest Stranger, or
worst Enemy. So false-hearted, that after fair Advances we often draw back in a
sly retrograde Motion, Heb. 10. 38, 39. So peevish, that when he reaches out
the hand, we pluck away the shoulder, Nehem. 9. 29. when called to him, we run
the faster and farther from him, Hos. 11. 2. So proud, that we are Lords, and
will not come at him, Jer. 2. 31. So profane, that we are either afraid or
ashamed to be near him; and therefore such bid the Almighty depart, Job 21. 14,
15. and the Prodigal gets himself into a far Country, that so he might be
further out of his Father's fight; and so with more freedom satisfy his lusts,
and will rather join himself to a Farmer to feed Hogs, and to be fed with
Husks, than to come home to his Father to have Childrens Bread: any way rather
than home, and Sub oculo Catonis. Cupiditas -- junxit porcis, a patre piissimo
quem sejunxit, Chrysolog. Sermon. 1.
any thing rather than a Father's presence. Fond desperate Soul,

-- Nescis temeraria, nescis
Quem fugias, ideoque fugis. --
Did thou but know what thou leavest, thou would draw nearer; and what thou
pursuest, thou would stand further off. Will a fainting Man leave the Snow of
Lebanon? And shall the cold flowing Waters be forsaken? Jer. 18. 14. Do not
such Shadows, the faster thou pursuest them, fly the faster from thee? Like the
foolish Boy running after the Be to catch it, sequendo labitur, assequendo
laeditur. Have not all such things, which draw out thy Soul so after them, as
to withdraw it from God, have they not either a Wing to fly away, that thou
never overtakest what thou seek, or a sting to hurt thee, when thou have
overtaken them? that thou gettest more hurt than good by them? Is not Dina
ravished, thy Soul abused and defiled by such out-gaddings? Is not (I say not
Health, Estate, Esteem, but it may be) thy Life, thy Soul lost in such
ramblings, and (which is worst of all, and above all) God lost too? Cain went
out of the presence of the Lord; but he thereupon dwelt in the Land of Nod, as
a trembling amazed vagrant Wretch in a most unsettled condition ever after, Genesis
4. 14, 16. Jonah also fled frrom the presence of the Lord; but a tempestuous
Wind is sent out with Hue and Cry after him; and when laid up in the close
Prison of the Whale's belly, he then confesses he had forsaken his own mercy.
The Prodigal went into a far Country; but the further from his Father, the
nearer to Ruin. Though we are studious to put far from us the evil day, Amos
6. 3. Yet, as the Lord lives, there is but a step between us and death, as
long as we keep at such a distance from the God of our Salvation; mischiefs
then near at hand to come, and irrecoverable when come. It Is said, that Laish
had no Deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, Judge. 18. 28. But who will be
thy Deliverer when Enemies are near, Ezekiel. 9. 1. Death near, Psalm. 107. 18.
Judgment near, Heb. 10. 25. And thou further from God? In this case H. de S.
Victore tells us, what In Psalm. 63.
Men usually betake themselves to; Aliis in necessitate bonum est consilium
suum, aliis in prosperitate bonum est gaudium suum, mihi unicum bonum est
adhaerere Deo. In Prosperity they think it is good for them to betake themselves
to their delights, and in straits to their shifts. But (...). This one direct
course of drawing near to God will be of more use than all their other Shifts
and Applications. Illos consilium non liberat, gaudium non conservat; as the
same Author there adds: all other nearest and dearest Friends may fail us, may
not come at us, Nehem. 4. 19. may cast us off, as Psalm. 27. 10. It Is God only
drawing near that must relieve us. And then, woe to us, if he only draw near to
us as an Enemy or Judge, (as Mal. 3. 5.) to take vengeance, not to rescue us as
our best Friend.

And therefore in the last place, this is of special use for direction

1. Of our Judgment in a right estimate of true goodness, which most Men are
inquisitive after. It Is the Voice of Nature, Who will show us any good? Psalm.
4. 6. and yet which very few are well resolved in, according to that of
Solomon, Who knows what is good for Man? etc. Eccles. 6. 12. But the Psalmist
affords a full Answer to both those great Questions, when after a long and
strong debate in the foregoing part of the Psalm, he concludes, It Is good for
me to draw near to God: and by good (as we have shown) he means the prime and
chiefest and best Good; mihi quidem optimum, so the Arabic has it. Now then
primum in unoquoque genere est mensura reliquorum, The first and chiefest in
every kind is the Rule and Measure of the rest. Let this therefore be the
Standard, by which we always measure the goodness of every thing that we most
value and set the highest price on: and let this be the Rule, which in such
prizings we go by, that that is indeed good, by which we are drawn near to God,
and that best by which we get nearest. My God is my goodness, Psalm. 144. 2. and
therefore that only (at least that principally) I must call good, by which I am
drawn nearer to God. Indeed because Bonum and Ens convertuntur, we are ready to
call any thing good; and because finis and bonum convertuntur, accordingly
every thing is good, at least in our eyes, which either is an end we aim at, or
a means conducing to it: And so, as the Apostle said in another kind, There be
Gods many, and Lords many; but to us there is but one God, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. So
there are many things which in Scripture Phrase, and ordinary use, are called
good: a good Day, good Company, a good Work or Employment; and so of the rest.
But in a Believer's estimate there is but one main chief good, and that is to
draw near to God; and all other things are only good reductive, as either they
may be reduced to this, or we led 1 Samuel 25. 8. Esther 8. 17.
to God by them. Some call it a good Time, and the Scripture calls it a good
Day, that is a day and time of feasting and rejoicing; but if they be Festivals,
rather than Holy Days; times in which we run a whoring from God, rather than
draw near to him; account that day to thee the worst in the year, in which thou
runnest furthest from God; and let that ever be accounted good Company, and
good Employment, etc. in and after which thy heart was most drawn out after
God; but if more deaded and straightened, God and thy Soul more estranged by it;
either certainly it was bad in it self, or at least unhappily it proved not
good to thee. If Jacob take a Wife of the Daughters of Heth, what good will my
life do me? said Rebekah, Genesis 27. 46. And what good will the goodliest
Beauties, and most delightful Objects in the World do thee, if (as the
Daughters of Heth did Esau's, so.) they draw off thine heart from God, whom to
draw near and keep close to is so good, as nothing is good without it; nothing
so bad as that which comes most cross to it. And this for direction of our
Judgment in a right estimate of true goodness.

2. Of our practice in our earnestest pursuit after our own happiness. Let this
Text (It Is good for me to draw near, and keep close to God) be ever our Vade
mecum to quicken us, still and ever to draw nearer and cleave faster. Draw nigh
to God, and he will draw nigh to you, says the Apostle, Jam. 4. 8. The Promise
is very heartning, that in these our approaches God (as the Father to the
Prodigal) will meet us the half way: but therefore it lays a greater
engagement upon us to mind the Duty. Let us draw near with a true heart, and
full assurance of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
Heb. 10. 22. Happy that we may, that such, as whose unworthiness is such, as
their place is with the Publican to stand afar off, and whose Guilt Luke 18. 13.
is such, as with Cain may make them run from God, may have liberty and
boldness of access to draw near to God; that the Exodus 3. 2.
Bush should burn and not be consumed, was not so great a Miracle, as that such
dry Stubble as we are should draw nigh to that God which is a consuming Fire,
and not perish in everlasting Burnings. That Blood of Sprinkling, which has
quenched the Fire of God's Wrath, being sprinkled on us has so cooled the
inflammations of our wounded and afrighted Consciences, that we with humble
boldness may draw near. We had need therefore look to it that we do.

And here now the faithful Soul breaths out the Psalmist's Prayer, Lord, cause
me to know the way, for I lift up my Soul unto Psalm. 143. 8. Psalm. 27. 8.
thee. Thou say unto me, Seek ye my Face; and my heart echoes back again,
Thy Face, O Lord, will I seek. When thou call to us, Return ye backsliding
Children; from our Souls we return this Answer, Behold, we come unto thee, for
thou art the Jer. 3. 22.
Lord our God. Thou have fastened Cords of Love upon our Hearts, thou have
savingly touched them, that they strongly move toward thee, they cleave to
thee, or they follow hard after thee, as it is Psalm. 63. 8. But the distance
between thee and us is great, the obstacles many, and the way hard we are to be
found, yet so to walk in it, as by it to attain to these blessed Approaches;
and therefore here the main Query is, in what way, and by what means we may so
draw near to thee, as to cleave close and abide with thee for ever?

SERMON. XXXI.
PSALM. 73. 28. III. Sermon, Preached at St. Mary's. December. 2. 1649.
It is good for me to draw near to God.


THe best Prospect to take View of the Creature's Beauty is at a greater
Distance, and in a transient Glance, whilst nearer standing and longer looking
discovers Blemishes and Deformities in choicest Beauties. But Moses bids Israel
stand still, if they would see God's Salvation: Here Juvat usque morari, when
gotten upon the Mount to a Glymps of this Transfiguration, Peter thinks it is
good to be here: He was ^^t well awake, when he spoke of making a Tabernacle;
he should have said a Mansion. Which, I hope, will excuse my longer dwelling
upon this Text, which speaks of our drawing near to God, with whom it is best to
abide for ever. In two former Sermons I have ^^deavoured to show how Good, how
every way Good it is to draw near to God, and that it might come the nearer to
us, I have endeavored also to set it home in the Application.

Now as to that Question, which in the Close of the last Discourse was but
barely propounded, viz. In and by what Way and Means we may draw near to God, I
say, as to that Question, when Thomas was stumbling on it, our Savior returns
this full Answer (John 14 5, 6.) I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no Man
comes unto the Father, but by me. We come to God by Christ, Heb. 7. 25. But of
this before. And therefore it now only remains to show by what Means, and
after what Manner we may by Christ thus draw near to God.

And here let me Premise in general; That

1. First it must be in due time, according to that, Isa 55. 6. Seek the Lord
while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. That Glorious God,
who in the perfection of his Essence and Majesty is at an infinite Distance from
us; and yet further removed by our sins, is pleased so far to humble himself
and stoop to us, as graciously to look toward us, and sometimes especially to
draw very near to us, as the Sun from on High in the Firmament by darting down
his warm Light and inlivening Beams, especially in his Summer-approaches. In
the Ministry of his Word God holds out his Hand, Romans 10. 21. and by the
Inspirations of his Spirit he lays hold on our Hearts. In both our Beloved puts
in his Hand by the hole of the Door, Cant. 5. 4.
and says, as unto Thomas, Reach hither thy Finger, and put thy Hand into my
Side: Or as to his Spouse, Cant. 2. 13. Arise John 20. 27.
my Love, my fair One, and come away. When thus Christ by his Spirit comes a
Woing to the Spouse, and after this manner whispers in thy Heart, he is come
very near thee, (as our Savior said) even at the Doors: And now that this Door
stands Mark 13. 29.
open, and Christ is coming out to meet thee; now come forth ye Daughters of
Jerusalem, and behold King Solomon, Cant. 3. 11. Now lift up your Heads, O ye
Gates, Psalm. 24. 7. Now, now is the time of Access. How deep may thou get
into thy Savior's Bosom, when thus wide opened? How much way may thou rid,
when thy spread Sail is filled with such a Gale? The Golden Scepter is reached
out; no danger or fear now to draw near, but only of missing the Opportunity.
When thou hear the sound of a going on the top of the Mul^erry Trees, then
bestir thy self, as God said to David, 2 Samuel 5. ^. when Christ thus knocks,
and would come in.

Now a wicked and froward Locking the Door against him may lose him for ever,
so that although thou should after knock and strive to enter, his Door may be
shut as well as thine, Luke 13. 24, 25. and all the answer thou have, be as it
is, v. 27. Depart from me, I know you not. God (says Aben Ezra) may be found
in any place, and at any time, but it must be ante obsignationem decreti: When
the Door of Mercy is Sealed up, look for no Entrance; so desperate is a wilful
refusal: Nay, so dangerous is a careless neglect, that in this our Advance it
may give us such a Back-cast, as will very hardly again be recovered, but that
we may come limping behind, and go halting to our Graves. The very Spouse's
Drowsiness and Coyness, cost her many a both wearisom and dangerous Step,
before she could again meet with her Beloved. There was indeed a Provision in
the Law, that they, who being far off in a Journey could not keep the Passover
in the first Month, might do it in the second; and the like Custom was among
the Romans, but remember See Grotius, in N^mb. 9. 10. etc.
that (but in that Case) it was Death to the Jews, [and that Case cannot be
here, for we may draw near to God in a Journey, when far from Home,] and with
the Romans, they were called Stultorum feriae. Let us therefore in these our
drawings near to God walk not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the time by
laying hold of every Opportunity. They are wont to say, a Wise Man will make
more Opportunities than he finds: What Fools then shall we be, if we take not
such as we find? Especially if we may be so advantaged to find God, and draw
near to him by them?

2. This drawing near, and keeping close to God, as it must be in due Season,
so with all Sincerity; as Barnabas exhorted the Disciples, (...), to cleave to
the Lord with full purpose of Heart, Acts 11. 23. Our approaches to God, should
be out of an inward and real tendency of our Souls to him, as of the Iron to
the Loadstone, or the Stone to the Center, not forced, or feigned.

Either out of Malice, to have advantage to do the more Mischief, as Judas drew
near and saluted Christ, when it was to betray him; or those false Brethren,
Gal. 2. 4. who crept in to epsy the Disciples Liberty. Christ and his Church
have too often such Snakes in their Bosom, as venomous Spiders in Kings Palaces.

Or out of Hypocrisy, as Men draw near and salute in a Complement, so some
cleave to the Church, but it is with Flatteries, Dan. 11. 34. nay, some compass
God himself about with Lies, Hos. 11. 12. draw near to him with Mouth and Lip,
whilst the Mat. 15. 8.
Heart is far from him, Isa. 29. 13. How prodigiously profane is the Hypocrites
Impudence, that with such Vizards dare approach so piercing an Eye, and draw so
near to play with such consuming Flames.

3. This drawing near to God, as it is to be with this sincerity of Heart, so
with all the intention of the Soul. This that (...) also imports, when it is
not Frigide and simulate, sed sincero and ardenti studio, as Beza paraphraseth
it, with full purpose of Heart, (...) with all the desire of the Mind, as that
of the Levites, Deuteronomy. 18. 6. It Is no lazy pace, but a rapt motion, in which
the Soul is snatched from all else to be fixed in God. It Is upon the Chariots of
Amminadah, shuns all Cant. 6. 12.
Delays, over-masters all Difficulties, is impatient of any thing to come
between it and its Beloved. Nihil libidinosi amatores, nihil conflataus Vulcano
e duobus unus, etc. None of the most loving Pairs, that either the Scriptures
express, or Poets fable, come near these passionate Outgoings of the Soul, or
these former Unions, Omnia illa naturalia, hyperbolica, fabulosa, turpia, etc.
as Austin speaks: There is an invincible irresistible Power in these mutual
Cords of Love, to draw hard and bind fast, as he said excellently, Grace
wins infallibly, holds inseparably, Dr. Field, of the Church. l. 1. c. 3.
leads undeclinably. The Union is so close, that it is a mutual Inhabitation,
John 6. 56. The Ty is so strong, that it is come to Paul's (...), 1 Cor. 7. 35.
The Soul cleaves, Psalm. 63. 8. as Jonathan's to David his sweetest Friend, 1 Samuel 18. 1. or as the loving Husband to his dearest Wife, Genesis 2. 24. so
cleaves to God, as it leaves all for him.

But this leads me off from this manner of drawing near to God, to the Way and
Means of such approaches.

1. For the first is Removendo prohibens, a careful avoiding 1. Negative.
of that which sets God and us at a distance, and that is Sin only: It Is not
thy outward Meanness, which may indeed occasion proud Men to bid thee keep
back, and stand there at a distance, Jam. 2. 3. Nor thy Poverty, which Solomon
observes is wont to separate the poor Man from his Neighbor, Prove. 19. 4. Not
the most dangerous and infectious Sickness, which may make thy Lovers and
Friends (as David 's) stand aloof off from thy Sore, Psalm. 38. 11. But Blessed
be our God, who stoops lower than Man will, and draws nearer than best Friend
sometimes either can or dare. It Is neither Prison nor Pesthouse, that the Son
of Righteousness disdains to look in at, or keeps the God of Heaven out from
keeping his poor dejected Servants company. Christ meets his cured Patient,
when Men had cast him out, John 9. 35. Visits St. John, when Banished to the
Isle of Patmos. Revel. 1. 9. and goes all along with his Israel in the
Wilderness. The poor Beggar that is shut out of the Rich Man's Luke 16. 20, 21,
22.
Gates is received into Abraham's bosom, and admitted into the King of Heaven's
Presence. The Mourner clothed with Sackcloth let in to his inward Court, when
thrust out of Abasuerus his outward. Yea, the Poor, the Blind, the Halt, and
the Lame, have they but on a Wedding Garment, invited to the Luke 14. 21.
Marriage Feast. It Is our Sin only that separates between us and our God, Isa.
59. 2. It fixes that great separating Gulf at last, Luke 16. 26.
and causes all Estrangement now. The Scripture says so, and we by too sad
and frequent Experience find it so. On Gods part with whom no Evil dwells (...)
(...), as Bazil speaks: Smoke and ill Savours drive not Doves and Bees more
away, than our loathsome Pollutions do the Holy God. In Scripture we find, that
it makes him forsake, Jer. 23. 33. and depart from us, Hos. 9. 12. even quite
cuts off his Soul from us: Luxata est anima mea a te, Jer. 6. 8. Insomuch that
the Holy Ghost makes account, that whilst we go on in our sins, it is our
meaning and intention (at least Intentio operis, if not operantis) that we
should have God gone from us, according to that, Ezekiel. 8. 6. Son of Man, see
thou the Abominations that the House of Israel commits, that I should go far
from my Sanctuary? As he plainly says, that he would have that Guest gone, who
entertaineth him with that which he knows his Stomach rises at only to look
on. So blessed a Guest is God, that he thinks he deserves a better Welcome; and
therefore makes haste away from such an unkind Entertainment. That for his part.

And for ours, it makes the Estrangement mutual, as God says, Zech. 11. 8. My
Soul loathed them, and their Soul also abhorred me. Sets us as far from God, as
it does God from us. For Instance, it makes us,

1. Unfit, that we may not. Unfit for the Beggar with his Rags and Filth to
press into a King's Presence Chamber: But more unfit for the more polluted Soul
to come near before those purer Eyes, that cannot endure to look on such
Filthiness. A Miriam, if leprous, her Father spits in her face, and thrusts her
out of the Camp, Numb. 12. 14. We cannot stand before thee, because of this,
Ezra. 9. 15.

2. Guilty, that we dare not draw near: Makes Adam hide himself from God in the
Bushes, as an unhappy Child, when in fault, from his angry Father's presence.

3. Weak, lame, and blind, nay, quite out dead, that we cannot: And therefore
they that were dead in Trespasses and Sins must be quickened, Ephesians. 2. 1. If
ever they that were afar off come to be made nigh by the Blood of Christ, ver.
13.

4. Peevish and froward that we will not. We are Lords, we will come no more at
thee, Jer. 2. 31. And therefore our Savior imputes it to the Jews perverse
Will, that they do not come unto him that they might have life, John 5. 40.
There is not more in God, that by reason of our sin we fear, than what
naturally we dislike and hate: we fear his Power and Wrath, and that makes us
run from him: We loath his Holiness and Righteousness and commanding Authority,
and that makes us more averse, and sets us off further from him.

Great Sins, like violent Blasts, blow us far from God on the sudden; and
lesser sins, by little and little, work us off more insensibly, as it is with a
Ship whose fest is loosed; every Wave puts off a little more from the Shore,
till it has quite lost the sight of Land, and is at last sunk in the depth of
the Sea. With God (...) is (...) Zech. 13. 1. A defiled Soul is like a Woman
put away for her uncleanness; or as a Man thrust out of the Camp for his
Leprosy.
If ever therefore we would indeed draw near to God, we must put away a
perverse Lip, Prove. 4. 24. for God cannot endure to come near so stinking a
Breath. And listen to that Counsel which Zophar gives to Job, Chap. 11. 14. If
iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and say unto it, Get thee hence, as
it is Isa. 30. 22. or as 2 Samuel 20. 20. Far be it, far be it from me. The
Loadstone draws not the Iron, when rusty; nor were the Virgins admitted to
Ahasuerus his Company, till after a twelvemonths perfuming and purifying,
Esther 2. 12. The like course God prescribes for our nearer approaches. So the
Apostle, Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: But mark
what follows, Cleanse your hands, and purify your hearts. Till then God stands
off at a distance from the lothsom sinner, Isa. 1. 10, to 16. But do but wash,
and make you clean, and then come now, and let us reason together, v. 16, 18.
If we would draw near to God, we must leave our sins behind us.

But for positive means and helps. 2 Positive.


1. There is a drawing near to God in Place and Office; to Magistrates, Jer.
30. 21. and so Ministers, Numb. 16. 9. are said to come near to God, as menial
Servants are near to a King, who daily stand before him, and minister unto him.
But I insist not on this, only let me hence take occasion to mind such whom it
concerns as of their Advantage, so of their Engagement; that Ministers and
Scholars, who by their Calling and Employment have the honor and benefit of a
nearer standing to God, would by it labor for the happiness of a saving
Approach; that they never make good that blunt, if not profane, saying; The
nearer the Church, the further from God; that the more like to God we are in
Knowledge, we come not nearer to the Devil in Malice and Wickedness. The Eye in
Heaven, and the Heart in Hell, what a real Soloecism! They of old were wont to
sacrifice in their high Places, as taking the advantage of the Ground to be
nearer Heaven: It were well that from our higher standing our Souls could take
a better rise for an higher flight to get the nearer to God. It Is good (not
more profitable than seemly) for me, a Minister, a Scholar, to draw near to God.

2. There is also a drawing near to God in Profession; according to that, Jer.
12. 2. Thou art near in their Mouth, but far from their Reins. Pity that the
Heart should be so far from the Tongue, and yet farther from God. Christ
desires to lie next the Heart; though he would also have the Mouth kiss him in
an outward Profession.

3. There is also a drawing near to God in his Ordinances, Psalm. 65. 4. 2 Chronicles. 29. 31. Mihi vero accedere ad cultum Dei bonum est; so the Chaldee. They
are the Bed of Love; it was called the Ark of his Presence: Israel met with him
at the door of the Tabernacle, and he spoke with them from the Mercy-Seat.
David accounts himself driven from God, when banished from his Courts, and
therefore he faints and longs for them and him together, Psalm. 84. 2. Nor is
God more absent now from Gospel Ordinances, in which Christ and his Spirit are
more fully and comfortably present. Christ is there present in the midst of his
Servants; and the happy Soul, that finds there the powerful impressions of God
upon it, reports that he is amongst them of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25. As on the
contrary, the woeful experience of our unhappy days gives too sad Examples of
many, who have indeed got as far from God, as they think they are above
Ordinances: but till we gain Heaven, where we shall at the next hand see and
enjoy God without such mediums, let all sober-hearted Christians ever keep
close to them, as they would ever draw near to him.

1. To the Ministry of the Word, in which if the Minister do not so much jingle
in the Ear, as labor to fasten Nails and Goads in the Heart, Eccles. 12. 11.
that it come to be (...), Isa. 34. 1. and 58. 2.
an ingrafted Word, Jam. 1. 21. It then, and God in it comes very near to us,
as we do to him, as Scholars sitting down at his feet to hear his Instructions,
Deuteronomy. 33. 3. or as Servants standing Ezekiel. 33. 31.
before him to receive his Commands, as Children and Friends from his gracious
Promises to carry away intimations of his Love, and his Threats prick our
hearts, Acts 2. 37. (...), Luke 4. 20. fastening the Eye, and putting the Ear to
his Mouth; as it was said of our Savior's Auditors, Luke 19. 48. (...), they
hung upon him to hear him. By these mutual outgoings of the Soul to God, and
God to it, they come in this Ordinance to an happy meeting, and then are very
near.

2. As likewise in the Sacraments, it is very near that we either do or may draw
on to Christ. In our Liturgy we say well, Draw near, etc. not so much to the
Minister as to God. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in
me, and I in him; and as I live by the Father, so he that eats me, even he
shall live by me, John 6. 56, 57. Though no Popish corporal Transubstantiation,
yet there is a very near spiritual union set out by three very strong and
almost strange Expressions.

Of a kind of Concorporation, as of the Meat and the Body that is fed by it, in
that Metaphor of eating and drinking.

Of a mutual cohabitation, or coinhabitation, in that other of his dwelling in
us, and we in him. Nay, of a more divine coalition into the same Nature, as in
that third expression of our living by Christ, as he by the Father.

In it with the Elders of Israel we go up to God in the Mount, Exodus 24. 11.
And it is mercy that (as it is there said) he does not lay his hand upon us; but
that we may eat and drink: draw so near as Children to sit down at our Father's
Table; with John to lean on our Savior's Breast; and with Thomas be bid reach
hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust
it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing, John 20. 27. It was our
sin, that, when we more frequently enjoyed Sacraments, we drew no nearer to
Christ in them, and therefore it is deservedly our misery, that we are cut short
of such opportunities of these blessed Approaches now in our too much want of
them.

3. In the Communion of Saints, if rightly improved, we may enjoy very near and
full communion with God; and therefore the Apostle, when he had said, Let us
draw near with a true heart to God, Heb. 10. 22. he adds, not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together. Thither God comes down to us, Matthew. 18. 20.
and thereby our mutual help, as upon one another's shoulders; our hearts are
gotten nearer up to him. The Saints are a People near to him, Psalm. 148. 14.
and therefore they that keep close to them, are not far from him, as they that
dwell in the Court are near to the King.

4, I add Prayer; for Petitioners use to draw near, when they tender their
Petitions, Numb. 32. 16. and so do God's Suppliants, when they present him with
their Prayers, 1 Samuel 14. 37. In Prayer we seek him, fall down at his
footstool, come into his presence. We speak to him, we lift up our Eyes, Hands,
and Souls to him; we wrestle with him. These and suchlike Expressions of it we
meet with in Scripture; and they all speak drawing near to him, according to
Jamblichus his description of it, that it is Copula, qua homines cum Deo
conjunguntur, Clavis, qua Dei penetralia aperiuntur; the Soul's Wing, by which
it mounts up to Heaven, and the Key that opens the Gate of Heaven, and lets us
into the presence of the everlasting King: How deep does it thrust both
Petition and Petitioner into its Savior's Bosom? And how often does the loving
Father with a sweet kiss take up the weeping Child from his knees into his
Arms? How near does he bow the Ear? and how low does he reach down his hand to
take us by ours, when it is lifted up to him? O the blessed interviews in this
Duty, when God's and our Eye meet! Thou drewest near in the day when I called
upon thee, said Psalm. 145. 18.
the lamenting Church, Lament. 3. 57. When for any other relief she could say,
The Comforter that should relieve my Soul is far from me, Chap. 1. 16. In
Prayer God draws near to the Soul, and the Soul to God; and one of his main
Suits, (as Esther's first was for the King's company, and the second for it
Esther 5. 7, 8.
again the second time, so it is) that God would both draw nearer himself, and
draw it also nearer. Draw nigh to my Soul, Psalm. 69. 18. and draw my Soul
nearer to thee; unite my heart, Psalm. 86. 11. With holy Austin, Read mihi te
Deus meus, read Confess. l. 13. c. 8.
te mihi, ut currat vita mea in amplexus tuos. O convert me, and I shall be
converted, Jer. 31. 18. Draw me, and we shall run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. as
well knowing that we cannot draw near to him, till he draw near to us first. We
cannot come, till the Father draw, John 6. 44. and therefore the Child reaches
out the hand in Prayer, and lays hold on the Father, that he may draw, and
thereby it also may draw nearer.

And thus we see, how by these and the like Ordinances, as by means appointed
and sanctified by God, we do (or at least may) draw near unto him. Which says
these things to us.

1. First therefore use them, and carefully attend on them, as ever we would
draw near to God, who for that very end has appointed them; and as we would
not, with the Pharisees, Luke 7. 30. reject the Counsel of God against our
selves; it is there said, they did it in refusing one Ordinance of Baptism. Too
many now reject not only that, but all Ordinances else. But do they get the
nearer to God by it? No; The Autumn's witherings tell us, that the Sun is
withdrawn backward, and the woeful decays of foam of their both Professions and
Practices says, that the Sun of Righteousness, instead of drawing nearer, is
got further off. Ordinances are sanctified Means of our approach to God. His
going is in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 68. 24. He meets us in them, and therefore
make Conscience to use them.

2. Because but means, therefore rest not in them, till we find that we draw
near to God by them. Not in Prayer, till either God draw near to us in a
gracious Answer, or at least we get so near him, as by Faith to lay hold on him
in a more serious wrestling. Not in hearing, till God speak something to our
hearts; Nor in receiving, till we feel him strengthening us with strength in our
Souls: Till we see the glory of God filling the Tabernacle, as Exodus 40. 34.
the Holy Ghost falling upon us whilst we are hearing the Word, as Acts 10. 44.
and Jesus Christ coming in and breathing upon us, when we are met together in
such Ordinances, as John 20. 22. Let the Spouse abide in the Bed of Loves, but
let her seek her Beloved there. Our falling short of this, and sitting down
with the enjoyment of bare Ordinances, Cant. 3. 1.


1. Makes others (as we see) undervalue and despise them, whilst we rest in
them. We in so doing make them our Idols, and then they think they have thence
just ground to make them their Abominations.

2. For our selves, instead of growing better, and drawing nearer to God by
them; by this means we prove worse, and are set further off. None further from
God and Salvation, than they that take up in means of Salvation, without
enjoying God in them; as none more sure to fall short of his journies end, than
he that sits down, as having gone far enough, when he has gotten on but the
half way. My Friend may be gotten the further off, and (it may be) past hope of
overtaking, whilst in the dark I take fast hold of his Garment, and think that
by so doing, I keep him as fast by me.

3. At best, nothing at all the better, as your Phrase is, never the nearer for
all those outward approaches. It will be but the grasping of the Cloud instead
of Juno; a looking into the Grave, when Christ is risen; a seeking in the Bed,
when the Beloved is withdrawn; an enquiring in the Temple, when the Glory of
the Lord is departed. And what a poor empty forlorn thing is the most Royal
Palace, when the Court has left it? The former Luster and Majesty, which the
King of Heaven's Presence conferred, to a heedful Eye makes his Court look the
more Desolate, when he is withdrawn. So that whilst others jollily vaunt, and
chant it, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Jer. 7 4.
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these: Yet the chaste Spouse, not
withstanding all these, is at a loss, and still upon the Inquest with her Saw
ye him whom my Soul loves? As long as she cannot Cant. 3. 3. Mat. 12. 6.
find him there who is greater than the Temple, who too often finds cause
enough in us on his part to leave his House, Jer. 12. 7. and then thou may
come and knock hard, and yet not meet with him; but more often on our parts,
when he is most graciously and powerfully present there to others, we are
absent from him, because absent from our selves; our Thoughts wandering, and
then the Mind is in another place; we drowsing, and the Man asleep is in
another World: Though God be in that Place, yet Jacob, when asleep, is not
aware of it, Genesis 28. 16. And Lot, when drowsy and drunk together, knows Genesis
19. 33, 35.
not when his Daughters lie down and rise up. And so we may come and go to and
again to God's Ordinances, and yet whilst we are in like Distempers, he and we
may continue very strangers. Ordinances are like those Golden Pipes, Zech. 4.
2. and yet but Pipes, do us no good, will be but empty to us, unless they empty
into us that Golden Oil, ver. 12. Sweetest Breasts of Consolation, but we shall
suck Wind rather than Nourishment; unless, like the Suckling, we then find our
selves in our Heavenly Father's Arms, and laid close to our Savior's Breast to
suck Lifeblood from his wounded Heart. It Is good thus to draw near to God; and
till it be thus, it will not be well with us, notwithstanding all outward
Approaches and Ordinances.

And therefore our chief care and endeavor should be in our enjoyment of them,
that they may Instrumentally concur to the working and quickening such Graces in
us, as whereby we may formally (I mean indeed and good earnest) draw nigh to
God.

1. Amongst which (as it is most fit) Knowledge in the first place must lead the
way, for he must needs go very wide that follows a blind Guide. He will toto
coelo errare, instead of arriving at God, or Heaven. The blind Sodomite will
sooner Genesis 19.
stumble on Lot's door, and a Man in the Dark hit right in an unknown way, than
that Man, whose Eyes the God of this World has blinded, find of himself the
way of access to God, or indeed find in his heart to draw nigh to him: For
Ignorance usually is very profane, and so cares not to come into God's
Presence, has so much Candlelight of Sense, as to commit Works of Darkness
by, and to see and follow that which leads off from God: But as long as it
continues invincible, cuts off all hopes, because it plucks off all those ansae
by which we might be laid hold on, and drawn nearer. And therefore gross
ignorant Men are in a most desperate Condition; they that are so dark must
needs be far from the Father of Lights now, as that (...) (which in the very
Name of it, denotes the remotest Mat. 8. 12.
distance from God) will be their Portion hereafter.

But on the contrary, the saving and clear Knowledge of God, and his Divine
Excellencies, especially in Christ, approaches so near, that the Understanding
is in a manner made one with so blessed an Object. It indeed is so
transcendently Glorious, that it bids Moses not come near, in regard of a
reverential distance, Exodus 3. 5. and yet so infinitely ravishing, that it makes
him desire to get as near as he may to see so great a Sight, ver. 3. as in
Heaven a full Vision begets a perfect Love and Union. Angels that always behold
God's Face, Mat. 18. 10. have the nearest Station. And if the lovely Creature's
Beauty uses to draw after it many Eyes, sure the infinite Beauty of God so
Glorious, of Christ so White and Ruddy, even the Brightness of his Father's
Glory, if beheld with a clearer Eye, could not but much more strongly snatch
our Hearts to it. They that turn away from him, do not see him. And if any be
so desperate as to hate him (as the School determines) do so, because they only
Aquin. 1. q. 60. a. 5. ad. 5.
look at some particular in him, that is contrary to their own Lusts, which are
nearer to them, and so blind them.

2. The second is a fervent and filial Love of God; for Spiritus noster
adhaeret Deo per intimum amorem, so Alensis: Love in its nature is Appetitus
unionis, and as such, carries the Soul out of it self, to the desired Embraces
of its beloved Object, 2 Samuel 13. 39. (...), David longed, or he was consumed
with desire of going out to a beloved Absalom. The Love of God, I am sure,
carries out the ravished Soul to God in Divine Ecstasies; as Dionysius
expresses it. This Glutinum animae, as Bernard calls it; How quickly does it
catch? and how fast does it cleave? These Cords of Love, how strongly do they
draw? And how firmly do they bind? The loving Wife and Ch^^d is not well, if
not in the beloved Father's arms, and Husband's presence. Had we more of the
Love of God in our Hearts, we could not live without him: It would be death to
part with him. We could not be such aloof-off Strangers, if we were more loving
Friends.

3. To Love add Fear; for although servile Fear (as in Cain) Genesis 4. 16.
makes the Slave run from his Master, yet a filial Fear brings the Child (as
Neh. 1. 11.) into his Father's presence. They shall walk after the Lord, and
tremble from the West, says the Prophet Hos. 11. 12. Trepide accurrent, they
shall tremble, but they shall come trembling. This Fear will make us fly, but
into our Father's arms; stand at a reverential distance, and yet even then on
our Knees creep toward him. And how deep is the awful Child put into the
Father's bosom? Whilst the bold Wanton is thrust away, and bid stand further
off. God's Salvation is nigh to them that fear him, Psalm. 85. 9. and where his
Salvation is so near, he himself is not far off. In a word, this Fear is most
of all afraid of sin, which alone separates us from God, as we heard from Isa.
59. 2. It cannot therefore but bring us very near, which removes that which
only can keep us asunder.

4. Humility is wont to be the Fear of God's attendant, and when the one is
trembling in its nearer approach, this much helps it to a more safe and easy
access, for though it fall low, yet it lifts up the Soul in the rebound much
nearer to God. The Psalmist says, that he humbles himself in looking down
upon us: Psalm. 113. 6.
But we by humbling our selves get nearer, and the higher up to him; who is
wont to have respect to the humble, whilst the proud he uses to behold afar
off, Psalm. 138. 6. For if none of us can Prove. 3. 34.
endure a proud Man's company, why should? How can God? We that are so mean and
low, might better away with an insolent Superior: But how can the most high
God endure a proud Competitor? And yet such is every proud Man, contests with
God about the two main Points of his Royalty; who should be the Prima Causa,
and Finis Vltimus. But the nearer he aspires to be to God in one sense, the
further he is from him in another; who scorns the Scorners, but gives Grace to
the lovely* Prove. 3. 34. Lucifer, that climbed so high above the Clouds to get
Isa. 14. 14.
near to be like the most High, is cast down to the utmost possible distance,
whilst Michael (whose very Name speaks humble Acknowledgment, and Adoration of
God's Supremacy) is advanced to his place, from which his Pride threw him; as
our proud attempt in Adam to scale Heaven was (as I may use the Prophet's
words) such a swelling in an high wall, that has tumbled Isa. 30. 13.
us down far off from God into this woeful Ruin, wherein he now finds us. At
magna humilitatis virtus, cui etiam Deitatis Bernard.
Majestas tam facile se inclinat. How gracious is this lowly Grace? or rather
how Gracious is the High and Mighty God, that, when we in humility bow down,
and as it were shrink back from him in sense of our own Baseness, he should
then bow down lowest to us in nearest Approximation: So as Heaven should never
be more clearly seen than in the lowest Vault, nor we ever nearer God, than
when we are furthest from all proud Conceits of our selves!

5. Repentance and Humility are near akin, and whilst these two lovely Twins
are not parted, they will keep us closer united to God. The penitent Publican
indeed stood afar off, Luke 18. 13. yet in their Addresses to God we know he
got the upper hand of him, that thought and bragged himself to be the better
Man. It Is true, some of our now overgrown Men think repentant Cries and Tears
Childish; yet let me be one of those Children, of whom is the Kingdom of
Heaven. Nor let their scoffs babish us, as long as the crying Child is laid
closest to the Mother's breast, and taken nearest into our Heavenly Father's
Bosom. For so the Psalmist assures us, that the Lord is nigh to them that are
of a broken heart, Psalm. 34. 18. Deus delinquentium gemitus esurit, sitit
lachrymas peccatorum, so Chrysologus. Sermon. 33.
Nothing more pleasing in God's sight, than a repentant Tear in Faiths Eye.
Which leads to a Sixth Particular:

6. Above all, says the Apostle, take the Shield of Faith, when you draw near
to fight with your worst Enemy, Ephesians. 6. 16. And I must advise you, above all
bring Faith along with you, if you would ever draw near to your best Friend.
There is nothing in Faith that has not a strong tendency this way.

In its justifying Act it has an Eye to look toward God, Isa. 45. 22. a Foot
to come to him, John 6. 35. an Hand to take him, John 1. 12. to lean on him,
Cant. 8. 5. to lay hold on him, Isa. 56. 4. 1 Timothy 6. 12. Heb 6. 18. so opens
the Door, Rev. 3. 20. that he may come in and sup with us.

And because no walking together unless agreed, and made Friends, Amos 3. 3. It
lays hold on Christ our Mediator, and Reconciler, which brings God and us
together: Brings our Benjamin along with it, by whom we have access into
Joseph's presence. By it we come to Christ, and by him to God. Through him we
have access, but by Faith, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 2.

There is also the Prayer of Faith, Jam. 5. 15. and by it we heard we have
access and entrance.

And the Scripture tells us, and Believers find, that there is such a thing as
the Assurance of Faith, in which the Apostle exhorts us to draw nigh, Heb. 10.
22. In this Plerophory our Sail is so filled, that we go amain toward God and
Heaven: We do, because it tells us we may, that whilst Infidelity dares not
approach, (She trusted not in the Lord, she drew not nigh to her God, Zeph. 3.
2.) and despair in Horror and Amazement makes us run away from him, as from our
Enemy and Judge, the assurance of Faith imboldens us to draw nigh to him, as our
Friend and Father. Guilt of sin lying on the Conscience is like a Mist, that
keeps Friends from seeing and coming near one the other; as the Pillar of Cloud
kept the Israelites and Egyptians asunder. But the Son of Righteousness
arising, and shining out in bright Beams of Assurance and Joy, shows us our
Friend, and imboldens us ruere in Amplexus. When the Spouse can say, my
Beloved, he is then as a bundle of Myrrh, lying all the night between her
Breasts (Cant. 1. 13.) And that is very near her Heart.

7. I might here add Hope, which, though in nature it is of an object absent,
yet as a Grace, it has God very present: And so the Apostle calls it a better
Hope, by which we draw nigh to God, Heb. 7. 19.

8. And Sincerity, which being (...), dare draw nigh to the Light, whilst the
painted Hypocrite is like the Man John 3. 21.
clothed with a kind of course Stuff, which they called, stand further off;
cares not for so near a view of so piercing an Eye. But I shall not Insist on
any more Particulars.

9. But lastly add in general, That a course of sincere Obedience in the
practice of all Saving Graces, is in Scripture Phrase, a Walking with God; and
that implies very near Communion. Genesis 5. 22. and 6. 9.
Every particular Grace in us is part of the Divine Nature, and so Allieth us
to God: But in the general exercise of them, all God is ours, not only in
surest Covenant, but also in closest Communion. It was the want of such a
Wedding Garment, that cast the Guest in the Gospel (...), into utter Darkness,
Mat. 22. 13. which signifies the utmost distance from God and Heaven, that
(...), that impassable Gulf, Luke 16. 26. being between. But whilst we are here
in a gracious Course, we have the best Stand and Prospect, for the fullest and
nearest view of God. Thou meetest him Psalm. 17. 15.
that rejoyeeth, and works Righteousness, Isa. 64. 5. And to him that
orders his Conversation aright, I will show the Salvation of God, Psalm. 50.
23. But when once Grace is made Perfect, and the Bride all over Clothed, and
fully made Ready, then shall be the Marriage of the Lamb, when Christ shall
come from Heaven to us, and we shall be caught up in the Clouds to meet with
him, and so for ever shall be with the Lord, when the whole Quire of Heaven,
every one in his own Part, and all together shall sing aloud this sweet Note of
the Text, (...) It is good for me to draw near to God, and to keep close to him
for ever.

Even so, Amen, Lord Jesus.
SERMON XXXII.
LUKE 21. 19. I. Sermon, Preached at St. Mary's. May 13. 1649.
In your Patience possess ye your Souls.


OUr Savior, in the beginning of this Chapter, is foretelling Jerusalem's
destruction, verse. 6. but as a forerunner of it, he foretells also his Servants
Persecution, that they shall be persecuted by Enemies, v. 12. betrayed by
Friends, v. 16. and hated by all, v. 17. As when the Ship, Acts 27. 42. was
ready to be wracked, they would first have killed Paul, who alone kept them
from drowning: A foolish mistake of a mad World, to do the Godly most hurt,
when they should most stand them in stead; when the Night is putting in, to put
out the Candle which should give them light; and when the House is falling, to
make sure of it, they will needs pull down the Pillars that uphold it [the Holy
Seed being (...) statumen eorum, Isa. 6. 13.] So sottish is the World's malice,
which otherwhile uses to be too ingenious in doing mischief to the Godly, as
it were on purpose to undo themselves.

But although they be such Enemies to themselves, yet Christ is a better Friend
to his Servants; and therefore as he encourages them, telling them, That not
an hair of their head shall perish, v. 18. so he directs them in this 19th
Verse, In your Patience possess ye your Souls.

In which words we have three Particulars; which, according to the Metaphor
here used, we may call,

1. The Freehold, and that is their Souls. 2. The Seisin (...), They are to be
kept in possession; Possess ye your Souls. 3. The Tenure, and that is the
Tenure of Patience; and so (...), In your Patience possess ye your Souls.
1. For a little opening of the words, and first for Patience; it is duplex,
Activa, Passiva. The one forbears, the other bears; both suffer, though in a
different way.

Active, so called, in reference to acting, but improperly a minime agendo,
because it acts not when Passion's Fingers itch, and would fain be doing; and
so it is defined, quae malum non infert, that even when provoked, does no evil,
which the Greeks express by (...), or long suffering. This is eminently and
essentially in God, who when we provoke him, is yet (...) long-suffering, Exodus
34. 6. even a God of Patience.

But Patience Passive is that, quae malum fert, that quietly suffers evil from
others, which is more properly this (...) in the Text; not properly falling
upon God, who simply is impassible, but is that which by his Grace he works in
his suffering Servants; when in an humble submission to his Will, out of Faith
in his Promise, in hope of his assistance and deliverance, they neither sink in
despondency under the burden, nor rise up in rage against him, or the
Instrument he strikes with, but willingly submit, and quietly wait for the
Salvation of God, Lament. 3. 26, 27. If you will have Tully's description of
it, Patientia est honestatis and utilitatis (let us add and Religionis) causa
rerum arduarum ac difficilium voluntaria ac diuturna perpessio. Or if rather
you would have Bede's, Patientia vera est aliena mala aequanimiter perpeti,
contra eum quoque qui mala irrogat nullo dolor moveri. This is properly this
(...) in the Text; by which when dispossessed of all things else, we are even
then able to possess our Souls.

2. (...), Possess ye, so it is usually read, and so it holds forth a Command;
though some read it (...), ye may, or so ye shall possess; and so it contains a
Promise. I shall make use of both, and here only add, that this word in the
Greek, answerable to (...) in the Hebrew, signifies both acquirere, and
conservare, both to procure and preserve; and Patience does F. Illyricu^.
both.

3. For the last word (...), I need not tell you, that although it most
properly signify the Soul, yet often in Scripture is put for Mat. 16. 26.
the Genesis 46. 15. Levit. 4. 2.
whole Man, and sometime for our 1 Samuel 26. 21.
bodily Life. Your Souls, your selves, your outward Life. Patience, as a sure
guard, keeps you in possession of all.

A word for natural Life, which I exclude not in reference to 1 Life.
verse. 18. they should not perish; and here patience is a preservative. As God
gives us possession of it, so patience helps to keep it. So we find in
Scripture, meek Moses and patient Job long-lived, whilst bloody and violent Men
live not out half their days, Psalm. 55. 23. As stormy Winter days use to be
short, whilst it is long before the Sun set in a serene calm Summer's day. The
Prophet said, In quietness and confidence shall be your strength, Isa. 30. 15,
and thereby also their safety, whilst frowardness and hastiness makes haste
only to destruction. Job's Wife, when she said, Job 2. 9.
Curse God and die, spoke truth, when she gave bad counsel; for it is curse and
die, there is but a step between discontented cursing and dying. But if there be
any such thing in this frail fading World, as via recta ad vitam longam, (which
the Title of his Book promises); amongst other Virtues and Graces, Patience
must be one of our Guides and Companions; and this, whether we consider either
God, or others, or our selves.

First, For God, we read that with the froward he will deal frowardly, Psalm.
18. 26. but he delights to beautify the meek with Salvation. The Lion of the
Tribe of Judah tears his Prey when it struggles and resists, but spares it when
it lies quiet and prostrate; so that if you be weary of your life, you may go
to it at sharp; but if you mean to save it, your wisest way is to submit, and
quietly to lay down your Weapons Crudelem medicum, etc. The unruly impatient
Patient makes his Physician cruel; and the Child's struggling does but increase
his stripes, whilst a quiet kissing the Rod often saves the whipping. Our God is
our Physician and Father. We provoke him to Wrath, when we are provoked to
impatience by whatever correction is inflicted by him. But it is meet to be
said to him by every dutiful Child, and in such a Child's Language, I have born
chastisement, and I will not offend any more; if I have done iniquity, I will
do no more, Job 34. 31, 32. and that is the way to prevent a second bout. With
the Bird of Paradise, by a meekned moan, to mourn it self out of the Snare; not
with the wild Bull in the Net, Isa. 51. 20. to tumble and rave, and so the more
to entangle himself in the Snare. When God hears Ephraim bemoaning himself,
Ephraim hears God comforting him, and telling him, that he is his dear Son and
pleasant Child, that ever since he spoke against him, he did earnestly remember
him; that his Bowels were troubled for him, and that he would surely have mercy
upon him, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. Whilst we frowardly struggle, 1. our Hearts fret
against God; and 2. we would be our own Saviors, and both these betray us to
danger. But by a patient lying under God's hand, as we acknowledge his
Sovereignty, and righteous Proceedings, so we resign up our selves to him, who
has a surer hand than ours to keep that wherewith it is betrusted. And thus
Patience helps to hold our Souls in Life; first in reference to God.

And, secondly, in reference to other Men, whom we are at a Solomon's
observation holds good, A soft answer turns away wrath; but grievous words
stir up anger, Prove. 15. 1. As the soft Wall damps the fiercest Shot, whilst
the clashing of two earthen Pitchers breaks either one or both. Fatigatur De
Patient. c. 8.
improbitas patientia tua, says Tertullian; Patience either wins or wearies
the most enraged Enemy, so that either he will not, or he cannot hurt. How
easily does the weak Man, when provoked by patient forbearing, prevent his own
mischief? Whilst the passionate Malcontent, either by busy busling begins
the Quarrel, or by giving the second stroke makes the Fray; and both ways, as
the furious Horse rusheth into the Battle, and so too often sins against his
own Life.

But were there none other to hurt us, yet impatience can Achitophel was
strangled with an Halter, or suffocated with some Humors raised by his grief,
some of late dispute. The Hebrew (...) may signify both. But which soever of
them it was, I Henisius. Grotius.
am sure his impatience of a neglect was the cause of it in him; as in both
kinds it has been with diverse others. Impatience of Pain, Poverty, Disgrace,
and the like, has proved in this unhappy World one of the great Apollyons and
Abaddons, chief Engines in murdering, not only others, but our selves also.
What sudden Inflammations, what pining Consumptions, Frenzies, Lethargies, and
other splenetick Distempers has it cast many a Man into? and so betrayed them
sometimes to more gentle and lingering; sometimes to more sudden and violent
deaths, and that sometimes by their own hands? Passions with a witness, which
make both Body and Soul joint-sufferers, like blustering storms that dash these
frail Vessels against the Rocks; or like roaring and riotous Guests and
Inmates, that set on fire, and pull down those Houses of Clay, which they are
in present possession of.

But on the contrary, A patient or cool Spirit, as Solomon phraseth it, Prove.
17. 27. how timely does it prevent these sparks from kindling, or happily
quench them when they begin to flame, by composing the mind, that it dare not
quarrel with God, nor pitch the Field with a Man's own self; and so quiets the
Body, that it either prevents Bodily Distempers, or helps to bear them quietly,
that they do not prove deadly? whilst the unruly sick Man by raving and
tumbling kills himself; another more patient, by being quiet, does sopire
morbum, and by lying still, makes haste to his recovery. Possess but thy Soul
with Patience, and it Patientiae infirmum non extendit. Tertul. c. 15. Centrae
infirmus qui impatiens est, ipsa impatient^a citius devolvitur in mortens.
Cerda in locum.
will keep thee in longer possession of the frail Tabernacle of thy Body.
Indeed, short-winded Men are soon at their Journies end, but they that are
longer breathed are so more ways than one, able through many difficulties to
run a longer race, and at last in a late evening of a long day come to the end
of it in peace. Discontents, I confess, may be long-lived, but so usually are
not froward, impatient, discontented Men. But when the Psalmist tells us that
the Meek shall inherit the Earth; Psalm. 37. 11.
that Phrase expresses as a surer title, so a longer continuance; and thus, as
our Souls are sometimes put for our Lives, even so by our Patience we are kept
in possession of them. So (...) (as I said some read it) you may, you shall.

And therefore for the Application, (...) (as the common possess our lives in
Patience. At the best, we are but Tenants at will; and if some of us consider
our Ages, and others our Weakness, and all of us the perilous Times we are cast
into, we may well think that our Leases are fast hasting to an expiration. What
Man therefore is he that desires Life, and loves many days, let him seek
peace, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 34. 12, 13, 14. and let me add, Patience; for
Patience is one of the best Preservatives. Prayers and Tears were wont to be
the Churches best offensive Weapons, and Patience one of the chiefest
Defensives. Not by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says God, when he
styles himself the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 4. 6. And truly the Spirit of Meekness
and Patience has in it the Spirit of a Conqueror. As therefore Christ our Lord
vanquished the Devil, not by fighting Qui pro nobis mundum vicit, non a^mato
milite, sed irrisa cruce. Austin. in Psalm. 62. ad finem.
but by dying: so our way to overcome the World, and save our lives, is rather
by patient yielding and suffering, than by peevishly contending. I mean, not by
a base unworthy complying with Men's sins, but by a generous suffering of their
rage, and ever with a silent and meek submission to the righteous Judgment of
God. Yea, in the way of thy Judgments have we waited for thee, O Lord, said the
humbled Church, Isa. 26. 8. And waiting, as it implies a still and quiet
attendance, so with God it ever finds at last a gracious acceptance. Thou will
never bid that Beggar stay and wait, whom thou at last intendest to send away
empty; much less will God make thee content quietly to wait, whom he intends to
send away discontented, by wholly frustrating thee of thy Expectation. The
prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time, says the
Prophet, Amos 5. 13. How evil our times are I need not say; and therefore if we
would show our selves prudent and wise for our selves, as we love our lives,
let us keep silence; and that is the Expression which in the Old Testament
Patience is usually and almost only set out by. Not a malicious silence, (as
Absalom's was, 2 Samuel 13. 22.) whereby we bite in for the present, but lie in
insidiis to watch opportunities of mischief and revenge; but a shamefaced
silence, in sense of our own confusion and guilt; an humble meek silence, not
murmuring against God's dealings, or an angry clamouring at evil Men's
proceedings; but a quiet submitting to his hand, and a patient enduring (as
long as God continues it) of their oppressions, saying (if any thing) with the
Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have Micah 7. 9.
sinned against him; or rather with our Savior, though led as a Sheep to the
Slaughter, and as the Lamb before the Shearer, so Act. 8. 32.
open we not our mouths; as Paulinus to his Friend, Nos taceamus Epist. 1. ad
Aprum.
istis loquentes ad Dominum silentio humilitatis, and voce patientiae; and tunc
ipse qui invictus est, pugnabit pro nobis, and vincet in nobis. So the dumb
Dove's mourning in a far Country was heard, and she delivered, if you compare
the Argument and the 56th Psalm together. And Christ the meek silent Lamb,
though slaughtered, yet shortly after was raised from the dead: to whom if we
be Unisons in this sweet still-Musick, we shall for certain have our lives for
a prey, either preserved or restored; either kept from death, or if the two
Witnesses be now to be slain, shall have part in a better Resurrection: For so
if we should take the word in the Text for our lives, so it holds good that by
our patience we may, and therefore ought to possess our Souls.

But take the word Soul in its more proper signification, for 2 Soul.
that nobler part of Man; and so most understand our Savior's meaning, when he
here says, In your patience possess ye your Souls.

In which words we have these two Particulars considerable.

1. That it is our duty to possess our Souls. 2. That Patience is one special
means to keep this possession.
As always, so especially in evil and perilous Times (for such possess our
Souls. Whatsoever the force be, we must stand to it, and keep possession. Above
all keepings, keep thy Heart, says Solomon, Prove. 4. 23. And keep thy Soul
diligently, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Take heed to your Spirit, says the
Prophet, Mal. 2. 15. And so here, In your patience possess ye your Souls, says
our Savior. A dear and great Pledge it is, which both God and his People do
mutually betrust each other with, and both to our present purpose. They him,
looking at it as their Jewel, and considering their own weakness and
heedlessness, leave it to be kept in his safer Hand. That we may possess it,
(as the Child gives the Mother that it would have kept) we put it into God's
Hands to keep it for us. And so it is Paul's (...), 2 Timothy 1. 12. his Depositum
which he leaves with God. And our dying Savior, when now to be dispossessed of
his Life, that he might keep possession of his Soul, says, Father into thy
Hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23. 46.

And he them; it being one of his chief Masterpieces, and Possessio siduciaria.
therefore as soon as it comes out of his hands, he commends it to every Man's
best care, as a great Talent which he betrusts us with, and will have at last a
strict account of: At our Birth sent out from him, and in Death, Eccles. 12. 7.
again to return to him, that he may have an account how it has been abused or
improved, whether kept or lost: When thrust out of this House of Clay, whether
we have not lost it, and it Heaven. For so this possessing of our Souls
includes a double care and endeavor, 1. That it be not utterly lost. 2. No,
nor so Distempered and Disguised, that neither we nor it be our selves.

1. First, I say, our care must be so to possess our Souls, that they be not
utterly lost; for so the Scripture speaks of losing the Soul, Mat. 16. 26. And
what is quite lost, is then out of our possession. And on the contrary, that in
Matthew, He that endures to the end, shall be saved, Chap. 10. 22. and this of
the Text, In your patience, possess ye your Souls, are by learned Interpreters
Grotius Brugensis.
made Parallel; so that (...) and (...), to possess the Soul, and to save it,
is one and the same thing. And this therefore should be a great part of our
greatest care, that our Souls may be so possessed, as they may be saved: And
that, although in dangerous Times, all else may soon be lost, yet that a sure
Course may be taken, that our Souls do not perish eternally.

2. But secondly, This care of a Man's possessing his Soul is not only that it
be not wholly lost at last, but that for the present in greatest Distractions
he be (as the Latin phrase is) Animi, (or Sui) compos, truly himself, his own
Man; yea, master of his own Soul and its Faculties, Passions and Operations,
which at such times often are quite stounded, or prove very wild and unruly. Men
dead with fear, as in Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 27. and there is no Life; drunk with
grief, as they Jer. 25. 27. and there is no sense; And mad with Oppression, as
even the wise Man sometimes is, as the wisest King tells us, Eccles. 7. 7. But
where is then his Wisdom? Which is then swallowed up, Psalm. 107. 27. Nay, What Is
become of his Soul? When, Nec manus, nec pes, etc. when neither the Eye can see
what is before it, or the Ear take heed what is said to it; the Man knows not
what either he says, or does; where he is, or whither he goes: In these Animi
deliquia and deliria the Man is truly Exanimated, bereft of his Soul; the Mind
and Understanding amazed, confused and darkened; the Affections and Passions in
a mutiny and perfect uproar: But where is the Soul; that (...) all this while,
that should keep better order? Is it in being? Or is the Man in possession of
it, which is wholly possessed with Amazements and Confusions, as a Town now
entered and possessed by a Conquering Enemy? This too often in perilous Times is
our Sin and Misery. But our Savior in the Text points out to us what at all
times, and even then, is our duty, to take care, that whatever else we lose,
that there be not Ejectio firmae, that we be not so cast out of our Freehold,
but that by Faith and Patience (the one as the Fundamentum, and the other as
the Sustentaculum of all Virtues, as Anselm distinguishes them) we may still
be our selves, and possess our Souls, not frighted out of our selves by Fears,
or sunk below our selves by overmuch Heaviness; but then speak and act with
Nehemiah, Chap. 6. 11. like and worthy our selves; with Jehoshaphat, when we
know not what to do, to be so much our selves, as to know how to do that which
is best; not like gaster'd Men to look wildly 2 Chronicles. 20. 12.
about us, but with a fixed Eye to God above us; not to be out of our Wits, but
to go out to God; and as David, when the sorrows of Death and Hell took hold on
him (Psalm. 116. 3.) to retire inward to our Hearts with his, Return unto thy
rest, O my Soul, Ver. 7.
even when the sorrows of Death and Hell took hold on him, enough to Exanimate
him, yet to retire inward; as a Man into his House out of the Crowd, in which
he was like to be lost; or like a wise Pilot, thrusting his Ship out of the
Storm into the Harbor: And then how safely does he stand firm on the Shore,
whilst he sees others overwhelmed with the Waves? So to turn into our Souls,
and to turn them over to God, and there quietly to rest; this is indeed to be
our selves, and to possess our souls, Dum nobis ipsis dominari discimus, hoc
ipsum incipimus possidere quod sumus, as Bede speaks. And thus whilst Christ
has held the Heads and Hearts of his Servants, they have been never more
themselves, than when besides him they have had least else to rest either Head
or Heart upon; never enjoyed themselves, or possessed their Souls more, than
when now to be dispossessed of all else besides; as take a Believer on his
Deathbed, or a Martyr at the Stake. It Is but God's bidding Aaron, go up to
Mount Hor, and put off his Garments and die, Numb. 20. 25, 26, 27, 28. No more
than a Parent's bidding his Child go up to his Chamber, and put off his Clothes
and sleep. They are fully themselves, nay, then more than ever above
themselves; now that the Soul is mantling, and almost upon the Wing, to fly
upward in Divinest Contemplations and elevated Expressions. (Some of which
Mylius gathers up in his Book, which he calls Apophthegmata morientium). When
the dying Man's tongue faulters, he speaks Apophthegmes, nay Oracles, and
though the bodily Eye grows dim in that shadow of death; yet that is but the
shutting of the outward window, whilst a more glorious Light is set up within
to enlighten that darkness, and so that gloomy Evening is but the dawning of
the now hasting Morning of the beatifical Vision. O the admirable
farewel-speeches of Martyrs at their Sufferings! Those high-raised Expressions,
that ravished other Men's hearts, showed plainly that they then most fully
possessed their own Souls. Sure, Stephen was perfectly himself and above
himself; that, when the Stones flew so fast at him, he could so quietly and
orderly kneel down, and look up to Heaven, and pray for his Murderes, Acts 7.
59, 60. as were Daniel's Companions, Chap. 3. 25. who, when cast into the
Furnace, did not fall all along, as Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 20. or down into the
Furnace, as their Enemies did, but then walked erect in the midst of the Fire,
and as the Apocryphal Addition says, there sung forth God's Praises; yea, and
therein exactly kept time and tune, (...), (as Chrysostom observes) in the same
Order that God made his Creatures they there sung his Praises.

And thus in these two Particulars, we see what is meant by this possessing of
our Souls, namely when such care is taken that they now be not distempered, nor
at last utterly lost.

Which in the App^ication is that which is further to be pressed Hated,
Persecuted, Betrayed, as in the foregoing Verses, when every way so beset, and
so wholly endangered. If Nature and Sense, like Pharez, (as Genesis 38. 28, 29.
it is ready) should put out its hand first it would find something next hand
first to lay hold on; here would be Wife, Children, Parents, Friends, to be
provided for: It may be my Estate, yea, my Life to be secured and taken care
of. How shall I make such a Friend? Or what way to pacify such an Enemy? How
shall I answer when called before such a King and Ruler? v. 12. But our Savior
would take them off from such distracting cares, (...), etc. In all this
unsettledness, settle you your heart not to meditate, v. 14. not to be
over-anxious for those things, but here in the Text he would have them to make
sure of their Chance. Let Martha, like the good House-Wife, be Luke 10. 41, 42.
troubled about many things. But see that you, like wise Christians with Mary,
make sure of the one thing necessary, as though he had said, in your getting
your other Goods out of the Scare-fire, be sure you look that you save your
selves. And whatever else Thieves and Robbers run away with, be sure to keep
possession of your Souls, that the Man be not first Wounded, and at last Killed
outright, that your Souls be not now Defiled, Distracted, or Distempered, and
at last Perish everlastingly. Let thy Soul be precious in thine Eyes (as 1 Samuel
26. 21.) that it may not be as 1 Kings 20. 39, 40. it missing, thy everlasting
Life go for it. This is here our best Friend's advice, and that which his best
Servants have followed. What ever else has comparatively been neglected, yet
their God and their Souls have been secured. David was so encompassed with
outward Enemies and Dangers, that he had his good Name, Estate, and his very
Life to defend and provide for. But his Soul was his Darling, which he tenders
as much as he can himself: And because his care and strength was too short, he
commends it to God; it in a manner only, it I am sure especially, and that
frequently and most pathetically. How often do you hear those sweet strains
among his bitter Complaints? Lord, keep my soul, Psalm. 6. 4. and 7. 2. and 17.
13. and 22. 20. and 25. 20. and 86. 2. and 142. 8.
preserve my soul, deliver my soul, leave not my soul destitute. In which
places though Life may be in part meant, yet the Soul properly so called, is
not to be excluded. And if it be the Will of God that we should know how to
p^ssess our Bodies in H^liness, (1 These. 4. 3, 4.) it is all reason that
according to the former Particulars, we should endeavor to possess our souls
in Patience. And that upon these following Grounds and Considerations. 1.
Because all outward Comforts and Possessions may be lost. 2. Even then, if due
care be taken, our souls may be secured. 3. Yet they are in greatest danger to
be Assailed. 4. Of such unvaluable worth, that the saving and possessing of
them will more than countervail the loss of all else. As on the contrary, the
loss of them is both irrecoverable, and unvaluable; not to be made up by all
other Enjoyments; and if joined with other losses makes them complete, and
utterly undoing.

1. We had need be careful and watchful to keep possession of our souls, that
we may be best possessed of something. Because of all else we may easily be
dispossessed. At all Times it is possible, but in perilous Times too likely and
probable. He was but a fool, and that upon Record, that said to his soul, he
had Goods Luke 12. 19, 20.
laid up for many years, when the following night turned him out of possession
of all. The Women of my People have you cast out of their pleasant Houses,
says the Prophet, Mic. 2. 9. I need not tell you how suddenly Job was partly
Plundered by the Chaldeans and Sabeans, and partly by an immediate Hand of God
stripped naked of all. Our Savior in general, has said of all Treasures upon
Earth, that the Moth and Rust will corrupt, and Mat. 6. 19.
Thieves break through and steal: Either of themselves will decay, as the Cloth
breeds that Moth, and the Iron that Rust which consumes it, or at least some
either violent Hand will break through, or some false Fingers will more slily
steal and carry away. The Grass will either wither of it self, or be cut down
by the Sith; so that Sidonius truly affirms, Hominem in Lib. 7. Epist. 4.
hunc mundum non tam editum quam ejectum: Like a Ship-wrackt Man, Ship split,
his Goods sunk in the Sea, or made a Prey of on the Shore: And it is well if he
escape with his Life, and that sooner or later will be sunk too; for Death will
be sure to turn all out of Doors, when it seiseth upon us: But when Death thus
dispossesseth our very souls of their Bodies, would it not be sorrow upon
sorrow, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 2. 27. for us then to be dispossessed of
our souls also, to lose all and our souls to boot? When Outworks are taken, to
have no Fort within to fly to: To come to Adrian's animula, vagula, blandula,
quae nunc abibis in loca? Not then to know whither our Souls shall go, or to be
the more exanimated, if we do, how woeful and miserable will it be? Especially
he so great an Astronomer, Qui cuncta de se scivit and praescivit; able
beforehand to write a Diary of all things that should befall him, until the
hour of his death, and then to be at a loss. You have taken away my Gods that I
have made, and the Priest, and what have I more, said Micah, when the Children
of Dan had plundered him, Judge. 18. 24. Poor wretched undone Man! They took
away the Gods that thou had made: But would thou have been at such a loss,
if thou had had an interest in that God that made thee? They had stolen away
thy Priest; but if he had not first stolen away thy heart, thou might then
have possessed thy soul, which might have beeh both Priest and Temple for thee
to have taken Sanctuary in. Which leads to,

2. The second thing propounded, That when all else is lost, yet if due care be
taken, the soul even then may be secured. Our Estate and Esteem, yea, our Life
it self, though they be our own, yet they are to be Inventoried amongst those
(...), things of another Man's, of which our Savior speaks, Luke 16. 12.
because he that cares not for his own Life, may easily be master of mine: But
our souls and our God, are that (...), among those things which are so our own,
that, unless it be by our own default, as no Creature gave them, so none can
take them away. That violent Hand which takes away Riches, Honors, Friends,
and Life it self, does but with Joseph's Mistress, get the Garment whilst the
Man goes free. If we be but as wise as the Serpent, in such a strait we lose
but the skin, but find our selves. Job when stripped of all, at worst was not a
maimed but a naked Man, Chap. 1. 21. but yet himself, a Man still; and by being
naked, it may be coming nearer to our first Innocence and Perfection. It Is the
infinite Perfection of God that he is (...), perfectly Self-sufficient, that
neither needs, nor indeed can go out of himself for any supply; and as in the
foul of Man appears most the Image of God, so herein it bears one of the
liveliest Resemblances of his Divine Perfection; that, as to all outward things
it is Self-sufficient, and that however, in regard of the necessities of the
body to which it is joined, it is forced to go abroad into the World, and
thereby too often is defiled (as Dinah was) in such Excursions, yet it is best
when it Genesis 34. (...). Plato. As Moralists to the pacifying our grief and
passions, tell us what time will wear out at last, Wisdom and Virtue should
enable us to abate and qualify at the present: So here with some inversion,
this is a hard Lesson to us, that are so immersed in outward and earthly
Objects.
keeps within at Home, conversing with and enjoying of it self, which it does
most, when it is least troubled with outward things. What therefore it does of
it self in a more gentle way, in abstracting it self*from Bodily and outward
Objects, the very same is done, though by a more violent hand, when Man or
D^vil plucks these outward things from it. Thereby it is left in retirement with
it self, and never more safe than when so shut up. They are Fools and Children
that are afraid, and cry when they are alone: But if the wise Man be Nunquam
minus solus, quam cum solus; I am sure the Godly Man, if he be wise, is never
less lonesome than when alone, whilst he has a good God, and a good Heart to
bear him company. If he in a public depredation could say, Omnia mea mecum, he
carried all that was his with him, when he left all else besides his naked self
behind him; I know no reason, but that a Christian may be as Wise and Happy, if
he prove not an Out-lyer, and live not too much in and upon the World; when all
else is plundered, yet his soul may be secured. And accordingly the Apostle, 1
Pet. 4: 19. most fitly and divinely Instructs them that suffer according to the
Will of God, to commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing. He
would have them take care that their souls be kept, because he speaks of
suffering Times, in which nothing else it may be can be secured; but he makes
account their souls may.

And yet (which is a third Argument for our greater care and diligence) though
our Souls by a careful watch may be secured, yet there is greater need of it,
because they are in greatest danger to be assailed. Many indeed, and horrid
have the Miseries been, which the Devil and his Instruments have inflicted on
Men's Bodies, but nothing to those innumerable Temptations and deadly Snares,
by which they have seized on their Souls. (...) Isa. 51. 23.
The precious soul is that which the Adulteress hunts after, Prove. 6. 26. And
they are the souls of Men, which the great Whore trades in, Rev. 18. 13. The
Devil has often possessed Men's Bodies, but far oftener their Souls, and has not
been unwilling to be dispossessed of the one, that he might take more full
seisin of the other: It being neither great nor small, which the Syrian fights
against; not so much those Rivers of Blood which have run down in all the great
Wars and Slaughters in the World, which he is satisfied with, as the Blood of
Souls which he thirsts after. God desires not the Blood of Goats, and Bulls,
Psalm. 50. 13. nor does the Devil principally the Blood of Men, unless it be of
their Souls. And it is then (he thinks) (...), he has hit them under the fifth
rib, when like the devilish Assassinate, he kills the Body and damns the Soul
together with the same blow. And therefore where the Siege is straitest, and
the Assault fiercest, there our Watch needs be strictest, and our Guard
strongest. Because the Soul is most laid at, it needs be most looked after,
that above all keeping we keep our hearts, Prove. 4. 23. so as rather to be
dispossessed of all, than not to possess our souls. (As God above all is to be
feared, so the Devil especially to be watched, because both (though in their
several ways) when they have destroyed the Body, can cast the Soul into Hell,
Luke 12. 5.) Greatest care therefore need be of our souls.

4. And this as in regard of the danger of them, so also of the inestimable
worth of them. (...) My soul's my glory, says Jacob, Genesis 49. 6. where the
Chaldee has (...) my precious ones, (...) my Soul is my Darling, or mine Prove.
6. 26. Psalm. 35. 17.
only One, says David, Psalm. 22. 20. But should we go no further than the
Text; this Phrase of possessing the soul says, that the soul it self is a
great possession. I may not now insist on all its Worth and Excellencies, that
it is Divinae particula aurae, a Sparkle of Heaven, a Glymps of God, in which
you may see most of his Image, and one of the Masterpieces of all his Works;
of a Spiritual immaterial Constitution, of an everlasting Continuance and
Duration, so that if it be not possessed, but lost one way, it will not be lost
in another: In its Nature far above all this Terrestrial World, in its
Apprehensions, that which a World cannot stint, nor in its Desires a thousand
Worlds satisfy, made for God, and only to be filled with God: So Capacious, as
if possessed and saved, can take in much of God, and if neglected and lost,
will take in as much of his Curse and Wrath: So admirable in its Operations,
that it is a shame, if for want of possessing it, it should like a Drunken Man
be so disquieted and distempered, as to be hindered from them for a time. But so
precious in it self, that it is a thousand pities that any of us should fall so
short of possessing our souls, that such a glorious Creature should be lost and
perish Eternally. It Is in Mundo animarum, in that World of souls, in which we
shall hereafter see more fully the worth of souls: In Mundo umbrarum, in this
world of Shadows, it is but little we see, or know either of them, or their
Excellencies. But yet so much (if we be not grown wholly Brutish) as may
exceedingly shame us, that when others look so much to the Cabinet, we take no
more care of the Jewel; that when others, nay, our selves are so diligent to
keep the Body in health and life, the precious everlasting Soul is no better
provided for to be kept in a b^^^er condition; Physicians of the Body so
honored; and Physicians of the Soul so slighted: The Body decked, and the Soul
neglected and starved, nay, by the Bodies being crammed, the Soul to be pined
or surfeited: That when we see sometimes so much Watch and ward to keep
possession of some sorry House, or small Cottage, and which, it may be at most,
we have but a short time in; we should either carelessly or wilfully yield
possession to the World, the Devil, and the Flesh, of these spiritual immortal
Souls of ours, which, if we look to it, may be the glorious Mansions of the
Blessed God to dwell in, and which to be sure we must dwell with, either in
weal or woe to Eternity. Had we nothing else to say, these two words might
heighten our Souls worth, and should our care in possessing of them:

1. They are the purchase of the Blood of the Son of God. (And shall we trample
under foot his Blood in so neglecting our Souls, which were purchased by the
Blood of the Shepherd of Souls? 1 Pet. 2. 25.)

2. And this that they might be holy and glorious Temples for the Blessed
Spirit of God. O then! be sure to keep possession for so happy a Guest, that
the Devil may not prove an Intruder. And thou that wilt be stiff, and earnest,
and peremptory, to maintain thine Interest in what thy Father or Friend left
thee, do not so under-value either thy Savior or thy Soul, as not to keep
possession of that, which He at so dear a rate has purchased. Our Souls should
be precious, that were purchased by Blood so precious. Let that be said to
every incroaching Enemy, what Jephtah said to the invading Ammonite, Judge. 11.
23. The Lord has dispossessed the Amorites before his People, and should
thou possess it? And let their resolution, ver. 24. be ours, Will thou not
possess that which Chemosh thy God gives thee to possess? And so, Whatsoever
the Lord our God has given to us, that will we possess. Our Souls he first
made, Jer. 38. 16. which we afterward lost, which he repurchased by the Blood
of his Son, and restored to us to be kept as an everlasting pledge of his Love;
and therefore whatever else we lose, look to it that we here keep possession.

But to the quickening of our care herein, I need not seek for more particulars
to set forth the Soul's worth, than what I there propounded.

1. Such, as the saving and possessing of it,

1. Crowns all other Enjoyments. Wisdom with an Inheritance does well, Eccles.
7. 11. but if men's sana in corpore sano, it is much better. It was a Solomon's
happiness, that amidst all his delights of the Sons of Men, his Wisdom also
remained with him. It Is an happy saving Bargain indeed, if a Man, especially in
losing times, when he saves his Estate and his Life, can save his Soul too,
without which a Man with all his other Gettings and Enjoyments is but like a
dead Body stuck with Flowers; or as a Room round-about-hung, and richly
furnished, and nothing but the dead Master's Hearse in the midst of it.

2. Countervails all other Losses. David's Mouth praises God with joyful Lips,
though in a dry and thirsty Land, when his Soul is filled with marrow and
fatness, Psalm. 63. 1, 5. And though he was for the outward Man at a weak pass,
yet it was a sufficient support that God had strengthened him with strength in
his Soul, Psalm. 138. 3. Though I possess months of vanity, Job 7. 3. and with
him be ejected out of all; if yet in possession of my Soul, I am no harbourless
Object. Though the invading Enemy has quite broke down the Fence, and laid all
open and waste; yet as long as with the Christians in Justin Martyr, we have
(...); When they have possessed themselves, and taken away all with them, if
they have left but a good God, and a good Conscience; a Soul, and a Savior,
it is but the Casket that is lost, the Treasure is saved, and lends them a Key
for Paul's Riddle of having nothing, and yet possessing all things. In this
sense dum Anima est, spes est, as long 2 Cor. 6. 10.
as my Soul is mine own, I am not only in hope, but in possession. No cause to
faint, though the outward Man perish, if the inward Man be renewed, 2 Cor. 4.
16. nor to complain, if the same hand that casts the Christian's Body to the
Beasts, casts his Soul at the same time into his Savior's Bosom. Paul meant
not to kill, but to cure the incestuous Person, when he would have him
delivered even to Satan to the destruction of the flesh, if his Spirit may but
thereby be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5 5. and that will make
amends for all. Thus we see that the saving and possessing of the Soul crowns
all Enjoyments, more than Countervailes all other losses.

2. But on the contrary, the loss of it,

1. Compleats all other losses and miseries, and makes them utterly undoing.
David speaks of his Enemies spoiling of his Soul, as their greatest cruelty,
and his chiefest misery, Psalm. 35. 12. The Prophet, Lam. 3. 65. when he had
given that heavy blow, that made the heart ache, Lord give them sorrow of heart;
he strikes the Nail to the Head, when he adds, thy Curse unto them. O woe unto
thee, thou have added grief unto thy sorrow, Jer. 45. 3.
and a curse to both, when by thy riotous, unclean, or otherwise vicious
courses, thou have lost (it may be) thine Estate, thy good Name, the health and
strength of thy Body, and which is worst of all, thy Soul and all. Undone
wretch! It was a desperate prodigal expense, which all the Money in thy Purse,
and thy whole other Substance could not discharge; but thy Soul also must go in
to pay the reckoning. Thy Savior's Soul being heavy to the death, was more sad
than all his bodily Mat. 26. 38.
Sufferings, and that thrust which lets out the heart-blood of thy Soul, is far
beyond all other Wounds, and makes them deadly. To see an Enemy in the
Habitation, is one of Eli's sorest Afflictions, 1 Samuel 2. 32. and to be a
possession to Enemies is Edom's heaviest Curse, Numb. 24. 18. but not so heavy,
as to see an Enemy possessed of this inward Mansion. The loss of the Soul
compleats all other losses and miseries.

2. Cannot be made up and recompensed with all other Gains and Enjoyments. The
round World is but a Cipher to it. For what is a Man profited, if he should
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? says our Savior, Matthew. 16. 26.
He that tenders a whole World, makes a great offer; but he that loses his Mar.
8. 37.
Soul for it, sustains a greater loss; for that World which cannot satisfy the
desires of a Soul before it be lost, cannot satisfy for the loss of a Soul
when it is. And therefore the rich Man, Luke 12. 19, 20. was but a Fool for all
his Riches; and the Hypocrite, Job 27. 8. is brought in as a desperate Fool for
all his Gain, when God took away both their Souls. How miserable! when dead, to
have so many Friends to accompany the Body to the Grave, and Devils only the
Soul to Hell, such Funeral Pomp and Tombs? He that has lost his Soul, is a
poor undone Man; though with the Young Man in the Gospel he have never so great
possessions: Mat. 12. 22.
For a Silk Stocken will not cure a broken Leg, nor daintiest Meat make the
sick Man well, nor all the choicest Extractions from the whole Body and Bulk of
the Creature, afford a Cordial strong enough to revive a languishing lost Soul.
And therefore as the Arabic Proverb advises, Noli gemmam perdere in die
festo; in our greatest Feasts it would not have us lose our Jewel, because it is
of such worth, that all the delight we can have in the costliest Meal, cannot
countervail the loss of it; so in all the richest of the World's entertainments
let us be so merry and wise together, as to be sure to look to our Jewel, to
our Souls, the loss of which all else can no way compensate.

3. As being in the last place irrecoverable. When our Savior said, What will
it profit a Man, if he win the whole World, and lose his own Soul? In those
words he tells us, that the loss of it is inestimable: But when he adds, or
What shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? He would thereby assure us,
that if after the price of Purchase, which he laid down to redeem our Souls,
and repossess us of them, they shall yet be so neglected, as that they come
indeed to be lost, that Morgage will never be able again to be bought out. No
(...) to be given in exchange, but the loss absolute and irreparable. But shall
then such precious Souls be lost for want of looking to; pawned for Toys, nay
sold outright for Trifles? That thou may take thy pleasure, carest not (as
sometimes thou profanely say) if the Devil take thy Soul. Is not this (...)?
more sottish than the Indians exchanging Gold for Glass, and more profane than
Esau's selling his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; by Drunkenness, Passion,
Drowsiness, Lust, putting our selves out of possession of the use of our Souls
for the present, or by these and suchlike courses hazarding the utter loss of
them for ever. Should this be the sad lot of any, as it will be of too many,
let it be of such sensual Brutes that know not the worth of a Soul, that can so
easily part with it; of such sordid Muckworms, quibus anima tantum est pro
sale, whose Souls serve only to keep them alive, and to preserve their Bodies
from stinking; and who are (as such) something distinct from their Souls, as
it is intimated of the Fool in the Gospel, to whom God said, This night shall
they fetch thy Soul from thee, Luke 12. 20. But for Christians, that believe
that the Blood of the Son of God was shed to save Souls; for Scholars, whose
Souls are themselves (Animus cujusque is est quisque) who study the nature of
Souls, and therefore should know the worth of them; for Divines, whose
traffic is in trading for Souls; let us have ground to hope better things of
you, and such as are (...), that accompany Salvation, Heb. 6. 9. whilst like
wise Men, Prove. 11. 30. you labor to win other Men's Souls, be not such Fools
as to lose your own. It Is his Disciples and Apostles that our Savior
especially directs his Speech to in the words of the Text, in which there is a
double (...). Whatever others do, yet you above all in your patience possess ye
your Souls.

SERMON XXXIII.
LUKE 21. 19. II. Sermon, Preached at St. Mary's, Cambridg, Aug. 19. 1649.
In your Patience possess ye your Souls.


TErtullian begins his Book of Patience with an ingenuous acknowledgment of his
own unfitness, Homo nullius boni, and aeger doloribus impatientiae, etc. And so
may I well begin my Sermon of the same Argument with the like Apology: but as
he there adds, The rich Man that so much desires health must be born with, if
he be speaking of it, especially is his speaking help to instruct him in the
Cure. And therefore in the handling of this Text of Patience, having dispatched
the two first parts of it the last time, which I called the Freehold and the
Seisin; and from them held forth our duty to possess our Denotat causam
instrumentalem, quam necesse est pios adhibere, si in calamitatibus spiritualem
incelumitatem r^tinere velint. Illyricus.
Souls, I now close with the third, viz. the Tenure of it, and that is of
Patience. In your Patience possess ye your Souls. All Graces indeed are of the
Soul's Lifeguard; and Faith is the Captain of them all, according to that Heb.
10. 39. (...), we are of them that believe to the saving of the Soul. But under
Faith in perilous times Patience in an especial manner is here by our Savior
set upon the Guard. And therefore he says, (...), etc* in your Patience
possess ye your souls. (And so James 5. 8. Be ye also patient, establish your
hearts.)

(...), Your Patience]. What Is that? As they are your souls; so is it your
patience? Yes. Thus far in the general: Both, their's Subjective, but neither
of them Causaliter. Both Patience and Soul's theirs; but so, as both from God;
the one from him as an Almighty Creator, and Father of Spirits, Heb. 12. 9. the
other as a gracious Sanctifier, and a God of Patience, Romans 15. 5. most patient
in himself, not forward to inflict any evil; And the Giver of Patience to his
afflicted Servants, whereby they are ready to endure all, according to that
Col. 1. 11. Strengthened with all Might, according to his Glorious Power, unto
all Patience and Long-suffering, with joyfulness.

Your Patience therefore; as thus, 1. Subjective, yours from God's gift in
possession. And, 2. Specificative, yours by way of Distinction, and that (as
some would have it) from a Fourfold other kind of Patience, viz. 1. Sinful. 2.
A Natural. 3. A Moral. 4. A Legal Patience.

1. There is a Sinful Patience: Falsa and probrosa, as Tertullian De patientia.
c. 16.
calls it: When Men, as he instanceth, are Patientes rivalium, and divitum, and
invitatorum; impatientes solius Dei: Impatient only of Christ's Yoke, and God's
Commands and Chastisements: But basely patient of the Tyranny, both of their
own and other Men's Lusts; can endure nothing for God's Cause, but any thing for
their own, for Profit, Pleasure, or Preferment sake; can patiently here and see
God blasphemed and dishonored, tamely prostitute Body, Soul, Conscience, the
Honor and Peace of them all: The Parasite patient of Abuse and Scorn for his
Belly-sake. The Courtier can receive an Injury, and give thanks, for his
Preferment's sake: Those (...) in Plutarch, to raise themselves, make their
Backs their Mistresses Footstools. Even Pathici are in Authors often Patientes.
Happy See Cerda in Tertullian, de patientia.
we, if we were but as patient in God's Service, as too many are in the Devil's
drudgery. But this Bastard-patience, the meekest Christian Spirit is impatient
of, as of that which, in stead of possessing the Soul, betrays and enslaves it,
that it is no more it self, than the Galley*slave his own Man. The Coolest
Spirit in its own Cause is warm in God's; as we see in meek Moses, Exodus 32.
19. Nor did Christ speak Contradictions, Rev. 2. 2. when he said of the Church
of Ephesus, (...), (...), I know thy patience, and that thou can not bear
them which are evil. But what cannot Patience bear? Any thing for God, but
nothing against him: It Is Impatient of that for which God is angry.

2. There is a second kind of Patience, which may be called Natural, arising
from the natural Constitution of the Body, or Mind, as in a Disease of the
Body, (as a Lethargy, or Palsy) that feels nothing; or from a natural Dullness
and Brawniness, that is not so sensible of pain and pressure, as in the
Brawniness of the Hand or Foot, in an Ox patient of labor, and the dull Ass
under a heavy burden; Or from the hardiness of the Body, patient of Cold, and
other outward Grievances; and from the courage and valor of the Mind, patient
of wounds and hardship. But this is Tolerance rather than Patience; (...),
rather than (...), and it will not possess the Soul.

1. In greatest Extremities, if long continued. The Ox that stands the Butchers
stroke with his Ax twice, falls flat at the third. The Brawn, when cut through
to the quick, proves sensible. And Saul, though a Stout Man, at last falls all
along, 1 Samuel 28. 20.

2. This Stoutness, though it endure pain, yet not disgrace, but Christian
patience can, Acts 5. 41.

3. There is that which I called a Moral Patience, such as the Though Aristotle
counts it but a Demivertue.
Heathen Philosophers, and the Stoics, especially gloried of, by which (they
will tell you) they attained to such an (...), such a tranquillity of Mind,
that no Injury could betide them. [See Seneca, lib. Quod in sapientem non cadit
injuria, Maximus Tyrius dissert. 2.] Nothing could trouble them; but that, like
the upper Region, they were always serene; Homines quadrati, which way soever
pitched, stood immovable. But as their wise Man was a Notion rather than a
Reality; so this steady evenness of Mind was sooner to be found in their Books
and Disputes, than in their Lives and Practices; especially when it came to a
pinch indeed, in the Storm when the poor Skipper was cheerful, their great
Philosopher's heart sunk within him: The more Wise and Knowing they were, the
more sensible they were of their Danger, and being always proudly conceited of
their own Worth, the more fearful they were of their Loss; and so the more
erect they stood upon their Tip-toes, the more flat they fell under that
burden, which they cold not undergo: As Saul higher by the Head than others,
when such a weight fell upon them, with him, (...), they fell all along, and
there was no spirit in them, 1 Samuel 28. 20. for although in ordinary cases the
spirit of a Man can bear his Infirmities, Prove. 18. 14. yet in extraordinary
Stresses and Exigencies, it is not a natural Stoutness, nor a moral Composedness
of spirit, but only Christian Faith and Patience, that will be able to keep it
up from sinking; so that it is indeed a great commendation of patience, (as
Tertullian observes) that these Heathen Grandees affected the Counterfeit of
it, as the chief piece of their Bravery; yet in truth (as Cyprian affirms) it
was only Insolens affectatae libertatis audacia, De bono patientiae. Affectatio
caninae aequantmitatis a stupore formata. Tertull.
and exerti and seminudi pectoris inverecunda jactantia, A vapouring humor
rather than any solid settlement of Spirit, because upon no good foundation:
Blown up by Pride in themselves, and heartned by Applause of others; and so not
able to keep possession of the soul in all Emergencies, though it may be
sometimes parient of Loss and Pain, yet usually impatient of Disgrace; so that
if cut in that Vein, none bled more deadly.

4. There is a Legal Patience, such as the Law requires, or rather which the
Legal Paedagogie trained them up unto, which (I think) Tertullian somewhat too
boldly under-values, nay, accuses, as that which trained them up to a kind of
Revenge, in allowing to take Eye for Eye, and Tooth for Tooth, etc. Though And
so Grotius often speaks.
that was in a way of Public Justice, and not of private Revenge. Sure I am,
the Law of God was Holy, Just, and Good; and could they have kept it, it would
have kept them, so as to have possessed their Souls with patience. This defect
was not in the Law, but them that lived under it; in degree, not in kind. And
accordingly Job then, whom Chrysostom calls (...) Tom. 6. p. 590. Fortissimus
athleta Dei.
(...), is by the Apostle held forth to the whole World now, in the time of the
Gospel, as a Mirror of patience, James 5. 11. And truly, when we read and
think of Abraham's faith, and Job's patience, and Moses his meekness, etc. the
Eminency of some of them then, may justly cast shame on the Deficiency of many
of us now, that their Twilight should outshine our Noonday, as though they
had lived under the Grace of the Gospel, and not we, who fall so exceedingly
short of that Conformity to the Law, which some of them in a greater measure
attained to. But yet to my purpose, that of Illyricus is observable. Quomodo
autem V. T. and Hebraei hanc patientiam vocant ignoro, nec etiane locum novi
ubi describatur. Patience is seldom mentioned in the Old Testament, and they
scarce have a proper Name for it, but when they speak of it, most commonly make
use of the word Silence to express it, as though for the most part of Men it
was then more rare, and less known under the Law, than it is, or at least
should be, now under the Gospel. And therefore although it was a great measure
of Patience which the Lord enabled some of the Faithful then unto, when (...),
etc. when they were Stoned, and Sawn asunder, and Tempted, etc. Heb. 11. 36,
37. Yet it was nothing to that which many Christian Martyrs by the Grace of the
Gospel were raised up to under heavier Sufferings.

5. And therefore in the last place, it is Christiana Patientia,
Gospel-Christian Patience: (...), Signanter dictum, Your patience; yours as
Apostles, as Followers, as Servants of Jesus Christ, by which, when you are
forced (it may be) to let all else go, you may even then keep possession of
your Souls. Nothing else can do it: But that can. That whereas Impatience
usurps a domineering power over the Man (according to that of Tertullian,
speaking of Adam) Facile usurpari ab impatientia caepit, c. 5. Sopita ratione,
and excitato fomite, quoquo vult hominem versat, Cerda. I say, Impatience
usurps over the Man, and then betrays all: On the contrary Patience keeps all,
the Soul at least above all in a quiet possession; and accordingly Albertus
Magnus makes Prudence and Patience, those two Wings of the great Eagle, by
which the Woman, Rev. 12. 14. fled into the Wilderness, and was nourished from
the Face of the Serpent.

And that is the Truth which I am now to prosecute. In which I shall, 1. Explain
what I mean by this Gospel-Christian Patience. 2. Wherein it may be said to
keep us in possession of our Souls. 3. How it does it. And then, 4. Conclude
with a short Application.

1. For the first, What Patience is was showed before, and I now only mind you,
that it relates,

1. Either to God, according to that, Psalm. 37. 7. Rest in the Lord, and wait
patiently for him; when it neither swells, nor sinks under his Hand, but
silently waits his pleasure.

2. Or to Man, according to that, 1 These. 5. 14. Now we exhort you Brethren, be
patient to all Men.

But it is called Gospel-Christian-Patience, as it is found in a Christian now
in the time of the Gospel: And this

1. As he is directed and animated by the Example of Christ; for he has also
Suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet.
2. 21. viz. in patient Suffering, as it is, ver. 20. his Steps having trodden
out to us a Path, that we need not be at a loss in the most unknown Way; and if
the Soldier be heartned by his Fellow Soldiers courage and company, as Paul
said, many of the Brethren waxed bold by his Bonds, (Phil. 1. 14.) then sure,
by looking to Jesus the Captain of our Salvation, enduring the Cross, end
despising the shame, we may well run with patience the Race that is set before
us, Heb. 12. 1, 2. and without danger or distraction follow on; when our
Abimelek, our Father-King (for Christ is both) has Marched before, and given
us that word (...). Do as I have done, as that other Abimelek did, Judge. 9. 48.

2. As enabled by the Grace and Spirit of Christ, according to that, Col. 1.
11. Strengthened with all might unto all patience, and Long-suffering with
joyfulness; but is is (...), according to his Glorious power, and that Power
the more Glorious, in that out of weakness they have been made strong, as the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 11. 34. The fearfullest and every way weakest Ages, Sexes,
Constitutions, have often in suffering Times been enabled with most Courage and
Wisdom, (...), as Chrysostom speaks, which plainly manifests that it was
Christ's Spirit that kept them so in possession of their own: And if the strong
Man armed keep his Palace, all is in peace, Luke 11. 21. If the Spirit of the
Almighty God undertake to keep possession, who shall be able to make an
Ejectment? It Is a deadly aching Head that is distracted, if God with his own
Hand do but hold it. It is an overgrown Burden that sinks me, if underneath be
an everlasting Arm. Such a Back of Steel will sufficiently strengthen a very
weak Bow. Though Paul be nothing, yet by Christ strengthening him, he can do,
yea, and suffer Phil. 4. 13.
all things.

3. As heartned by the Comforts of the Spirit of Christ, for the Joy of the
Lord is our strength, Neh. 8. 10. Farina in olla, Meal in the Pot, that takes
away the deadly intoxicating bitterness of it: Vinum in pect^re, the Cordial
that Antidotes these Animi deliquia, these Swoonings, and sainting Fits,
according to that, 2 Cor. 4. 1. (...), according as we have received Mercy, we
faint not; such sweet Morsels strengthen the heart, that it can go on in its
work and way, and not sink under its burden. Thus we had Patience and
Joyfulness joined together, Col. 1. 11. as mutually begetting and strengthening
each other.

Patience much furthering our Joy: So the Apostle, we rejoice (or glory) in
Tribulation, if it work patience, Romans 5. 3. And so Tetullian speaks of a
Sagina voluptatis, of Patience fatting Saginari voluptate patientia voluit
Christus. Cap. 5. Assideat, Cap. 1. (...).
the Soul with delight, and brings it in as the sick Man's Nurse that sits by
him, and cherishes him.

And Joy much strengthening and confirming our patience, whilst sense of Mercy
drowns the sense of Misery, makes the Martyr lie quietly on the Grid-Iron, when
it is with delight, as on a Bed of Roses: Whists and silenceth all discontented
complaints of Pain, Loss, Disgrace, etc. whilst he is sensible of the saving
health of God's Countenance: can rejoice in his spiritual Gains, yea, and can
Glory that he is accounted worthy to suffer Shame for the Name of Christ with
them, Acts 5. 41. When this Candle of the Lord shines upon our head and heart,
we Job 29. 3.
are able with Job to walk through darkness, even dance in the dark without
stumbling. And then with more ease lie down quietly, and sleep sweetly in the
darkest Night.

Thus Patience animated by the Example of Christ, and spirited by the Grace and
Comfort of the Spirit of Christ, becomes true Christian Patience: Which was the
first thing propounded, and so, as such, in most troublesome Times helps us to
possess our Souls.

2. But wherein does that consist? Which was the second Particular.

I answer, especially in two things, viz. 1. In so keeping the Soul, that it be
not at last utterly lost. 2. That for the present, whatever the occasion be, it
be not so Disguised and Distempered, but that it may be it self, and we still
our own Men. This was shown in the general in the former Point: And now in the
second we are particularly to show, that Christian-Patience is able to do both
these.

1. Patience keeps possession of the Soul, in taking care that it be not lost
and perish eternally. So that we find, that patient continuance in well-doing
ends in eternal Life, Romans 2. 7. And the Apostle, Heb. 10. 36. says, that we
have need of patience, that, after we have done the Will of God, we may receive
the Promise. There is absolute need, especially in evil Times, that the Soul be
possessed with patience, if it would at last be possessed of Glory, as will
clearly appear from the contrary. Take an impatient Man, and let him meet with
Trials and Exercises, and he presently chooses Sin rather than Affliction, as
the phrase is, Job 36. 21. He cannot Suffer, and therefore he must Sin, nor is
there the most dreadful and damning Sin, which in that fright and hurry he will
stick at, or set him at a stand; but over Hedge and Ditch, though with never so
many break-neck Falls to his Soul, that he may but escape that outward danger
that he is more afraid of. Cyprian, in his Book De bono Patientiae, and his
Master Tertullian before him, in his Book of the like Argument, are large in
this, to show that Impatience is not only a Sin, but a Mother-sin; that at
first undid the Devil, and afterward Adam; thrust on Cain to his murder, Esau
to his profaneness, the Jews to crucify Christ, and all Heretics to corrupt
and blaspheme the Truth of Christ, which was but impatience to withstand their
own Lusts; but in suffering time to withstand the rage and lusts of the Devil
and Men, this the fearful unbelieving impatient Soul finds it often an harder
task: and therefore rather than stand out basely, yields up all, and it self
and all; will be content to do all rather than suffer any thing. We may
tremble, when we think of David counterfeiting the Madman; Peter denying and
forswearing his Lord and Master; Cranmer subscribing, and others of the
choicest Servants of Christ faultring and fowly miscarrying in times of straits
and dangers: Even their Souls had hereby been lost, if Christ had not saved
them. Peter had utterly sunk in that great Wave, had not Christ reached out his
hand and re-saved him. But howl then Mat. 14. 30, 31. Zech. 11. 2.
ye*Fir-Trees, if the Cedars be fallen. If the Righteous be scarcely saved,
where will the ungodly and sinners appear? If the Godly for want of the
exercise of Patience run such an hazard of their Souls, how will the ungodly,
that wholly want the grace of Patience, avoid the utter loss of theirs? Upon
two grounds, 1. Their over-prising outward things, which they cannot be
without. 2. Undervaluing their Souls, especially seeing it is their Souls that
they least of all look after, and expose them to danger and loss rather than
any thing else, deal with them as the Levit did with his Concubine, Judge. 19.
25. who, to save himself, did prostitute her to their lust to be abused to the
very death, (as the Castor bites off and leaves that part of his Body* which
they most hunt after to save the rest). Or, like a Forlorn, left to face and
entertain the Enemy, whilst they draw off their Bag and Baggage, that they may
secure Body, Life, Estate, Esteem, and the like, leave the Soul at stake to be
wounded and defiled with the fowlest and most horrid sins, even to deny Christ,
and utterly to apostatize from him, his Truth, and Grace, and so, merely for
want of Faith and Patience, (...), in such a Luke 8. 13.
time and pinch of tentation such fall away: And so the best bargain they make
of it is, but to gain the World, and lose the Soul. But our Savior in the
place parallel to the Text says, He that (...).
endures to the end shall be saved: Now (...), Patience is the enduring Grace,
and therefore is the saving Grace, at least saves the Soul, when it can secure
nothing else; dare suffer, and thereby may expose the outward Man to danger and
misery; but dare not sin, and thereby provides for the Soul's safety, and so
keeps possession, that it be not lost at last.

2. That it be not distempered and disguised for the present, how distracting
and intoxicating soever the exercise and affliction be, Ira furor brevis. As
anger is a madness, so impatience is an angry Sore that swells and burns,
(Semper aeger caloribus impatientiae, De Patientia, c. 1.
as Tertullian speaks of himself) and so casts the Soul into a Burning Fever,
and thereby brings the Man to a perfect (...), he is so distempered, that he
knows not what he says or does. And so Asaph in this case by his own
confession becomes like a Beast, Psalm. 73. 22. And Heman, though he continues a
Man, yet a distracted Man, Psalm. 88. 15. David, when his Heart waxt hot, and
the Fire burned, he says, he spoke with his Tongue, Psalm. 39. 3. and (as some
expound that place) more Junius.
than his share. I am sure even Job himself, when his Patience began a little
to be inflamed into Passion, spoke over; he confesses that he uttered that he
understood not, Chap. 42. 3. And if these, that were of so sober and gracious a
Spirit, were, whilst in this case, so much besides themselves, then how stark
wild may you expect to find such, who have no such inward bridle to check such
a wild Horse, but lay the Reins loose on the Neck of passion and rage? And what
is it that you then see? A Man in his right wits? No: but a wild Boar foaming
at the Mouth, a Lion sparkling with his Eyes, a very Bedlam in the height of
his phransy. And how is the Soul then kept in possession?

But Patience cools such hot Distempers, and being spiritualis Illyricus
Patientia sanitatem. Tertul. de pat. c. 1.
incolumitas, (as he calls it) the very health of the Soul, it either prevents
or cures such phrensies; keeps the Soul in a due temper, that the Man is still
himself; as our Savior, That his Patience might have its perfect work in his
sensible sufferings of the extremity of his torments, refused that (...), Mar.
15. See Galatinus.
23. which some say was wont to be given to Men, when they suffered, to
intoxicate and make senseless. No better Receipt than a Patient Spirit against
a light Head under heaviest Burdens and Afflictions; though Job's Messengers
trod one on the heel of another, and that so long, till at last they had
nothing more to say, because he had almost nothing more to lose: yet, as long
as his Patience received their Messages, and he heard them by that Interpreter
(though indeed at last he started up and rent his Mantle, and shaved his Head,
and fell down upon the Ground; and Satan that stood looking on, to see how his
Train, that he had laid, took, it may be might now think that the distracted
Man began his Anticks, yet he fell short of his Hopes.) It Is added, that after
Job had done all this; he worshipped, and said, Naked came I out of my Mother's
Womb, and naked shall I return thither: The Lord has given, and the Lord has
taken away: Blessed be the Name of the Lord, Job 1. 20, 21. Now, (as they said)
these are not the words of him that has a Devil: So those words of Job, John
10. 21.
have they the least touch or air of a Distraction or Distemper? (...). You
hear not in them a distracted Man's nonsense, but rather a Man divinely
inspired speaking Oracles: Such a full possession and enjoyment of a Man's Soul
and self does Patience put and keep him in; that if it have but its perfect
work, it makes an all of Joy, when there is in view nothing but grief and
sorrow, Jam. 1. 2, 4. so that when it comes to that (...), a Man is round about
beset with miseries and mischiefs, that another Man is quite-out exanimated and
distracted, as Moses says, even mad for the fight of his eyes, which he sees:
Deuteronomy. 28. 34.
yet even then a truly patient Christian is so fully and perfectly himself,
that he can freely enjoy himself; with the Martyr, sleep as soundly the night
before his Suffering, as at any other time, and with as much strength and
feeedom of Spirit pray and meditate, converse with God, and walk on in his way
before Man, as if there were nothing to disturb and interrupt him; like an
Archimedes, be hard at his Study, and intent on his Demonstration, when the
Enemy has now taken the Town, and takes away his life together; or rather as a
Man in an impregnable Garrison, may be every whit as quiet, and as little
troubled, when the Cannons roar, and the Enemies fall on, as if there were none
at all to molest him: But he may thank his safe Garrison for it, which he is
possessed of; and so must a Christian his Patience, which, as our Savior here
shows, is that which keeps both himself and Soul in possession.

3. The third enquiry is, How Patience does this? I answer two ways. 1. As it is
enabled to suffer. 2. As it is trained up to wait with expectance; and the word
(...) hints both.

1. Patience is a suffering Grace, and therefore in Scripture joined with
long-suffering, Col. 1. 11. 2 Timothy 3. 10. can bear much. So (...), Thou have
born, and have patience, says Christ to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 3. as
the patient Ox endures the Yoke without kicking or fainting: and so the patient
Christian, because he can endure much; therefore it is that he is not much
distempered. A cool Spirit does not diffluere in greatest heats of Persecution:
[In this like a Man that has so strong a Brain that he can bear much Drink, is
not so soon drunk;] so that, though with Job he possess months of Job 7. 3.
Vanity, yet he possesses his own soul, and keeps all safe and in due temper:
For what is the reason that many Men in evil Times are so much besides
themselves, mad with Rage, drunk and swallowed up with Grief, and dead with
Fear, come to deny Christ, to apostatize from the Profession of his Truth and
Grace, stick at nothing, swallow any thing, though never so deadly and
destructive? But only because they are either so weak, or so tender and
delicate, that they would (...), and so cannot suffer persecution for the Cross
of Christ, Gal. 6. 12. The Cross is too heavy for them, and therefore they fink
under it: They are impatient of Pain, and Shame, and Loss, dare not, cannot
lose their Lives, and so cowardly, and yet desperately lose their Souls.

But what said Christ in the former place? (...), and yet, (...), ver. 3. Thou
can not bear; and Rev. 2. 2.
yet, Thou have born. Patience cannot endure to sin, because it can endure to
suffer; does not betray the Soul and yield up possession, because it is able to
withstand the assault of the Enemy; Does not sink under the burden, because
able to bear it. And this in a double respect, 1. Because it lightens the
burden, 2. Strengthens the bearer.

1. It lightens the burden, which Impatience doubles and aggravates; makes a
Mole-bill, a Mountain, and a Day, a Year; looks at the wrong end of the
Prospective, or through a Magnifying-Glass, and calls Little, Great; and Short,
Long; usual 2 Cor. 4. 17. Numb. 13. 28, 29, 30.
and light Afflictions, strange, and unsupportable: Like an evil Spy, makes it
self a Grass-hopper, and every Enemy a Son of Anak, whilst patience with Caleb
stills the uproar, and says, we are well able to overcome them. How does the
least weight gall a sore shoulder? And a drop of Vinegar fret where the Skin is
off? Whilst a sound part feels no smart, though never so much be poured on it
Mollius fit patientia, etc. Faith and Patience add weight to Mercies, but
lighten burdens, and so better bear them. As patient Job, when Miseries fell so
thick and heavy upon him, as might plane obruere animam, yet when he had lost
all other his possessions, his patience kept him on his Legs, and in possession
of his Soul, by suggesting to him alleviating considerations. Naked came I out
of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return thither. I am but Naked, not
Wounded: I am but reduced to my first condition of Nature; and such a motion,
though seemingly violent, should not be troublesome, nor I be troubled to go as
naked to Bed at night, as I arose from it in the morning. And again, The Lord
has given, and the Lord has 1 Samuel 3. 8. Hab. 2. 20. Psalm. 39. 9.
taken away. It Is his Sovereignty, as Lord, to do what he will, especially
seeing what he does is nothing but common Equity, in his own time to call home
his own, which he at first lent me: And therefore no cause for me to Curse God
for taking it away so soon, but to Bless him, that he continued the Loan of it
so long; and therefore, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Thus Patience helps to
lighten the Burden.

2. And strengthens the Bearer; so it is said to stablish the heart, Jam. 5. 8.
that such a composed quietness is our strength, (...), Isa. 30. 15. And so by
patience we are enabled to run the race, Heb. 12. 1. as a long-breathed Man
holds out to the end, when one that is short-winded is ready to faint and sink
at every step. Great is the advantage that a patient considerate Man has
against his Adversary, either in a Dispute, or any other more rough Conflict.
And great is the help that Patience affords.

Partly as it encourages and comfort the Heart, (as we read Romans 15. 4.
Patience and Comfort joined together) and that strengthens it. For the Joy of
the Lord is our strength, Neh. 8. 10. Such a Cordial does (...) restore (or
bring back) Psalm. 23. 3. Lam. 1. 11.
the Soul, which in such swooning fits is going away, and keeps it in
possession.

But especially as it has the Company and Assistance of all other Graces, that
are most reviving and strengthening: According to that of Bid, Idcirco
possessio animae in virtute patientiae Gregor. Hom. 35. in Ezekiel De patientia
patientia c. 15. vide cerdae. Annot. ibid.
ponitur, quia radix omnium, custosque patientia est. It Is Mother or Nurse of
all other Graces; Fidem munit, pacem gubernat, dilectionem adjuvat, humilitatem
instruit, etc. as Tertullian goes on: And as he in Cap. 5.
another place calls Impatience, Delictorum Excetram: There Is no sin so horrid,
As all angry bad Humors flow to an angry Sore.
but Impatience is ready to hurry a discontented Man into, makes him blaspheme
God, wrong others, undo himself; so there is no Grace which Patience does not
either receive life from, or give life to, or both.

It Is joined with Faith, Heb. 6. 12. Rev. 2. 19. and 13. 10. Faith begets
Patience, Jam. 1. 3. and Patience back again strengthens Faith. Fidei
fundamentum, firmiter munit. Cyprian.

And the like I may say of Hope. Sometimes in Scripture Patience seems to be
made the fruit of Hope, Romans 8. 25. 1 These. 1. 3. and sometimes Hope the effect
of Patience, Romans 5. 4. and 15. 4.

And so I might show of other Graces: But that of Cyprian in the general, may
suffice. De unius quidem nominis font proficiscitur, sed exundantibus venis
per multa gloriarum itinera diffunditur. This one blessed Fountain spreads it
self into many happy streams. The patient Man, as such, believes and hopes, is
Loving, Humble, Meek, Wise, Valiant, by it approved to be sincere, and trained
up to be Heavenly-minded: And so of the rest, that the Soul, that is thus
guarded, need not fear to be kept in possession. How sweetly and fully does
that happy Soul enjoy it self, while Patience takes time, and by what it
suffers opportunity and advantage, to exercise all other Graces? And whilst
it is suffered to have its perfect work, so fully completes our happiness, that
we are as the Apostle expresses it, Jam. 1. 4. (...), Perfect, Entire, and
wanting nothing. And sure there is full possession kept, where there is nothing
wanting. And thus Patience does first, as it is a suffering Grace.

2. As it is a waiting and expecting Grace. So the Husbandman (...), waits and
expects a Crop in his Wait patiently, Psalm. 37. 7.
long patience, Jam. 5. 7. And so with Christians that sow for Eternity, though
it be in tears of Affliction, yet it is with patience, because with expectance
of a better Harvest. (...), If we hope for it, then with patience we wait for
it, Romans 8. 25.

Christian Patience, though it suffer much, yet is full of Hope, and thereby
full of Heart: And so keeps the Soul in life, according to that of the Prophet,
The Just shall live by his faith, Hab. 2. 4. and he there speaks of dying
Hours. Even in them the Heart may live, Psalm. 22. 26. and that it does, as long
as the Man has in him that lively Hope the Apostle speaks of, 1 Pet. 1. 3. and
in this a Christian's Patience so much exceeds that of the choicest Heathens,
as his Hope exceeds theirs. They sometimes with patience suffered much, it may
be out of love of Virtue, and hope of Applause: But he may more patiently
suffer more, when it is out of love of Christ, and hope of Glory.

Nothing more exanimates and dispossesseth a Man of himself than Despair: makes
Cain run wild out of God's presence, Genesis 4. And them, Rev. 16. 10, 11. gnaw
their Tongues, and blaspheme God like Mad men: And he that you read of, 2 Kings
6. when he hopes for no relief from God, in stead of keeping possession, he
gives up all for lost, is short-winded, and will not wait on the Lord any
longer: But a patient Christian, though he sorrows, yet it is not as others
that have no Hope; and here then invert the saying, Dum spes est, anima est:
Till he is Hopeless, he is not Heartless. He keeps possession of his Soul, as
long as it is possessed with a lively assurance of an happy close at last: (...)
Aeschylus.
was said (you know) to animate some to patience and courage. Suitable to which,
is that of the Apostle: You have heard of the patience of Job, (...), and have
seen what end the Lord made, Jam. 5. 11. and his expectation of such an Chap.
19. 25, 26, etc.
end, was that which helped him to possess his Soul with such patience. And
well may the Soul be possessed with that patience now, which assures, that at
last it shall be possessed of Glory. It Is through Faith and Patience that some
inherited the Promises, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 12. Promises are of
things to come; and therefore patience is put to stay and wait, but faints not
away in waiting, because it is joined with Faith, and so is assured of
inheriting it at last, and therefore meanwhile keeps the Soul in quiet
possession. And this, I say, in these two respects, 1. As it is enabled to
suffer much from Man. 2. To expect more from God. So that what the Apostle said
of Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 7. that Charity bears all things, endures all things,
and withal believes all things, and hops all things, ver. 7. and thereupon
in the very next words adds, that Charity never fails, may fitly according to
the former particulars be applied to Patience. Because it, 1. Bears and
endures all things. And, 2. Believes and hops all things; it therefore
never fails, nor will suffer the Christian's Heart to fail, that the spoiling
of his Goods, Heb. 10. 34. should come to the spoiling of his Soul, Psalm. 35.
12. but that in greatest Direptions and Depredations he may in patience possess
his Soul.

Which (for Application) calls upon us for an earnest endeavor possession of
our Souls by it. The Apostle's word is strong, and very general, Let patience
have her perfect work, that you may be perfect, and entire, wanting nothing,
Jam. 1. 4. Some Christians then were forward and quick at the first Assault;
but when the Battery continued long, were too ready to faint, and so by giving
out in the Race, fell short of the Prize: For want of patience, too soon
plucked off the Plaster: And so came not to a perfect Cure. And therefore the
Apostle's advice is, that they would but stay, that it might have its perfect
work; and then assures them, that it will make them perfect, and so entire,
that when come (...) to the worst, it will come to a Nec habeo, nec careo: that
even when they have nothing, they shall then want nothing. Such a perfect and
perfecting Grace, is this Grace of patience, that by its perseverance it sets
the Crown upon the head of all other Graces: For Omnes virtutes certant, sola
perserverantia vincit and coronatur.

The Arguments, by which the Ancients much commend this Tetullian. Cyprian.
Basilius M. Ephrem. Syrus, etc.
Grace to us, are many.

The Example,
Of God, who with much long-sufferance does not only bear his undutiful
Childrens manners, Acts 13. 18. but his professed Enemies rebellions and
insolences, forbearing to punish them when their sins would enforce him, and
causing his Sun to shine, Justis similiter and injustis indiscretas pluvias
largiatur. Cyprian.
and his Rain equally to fall on them, and on them that are dearest to him;
insomuch that he suffers, because they do not, and that even by them too,
whilst they are ready to think, that he is like them, or at least is not much
displeased with them, because he does so much forbear them, Psalm. 50. 21.

Of Christ, in whose whole Progress from his coming down Rev. 1. 9.
from Heaven, till his returning thither again, the Fathers are wont to observe
a Signature of patience in every step all along in the Way: But especially in
and toward his Journeys end, to endure a Traitor Judas in his Bosom, though
fully known to him, yet not to discover him to others; and when he had betrayed
himself in betraying his Master, to entertain him with the compellation of a
Friend, who was to be reckoned amongst the worst of Enemies; to endure so much
of the Jews malice and rage with so much meekness and love, notwithstanding all
that pain and shame, those buffetings, scourgings, spittings upon, those
railings and blasphemies; as the dumb Lamb, not to open the mouth, or if at
all, in that heat of his agony to breath such sweet breath, as, Father, not my
Will, but thine be done: And again, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do. That still voice speaks aloud Christ to be God, even a God of
Patience, who was Water to those Sparks, to which the meekest of us would have
been Gunpowder.

Nor yet so, fors ut de supernis aestimetur, as Tertullian speaks, Chap. 3.
as though this were so far above us, as nothing belonging to us; for (in the
third place) they find Examples and Paterns of Patience, not only in God and
Christ, but in the Servants of God, in Moses, David, Job, Jeremiah, Stephen,
Paul: In the Prophets, Jam. 5. 10.
Apostles, Martyrs, all so long-breathed, that we shall scarce approve our
selves to be of the same piece, and to have the same Spirit, if we be
shorter-winded.

They are wont also, the better to compose our Spirits to a meekned Patience
under sufferings, to put us in mind of our condition, either as fallen in Adam,
and so we are born to trouble, or as restored by Christ; and so it is the
Patience and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 9. An enraged Devil and World
will have the Cross to be our Companion, which therefore we should not quarrel
at, especially seeing it is such a Companion, as proves a very faithful Friend.
It would be endless to go about to repeat all those benefits, which the Cross
and our patient bearing of it brings in to us, whether for Grace or Peace here,
or Salvation in Heaven hereafter: Affliction is very sharp, but a much
improving School. And Faith and Patience help us to take out many an happy
Lesson in it. It inherits Promises, Heb. 6. 12. brings Glory, 2 Thessalonians 1. 4, 5.
And so whatever it meets with in the way, yet to be sure it ends well, Jam. 5.
11. And all is well that ends well.

But I omit all other Particulars, as being sensible of what Cyprian says in
the beginning of his Tractate of this Argument, [De patientiae locuturus, etc.
unde potius incipiam, quam quod nunc quoque ad audientiam vestram patientiam
video esse necessariam, etc.] That our Hearers, whilst we preach of Patience,
have need to exercise their Patience, and therefore I Will not tire out yours. And
therefore shall touch only upon two things, which partly the Context, and
partly the Text afford us.

1. And the first concerns the present time and season. It was, when Jerusalem
was now near to be destroyed, and as a forerunner of it, that his Disciples
should be hated, betrayed, and persecuted, in the foregoing part of the
Chapter, that our Savior prescribes this Receipt in the Text, that the Malady
might not prove mortal, that in patience they possess their Souls. And of the
same time and day (some think) the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10. 25. And after
showing how great a fight of Afflictions they endured in reproaches, and
spoiling of their Goods, etc. v. 32, 33, 34. he at last concludes, (...), that
they had need of Patience, v. 36. And so for certain have we now, or may have
ere long, as Capito in his time to Farel, Dura patientia Inter Calvini
Epistolas. Number. 4.
nobis opus est in hac dissolutione qua versamur, etc. How near the destruction
of our Jerusalem is, I dare not fore-prophesie. The God of Peace make and keep
it a true Jerusalem, a Vision of Peace both now and to perpetuity. But if Wars,
and rumors of Wars, if false Prophets, and false Christ's, if the betraying,
and hating, and spoiling of the Ministers and Servants of Christ be the sad
presages and forerunners of it, then (unless God be the more merciful) it may
not be long before we hear of it, when it may come again to be said, as Rev.
13. 10. and 14. 12. Here is the Patience and Faith of the Saints; when no
remedy but Faith and Patience; so that either already we have, or then may have
very great need of it. And happy we, if, when the worst comes, we can but be
able to possess our Souls by it.

2. And that is the second Particular in the Text, viz. the great benefit and
advantage of it, that whatever other loss we sustain, yet the main chance may
be saved; our Souls possessed by it. And God thought he allowed Baruch fair,
though he did not grant him those great things he sought for, if he might have
his life for a prey, Jer. 45. 5. Straits may be such, that it may be a great
mercy, if we may but have our lives: but if so as withal to possess our Souls,
that they be not endangered or lost to eternity, nor for the present so
affrighted or distempered, but that in greatest distractions we may be our own
Men, and do, yea, and suffer like Christians. So to possess the Soul, even when
we have lost all else, is such a Mercy, that with much thankfulness and comfort
we may say with the Psalmist, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord
has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm. 116. 7. A rich bounty and largess, if
through Patience keeping possession, we may be able so to turn into our Souls,
and they return to their rest in God, even when it comes to the Apostles (...),
1 Cor. 4. 11. When cast out of all, we have no certain dewlling place: but with
the faithful of old, Heb. 11. 37, 38. we should wander in Deserts, and
Mountains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth: If it should come to that pass,
that (as you use to say) no Remedy but Patience; you will have no cause to
complain, for it is a very sufficient one: even then we shall not be altogether
harbourless outcasts, as long as we can by Faith take Sanctuary in God, and by
Patience keep possession of our Souls. For certain our Savior thought so, when
against all those animi deliquia, those sick fainting Fits in the former part
of the Chapter, he prescribes only this Cordial in the Text, In your Patience
possess ye your Souls.

Superaddenda.
Should our Spirits sometimes grow hasty, and not willing patiently to wait
God's leisure; Consider,

1. That God's Retribution will be full.

2. The day of it certain, Hab. 2. 3. Heb. 10. 36, 37.

3. Though it stay, yet let this stay our Stomachs, That necdum vindicatus est
ipse qui vindicat: Christ himself, who has been more wronged than we, and who
will at last fully vindicate both himself and us, is not yet righted: but to
this day he waits till his Enemies become his Footstool, Heb. 10. 13. And
therefore be not so bold to desire, that the Servant should be served before
his Lord, Nec defendi ante Dominum servi irreligiosa and inverecunda
festinatione properemus. Cyprian S. 15.

Dr. Hammond on Matthew. 10. Annot. f. makes not this a Precept, but an Assertion
or Prediction; that there was no such way to keep or preserve their lives from
that common destruction coming on the People of the Jews, as persevering
faithful adhering to Christ.

Patient Men are the only Freeholders.
Their Comforts forfeited to God their Lord,
Who can best keep them for them,
Surrendered by them,
Purchased by Christ.
And as the Philosopher's Scholar, who having given himself to his Master to
teach him, when taught, was by his Master given back again to be his own Man.

SERMON. XXXIV.
GENESIS 49. 18. I. Sermon Preached at St. Mary's (in Stur-bridg fair time) Sept.
8. 1650.
I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.


THe dying Swan's Song, though now found to be a Fable, Brown's vulg. Errors.
yet if moralized of a dying Christian, may oftentimes prove a real Truth: for,
whereas the dying Man's Breath uses to savor of the Earth, whither he is
going, the believing Soul, then especially, breaths Heaven, to which it is then
ascending. Some Books, which contain Apophthegmata morientium, tell us how,
when their Tongues Mylius.
faulter in their Mouths, they are wont to speak Apophthegmes; but in God's
Book, we find them uttering Oracles. What a sweet Breath, and Divine Air was
that in old Simeon's Nunc Dimittis? Paul's farewell-Sermon, Acts 20. had such a
ravishing Luke 2. 29.
(...) in it, that they could not then hear it without weeping, nor can some
yet read it heedfully with dry Eyes. Above all in that ultimum vale of our
Savior's to his Disciples before his Passion, John 14. 15, 16, 17. The Sun of
Righteousness a little before its setting, shone out most Gloriously. This in
the New Testament.

And for the Old, what heavenly strain's do you meet with in Hezekiah's ultimus
singultus? Isa. 38. in David's verba novissima? 2 Samuel 23. in Moses his Songs a
little before his death? Deuteronomy. 32, and 33. and in Jacob's before his, as in
this whole Chapter, so especially in this Text? in which the Divine Soul, as
the Bird before fainting in the snare breaks through it, in an abrupt
expression, and having got it self a little upon the wing, as it were on the
sudden bolts up Heavenward in this Divine Ejaculation, I have waited for thy
Salvation, O Lord.

Here in Jacob's blessing of Dan we find it, but how it should come there, and
what coherence it has with the foregoing words, that is the question; and some
think a difficult one. So Pererius, Quae occasio hujus abrupti sermonis, etc.
Calvin.
Perobscura est haec sententia, and multiplex interpretandi ejus ratio.

Some satisfy themselves with this, that the Spirit of God will not be tied to
our Artificial Methods, as too low and pedantick for him to be confined to, who
both acts and speaks like himself; like a God, i. e. with greatest freedom.
And therefore as his Illapses are sudden, and his impulses strong, Act. 2. 2.
so the ventings of them answerable, as the Spirit gives utterance. v. 4. and it
may be never more abruptly, than when those (...) v. 11. are utterred, and so
the Soul now full of God, and breaking for the longing it has to him (as Psalm.
119. 20.) cannot always keep rank and file, but breaks out to him, and is glad
to get to him, though not in a methodical way. And so it is in all strong
workings of Passion, Love, Fear, Joy, and Desire, etc. Expressions sudden,
abrupt; for so Passions are, and their Expressions accordingly. So Judge. 5. 10.
on those words [Then shall the People of the Lord go down to the Gates] Mais
thus, Videtur hoc hiare, etc. ut pote ex affectu dictum: affectus enim non
servat ordinem, sed plerumque evagatur. In such a rapture Jacob's Soul might
here be caught and snatched to God, without being led to him by coherence, or
the thread of the foregoing discourse.

Zuinglius thinks that this Text might be versus intercalaris, and only added
to make up the verse in this Divine Poem.

Others rather think, that after the manner of weak fainting vide Pareum
Oleastrum.
old Men, or sick Men, who are wont, whilst they are speaking, sometimes out
of faintness, and sometimes out of devotion, to pause, and to interpose sighs
and prayers; so old Jacob here spent with speaking, relieves his spent Spirits,
or rather pours out his fainting Soul into God's Bosom, in this parenthetical
ejaculation, I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.

But the first verse of this Chapter tells us, that the whole is Prophetical,
of what was to befall them in the latter days.

And accordingly some apply it to Judas, whom they make Ambros. de benedict.
Isidore. Gregor. Moral. 34.
that Serpent in the way, in the foregoing verse: Others to Antichrist, whom so
many of the Ancients thought should be of the Tribe of Dan: and that Jacob,
foreseeing what havoc he should make of the Israel of God, (as they expound
the former verses) cries out (in this) for Christ and his Salvation. But this
conceit of this Dan-Antichrist (with due Reverence to those Ancient Authors) by
some, of even the Papists themselves, is held Tostatus.
uncertain, by others of them Oleaster. Bellarmine acknowledges this Text does
not evince it. de Pontif. Romans lib. 3. c. 12.
fabulous, and therefore, seeing they are sick of it, we have no cause to be
fond of it. To omit other particulars, I insist on these two, that Jacob,

1. Foreseeing both the sins and miseries, which his other posterity, and
especially this Tribe of Dan should fall into, by Faith looks up to God for
Salvation and Deliverance; which was especially effected by Sampson, a Judge of
that Tribe; and he very fitly compared to that Serpent in the way, and Adder in
the path, etc.

2. And yet foreseeing, notwithstanding this, that Sampson should dye, and
Israel should lie under captivity and affliction, and so Sampson's but an
half-Salvation: (he did but begin to save Israel, Judge. 13. 5) After the manner
of the Prophets, (who See Junii. Annot. in loc. Christ (as Sampson) conquered
dying, and by Death. Judge. 16. 31. Colos. 2. 15. See Light foot Harmony of O.
T. p. 40.
when they speak of any great Deliverance, or Deliverer, which did either
typify or any way resemble the greater Salvation of the true Messiah, they were
wont to look through one to the other, and so Jacob here looks above that
Nazarite to the true Nazaren, from Sampson to Christ; not resting in that
partial and temporal deliverance, but in, and through, and beyond it, looking
at, and waiting for Messiah's Salvation. In a word,

In their foreseen dangers and miseries he waits for deliverance by Sampson,
and there he rests not; but in and above that foreseen deliverance by Sampson
he looks and waits for Salvation by Christ. And so understand we these words, I
have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.

For the handling of them let me but premise this: That Salvation presupposes
danger and misery, and speaks deliverance; and and then the Text will afford us
these particulars.

1. That it is the lot of the Seed of Jacob to be in such straits, that they
shall stand in need of Salvation, and so long, that they are put to wait for it.

2. That it is their happiness, that notwithstanding those straits, yet they
shall be saved.

3. That it is by the Lord. It Is Jehovah's Salvation.

4. That it is their duty in all their dangers and straits to wait for
Deliverance and Salvation.

5. And in all outward and temporal deliverances by man to look and wait for
spiritual and eternal Salvation by Christ, so we shall fully come up to Jacob's
(...), I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord. The three former are more
Doctrinal and often spoken to, which I shall therefore only briefly touch upon,
that I may the rather insist on the two latter, which are more practical, and
yet I fear but little practiced, at least in a right way.

For the first, that the condition of the Israel of God is such, Salvation
presupposes danger, and when he says, I wait for Salvation, he tells us, he
needs it: for we do not wait for what we do not want.
Salvation, is so genuine to this Text, that it occasioned this expression. It
was because Jacob foresaw the trouble and miseries that should betide this
Tribe of Dan in particular, being with the last settled in its inheritance, and
there sometimes grievously oppressed by the Amorites, Judge. 1. 3^4 and at all
times galled and infested by their fast-by-neighbours the Sea Josh. 19. 47.
Judge. 18. 1. vide Junium in loc.
Philistines. Nor did he only relate to the miseries of this Tribe, but also to
the troubles and dangers of all the rest; who while in Egypt, were in a
Furnace, after that in a Wilderness; and though after settled in Canaan, flowing
with Milk and Honey, the very Edon of God, and the Glory of all Lands, yet it
bounded on both ends with Wildernesses, and on both sides with Seas, and round
about (from all quarters) compassed with malicious and enraged Enemies; a
perfect emblem of the site and posture of the Church of God in this World,
though supplied with spiritual and heavenly provisions, which Canaan's Milk and
Honey signified, yet so as surrounded with all sorts of Enemies, Wildernesses of
wants, and whole Seas of dangers and miseries, that it often comes to the
Disciples, Save Lord, we perish. And how near we now are to Matthew. 8. 25.
it, God knows, I do not. It would be mercy, if we could say with Jacob, we
wait. I am sure, our case is such, that we may all say, we have great need of
thy Salvation, O Lord.

More particularly it is to be observed, that Jacob breaths out Prima ad
Idololatriam, delapsa. Piscator. (...)* Israelitica antesign^^i and primipili.
Mede in Apoc. 7.
this sigh, whilst treating of Dan, the Tribe that is first in particular
noted for Apostasy to Idolatry, that had first a Teraphim in the time of the
Judges, Chap 18. v. 30, 31. and after had a Golden Calf in the time of the
Kings, 1 King. ^^. 29. and therefore left out in the numbering of the sealed
ones, Revel. 7. Of all Churches, such as prove Apostatical and Idolatrous,
though they least deserve, yet they will most need God's Salvation, as being
most in danger of his fiery Indignation; it being a sin that divorceth a person
and people from God, and is wont to bring heaviest judgments upon Men, makes
the Earth quake, as well as Heaven thunder. Their sorrows are multiplied, that
hasten after another God, Psalm. 16. 4. When they chose new Gods, then was War
in the Gates, Judge. 5. 8. So that God will rather lay Cities waste, than not
make Idols desolate, Ezekiel. 6. 6. like the Devil (in the Gospel) that would not
be cast out without rearing: that fretting Leprosy in the Law, hardly cured
without pulling down the house that it is in. This desperate infection our Land
has been extremely sick of; the disease of it self deadly, and the cure so
hard, that the Lord grant it prove not mortal. If the Ancients expound the Text
of Antichrist, we may at least apply it to him as the Serpent by the way, and
the Adder in the path; which by his Idolatries and witchcrafts has so bitten
the Horse-heels, that the Rider is fallen backward. And now between the Stirrup
and the ground we all have need to sigh and cry out with fainting Jacob in the
Text, I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord. Those words speak him so
oppressed, ut non nisi divinitus servari possit, as one paraphraseth Junius.
it. For us, our sins have brought us so to the brow of the Hill, and such a
precipice, that man's arm is too short to hold us; it must be an hand reached
from Heaven only, that will be able to uphold us. And yet this but the lot of
God's people, which was the first point: Their dangers and miseries so great,
that they have need of Salvation. But is Salvation in that case to be had? To
which,

The second point answers, Yes: for this word Salvation, as it implies danger,
so it speaks deliverance, and he says he waits for it; and God suffers not
Faith to wait in vain, and we will not wait for what we cannot expect. The
point is,

As it is the Lot of God's people to need, so it is their happiness obtain
Salvation. So Faith call's God the hope of Israel, and Jer. 14. 8.
the Savior thereof in the time of trouble; so that, be the case otherwise
never so desperate, there is yet hope in Israel as long as God is both hope and
Savior, what ever comes, they are never either hopeless or helpless. Thus
their style is the Redeemed of the Psalm. 107. 2. Ezra 10. 2. Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
Lord. Though thraldom, yet Redemption, and saved by the Lord. Though danger,
yet Salvation. As God (in nature) lays his beams in the waters, Psalm. 104. 3.
you would think but a sinking foundation, and founds the Earth by the Seas, and
establishes it upon the Floods, Psalm. 24. 2. and that is as dangerous a
situation: So in his Church, though seated nearest greatest dangers, yet
farthest from being swallowed up by them, because ever at last either defended
or delivered from them; a most firm bank near a most raging Sea: a sure Shield
amidst showers of invenomed darts. So God is David's Shield-bearer, (...) Psalm.
7. 10. my Shield is upon God. Nay God is my shield, Psalm. 3. 3. nay more than
Shield. It covers the Man but on one side; but God is a Shield round about,
Thou compassest him with favor as with a shield, Psalm. 5. 12. I should be too
large, if I should run out in suchlike Scripture-proofs. Mark but out of one
Psalm, those many and strong expressions, it is Psalm 68. They had lain among
the Pots; but fly out of the collow as a Dove with silver wings, v. 13. See how
God beautifieth them with Salvation, as white as Snow in Salmon, v. 14. Snow is
white; but Salmon signifies a shady gloominess. Behold, how there arises to
them Light in Darkness! He is to them (v. 20.) a God of Salvations, multiplied
deliverances in multitudes of dangers, to whom belongs issues from Death; when
round about besieged and begirt with extremities, v. 21. he will wound both
head and hairy scalp of Enemies. The wound in the Head is deadly, and dasheth
out the Brains of all their Counsels, and the hairy-scalp signifies strength
of Age, and constitution; and not weakened and made bald either with Age or
Sickness. And (to add no more) v. 22. He will bring back from Bashan (out of
Og's, the most Gigantean Enemie's Clutches) from the depths of the Sea. Even
the depths of Hell shall not drown the Israel of God, whose Hope is anchored
upward in Heaven. It Is a Christian's comfort, that whatever his dangers and
troubles in this World may be, yet the last Articles of his Creed are a
Resurrection and Life everlasting; and when come to the last cast, he can with
fainting old Jacob lean on this Staff of comfort, and look up to God* and say,
Lord I have waited for thy Salvation.

Salvation! But Lord it is thine, and that is the third particular before
observed. It Is the Salvation of a God, that the Israel of God is saved by.
Jacob here put by all other Saviors, when he Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Psalm. 124. 1, to 6.
Jer. 3. 23. Psalm. 121. 1, 2.
looks up to God, and waits for his Salvation. If it had not been the Lord, who
was on our side, both then and now may Israel say, then the proud waters had
gone over our Soul; as a Man in a Storm, that sees nothing but Sea and Heaven,
may cry out, if yonder Heaven do not save me, this Sea will drown me. And this
partly from the extremities of the Church, and partly from the good pleasure of
God.

1. The extremities of the Church often de facto are such that of necessity it
must be so. His Salvation or none, so Jonah 2. 9. Psalm. 3. 8. Evils sometimes
are so many and great, either so suddenly surprise them, or in continuance so
tire them, or by their weight so overpower them, that unless it be (...), they
are quite at a loss; no power or wisdom either of their own or others can
rescue them.

Not their own, that they should prove Self-faviours. Indeed it is wont to be
said, that Self-defence is held the first Maxim in Dodonas Grove. See Deuteronomy.
33. 7.
Policy: But it is not so in Divinity. Enemies are so crafty and strong, and the
Flock of Christ so simple and weak, that if the Sheep's strength be not in its
Head, and it is security in the Shepherd's care, it would be soon either lost or
worried. So Jehoshaphat cries out, we know not what to do, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. and
Asa (Chap. 14.) speaks as though he had no power, when he had Ver. 8. with 11.
almost Six hundred thousand fighting Men. It was not their own Sword or Arm,
but thy Right Hand and thy Arm, and the Light of thy Countenance, Psalm. 44. 3.
Jerusalem may have Palaces, but God is known to be the (...), the Refuge in
them, Psalm. 48. 3. In Jer. 36. 19. they bid Jeremiah and Baruch hide
themselves; but it is added, ver. 26. that the Lord hid them. It Is not our own
hiding, but God's, that must secure us. When we are in such deep Waters, it is
the stretching out of our Hands to Heaven that must save us. Clasping our Arms
about our selves, is the certain way to sink us. If saved, it is not by their
own might.

Nor by others help. They either do not help us, or it is only by and from God,
if they do. They do not, because they will not or cannot. Some may have
glorious Titles; as he is called Hadadezer, 2 Samuel 8. 3. which in its
signification promises a magnificent help. But in the Apothecaries Shop very
promising Titles are often writ upon Boxes that have either nothing, or (it may
be) Poison in them. The Horse (in which is the strength of the Battle, and
therefore promises much) Psalm. 33. 17.
the Psalmist says, is a vain thing, and that signifies nothing. But the Reed
of Egypt not only breaks, but also wounds the hand that leans on it, and
that is as ill as Poison: like him (in Austin) that in a Tempest sailing toward
a Mountain, light and split upon a Rock, Vbi non invenit portum, sed planctum.
Tract. 1. in Joannem.
They that promise most, often perform least, unless it be Mischief. The one of
which is Vanity: And the other Vexation. In a word, every Man is a liar, the
Apostle says; and of all others, Romans 3. Psalm. 62. 9.
Men of high degree, which promise most, the Psalmist, are a very Lie in the
abstract. And if any at any time make good their Name, that in Scripture are
sometimes called Saviors, it is Neh. 9. 27. Obad. v. 21.
only as they are Weapons in God's Hand, and in the alone Strength of this our
Great Savior. And so indeed, as he said to Gideon, Go in this thy Might, and
thou shall save Israel. Otherwise, Judge. 9. 6, 14.
Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the multitudes
of Mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the Jer. 3. 23.
Salvation of Israel. Though Hills, Mountains, multitudes of Mountains, though
Pelion Ossa, though never so many Mountains be heaped one upon another, yet if
they be but Mountains of Earth, they may not be high enough to set us above
danger. A Deluge (as Noah's) may overtop them all. They are but See Wolphii,
Lect. Memorab. Cent. 1. p. 24.
Lying Fables, and contrary to Scripture, that tell of some saved then on the
tops of Paris, or Ocila. First the Extremities of the Church may be so great,
that nothing under Heaven, or less than God, can rescue it. Experience proves
it is so.

2. The good pleasure of God is such, that on purpose he will have it so. As
for Instance,

For Time, though Christ's Disciples be in a Tempest, yet he Mat. 14. 25.
stays till the fourth and last Watch, that they are toiled out with Rowing,
and faint with Waiting, that so he may say, It Mark 6. 48.
is I.

For Pressure and Danger, not till the Case be in a manner desperate, the Ship
now covered with Waves, and now Conclamatum est, when they cry out, Lord save
us, we perish; or as the Church, Lam. 3. 54. Waters flowed over mine Head; then
I said, I am cut off.

For Persons, most weak and helpless. He is the Orphan's Father, and the
Widow's Judge, Psalm. 68. 5. That is said with an Emphasis, Judge. 5. 11. The
Righteous Acts of the Lord toward the Inhabitants of his Villages in Israel.
They most subject to be made a Prey, Ezekiel. 38. 11. If he be a Safeguard, it is
especially to his poor open unfenced Villages: And there, if his Spouse be a
Flower, it is not one that is planted and preserved in the Garden by Man's care;
but Ego sum flos campi, and Lilium convallium, Cant. 2. 1. the Flower of the
Field, and the Lilly of the Valleys, exposed to every Hand to pluck, and every
Foot to tread on; all to make out the truth in hand, Quod non humana industria,
sed sola Divina benignitate, and caeli influentia floreat, as Pineda observes.
They say, It Is a Royalty at Sea to join with In Job. 12. 4.
the weakest. I am sure it is the Royal Bounty of Heaven, that God chooses to
help the weakest.

And that (in the last place) for present Condition, when they are at the
weakest: When he sees their power gone, and there is none shut up or left,
Deuteronomy. 32. 36. When the Physicians had drained the Woman's Purse, and not
stopped her bloody Issue, Mark 5. 26.
and now given her over as a desperate Patient and a Beggar together, then is
she fittest to be our Savior's Cure. And when the Disciples themselves could
not cast out the Devil, then bring him to me, says Christ, Mat. 17. 17. Who
meets with the Man, when the Jews had cast him out, John 9. 35. Takes up
David, when Father and Mother had cast him off, Psalm. 27. 10. is a Strength to
the Poor and Needy; but it is added, and that in his distress: A Refuge from the
Storm, but then especially, when the Blast of the terrible ones is as a Storm
against the Wall, Isa. 25. 4. That heals Simon Peter's Wive's Mother in the
Paroxism of a Fever, and height of a Fit. Cum duplicantur lateres, etc. Makes
Day break a little after it has been darkest, and brings to an happy Birth by
the sharpest Throw: In a word, that takes Extremities for fittest Opportunities
for him to come in with most seasonable Mercies and Deliverances, that it may
be said, What has God wrought? Numb. 23. 23. That it may be proclaimed to all,
that Salvation is of the Lord, when his blessing is upon his People; that, when
none else can, the Lord Jehovah, Psalm. 3. ult,
in the Text, both can and will save his People, command, and rather than fail,
as it becomes a Jehovah, create deliverance. And all this,

1. To stamp an Impress of spiritual and eternal Salvation, even Temporal
deliverances: that as it is the same Savior and saving Love that effects both;
so in the one we may have a Glimps, Representation and Specimen of the other.
And hence thou shall be put into such Circumstances and Exigences, that thou
shall see plainly that it was God only that saved thy Body or outward Estate,
the more to mind thee, that it was he only that saved thy Soul. And if my case
sometimes were such, that, when all others gave me over, he himself saved me
from Sickness and Death, then it was none but He alone that saved me from Sin
and Hell; that Christ only trod the Winepress alone, and there was none with
him, and that when he looked, and there was none to help, and wondered that
there was none to uphold, then his own Arm brought Salvation to us: And when
Levite and Priest left us, then our good Samaritan relieved us. Isa. 63. 3, 5.


2. And therefore secondly, To let us know how for both Salvations we are more
beholden to one God, than all the World besides, when in our greatest straits
it is He always especially, and at sometimes only, saves us. Others never can
without him: But he oftentimes does without them.

Be we never so much beholden to other Friends and Creatures for greatest
Deliverances, yet then even in and for them we are infinitely more beholden to
God. If the Inhabitants of Jerusalem be my strength, it is in the Lord of Hosts
their God, Zech. 12. 5. Though others may be Instruments, yet he only is (...),
Heb. 5. 9. the Author of Salvation. And therefore the Sword of the Lord and of
Gideon, Judge. 7. 20. is but like Caesare and Bibulo Consulibus: God is the
Figure, and Gideon is but the Cipher. The one but the Sword, the other the Arm
that smites with it. My Physician may Curare valetudinem; but it is my God that
works the Cure. Counselors may advise for us, and Soldiers may fight for us;
but it is God that saves us: As they confess, We have wrought no Deliverance in
the Earth; but thy dead Men shall live, Isa. 26. 18, 19. We may Sow and Plant,
but Heaven's Shine and Showers give the increase: For else if the Heaven be
Brass, the Earth will be Iron. When others are and do most, Christ even then is
All in all, Col. 3. 11. and if he be All, then all without him are just
nothing: When others do most, it is all in and from God, and He then does more.

But sometimes it must needs be God's Salvation only, and he do all, because
all else are and can do nothing. When I am in close Prison, the best Friend
cannot come; when in a Pesthouse, he dare not; when on a Deathbed, and I am
bidding good night and adieu to all, my Physician gives me over, and some
Friends take leave of me, others it may be, stand by me and weep over me, but
cannot help me; Oh now none but Christ, none but Christ. It Is none else but the
Living God alone, who in that dying Hour can relieve me. In a word, think what
is possible, and withal what is certain.

It is possible that in a more violent way, the Man may be stripped as naked as
ever Job was of all his outward Estate.

That the Town or City may be so straightly round about begirt, that none may
come in or go out, and only Restat iter caelo.

The whole Land, as God sometimes Threatens in the Prophets, may come to its
(...) to be utterly emptied Isa. 24. 1, 2. Jer. 9. 10, 11. Nauclerus.
and spoiled, emptied of Man, Woman, and Child, as Rome was sometimes by
Totilas, or as the Prophet threatens Israel, no Man to pass through, no Voice
of the Cattle heard: Both Fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts fled: Nothing of
all that we had to comfort us left: But Zion left as a Cottage in a Vineyard,
Isa. 1. 8.
and a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers all alone, forlorn and desolate. Like a
lone Lamb in a waste Wilderness, Hos: 4. 16. as a Beacon on the top of a
Mountain, and as an Ensign on a Hill, Isa. 30. 17. This possibly (I do not say
probably) may be.

And on the other side, in an ordinary natural Course it is certain these
outward Supports and Comforts will not abide by us always. The Flower will
fade, the Shadow will decline, and the Sun set. When we are now to leave the
World, (if not before) Friends, Estates, Honors, Health, Life it self will
leave us. It Is God and his Salvation only that must then relieve us. And is not
the good Samaritan then the Neighbor that comes in to us, when Priest and
Levite pass away from us? And am not I more beholden to God than all the World,
who then stands by me and saves me, when all the best Comforts and Confidences
I have in the World have cast me off and left me?

3. And as upon this account we are more beholden to God than all the World, so
truly upon it too we owe more to Him, than to all the World besides: More Fear,
and Love, and Service, and Praise, even our whole selves to God only, who
whether with or without any else is our alone Savior.

It Is all Reason; and Self-love would teach us it, to be fearful Fear.
to offend, and careful to please him at all times, who sometime or other may
be able to pleasure us, when none else can. That Physician of all others I
should be most loath to displease, who only can cure that sore Disease that I am
subject to, and should I not then be much more afraid to offend God, who alone
can be my help in all these Maladies, which none else can Heal, or at least
without him are Physicians of no value? It Is not wisdom to provoke a Man, when
we know not how soon we may be in his Lurch, and lie at his Mercy. Friend, how
safe soever thy present Condition is, yet at best thou art always in
Misericordia Domini; especially in some more eminent dangers, it is manifest
that God only can or does help thee: and how then do the Tyrians crouch to an
offended Herod, when their Country is nourished by his? And how do they cry
Abrek, bow the Knee before Joseph, when without him none might lift up Hand or
Foot in all Egypt? Genesis 41. 43, 44. To be sure there is none in all the World,
that can lift up either Hand to desend us, or Foot to make a step to relieve
us, without our Joseph, our Jesus, and help from him. And therefore how should
we bend the knees of our very Souls to him, without least lifting up of Heel or
Head against him? O take heed of sinning, with the Prodigal, against Heaven;
for such Droughts may soon be, which may quite dry up all Springs of Comfort
that lie here in the Earth, especially in the Land of Israel, which has few
such, as Hierom says, and drinks of the Rain of Heaven, depends more of
Heaven's Showrs, than these lower earthly Springs, as Moses tells us, Deuteronomy. 11.
10, 11. If Heaven therefore being angry should shut up its Treasures from us,
in Samnio Samnium, Canaan would not be it self, a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey; but, as now it is, a barren and burnt Wilderness. And therefore fear we
God much, on whom we depend so much for safety and deliverance, always chiefly
and principally, and at some times and in some cases only.

And let this also persuade us to love him above all, who then sticks to us,
when all else fail us. At my first Answer, says Love. Psalm. 18. 1, 2.
Paul, no Man stood with me, but all forsook me, notwithstanding the Lord stood
with me, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. Such failing Brooks are other best Friends, Job 6.
who either, through weakness or falseness then do least, when we need and
expect most. Sub cultro liquit, as the Proverb is. But should not our hearts
then lie close to the Fountainhead of Living-Waters, which as those perennes
Fontes, retain an equal fullness in the driest Summer, and in the wettest
Winter; and the only difference is, that in the greatest heat they are coolest,
and so most refreshing? Let Jacob have Rachel's love and self, who rolls away
the Stone for her, Genesis 29. 10.
that none other can. And let the lost Prodigal think at last of returning home
to a Father, who will allow Childrens Bread, when Luke 15.
others cannot afford Husks. With Men it is equal, that they should have most of
our love, whose bounty and kindness we most taste of. And therefore it is all
reason, that we should love God with all our Heart and Soul, because he only in
all our straits is our All-sufficient Savior.

And upon that ground praise him too for whatever Salvation Praise.
and Deliverance we are at any time blessed with. Instruments may have their due,
but not so as to rob God of his. And if Victories gained by the Soldiers
valor be usually ascribed to the General, as matter of his praise, 2 Samuel 21.
22. who it may be only gave direction, and sometimes not that; how should the
Captain of our Salvation, Cui nihil ex ista land Centurio, nihil praefectus,
nihil cohors, etc. who either immediately, without the subserviency of any
Instruments, creates Salvation, Isa. 4. 5. or when Instruments do most, he not
only directs, but assists, and commands Deliverance, Psalm. 44. 4. and 71. 3.
How should he that is the God of our Life, Psalm. 42. 8. and the God of our
Mercy, Psalm. 59. 17. be the God of our Praise! Psalm. 109. 1. It Is not the line
cast out that saved thee from drowning; but the friendly hand that cast it out,
and by it drew thee out of the deep Waters. Isa. 38. 17, 19, 20. Psalm. 44. 3.
It Is not thy Meat that feeds thee, nor thy Physic that cures thee, nor thine
own Sword, or the greatest Champion's on Earth, that defends thee. It Is thy God
that either with or without all these saves thee. And therefore what they
maliciously said, to the blind Man recovered, against Christ; Give God the
praise, for we know that this Man is a Sinner, John 9. 24. Say we humbly and
thankfully of and to Christ, Lord, we give thee the praise of these Salvations
and Deliverances: for these means which we used were poor, these Instruments
weak, these Men sinful, and therefore might rather have hurt than helped us.
And therefore through them we look up to thee, and both for them, and any help
we have had by them in all that is past, we bless and praise thee.

And for the present, and for what is to come in all straits and Trust.
occasions, when we have either most or least of the Creature's help, we will
trust thee, and cast the stress of all our Salvation upon thee. At this Anchora
Sacra let us ride in greatest Storms, when all other Anchors break or come
home. In desperate cases, let not the Romans rely more on their Triarii, than
we on a blessed Trinity. Eleazar smote the Philistines, and wrought a great
Victory, when the Men of Israel were all fled and gone, 2 Samuel 23. 9, 10. and
he but a weak Shadow and Type of Christ our true Eleazar (the help of God, as
that name signifies) who can recover deep Consumptions, help at desperate
Plunges, rescue us when all else have quite deserted and left us: Other Props
and Supports often fail us, sometimes ruin us, Jer. 2. 37. Vallus vitem
decipit, like the weary Man that leans his hand on the Wall, Amos 5. 19. and it
either totters and fails him, or a Serpent in it bites him. But what Peace,
Peace, perfect Peace is there in staying the Soul upon that everlasting Rock!
Isa. 26. 3, 4. Safe standing on so sure ground. Good laying hold where there is
so good hand-hold. Good hanging on that Nail fastened in a Eliakim.
sure place, on which we may hang both Issue and Offspring, both Cups and
Flaggons, Isa. 22. 23, 24. Our selves, and all our not only lesser, but even
greatest wants and burdens. Jacob here did so both for himself and his
Posterity; and though now fainting, and dying, yet he could quietly lay down
his weary Head in his Father's Bosom, and there pour out his Soul in this sweet
warm breathing, I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.

SERMON XXXV.
GENESIS 49. 18. II. Sermon Preached at St. Mary's, October. 13. 1650
I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.


BUt this leads me to the fourth Particular at first propounded.

That the Israel of God in all their straits should wait for his Salvation.
Yea, in the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee, says the
Church, Isa. 26. 8. Wait on the Lord, Psalm. 27. 14. And Jacob here by a Spirit
of Luther. Pererius.
Faith and Prophecy, as he foreseeth the miseries of his Posterity, that they
had need of Salvation, so he foreseeth also how God from time to time would
raise up Judges and Kings, and others to deliver them, and so he comfortably
and confidently waits for it, nay prevents the danger with expectation of
deliverance, (...) in the Preter Tense, even long before, I have waited for thy
Salvation, O Lord. So old Jacob here, which old Simeon, Luke 2. 30. otherwise
expresses, Lord, mine eyes have seen thy Salvation; which two Speeches of
these two old dying Men, set out the difference of the two Testaments. The one
says, Lord, I wait; the other, I have seen; but both the same Salvation. So
that now that our Savior is come, we see that which So Luke 2. 25, 38.
they waited for. But because he is to come again a second time, and till then
perfect Salvation will not fully be come, but mean while many difficulties and
dangers will be coming between; as we shall have need, so it will be our duty
in this present condition with Jacob here to be waiting for God's Salvation.
Which waiting contains in it three Particulars; 1. An earnest desire. 2. A
confident expectation of it. And, 3. a meek staying of God's leisure, and
attending upon him for it.

1. An earnest desire and out-going of the Soul to the Salvation that it waits
for. The word (...) here used.

In the rise of it (as Oleaster and Foster observe) has an affinity with
(...), and so signifies an extended stretching and reaching out of the Soul:
And in the use of it, is joined with others that signify a diligent seeking,
Psalm. 69. 6. an earnest defiring, (...)
Isa. 26. 8. an ardent breathing, as the heated Labourer or Traveller does
after the cool shadow, Job 7. 2. Such a breathing, and even breaking of the
Soul there is in waiting, as the Watchman, that in a cold dark night waits for
the Morning, Psalm. 130. 6. with many a long look and longing desire, as David's
Soul went out to Absalom in his long absence; and Sisera's Mother upon 2 Samuel
13. 39.
his long stay looks out at the Window, and cries through the Lattess, Why is
his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the Wheels of Judge. 5. 28.
his Chariots?

And such an (...), as the Apostle calls it, Romans 8. 19. such an out-looking
and longing, such an out-going and reaching stretching out of the Soul, such
breathing and panting, in Waiters at Court are wont to be Suitors.
most fervent Prayers and ardent Desires after God's Salvation, does he work in
them that wait for it, and expect from them, that being in straits stand in
need of it.

And this,

1. That he may have the honor of the Gift, whilst all eyes with long looks
are up to him, and all hands stretched out toward Zech. 9. 1.
him, thereby proclaiming, that they expect all from him, as Psalm. 145. 15.

2. That hereby also it may appear, that they are sensible of their need. This
poor Man cried, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 34. 6. pointing at himself as a poor
Beggar, whilst he is crying for an Alms. The dry Earth says it is thirsty, when
it gapes for Heaven's Rain; and so do we under pressures and burdens tell God,
(as fainting Jacob here in the Text) that we are spent and out of breath, when
we breath after his Salvation, as Isa. 38. 14. O Lord, I am oppressed, ease me,
or undertake for me.

3. That so he may the more hasten the Mercy and Deliverance. When the Child
cries earnestly, the Mother comes running in speedily. Nor is our Heavenly
Father often wont, when his Children cry aloud, to stay long. When Israel in
Egypt sighs, and cries, and groans by reason of their bondage; their cry came
soon up to God, Exodus 2. 23, 24, 25. and it was not (...) they came out of that
Furnace: As it is said of that travailing Woman, Rev. 12. 2. which signifies
the Suffering Church, (...), she cried travailing in Birth, and pained to be
delivered. Clamabat parturiens. Her crying out in her Pains, was both a sign
and a means of her delivery now at hand.

And truly for this very end God oft-times quickens throws, to force our cries,
that so he might hasten the Birth. On purpose he multiplies and aggravates
Afflictions and Burdens, that he might quicken our desires, and call out our
more earnest Cries and Groans, the more to quicken the earnings of his Bowels
toward us, and so the more to hasten our deliverance.

Which tells us in these times of our perplexities and dangers, Salvation, in
our neglect of this first Particular of waiting for it.

1. In want of these stronger outgoings of the Soul, and these warmer
breathings after that Deliverance and Mercy, which we stand in so much need of;
not that our outward peace and safety were either in it self, or in our
deliberate esteem less desirable, no less than Health and Life is to a Man in
a Lethargy. But that Disease makes him senseless, so as that, when he stands in
most need of it, he is least of all affected with it, and so lies still as
dead, without desires of it, or any other way making out for it. O the deadness
of our hearts! such a Lethargy, I fear, has too much seized on us. Our Straits
are many, our Dangers very great, and yet our Hearts very dead, because of
later years we have been accustomed to troubles, and now like a Man before
tired out with labor and watching, fallen into such a deep sleep as he cannot
be wakened. We are very far from an awakened frame of Spirit to look up to God,
and to look out for Salvation; and the right way to come by it, as the Prophet
complained, though we fade like a Leaf, and our iniquities like the Wind are
ready to take us away, (as a blustering Wind does the fading Leaves from the
Trees in Autumn) yet there is none that calls upon God, that stirs up himself
to take hold of him, Isa. 64. 6, 7. We are very secure in the midst of danger.
The drunken Man is asleep on the top of the Mast, in the midst of the Sea. And
although Prove. 23. Dan. 7. 2.
the four Winds of the Heaven strive upon the great Sea from all quarters of
the World, nothing but Storms and Tempests, (...) ever, yet those sweeter gales
are very silent, a spirit of Prayer is very much down; and when the said, as
Jonah, 1. 2.
Wind is down, the Shower is wont to pour down. The Lord grant it may not be a
Shower of Fire and Brimstone, that Sodome's sins may not bring upon us a Sodom's
overthrow. But so much for the first particular of this waiting, viz. an
earnest desire.

2. The second, was a confident expectance: For waiting is an act of Hope, and
Hope the Daughter of Faith, and Faith is (...) Hebr. 11. 1. the very
subsistence of things hoped for. Faith assures, and thereupon Hope expects, and
thereupon also waits. My Soul, wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is
from him, Psalm. 62. 5. Waits as long as it expects, and no longer; as long as
you expect a friends coming, so long you will wait, though it be very long: but
give over looking for him, and then you will wait no longer. When that
desperate Courtier in a pang of despair said, Behold this evil is of the Lord
(which he will not, and we cannot remove, and so despair of remedy) then what
followed but that desperate conclusion, why should I wait for the Lord any
longer? 2 King. 6. 33. But a meekned Believer, because he expects much, is very
willing to wait long, and in this patient waiting he continues confidently
expecting, according to that Isa. 8. 17. I will wait upon the Lord, and I will
look for him. Believing Waiters are men of great hopes and expectations.
Mordecai is confident that enlargement and deliverance shall arise to the Jews,
Esther 4. 14. Our God whom we serve is able*yea and he will deliver us, said
Daniels three fellows, Chap. 3. 17. and fainting Jacob here in the Text, though
whilst he foresaw the strength and prevalency of Enemies, and the sins and
sufferings of his posterity, and especially of the Tribe of Dan, which he now
speaks of; yet (as old Simeon, having it revealed that he should not see death
before he had seen the Lord's Christ Luke 2. 25, 26. So old Jacob here) seeing
for certain a great deliverance by Sampson, and a greater by Christ, in the
midst of all disheartning discouragements, whilst he expects he waits, and
whilst he waits, he expects Gods Salvation.

This did he, and this should we, and that in greatest straits, wait and look,
wait and look to God, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. nay wait and look for much from God, as
the Cripple, (...), looked on the Apostles expecting to receive something of
them, Act. 3. 5. Especially when Peter had before in the 4th verse said to him,
look on us. And the very same word God says to us, when we ly before him in a
more miserable condition, look unto me and be ye saved, Isa. 45. 22. As the
Stung Man looked on the Brazen Serpent in assurance of cure, and the Servant on
the hands of his Master in expectance of a langess: so our Lord and Master in
this our waiting posture would have us by Faith look to him not only with
desire, but with expectance of Salvation.

And this as very much making also,

1. For the Glory of God, which was much advanced (in the former particular) by
having the Eyes of all Creatures looking to him in way of desire, but much more
(in this) when they are fixed on him in expectation. That spoke him an
alsufficient Sovereign, but this proclaims him a gracious and bountiful one:
for otherwise with men, some may be so able that much is desired of them, but
withal so strait-handed, that it is but little which is expected from then* but
how glorious is our God, that is as gracious as great, not more powerful than
bountiful, from whom his servants may promise themselves as much as they ask?
My God will hear me, Micah. 7. 7. yea, expect more than they desire, as being
both able and willing to do more, than we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. This
glory of his free and rich Goodness, is his great Design, especially in the
Covenant of Grace: and therefore it is that he makes choice of the recumbency
and expectance of Faith, by which he will dispense not only eternal, but even
temporal Salvation, as that which in so doing much sets forth this his Glory.

2. And secondly, as much furthers and facilitates our Deliverance: for great
Expectations are great Obligations, even with Men of generous spirits to do
much for them, that rely much on them, and promise themselves much from them,
that the others good thoughts may not exceed their goodness; and this sometimes
to those that can plead no Merit, that it might appear to be mere Goodness and
Mercy. If thus with ingenuous Men, then much more than so with an All-Gracious
God, who has professed, that he delights in them that trust and hope in his
Mercy, Psalm. 147. 11. and therefore takes pleasure to answer and exceed our
good thoughts of him with his better performances to us. Our good persuasions
of God prove very strong persuasions with him to do us good, that it may appear
that we cannot outthink his infinite Goodness, that our thoughts of him cannot
be better than his are toward us, nor our heart more enlarged by Faith to hope
and expect a mercy than his hand opened with bounty to bestow it. And therefore
open thy Mou^h wide, and I will fill it; so in the old Testament: and according
to thy Faith be it unto thee, so often in the New. Under both, God has
oftentimes in very unlikely cases gratified the Faith and expectations of his
Servants with extraordinary mercies and deliverances.

And therefore for the application of this branch also, seeing Salvation great
that we stand in need of; let not Sloth and Unbelief keep us from what we may
have by asking and expecting. We strengthen our forces to fight with our
Enemies; but it is (I do not say our cheapest, but I am sure) our safest and
surest way to strengthen our Faith by expecting of much, to prevail for much
from him. But we have low thoughts of God, and that keeps us from rising high:
Misgiving hearts, which keeps God from being on the giving hand. Thou would
not so readily gratify another with that, which thou know he entertains so
hard thoughts of thee about, that he thinks thou will not be so kind as to
grant. God fully knows all our hard unkind thoughts of his unkindness; which
discourageth him much from vouchsafing much of that which we need, and he
otherwise is ready to give. The Prophet wanted not Oil, but the Widow Vessels.
The Fountain, or River is full, but one carries away nothing from it, because
he has no Vessel to receive it, and another but a little, because his Vessel
is so. Thank, nay blame unbelieving contracted hearts, that they hold no more
of God's goodness; hands shrunk up like Jeroboam's, and paralytick, that can
grasp no more, nor lay any faster hold on his bounty. Joash strikes with his
Arrows but thrice, and therefore he overcomes the Syrians no oftener. O thou of
little Faith! That Is the reason why thou receivest no more, either of Spiritual
or 2 King. 13. 18, 19.
Temporal Salvation: and therefore, seeing that God is so unwilling to
disappoint the Faith, and frustrate the expectations, which his own Spirit has
raised in Believers, that it is but hope and have; let us in a way of God even
in most dangerous times hope much that we may enjoy the more.

I said, in a way of God. And that leads us to the following particulars. That
we may with Jacob wait on God for Salvation, with such expectance and
confidence it is required, that,

1. Our selves be under Covenant: for though to others God often grants temporal
Salvation, yet it is certain, that they, as such, have no ground with confidence
to expect it. A Rebel may possibly be spared, but it is a loyal Subject that may
justly expect his Princes Protection, whilst the other according to his
demerit, may stand trembling at the Bar, and justly expect the Sentence of
Condemnation. The Apostle speaks of a fearful looking for of judgment by some,
Heb. 10. 27. But they are the Righteous, whose Hope is gladness, whilst the
expectation of the wicked shall perish, Prove. 10. 28.

2. The Mercy or Salvation we would expect be under promise: for what God does
promise, we may confidently expect that he will assuredly perform, so that in
doubtfullest times and cases, our Course and Duty is not so much to search into
God's secret Will, what he will do, as into his revealed Word, what he has
therein promised, either in general to his Church at all times, or particularly
to his People in some special times and cases. So Daniel looks into his Books,
and finds that there, which inables him to look up to God for the return of the
Jews captivity, Chap. 9. 2. But our Self-love often promises us Salvation, when
God's Word, if consulted, threatens Destruction; as it was with Judah before
their threatened Captivity, who looked for Peace, but no good came; for a time
of health, and behold trouble, Jer. 8. 15. and 14. 19. Scriptures, Promises,
and Prophecies, especially that of the Revelations should be much read, and
studied in these doubtful times, that we may know what to expect or fear by
what is therein promised or threatened.

3. Our present way and course be under the Condition of the Promise: for else
though we be in Covenant, and the Mercy be promised, yet if our present
habitude and posture be not according to that Condition, that either we are
under the actual guilt and defilement of some provoking sin, or in the use of
unlawful means, instead of the Mercy expected, we may meet with the Mischief
which we looked not for: Though Israel was no Servant, nor homeborn-Slave, yet
he is spoiled, when God has that to say to him, And now what have thou to do
in the way of Egypt, to drink the water of Sichor? And what have thou to do in
the way of Assyria, to drink the water of the River? Jer. 2. 14, 18. as before
that, Josh. 7. 13. though they were in Covenant with God, and had the promise
of Canaan, yet, when they had an accursed thing in the midst of them, they
received a repulse at Ai, instead of gaining the victory. Salvation from God is
only to be found in a way of God. Even an honest Man in bypath may meet with
Thieves and Robbers. Fouler sins put us out of God's protection, dash and
frustrate expectation, whereas make but sure of these three, that the Mercy be
found in a Promise, our selves in Covenant, and our way and temper within the
Condition of it, and then we may not only with comfort desire, but also with
confidence expect Salvation.

3. But yet so, as then in an humble and meek Patience silently to stay God's
leisure for it, which is the third particular, wherein this Waiting most
properly and formally consists, as ever including some longer or shorter stay:
and therefore expressed in the New Testament usually by (...), or its
compounds, (...), or (...), a staying, abiding and sitting down by it: and in
the Old Testament usually expressed by this word in the Text, which (I said)
sign fieth an Extension or Prolongation as of the desire, so often of the thing
desired. In the first particular of it (as we have seen) it contained in it
long looks* and longing desires; but not like Women's longings, that are so
short-winded, that they cannot stay, or like short-winged Birds, that can make
no long flight. No, (...) Even in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we
waited for Isa. 26. 8. In itinere. so Junius.
thee. Though the way be deep, a way of judgments, and long too, as the word
(...) imports, yet, (...), their line is stretched out to its length: and as
long as God stays, they will wait* In waiting they will wait, Psalm. 40. 1.
Patiently they will wait, Romans 8. 25. and this every day, continually, Hos. 12.
6. (...)* a Believer's juge sacrificium, which day by day he attends upon God
with, and this all the day, Psalm. 25. 5. and this, although it be a very Stormy
Winter day, all the days of my warfare will I wait, says Job. Chap. 14. 14.
and Jacob here, though this Salvation which he expects was not till diverse
hundreds of years after his death, yet because he knows that God is so true
and faithful, as never to forget his Word at last, and so wise and merciful, as
to be sure to remember it at that time which shall be most fit: therefore
although this Tribe of Dan was one of the last that was settled in its Lot, and
therein very much molested by the Amorites, especially by their bad Neghbours
the Philistines, yet, Dum spiro, spero, as long as he lives, he hopes, and when
he is now a dying, his Hopes die not with his Life: but he both lives in hope,
and when he dies, rests in hope: he be-believes that his Covenant will be able
to reach his Seed when he is dead to a thousand Generations, Psalm. 105. 8. and
therefore expects that now, which shall betide them then: Mean while patiently
waits God's leisure: And now being upon the point of Death, he lays his Head
in his Father's Bosom, and there quietly breaths out his Soul with this warm
Breath, (And how sweet is it!) I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord; which
comes to this, that we are to stay God's Leisure, and to wait upon him for
Mercy.

1. Though intervening Occurrences come cross, as it was in the Danites
infestations from Amorites and Philistims. I acknowledge this puts Faith to it,
as it did David's; who, after that he was promised to be King, was pursued as a
Traitor; whereupon he sometimes thinks it long, and cries out, O when will thou come unto me? Psalm. 101. 2. And sometimes grows very quick and hasty, and
in that haste says, All Men are Liars, Psalm. 116. 11. even Samuel himself, who
promised him a Kingdom, and behold, nothing but Misery and Thraldom. But let
Israel, even when the Sea is before them, and the Egyptians behind them, and so
nothing in view but em^^inent Destruction in stead of the promised Deliverance
and Salvation, let Israel, I say, even in that posture stand still and wait,
and see God's Salvation, Exodus 14. 13. The Man may be taking the greatest Leap,
when he goes most backward, and God may be then about to do most for his
People, when there is the least appearance of any thing but of the quite
contrary. Israel at last shall be settled in Canaan, though, when now upon the
Borders of it, they are driven back in the way to the Red Sea again. Stay
therefore God's Leisure and wait upon him, though intervening Providence seem
cross.

2. Though delays be very long. The Danites had their Lot with the last, and
yet in reference to them Jacob's Faith could rest on God, and say, I have
waited for thy Salvation, (...), Hab. 2. 3. Though it tarry (and the word is in
forma duplicata, to express a longer double delay) yet wait for it. The
precious Fruit, that the Husbandman with such patience waits for, lies
sometimes long under ground, and so it is often with God's preciousest Mercies:
Oftentimes they have but slow beginnings, and no hasty progress (it may be)
afterward, but As the Alder-Tree, Borel. l. c.
ripen very fast toward the latter end, like a natural motion, slow at first,
but quick in the close. After God's Promise of multiplying Abraham's Seed as
the Stars of Heaven, Genesis 15. 5. for above 200 Years of the 400 mentioned, ver.
13. The holy Seed were no more than Seventy. Chap. 46. You will say, It was but
a backward Spring; but yet for all that, proved a very plentiful Harvest:
Though their beginning was small, yet their latter Job 8. 7.
end did greatly increase: When that Seventy in a less time, grew to six
hundred thousand Men, beside Children, Exodus 12. 37. And of Dan, one Hushim,
Genesis 46. 23. comes to Sixty two thousand seven hundred, Numb. 1. 38, 39. As
single Numbers may be but As an Elijah's Cloud, 1 Kings 18. 43, 44, 45.
few, but soon rise to vast Sums, if you go on to multiply them. And the same
People in their last year in the Wilderness, advanced as much toward Canaan,
as they had before done in all the former thirty nine. As he that runs fair and
easily in the beginning of the Race, puts on apace, and makes all speed when
now toward the end of it. And so God tells the Prophet, that the Vision is yet
for an appointed time, but at the end it will speak and not ly: Though for the
present you hear nothing of it, yet at the end it will speak out to purpose,
and proclaim God to be True and Faithful; and therefore he might well add,
though it tarry, yet wait for it. When the Master tarries, the Servant waits:
And therefore, if God tarry as a Master, Faith should teach the Believer to
wait as a Servant.

And this not only in fair Way, and the lightsome Summer's Day of Peace and
Prosperity, (for, if so only, our meaning is, that God should wait on us rather
than we on him) but even in deepest Ways and foulest Weather, and darkest
Winter-nights of Adversity and Afflictions, (...), Yea, even in the Way of thy
Judgments, have we waited for thee, O Lord, Isa. 26. 8.

An irksom task, I confess, and to Flesh and Blood intolerable, which thinks
it is for Melancholic Fools to sit so long waiting and starving in the Dark,
and to be looking for a late Morning-light in such long Winter-Nights. It Is
very hard meekly to tarry God's leisure, especially when he tarries long, and
not one of these three ways to miscarry, and yet all contrary to waiting. After
a longer sighing under Pressure, and breathing after Ease, not, 1. Either to
sink in Discouragement, Lam. 3. 18. Or, 2. To rise up in Discontent, as Job,
and Psalm. 39. 3. Or, 3. To start out in some unwarrantable Way, so to make a
shorter cut to our Freedom, 1 Samuel 27. 1. For we are naturally,

1. Sensual and Brutish, extremely affected with present Pain and Ease, Wants
and Enjoyments. Want the wisdom of a Man, to foresee what may be best for
hereafter, and the Faith of a Christian, which is the substance of things hoted
for, and so are impatient of waiting upon even God himself, of whom we will
have present Payment, and will give him no more time (though he always allows
for it) especially if it be something that we are so greedy of, that with Eli's
Sons, we will rather have it raw, than stay for it.

2. We are very Weak: And a weak Body cannot stand long under an heavy Burden
without sinking. How much to do has a weak sick Man to get over a long
Winter's Night without fainting? Job was half at that pass, when he said, What
is my strength that I should hope? Job. 6. 11, 12. And my strength and my hope
is perished, said the Lamenting Church, Lam. 3. 18. When her Strength is spent
that she can bear no more, her Hope is also gone with it, that she can wait no
longer.

3. Unbelieving. As he that believes makes not haste: So Isa. 28. 16.
nothing sinks the Heart sooner than Despair, which gives over hoping and
waiting together, 1 Samuel 27. 1. They wait (Isa. 26. 8.) when the desire of
their Souls by Faith is carried out to Piscator.
the remembrance of his Promises.

4. Not more Weak than Froward, as the sick weak Man uses to be; and the
froward Child cries fiercely, if you stay long. A Burden on a galled Back
frets, and makes the Man go fretting, that he cannot standstill.

5. And very Proud too. Now waiting, as it puts Honor upon him that is waited
on, and therefore great ones affect it, so it debaseth the Waiter: And
therefore the proud Man cannot endure it, is hasty, cannot wait; no, not upon
God himself, 2 King. 6. 33. It Is not so with us, when we are humble; but ever
some stirring of Pride, when we cannot quietly wait, and sit still.

6. And lastly, We are very full, as of Self-love, so of Self-conceit. The one
concludes for our Safety, and the other consults for Means of it of our own,
which usually are next hand, and so we cannot stay to wait on God's Counsel,
Psalm. 106. 13. This we see in Saul, who cannot stay for Samuel's coming, when
he apprehends present danger, 1 Samuel 13. 11, 12. and so strains Courtesy and
Conscience together, and Chap. 14. 19. he cannot tarry to wait for an answer
from God, when he conceives he has thought of a better Course than God could
direct him to. Which even David also had a strong touch of, Chap. 27. 1. when
consulting with his own Heart about the best way of his Safety, he cannot stay
and wait upon God, who had so constantly preserved him: But he must needs both
dangerously and dishonourably run away to the Philistines. No greater Enemy to
our trusting and waiting upon God, than leaning to our own understandings,
Prove. 3. 5. Thus Weakness and Unbelief sink us, Pride and Frowardness make us
swell, and hastily rise up against God; Self-love, and Self-conceit, make us in
unwarrantable ways of our own start out from him; all severally and jointly
keep us from an humble, meek, faithful, self-resigning Waiting upon him. Which
yet there is all reason we should endeavor and pr^ctice, if we consider:

1. Who, and how great that God is, that we are to wait on: O shame we our
selves, whilst we think how long we can endure to dance Attendance on great
Men, and have not the patience to wait half the time on the Great God. How
blasphemously irrational was his reasoning? 2 Kings 6. 33. This evil is of the
Lord: What should I wait on the Lord any longer? The Prophet teaches us a
better and a quite contrary Inference, Hos. 12. 6. because he is Elohim; the
Great God, and ours, we should therefore wait on him continually.

2. Who, and how Mean we are that do wait: poor Beggars; and Beggars may well
be Waiters: The poor of the Flock waited on me, says the Prophet, Zech. 11.
11. We are Poor, let us not be so Proud, as not to be willing to wait, but so
Ingenuous as to blush, when we think how long we let the Beggar wait at our
Doors, and yet have not our selves the patience to wait any time at God's, who
yet are but Beggars.

At best but Servants: And do thou expect that thy Servant should wait on
thee, and not thou on God? Especially seeing Waiting in Scripture is put for
Service, Prove 27. 18. So it is that piece of Service, which God sometimes only
calls for, only to wait on our Master, when we cannot work for him: That which
both fits us for Work, and which God expects (even Waiting upon him both for
Pardon and Acceptance) after all our Working, Luke 17. 7, 8.

3. As Great as God is, and as Base as we are, yet consider, whether in waiting
God has made us stay long:

Either absolutely, when sometimes he has prevented our Prayers and Thoughts,
Isa. 65. 24. So that as it is Chap. 30. 18, 19. He has waited, that we might
not wait: Not we so much, as He has waited to be Gracious. And have we so much
cause to be thankful to God, that He has oftentimes rescued us so speedily,
and can we see no cause then to be content when (always for some good Cause) He
sometimes comes in more slowly? Oft-times absolutely it has not been long that
God has made us wait.

At least comparatively, not so long; as

Our Betters have waited on him. Heman from his Youth, Psalm. 88. 15. and David,
all the day, Psalm. 25. 5. Our selves have waited on Men for lesser Matters:
Have made others wait on us for Trifles.

Nay, have made God himself wait on us, (1.) For first Conversion; Hand held
out all the day long, Romans 10. 21. (2.) Afterward for further Entrance and
Communion. Christ stands and knocks at his Spouse's Door till his Head be full
of Dew, and his Locks with the Drops of the Night, Cant. 5. 2. for that which
after all his waiting he has gone away without, (as in both those places); and
1 Pet. 3. 20. His Long-suffering waited One hundred and twenty years in the
days of Noah, and yet was disappointed.

4. Though never so long, yet not longer than till we be once fit for it.
Though till then it did tarry, yet then it will not, Hab. 2. 3. Till then God
waits, and not we.

5. Fifthly, for the most part we have not used to wait so long on God for
Mercies in our want of them, as God has waited upon us with Mercies in our
enjoyment of them. Many of us must say, that our Fevers have neither been
Quotidian, nor Hecticks; our Good days have been more than our Ill days; as
with us in this Climate, our longest Winter-nights are not longer than our
longest Summer-days: Our Peace longer than our War, and our Plenty than our
Penury; and therefore either absolutely we have not waited long, or at least in
all the former Particulars not so long Comparatively that we have cause to
complain of it.

And though it should be longer, yet not longer, if we consider the weight and
worth of the Mercy we wait for. It Is sometimes no less than Christ and
Salvation thou waitest for; assurance of God's Love, the mortifying of an
habituated Lust, like the healing of an old Sore, and curing of a Chronical
Disease. It may be it is now the Rescue of a whole Land from Destruction: A
right Settlement of Church and State upon safe and lasting Foundations. Lameut
only after the Lord, and he not too hasty to fret against him, though the time
be long, 1 Samuel 7. 2. It Is a great Load; think not much that it comes not in
gallopping, but be drawn on heavily and come in slowly: a rich Freight and
Lading; think not a long Voyage long. The Husband man waits with much
Long-suffering, for the precious Fruit of the Earth, James 5. 7. And shall we
have no patience left in waiting for the more precious things of Heaven? Say
not so much, that the Evils are great, which we therefore would make haste to
be rid of: But argue, and think withal, that therefore the contrary Mercies are
proportionably great, and therefore should be quietly stayed, and in God's Way
and Time waited for.

6. And the rather, because humble and silent waiting at last will never be in
vain, and wholly disappointed, Psalm. 9. 18. At the end the Vision will speak
and not lie, Hab. 2. 3. God bids us wait, Psalm. 27. 14. and if we mean not to
disappoint them, whom we bid stay, far be it from us to think God so
unfaithful, as to let his People's Eyes quite fail with waiting. No, their
Experiences and Praises bear witness for him to the contrary, while they can
say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: This is
the Lord, we have (...) waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
Salvation, Isa. 25. 9.

7. I might add, that this Salvation, the longer and the more patiently it has
been waited for before it come, it will be most seasonably and fully, with more
Comfort and Blessing: Though, whilst deferred, it made the longing Heart sick,
yet when come, it is a Tree of Life, Prove. 13. 12. An Isaac, a son of Laughter,
that was long waited for. Thus, it will not be in vain at last.

8. No, nor for the present, were there nothing but what the faithful Soul
meets with in the Interim, and whilst it stays waiting, even a Lamenting Church
may truly, and feelingly say: The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to
the Soul that seeks him, Lam. 3. 25. And therefore, ver. 26. It is good that
a Man should hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of God. Truly, so good,
that for many a Mercy it is better with us in the waiting for it, than in the
rejoicing of it. More of God's glorious Power (as some observe) manifested to
Israel, waiting upon him in the Wilderness, than when settled in Canaan: And
more of God's Grace and less Sin, expressed by David, whilst he waited upon God
for a Kingdom, than when he was possessed of it. The waiting Soul is all that
while kept more awful, humble, heavenly, closer to God in Prayer, and Spiritual
Communion. Faith, Hope, Love, Meekness, Patience, Wisdom, Courage, are
Ingredients in waiting into the very Substance (and not only in the Infusion)
and in liveliest, strongest Exercises and Operations. Whilst they wait on the
Lord, they renew their strength, they mount up with Wings as Eagles, they run
and are not weary, and walk and yet not faint, Isa. 40. 31.

And therefore upon these and the like Considerations, in greatest either
outward Dangers, or inward Faintings, let us live by Faith believing, and even
die in Hope, then Waiting; and with dying Jacob, in the Text, even breath out
our Souls into our Fathers bosom with his I have waited for thy Salvation, O
Lord.

Which was the fourth Point, That all in straits we should after his Example
wait for God's Rescue and Salvation. But that is not all. Something yet more
which a Fifth Point held out, and that (as some think) according to the special
meaning of the Text.

SERMON XXXVI.
GENESIS 49. 18. III. Sermon Preached at St. Martes, (Cambr.) March 30. 1651.
I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.


THat in all outward temporal Deliverances by or from Men, wait for Spiritual
and Eternal Salvation by Christ. So very many both Jewish and Christian
Chaldee. Pererius. Oleaster. Gordonius. Brentius. Fagius.
Interpreters upon the Text agree, that although Jacob here looked and waited
for a temporal Salvation to be wrought, especially by Sampson, Israel's
Champion: (of which we spoke in the former point) yet this satisfied not his
desire, nor terminated the Eye of his Faith, for that was but a temporal
Salvation: and after it, Sampson himself dyed, and Israel were oppressed, and
carried away Captives, and therefore after the manner of the Prophets (as was
before said) who when they spoke of any great Deliverance or Deliverer, which
did either typify, or any way resemble Jesus Christ and his Salvation, they
were wont to look through the one to the other; so he looks at God's mercy in
Sampson's Deliverance, but rests not there, but from the Nazarite looks to the
Nazarene. Non sufficit Sampson, veniat Schilo, as Gordonius paraphraseth it; or
rather as the Chaldee more fully. Non expecto redemptionem Gideonis filii Joas,
quae est salus temporalis neque redemptionem Sampsonis, quae est transitoria:
It Is not the temporary transitory Salvation of Gideon, Jephtah, Sampson, or any
of the rest of those Saviors that I so much look for, or at all rest in; but
in, through and above all them, it is the Salvation of Jehovah, the Spiritual
and Eternal Salvation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of God: It Is
He, which I wait for. This was dying Jacob's last Breath, and this the lively
breathing of every true believing Soul, that in all straits waits for
deliverance from God, but in all such Deliverances looks further for a greater
Salvation by Christ with this (...) I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.
All other outward Salvations thou workest, and they are truly thine; but this
Spiritual, Eternal Salvation thou alone workest, and its every way only thine;
which whether without or with them I look and long for especially, and in a
manner only.

For the better clearing and pressing of which Duty, it will be useful for us
to consider,

1. The Example of God himself, who, though the whole World be his, and what
content the whole Body of the Creature can afford is at his command, yet it is
not the flesh of Bulls that he Psalm. 50. 15. and 147. 10.
eats, nor the Blood of Goats that he desires to drink, nor the strength of the
Horse that he delights in; But he proclaims from Heaven, that it is Christ his
Beloved Son, in whom he does acquiesce, and is well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. That
therefore which replenisheth the Ocean, should fill the Cistern. That in which
God rests, we should, and in nothing else. Till we come to it we would be
restless; and as God in the Creation rested not in his making all other
Creatures till he had made Man; so answerably in our recovering or enjoying all
other contentments, we should not rest till we enjoy God in Jesus Christ.

2. The practice of the faithful, who of all Men best know what Christ and his
Salvation are. And here we find the Spouse Cant. 3. 2, 3. when she is at a loss
for her Beloved, going about the City in the Streets and in the broad ways; and
in that goodly City, especially in the fair Streets of it, was there no gay
sight, or precious commodity, which might entertain her Eye and Heart, and bid
her stay, and stand still and sit down, and give over her so earnest pursuit
and inquest? No, if one would give her all the substance of his House, all the
riches of the City, all the Glory of the World for her Love, (...) it would
utterly be contemned Chap. 8. 7. You find her in the highest Streets, pressing
through the greatest crowds of other friends and contentments with her But saw
ye him whom my Soul loves? Saw you him whom my Soul loves? Why! May thou
not see in such a City so many friends and contentments that thy Soul may not
disdain to love, that in the midst of them, as bereft of all, thou make such
enquiry after him that thy Soul loves? Indeed, the Daughters of Jerusalem,
Chap. 5. think it strange, and the Children of this World account it little
better* than distracted nonsense: But whatever they think or say, she must
still on in her pursuit, till she find him whom she seeks, and that is her
Beloved, whilst she is thus sick of love. So when Daniel had prayed for
Judah's Deliverance from the 70 years Captivity in Babylon, he rests not there,
but goes on to enquire after (at least God does to promise) a greater
Salvation by Christ after 70 weeks of years, Dan. 9. 23, 24. Thus the Believers
in the time of the Law, though in that Dispensation they were much entertained
and even trained up with Temporal Mercies and Deliverances, and pompous outward
Services, yet even then they lived and walked by Faith in that valley of
Vision. Through those Vails they looked at Christ, and saluted him afar off,
Heb. 11. 13. and under those leaves they felt for the Fruit of the Tree of
Life; were not satisfied with those present outward mercies, but looked long
for Christ, and waited for the Consolation of Israel by him, Luke 2. 25. as
Ambrose upon that of the Psalmist, Defecit in salutare Psalm. 119. 81.
tu^m anima mea, My Soul faints for thy Salvation, shows how earnestly
their Souls went out to the Messiah, that the more their Souls fainted, the
more lively and vigorous was their love: and the longer he was deferred (eo
expectantis desideria majora sunt, and quadam vi amoris ignescunt) the more
were their Souls and desires kindled and inflamed with an Oh that thou would
rent the Heavens, and come down, Isa. 64. 1. Insomuch that Bernard when he
thinks of it, is not more grieved than ashamed at our deadness and
sluggishness. Compungor and confundor in memet ipso, pudet torporis and teporis
miserabilium temporum horum, etc. that Christ and his Grace should not be
entertained with so much Love and Joy now that they are exhibited, as they were
with desire and expectation of them then when they were only promised. Cui
namque nostrum tantum ingerit gaudium gratiae Sermon. 2. in Cant.
exhibitio, quantum veteribus Patribus accendebat desiderium promissio? So
little did their temporal Deliverances and Mercies, which they were trained up
with, satisfy their Souls, or flat (but rather quicken) their longing desires
after Christ and his Salvation. Answerable to which is that of the Apostle; for
whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but Dung, that I
may gain Christ, Phil. 3. 8. Gain Christ: it seems therefore that Christ only
was his Gain; and that whatever else he had gained, till he had him, all that
gain he might put into a wet Eye, as being a very great loser: or, at best, at
a very great loss, and therefore (v. 9.) he desires to be found in him, etc.

But withal, in that he suffered the loss of all for Christ, it affords by the
way a further strong proof of this point; for he that could be content to
suffer the loss of all for him, could not be content with any thing without
him. The Merchant in the Matthew 13. 46.
Gospel, that sold all he had to buy the Pearl, was not satisfied with all he
had, to go without it. A South Country will not satisfy a thirsting Soul,
without upper and nether Springs. Whilst Judge 1. 15. Genesis 30. 1.
Rachel was barren, she said, Give me Children, or else I dye: when she had
them, and was after deprived of them, whatever other comforters she had, yet
she could not be comforted, because they were not. Till a Christian have
Christ, what ever else he has he cannot be satisfied: and if afterward, in any
manner he lose him, whatever else he keeps safe, he cannot be comforted. So
Austin on that place of John 6. 68. Lord, whither shall we go? etc. brings in
Peter, speaking thus, Repellis nos a te? da nobis Tract. 27. in Joan.
alterum te. Lord if thou put us away from thee, thou must give us another that
is the very same with thee, for we cannot be satisfied without thee; and as he
elsewhere adds, Da amantem, da desiderantem, da esurientem, da talem, and sciet
quid dicam: si autem frigid^ loquor, nescit quod loquor, etc. To a dull dead
spirit this is a riddle; but one that knows and loves Christ feelingly,
understands it, as being his inward hearts language: To such an one all else is
nothing besides him; and therefore nothing can satisfy without him. If Christ
be all in all, Col. 3. 11. then all besides him, if without him, is nothing. As
in God we live and move as Creatures, Acts 17. 28. so in Christ, as Believers.
The Needle touched cannot leave trembling, till it pitch North: Were it but the
Soul of a Man, it is unquiet till it rest in God, but let it be an Heart truly
touched with sense of saving-Grace, whatever else it has, it is yet unsatisfied
without Christ.

3. And great reason for it, if we shall consider, Thirdly, who and what Christ
and his Salvation is; and this without other things, that one thing necessary,
Luke 10. 42. It Is not necessary that we should have Health, Wealth, Worldly
Honors, or outward Deliverances, but it is absolutely necessary for us to have
Christ and Salvation by him; else we are utterly undone. And therefore to be
satisfied with them without him, is to be content with trifles and
superfluities, and want necessaries. For so in Scripture we shall find him
called by the names of such things, which (what ever else we either have or
want) we cannot be without; of Father, Husband, Captain, Shepherd, Head, Bread,
Sun, Light, Life it self, and the Breath of our Nostrils, as diverse expound
that, Lament. 4. 20. and if all this, we may well ask Bernard's question, Vbi
been est sine te? Vbi male poterit esse cum te? Lord with thee, how or where
can it be ill with me? who in thee have Father, Husband, Captain, Shepherd,
Head to guide, protect, and provide for me; the Staff of Bread to feed and
support me, the Sun, Light, and Life to inlighten and inliven me. But alas!
how? where will it, can it be well with me, if without thee, without whom all
this, all else is nothing? What forlorn Orphans are we, if we have not him to
be our Father? What desolate Widow-Souls have we, if divorced from this
Husband? silly helpless stray lost Sheep, and only for a Prey, though fed in
other never so fat and green Pastures, if not under this good Shepherds care!
Though a Sampson should be my Champion, yet a miserable inthrall'd Captive I
shall be, if not under the protection of this Captain of my Salvation; pined
with all other dainties, if not fed with this Bread of Life; benighted in
blackness of darkness for ever, though other Stars shine, and all other
Torches be lighted, if not enlightened with this Sun of Righteousness* a
senseless trunk if not united to this Head; a liveless Life, if not enlivened
with this quickening Spirit and Life. Sine Christo vanum est omne quod vivimus,
what good will my Lapide in Lament 4. 20.
Life do me, if Jacob marry with the Daughters of Heth? said Rebekah, Genesis 27.
46. and what good will mine do me, if I be not married to Christ? None but
Christ, nothing but Christ. Whatever ground I stand on, my foot sinks till set
upon this Rock. And therefore what ever other mercy or Deliverance I have,
still with Jacob in the Text I will wait for thy Salvation, O Lord. Which leads
to

4. A 4th. Consideration to this purpose, and that is, of what all other
Mercies and Deliverances are, besides Christ and his Salvation.

1. They but pledges of this. Outward mercies of Christ and his Grace and
Salvation. Indeed, they are not this in themselves, so as either wicked Men
that have their share in them should thereby have any Evidence of interest in
Him, or that the Godly from their want of them should doubt of their part in
him. For in both these respects, Solomon's rule holds, By them no Man knows
either Love or hatred, Eccles. 9. 1. But yet because as to Believers the same
electing Love, that designs Heaven and Eternal Salvation to them in Christ,
does in and by him dispense also outward Mercies and Deliverances (and
therefore the Apostle from the one argues and arises to the other Romans 8. 28,
29, 30.) therefore they in their enjoyment of them should so improve them, as
Israel's Deliverances from the Iron Furnace in Egypt and Babylon were types of
their and our Salvation by Christ from the fiery Furnace of Hell and Damnation;
so still that temporal Favors and protections should be tastes and pledges to
us of spiritual and eternal Salvation by Christ, as it was with Paul. 2 Timothy 4.
17, 18. I was delivered from the Mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver
me from every evil work, and preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom. But if so,
then the thirsty Soul cannot be satisfied with such tastes, but by them rather
has its appetite further quickened after those fuller draughts of Grace* and
Mercy in Christ. And these lesser pledges draw it out in more earnest longings
after those greater matters, and which it far more looks after. For although in
some other cases the pledge may in worth equal, yea and exceed the thing
insured and expected, yet here it is far otherwise. This pledge is scarce an
earnest penny, and therefore will not satisfy the wary Soul instead of its full
payment. And so, though it has this Earnest, yet it looks still for the
Principal. Though delivered by Sampson, yet still waits on God for his
Salvation.

2. These outward Mercies and Deliverances are given and intended by God in a
sanctified use of them, to be as means, and as it were under-steps to lift up
the Heart to higher desires and enjoyments of Christ and Salvation: As Zacheus
by getting up into the Sycomore-Tree, gets a sight of Christ. In these more
savourable and liberal entertainments in our way, God never intended that with
the drowsy Disciples, we should dream of pitching our Tabernacles, and say
it is good to be here; but that,

These Accommodations on the one hand should be as our viaticum and
encouragements.

And those Deliverances on the other hand remove discouragements and
stumbling blocks in our way to Salvation.

The one build our Scaffold, that we might better edify our selves in the Faith
of Christ; as Act. 9. 31. when the Churches had rest and peace, they were
edified, walking in the fear of God, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. And
therefore the Lord by his Prophet Joel, Chap. 2. after he had promised plenty
of other food. v. 26. adds a Promise of pouring out his Spirit, v. 28. The
other are but to free us from encumbrances, that we might vacare Deo, and serve
him with less distraction, as Zachary sings, being delivered out of the hands
of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness
before him all the days of our Life, Luke 1. 74, 75.

Indeed we are too subject so to abuse and pervert such outward helps, that on
the contrary they too often prove hindrances, Snares and Thorns to entangle us in
our advance to Heaven, so that sometimes we never had less of Go^^ than when we
had most of the World, and our being set free from trouble is but the opening
the Cage or Prison-door for loose hearts to run further from God.

Who thereby is enforced, that he may recover us out of those wild vagaries, to
bring us into some narrow deep Lanes beset on both sides with Thorns, the
better to keep us in our way; and to break those Crutches, which we too much
rested on, that we may be taught to lean upon our Beloved in a Wilderness,
Cant. 8. 5. and so we come to make more speed to our journey's end, when
lightened of that Luggage, which so much loaded and hindered us in our way.

But that is from God's Grace. Mean while it is a great part of our folly and
perverseness to turn our helps into hindrances. He at once both wrongs himself
and his Friend's courtesy, who having a Stool lent him to reach something he
has great need of, when he has gotten upon it, only stands strutting upon it,
and braving over others that are under him, till instead of reaching what he
wants, falls down headlong. He is a foolish Passenger, that when the Master
of the Ship puts him ashore for his refreshment, or to take in something for
his accommodation, stays so long gathering Shells on the Sand, or Flowers in
the Meadow, that he loses his Voyage: Nor is he the wisest Traveller, who for
the more comfort and speed of his Journey, being by his Friend led in a plain
fair way, and through pleasant Meadows, is so taken with them, that he lies
down to sleep in them, forgetting his Errand, and so loiters as loath to part
with them, as that he is benighted and falls short of Home. A good Traveller is
of another mind, and takes another course; says, the Coast indeed is clear and
free from Thieves and Robbers, the way pleasant, and Inns and other
Accommodations by the way commodious; but yet for all that (as it is in the
Proverb) utinam domi essem, I would I were at home: And so, the fairer the way
is, the more haste he makes and puts on. It is or should be so with every true
Traveller Heavenward. If in his way he meet with trouble and danger, he says
I would I were at Home in Heaven, where there is none of this: but if safety
and prosperity, yet would I were at Home in Heaven, where there is much better
than this: Heaven is my Haven, and these are but fair Gales to carry me on with
more speed thither. Christ is the End I aim at; and therefore as Austin upon
that Title of the Psalm: In finem cum audis, in Christum intend, ne in vita
Psalm. 55.
remanendo non pervenias ad finem: When I hear of the End, I must think of
making after Christ, and not stand still in my way, lest I come not to my
Journey's end. Quicquid est ubi infra steteris, antequam ad Christum
perveneris, nihil aliud Divinus sermo dicit, nisi Accede. How firm soever the
Ground be that I stand upon, on this side of Christ, though Sense and carnal
Reason say, stand still and abide by it; yet Scripture has nothing else to say
to me but this one word, Arise, this is not thy resting place, Mic. 2. 10.
There is a Plus ultra: Get nearer to Christ, advance further to Heaven, and
when a Sampson has delivered thee from the Philistines, and other suchlike
Enemies, let not this be all thou look for, but still say with Jacob, O
Lord, now that I am thus saved, yet still I wait for thy further and greater
Salvation.

3. And this Thirdly, By reason of the little advantage of the one, if we fall
short of the other. Though we should be saved from Bodily danger by an Arm of
Flesh, if our Souls should not Mark 8. 36, 37.
be saved from Hell and Wrath by Christ; What will thou give me, (said Abraham
to God) seeing I go Childless? Genesis 15. 2. And in that Child he looked at
Christ: And so a right Heir of Abraham says, Lord, what good will all else
that thou have given me do me, if I go Christless? We are indeed unworthy of
Crumbs, less than the least of Gods Mercies, and therefore should be thankful
for them: But yet because they are amongst those (...), Luke 16. 10. those
least of Mercies, it is but little good we shall reap by them, if we have not
Christ and his Grace, and Salvation, that great Gift of God with them. It Is not
an half-Mercy where Christ is wanting, who is All in all. As here Consider,

1. On the one side, how wretched we may be with all other Mercies and
Deliverances without Christ. Indeed, so we may account our selves as Happy, as
he accounted himself Perfect: And therefore made the boasting Question, Mat.
19. 20. What lack I yet? And Answer here may be made, Yet lackest thou one
thing, and that is Christ the one thing necessary, in whom only we (...).
are complete, Col. 2. 10. Happy the World may account, and call us, Psalm. 49.
13* if with Judas we bear the Bag: But yet for all that so Happy, or Miserable
rather, that with him, if we have nothing else, it had been better for us that
we had never been Born, raised from a Sickbed, and upon it fall more
desperately Sick to the very Death of W^ntonness and Lust. Prison-Door set
open, and then run wild from God, as it was usual with Israel, delivered to all
those Abominations, Jer. 7. 10. set free from Oppressors and Enemies that
fought against the Body, and then more than ever inslaved and inthralled to
Satan and those Lusts, that fight against our Souls. As God told Israel, if the
Canaanites should be suddenly destroyed, the wild Beasts would devour them.
Wild Lusts are these wild Beasts, which raven most in the quiet Night, when the
scorching Sun of Persecution is set: And like Vermin, breed fastest when the
Weather is warmest. And is there not then need of a further Salvation?

2. And so secondly, On the other hand, when God completeth an outward Mercy
and Deliverance, he is wont to do more for the inward than for the outward Man;
in Mercy to Hezekiah's Soul draws his Body out of the Pit of Corruption, and
casts his Isa. 38. 17.
Sins behind his Back further, than he leaves his Sickbed behind him. A
blessed thing to have a good Uprising from a Sickbed, that we Relapse not.
Mercy is to be taken with a trembling Hand. When he plucks David out of the
miry Clay, then sets his Feet upon the Rock, and orders his goings, Psalm. 40.
2. To delivering Mercy adds guiding Mercy, as to Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32. 22.
when an Out*gate from Misery is an Inlet to Grace, and so to Heaven: And the
same good Hand that drew me out of the Water, leads me to the Rock that is
higher than I; that is, a full complete Deliverance. And therefore (as some of
our Cartwright, Hist. Evang.
Divines observe) it is usual with the Prophets, when they made largest Promises
of greatest Prosperity to Israel, to ground them upon, or to close them with
something of Christ, as in whom both such Promises and Mercies had their full
accomplishment: All our Good being so far indeed good, as it leads us on to
Christ and his better Salvation.

Which, in the Application of it, shows us (First) a broad Israelite. The Sons
of the Concubines were put off and satisfied with Gifts, but Isaac, the Son of
the Promise, must have the Inheritance. The Carnal Jews sit down by it in
Babylon, but those that were more 1 Chronicles. 4. 23.
Spiritual returned to Zion; as the Raven takes up with the Carrion, but the
sole of the Doves foot cannot rest but upon the Ark.

It Is on the one hand a plain evidence of a carnal worldly Heart to rest
satisfied with Prosperity and Safety without Christ and his Salvation. A sign
of an Harlot, to be contented with the Love-token without true desire of the
Lover. As of the Mungril-Cur in the Fable, to leave the Game, and to take up
with the Gobbet cast before him: Unchaste Soul, that commitest folly with the
Gift, and neglectest God the Giver; fastnest upon the Bait, and art not drawn
to Christ, who would draw thee to himself by that Cord of Love: Like the Romish
Fisher, that casts away the Net when he has caught the Fish he fished for;
opens the Door of the Heart so wide, as to take in an outward Mercy from the
Hand of Christ, and then shuts it against him, who thereby would have made way
for himself to enter in; nay, (it may be) with those Husbandmen in the Gospel,
will kill the Heir, that they may have the Inheritance; shakes hands and quits
Christ with Demas, to embrace the World: Mat. 21. 38.
At least, when he has grasped the World, cares not to reach out to a
Savior, as Adam of old satisfied his Appetite with the pleasant Fruit of the
Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, but cared not to taste of the Tree of Life.
Foolish People and unwise, but do we so require the Lord, to forget him in
those Tokens by which he would be remembered? To lose Christ in the Crowd in the
midst of those Mercies, in and by which he would be found: To make the End, the
Means, Christ as a Bridge only by which we would get over to what we would come
to; and on the contrary, to make the Means and Way the end of our Journey,
which we mean to sit down and rest in. Remember that as Christ calls it hating
of Father and Mother, when we under-value them in comparison of him, so he
calls it hating of him, Prove. 8. 36. when we prefer any thing before him, or
rest in any thing that is short of Him and his Salvation. But Drexel. horolog.
what? (As he said) An Coelum desperasti? Wretched Man, do thou despair of
Heaven, that thou thus lie grovelling on the Earth? Now Sursum Corda. And when
shall our Hearts make the Responsal, Habemus Domine? When we have all, have we
an Heart hungering and thirsting after Christ, who is all in all, without whom
all else is nothing?

For so on the other hand, a Jacob's, and every true Israelite's heart that is
touched with sense of the emptiness of all else, and the only All-sufficient
fullness of Christ, after fullest draughts of all other Contentments, thirsts
everlastingly till satisfied with him; with Miphibosheth bids the Zibaes of the
World take all, 2 Samuel 19. 30.
may but the King return to his Soul in peace: Bids others much good do them
with their Corn and Wine, whilst he still cries, Lord, Psalm. 4. 6.
do thou lift upon me the Light of thy Countenance* is content to part with
them all for him, and therefore cannot be content with them without him. With
the Martyr says, Valeat Pecunia, valeat Vita, veniat Christus: Farewell Money,
farewell Life, farewell all; only come Christ, who is more than all, who is All
in all. And though too often in perfunctory Duties, he puts off Christ with skins
and shells of Performances, yet he means not to be so put off by him with
these husks and shells of outward Contentments. No, Christ is the Kernel which
his People hungers after, and is only satisfied with: And therefore the hungry
Child is not put by with such Toys and Rattles, but cries earnestly till it be
fed with this Bread of Life: Like Ruth, and Elisha; the one is not shaken off
by Naomi, with a Go return Ruth. 1. 2 Kings 2.
to thy Mothers House; nor the other with an Elijah's saying, Tarry here. But
on they will, and nothing but Death (as it is in your English) nay, not Death
it self shall separate them, as it is in the Hebrew, Ruth. 1. 17. So a true
Christian, whose Heart is indeed touched with the Love of Christ, though he
might have Chains of Gold to bind him down to fit still by what the World can
afford him, yet he cannot rest but in the Bosom of his Savior. He cannot be
safe in the greatest security that falls short of his Salvation. I, this is an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile, and let this be his Character, which we
may judge both of him and our selves by, and not be beguiled.

This, Secondly, instructs us what is a right Spiritual Use only in the 1 Cor.
7. 39.
Lord. If they do not terminate our thoughts and desires so as to take them off
from Christ, but rather (as it was here with Jacob) prove as a Rise to lift up
our Souls to him: And as so many Illicia, and Prolectives, to draw them out
more earnestly toward him. The Earth is indeed an opake dense Body, which we
stick in; and our Eye cannot penetrate and pierce through, and so are earthly
Contentments to earthly Hearts (like thick dull Glass) which intercept the
Light, and dull, and almost terminate our Eye and Heart: But if all were right,
they should be as Media diaphana, as clear Crystal Glass, that might transmit
the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness to our Souls: Looking-Glasses, in which
we may see Christ; or as so many Shadows, that better commend and set out to us
the Beauty of Christ, that by these Streams we may be led up to the
Springhead, and by these Rivers led out to the Ocean. This is the right
Spiritualizing and Sublimating these low and gross earthly Enjoyments: Not a
Rosicrucian Philosophica Theologizata; nor the Libertine Familist high-flown
Allegorical, Mystical Divinity; Or the Enthusiasts crying up the Spirit, whilst
he wallows in the Lusts of the Flesh: But a plain Honest-hearted Christian's
taking advantage from outward things, to be raised up to Spiritual and
Heavenly: As a Man from the rise of a Hill makes a greater Leap, and as the
Bird, which from the Tree takes a longer-flight; so from the advantage of the
higher Ground of an outward Exaltation and Deliverance, instead of being lifted
and puffed up in Pride, to have the Heart raised up to diviner thoughts, and more
ardent desires of God and Heaven; as he, Luke 14. 15. whilst sitting at Meat
with Christ, raises up his thoughts to the Blessedness of him that eats Bread
in the Kingdom of God. This Meat is pleasant; but Oh! what then is the Bread of
Life? This Garment comely; But how Glorious then the Robe of Righteousness?
This House a very good Dwelling; But Heaven is better. O sweet Friend! But O
sweeter Savior! When thus these outward tastes do not dull, but rather quicken
the Spiritual Appetite, and make us more hunger and thirst after fuller Meals
and greater Draughts of Christ and his Salvation: This is a right, (not so much
using as) improving them, which God would have us ready at, and have a holy
Skill and Dexterity in. Their Anagogical Interpretations of Scripture are often
vain, but here (...) is truly Divine, when an holy Heart out of Terrene and
Corporal things extracts the Elixir or Divinest Contemplation and Affections to
Christ and Heaven.

To this purpose God even in Paradise would have some Trees Sacramental and
Mystical, that Adam in that Garden might rise higher than Philosophical
speculation, and not perish by a Tree of Knowledge, but be fed and live by a
Tree of Life.

And for this end likewise, Christ as he uses so many Parables, and
spiritualizeth outward things, so he is set out by the Name of some of the
Chief and Choice of all kinds of Beings. The Angel of the Covenant amongst the
Angels; the Sun and Morning Star in the Heavens; The Rock and Precious Stone
among the Inanimates; The Vine and Apple Tree amongst Vegetables; and both Lion
and Lamb amongst Sensitives. And so of the rest; that as Quaelibet herba Deum,
so in every Creature we see and feel after and find Christ; and that as all of
them were Acts 17.
at first made by him, so by all we might be led to him.

Which therefore (in the last place) is that which we should all be seriously
exhorted to:

1. That we would not have our desires terminated, and so take up with any or
all such outward Mercies and Salvations which in the World we may be
entertained with, but still to seek on, till we find a better Savior and
Salvation, which we may safely and quietly rest in; as Joseph and Mary stay not
with their Kinsfolk and Acquaintance, till they find the Child Jesus, Luke 2.
44, 45, 46. and mean while they seek him sorrowing, ver. 48. The Beggar that is
ready to die for Hunger, though he have never so much else given him, if not
Food, waits still as wanting that which he came for, and had most need of. When
Christ said to the Blind-man, What will thou that I shall Luke 18. 41.
do unto thee? His answer is, Lord, that I may receive my sight. A Sinner that
has his Eyes so far open as to see Christ's Worth, and his own want of him,
would have said, Lord, that I might receive Thee. A poor Believer has a
further and greater Errand to Christ, than for Corn and Wine, or outward Safety
and Prosperity, which those in Hos. 7. 14. howled upon their Beds for. He has
a Soul to be both saved and satisfied; and nothing can do either of them, but
Christ only. O that we had such hungring thirsting desires after him, that
nothing might stay our Stomachs without him, much-less take away our Stomachs
(as too too often they do from him). Nor is this all that Speech of Jacob calls
upon us for; not only not to be taken off or hindered in the outgoings of our
Souls to Christ, by being satisfied with those outward Mercies and
Deliverances: But

2. By them (as Helps) to be drawn out and raised up in our desires after him.
It Is great Mercy, if by any means our Hearts may be led out to him, though they
be the Horrors of Conscience that prick us, the Terrors of the Law that whip
us, outward Wants that drive us, or Dangers that affright us: It Is well if any
thing will bring us, even Chains of Affliction will draw us to him, but yet not
so well as if they were those Cords of Love: If we might be preserved in Sugar,
rather than in Brine: If comfortable Supplies and Deliverances be not as Seats
to sit down, but as Foot-stools to get up to Christ by.

In times of Want and Danger to seek Christ, may be rather to seek our selves
than him, and to make our selves our End, when we only make use of Christ as a
means to it. Such may be shaken off with Jephtah's check: Ye did thus and thus
unto me, and why are you come to me now that ye are in distress, Judge. 11. 7.
more out of love of your selves than to me. And the like also may be said, if

In times of enjoyment of Mercy and Deliverance we rejoice in God, and seem to
love and praise him. This also may be Self-love rather than the Love of God.
They might rejoice in God's great Goodness, Neh. 9. 25. who yet did not serve
him in his great Goodness, ver. 35. And he might say, Blessed be God, for I am
rich, Zech. 11. 5. who yet never truly praised him. This may be but their
following of Christ for Loaves, John 6. 26. as the Roman Emperors did* Populum
annona demereri. Heinsius Exercit.


But thus to love God and Christ in his Mercies, that He is the Oil of
Gladness, swimming on the top of all; that we are no way satisfied with them
without him, and best satisfied when we enjoy Him in them and by them; this
shows the ingenuity of our Love, and that it is not the World or Self, but
Christ that is the Object of it: That as Paul said to his Corinthians, I seek
not yours, but you; so it is not our selves, but Christ that we 2 Cor. 12. 14.
love and desire; and not his Portion, but his Person; and not so much Man's,
as his Salvation.

And therefore (to conclude) as in all our gettings, we are to get Wisdom,
Prove. 4. 7. So, in all our seekings let us seek after Christ: And in and above
all our Enjoyments let us enjoy and eye Him. As Jacob here in Sampson's
salvation had a further longing look at His. And so Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. in a
Samuel looks at a Savior. And therefore (as it has been observed by some) her
Song at his Birth, and Mary's at the news of Christ's, in many Passages of both
very much agree, and are perfect Unisons. And this further that Song of Hannah
will to our present purpose inform us, that the Eying of Christ in all other
Mercies will,

1. Make little Mercies great. As the Diamond adds Value to the Brass-Ring. And
the Figure added makes empty Ciphers vastest Numbers. And so you shall observe
that Hannah in that Song for her gaining a Son, and prevailing against her
Adversary Peninnah, as concerning their Houshold-talk, and Women's Brabbles,
speaks of greater Matters, carries it in a very high Key, in the strain of a
Triumphant Song of some glorious Conqueror: And such indeed Christ was, whom
she in that looked at; and where ever Faith sees him, it sees Magnum, though
in Parvo, which will make little Mercies great.

2. Will not (be they never so great) let the heart rest in The greater Light
dims the lesser.
them, which would be a dangerous Disease of a vain lovesick Soul, like those
Obstructions in the Body, when those Vessels, that should convey Spirit and
Nourishment to the other parts, stop and intercept them by the way; but like
the Tennis-Ball touches upon the Ground, yet thereby rebounds upward; so it
from the Earth mounts up Heavenward; as Jacob here from deliverance by
Sampson, rises up to Christ's. Though Sampson as the Serpent by the way so
bites the Horse heels, that his Rider falls backward, and so he is saved from
him, yet that is not enough, not all that he looks for: And therefore he adds, I
have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord.

And so Lord do thou ever wait to be Gracious, Amen, and Amen.
SERMON XXXVII.
MAT. 24. 45, 46. Preached at St. Alphage Church, London, May. 2. 1648.
Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over
his Honshold, to give them Meat in due season?

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.


IN the Parallel place of St. Luke upon our Savior's Exhortation Chap. 12.
ver. 41, 42, 43.
there (as here) to Watchfulness Peter makes bold to ask him, Lord, speak
thou this Parable unto us, or even to all? ver. 41. Which Question of his our
Savior answers with another Question in the words of the Text, Who then is
that faithful and wise Servant? etc. By which he gives him and us to
understand, that although in part he meant all Chrysostom.
others, yet especially Ambros. Hilarious. Cartwright.
them and their Successors, to whom he commits the Government of the Church:
for if the ordinary Soldier must Watch, then much more he that stands
Sentinel. The Text therefore, and the Auditory suit, and in it you have these
Four particulars.

1. Your Office. Servants, but yet made Rulers over the Lords Household.

2. Your Work and Employment, to give them Meat in due season.

3. Your Qualifications requisite for the discharge of it, You must be Faithful
and Wise, ver. 45. and so sincere, constant and instant about it, that the
Lord, when he comes, may find you so doing, ver. 46.

4. Your Reward. Happy Men if you be such, and do so, it is no less than
Blessedness; Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find
so doing. You see I have much way to rid in a little time. I must therefore
make the more haste, and view some things only in transitu, and stay upon
nothing long, nor need I in so Pious and Judicious an Auditory.

I begin with the first, viz. their Office, which may be considered in a double
reference. 1. To God in that word (...) they are but his Servants. 2. To his
People. They are (...), They are made Rulers of his Household.

1. The Governors of the Church are but Servants of Christ. Moses a King in
Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33. 5, and yet but the Servant of the Lord, Josh. 1. 1.
Faithful in God's House, but as a Servant, Hebr. 3. 5. Paul, not inferior to
the chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 5. and yet acknowledges himself to be the
Servant of Jesus Christ, not only as a Christian, but as an Apostle, Romans 1. 1.
Though (as Aristotle observes) Nature makes them that have Politic. 1.
but weak parts to be Servants to Men; yet Grace teaches Men of greatest Gifts
Graces and Places to be Servants to Christ, who in the Government of his Family
will be sure ever to be the Lord over his own House, as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 3. 6. whilst highest Church Officers but Servants, and set over it, not as
their House, but Christ's.

And in this, differing from Kings and other Civil Magistrates, that
Church Government and Governors are not Despotical, but merely Ministerial.

That whereas Princes (...) and (...), Exercise Matthew. 20. 25. Luke 22. 26. 1
Pet. 5. 3.
Lordly Authority over their people, our Savior's peremptory Interdict is vos
autem non sic. In his Church he permits no such Lording it over his Heritage.
(...), Matthew. 20. 26, 27. a Minister and a Servant is the highest style he
suffers them to aspire to.

They, though Servants (Ministers of God, Romans 13. 4.) yet are permitted to be
such Lords, as to create Offices, and to enact Laws for all things in their
Government, provided they be not against the Law of God. And so both are (...),
Ordinances of Man, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Here, though whilst observing the general
Rules of the Word the persons may be designed and chosen by Men, yet the both
erecting of Offices and the enacting of Laws is the Prerogative of the supreme
Lord and Lawgiver. They must be the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which we as
Servants must administer, and he only as Lord institute. No dogmatizing for us
here, Col. 2. 20. The servants of Christ must not be Lords of his peoples
Faith; the Lord make us helpers of their Joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24. As
Church Governors we are Servants to Christ, and in some respects to his
Church, 2 Cor. 4. 5.

Be not therefore highminded, but fear. If God be a Master, upon that account
he expects Fear, Mat. 1. 6. and if we be Servants, though we have cause to be
thankful, yet I am sure we have none to be Proud; and yet Men's Servants often
are, and 'twere well that Christ's Servants never were. There is one that
styles himself Servus servorum, who (the Apostle tells us) exalts 1 These 2. 4.
himself above Dominus Dominantium: and therefore we had need be very wary; and
the rather,

1. Because as Pride is a spiritual sin, so it is through our corruption very
subject to breed in Spiritual transactions. Liquor full of Spirits soon set on
a bright flame.

2. Especially in Novices; (...), 1 Timothy 3. 6. not a Novice, lest being puffed up
he fall into both the sin and condemnation of the Devil. Whence some collect
the Devil's first sin was his being proud of his Office. A Novice, whether in
Christianity or in Office, either it new, or he newly put into it, is subject
to be proud, as the Child of his new-Coat. We had need therefore be the more
careful.

3. And lastly, the rather, because to be sure many will be very watchful. New
things are much viewed, and strangers most looked after. When Austin and his
Company came first into England, the direction given, to discover whether they
were the true Servants of God, or no, was to mark whether they were proud or
humble. Look for the like eyes upon us now. Some have been so quick, or rather
maliciously evil, that they could foresee, that in the managing of these
affairs we would be proud, as the Devil foretold, that Job would be a
Blasphemer; O that our humility, as well as Job's Patience, might make the
Devil and such devilish malice a Liar: and no better way than by knowing our
place, and the Text tells us, it is to be Servants; and that place and relation
tells us our duty.

That what the Scripture requires as due from our Servants Subjection,
Obedience, Ephesians. 6. Col. 4. Tit. 2.
Fear, Fidelity, not with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but with singleness of
heart, as unto Christ, waiting upon him to appoint you your work. Consult his
Word and Providence, and say as, Act. 9. 6. Lord what will thou have me to do?
And for direction, assistance, and acceptance in your doing of it.

And then, because a Servant is but (...), a rational tool in his Master's
hand, to be ad nutum Domini, resigning up our Reason to his Wisdom, and our
Will to his Commands, doing it willingly, cheerfully, fully, without
contradiction, or exception.

Frequently and sadly thinking of our Account, Heb. 13. 17. which will be very
great, when we have so many besides our selves to reckon for; and yet most
certain, and cannot be avoided, Luke 16. 2. Matthew. 25. 19.

And yet comforting and encouraging our selves in a faithful and joyful
expectation and assurance of a faithful and bountiful Act. 13. 36.
Lord's reward. From Enemies, Strangers, yea from Fellow Servants (it may be)
envy and hatred, derision, opposition, and the greatest injuries and mischiefs
they can reach us: but what is all this to our Master's last Euge, well done
good and faithful Servant, enter into thy Masters Joy?

Thus much of your Office, as in reference to God in the word (...). You are
but his Servants.

2. Secondly, Consider it in reference to his People, so you by it are made
Rulers of his household. In which words, two things: 1. The place it self* It Is
(...), Rulers of the household. 2. The Institution of it, and the investiture,
or putting them into it, in the word (...), he has made or constituted Ruler
of his Household. I shall briefly touch upon both.

1. For the Place or Station, Rulers of God's Household, as he, 2 Chronicles. 31. 13.
is called, (...) the Ruler of the House of God. I confess, the word is not here
in the Original, as it is there: but

1. The Phrase in this place implies it (...) over the Household, i. e. in
place of Rule and Superiority over the Household: as Genesis 41. 43. its said,
Pharaoh made Joseph (...) over all (i. e. as our English rightly expresses it,
Ruler over all) the Land of Egypt, according as it is expressed, Act. 7. 10.
(...).

2. Other places in plain words and full titles express it, where they are
called (...), 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. Act. 20. 28.
words partly in Scripture, and partly in other Authors, given to Princes in
Commonwealths, to Generals and Captains in Armies, to Governors in Families;
in all which there is an authoritative power of Rule and Government over them
that are set under them. They are called Rulers, and that word commands
Obedience.

Fathers, and that speaks Authority.

Elders, and such a (...), such a Senate has power.

Were it but only Shepherds and Stewards (as he that is here Act. 20. 1 Cor. 4.
1.
called (...) is in Luke called (...), that tells that although like the
Centurion, Matthew. 8. 9. they be under a Superior Authority, yet as such, they
have others under theirs. Called (...), Mark 13. 34. but not taken for an
ordinary Porter, but servus atriensis, a Steward that has the Keys of all, as
Isa. 22. and yet as Porters, to let in and keep out of the House of God, and
from his Table. Eve^ ^^ey who most of all raise up the Authority of the whole
Church, as the immediate and first Subject of Church Power, as totum and finis,
do freely grant the Exercise of that Power in some things, as only vested in
the Officers, and in some other things in them especially. But the Duty of this
place, especially of this day, is not to dispute Controversals, but to exhort
and urge Practicals.

And therefore, in that God by this Office has advanced you set you over his
Household, Be exhorted so far to know your Place, and the dignity and worth of
it, as not to be ashamed of it, nor to be babished in the Execution of it. Take
heed of such an height of spirit, as to grow proud of it; (of which by and by)
but yet pray and labor for such a generous magnanimity of Spirit, as may in
some measure answer the worth of it, and may help you with a Holy (...), a free
boldness of Spirit, to manage it. Great Men expect it in their Stewards; and
the great God requires it in his. This Masculine Ingenuity was in Jehoshaphat
in his Temple-work. It Is said, his Heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord,
2 Chronicles. 17. 6. and Nehemiah, that unwearied and undaunted Repairer of
Jerusalems ruins, when the breaches were many, and the rubbish that hindered
their work much* the strength of the Laborers little, and yet decaying, and
the scorns, insolences, and oppositions of Enemies very great, and yet
increasing; how did he by Faith and Prayer, raise up his own Spirit, and by
encouraging both Words and Actions endeavor to do as much for his
Fellow Laborers? Chap. 4. and 6. Tricubitalis Paulus, a low little Man for
stature of Body, and yet for lowliness of heart yet lower, in his own Eyes less
than the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. yet there was magnum in parvo. With
what an Heroic Spirit does he carry on the work of his Ministry? How does the
little Man stand as it were on Tiptoes, when the Pride and Malice of false
Apostles and others, would have debased that Fastigium Apostolicum, with a
(...), I magnify mine Office? Romans 11. 13. Yours is nothing near so high, yet
whilst it is over God's Household, too high to be trampled upon by the foot of
Pride: which yet it is, and will (on purpose) be more, if Enemies once perceive
that their Scorn and opposition can baffle you into a degenerous Despondency,
whom this height of your Office should set above any such Indignities. A
Luther's Courage with a Melancthon's Meekness make between them a fit temper
for a right Churchman.

Although what I have herein said, perhaps is not enough to raise some of our
Spirits, yet it may be to some is too much, who will think I preach that Pride,
which (out of their Charity) they say we will practice.

And therefore because it is a Duty of Humiliation we are now upon, I shall
rather press Humility.

And that as from the former Particular, because by our Place Servants; so also
even from this, because that by it we are set over Gods Household: For, though
the Station be High, yet be not high-minded, but even therefore the rather
fear. Lower thy Sail, the higher the Wind is. In Ezekiel's Vision we read the
Rings were so high that they were dreadful, Chap. 1. 18. As the higher we are,
the more we tremble when we look downward: The height and weight of your
Places, though it may make an empty pragmatick spirit Proud, yet (when well
considered) strongly engages them that are better advised to be Humble,
Watchful, Fearful.

As for Instance. Are we over Gods Household?

1. It Is an High Place, but withal it is a great Charge, which The higher Orb is
to carry the inferior ones about with his motion.
will bring at last to a great Account, Heb. 13. 17. If we be Overseers, Acts
20. 28. then (as Nehemiah contended with the Rulers, Chap. 13. 11. so) we shall
be accountable for whatever miscarriage in our Charge is occasioned by our
oversight (As Diogenes struck the Master for the miscarriage of his rude
Scholar). By our Offices we are made Debtors, Romans 1. 14. And shall we be proud
of such engagements? I that cannot answer for one of a thousand of mine own
sins, Job 9. 3. How shall I for the sins of (it may be) thousands that I have
the Charge of?

2. The higher the Place, the more in view. (As a blemish in the Face, in the
Eye most visible). Our Savior told his Apostles, that they were as a (ity that
is set on an Hill, set high; but therefore could not be hid, Mat. 5. 14. We may
be sure to have many Eyes upon us, and, it is to be feared, too many of them
evil enough, and what care (then) need we have that our Nakedness be not
discovered in this our ascent to God's Altar? Exodus 20. 26.

3. The higher the place, the lower and heavier the Fall, if we tread awry: And
no Precipice so dangerous, as when Satan prevails with us to cast our selves
down from the Pinnacle of the Mat. 4. 5, 6.
Temple. The instances of Korah (in the Law) and of Judas (in the Gospel) and
of many others since, say plainly; that, as God in a way of Judgment begins at
the Temple, Ezekiel. 9. 6. so none heavier than such as have been inflicted on
evil Churchmen. And justly: For of them it is especially spoken, the Servant
that knows his Master's Will, and does it not, (...), shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12. 47.

And therefore, if the higher my Place is, the greater is my Charge and
Account, the more Eyes upon me, and the more desperate will be my downfall, How
should this prick the bladder of my swelling Pride? How should it compose our
Spirits to an humble, meek, awful, and watchful frame in all our Walkings, and
especially in our Church-Administrations? When Christ the Master of the House
was Meek and Lowly, how should Mat. 11. 29.
we learn of him, who are but Servants, and at best but Stewards, set over the
House, but not to be on the Housetop, presently in Passion when at any time we
are crossed? St. Paul teaches us a better Lesson; The Servant of the Lord must
not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to Teach, Patient, (...), 2 Timothy 2.
24, 25. Let not this Superiority be corrupted into a proud Superciliousness.
Some say it will ruin us. I hope they will prove false Prophets; I am not in
telling you that it will very ill beseem us. For,

In the third place, This Height in being over God's Household of the Office, so
not to be a shame to it. But as we are herein much Dignified, so to walk worthy
of this high and holy Calling, and to labor to be as much above others in
Grace, as we are in Place. Is de nobis omnibus judicet, qui omnibus melior, was
once the Vote of the People in the choice of their Censor. Think that it is the
Valerianus.
expectation of our People in each Pastor, or other Church-Governor and
Censors. This (...), this Supervisorship of ours in the name and nature of it,
speaks more of Care and Labor, It will be a shame, Mat. 7. 3, 4, 5.
than of Honor and Preferment. And therefore let it be our labor and care
with Paul, to magnify our Office, as in a vigorous asserting it against such
as oppose it, so in casting Beauty and Glory upon it in our holy, just, wise,
grave, and faithful Management of it. The Law admitted of no Blemishes in their
Priests, Lev. 21. 17, 18. etc. And would it not look very illfavoured, to see
grosser Deformities in the Gospel's Ministers? But what a sweet Note is that of
Paul's, 1 These. 2. 10. Ye are Witnesses, and God also, (...), how holily, and
justly, and unblamably we behaved our selves among you that believe. I, that
was for a Paul, for a Scholar of the highest Form, who (as Chrysostom says of
him) as for his Divine Contemplations was (...), so in regard of his heavenly
Conversation (...). Yea, and for us too to aspire unto, and labor after, that
our Abilities, Graces, Carriages, may in some measure, if not answer, yet suit
with our Offices, that when the one is high, the other may not be low; in the
one, over others, and in the other under all. I say no more, but with Solomon,
The Way of Life is above to the Wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath,
Prove. 15. 24. The Lord help us in this kind, both to be Wise our selves, and to
be a means of making others also Wise to Salvation.

2. Having thus considered your place, Servants; and yet Rulers over God's
Household: We come secondly, to take notice of the Institution of it, and your
Investiture in it, and both held out in the same word (...), whom the Lord has
made Ruler over his Household. Quem constituit: A word in the signification and
use of it holding forth an Institution, and accordingly here signifies
Christ's Instituting the Office, and Constituting the Person; as here being
compared to a Master taking a far Journey, Mark 13. 34.
and in his absence appointing, 1. That one of his Servants shall be in his
place. And, 2. Choosing whom of them he pleases to look to the House, and to be
over the rest of the Family. The Institution of the place, and choice of the
Person being both at the Master's appointment, and both necessary, that that
Servant may take it upon him, and act in it with Warrant and Authority; which
holds here likewise, but only that the former (the Institution of the Office)
is immediately and only from our Lord and Master: But the latter, viz. The
calling and putting of fit Persons into it, though in extraordinary Functions,
as of Apostles and Prophets, etc. that also belongs to God; yet in ours Gal. 1.
1. Heb. 5. 1, 4, 5. Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5.
of Ministers and Elders, and such like, which are ordinary, he admits of an
intermediate Call of the Church: But yet so according to general Rules
prescribed by God, as that we may say, that both Places and Persons are
Appointed of God, and that he has made them Rulers over his Household.

Which I earnestly desire, that all of you, who take upon it, by God; that in
both respects, whether you be Ministers, or other Elders, it is God that has
made you Rulers over his Household.

1. For us that are Preachers, that our Office is of God, I hope we are not in
doubt, nor to seek for proof of. No. As long as we understand and remember what
the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. (...), etc. And he gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, etc. No Socinian, or other
Sectarian, will ever make us call it in Question.

You that are assisting Elders, have had your Place and Employment formerly
decried, and to this very day questioned, as for a long time forgotten in the
Church, nor so fully and clearly held out in the Word; and therefore as the
Man, in whom the evil Spirit was, said, Paul I know, and Apollos I know, but
who are ye? Acts 19. 15. So some almost out of a like evil Spirit are ready to
say, Pastors I acknowledge, and Teachers I allow, but who are ye? And therefore
you have the more need to be fully grounded in this main Point, that your
Office is not only Permitted and Allowed, but directly Instituted by Jesus
Christ. For whatever others hold, I for my own part must freely profess my
Thoughts, that if by your Place you have, as Officers of the Church, a share
and Interest in the Government and Censures of the Church, in ordaining
Ministers, admitting Members, and in casting out and Excommunicating scandalous
Offenders, things all of them so material and essential to Church Communion,
and so purely Ecclesiastical, nothing less than a Jus Divinum, and a true and
proper Institution of Jesus Christ, will groundedly Warrant you to take upon
you such an Office, and to manage such an Employment. Nothing is to be at the
Master of the House his Appointment, if the great Officer and their chief
Employments, upon which all the Government and Welfare of the whole Family
depend, be not. Neither the Time, nor the Duty in hand will permit at present,
a clearing of your Title: But it does call upon me to call upon you to get it
cleared in your own Consciences. The Priests, the Children of Hobajah, who out
of Ambition had married into Barzilla'is stock, and would be called by his
Name, when they sought their Register, and it could not befound in Aaron's
Genealogy, they were, as polluted, put from the Priesthood, Nehem. 7. 63, 64.
And lest such a Non est inventus be returned, you have great need to search the
Scriptures, the Rolls and Registers in which all such of God's Charters and
Commissions are recorded; and if in 1 Cor. 12. 28. in that (...), Governments,
you can distinctly spell your Ruling-Power, you have in the beginning of that
Verse God's (...), God has set in his Church, and that speaks plainly an
Institution; or if in 1 Timothy 5. 17. you can truly and satisfactorily make out
Elders that Rule well to be distinct, both Persons and Officers, from them that
labor in the Word and Doctrine, you have that which your Faith and Practice
may safely build upon from that place, in which God provides for their Honor
and Maintenance, and that in a Church Way, which he would not do, if they were
our Creatures, and not his own Ordinances: for how should we dare to think what
I am (though in way of abhorrency) afraid to utter, that our heavenly Father
should keep our Bastards? Thus, make sure in the first place, that your Calling
and Office be of God.

2. And as sure that your particular calling to it be from God also; that he
made the Seat, and then set you in it, that you did not run before you were
sent, that neither greedy desire of gain in Jer. 23. 21.
Ministers, or a busy pragmaticalness, or a tickling Itch after applause and
domination, to be accounted some great doe-littles, do prick on them or other
Elders, but that God, after he had in some measure fitted them, has inwardly
inclined them and brought them to Paul's (...), Romans 1. 15. Or in case of a
Moses, Jeremiah's, and Ezekiels averseness, either some overpowering work of
God's upon our Spirit, or over ruling providence in our way has thrust us out
to be Laborers in his Harvest, Matthew. 9. 38. and the wants of our Brethren
have with the Man of Macedonia to Paul cried to us, Come and help; the Acts 16.
9.
vote and mission of some, and the welcome reception and giving of the right
hand of fellowship from others, have drawn us ab-inter sarcinulas, as once
Saul, (though in another sense than he was) to be Rulers of his People.

In this Exhortation, I am the more serious:

1. As on the one side, because of our very uncomfortable walking in this way,
if we halt in this particular. It Is error in fundamento, a fault in the first
Concoction. Were it no more than an unsettled hesitancy, or a scrupulous
doubtfulness of our Minds, that either the Calling it self is not of God, or
that we are not called to it by God, it will be like Gravel in a strait Shoe,
will pinch, and make us tread very g^ntly, and tenderly, when we walk fair and
easily in evenest ways; but will make us halt quite down, and give out wholly,
when we are put to it in rough and hard ways; will make us fall short of that
(...) or free boldness, which is requisite for the through carrying on of our
work. When we seem to have the most assistance from God, and least opposition
from Man, yet (...), the Man that has some inward defect, is faint within, by
the warmest Fire, and in the cheariest Sunshine: as the Man, though at a
Marriage Feast, yet when he could not answer that question; Friend how came
thou in hither? is said to be left Speechless, Matthew. 22. 12. But suppose, at
some special times, and in some heavy pull, and great strait of our employment,
God should seem to frown, and the World and (...) should indeed rage (as the
former we may often deserve, and the latter we may be sure of) what cheer is
like to be then, if as it was with Elijah, now in a Wilderness, and (as many
think) out of his way, the Angel again and again haunt him, and ask, but what
do thou here Elijah? 1 King. 19. 9, 13. If in such a strait our own
Consciences gagg us, and such misgiving thoughts rise up within us, I fear my
work is not the work of God, or, that I am not the workman appointed to it by
God; and so, though Men blame me, yet God does not thank me; though they
unjustly oppose me, yet he may most justly desert me with a quis requisivit
haec? who required these things? or at least, of your hands? The discouragement
Isa. 1. 12.
and despondency of mind in this case would be very great, and the Event has
sometimes proved very dreadful, but not more disheartning,

2. Than on the other side, the Conscience and clear Evidence that our errand
is from God, and that he has sent us on it, will be encouraging and
strengthening, and as good as Elijah's first and second B^it, with him to walk,
though it be in a Wilderness, many a hot Summers-day, and cold Winters night,
till we come to the Mount of God. If it be a way of the Lord, it is Strength to
the upright, Prove. 10. 29. and if I be called by him to it, my Call is my
Comfort, my Commission my Warrant, which therefore Jeremiah (Chap. 17. 16. and
20. 7.) Amos (Chap. 7. 14) and our Blessed Savior, and his blessed Apostle
Paul, had often recourse to, and still held out and pleaded against all
Objections John 7. 29. Gal. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 9. 1. and 15. 8, 9, 10.
and Oppositions. For who has more Authority in the House, than the Lord of
the Household? And if he have appointed and employed me, what has a^y Enemy or
stranger, yea or fellow Servant to do to appose or hinder me? When I can
without wrong make use of the Apostle's plea, whether it be right in the sight
of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye, Acts 4. 19. it is a
Back of Steel to my Bow, and a full Gale in my Sail, strongly engages the heart

To be ready and earnest to do our utmost in our Duty. It was before the Lord
that chese me, says David, when he danced before the Ark with all his might,
and he would therefore be more vile, 2 Samuel 6. 14, 16, 19.
though so vile already in Michal's Eyes, that she despised him. The Lion has
roared, who will not fear? The Lord has spoken, who can but Prophesy? Amos 3.
8. We cannot but speak, Act. 4. 20. (...), a necessity is laid upon me, and woe
unto me if I preach not the Gospe^ 1 Cor. 9. 16. It engages and encourages
the Heart to duty.

And in doing of it, to expect and wait for God's Mercy. If I be sure that my
work be God's, and that he has called me to it, I dare not but so far honor
him, as notwithstanding all discouragements to trust him, and confidently to
rely upon him for

Acceptance: For if in both my Place and Employment I be his, in accepting of
me, he owns himself; else I may say, Lord thou have deceived me, Jer. 20. 7.
Assistance, which other Masters are wont to afford their Servants in their
work, and our best Master is not wont to be worse in this kind to his Servants
in theirs, who never suffered his Servants to do his work by their own
strength, but first bespeaks Gideon's might, Judge. 6. 12. and then v. 14. bids
him go out in it, and promises he shall save Israel by it. Which adds a third
thing,

Blessing. Common Adultresses use not to be fruitful, and so Bastard-Ordinances
are barren; but as we love our own, so God, who has more cause, uses to love
and bless what is his. When Isaac sends Jacob to Padan-Aram, he blesses him,
Genesis 28. 1, 2. i. e. he prayed for it: but our Master, when he sends us, he
so blesses, that he bestows it. Because the false Prophets ran on their own
heads, they therefore went on a bootless ernand. I sent them not, therefore
they shall not profit this People at all, Jer. 23. 32. but had they stood in my
Counsel, they should have converted my People, v, 22. How do we go amain, when
we have the Wind as well as the Tide with us? the Gale of Heaven, as well as
the current Stream of our Brethrens votes and desires?

Reward for whatever Man may do, yet God never suffered his Servants to serve
him gratis. The same virtuous Woman that sether Servants their Task, gives them
also their portion of Meat, Prove. 31. 13, 14, 15 and that God which sets you on
work, will be sure Mr. Moor of Norwich.
to pay you your wages. For the outward Man, Gainers many of you cannot be, and
it is well that it is so; and you might escape well, if you were but gainers in
the sense of that Phrase, Act. 27. 21. where Paul speaks of gaining harm and
loss, that is, in preventing and avoiding it. Injuries and Losses may be all
our gains from Men: but there will be nothing lost by what we lose for God,
when we come to our last reckoning. When God sends us of his errand, he bids us
indeed be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord;
but for our encouragement withal, he tells us, that our Labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58.

[What follows was prepared, but not Preached.]

SERMON XXXVIII.
MAT. 24. 45, 46. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord has
made Ruler over his Household, to give them Meat in due season?

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.


BUt that Reward is the last part of my Text. We are before that to consider of
our Work.

And that is the 2d; Which (having dispatched our 2 Work.
Office, Servants, and yet made Rulers over God's Household) we come to in those
words, (...). It Is to give them their Food in due season.

1. I will not insist upon that, which yet some observe from the word (...),
that it is a giving, and not a selling of this Food to the Household. Christ once
whipped Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple: but after-ages complained much that
they were gotten in again. This Food for the Household is the Masters Provision,
and only put into the Stewards hands for his Households use. All thy Grace,
Wisdom, Ability to dispense the Word and other Ordinances, to govern the
Church, etc. are God's Gifts, which he never betrusted thee with to enjoy, or
make a Market of for thy self, thine own gain or applause, but for the Glory of
thy Master, and the service of his Spouse: and therefore although the Labourer
be worthy of his hire, Luke 10. 7. yet neither be thou on the one side ever so
mercenary, as to account thy maintenance such an hire of thy Labor as which
thou aimest at, and put off the Ordinances of God for: No, in this sense
freely thou have received, and therefore freely give.

Nor let the People be ever so mean as to think, when they Mat. 10. 8.
have paid their Pittance they have bought you for Slaves, and like good
Chapmen have made a fair purchase of the Word, and the rest of God's
Ordinances, which they hereupon claim as their due, and in case, though by
their own default, they come short of, you shall fall short of yours. But how
unworthy are such base Simoniacal chafferings of thee, as thou art either a
Minister, or Christian? something akin to Judas selling, and the Jews buying of
Christ for thirty pieces of Silver: and a goodly price, wherewith I was prised
at of them, says the Lord, Zeeh. 11. 13. The Apostle would lift us up to
higher thoughts, when he calls the Church Officers maintenance, not Wages but
Honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17. to be freely honorably allowed, not as a recompense of
their Labor, but as an honorable testimony of our love and respect, not as the
price of the Gospel, and all that either we mean to give for it, or the
Ministers should look at in dispensing of it. There Is much more that God
expects for it from the People, and which his Ministers should look at in their
administrations of it. They are first (...), to give the Household their Food in
due Season.

2. The second thing observable is, what they are to give, expressed in the
word (...), their Food and Nourishment, by which Hierom means Cibaria
doctrinarum: others, verbi and Sacramentorum pabulum, the sacred Food of the
Word and Sacraments; not excluding either the wholesome Physic of
Church Censures, for it is Physic as well as Food, which we pray for, when we
beg our daily Bread, Matthew. 6. 11. or the due administration of any other of
the parts of Church Government, for as Christ (...), feeds whilst he rules,
Matthew. 2. 6. (Kings are (...)) so we may properly be said to Feed, by Governing
as well as Teaching. In reference to both which, Paul in his charge to the
Elders of Ephesus calls upon them (...), to feed the Church of God, Act. 20.
28. That Is their Task, nor can you conceive otherwise, if you consider,

1. Either the Master of the House his Royal Bounty. He would not have his
Family starved, and therefore takes order that they shall be fed. In our
Fathers House there is Bread enough, Luke 15. 17.

2. Or his Servant's Office and Duty. They are elsewhere styled Shepherds; and
a Pastor's work is to feed the Flock, Zech. 11. 7. Nurses; and they suckle and
cherish their Children, 1 These. 2. 7. in the place of Luke parallel to the Text
(...), Stewards, whose whole work both here and there is summed up in this
comprehensive expression of giving Food to the whole Family. And for your
quickening herein, the Application of this

Proclaims the People of God their great need, even greater of careless and
foul Sinner, of Threats and Admonitions, than the foul diseased Body of
stronger Purges; and the obstiuate Sinner more to be cast out, than the
gangrened Member to be cut off: all of us as much and more of this Spiritual
Food, than any, than all of us do of our Natural-Food, and Job called that
necessary Food, Job. 23. 12. and therefore no wonder if Paul said, a necessity
is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I Preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 16. God
and Nature is not wanting to thee in necessaries: Let not Grace suffer thee to
be wanting to thy charge in their necessities. Christ was willing to bleed,
that of his Flesh and Blood he might make the Provisions, wilt not thou be
willing to be at the Cost, though it be of thy Sweat, to set them on the Board?
Let thy People's hungring desires bespeak thy pity. It was one of the saddest
Notes in the Church's Lamentations, that the Children asked Bread, and there
was none to break it to them, Lament. 4. 4. Or should their Desires be silent,
yet let their Wants cry for thy Compassion. Cogita de cibo and potu animalium
tuorum, says Bernard, nam esuriunt, and non potunt; they often are Hungry, and
yet so weak, sullen, or shamefaced, that they will not, or cannot ask; nay
(which is worse) inedia langnent, and tamen non esuriunt, they too often are
half-famished, and yet are not an hungry, are ready to die, not so much for
want of Food, as of a Stomach, as it is with too many of our Flock at this day.
And therefore (in this case, if in any) if there be any Consolation in Christ,
if any Comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and
Mercies, let our Bowels earn over them. Starved Souls will be frightful Ghosts
to us, when they ^^d we at last shall stand together to give up our account,
and to receive our doom. Let this make us think of our charge and mind our
work, It is to give Food to God's Household.

Which calls for a second part of our care, that it be indeed nourishing-Food,
that we give them. If they ask Bread, give them not a Stone; or if Fish, let it
not be a Serpent, (Matthew. 7. 9, 10.) in hard and harsh usages.

It Is Food, not the Poison of Heresies and corrupt Doctrines, or destructive
Administrations. Your Power is given to Edification, 2 Cor. 10. 3.
and not to Destruction.

It Is (...), solid nourishing Food, not the Froth of Airy Notions, or our
fine-spun high-flown Speculations, not the Trash, Hay and Stubble of our own
Fancies, Humors, Passions, no nor the rarest Flowers of our great Readings and
curious Elegancies. The Sheep of Christ's Pasture use to feed on more wholesome
Herbs, whilst they let such Flowers stand by. The Word is the immortal Seed,
that begets us, 1 Pet. 1. 23. (These too dilute to be prolifical, as he of the
Philosopher's Books, animum non dant, quia non habent) and the sincere Milk
Chap. 2. v. 2. to nourish us. From these we can suck nothing but Wind, which
makes us swell, and that is all. What Is the Chaff to the Wheat? Jer. 23. 28.
It Is (...), the solid nourishing Bread of Life, and therefore away with all
such Kickshaws.

3. The third thing observable in this second part is, that what Matthew here
calls (...), their Food, Luke in the parallel place, calls (...), demensum,
their portion of Meat, which Agur phraseth (though in another sense, (...)
(Prove. 30. 8.) Food convenient for me. The same Dispensation will not either
for kind or measure suit all. There are in God's Family young Babes as well as
grown Men. Some sick and weak, others healthy and strong, some sick of lighter
Fevers, others of more putrid, it may be Hectical or Malignant. That which will
feed the Child will pine the Man: and what is Food to him that is healthy, may be
poison to the Sick: and that which will heal a Whitlow, will not cure a
Gangrene: As therefore God in his greater House of the World, has such both
store and choice, that he answers the want and desire of every living thing,
Psalm. 145. 16. So this Presence Chamber of his Church he has so fully fitted
and furnished, that in his Word, Sacraments, Censures, and other
Administrations, his Mannah is answerable to every Palate: he has a fit
Medicine for every Malady; both a Rod and a Pot of Manna in his Ark. But now to
^^w which of them to use, and to whom. This (...), this right dividing of the
Word of Truth, 2 Timothy 2. 15. so as the proud Sinner may not presume, nor the
fainting Christian droop, the right Administration of the Keys, that no false
Pretender, notwithstanding his greatest shows, may be let in, nor the weakest
Believer, notwithstanding his many weaknesses, kept out, that we do not on the
one hand, in too rigorous a way kill a fly on our Brothers Forehead with a
Beetle, nor on the other, through ignorance, in advertency, Interest or the
like, blow whole a corrupt Ulcer a little skinned over. This is one of the
hardest pieces of our work; hic labor, huc opus, and (...); Lord who is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. This would call for in Ministers a
more diligent inspection into, and Knowledge of the state of our Flock (Prove.
27. 23.) than I fear we have any of us attained to, or many of us endeavored
after; which we had need this day to be greatly humbled for our want and
neglect of. This requires all the qualifications, which Christ here mentions,
of Faithfulness, Wisdom, Sincerity, Constancy, Instancy, which (I said) are
contained in the third part of the Text, so worthy to be sought, and yet so
hard to be found, if all of you should be like some of us, that in both
respects Christ may here ask the question, Who is that Faithful and Wise
Servant, whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his Household, to give them their
Food, or due portion of Meat, in due season?

4. Which last words, (...) in season, is the fourth particular in this second
part of the Text.

Food is to be given, and that in a fit proportion, and also in a fit Season.
It Is so with orderly Men, and in well-ordered Families, Eccles. 10. 17. and God
would not have his House worse ordered. The wise Physician as he weighs the
Dose he gives, so he calculates the time in which he should most seasonably
give it. It Is the Wisdom of God as Governor of the World, that as he satisfies
the desires of his Creatures in giving them their Food; so, that it is in due
season, Psalm. 145. 15. and accordingly as the Lawgiver of his Church you shall
observe how punctual he is in the Law to require his Ordinances to be observed,
but in their season, Exodus 13. 10. Levit. 23. 4. Numb. 9. 3, 7, 13 and 28. 2.
He is now no whit less careful of it in the dispensaon of the Gospel. (...), is
the Apostolical Precept, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Be instant in season: He adds indeed, and
out of season too, though that is out in some Copies: but if you take it Beza.
in, you must understand it of that which the wisdom of the Flesh accounts out
of season, as that it will not stand now with the Ministers profit, or the
peoples occasions or humors. For otherwise it is the both faithfulness and
wisdom of Ministers and other Church Officers heedfully and watchfully to watch
and catch all fittest oportunities, in which they may act most seasonably:

1. Hard to be hit on, and therefore the more carefully to be heeded. Much good
lost because the opportunity is slipped: because is every purpose there is a time
and judgment, therefore the misery of Man is great upon him, Eccles. 8. 6.

2. Most Successful usually, if observed. The thing is then Beautiful, Eccles.
3. 11. and therefore taking: upon the Wheels them and therefore goes on
smoothly. I am no Arminian, to make the Efficacy of Grace to consist in Moral
persuasions applied tempore and modo congruis, in the fitness and
seasonableness of such Applications. No: I know that God to show the freeness
and prevailing Efficacy of his Grace, sometimes works it (as in Paul and
others) when the Sinner is most indisposed, as Christ the Physician came when
the World was most Corrupted; who, otherwise than other Physicians, can to
purpose give Physic in the height of a Fit, as he cured Simon's Wive's Mother,
In aestu Febris, in the very Paroxism of her Disease. Nullum tempus occurrit
Regi.

SERMON XXXIX.
PHIL. 1. 21. 1. Sermon Preached at St. Mary's, May 2. 1658.
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.


ACcording as our Nature is, so proportionably is our Life and Practice. It is
so with us, as we are Men; and so it should be with us, as we are Christians.
As such, in my former Text lately handled, Peter told us that our Nature is
Divine; and Paul tells us here, that his Life is 2 Pet. 1. 4.
such: To me to live is Christ, and so to die is gain. When Christ first is our
Life, then even Death at last proves our advantage. In the two following
Verses, the Apostle tells us, he is in a strait between two, and knew not
which of them to choose. Happy strait! Not such an one as David was in, 2 Samuel
24. 14. when he was to choose which of three Evils, but of two Good things, and
both so Good, that he knew not which to make choice of. Such a proffer whether
to live or die to a condemned Malefactor would not be accounted a Strait, but
an happy Enlargement, when all his hopes are in Life, and he has no assurance
of any Good after Death; Skin for Skin, and all he would give for his Life.
Indeed such an Option (whether of Life Job 2. 4. Eccles. 15. 17. Deuteronomy. 30. 15,
19. Jer. 21. 8.
or Death) was once by God tendered to Adam, and by Moses and Jeremiah afterward
to Israel; and Death was by them unhappily made choice of, not as sometimes
Jer. 8. 3.
it is out of present anguish and weariness of Life, but from desperate
preferring of Lust to Life, and a careless, if not wilful Ignorance or
non-attendance of what Death and its consequents come to. But Paul's both Case
and Temper here was far better. Because Death would have been his own gain, so
he could willingly have made choice of it: But because his Life would be
Christ's and the Church's advantage (which he must prefer before himself, and
therefore deny himself rather than them) so; as Christ, when Nature simply
would have desired Life, out of Obedience Mat. 26. 39, 42.
to his Father, chose Death; so, on the contrary (but from the same Spirit) the
Apostle Mortem habet in desiderio, vitam in patientia. When Self-interest would
have made choice of Death, Christ's Interest makes him choose Life. And happy
he, that he might so well do either, seeing to him to live was Christ, and to
die was gain. Christ, (as other Interpreters and Translators Calvin, Beza, C. a
Lapide.
render it) being to him both in Life and Death advantage. This latter reading
Calvin preserreth, as containing a less forced Sense, and a more full Doctrine,
and best agreeing with the words foregoing in the precedent Verse, in which the
Apostle expressed himself confident, that Christ should be magnified in him,
Indifferens sibi ass and in aequo affirmat vivat ne an moriatur, quoniam
Christum habens utrumque lucro apponit. Calvin.
and that he was indifferent whether by Life or Death, because (as he adds in
this Verse) both in Life and Death Christ would be gain to him. Which not only
Beza, and Bullinger, and Hemmingius follow, but also some of the Popish
Expositors, taking leave to forsake their own vulgar Interpreter. For my part
with Zanchy, and Piscator, and the joint concurrence of Antiquity, I take leave
in this to follow the old Interpreter, and our last Translation; which I do not
find clogged with the fore-objected Inconveniences.

The Doctrine contained in the words thus read being full, as we shall
afterward see in the handling of them, the Sense nothing forced (as was
Objected) but easy, and obvious, and exactly agreeable to the words as they
are placed in the Greek, without the harsher Transposition of them, and
Addition of some not expressed in the Original Text, which the other reading is
encumbered with.

And lastly for the Coherence, much more agreeable to the Sea Zanchy and
Piscator in locum.
words foregoing, to which they relate, as appears by the causal (...), for.
And they are not those, ver. 19. For I know that this shall turn to my
Salvation: But those immediately preceding (ver. 20.) Christ shall be magnified
in my Body, whether it be by C. a Lapide.
Life or by Death: For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. In which
words he gives an account, how Christ would be glorified both in his Life and
Death, as Aquinas observes, the Ostendit quomode Glorificaetur Christus per
vitam vel mortem. Aquin. in loc. Et vita nostra, and mors pertinet ad
magnificentiam Christi. Hieron. in locum.
two parts of the Text answering the two Expressions in the end of the two
foregoing Verses, To me to live is Christ; that is, if I live, the aim and
business of my whole Life shall be to promote his Honor and Service, and so he
shall be glorified by my life, this expressly: The other Piscator thinks more
impliedly, I conceive expressly enough: Thus; If I die a Martyr in his Cause, he
will be as much if not more magnified by my Death, and so far he will be a
Gainer, and my self also to boot, for then I shall be with Christ, which is
(...), much more better, even best of all.

And so in the words of the Text (spoken by Paul, both as an Apostle, and as a
Believer) we have these two Observables, 1. A good days Work. 2. A good
evenings Wages and nights Rest. The Work and Business of a true Christian's
Life, and the Happiness of his Death, the one is Christ, the other is Gain: For
to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.

The first then is this, That Christ is a true Christian's Life: Live is
Christ: For so Zanchy observes, that the Apostle does not say, Christ is his
Life, as the efficient cause of it, but Ipsum vivere, his very Life was Christ,
as the Final cause of it, the whole that he did and aimed at in it. So that
Christ is not the Subject of the Proposition, as Calvin and Beza would have it,
but the Predicate, so that whatever he either projected or acted, Christ might
be predicated of it, it had the Signature of Christ, something of Christ, as
the Principle or Effect, End or Object of it was stamped and found upon it; But
herein I list not to be overcurious. Take it (if you please) according to the
former Expression as more plain, Christ is a Christian's Life. But that you may
know in what Sense it is here meant, Christ may be said to be a Christian's Life
two ways:

1. On Christ's part, as he is the Efficiens, Procreans, and Conservans, the
Author and Preserver of a Christian's Life even Natural, John 1. 3, 4. but
especially Spiritual and Eternal, who Acts 17. 28.
is both the Way, the Truth, and the Life, John 14. 6. But this is not here
intended, though in the prosecution of this Point we shall have occasion to
make use of it.

2. But secondly, On the Christian's part, Christ is his Life, in that he
desires and endeavors to make him so, that although he live in the Flesh,
(as he speaks in the following Verse) yet he lives not to the Flesh, but to
Christ. His Natural Life he looks at as a Mercy, as in which he has
opportunities and advantages to honor and serve God, and to do Good to himself
and others: Otherwise to live, only to live, though it be with ease, content,
and pleasure, it is not worth the while, as that which Beasts as much, it may be
more than we, attain to; but if (as oftentimes it falls out with many) which we
see (as we are wont to say) laboring for Life in Penury and Infamy with bodily
Pains and Sickness, and inward Horror and Anguish, Death has by many been
desired, rather than such a Life: It is Vita minime vitalis: But (...), the
Life, that vital Jer. 8. 3. Job. 3. 11, 20, 21, 22. and 6. 11. and 7. 15. 1
Kings 19. 4. Jonah 4. 3.
Life which a Christian (as such) desires to live, without which a Man, though
otherwise never so lively, is dead whilst he lives, is Christ only.

But how and in what respects does a Christian thus make Christ his Life?

1. First as the vital Principle from which he acts: For that life is in
every living Creature, and so Christ is to every living Christian. Paul lives,
but not so much he as Christ in him, because he in and from Christ; as
Dionysius Areop. makes it the top of the Souls perfection in Praying, Working,
Suffering, Potius passive quam active se habere: The life which I now live, I
live Lapid in Lam. 4. 20. Rom 1. 17. We live most in our Principles, as a Tree
in its root.
by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. It Is a Life of Faith, and Faith
fetches all from Christ, (...), I can do all things, Phil. 4. 13. Great words
you will say, and may be ready to think spoken by some Thrasonical Bragadocio.
What! All things? Can he both do and suffer all Things? (For that is his
meaning) And that with an (...), with full Strength and Ability? Yes, but in
the very next words with the same Breath, he tells you, whence his Bow had such
a back of Steel: It Is (...), it was all in and from Christ that strengthened or
enabled him: In which Expression, take notice of this multiplied Emphasis. 1.
It Is not I, but Christ. 2. Quoad potentiam, for the Power, Faculty, and Ability
of it. It Is (...). It Is his (...) which is the cause of my (...). It Is his
Power that works in me this Ability. 3. Quoad actum, for the Act, or my actual
exerting and putting forth this Ability, it is again (...), it is from his actual
Influence, by which he actually strengthens me. 4. Quoad continuationem, for
the continuation of it, it is still (...), which Participle expresses a
continued Act, it is from Christ still enabling me, for should he leave off
never so little, I should presently stand still and do nothing. And lastly,
it is not (...), but still (...), which signifies not only a lighter outward
touch, but an inward enacting and enabling, as from a Vital Principle, which
David phraseth by God's strengthening him with strength in his Soul, Psalm. 138.
3. And Paul by being strengthened with Might by the Spirit in the inward Man,
Ephesians. 3. 16. All this our Apostle feels and acknowledges that he has need of
from Christ in his living to him, and acting for him, as being very sensible of
the truth of what he before had said, Ephesians. 1. 19. that it is no less than the
exceeding greatness of his Power, according to the working of his mighty Power,
which is to usward who believe. The Expression according to our Translation is
most full: But the Greek far more Emphatical, which runs thus: (...), in which
Piscator observes, and admireth a wonderful heaping up of very many most
Significant and Emphatical words, and all too few to express that
unconceiveable Greatness of God's Power, which we need, and he puts forth in
his People. It is, 1. The Power of God. 2. The (...).
Greatness of that Power, (...). 3. The excess of that Greatness, (...). And,
4. The Energie or effectual Working of all: And all this every faithful Soul
finds and feels it has need of from Christ to any spiritual vital operation,
and therefore accounts the Motto of the Spider (if applied hither) to have
deadly Poison in it, Ego debeo nulli. No: It owes all to Christ, and judges
that a most profane and blasphemous saying of Mezentius, Dextra mihi Deus, My
Righthand Aenead. 10.
is my God. Oh! no; but on the contrary, my God is my Right Hand, my Christ is
my Strength, my Life, my All, I depend for all upon Him, I receive all from
Him; my Head, Root, Life, Col. 3. 4. 1 John 5. 12. John 6. 53. Deuteronomy. 30. 20.
the Strength of my Life, Psalm. 27. 1. The Fountain of Life, Psalm. 36. 9. which
if by my sin obstructed and intercepted from me, I can do nothing; am nothing,
but dead, dry, empty, as some Allegorize that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 74. 15. If
thou dividest the Fountain and the Flood, then thou driest up (...) even the
fullest and mightiest Rivers. As Jordan, Josh. 3. 13. 16.


2. Christ is a Christian's Life, as the Causa exemplaris, as the Sampler and
Pattern, which (as you use to say) to the very Life he desires and endeavors
in his Life to imitate and express, so as it may both be like him, and beseem
him. Christ is my Life, when in my Life I am not a Counterfeit, but as it were
a lively Picture of Christ, (...), after Christ, or according to Christ is
formed in him. Gal. 4. 19.
Christ, as the Apostle's phrase is, Col. 2. 8. As a dead Parent may be said to
live in his Child that is like him, and Christ in us, when we live after his
Example.

1. When (as I said) we imitate him, and follow his steps, as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Pet. 2. 21. he speaks there of like-patient Suffering, which Paul
calls the filling up of the (...), of what was behind of the Sufferings of
Christ: Not of Christ personal for Satisfaction, but of Christ Mystical for
Edification, and so from our Union with him and Assimilation to Him our
Afflictions are called Christ's; Christ is as it were seen suffering in us, and
so in our Christian Christ-like walking, Christ is seen walking, and working,
and living in us; that when some say, Lo, here is Christ in this way, Mat. 24.
23.
and others say, Lo, here it Christ in another, it may be truly said of us,
Lo, here is Christ indeed, where is to be seen so much of Christ, and when
Christians are (...), Imitations and Transcripts of Christ's Holiness and
Humility, and Love, and Meekness, etc. when I say we thus imitate Him,

2. And thereby lively express Him, showing forth not our own When the Life of
Christ is manifested in us, 2 Cor. 4. 11.
weakness and corruptions, but his Virtues and Praises, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

And this especially when our former Customs, or natural Tempers, are or have
been more unlike and cross, and contrary to Christ, proud, froward, malicious,
revengeful, etc. If now such a former sinful self disappear, and in stead
thereof on the quite contrary more of Christ look out, in our or rather his
Humility, Meekness and Love, truly then Christ more eminenly is our Life; when
He looks out so much in our Lives, and lives more in us, than we in our
selves, that the World may know what Christ is whom they do not see, by
beholding what we are and do whom they do see, that He is Holy and Harmless,
Heb. 7. 26.
and separate from Sinners by finding us so. Christ is then our Life, when in
our life we thus imitate and express Him. And,

3. Thereby thirdly, Take care so to live as may be worthy of Him, Phil. 1. 27.
may become and beseem Him, be a Praise and Honor to Him, and so what the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 9. says of the Faithful (who are like to Christ, living
Stones, ver. 5. as He is, ver. 4.) that they show forth his Virtues: The
Syriack (whom our English follow) renders it His Praises, the Son of
Righteousness shining out gloriously, as reflected on the lives and graces of
his Servants. Whereas on the contrary, for professed Christians to live
viciously and scandalously, whereby he is dishonored, and his Name blasphemed,
Romans 2. 24. as the Apostle said in another case, this is not to eat the Lord's
Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 20.
so truly, this is not to live the Life of Christ, or Christ to live in us;
this is not that Christ which the Apostle means, when he says, to him to
live is Christ. No, this is a false Christ, or rather an Antichrist, when the
true Christ is thus disguised and dishonored by us; as when the Jews had
muffled and spit upon Christ, then for Pilate to bring him forth, and say,
Behold the John 19. 5.
Man, was rather in way of Derision than any thing else, and no better do we
yet deal with him, when whilst we profess Him we thus dishonor Him.

3. But thirdly, Christ is a Christian's Life, when He is Causa Finalis, when
He, his Honor and Service is the main End and Scope, at which in the course of
his Life he chiefly aims and labors to promote, as knowing or designing no
end of his Life than to live to God, according to that, Psalm. 119. 17. Deal
bountifully with thy Servant, that I may live and keep thy Word. This is that,
which Interpreters generally agree in to be the principal thing intended by the
Apostle in this Expression, which diverse of them diversely paraphrase, but to
the same purpose. If I live it is to Christ, so the Aethiopick reads it. Non
alia causa Si vivo, Christi causa vivo; si morior, meo commodo morior. Sasbout.
in promovenda gloria Christi. Piscator.
volui vivere, nisi Christi, I would not live for any cause else, but Christ's.
So Hierom, I have consecrated my life to Christ and his Gospel. So Estius, He
is the scope of my life. So Piscator, Si vixero, nihil aliud mihi proposui, non
alia mercede vivo, etc. I propound nothing else in my whole Life, I desire no
other Stipend or Wages for all my Work and Warfare, but only to honor and
serve Christ in the Gospel. So Calvin. Aquinas (methinks) well resolves it.
Life imports Motion, and is the active Principle In locum.
of it; and therefore as in other Cases, the end that moves the Agent to act he
properly calls his Life (Vt venatores venationem, amici amicum): So Christ and
his Glory (as being that, which as his main end, sets the Christian on
working) may well be called his Life, in which he lives, and in the Design and
Prosecution whereof the strength of his Life is spent and exercised. Christ is
his A and O, All he has or is, he has Rev. 1. 8.
from Him, and all he is, has, or can do, is all for him. All manner of
pleasant Fruits, new and old, I have laid up for thee, O my Beloved, says the
Spouse, Cant. 7. 13. The Best, the All of a Christians Abilities, Gifts, Graces
whatsoever, and how precious soever they be, they are all for Christ, ready
pressed to serve Him, paid in as a Tribute to Him. As of Him, so to Him are all
things, Romans 11. 36. As there is one God the Father, of whom are all things,
and we (...) for Him, so one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we
by Him, 1 Cor. 8. 6. yea, and to Him and for Him: for of Him it is elsewhere
said, Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto
the Lord; and so whether we live or die, we are the Lords, Romans 14. 8. And
these last words give a sufficient Reason of the former: if we are the Lords,
then we should live to the Lord; if we be not our own Men, but Christ's
ransomed Servants, then, as the Master's Service, Honor, and Advantage, is or
ought to be the Servant's aim and scope in his whole Employment, so Christ's
should be ours, and so He becomes our Life. For we live much in our Ends and
Designs which we project and endeavor to promote, and according to them,
though not only yet especially, our Lives are to be judged of; as in other
Cases, so in this Particular, if the constant Tendencies and real Intentions of
our Souls be seriously for Christ, to please, honor, and serve Him, this is to
have Christ for our life, and thus to live (in the Apostle's Phrase here) is
Christ, when (as he spoke in the Verse foregoing) our (...), the earnestest
out-lookings of our Souls are, that Christ may be glorified by us, whether by
Life or by Death. And this is best, when it is in our more frequent actual
Thoughts and Intentions of it; however it must be in our inward general and
habitual Disposition, Frame, and Purpose of Heart, and constant course of Life,
as a Traveller's resolved intention of his Journies end at his first setting
out, and after progress in the way to it, though at every step he makes he do
not actually think of it. In a word, when we own no other Interests but
Christ's, or at least none that are contrary, but only such as are reducible
and subordinate to it, when we neither start nor pursue any other false Games,
which (adversa front) broadly look and run counter contrary to him, no nor
with a squint Eye look aside to these golden Apples of Pleasure, Profit, or
other Self-advantage cast in our way, when we seem to take never so speedy and
straight course to him: but when our Eyes look right on, and our Eyelids look
straight before Prove. 4. 25.
us, as Solomon speaks, as they Jer. 50. 5. who asked the way to Zion with
their Faces thitherward, and as it is said of our Savior, (...), that his Face
was going, or, as though he would go to Jerusalem, Luke 9. 53. so when with a
single Eye and Heart we directly and indeclinably eye and look at Christ and
his Glory, so that all that observe us may well take notice which way our Eye
and Heart look, this is to have Christ indeed fully both in our Eye and Heart;
and so Christ is our Life, when thus in our Heart the seat of Life.

Otherwise to drive a Trade for our selves, whilst we profess our selves only
Factors for Christ, to seek our own advantage (as Paul, Phil. 2 21. says most
do) and not the things of Jesus Christ, or if at all, yet only in subordination
to our own Ends and Interests, this is Self, not Christ; to seek and find the
Life of our own hand (as the Prophet's phrase is, Isa. 57. 10.) not to express
Christ living in us, as its said of Gad, Deuteronomy. 33. 21. that he provided the
first part for himself, and as Pharaoh said, my River is (...)
mine own, and I have made it for my self, or I have made my self, Ezekiel. 29. 3.
as the vulgar Interpreter reads it, and both the words and the sense of the
place will bear it, and so proved his own both Creature and Creator together.
But the Creature, whose Life Christ is, knows that God has created all for
Prove. 16. 4.
himself: and therefore in the Apostle's sense here in the Text, makes his Life
to be Christ. Si quidem vita mea, mea (inquam) Christus est, as the Syriack
renders it, Christ is all the Life, which is any way mine: because nothing I
own as mine, which is not Christ's, and which I do not enjoy or pursue in a
tendency and subordination to Christ. For none of us lives to himself, and no
Man dies to himself: but whether we live, we live unto the Romans 14. 7, 8.
Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live or die, we are the
Lord's, as the Apostle speaks in the place before cited.

4. Fourthly, Christ is a true Christian's life, as he is the subject or Object
of his Life, for so we are said to live, not so much in our selves, as in those
things which our Hearts and Lives are either wholly or chiefly taken up with.
And so the Christian if true to his rule, lives not in himself, but Christ in
him, and he in Christ. When the whole Man is fully taken up with Christ, as to
fear God, and keep his Commandments is (...) the whole Man, Eccles. 12. 13. So
Christ, who is (...), Col. 3. 11.
all in all in himself and to all his, is the whole of a Christian, whilst he
dwells in his Heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and so as to take up all the room
there, that the whole Soul is full of Christ, as that which it lives upon, and
the Object which he is possessed, entertained and taken up with,

1. In his Thoughts and Meditations, and we live much in our Thoughts, as being
the first outgoings of the (...) or emanations and Issues of a rational Life,
which Solomon speaks of Prove. 4. 23. and those, (...) those Possessions of
the Heart, Job. 17. 11. which the Soul of a Man is possessed with. Job there
speaks of the thoughts of other things: but to a true Christian as such, Christ
is that which his thoughts are chiefly possessed with, and which the first
natural Issues of his Spiritual Life go out to, the Gospel (not a Crucifix 2
Cor. 3. 18.
) being that Glass which he is ever looking into, to behold in it the Glory of
God in the Face of Jesus Christ. It Is made the black Mark of an ungodly Man,
that God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. but it is the lively Character
of a true Christian, that Romans 3. 25.
Christ is ever in his, whom as God (...), has set or held forth as a
propitiation, as a Brazen Serpent for him that is stung to look upon and be
healed, so a long-looking wist Eye of Faith is intently fixed upon him in
saddest and sweetest, most constant and serious Meditations: amidst all other
most beautiful Objects chooses out Christ to pitch his Eye on, as they, John
12. 21. to Philip, Sir, we would see Jesus, and as Statius of Domitian, Ipsum
Ipsum cupido tantum spectare vacavit. Then, then Christ is Sylv. l. 4. p. 406.
our Life, we live very much in Christ, and Christ in us, when our most serious
and least interrupted thoughts are pitched, fastened on him, as the Eyes of his
Hearers were sometimes on him, when he Preached, Luke 4. 20. and his Disciples,
when he ascended, Act. 1. 10. where the word (...) is used, which signifies a
steadfast and earnest beholding, such a steady contemplating of Christ is the
Life of the Life of a Christian. We live (said Paul to his Thessalonians) if ye
stand fast in the Lord: and how happily 1 These. 3. 8.
should we live, if our Thoughts and Hearts were more fast fixed on Christ? If
the Philosopher was born to look on the Sun, truly the Christian's Life may
well be in a steady eying and contemplating the Sun of Righteousness. It is the
happiness of the glorious Angels in Heaven always to be beholding the Face of
his Father, Matthew. 18. 10. and it will be ours in that beatifical Vision at
last, constantly to behold Christ's Glory, John 17. 24. But alas! It Is here too
often hid, veiled, and overclouded, and more often such Fools are we, that our
Eyes are in the ends of the Earth, wandering here and there: our thoughts of
Christ broken off, and shamefully interrupted by others sinful and Praefat. in
Comment. in Lament.
impertinent crowding in. In contemplationis altitudine libere volant angeli,
sed saltant tantum homines miseri, as Bonaventure speaks. Angels and glorified
Saints are upon the Wing, and make an even and steady flight: but alas! we poor
Grasshoppers here on Earth do but hop and leap, bolt up sometimes, it may be, in
a holy Meditation or Ejaculation, but are presently down Psalm. 94 19.
again, and then so entangled and ensnared with other multitudes of thoughts
(as the Psalmist calls them) that the Rabbis account may be too true, who so
cast it up, that they say that all the time of Methuselah's idle thoughts being
defalked and taken away, of the 969 years of his Life, he lived but 10 years.
And truly a great deal of precious Time, and of our Life, is often spent, and
little or nothing done through the intercurrence of vain thoughts of other
things, which if pitched upon Christ, would help to make up the best part of
our Life, whilst Christ thus more fixedly looked and thought on, would animate
and enliven it. This the Apostle in the narrow compass of four Verses
expresses and urges with great variety of words very Emphatical, (...),
neglect not, take heed, give attendance, meditate on these things, give thy
self wholly to them, be wholly in them, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. Were Christ
and the things of Christ thus heeded and studied; so to live, and think, and
live thinking, were to live Christ, Christ would so be our Life, when our
thoughts (which take up so great a share of our Lives) are constantly busied
about him.

2. When our Hearts and Affections, Desire and Love, Content, Comfort, Joy and
Delight, do as fully and constantly close with him, and act toward him and
upon him, and rest in him. Such warm breathings argue Life: And as the Party
loving lives in the Beloved, and the Beloved back again (yea though dead) may
be said to live in him: So here, a Christian Vbi amat, non ubi animat. See what
in our whole life we most love and prize and cannot live without, that we use
to call our Life, and so Jacob's Life, is bound up in Benjamins, Genesis 44. 30.
See Corn. a Lap. in locum Christus est meus spiritus, meus anhelitus mea,
anima, mea Vita, Christus est quem spero spiro, in quo respiro, quem in spiro,
expiro etc. as he goes on in his devout raptures.
even lives to love, and lives in loving. Christ is his very Life, when he is
the constant Object of his Desire and Love, Delight and Comfort. The lamenting
Church called Josiah the Breath of her Nostrils, Lam. 4. 20. typifying out (as
Interpreters observe) what Christ is to a Christian, (...), as Theophylact upon
my Text, Light, and Life and Breath, and all things, whilst he breaths in from
Christ Comfort and Joy, and breaths out Love and Praise. O Lord by these things
Men live, says Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 16. and in these things is the Life of my
Spirit, says a true Christian, I cannot live without them, without Christ, and
Interest and Comfort in him; I am weary of my Life, as Rebekah said, and what
good will my Life do me? Genesis 27. 46. Sine Christo enim vanum est omne quod
vivimus. (Hierom) It Is vain and to no purpose, not worth the while, not worth
all the vanity and vexation we here meet with to live, if we live out of
Christ, or not to him, or not in communion with him. Indeed our Riches and
Possessions and outward Enjoyments are usually called our Livelihood or Living
in the World's Dialect, and according to it the Scripture sometimes so styles
them, Luke 15. 12, 30. and 21. 4. but withal, it elsewhere tells us that which
our Experience finds to be most true, that a Man's Life confists not in the
abundance of such Possessions, Luke 12. 15. I am sure a Believer's does not,
notwithstanding the greatest affluence of such Livelihoods, if he want Christ,
his is (...), a lifeless Life. As the Spouse in Christ's absence Cant. 5. 8.
is sick of Love: so the faithful Spouse dies away, and cannot live without
him. The whole World is not a Paradise, but a Wilderness without this Tree of
Life in it. And although they told Naomi, that Obed her Grandchild would be the
Restorer of her Life, Ruth 4. 15. yet it is neither Child, nor Father, nor
Friend that is either Giver, or Restorer, or Preserver of a Christian's, but
Christ only, and he alone alsufficiently. Quamdiu Christi gloria incolumis
perstat, etc. (as he says) as long as Christ's Hyperius.
Glory and my Interest in him is entire and whole, I am well, I live, and am
lively, amidst all other cool fainting Qualms and Swoons. This is the
Life-Bloud of my Heart, which keeps it warm, and alive, whilst my Desires,
Loves, Joys, close with him, and are animated by him.

SERMON XL.
PHIL. 1. 21. II. Sermon Preached at St. Mary's, August 15. 1658.
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.


ANd as thus our Life is seated in the Heart, so (as I may say) it breaks forth
in the lips. And so,

3. In the third place, Christ is our Life, when in the course of our Life we
much breath Christ, making him the Subject of our Discourse, and ever
frequently and freely setting forth his Truth, Grace and Praises; when whatever
we do (...), in Word, all is in the Name of the Lord Jesus, as the Apostle
speaks to this purpose, Col. 3. 17. This I the rather mention, because it is a
great part of the Apostle's meaning here in the Text, where, when he says to
him to live is Christ, he means, that if he live, his Life shall be spent in
preaching, Si vixero, nihil aliud mihi proposui, quam ut Christum glorificem
praedicando, etc
and setting forth of Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel, as Calvin and
others jointly interpret it. And he was as good as his word, his Practice
herein being very observable for our imitation in these following particulars:

1. In delighting very often, and upon all occasions to make mention of the
Name of Jesus Christ, above 450 times in his fourteen Epistles, hoc patiebatur
Paulus ex nimio amore Christi, ut In Ephesians. 1.
quem diligebat superflue and extraordinary nominaret, as Hierom expresses
it. It seems Christ lived much in his Heart, when out of the abundance of it he
breathes him so fast, and his Mouth Assiduum Jesu nomen and domi and foris ere
resonare docuit. Gazaei pia hilaria. Tom. 2. Page 478. It Is said of Anselm,
Ejus ori nunquam Christus defuit. Edinerus in ejus vita.
so abundantly speaks of him, and that so very often, that by Heathen Elegancy
it would be counted a Tautology, but yet no Popish Battology, which appears in
some of their superstitious Prayers, too too affectedly repeating the Name of
Jesus to make as it were a Charm of it, and with the upstart Sect of Jesuits
would be known by their continual both at home and abroad naming the Name
Jesus. But Paul, that had none of their superstition, had more love of Christ
in this his so frequent (not affected, but) affectionate naming of him.

2. Observe likewise, that to this purpose he studiously takes, (nay, often in
his Writings makes) occasions to make mention of him, and as it were casts
about to bring him in, as we often do to meet with a Friend, or to give
occasion of Speech of that which our Heart is set upon. So the Vainglorious
Man is wont to hook in a Discourse, which may give occasion of speech of that,
by which he might fan to himself his own praise: But humble Paul so, as that
thereby he might take opportunity to Exalt the Honor of Jesus Christ.

3. Take notice also, when he has so gotten an Opportunity of mentioning
Christ, how then he runs Descant upon it; and, as though he had left and
forgotten what formerly he was speaking of, what large and long Excursions he
makes into this happy Latifundium, even to Hyperbatons and Anantapodotons,
Which make sometimes the coherence and sense of his words more difficult.
which an Heathen Orator would reckon Inter viti^ Sermonis, and even Hierom
notes in him as Soloecisms. But our holy Apostle chose rather to forget himself
than Christ, and to be esteemed rude and barbarous in Speech, than to be
tonguetied, nay not exuberant in the Praises of his Lord and Savior.

4. To this purpose in the last place observe, when speaking of Christ, and the
things of Christ, how he delights in most emphatical and superlative
Expressions, in augmentative Compositions of words, heaping Comparatives upon
Comparatives, and Superlatives upon Superlatives, when the word signified
Eminency, adding an augmentative Particle to heighten it, as though he could
never speak enough, or high enough of Christ and his Excellencies: in which,
though something is to be given to that Fervidum ingenium, which is observed to
be naturally in him; yet more to that transcendent high Admiration, that
Fervor of warm, zealous, lively, vigorous Love of Christ, which so abounded in
his Heart, that it thus burst forth in these Superlative and almost
Hyperbolical expressions of it. Of this sort are his (...), Ephesians. 1. 2. and 4.
10. (...), Romans 8. 37. (...), Phil. 2. 9. (...), 1 Timothy 1. 14. (...), Phil. 1.
23. (...), 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...) Ephesians. 3. 20. as Grotius observes upon that
place, and on Romans 5. 20. We need go no further for this, than to the 3 d.
Chapter to the Ephesians, in which we have a full constellation of these
Emphatical and Transcendent expressions. There you meet with (...),
unsearchable Riches, ver. 8. (...), Variegata, multiformis sapientia, manifold
Wisdom, ver. 10. (...), rich Glory, or Riches of Glory, ver. 16. (...),
Breadth, Length, Depth, and Height, ver. 18. (...), even all the Fullness of
God, ver. 19. And so (...), above all we can ask Summa cum exuperantia.
or think, ver. 20. Blessed Soul! indeed full with all the Fullness of God, and
with the Love and Life of Jesus Christ! to him indeed to live was Christ, when
he as it were only lived to preach Christ, and to speak of him so frequently,
so fully, so affectionately and emphatically: in which many holy Men since have
closely followed him; amongst others Mr. Fox, whose Advice to his Friend was,
Brother, Preach Jesus Christ, Preach Jesus Christ; and his complaint was, that
Christ was not, as He should be, Preached in England then: and I wish he were
more now, that instead of so much said of Nature and Reason, we had more of
Christ, and Faith, and Grace. But amongst others in this kind eminent, few
exceeded Mr. Dod, that Man of God now with God, in conversing with Christ, who
made it his very Life always and in all Places and Companies upon all occasions
to be speaking and discoursing of Him.

Such, as they should be our Examples, so they may justly shame us for falling
so short of them in this particular, while at our Meetings and in our Companies
(which here in the University, we have the happy opportunities and advantages
of, had we Hearts to improve them) amidst much other Talk, so little of matters
of Learning, but much less of Christ, but an altum silentium of him, as of one
either unknown, or unloved, unremembred, or one that we are either afraid or
ashamed to make mention of, whilst our Mouths are filled either with Froth, or
Poison, either with foolish Vain talking and Jesting, the Scholars, the
Universities great sin both in private Companies, and public Exercises; or (it
may be) more corrupt Communication, in lascivious Speeches, which under Edward
the Fourth were accounted Court-Elegancies; Reviling and Backbiting of others,
compared in Scripture sometimes to Swords that cut deep; to sharp Arrows which
wound at a distance; to sharp Razors, which take hold of the least Fault, as
they of the least hair: And by Plutarch, likened to Cupping-Glasses, De
curiositate.
that draw out the worst Blood, and to the Sca^venger's Dung-Cart, which
carries the Filth of the City, or that which carries the Malefactor (it may be
with us, the Innocent) to Execution.

I wish God and Men might not over-hear things of yet a higher and worse
nature, that whereas Macrobius tells us, that In somn. Scip.
the Heart and the Tongue a Graecis nigra membra vocantur, were wont to be
called black Members; it were well that some of us did not make ours so by
hellish Thoughts and Lusts, and black-mouthed Blasphemies.

But whilst we are thus sitting, or walking, and talking, should Christ come
and join himself to us, as he did to those Disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24.
17. and ask us on the sudden, as He did them, What manner of Communications are
these that ye have one to another, as you walk and are sad? (It may be we then
are too merry) How should we stand speechless? But is Christ our Life, if in
all our life, unless in danger, or on a Sickbed, our first unforced savoury
word of Christ is yet to be spoken? Solomon sometimes calls a righteous Man's
wholesome Tongue, a Well of life, Prove. 10. 11. and sometimes a Tree of life,
Prove. 15. 4. And says, that the Roof of the Spouse's Mouth, is like the best
Wine that goes right to her Beloved, causing (...)
the Lips of those that are asleep to speak, Cant. 7. 9. Holy Conference and
good Discourse is like the best Wine that moves aright, and that is, directly
up to Christ, which as it awakens others, and with God's Blessing, may be a
Well, and Tree of Life to them; so (as speech in Nature) it is a sign and
evidence of Life in us; and that that Life is Christ, which is thus busily and
constantly employed in speaking of Christ to his Praise, and our own and others
Benefit. This is part of Solomon's meaning, Prove. 2. 3. in that Phrase (...),
where he calls upon us to give our voice to Wisdom, as it were to dedicate and
consecrate it (as Cartwright expounds it) to Christ's Service. This was that
which David made the very end and product of his Life, Let my Soul live, and it
shall praise thee, Psalm. 119. 175. John Baptist could neither make or name
himself any thing else, but Vox Clamantis, the voice of a Crier in the
Wilderness, to prepare the Way for Christ, John 1. 23. And Paul here, another
of His chief Heralds, can make nothing of his Life but Christ, because wholly
in a manner spent in Preaching of Christ, as the full object of his Thoughts,
Desires, Words and Speeches.

4. But withal, in the last place, of His Works and Actions: If whatever we do
in word or deed all be in the Name of Christ, Col. 3. 17. Si vivo Christo
servio. Romans 1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. Tit. 1. 1.
For that is also a great part of his meaning in these words, To me to live is
Christ, i. e. The Interest and Service of Christ, is the Business of my life,
Vita mea non nisi in Christi rebus occupatur, as Grotius paraphraseth it. As
though he had said, I profess my self a Servant of Jesus Christ, (for so he
often styles himself) and so my whole time and life is not my own, but to be
spent in his Service: I have no other Interest or Business in the World, but to
mind and promote His: And this with all diligence and seriousness, and when it
is once done, I desire to live no longer, but then to go to Him, and rest in
Him in Death, which is far better, and my greatest Gain and Advantage.

But more distinctly,

1. More generally it holds forth a Christian's Work. Christ is his Life,
because his Service is the business of his Life. To live to him is Christ,
because the business of his whole Life, is to serve Christ, Totus in illis,
(...), 1 Timothy 4. 15. Totus in hoc sum. (...). Piscator.
Give thy self wholly to them. And this according to our Savior's own Example,
Luke 2. 49. wist you not (...), that I must be about my Fathers Business. Or if
as some Syriack. Fuller. Miscel. l. 4. c. 17. Grotius. Hammond in locum.
will have it read, in my Father's House, it is still as much for my purpose,
for he was in his Father's House, there to do his Father's Business; or (as the
word is) to be in it, and wholly employed in it, to give us an Example, that as
He was in his Father's, so we should be in his: for although our life is said
to be hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. viz. as to See Davenant in locum.
its being safely laid up with Christ, and what it will be at last in Glory,
yea here in Grace not always clear to our selves, and much less to others in
the World through our own Infidelity and their Prejudice, yet not so but that
others may see, we are alive by our Working, and our Works wro^ght in God and
for Mat. 5. 16.
God, and that we are not so much about our own Business, as God's and Jesus
Christ's. This the Apostle calls for, Col. 2. 6. As ye have received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him; as you have received Him for your own
comfort, so walk in him to his Glory. If you have received Jesus Christ as a
Lord, you must walk in him and to him, as his Servants. But what is it to walk
in Christ? To persevere and proceed, to continue and increase in the Faith of
Christ. But that is not all, significat vitam ex Davenant in locum. Calvin in
loc.
fide Christi and ad ejus praescriptum atque, ex ejus spiritu traducere, so
Zanchy, to lead our whole Lives and wholly to act from the Faith and Spirit of
Christ, that that be the business of our Life. And this walking in Christ makes
Christ to be our Way, as he styles himself, Joh. 14. 6. in which we are to walk
and ever to be found, so that so much as we act and move not from him, and to
him, though we bestir our selves in the World busily, and run swiftly, yet (as
we have it in the Proverb) its besides our work and way, per de via, so that
without better aid and guidance, as we have lost our way, so we may come
finally to lose God (...).
and our selves to Eternity. In a word, there, Christ is our way which we must
walk in, here, our Life: and the main business of it, which before all other
things we are chiefly to be taken up with.

This in general.

2. But more particularly,

1. This, directly and immediately in our frequent and constant more immediate
Applications to Christ, and so living in him, and upon him: for what is more
immediate to a living Creature than its Life? And therefore this includes and
holds forth the first and most direct emanations of our Life, like that Wine
before mentioned, Cant. 7. 9. (...) which mo^e directly and immediately to our
Beloved, as in Prayer, Praises, Meditations, and the like outgoings and
outstreamings of the Soul in Faith, Love, Delight, desire, and such other
immediate Addresses to Christ. It Is Heaven and the Angels happiness in nearest
and directest view, to behold the Face of God there, Matt. 18. 10. and it is the
Porch and Gate of Heaven to have much of Genesis 28. 17.
our Life spent in like blessed interviews between Christ and our Souls here.
It Is a pleasant thing to see the Light, to have our dark hearts gilded with the
Golden Beams of the Sun of Righteousness in such nearer Approaches, and more
happy and benign Aspects. It is good for me to draw nigh to God, said the
Psalmist, Psalm. 73. 28. It was so chearing and enlivening to the Apostles in
his Transfiguration, that they would have pitched down Tabernacles, and sitten
down by it, Matthew. 17. 4. but it is not so fully to be enjoyed here in our
Tabernacle-condition, being reserved for our Mansion-state hereafter, when
being caught up to meet Christ in the Clouds, we shall for ever be with the
Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. and to behold his Glory, John 17. 24. When Christ who is
our Life shall appear, and we shall appear with him in Glory. And therefore
Col. 3. 4.
although I cannot allow of such Monkish Devotion, as (upon pretense of
endeavors after uninterrupted converse with God and Christ) neglects such
other services of God and Man, as they are necessarily called to, much less of
such as under this pretext give themselves over to Idleness and Luxury; how
contrary is this to the Life of Christ? at least how little of the Life of
Christ is to be found among such unfruitful and unprofitable ones? Whereas Paul
(v. 22.) does join his abiding in the Flesh, and the fruit of his work
together; so I must needs account them the most happy Men living, and that they
have an Heaven upon Earth, who in their even treading in the ways of general
and particular calling, (which some say, was meant by the cleaving of the Hoof
in the Law) do walk and abide under these more full and direct Rays and
Influence of this Sun of Righteousness, whilst they can either step out of the
crowds of other avocations into this more free Air, as Psalm. 116* 7. Return to
thy rest O my Soul, Or even in the midst of them can (with Stephen) look up and
Act. 7. 55, 56.
view Christ, and converse with him. This will be the happiness of the Elect at
the last dreadful day, to be able with joy and without hurt to look up and lift
up their Heads, when the Elements Luke 21. 28.
shall be melting and dropping down. And next to it is this, for Believers here
in the midst of all other encumbrances of doing and suffering to be vacant for
God, and to have free and immediate converse with Christ, and even in the Fiery
Furnace, with those three Worthies, Dan. 3. 25. to have the Son of God walking
with them. Thus, Oh, thus to live is Christ, this would be most eminently to
have Christ to be our Life: and happy we, if we had more of it, in these more
immediate addresses and enjoyments.

2. But Secondly, Christ would be our Life, though not immediately, yet
reductively, if in all businesses of this Life, and our particular Callings, we
did direct and subordinate all to him, that they do not, as an opake dense
Body, terminate our Eyes and Heart so, but with them and through them we may
look to Christ, for in that we live much, that (notwithstanding other things,
yea and in them) we mind most. So the Apostle would have Servants in doing
their Masters work, to serve the Ephesians. 6. 5.
Lord Christ, Col. 3. 22, 23, 24. So, as we are Scholars, with our Books we are
to study Christ too, and how we may be most and best serviceable to him; and so
in all other Callings and Employments, as we are Men, so we are to remember we
are Christians; and so not to be content in them to serve our selves and live
to our selves, but to think and design how we may live and be subservient
therein to Christ. His Interest should direct, determine, subordinate and
qualify all. As the Box smells of the Musk that is in it, so should all our
designs and undertakings of Christ; and as the Artery goes along with the
Vein, so should Christ with whatever our warmest Life-Bloud runs in; and
therefore our thoughts should run much in this Channel. Jacob said to Laban,
thou know how I have served thee, but when shall I provide for my own House?
Genesis 30. 29, 30. I have lived thus long, and thus much to my self, but how much
mean while to Christ? By all these Employments and Seize, I have exalted
my self, but have they been as so many understeps to lift up Christ the more,
and me nearer to him? I have other ways gained so much, and so much, but how
much, or rather how little have I gained to my Lord and Master by them? This
were a right Anagogical Sense and Interpretation of our Lives and Actions. And
thus to live were Christ, whilst we reduce and subordinate all to him.

3. And this, if with all diligence and seriousness, earnestness and
liveliness, for we do not loiter it, when we labor for Life. Then Skin for
Skin, and all that a Man has, will be give for it. Job. 2. 4.
And so when Moses told Israel, that their obedience to God's Commands was not
a vain thing, but it was their Life (as much as their Life was worth) he thinks
he has cause to bid them set their hearts to it with all seriousness, Deuteronomy.
32. 46, 47. and indeed Life is active and lively. I am sure a Christian's
should be so, if Christ be his Life, for (...) was not idle, but still in his
Fathers business, ever going up and down doing good; and Paul, who Act. 10. 38.
labored, as he said, that the Life of Christ might be manifested in him, how
active and serious and unweariable was he in Christ's 2 Cor. 4. 11.
service? He in another sense said to the Corinthians, so then Death works in
us, but Life in you: but it was Ironically, for v. 12.
he was very far from being a dead-hearted Servant. No, the Life of Christ was
excedingly operative in him, according to that Colos. 1. 29. in which almost
every word has a quick Emphasis, (...), Whereunto I also labor (and the word
signifies a cutting labor) striving against Dangers and difficulties, as the
Actors in the Olympic Games, with all contention and earnestness) yea this
(...), secundum efficacem illam vim, according to the Energy and most effectual
power and efficacy and that of Christ, which wrought in him (...), potenter,
mightily.* I, thus to live was Christ, when Christ and his Spirit thus
effectually and mightily lived and wrought in him: and the like he called for
in others, not to be slothful in service, but fervent in Spirit, whilst they
served the Lord, Romans 12. 11.

For on the contrary, nothing almost is so unlike, yea and contrary to Life,
especially the Life of Christ, than a dull listless Dead-heartedness, a cold
benumbed Frozenness, or an indifferent Lukewarmness in service, unworthy and
falling short of that animi presentia and vigor of Spirit, which was found in
Heathen Worthies; as in him, who said, se malle mortuum esse, quam Curious
Dentatatus.
non vivere, that he had rather dye outright, and be dead, than to be dull;
and rather not to live at all, than not to be lively: for which Drones and
Dullards the Pythagoreans would have prepared a (...): And therefore how much
more unworthy is it for Christians, who pretend to the Life of Christ, whilst
they say Christ is their Life, to be either all amort (Nabal-like) through
Dejections, or to be dull and dead through the Lethargy of Spiritual Sloth,
Listlesness and Negligence? to be, as the Scripture speaks, either dull of
hearing, Heb. 5. 11. when we should be swift to hear, James 1. 19. slow of
heart to believe, Luke 24. 25. when we should receive the Word, as they, Act.
2. 41. (...), gladly, or as the more noble-spirited Bereans (...), with all
readiness of mind, Acts 17. 11. when the work of Christ is a weariness to us,
and we puff at it as Matthew. 11. 30. 1 John. 5. 3.
under a burden, Mal. 1. 13. when Christ's Yoke should be easy to us, and his
Burden light, and no command of his grievous; In a word, when what is said of
the wanton Widow in regard of her 1 Timothy 5. 6.
wantonness, may be said of us for our sloth and negligence, that we are dead
whilst we live. But is not this to seek the living among the dead? Or, is the
Life of Christ in this deadness, whilst we thus present God with dead Hearts,
dead Prayers and Services? Is this, as the Apostle requires, to offer to him
that (...), Romans 12. 1.
living Sacrifice? Thus to live is it Christ? Or expresses it any thing of the
Life of Christ, whom the Scripture calls a quickening 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Spirit, not only at the last day to raise up our dead Bodies, but now also by
his Grace and Spirit to enliven our dead Hearts? Is this any partaking of the
Divine Nature, which is a pure Act to be thus restive? Sure those that come
nearer to it, give another kind of resemblance of it. The Heavens in their
unwearied motion; and the Sun, that like a mighty Man rejoices to run his
Psalm. 19. 5.
Race; the glorious Cherubims, whose pictures God would have made in his
Temple, delighting in them (as Stella observes) as Emblems maximae
velocitatis, of greatest swiftness and cheerfulness in his Service; as also the
Seraphims of burning Zeal, who in Isaiah's Vision are described to have six
Wings, to show (says Isa. 6. 2.
Cornelius a Lapide) that vere obediens est totus alatus, and are there said
both to stand and fly, to signify (as he adds) that Deo adstare, volare est,
that to stand before God as his Servants, is speedily and cheerfully to fly at
his Commands. But to come lower, to them in a lower Orb, who dwell in dull and
heavier Houses of Clay, yet if the Spirit and Life of Christ dwell there,
especially if with some more freedom; Paul often expresses his Course by the
metaphor of running, which expresses speed and earnestness; and David, 2 Samuel
6. 14. 16. danceth before 1 Cor. 9. 26. Gal. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 4. 7.
the Ark, which manifests his cheerfulness, but the words in the Hebrew are
(...) and (...) words not so usual, and one of them in forma duplicata, to hold
forth David's extraordinary and double vigor in that Service, and which
signify intense strength and seriousness, and therefore translated Saltabat
omnibus viribus, and contentissime, to express the (...) the (...), Vulgat.
Junius.
the whole might and vigor which is cheerfully put forth by them that are
spirited and inlivened by the Spirit and Life of Christ: the true Sabbatism
which Philo Judaeus speaks of, and describes to be (...), which the Lord and
our Consciences know how far we fall short of: and of Paul's Copy which he here
sets us, to whom to live was Christ, and that expressed great Liveliness and
Activity.

4. And lastly this, that when we can no more live so to Christ to be content,
and willing, and with submission desirous to live here no longer: I say with
submission to the Will of God to wait his good pleasure; for we must not be so
proud, as, when by reason of Age, Sickness, or other disablements we cannot be
longer Christ's Servants to do his work, to disdain to be his Beadsmen to live
upon his Alms, nay, by God in his Servants, as well as by us in ours, it is
taken as Service to wait as well as to work, as it was with the Aged Levites of
old: and when thou art past thy work, meekly, and humbly, and thankfully to
wait and receive all from him when thou can do nothing for him, for the
setting out and magnifying of his free and munificent Largess and Bounty, as
well as for the relief of thy necessity. But yet (saving this humble
submission) if to us to live be Christ, and to do him service, then, when we
can no longer so live to him, it beseems us to be content and willing with
his leave to dye in him, when our Day is done, to be glad to go to Bed, and
when our Work is over to go to our Rest, as David, Act. 13. 36. and Christ
himself, John 17. 4, 5. I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the
work that thou gave me to do, and now, O Father, Glorify thou me with thine
own self; and so our Paul, when he had once fought the good Fight, and finished
his Race, then he reaches out his hand to the Garland and Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 7,
8.

And this not out of an impatient taedium of waiting, which even Holy Men have
been sometimes overmuch overtaken with, much less out of a proud discontent,
that we outlive our former serviceable active selves, and are now proved
unprofitable De Tranquil. animae.
burdens of the Earth, truncus ficulnus, inutile liguum, burdensome to many and
profitable to none; a strong tang of which Seneca expressed in that his ultimum
malorum est, ex vivorum numero exire Epist. 93.
antequam moriaris, to be dead before we dye; and elsewhere ante mortem periit,
as though he would not be beholden to God for holding all he has from him, in
the Tenure of F, rank Almonage, and free bounty, or as though none else could
or at least he should be discontented, that any should do service, when he is
once laid aside: Far be such proud thoughts from humble Christians.

But yet this will well consist with their Humility, with old Simeon now become
Miles emeritus, meekly to breath forth their Luke 2. 29.
Nunc dimittis with submission to God's Will, to desire that he would please to
dismiss him, at least when God does express his will in that kind, not only
contentedly, but most willingly and gladly to comply with it. And this not only
for our own ease and advantage, but also for God's further and better service;
that as Paul when he had no further service to do for Christ in one place, was
desirous to go to another, Romans 15. 23. so when through weakness or other
hindrances we have no more service that we can do for Christ here on Earth, we
should be well content and glad and desirous, when all weaknesses and
oppositions shall be once removed, and the Eagle's Age renewed, to be upon the
Wing for Heaven to wait upon him with our praises there, where to live will be
Christ indeed, where we shall be perfectly transformed into him, and for ever
live with him.

And thus to us to live will be Christ: in these particulars Christ is our Life.

Which in the Application of it calls upon us in the general, vita mea, mea
in quam Christus est, as the Syriack (I said) reads it, my Life, even mine is
Christ; that what ever others do, yet in all the former particulars, for
Principle, Pattern, End, Object of my Thoughts, Affections, Word and Actions, I
live Christ, and so it is not so much I that live, as Christ that lives in me.

And this, either as we are Ministers, or ordinary Christians.

And first as Ministers, for in that capacity especially Paul here 1. As
Ministers.
speaks these words, being confident, v. 20. that Christ should be magnified by
him whether by Life or by Death; if he lived by Preaching of Christ and his
Truth; or if he dyed, by sealing it with his Blood: thus to him as an Apostle
to live was Christ, and Dr. Hammond.
thus it should be to us as Ministers, whilst our Life is spent in preaching
Christ: the Vigor and Life of our Ministry should be exerted in preaching the
whole Counsel of God, but especially in preaching Jesus Christ. This was the
first and best Preachers Text and Theme. They Preached Christ, as we have it
often expressed 1 Cor. 15. 12.
in the Scripture, (Act. 8. 5. and 9. 20. and 17. 3 1 Cor. 1. 23. Philip. 1.
15, 18.) when in their Preaching to Jews and Heathens they laid Christ as the
Foundation: and he is the Cornerstone still, that by wise Builders must be
carried up to the top of the Building.

1. From him they have their Commission, and therefore are signanter styled the
Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1 2 Cor. 11. 23. Col. 1. 7. and Ambassadors for
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

2. Their Errand and Message is characteristically called the Gospel of Christ,
Romans 15. 19. 2 Cor. 2. 12.

The Testimony, Revel. 1. 9. and 12. 17. and 19. 10. The Doctrine, Heb. 6. 1. 2
John 9. The Mystery, Col. 4. 3. The unsearchable Riches, Ephesians. 3. 8. But all
of Christ. The Covenant of God, but in Christ, Gal. 3. 17.
3. The End and Fruit of their labors in their Hearers was, that the Word of
Christ might dwell richly in them, Col. 3. 16. that they might learn Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 20. and every Thought in them might be brought into Captivity, to the
Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5.

4. And accordingly their care was,

That Seducers should not spoil them through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after
the Traditions of Men, and Rudiments of the World, (...), and not after Christ,
Col. 2. 8.

And for themselves: To say the Truth, but in Christ, Romans 9. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 7.
To speak as of Sincerity, as of God, as in the sight of God, but in Christ, 2
Cor. 2. 17. and 12. 19. that their Hearers might have a proof of Christ
speaking in them, 2 Cor. 13. 3. And that wherever they came they might
triumph, but in Christ, and be unto God a sweet savor in all, but a sweet
savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15.

To teach us, that for the Matter of our Preaching, we should not read a
Lecture of Philosophy, or bare Morality, which they that never heard of Christ
might do as well as we, and so (as some complained of the Schoolmen.) make
Aristotle's Ethics our Bible, or the Documents of Plato, whom we call Divine,
our Divinity: And so none might find Christ in our Sermons more than Austin did
his Name in Tullie's Works.

Nor for the manner of it, to make some Nose-gays of our own Wit; Fancy, and
affected Eloquence, to smell to our selves, which to do to the holy Perfume in
the Law, was deadly; Exodus 30. 38.
or to fan to our selves the sweet scent of it, by the Breath or Applause of
others, but that the Matter we Preach be Christ, and a Crucified Christ in a
Crucified manner, and so prove a sweet savor of Christ, and that such a savor
of Life, as may quicken dead Sinners to the Life of Christ, which other
affected Discourses Cant. 7. 9.
fall wholly short of, Animam non dant quia non habent. Thus, let Christ as a
Quickening Spirit, be the Life of our Preaching, and in such like Preaching let
our Life be spent, and so to us to live will be Christ, as we are Ministers, in
our Preaching.

2. And secondly, whether as Ministers, or other Christians, He that said, 1
These. 3. 8. we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord, would say, I live, if I live
to the Lord Christ.
this calls for the like care of us in our Lives and Practices, that in the
Sense aforesaid, To us to live may be Christ: The Grace and Interest of Christ
may be that which the whole business of our Life upon a true account is summed
up, and resolved into. I, say Christ.

And not,

1. Self: Not Self Ends and Self-interests. I mean our own Profits, Pleasures,
or Preferments, which too usually the very spirit and vigor, the whole of most
Men's lives is intensly fixed and so spent upon, which should they be taken out
of their Lives, it would be a lifeless Life that would be left; when in those
otherwise very active Spirits, you can scarce discern the least moving, or so
much as breathing after God in Christ: But how empty a Vine is Israel, whilst
he brings forth Fruit only to himself? Hos. 10. 1. Or if they be called
Christians, what another kind of Christ do they make of him than He was, who
said, that His Kingdom was not of this World? John 18. 36. and then not his
Life neither. In all this thou have but found the life of thy hand, as the
Prophet calls it, Isa. 57. 10. and that is but a poor withering dying Life. It Is
but Wind, Job 7. 7. A Vapor, James 4. 14. Thin, vain, empty, and if full, only
of Vanity and Sorrows, that we are weary of it, Job 10. 1. Isa. 38. 12.
Despise it, Job 9. 21. Hate it, Eccles. 2. 17. Acts 20. 24. Even our own frail
Life consists not in the abundance of those outward things we possess, Luke 12.
15. much less the Life of Christ. Our bodily Life is more than Meat, etc. Mat.
6. 25. And therefore the Life of Christ sure is much more. Even our natural
Life is not that which in it self, especially in compare with Christ we should
so much look after: for if to us to live, be only to live; yea, or to live
delicately with the Courtier, Luke 7. 25. or with the Whore, Rev. 18. 7.
Deliciously, is not Operae pretium, not worth the while; for Christ's being our
Life in the Text, is called the fruit of our Labor, in the following Verse.
Christ and Self are two things very distinct, and otentimes directly opposite,
so that we may be forced to deny the one if we would own the other; even be
dead to the World and Self, if ever we would live either to Christ, or with
Him, who therefore died, that they which live, should not henceforth live to
themselves, but unto him who died for them, 2 Cor. 5. 15. And accordingly you
read of their Resolution and Practice; for none of us lives to himself, and no
Man dies to himself, but whether Romans 14. 7, 8, 9.
we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we did unto the Lord; yea,
and sometimes for Him too, with Ittai's professed Resolution to David, and the
like should ours be to Christ, As the Lord lives, and as my Lord the King
lives, in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in Death or in Life,
there also will thy Servant be, 2 Samuel 15. 21. Hoc scilicet vere est Christo
vivere and mori, cum nobis posthabitis ferimur quo Christus nos Calrin, in
Phil. 1. 23.
vocat, and rapimur. To us to live must be Christ, not Self.

2. Much less Sin, or sinful Self, or Satan, for they always stand in a flat
contrariety to Christ; What concord has Christ with Heb. 7. 26.
Belial? 2 Cor. 6. 15. or sin with him who is Holy, and Harmless, and separate
from Sinners? And yet should we observe many Men's lives, should we not see
that the vigor and very life of their lives is exerted and run out in the
eager pursuit of Mic. 7. 3. Jer. 22. 17. Jer. 23. 10.
dead Works, who do evil with both Hands earnestly, whose whole course is evil,
and their force is not right, as the Prophet speaks; who in a course of
Sensuality live the Beast, not the Man, much less the Christian, do not eat to
live, but rather live to eat; and to whom Bibere est vivere, or in a
mischievous way live the very Devil, who breaths in their Oaths and
Blasphemies, and plays the very Devil in their mischievous Impieties; cannot
live unless they take away some others Lives, or do some other Mischief, Prove.
4. 16.

Et si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset. But is this Christ, or any thing
like the Life of God or Christ, who (you heard) was Holy and Harmless, and came
to save Men's lives, and not to destroy them? If Peccatum be Deicidium, Luke 9.
56.
it cannot partake of that Life, which it does destroy; it put Christ to Death,
and therefore cannot consist with his Life: To live in Sin, and to live to
Christ, are (...), and therefore we must Die to the one, if ever we would Live
to the other. If to live to us be Christ, it is not Self; much less Sin and
Satan.

3. No, nor most accurate virtuous Carriages abstracted or separated from
Christ. Not that I judge Moral Goodness to be bad, or not necessarily required
in that which is truly Evangelical. It Is Antinomian Nonsense as well as
Blasphemy, to pretend to Evangelical Perfection, and meanwhile (nay,
thereupon) to live in all Moral Impieties. A Christian is a Man, and a great
deal more. Take Morality from him, and you Unman him; but yet if you stay him
there, you keep him from being a true Christian: As under-steps must
necessarily be ascended, but he that abides upon them, will never get to the
upper (...).
Room in Heaven. For that, it is necessary that we be Justified by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, and Sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, and that our
best Works and Graces be Enlivened and Spiritualized with the Tincture of the
Blood of Christ, which though it be not enough (as some would have it) to our
Justification, yet is necessary to the truth of our Sanctification. And
therefore here fall short

The so much admired Virtues of the Heathens, or other mere Moral Men, Deists,
not Christians, who know not Christ either at all, or not savingly:

As also the good life of the Socinians, so much cried up and made their
Character. But the Lord grant us something better than the Socinians good life,
which denies both the Satisfaction of Christ, without which in point of Guilt,
we are dead Men in our selves, and also the Deity of Christ, without which we
cannot live to God.

Let us therefore to our utmost labor to live in all good Morality as we are
Men, but with all and above all, let us be careful that to us to live may be
Christ, as we are Christians. That ought to be done, but it will go ill with us
if this latter be left undone. In what we do, let Men behold our good
conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 16.

And in what we suffer, let us suffer not as a Stoic, or a Philosopher, but as
Christians, 1 Pet. 4. 16. Whatsoever things are True, whatsoever things are
Honest, whatsoever things are Just, Phil. 4. 8.
whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are Lovely, whatsoever things
are of good Report; if there be any Virtue, or any Praise, let us think of
these things; that may answer all precepts of Morality, yet let the same
Apostle show you a more Excellent Way, when he calls upon us to have our
Conversation as becomes Phil. 1. 27.
(not a Philosopher, but) the Gospel of Christ; and in what we suffer, (as the
Apostle Peter exhorts us) both for the Cause and Manner of it, let us be not
only Witnesses, but also 1 P^t. 5. 1. and 4. 13.
Partakers of the Sufferings of Christ. To induce and force us hereto, consider,

That we are Christians, Acts 11. 26. and 26. 28. not (...) Motive. 1.
(...), not mere Men, not Heathens, not Deists. And therefore above what they
come or pretend to, let something, yea, much of Christ be felt in our Hearts,
and expressed in our Lives. Christians, as such, both for Name and Nature, are
Anointed ones with the Grace of Christ, 1 John 2. 27.

2. That Christ is our Lord by a dear Purchase, and Servi Grotius, in Romans 14.
7, 8.
toti Domini sunt: And therefore none of us should live or die to himself; but
whether we live, we should live to the Lord, or whether we die, we should die
to the Lord; because whether we live or die, we are the Lord's.

3. That if Christ (in the sense before expressed) be our Life on our parts, he
will be our Life also on his part.

He is our Life of Nature, John. 1. 4. Ambros.


And, He will in this way be

Our Life of Grace, in the Power and Vigor of it. I live by the Faith of the
Son of God, Gal. 2. 20.

Our Life also of Peace, and Joy, and Comfort: That sweet Relish which we feel
in eating of the Tree of Life, Rev. 2. 7. For if with Christ, John 4. 34. it be
our Meat to do the Will of God; that phrase expresses what sweet and satiating
Content God vouchsafes, and we shall find in it.

Our Life also of Glory at the last: for, To me to live is Christ, will hold in
Heaven, as well as here, though in another way of Dispensation. Christ there
will be our Life most fully, eternally. If we here live Christ, if we live to
Him, we shall there live with him. For the same Apostle, that here said this,
said that also, Col. 3. 4. When Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall
ye also appear with him in Glory. And although Death came between, it did not
dead and bury his Confidence, as being but that dark Entry, which leads to that
Light and Life, upon which grounds when he had said, To me to live is Christ,
he presently adds as the infallible consequent of it, and to die is Gain: Which
leads to the second part of the Text, To me to live is Christ, and then, to die
is Gain.

And that without further Preface is the Point.

That Death is Gain to the Godly. A Christian Paradox Paul's mind, and say,
it is Gain for them to die valiantly. But it is one thing what such say in the
flush of a Brave, and another what they think in cool Blood, and on more mature
deliberation; and then such as have most to lose, think that they can least
gain by it. Greatest Men if they be not more than Men, if not true Christian
Men, of all Men can least be willing to hear on this Ecclus. 41. 1.
Ear. And therefore Lewis the 11th of France, though a very both great and wise
Man, when now a dying, gives charge that Death be not named to him. And our
Elizabeth, though one of the most Wise and Courageous of Women, and best of
Princes, yet had this as one of her weaknesses, that she was displeased with
Bishop Rudd, for his plain telling her of her tokens of old Age, and Harbingers
of Death, which to great ones (as he calls it) is Ingratissimum acroama: It
grates too hard upon Fuller's Ecclesiastical History. l. 10. c. 17. p. 69.
such tender Ears; but was the very Joy of our Apostle's founder Heart, who
when he could say, that to him to live was Christ, could cheerfully add, and to
die is Gain. Much to this Argument, I have spoken out of another Text, 1 Cor.
15. 55. in Published in Print.
which I especially showed, that Death being disarmed, could privately do us no
hurt, or procure our loss. But here we are principally to make out, that on the
contrary it positively brings us in much Gain: But because even of this many
particulars were there spoken to, there is less now to be Insisted on. Now what
our Apostle more plainly expresses concerning himself, saying, that his death
was his Gain; in effect he enlarges to all true Believers, 1 Cor. 3. 22.
(...), Whether Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, (...), all
is yours, and Death as well as Life, or the whole World and all the Comforts of
either. The Apostle here writes the Godly's Inventory, and inter peculia,
amongst all their other Goods, he sets down Death for one part of them: and
therefore, as other Goods are therefore so called, because they are for the
good of the Owner; so Death is reckoned amongst them, because by Christ it is
for the great good and gain of the Believer: For if all things work together
for the good of them that love God, Romans 8. 28. then Death also, for it is also
reckoned among those all things, ver. 38. Hither also referr that of Solomon,
Eccles. 7. 1. The day of Death is better than the day of ones Birth: And that
in Rev. 14. 13. where a Voice from Heaven ploclaims, Blessed (...) they that
die in the Lord. So that if Blessedness be Gain, Death is so too, which puts
them into the possession of it.

And for further Proof, it appears that they are fully persuaded and assured of
it: Else

1. They would never so desire it before it come: For Evil and Loss, as such
can never be the object of Desire, but it must appear to be good and profitable
if desired; but so Death has been, and that earnestly by the Faithful. Old
Simeon's Nunc dimittis, Luke 2. 29. tells us what he did; and our Apostle,
because he could here say, that his Death would be his Gain, does in the next
Verse save one say, that he had a desire to depart; and well he might, for then
he should be with Christ, which is (...), much more better, best of all, and
that is Gain with an advantage. How ambitious were Primitive Christians to die
for Christ? And how earnestly desirous have others been to Die, if it might be
in Christ? Making use of the Psalmist's expressions, my Soul thirsts for God,
for the Living Psalm. 42. ^.
God, When shall I come and appear before God? The Moralist's Maxim is, Summam
nec metuas diem, nec optes, that we should neither fear Death, nor desire it:
But a truly believing Christian goes higher, has Vitam in patientia, mortem
in desiderio, fears not Death because it can do him no Damage, but, desires
it, because it brings with it greatest Gain. -- And upon this ground as he
desires it before it come:

2. So with Joy he welcomes it when it does come; yea, though in a violent way:
As Ignatius blessed God upon Trajan's condemning him, Cum gaudio circumponens
vincula: The Martyr Vide martyrium Ignatii. page 4.
could kiss the Stake, and say, Welcome the Cross of Christ. And well he might,
when he could add, welcome everlasting Life; in which expressions we have his
joyful Welcome of it, with the Ground of it, because he gained no less than
everlasting Life by it. And if so with them that went up to Heaven with Elijah
in a fiery Chariot, and a Whirlwind: Then, no wonder, if so with them that are
carried hence by the conduct of a more placid and easy departure; and if some
only from weariness of this troublesome Life account Death such a Gain as to
dig for it as for bid Treasure, and rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they
find the Grave, Job 3. 21, 22. then we may well conceive how glad the assured
Believer may be of it, when he knows he shall be greater Gainer by it, as not
only resting from his Labors of this Life, but also then entering into his
everlasting both Rest and Joy in a better Life, which those others may not then
meet with, but the contrary. But if upon this ground the Righteous has such
hope in his Death, Prove. 14. 32. then I hope you will not deny him Joy in it,
and if Joy then Gain also.

But this will more particularly be made out, if we consider the several kinds
of Deaths of Believers. And (as I even now touched) they may be either for
Christ, or only in Christ.

1. If for Christ, then as their outward Loss is the greater, so is their
eternal Gain too: no less, than of a Crown. It is the Crown of Martyrdom.
Sciant Christi milites se non perimi, Cyprian. Epist. 82. Sect. 2.
sed coronari; and more massy than others. And if there be any such things as
Aureolae, they will be found on their Heads; God's Firstborn, and therefore
have a double Portion. Tot mercedes Idem Epist. 77. Sect. 1.
in caelestibus, quot nunc dies numer antur in paenis; as Cyprian speaks, who
compares them to that good Ground that brings forth an Hundredfold, and
therefore their Harvest-joy will be greater. And therefore Ignatius professes,
that it is better to (...). Epist. ad Romanos.
Die for Christ, than to be King of the whole Earth. He therefore thought it
was the greatest Gain. To be sure, Christ will see they shall be no losers; who
has given his Word that he that finds his Life shall lose it, and he that
loses his Life for his sake, shall find it, Mat. 10. 39. and 16. 25. And
because we know not what God may call us to, it will be good to encourage and
comfort our selves with these Words, and with firm belief of this undoubted
Truth, that they who Die for Christ are greatest Gainers.

2. And if it be but in Christ, most happy Gains will come in to us by that
also: And that both Privative and Positive.

1. First Privative; for such a kind of Gain we find in Scripture, as Acts 27.
21. that phrase of (...), where Paul tells them that were in the Ship with him,
that if they had followed his advice, they might have gained that Loss; that
is, they might have prevented it: And such* a first kind of Gain the Faithful
have by Death, in freeing them from that both Sin and Misery, either by ending
what before they were in, or preventing what, if they had lived longer, they
might have fallen into.

1. It ends

Sin, which all our Lifes-time we were woefully encumbred with, which made Paul
so sadly groan out that complaint, Romans 7. 24. O wretched Man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of Death? That is, either this outward mortal
Body, or this inward body of Sin which is more mortal. Both may be taken into
the Sense, because both are together in the Event; not till the death of our
Bodies is the body of Sin quite dead in us; but then it will be: for as Sin
entered into us at the first union of Body and Soul, so it goes not out till
their last dissolution. But being then parted,

As to the Body, for fins of omission, this lump of Earth does no longer
aggravare animam, clog the Soul from doing duty; nor as to sins of commission,
does this Earthly dusty tabernacle any longer defile the Soul, as being a
fomes, and an Instrument by which it acts its self-pollution.

And as to the Soul, though wicked Men's Souls are in statu separato as sinful
as they were before, yet the spirits of just Men are then made perfect, Heb.
12. 23. and therefore not liable to sin, which is the greatest imperfection.
And what a gain this is, a holy Heart will tell you, when now groaning under
the Burden and Pollution of some defiling lust, would give a whole World to be
rid of it, even exchange his life for Death, because by it he shall gain a full
deliverance from it.

And as Death ends the Believer's sin: So also all that misery, which by reason
of his sin he more or less all his Life long was exercised with. No more inward
sorrows or fears, or anguishes and perplexities in and from himself, no more
temptations from Satan, no more molestations or persecutions from the World; or
if any, he is no more sensible of them. There the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary are at rest; there the Prisoners rest together, they hear
not the voice of the oppressor* Job. 3. 17, 18. And if you say, that for these
outward troubles it is then as well with the wickedest sinners as with the
holiest Saints: I say, but it is not so as to those inward anguishes and
perplexities, which are the greatest miseries; for they in the wicked are not
then ended, but (as to their greatest extremities) then begin. But for the
Godly no more [then] any of these: They then cease from all their Labors,
Revel. 14. 13. and rest quietly in their Beds, Isa. 57. 2. not one bodily pain,
or disquieting thought more: as Mr. Knox on his deathbed, being asked* whether
his See his Life.
pains were great, answered, that he did not esteem that a pain, which would be
to him the end of all trouble, and the beginning of endless Joys. Serve the
Lord in Fear, and Death shall not be troublesome to you. Blessed is the Death
of those that have part in the Blood of Jesus. And is not he who has attained
to this proved a great Gainer, having all his former sins and miseries so well
and for ever ended?

2. And whatsoever of both kinds, if he had lived longer, he might have fallen
into, most happily prevented. The Apocryphal Solomon says, that Enoch was
speedily taken away, lest wickedness should have altered his understanding,
Wisdom 4. 11. But I am sure from authentical Scripture, that Josiah was, that
he might not see that desolation which was coming upon his people, 2 Chronicles. 34.
28. and that the Righteous are taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57. 1. of
which some expound that Dr. Hammond.
Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, namely at that time
there meant, because after that time there would be greater misery. It may be
we cannot but think how miserable some Men would have been, if they had lived
any longer, yea, and what sinful Snares some of God's Servants would have been
in danger to have been taken in, if they had not died the sooner. But when they
were now falling, a Fathers watchful eye saw their danger, and with a wary hand
snatched them out of it, and took them into his own Bosom, out of the reach of
it. Blessed Father! Happy Child! And gainful Death! that put them into harbor,
when the storm was coming that would have sunk them, prevented those sins and
miseries that might have undone them. And thus Death to the Godly is gain
privatively in preventing loss.

2. Secondly, Positively in bringing in reallest Gains.

1. Of Grace made perfect, and that in the most perfect exercise and operation
of it. Faith then completed in Vision, and Hope in Fruition, and therefore
called the end of our Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. not so much of cessation, as the
consummation and perfection of both: and for Love; what was here imperfect
shall then be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. So that it shall be perfectly then
exerted toward God, and one another, when we shall be (...), Luke, 20. 36. like
to the Angels of God every way pliable and expedite in doing his will: And we,
who think how well it is with us, when we can here in any measure of freedom
and liveliness meditate and pray, or in any other kind with enlarged hearts run
the way of God's Commandments, and feel how burdensome it is to lie under the
burden of Sin, and have our Chariot-Wheels taken off, so that we drive heavily
in what he sets us to, what unvaluable a gain shall we esteem it, when all
these cloggs shall be taken off, and we shall find our Souls as upon the
Chariots of Amminadab, freely to expatiate in those latifundia of Eternity, and
with those Angels in Ezekiel's Vision, whither the Spirit is to go, to go
without hinderance and Ezekiel. 1. 12.
weariness. Now a true Christian estimates Gain, not by that of Money (as it is
called Judge. 5. 19.) or other commodities which the Men of the World traffic
in, but that which arises from being Rich in Faith, James 2. 5. and God's
fear, Prove. 22. 4. Which is the Luke. 16. 11.
true and the Prove. 8. 18.
everlasting Riches, as our Savior and Solomon calls them; and therefore when
such Riches and Gains are come in fullest, he accounts himself the greatest
gainer, and that will be when in Death Grace is perfected.

2. And happiness completed, and that will be then also, if you will only abate
that which will arise from the Souls reunion with the Body, which will not be
till the last day. But at Death Paul makes account, that when he departs hence,
he shall be with Christ, which he esteems to be best of all, v. 23. of this
Chapter, in a more full Vision and Fruition of God, and what attends that
Estate, and in what else can be our best happiness. Mr. Mede indeed says, that
he remembers not, that Death is On Rev. 14. 13. Diem mortis diem mercedis
indigitari.
ever in Scripture said to be the time of reward. Nor it may be is it so said
in those express words, nor indeed is it the time of the reward of the most
full and complete payment of it, which is reserved to the Resurrection-day. But
I am sure, if Paul said true, that upon his departure he should be with Christ,
that the greatest part of the reward is then given, and that not only to him,
and such like him, which the Papists grant, but even to all the faithful that
dye in Christ, whose Souls are not to be sought for in the Papists Purgatory,
or our new Philosophical Divines lower or upper Quarters, where they can tell
you in their several Vehicles, what Meat they eat, and what Recreations they
sport themselves with. In former times with Protestant Divines, and others
before them, there were but two Receptacles of Souls departed, either Heaven,
or Hell; and if they that dye in Christ be not in Hell, I hope they are in
Heaven, and if there, then most happy: and if Death send them thither, then
what gain they get by it, they will think of, and bless God for, to Eternity.

The sum of all these particular proofs is epitomized in that short saying of
Austin, Mors beatitudinis principium, laborum meta, peremptoria peccatorum; It
kills Sin, ends Misery, begins Happiness in Grace and Glory, and therefore upon
all Accounts it is gain to the Godly.

And then (...) O the blessedness of that Man whom Solomon say the Righteous
Prove. 12. 26.
Man is more excellent than his Neighbor, in that when to all other (wicked or
Worldly) Men, Death is the loss of all which they account gain, as of Life, and
all the outward comforts of it, so that when they are gone, they say with
Micah, when he had lost his Idols, what have I more? Judge. 18. 24. he can say I
thank God I have lost nothing, nay I am so far from being a loser, that I am a
most happy gainer by the bargain; and he that is a gainer by Death it self,
can, as to other matters be a loser by nothing, nay he is a loser by Life, (as
Paul was v. 23.) if Death be gain to him, how great is the difference? Some
would have it hinted by the Psalmist, Psalm. 49. 10. where he says Wise Men See
Muts in locum.
dye, but Fools Perish. The Godly-Wise are subject to Death, as well as others,
but Christ by his Death has changed it to his from a Curse to a Blessing, that
it is not now it self, not a Death, but a Carcass of Death, a vanquished Goliath,
before terrible, but then by every little David trampled on, a dead Lion, whose
1 Samuel 17. 51. Eccles. 9. 4.
very roaring (the noise or mere naming of it) was before affrighting (as we
saw before) but now so far from terrifying, that as Sampson's Lion it has
sweetest Honey in it, when sweetest and Judge. 14. 8.
greatest gain comes by it. Thus Death sits upon (...), Revel. 6. 8. we
translate it a pale Horse, but the word (both according to its derivation, and
more frequent use) signifies also green and virdant. To the wicked it is
pallida mors, pale Death, because it makes them look pale, but green and
pleasant to the Godly, they that in old Age being planted in God's Courts, are
green and fruitful, Psalm. 92. 13, 14. even in Death it self, which blasts all
else, retain their flourish, and never more than then, when they are now
sprouting out to Eternity. Hezekiah now sick, and in his own sense dying, and
that in some respects so sorrowing, that it is said he wept sore, and as it were
now receiving the fatal stroke from God's hand (thou will make an end of me
Isa. 38. 13.) yet uses a word to express it, that had peace and comfort
contained in the signification of it (...) from (...) which signifies peace,
so that although it be an end, yet it is a peaceable one, and so makes good
what David said, that the end of that Man is Peace, Psalm. 37. 37. as how full
of Peace and Comfort are David's own last words, 2 Samuel 23! and some See Muis
on that Psalm.
conceive he made Psalm. 72. on his deathbed.

At non sic impii, non sic. The ungodly are not so, it is far otherwise with
them. Mors peccatorum pessima, as the 70. and vulgar read, Psalm. 34. 21. In the
last part, and end of a sinner's Life, it is worst with him. They had in their
lives been busily Jam. 4. 13.
trading in the World, buying and selling and getting gain, and ruffling it in
the World, but mean while by their sins they run James 4. 13.
deep in debt with God, and for want of Interest in Christ to be their surety,
at Death (it may be on the sudden) it comes to that of the Psalmist (...) Ps.
55. 15. let death seize upon them, and let Psalm. 55. 15. Dr. Hammond in locum.
them go down quick into Hell. Death seizes on them unawares, as a Sergeant,
or Pursevant, and casts them into Prison, which is expressed by their going
down quick into Hell, (as it is said Numb. 16. 32, 33. that Korah and his
Company did) and there the Psalmist says, they lie like Sheep, (or Wolves
rather) and Death feeding on them, as they before (it may be) preyed on the
Sheep of Christ. Bernard Psalm. 49. 14. Detracto vellere mundalium divitiarum.
thinks it is said as Sheep, because their former warm Fleeces of Riches and
worldly contentments will then be close shorn, and their Skins flayed off, and
then Death feeds on them, though they never dye, quia semper moriuntur ad
vitam, and semper vivunt ad mortem, and there, as Prisoners with the Devils,
are reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great day, as the Apostles Peter and Jude express it: though it 2 Pet. 2. 4.
Jude 6.
may be they lie on their Deathbeds like Logs, either senseless, or smothering
in disquietness of mind; yet that is but in the smoke of the Furnace, but the
worst is, that at last they will burn in Hell. Of them at Death you may say (as
you use to say of some miserable Man here) that their best days are past; but
of the Godly if Death be their gain, even in the saddest days of their Life,
that their best days are yet to come, even the day of Death, and of the
Resurrection. Oh what a great Gulf will there then be betwixt the Righteous and
Ungodly, (...).
Luke 16. 26? What a distance? what an odds between them, when both their
Accounts shall then be cast up? when the one, who counted gain to be godliness,
shall lose all, and the others 1 Timothy 6. 5.
Death shall prove their greatest gain? And therefore let Hannah's words be
said to the head of the proudest profane Worldlings; Talk no more so exceeding
proudly, let not Arrogance any more come out of your Mouth, speak no longer
grievous things proudly and 1 Samuel 2. 3. Psalm. 31. 18.
contemptuously against the Righteous. Say not (as they would have had Job to
have said) it profits a Man nothing that he should delight himself in God?
What advantage will it be to thee, and what Job. 34. 9. Job. 35. 3.
profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? or as they in Malachy 3.
14. It is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances, and walked mournfully before him? What profit? Why (as the Apostle
says in another case) much every Romans 3 1, 2.
way, for us and ours, for Body and for Soul, in Prosperity and Adversity in
Life, and especially in Death and after Death; When Christ is our Life, and
Death our gain, when such Scoffers will call themselves Fools for accounting
such Men's lives Madness, and their end to be without honor; when they shall
see Wisdom. 5. 4, 5.
it is their greatest gain, and they numbered amongst the Children of God, and
their lot among the Saints, and those Deriders then have those two questions
returned upon them to answer, that in Job 27. 8. What is the hope of the
Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? And that
other* of our Savior, Matthew. 16. 26. What is a Man profited, if he shall gain
the whole World, and lose his own Soul? and what shall a Man give in exchange
for his Soul? These they will never be able to say, though they will be sadly
thinking of them in Hell to Eternity.

And therefore, what should our greatest care and endeavor be, but that we may
attain to this happiness, that Death which Paul's be our gain? It Is a busy
World we live in, and except only such slothful Drones, or debauched Prodigals,
who labor for nothing, but to gratify their Ease or their Lusts, all that
would not be idle and sensual Bruits, are busy in trading, in something or
other, that they think will turn to account, and bring in some advantage, and
procure at least a livelihood; but alas it is only a livelihood, it is for a
short life only: but there are too few that think what will be gain to them at
Death, when they will be in greatest need of something that may make their
hearts then to live, upon which they may live to Eternity. And therefore it
would be a great part of their Wisdom and Thrift, whilst they think they have
too little time to compass their other ends and projects to gain time (as the
phrase is Dan. 2. 8.) to get ready a Cordial against that swooning Fit, that
they may be gainers not only at Death, but by it, when time shall be no more.
So they may be gainers indeed, and be profitable to themselves, as Eliphaz
says, a wise Man is profitable to himself, Job. 22. 2. and that gain will not
be only great, but so sure, that there will be no undoing after-claps, as Job
says there will be with others after their greatest gains, when God takes away
their Souls, Job. 27. 8. Socrates, the night before he died, was desirous to
learn Music: happy we, if then* instead of fears and sorrows for the losses we
shall then undergo, we can make melody in our Hearts, but it will be good to
have been tuning of them to it before.

And for this purpose

1. Let it be one great part of our good Husbandry not to deal in, or to make a
trade of any sin, which in other respects we may account most gainful and
profitable; for it will certainly eat out all our gains, it may be in this
Life, whilst God blasts them, or our Souls be blasted, and (it may be here)
tormented by them. Solomon's word will for certain be found true, the wicked
works a deceitful work, Prove. 11. 18. and it is the word of him that repents
for sin, I have sinned, and it profited me not, Job. 33. 27. Isa. 44. 9, 10,
and 47. 12. and 57. 12. Jer. 2. 8, 11. and 12. 13. and 16. 19. and 23. 32.
And how frequent in the Prophesies of Isaiah and Jeremiah are those
expressions, that they do not profit, they shall not profit, that they cannot
profit, that such Idols are profitable for nothing? But to be sure at Death it
will more fully appear to be so, when such gains will not only be lost, but
prove loss, whilst we are for ever lost by them. The very Sting of Death is
Sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56. and then, although we before thought the gain of sin was
sweet, (...). Orig. contra celsum lib. 5. Psalm. 17. 14: Eccles. 41. 2.
yet it will then be as bitter as Death, when with the Honey we have got this
Sting with it, which will prove the Worm that never dies, Mark 9. 44.

2. Learn to undervalue the World more, with all the gains, profits, and
contentments of it: for if we be of the Men of the World, who have their
Portion in this Life, and they be our Portion, they

Will make us unwilling to dye, according to that, O Death, how bitter is the
remembrance of thee to a Man that lives at rest in his Possessions?

And it will be Death indeed to us, when we must die; when all that is lost and
scattered, which the very Life of our Souls was wrapped up in; when such Men
(with him, Act. 16. 19.) see that all hopes of after -gains are gone, they then
sink into Despair, before their Souls do into Hell; nay when they see all their
former gains are lost, they are lost too, and so end their lives with that
Emperor's last words (...), I have been all things, and all now profit me
nothing. It was therefore no bad husbandry of Matthew the Publican to leave his
Toll-Booth to follow Christ, nor will it be to us to loosen our Hearts from our
most profitable employment in Life* to, get nearer to Christ, that by his Death
our Death may be gain to us, and we may then be no losers; which leads to

3. The third Direction, which is a high valuation of Christ, so as to be
willing to part with all for him; for so the same Paul, who here says, that
Death is his gain, in the third Chapter of this Epistle, v. 7, 8. says, that
those things which were gain to him, he accounted loss for Christ. If we
account gain, loss for Christ, then Death with the loss of all things will be
gain to us by Christ. If the main Pillar by which the House is held up do but
stand, it will not fall down, though other props be taken away; and if Christ
be our All in all, then although all things else at Death be taken from us, and
we from them, we have lost nothing; no, have gained by it, fullest union with
him, and possession of him, which is our greatest gain, because our greatest
happiness.

4. Improve the Talents we are betrusted with, so as our pound may gain ten
pounds, Luke 19. 16. and that at Death, when thou come to thy account, will
gain thee Authority over ten Cities, v. 17. Be thou a private Christian,
especially if a Minister of the Gospel, labor carefully to gain Souls to
Christ, and that will bring thee plentiful gain both at Death in inward
Comfort, and after Death in a more plentiful reward. Paul was very industrious
in this Trade, as you may see, 1 Cor. 9. 19, to 23. and Chap. 10. 33. in which
his Life was so laborious, that you find here his Death was gain to him.

5. But add Perseverance to all: else we lose all that we have gained, 2 John
8. As the Nazarite in the Law, if after his Vow he were polluted, he lost all
his former days, Numb. 6. 12. or as he that runs a Race, though he has gone
on far in it, loses the prize, if he give over before he come to lay hold of
it: and therefore although either the length of the way, or our pains in
getting on in it, put us to it; yet with that worthy Knight on his Deathbed
say, Sir John Pickring.
Hold out Faith and Patience yet a little longer, and it will not be long
before Death pay for all.

6. Lastly, Remember what went before these words in the Text, To me to live is
Christ; and then, to die is Gain. Labor that Christ in all the forementioned
Particulars be our Life, and then we be very certain that Death will be our
Advantage: A Christ-like though painful Life, will certainly end in a most Acts
10. 38. John 17. 4.
gainful and joyful Death. He went up and down doing good, and finished the
Work which his Father gave him to do, suffered those things which were
appointed Him, and so entered into Luke 24. 26.
Glory. And we following Him in His steps, need not doubt but we shall into it
also: But to live like a Beast or a Devil, and to think to die like a Saint; to
live so unprofitably that neither Christ has service from thee, nor any Body
any benefit by thee, and to hope that Death will be Gain to thee, how vain and
unreasonable? Epictetus could say, (...), where there is true Gain, there must
be true Godliness; and the Apostle says, Godliness is Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. and
profitable for all things, having promise not only of the Life that now is, but
also of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. And therefore the profit of it is
not ended in Death, but then more than ever before comes in, and is made over
to be enjoyed in everlasting Life and Glory.

Which therefore, for the third Use of the Point, should encourage Gain does
not use to be the Matter of our Fear, but of our Desire and Joy. The Tradesman
is not wont to be afraid of a profitable Bargain, nor the Labourer of his Day's
work in the evening to receive his Wages and Reward: Now this (if we believe
Paul) Death is, or brings with it. He confidently says here, that it is Gain,
and therefore, as such, is not afraid of it, but ver. 23. desires it. Indeed he
speaks of some, Heb. 2. 15. who through fear of Death, were all their lifetime
subject to Bondage: But who were they? I confess such he speaks of as were to
be saved by Christ, as the beginning of the Verse shows in those words, that
he might deliver them, etc. But yet so as they were out of Christ for the
present, or if in Christ, yet not assured of it, but still under a spirit of
Bondage according to that Legal Dispensation before Christ. And yet I do not
remember, I read in Scripture of any either under the Law or Gospel truly
Godly, that were much affrighted at the approach of Death. Hezekiah indeed wept
sore at the Message of Death, and some (I confess) think he was then under some
inward auguish of Spirit: But I cannot Isa. 38. 3.
easily believe that it was simply from any fear of Death, whilst he even then
had so clear a testimony of his Conscience, that he could appeal to God that he
had walked before him in truth, and with a perfect heart in his life, but it
was because he yet wanted a Son to continue the Promised Seed, or for some
other like cause. And as Death is an Enemy to Nature: so Nature may, with
submission to God's Will, without sin be ready to turn from it. So our Savior
desired that the Cup might pass from him. And it is said of Peter, that some
should Matthew. 26. 39. John 21. 18.
gird him, and carry him whither he would not. But our Savior's was more than
an ordinary Death, than any Martyr's death, that suffered never so great
Torments in it; and was it out of fear of Death, when his Face was set to go to
Jerusalem to be Luke 9. 53. John 18. 4. John 10. 18.
Crucified? When he went out to meet His Apprehenders? when He says, that no
Man took away his Life, but that He willingly of himself laid it down; and
therefore was not thrust out or driven, but says, I go to my Father, as some
observe? When John 7. 33. Cartwright.
even He deprecated to be delivered from that Hour, yet says, even for that
Cause He came to that Hour? And therefore quietly John 12. 27. Matthew. 26. 39.
Luke 22. 42. Luke 23. 46.
and submissively said, Father not my Will, but Thine be done? And even in the
Pangs of Death so quietly could say, Father, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit? And for Peter, when now near to Death, we do not find him bewailing it,
but calling of it only a putting off his Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1. 14. Nor does the
Story of his Death mention any such affrightment of him then, but the contrary.
And for others, Moses and Aaron went up the Mounts to die, as a quiet Child
does at his Fathers command go up to his Bed to sleep (as I have elsewhere
showed). Simeon sings his Nunc dimittis. Paul knows his departure is at hand, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8.
but he calls it his (...), and that word signifies such an Unbinding and
Taking off of Burdens, as we do to our Beasts when we come to our Inn, or
return to our Home; and that (I hope) is not dreadful, but desirable and
welcome, as his was there, when after his good fighting of his good Fight, and
finishing his Course, he had his hand upon the Crown of Righteousness. And it
was a breaking of his heart, that they should weep and pray him not to go to
Jerusalem, who was ready not only to be Bound, but also to Die for Christ
there, Acts 21. 13. As Ignatius in the very like case said to his Friends,
(...). Epist. ad Romans
How cheerfully did the Martyrs in former and latter Times make haste to their
Torments, (as fast as an old Man can, said old Latimer) embrace the Flames, and
had less trouble to endure the Torments, than their Torturers had to inflict
them? I do not say that all, especially weak Christians do, or can arise to the
Heroic spirit of these Worthies, and God forbid that I should fear the safety
of their Estates, who from weakness of Faith and want of Assurance are afraid
of Death, and because they dare not as yet die, pray with David, Psalm. 39. 13.
O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more.

But yet this I must say to such, that whilst thus they pray for time to
recover strength, they must acknowledge that it is their weakness, which is not
to be rested in. And if it be from their former careless neglect of preparation
for Death, or contracting of, and continuing under the guilt of some favored
Sin, which makes Death terrible, they have the more need to make haste to get
out of it. Or if it be (as it may be sometimes it is) because in their former
Life, they among their other many Petitions, have not so much pressed that for
comfort in Death; they had then need plie it the more, and listen to holy
Bradford's On the Lord's Prayer last Petition.
Counsel, who thus advises, Pray when the tide of Death comes, that we may
hale forth of the Haven of this Flesh, this World, cheerfully. Nor indeed
should it be a Haling, but a ready going with the Stream, as St. Austin says:
In Death we should be like live-Honey, which is the best, not to need pressing
out of the Comb, but to flow freely from it. But the Wax of this Comb sticks
too fast to us, and makes us cleave too much to this present Life, that we have
need to chide out our restive Souls with him, Egredere, O anima, egredere,
rouse up, O slothful Soul, get up and get out. Go forth, O ye Daughters Cant.
3. 11.
of Zion, and behold King Solomon with his Crown. Are you afraid to shut your
eyes from seeing the World and Men, that you may open them to see God and
Christ, as Cyprian speaks? De exhortatione Martyrii. Cap. 12. ad finem. De
mortalitate. S. 15.
Is Death to the Godly but an (...), an Exitus, Heb. 13. 7. an (...), 2 Pet. 1.
15. an Out gate, as of Israel out of Egypt? Nay, as Cyprian elsewhere says,
Non exitus, sed transitus, and temporali itinere demenso ad aeterna
transgressus? And shall we be unwilling or fearful to go out of our Prison into
our glorious everlasting Mansion? Is it but an (...); (as even now we heard)
and after a long tedious and dangerous Journey, should we be troubled to return
Home, and there to have our Burdens taken off, as we said that word signifies?
Is it but an Accersitio, as Lucianus in Cyprian styles it, but our Father's
sending for us Home after a long absence from him Epist. 22. S. 2.
either by our wild Vagaries, or upon his sending, and occasions? and should
not then even the Prodigal, when come to himself, say, I will arise and go to
my Father? Luke 15. 18.

And lastly, In the Text is it a Gain? Then what bad Husbands we, if we be
backward from making out after it? But is it indeed Gain? Then all the time
before we arrive at it, if it be not Damnum emergens, accruing loss, as too
often by our prodigal Mispenses we make it, yet at best it will be but Lucrum
cessans, it is a ceasing and intercepting of that Gain, which we might have had
by it. And then Quis hic anxietatis and sollicitudinis locus est? Quis inter
haec trepidus and moestus est, nisi cui Cyprian. de Mortal. S. 2.
spes and fides deest? What place is here left for Anxiety and Fear, as the
Father speaks, unless it be in them that have no hope, or but a weak Faith if
any? It Is for Heathen Romans to have a God, whom they made the president of
Death, and therefore called him Viduus, (because he did Corpus anima viduare)
and therefore would let him have no room in their Houses, but shut him out, and
let him stand without; and so Romana Religions damnatur potius quam colitur.
But the assured Christian with Joseph of Arimathea, may well place his
Sepulcher in his Garden of delights, and put Death and the thoughts of it in
his Bosom, (not as a Snake to sting it, but) as a Jewel, as his Gain to enrich
him: Ejus est mortem timere, qui nolit ad Christum ire, Idem ibid.
It Is for them to fear Death that would not go to Christ, and they that have no
assurance of a better Life may be loath to leave this, because they know not
where to mend themselves; and so Earth in possession they think is better to
them, than Heaven in reversion. But how more happy will it be, if, after Christ
has been our Life, Death prove our Gain? After whatever I have in this Life
lost for Christ, if not here, yet at Death I shall be sure to be no loser by
Christ, but there may be able with David, and our Blessed Savior to commend my
spirit into God's Hands? then Psalm. 31. 5. Luke 23. 46
when there will be enough to take our Goods and Honors, and other Earthly
possessions to enjoy them, and some (it may be) to take our dead Bdies and bury
them, but none but God to receive our Spirits, who only can secure and save
them: Then, then to be able with much peace to say, Father, take my Jewel, and
lay it up in thy Bosom, (...) my only One, my Darling, my Glory, and glorify
it with thy self for ever: How happy will that be, and how blessed shall we be
then? Which in a way of close walking with God, and working for God, we should
labor now to get assurance of, and then after a longer or shorter days labor
not to fear Death, but be glad to go to Bed and to rest with God for ever.

This at all times, but especially in these times

Of the Old Age, and Ruin of the World, and (it may be) of some of our now
almost spent Lives.

And of these our troublesome and perilous Days. It Is good dying in Evil-days,
if assured that we shall then live with God for ever. No hurt to be taken away
from the evil to come: For the Ship to be put into the Harbor, when the Storm
threatens a Shipwreck. Upon this Ground the Father exhorted the Christians
Cyprian.
in his hard Times, to be willing to Die though it were by Martyrdom; Vt qui
cernitis caepisse gravia, and scitis imminere graviora: Because they saw sad
things, and foresaw sadder coming on. Death should not then be bitter, when
such things as are more bitter than death are in view for those that live
longer.

Let this be the Rule by which we estimate true Gain, viz. If Death, and Death
it self be Gain to us; for then our accounts will be summed and made up, and
then Gain and Loss will best appear; as Solomon said when he came to his Audit,
Eccles. 2. 11. Then I looked on all the Works that my hands had wrought, and on
the Labor that I had labored to do: And that was very great, as we may see in
the foregoing Verses, where you find him as a diligent Chemist very busy at
his work, to extract and gain an Elixir and Quintessence, even the Spirit of
whatever Contentment the whole Mass and Body of the Creature could afford. But
alas! when all else was evaporated, there was nothing left but that Caput
mortuum; Behold, all was vanity and vexation of Spirit, and there was no profit
under the Sun: And as little do all our great Traders (and Gainers, as they
themselves thought) that say, as James 4. 13. Tomorrow we will go to such a
City, and buy and sell, and get Gain: As little profit do they find, when at
Death they come to their last reckoning. In their life and enjoyment oft-times
no other profit by what they have Gained, but the beholding of them with their
Eyes, Eccles. 5. 11. But to be sure at Death, when they must leave them, Riches
will not profit in such a day of Wrath, Prove. 11. 4: will not be able then to
purchase a Freedom, no not a Reprieve from Death, Psalm. 49. 6, 7, 8, 9. much
less everlasting Life, and it will be well if not Death eternal. And here let
me name some few things, which Men usually for the present think very Gainful
to them, which will not at Death turn to account.

1. All sins, even the gainfullest. Demetrius may get no small Gain by making
Silver shrines for Diana his Idol, and the Master Acts 19. 24. Acts 16. 16.
of the Pythoniss by her divination, and many others now a days by unlawful
Callings, and unlawful and dishonest Gains, at which God, as very angry, Numb.
24. 10.
smites his hands, Ezekiel. 22. 12, 13, 27. But none of these can in themselves be
true Gain, which is wont to be defined to be Boni utilis acquisitio, quod ad
venerandi Ficinus in argumento Hipparchi Platonis. Romans 6. 23.
boni consecutionem conducit. It Is the acquiring of something that is
profitable toward the acquisition of the chief Good. But if the wages of sin
be Death, this must needs be quite contrary, the greatest Loss, loss of Peace
with God in Life, and the loss of God and everlasting Life at Death. And then
(as they said) Why should Damage grow to the hurt of the King? Dan. 6. 2.
Ezra 4. 22. So I to thee, But why should such an utterly undoing Loss grow to
thy Soul? Or, as Paul said to them, Acts 27. 10. Sirs, I perceive that this
Voyage will be with hurt, and much Damage not only of the Lading and Ship, but
also of our Lives: So I must say to every such Sinner, unless he strike Sail
and steer another Course, though thou be now Top and Topgallant, and go
before the Wind with all Sails spread, and filled with (as thou think) a
most prosperous Gale, yet this Voyage will be to thy hurt, and much Damage not
only of Lading and Ship, of that Saburra of outward Contentments, that thou art
so deeply laden with, and of thy Body's brittle Bark, but of the Life, and
that of thy Soul for ever, Acquisivit pecuniam, Augustine.
perdidit Justitiam, lucrum in arca, damnum in conscientia: Gain in the Chest,
and Loss in the Conscience, he has gotten Money and lost Piety and Justice,
are sad words, but sadder things. Such Gainers I compare to such prodigal
Unthrifts, that lavish it at their Inns; and what Gainers they, who have got so
much Mirth and good Cheer! Ay, but Friends, there is a great reckoning that
must be paid before, or when you go to Bed in Death, which will not suffer you
to sleep quietly. Whilst you by these sinful means increase your Gettings, you
like such Prodigals run fast and deep into debt, which, whilst you find the
life Isa. 57. 10.
of your hand, as the Prophets phrase is, that which supports you with a
livelihood, you are jolly and never think of it. O but there will at Death come
a day of payment, and then a Prison, out of which you will not get, till you
have paid the utmost farthing, and that will never be; and so you lie in chains
of darkness to Eternity. What gain by sin will you then think you have got, by
that of which you are then ashamed, because Romans 6. 21.
by it utterly undone? You may then put it all into your Eyes; and be there
weeping it out for ever. Penny-wise and pound-foolish will be then a sad
Proverb, which you will be sadly thinking of, when all is lost and you with it;
to have gained Lordships and Kingdoms by sinful ways will be found greatest
loss at last. They will then appear to have been the Devils gifts rather than
God's: and as they use to say, that the Devil's Gold which he gives to Witches
is found to be but leaves and trash; so you will find these to be such trash,
as will yet make Fuel for everlasting burnings. What therefore (you heard out
of the Prophet) Ambros. de Joseph. lucrum pietas nescit pecuniae, in quo pietas
dispendium est.
God in anger smites his hands at, we should with an holy despising (with him,
Isa. 33. 15.) shake our hands of, namely of the gain of oppression, bribes, and
whatever other unlawful profits, which will then prove loss with a witness. No,
then Godliness will appear to have been profitable for all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
and although in the profession and practice of it, we have met with 2 Cor. 7. 9.
inward repentant grief, and outward loss and mischief, yet (as Paul says) we
shall in the upshot find, that we have received damage by it in nothing.

2. Nor will all, even lawful acquisitions of outward profits or pleasures, or
honors, or the like contentments (as we use falsely to call them) if not better
improved and husbanded, make Death gainful, or be gain to us then, when (I say
not the unlawful getting or using or keeping of them, for that I spoke to in
the former Head, but) the bare resting and satisfying our selves in them,
without making out after, and sure of Christ, who is both in Life and Death
advantage, will be the loss of our Souls; and what has a Man then gained,
though he had gained the whole World? Matthew. 16. 26. In regard of usual events
in ordinary providence, Solomon says, there is a time to get, and a time to
lose, Eccles. 3. 6. and all our Life should be a getting time to get Grace and
Peace, that so at length we may gain Glory; but there is no time to lose, at
least to lose our Souls, especially death is no such time, when, if they be
lost, they are lost for ever. 1 Samuel 9. 3, 20. Psalm. 119 ult. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Mat.
18. 11. Luke 14. 4, 5.


Readiness lost Asses may be again found, and so the lost Sheep (and such were the
best of us) in this Life may be also; but Souls lost at Death will never be
able afterward to find the way to Life: nor will all the riches of the World be
able to purchase then a Guide to it.

Indeed in the right improving of them for God and the Poor, thou may be
laying a good foundation (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.) against
time to come, that, when Death comes, thou may lay hold of everlasting Life:
but the bare enjoying of them, though it may set thee on higher ground amongst
Men here below, yet it will never be able to lift thee up to God's favor in
Life, or to Heaven in Death. The gain of these things is the Devil's Bait, and
therefore he cast it out as his last device to take our Savior with, All this
will I give thee, etc. Matthew. 4. 9. and with which (...), he enticeth Men to
the loss of James 1. 14.
their Souls, and so the same Greek word (...) signifies both Gain and Craft
or Deceit, because by gain he craftily deceives Men to their perdition. And so
his prime Scholar Simon Magus, (because, as Solomon says, Money answers all
Eccles. 10. 16. Acts 8. 19.
things) would be chaffering with it for Spirituals: but Peter gave him his
Answer, that his Money was not current in God's Market, but bade it perish with
him; so that it seems Ver. 20.
he might perish for all it with it: and if gain be all his Godliness, all that
his gain will be found to be loss at his 1 Timothy 6. 5.
last reckoning, and then the Covetous, who are most greedy of gain, will be
greatest losers, as the Prophet pronounces a Woe against such, Hab. 2. 9.

3. Nor will the bare enjoying of outward Ordinances, though more gainful, make
Death our gain, which yet Men are too ready to phansy and promise to
themselves. Now know I (says Micah) that the Lord will do me good, seeing I
have a Levite to my Priest, Judge. 17. 13. and it is a Plea which some even at
Death and Judgment will knock boldly at the Gate of Heaven with, to have it
opened to them, We have eaten and drank in thy presence, and thou have taught
in our Streets, Luke 13. 26. And to this day it is a very short cut that some
are ready to make from a Deathbed to Heaven; they have been Baptized, and by
it Original sin was taken away from them, and they have gone to Church to
Prayer, Sermon, and Sacrament, and if then at the point of Death they may have
their actual sins taken off by Absolution, and receive the Sacrament upon it
for confirmation of it, they make no question but they shall go bolt right up
to Heaven; and whatever their lives be, Death will be their gain without all
peradventure. But Friend, be not too hasty to reckon without your Host, sit
down a little, and think seriously of these Scriptures. Bodily exercise
profits little, 1 Timothy 4. 8. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh
profits nothing, John 6. 63. Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the
Law; but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made
uncircumcision, Romans 2. 25. It Is not the bare having them, but profiting by
them in one sense, if either in Life or Death thou would be profited by them
in another. Indeed we read Romans 3. 1, 2. What advantage has the Jew, or what
profit is there of Circumcision? Much every way, and chiefly, because unto them
were committed the Oracles of God, says Paul; and so say I, great is the gain
that in Life and Death we get by them, if we in Life gain saving-Grace, and
Souls-advantage by them: but they will not be so if we live wickedly, or but
unfruitfully under them, and so have our condemnation aggravated by them, as
some would gather out of Revel. 14. those that will not be gathered in Grotius.
the Gospel's Harvest. v. 15, 16. will be pressed in the Vintage of God's
Judgments, v. 17, 18.

4. Nor will outward Profession, and a fair show under those Ordinances, which
too many rest in, and hope to gain Heaven by, accrue to their advantage at
Death, and their last account then. Paul could say, Though I speak with the
Tongues of Men and Angels, and though I have the gift of Prophesy, and Faith to
remove Mountains, and bestow all my goods on the Poor, and have not true
Charity, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.

And more near to my purpose; that is a sad question, Job. 27. 8. What is the
hope of the Hypocrite though he has gained this and that, and the repute with
Men, with Christians of more than ordinary proficiency in Grace and Holiness,
when God takes away his Soul? Man, thou will then be stripped (for we shall all
be judged) naked, and then, as Solomon says in another case, Prove. 23. 8. The
Morsel thou have eaten shall thou vomit up, and lose thy sweet words: the hid
corruption of thy Heart will then up and out, to the loathing of both thy self
and others: and all those sweet words and pretenses by which thou did impose
upon others, and endeavouredst upon God also, will be all lost, and thou with
them, when thou shall find that of the Apostle Romans 2. 28, 29. made good, He is
not a Jew, who is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward
in the Flesh: but he is a Jew, who is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of
the Heart in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of Men but
of God.

Ravennae extat emblema ad picturam Phaenicis:
Securus moritur, qui scit se morte renasci, Mors ea non dici, sed nova vita
potest.
Expuncta hac morte ad immortalitatem venimus. Cyprian de mortalitate, S. 2.
FINIS.
There are several literal Mistakes, and some mispointings in the Hebrew words,
which the Candid and Learned Reader is desired to amend. The other most
material here follow.
PAge 3. Line 13. Read by. p. 4. l. 3. r. notional. p. 9. in the margent, r.
John the most Eagle-eyed Evangelist. p. 21. l. 32. r. Michal. p. 24. l. 8. dele
self after him. p. 32. l. 31. r. add some. p. 81. l. ult. r. (...). p. 88. l.
11. r. Josh. 4. 18. p. 91. l. 17. r. lumber. p. 112. marg. r. legis sectam. p.
122. l. 8. r. in Christ. p. 182. l. 35. for God himself, r. Godliness. p. 183.
l. 36. for cross, r. crasse. p. 224. l. 18. r. meant. p. 230. l. 8. r. (...).
p. 232. l. 9. r. adore him for. p. 233. l. 13. r. could bestow. p. 239. l. 38.
for crimes, r. aims. p. 247. l. 4. r. is terminus. p. 378. l. 1. r. quid. p.
403. l. 15. r. this. p. 415. l. 8. dele why. p. 441. l. 23. r. faedus. p. 462.
l. ult. and 463. l. 1. r. none before the guide. p. 469. l. 30. r. persons. p.
471. l. 15. r. (...). p. 474. l. 21. r. Anaxagoras. p. 478. l. 35. r. (...). p.
489. l. 20. r. Rereward. p. 511. marg. l. 21. r. prima q. 105. p. 537. l. ult.
r. conflatus a Vulcano. p. 538. l. 2. r. firmer. p. 542. l. 34. r. there, by.
p. 560. l. 23. r. main chance. p. 561. l. 21. r. left. p. 564. l. 1. after
small, insert But the King. p. 566. l. 27. r. Abject. l. 26. r. rescued. p.
594. l. 35. r. the Psalmist says. p. 614. l. 25. after come, add when it does
come. l. 37. r. enjoying. p. 652. l. ult. dele of it. p. 661. l. 26. r.
Jesuates. p. 666. l. 24. r. move. p. 668. l. 12. after Genesis 30. 29. add, But a
Christian should say thus with himself. p. 672. l. 8. r. inquam. p. 678. l. 15.
r. privatively. p. 686. l. 12, for say, r. answer. P. 692. l. 31. r. enough.


