A LETTER TO Mr RICHARD BAXTER Occasioned by several injurious Reflections of
His upon a Treatise entitled. Justificatio Paulina.

For the better Information of his weak or Credulous Readers.

By THOMAS TVLLY D. D.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own Cause seems Just: but his
neighbor comes and SEARCHES Him.

OXFORD. Printed by Hen. Hall: for John Wilmot, Ann. D. 1675.

Mr BAXTER,
I have lately from three several public messengers of yours (the later
treading still upon the heels of the former) received your expected
Salutations: all of them much resembling Ahimaaz, both for the swiftness of
their pace, and that they had nothing to say when 2. Sam. 18. 19.
they came. The two first indeed approached me as if they had a mind to lie
Incognito's, for they took up their lodgings where none would enquire for them;
the one in a little corner of a Preface to Mr Danvers, the other in the wide
open field of your Catholic Theology, where yet he stood placed so
cunningly, that a man might traverse about three parts of that large Champian,
before he could gain the Satisfaction to see him. Your 3d. is of a freer
Conversation, Preface to two Disput. about Orig. Sin.
and though He brought the face of war with him, and seemed to threaten much,
yet I found him civil and good natured, and he went off fairly without doing
any harm. In your Preface to Mr. Danvers, I am beholding to you for the
trouble you have saved me of transcribing that very little I have of your new
Original Sin. vz: Vnum vero praetereundum non censeo etc. p. 2. only I beg your
leave to English it for the sake of your un-latine Readers, and thus it sounds.
One thing I judge ought not to be waved, which is a novelty amongst the newest
(though it may seem a little more remote from the Argument before Us.) that the
Prefacer (I know not by what fortunate Mercury) has found Us another Original
Sin of a much later Date then that which claims from Adam. O blind Divines who
ever went before! This is my charge, and the whole of it to a word, which I
entreat the Reader (for his better satisfaction) to keep carefully in his mind.

Now, Sr, that I do not praevaricate or misreport you in a syllable, your
Self I doubt not will be my Compurgator in your PREFACE to a Treatise of
another man's concerning the nature, Ends, and Difference of the two Covenants.
Your words are these, most writers, if not most Christians, do greatly darken
the sacred Doctrine by over-looking the Interest of children in the Actions of
their nearer Parents, and think they participate of no Guilt, and suffer for
NO ORIGINAL SIN but ADAMS ONLY. Any that is not blind (and understands the
langauge) may see I fasten upon the last clause alone, the new Original SIN, I
meddle with no other INTERESTS of Children; this is the All of my charge, A new
or (as you pleasantly call it) a SECONDARY Original Sin, that is, a secondary
first of All.

Now let us compare your Answer, which in the same Preface is clearly to this
effect, that I charge you only for holding some guilt of children in their
nearer Parents sins. For although in the close of that period you shuffle in
your secondary Original Sin, that comes in but by the By, not as any words of
mine but as an Ex abundanti, a private whisper of your own, where it would not
by All be so easily minded as any Part, much less as the whole of my Charge.

I appeal now to your self, whether this was done as a fair ingenuous
Antagonist, or to use your own words, as an Impartial Friend of sacred Dedic.
before the Pref of Orig. Sin.
Truth who is above the Dominion of Carnal Interest, faction, and false
prejudice; and is cured of the malady of praesidence, hasty Judging etc. Will
any unbiased Reader think you have done me right here, and not rather be
tempted to believe you sought a Quarrel? you should have proved that some
before your self had owned another Original Sin, and that under the very terms
(for I do not desire you should give your self the trouble to make any
Consequences for my use) instead of which you present me with some Interest of
children in their Parents Sins, which neither I nor any Body Else I know off
denies as to the thing, though as to the Extent and other circumstances all are
not agreed, and you may in that enjoy your Opinion for me. Sr, Austin has a
sharp rebuke for him, qui verba supprimit quaestionis, and bidds us have an eye
to him, but I forbear.

You go on there to tell your Reader (I would hope not to expose my Ignorance)
I know not your new Original Sin was Austins judgment, and many other ancient
and modern writers: wherein you have done me but right, for indeed I did not
know it, and despair I ever shall; but more of that anon.

You might have spared your objecting the Litany against me with i'ts flourish,
that I am less for it then you, which is another piece of news to me. I admire
the mystery so much the more for the notable proof you have annexed to
persuade me and others to believe it, viz: because you pray heartily, Remember
not Lord our offenses etc. Good Sr what would you have me to subsume? I can
find nothing but this hard chapter; that I am not so happy as to pray so
heartily etc. Ergo you are more for the Litany then I. Who will be able to
stand before you, if you fight with such weapons as these? I have heard of some
weak or unquiet men, whose fancies or ferments have found in this passage of
the Litany a way to Purgatory, but never any till now that discovered by it the
Nova Atlantis of a new Original Sin. Why was I not as well attaqu'd with the
second Commandment? what need of going any farther?

In the close of the same To Mr Danvers.
Preface you promise us fuller satisfaction to both these points, Justification
by works, and the Secondary Original Sin. Truly, Sr, I crave your pardon, if I
think your fullest Satisfaction would be a full entire Retractation of both;
of the latter, as you give it the new stamp of another Original Sin; farther I
am not engaged at present against it. It Is a pity but those good words of yours
should be turned into Real Actions, where you profess Appeal to the Light. p. 4.
your readiness to buy the Truth at a dearer Rate then the Recantation of your
Error. O for more Austins, more Exemplars of that admirable modesty, which
enameled all the Gold in his other excellent writings: more of that generous
Love to sacred Truth, which should make us lay all our poor concerns and
reputations at it is feet, and value one Euge of a good Conscience above all the
shouts and acclamations of a Triumph. But alas, Sr, how faintly such heroicke
selfe-abasements are to be expected your self have taught us in remarkeaable
words.

I like them so well, that I hope the Reader will not think them unworthy my
transcribing. If (say you) you have a Friend that errs, whose recovery you
desire, be sure you write not a Confutation Disput. 5. of Right to sacraments.
p. 481. 482.
of his Errors, for ordinarily that is the way to fasten them in him, and to
make him worse. Some will think this is a hard Censure to pass upon learned
Godly Men. But there is no reasoning against Common unquestionable Experience.
Of all the Cartloads of Controversial writings that swarm in the world how many
can you name that convinced the Antagonist, and brought him to a Recantation?
And anon, As Soon as you speak to men in the hearing of the World, they
presently apprehend their Reputation to be so engaged, that they are excited to
defend it with all their might, and instead of an impartial Consideration of
your Arguments, and a ready Entertainment of the Truth, they bend their Wits to
study how to make good what once they delivered, THAT THE WORLD MAY NOT THINK
THEM SO WEAK AS TO HAVE MISTAKEN. Nay, they who do PROFESS TO LOVE THE TRUTH
as Truth, yet this SELF is so near them and so potent with them etc. Words
full of truth with the sad experience of all Ages to confirm them: and you that
have given us the Adviso have a particular obligation to observe them
punctually for your self upon all occasions. But, Sr, to deal plainly and
Christianly with you, It Is not only my own fear, but of diverse knowing persons,
who pretend (at least) to be your very Friends, and to have a fair Respect for
your Parts and sincerity, that you fall too near the reach of the description,
you here give of others. I have a particular reason to fear it. A great Outcry
you have made of Me, as chargeing you with things you have retracted; which, if
true, I hope is no inexcusable crime on my part, for I Am sure it will amount to
no more than a fault of unwillfull Ignorance. I knew not it was my duty to read
all the books your fruitful pen has brought into the world, much less to look
for Retractations, where I had no Encouragement to Expect, nor any Inscription
of your numerous Treatises hinted the least promise of so noble a self-denial;
and let me assure you I have not been negligent in my Enquiries of those that
might know better than my self, what you have retracted: All I have met with
profess to be as ignorant as my self of this. Your very late Preface to the
Discourse of the two Covenants shows us little of Retractation.

And to come closer to you, if I have wronged you in this matter (as you
allwaies charge me) what is the reason you have not hitherto directed us to the
particulars of your Recantation, what, when, where? but throw a general roving
Accusation against me without offer of proof. You direct me indeed to a small
Book above twenty years ago (as you say) retracted, Preface to the two disput.
of Orig. Sin, p. 44. I suppose you mean your Aphorisms (the most scholar-like
and elaborate (though erroneous) Book in Controversy you ever composed,
excepting it is numerous Oracular Dictates) and thence Appeal especially to your
Disputations about Justification, and some others. But truly, Sr, I cannot
trudge up and down to every place you would send me, my legs at present are too
weak. Had you a mind to satisfy your Reader, what would it have cost you to
save him a labor with one point of your finger to the particular places? All I
can pick up of any seeming Retractation (where I have happened to be) is that
you some where say (after your wary deliberate manner) that works are necessary
AT LEAST to the Continuation of Our justification. But, Sr, AT LEAST sounds no
alteration of Judgment but an Haesitation, or suspension at most: nor have you
me for your Antagonist in that (sano sensu) in the known Reformed notion. Our
Question, Sr, with your good leave (disguise and darken it as you please) is
not what is necessary to the justified Person, or to the continuance of his
Justification, but what to the primary Justification it is self, in which if you
disclaim your Works, the Controversy will shrink into a narrow point, and then
you may in time be obliged to unravell all your entangled Threads of
Justification again, and come to the Penance of speaking as your Neighbors do.

Only you cannot blame me if I wish you would go about your farther
explanations to some better purpose than hitherto you have done, that you would
not raise clamours of being grossly misreported by me, for I doubt all the gross
Misreports will come to some other door at last, that you would make good your
smooth suffestion, that such Teachers as oppose you think that Agreeing Men (in
P. 7.
these points) are not agreed: In short that in a few plain undisguis'd words,
you would let us know where We are agreed, and where not, and deliver your
Reader from the Jealousy you have raised that there is no such Agreement. So
that if the fear be just and true He may not be surpised; if false he may give
it over. Si verus, Ne opprimar, sin falsus ut tandem aliquando timere desinam.
Cic. in Catil.


I have done with your first Attacque, and proceed to the next in your
CATHOLIC THEOLOGY, fol. 255. There it seems you are pleased again not only to
arraign and condemn me for my Doctrine, but to put me also in the Cubb with
diverse mean and contemptible Malefactors, such as wild Saltmarsh, P. Hobson,
and the Marrow of modern Divinity, whose Author (out of great kindness no doubt
to some body) you industriously tell us in the margin, is reported to have been
an honest Barber; a note which many think you might have spared as well as any
that ever traded so busily in Controversies of Religion; Thus you think fit to
mark out my poor name to Posterity.

But, good Sr, one word with you before we go off from this suggestion so full
of Truth and Civility. Had you no other names in your memory, had you not many
scores of greatest Eminence and repute in the Christian World of the same
Judgment with me, that you could find no better Fellows for me then such as
these? Know you not I speak the same thing with all the Reformed Churches
(where they have occasion) and generally with all the Old Reformed Writers?
This sure would be too gross an Imputation of Ignorance to a Person of your
Parts, Fame, Industry and Reading. Do you know it? Then you have made me
Reparation enough by joining me in that very scandalous Reflection with such
numerous Worthies as those. For shame let it be no longer Dr. Tully, Saltmarsh,
etc. But the Church of England with all the rest of the Reformed, and their
several old renowned Writers; these be your Hobsons, your Saltmarshes, and
your Barber-Scriblers. I am heartily sorry you have forced me to be so plain
with you; had not such names and so many of them been embarked with mine in
that odious Insinuation I could have turned it into mere Divertisement (for
otherwise it could deserve no farther notice) But as it is you may well allow
me to question by what Spirit you thrust that Paragraph into your Book, and to
believe no protestation Contra Factum.

I must not wave the Character you there give your Readers of me and the Honest
Barber etc. viz. where you admonish them that such Writers in their learned
network Treatises (being wise or Orthodox overmuch, entangled and confounded
by incongruous notions of man's Invention) are liker to entangle and confound
etc. What learned Network Treatises some of those names were ever guilty off,
or what fowl they caught by their Network but Widgeons etc. I know not. But let
any man seriously peruse your own controversial writings in these points, and
it is not improbable but (as in Anselm's dream) he will find all overspread with
Nets, so many Windings in and out, off and on, this way and that way, such
clouds of Novel Distinctions, Preambles, Limitations, etc. such wheelings and
lines of Circumvallation at a modest distance about the Quaestion, and faint
uncertain Approaches to it, that to my knowledge diverse who wish you well have
sadly complained of it, and professed your fuller Explanations (as you call them)
have but bewildred them more, and sent them away with less satisfaction than
they came unto them. You will not, I hope, account me your Enemy for telling
you the truth, and yet, so I may do you good, pass what judgment of me you
please, it matters little.

And now, Sir, to your large PREFACE before your Disput. of Original Sin, all
which you have frankly bestowed on me, but with such an unfortunate mistake, we
are neither of us the better for it, I have no profit, and you no credit by it.
For though you charitably intend something for my satisfaction, it is all lost
in your speaking nothing to the Question. You may remember, Sr, (what stands
visible to every eye) that I charged you only with your new Original Sin,
underiv'd from Adam, unknown, unheard off before in the Christian World, and
which therefore I thought well deserved the Exclamation, which so pains you, O
caecos any Theologos etc. To this your Preface has not one word to the
purpose, nothing in all your quotations, that I laid to your charge, of which
more anon.

But because you give us Preface upon Preface, a medley of things that have no
great cohaerence with your main design (to smooth, I suppose, your way to some
of your more Innocent, but eredulous Readers) I must attend your Motions. P. 3.


And first of all I cannot but approve your Note concerning Good Intentions,
that They will not Justify our Errors, and that by our bold hasty Judgeings of
those things We never well digested, or understood; we do but bring Our selves
into a suspicion, Our Understandings are none of the largest size, or plainly
to that affect. Only your Remarque in my Judgment had been more complete with
the Addition of that rational sentence in the Law, Magna Negligentia est lata
Culpa. Our have when Wilful and Excessive, may justly bring Our Morals into
quaestion too. For wilful ignorance has ever been accounted somewhat more
than a fault of the mind and Understanding.

Now, Sr, can you endure a little plain dealing from a friendly Antagonist? Do
you think your good Admonition has no Aspect upon your self? would God it
looked not so full upon you. I appeal to your own Conscience (as well as the
Readers judgment) whether of us two be deeper in the Guilt of bold and hasty
Judgeing; you that in your single leekie Brigandine dare set forth with so high
a sail against wind and tide to brave all the Reformed Churches etc. Or I who
content my self to cast my Anchor by theirs upon the Faith and Doctrine which
was once delivered to the Saints, trembling at a thought of exalting my self
above so many Worthies at whose feet it would more become you and me to sit
with Reverence, than to be thus Pelting at their Heads, and dragging them by
the hoary hairs, as a spectacle and a Byword to all, You know, Sr, (at least
give others leave to think they do) what Armies, of what Strength and Quality
appear in these Battails against you, and that through such poor Names as mine,
you defy and wound them, you may hear more anon.

I see therefore no cause as yet to repent me of calling (as you say) to the
Academicall Youth (to All indeed) that, as they love the knowledge of the
Truth, they take You not for an Oracle in your bold dividing singularities. I
bless God I can with a clear Conscience call upon them again and again to do so.

Next you fall upon that obvious popular Topic of each Parties bidding their
Fellows beware of the other, Papists, Protestants, Lutherans, Calvinists p. 5.
6.
etc. Of which the natural Inference must be this, Ergo my Admonition (or any
other man's of the like nature) concerning Your self is not to be heeded. Might
not the false Teachers in the Church's Infancy have used the same Plea for
themselves to the many Caveats put in against them by the Apostles? Or were
those Caveats to be blasted as Phantasms or Melancholies (in your own Courteous
p. 51.
Phrase) Or were the faithful Admonitors to withdraw their good Counsels upon
Fear that such a roving Topic should be brought against Them? nay does any man
practice what you here condemn more than Your self? As particularly You have
lately treated me in your forementioned Catholic Theology, where you expressly
dissuade your Readers to be instructed by Me, or Saltmarsh etc. lest they be
led into Error, Truly, Sr, I wonder what opinion you have of the Age you live
in (for Vetera praeter ierunt) to think such little wiggles and Evasions will
pass for rational Discourse, nay that even your frequent Self-oppositions,
though in the open view and light of the Sun, shall slink away unobserved.

You say well p. 5. that it is not the part of a good man to set Churches
together by the Ears, and to make People believe they differ where they do not.
If this be designed (as no doubt it is) for the Teachers of Justification by
Faith without works, I pray what Churches are by this Doctrine set by the Ears
together? not the Reformed sure, for, as I have showed you elsewhere, they are
of one lip and doubtless of one Heart too in the Point, with both against your
own makebate Novelties. What other Societies of men you can take in, except
Papists, Socinians, or of late the Quakers, I understand not. And would you
have us yield up the great Truths of the Gospel for fear of offending such
Churchshipps as these? In the mean time, Sr, You may do well to Consider who
began the Fray, and how much easier it is to begin one, than to end it. Next you
proceed to some grave Advice commended to our Acceptance from the Test of
much, and so much Experience of your own, and that in effect is not to conclude
difference in Doctrine from different Terms, Orders or Methods of Expression,
digesting of Conceptions etc. and withal give us timely notice you are
resolved to the utmost of your skill and opportunity to (...) them that think a
different name or method is a different Doctrine. And it is a very Charitable
undertakeing where ever such sad creatures can be found, who know not the Some
Thing may be expressed in Different Names or Languages.

But I pray, Sr, let us fall a little closer to our Business, speak in good
sadness: would you not have your friends with the Glib swallow conclude upon
this Admonition, that all the Difference betwixt you and me (or others of the
same judgment) in the point of Justification is merely Verbal, nothing but a
strife about Words and Forms of Expression, and that in the Maine we are
agreed? It Is clear enough, I think, you would: But not so fast, Sr, my weak
legs cannot hear your company at this rate. What? Perfect Contradiction^ no
more than a Difference in words? Faith alone, and no Faith alone, Faith with,
and without works, one and the same thing? Excuse our dullness here. I see it is
not for (nothing that to an Objection against your Doctrine as Popist, you
return this Heroique Answer, FRIGHTEN NOT ME WITH THE NAME OF PAPIST, when I
speak the Truth. It seems you would be taken for a stout Protestant, and so you
are. All no doubt in the Point before Us is a mere Logomachy, with which no Man
of Mettle ought now to be frighted, though Our White-liver'd Progenitors in the
Reformed Churches durst not take the note so high.

Sr, you have taught me to guess What Answer you would return to This: which
very likely would be to this effect. What? would you have me frighted from
owning a Truth because a Papist owns it too? Then I must not believe there is a
God or a Jesus etc. (and so on for two or three pages together) Pref. p. 52.
Is this Doctrine fit for an Academical Doctor, and a Master of a literate
society? And having run on a while so pertinently and withal so modestly then
woe to some. Sr, most if not all the Differences betwixt Us and the Romish
Church were ever held (with your good leave) by as wise and learned Protestants
as ever you or I are like to be for more than Triflings of words, and above all
in the Article of Justification, which you seem to place amongst your
Logomachies, or Logical notions. Let any discerning Reader compare the 48.
Sect. of this Preface with the words in p. 5. of your Appeal to the Light, and
it is likely he will concur with me (let him be never so Aerie) in that
Melancholy Phantasm or Fear. For it is worth the noting how in that dark Appeal,
where you distinguish of Popish points; i. e. some where the Difference is
irreconcilable, others in effect but in words; We have no direction upon which
Rank we must bestow Justification, nothing of it at all from you, Name or
Thing. But why, next to the allseeing God, you should know best your self.

Sr, pile one Distinction or Evasion upon another as long as you please, as
many several Faiths, and works, and Justifications as you can name, all this
will never make the two Poles meet, your Doctrine I mean of Justification with
that of the Reformed Churches. But seeing you are so busy in turning Our
greatest Controversies with the Papists etc. into a childish Contest of words;
to undeceive some of your Readers, who dream of no harm from such a Name as
yours (but in the simplicity of their hearts go along wherever you lead them)
we must give it a little farther Examination. And a little will serve the turn.

Words, Sr, as they are enfranchised into Language, are but the Agents and
Factors of Things, for which they continually negotiate with our minds,
conveighing errands upon all occasions from one soul to another. Whence it
follows that their Use and signification is unalterable, but by the stamp of
the like public Usage and Imposition from whence at first they received their
being, and therefore (if I may here accommodate the holy phrase) of no private
Interpretation. What all others call a Tree you must not call a Stone, and
pretend the difference is but in a name or Words. For although the same thing
may be sufficiently represented by different words, it is only when they are
synonymous and agreeing in sense; It cannot be otherwise, no more than a Stone
can be represented to the eye by the Image of a Tree. Now as keeping close to
t^is common Usage of words is necessary in all affairs of humane life, it is so
especially in the concerns of Faith and Religion. It Is not sure for nothing
that Paul advised Timothy to hold fast the FORM of sound words, non solum
quoad substantiam, sed 2. Tim. 1. 13.
quoad ipsam orationis figuram says Calvin. For (as the wise and learned
Melanchton has minded Praefat. in Luth. Op. Tom. ^.
us well) Amissa verborum proprietate, quae rerum notae sunt, alias confingi
res necesse est. That is, when once we lay aside the propriety of words, which
are the notes or Symbols of things, We pass undoubtedly to the minting of new
Things themselves. The old Primitive Doctors and Churches were sufficiently
aware of this, and therefore would not dispense with the Intrusion of one (...)
(much less of one novel word) in any Article or head of Faith, where Custom
and the Usage of the Church had authorized another. And this they did upon the
great and cogent reason Melanchton gave us but now, vz. because they were not
to learn that such as thought with the Church, would be content to speak as she
did, and that the Contrary Practice never boded good to the Unity, Peace, and
Doctrine betrusted to her care: Of which I think we of this Age have had
Instances enough amongst our selves to our cost: so that (to return your
kindness) It is not the part of a Good man to set ^ 7.
Churches by the Ears together, and to make Our silly Credulous Admirers
believe that the Vast gulf which was ever fixed between Us and the several
branded Corrupters of the Truth is now so near upon the close that if a man do
but go back a little to take his feeze, he may easily jump over it. Nor is it
the part of a wise Teacher to think himself, that Men are agreed, where every
eye may see them dealing blows and Deaths about.

As for the Difference of Method, Ordering, Digesting and expressing our
Conceptions (of which you seem to make little account in Comparison) I know not
yet how far you may stretch your Order and Method of conceptions; whether you
speak of that order which is no more than a beauty, or Circumstance; or would
draw it out to All indefinitely, and so leave nothing but deformity and
Confusion. A child may be born with all the parts and limbs of a perfect man,
yet if not placed in their rank and Order may be a prodigious Monster: and a
Book may want never a letter of the Alphabet (and all repeated many thousand
times over) yet not contain a word either of sense or Language for want of
Order.

Thus Papists and Protestants are agreed about the necessity of good works, yet
the difference is much wider than you seem to make it, because both do not rank
that necessity alike; the one stretching it to the first Justification, the
other not, but confining it to it is proper Rank and Province of Inhaerent
holiness, where it ought to keep. So that upon so crude and general an
Admonition about different Names, Words, Orders, and ways of Expression, your
weaker Readers had need beware that instead of instructing you do not entangle
and confound them.

Next, Sr, you are pleased to turn something out of your way to a pleasant
Discourse about Melancholy and it is ill effects, perhaps to drive the
pernicious humor from all your Readers by your odd introduction of it there
(with it is handsome Attendants) as Heraclitus was cured of his, pro tempore, by
a not extremely differing Rencontre.

I have now done with that part of your Preface, which you have wasted upon
your Secondary Orig. Sin.

But you have one word with me more, and I Am glad it is but one, for such sad
work as this might afflict a more Athletique constitution then mine; and in
earnest I somewhat wonder how you held out with it your self, it must needs
make any man sick at the heart.

And now the heavens are on a sudden all covered with black; a storm is coming,
to which the former was but a brisk musical gale. Lets look to our tackling.

In my Justif. Paulina, I had made two civil requests to you, the one Probe te
excutias, that you would well examine and sift your self before Cap. 11.
God and your own conscience, whom you especially design by that ONE Person,
who alone (upon supposal of difference) is to be followed before all Dissenters
in the matter of Justification, according to your 42. Direct. for the Cure of
Church Divisions. My other suit is in these words, Diligentius apud se
perpenderet etc. That you would diligently consider the great Affinity your
Justification has contracted with the Popish.

Now let the Reader well observe how you manage this part of the Battle; and
thence take his measures of your skill and dexterity in Controversal
Engagements. Let him take notice first where and how you begin, with a mere
catch at the word [Diligence] to let us know what a hard Student you have been
in your time. p. 44.
Your Call for Diligence (say you) tells me you know me not, who have little
spared for labor these 37. years, and I am now unfit for increased diligence;
and this is all we have to that Concern.

I pray, Sr, did I ever tax you (directly or indirectly) with sloth in your
Studies? and yet do not you suggest unto your Reader I do? And shall we call
this Sincerity? my desire was you would take your Balance and weigh more
diligently, that so you might see the very small odds betwixt your
Justification and the Council of Trents; for to me neither of them turns the
scale upon the other: I spoke of no pains or labor, but only a more diligent
Consideration.

For give me leave, Sr, by the by to mind you, that much reading and tumbling
of Books contains not all the necessary ingredients of an useful Scholar, no
more than the thrusting down of meat in abundance to the Stomach makes a strong
or healthful Body. If we will have good blood and nutriment, strong Nerves and
bones for action, after the best choice of our meat, we must allow nature her
due periods of Concoction, otherwise all will be but unperfect or hurtful
chyle. It Is Meditation, Sr, which is the Stomach of the mind, weighing,
sifting, and reflecting upon what we read: in which if there happen to be an
error, either in point of diligence, or judgment (as too often there does) no
after-concoction will make amends; All will be Cruditie and Contagion still.

But now (if you please) to our business of Justification (for you know well
enough my words refer only to that) you say you will not summon me before God,
or Conscience, but what will the world think of my dealing, to bait, and that
by gross MISREPORTS, a small Book, above twenty years RETRACTED.

Sr, I gave you no Summons, but a Friendly Admonition (as all the world may
see) and I here do it again. I have MISREPORTED you in nothing, much less
GROSSLY (let your friends themselves be Judges) I know of no RETRACTATION you
have made to this day, notwithstanding all my diligent enquiries of Persons
that are well acquainted with you: no one Book under that title (which yet
would have been no disgrace to so good a work) no talk of RETRACTATIONS till
I had printed my Book, and that only from your Self, no direction from you
either what you have retracted, or where we may find it since; which is yet the
more amazing, because in your first complaint of this matter, p. 4. you tell us
of about SIXTY Books of Retractations (in part at least) you have writ, and
blame me for passing them All by without observation: I envy not the readiness
and faecundity of your Pen; but you seem a Pretender to Cryptography in writing
what few Eyes (if any) besides your own can read. Well, when we see these
famed Retractations, we shall take our measures accordingly.

But, Sr, for your Own, your Readers, and the Truths sake, I beseech you take
care we have no Retractation of those yet invisible Retractations, and that you
no where contradict your self.

Sr, the world will expect some clearer and more ingenuous satisfaction from
you (at this time of the day) then to be wheadl'd with bare Talk, and
complaints of gross MISREPORTS, where none at all appears. And truly, Sr, I
give you this Admonition as a Friend, for otherwise I needed not.

Next you surprise me with a pretty Quaestion, why I turn a Logical case of
Defining into a Theological de Re, and we hear of this new quirke p. 45.
of Defining from you more then once, and it is All your own fruitful
Invention, Justitia Christi Imputata is one thing (say you) and the Definition
of Justice or imputation is another. Of Justice, or Imputation! I take [OR]
Sir, to be a Disjunctive, not a Copulative, and so it is a plain Fallacy of
Division, which any young Logick-Smatterer would tell you. Who knows not that
the wall is one thing, and the whiteness of it another, and so must have their
Definitions apart; but, good Sr, is the Definition of a white wall another
thing from a white wall? then it is no good Definition, and our Plea now is not
about false Definitions, but what are supposed (at least) to be True; about
Definitions indefinitely, for there lies your Novell Instruction.

Justice, Sr, is one thing, and the Imputation of it another. but Imputed
Justice cannot differ from it is true Definition, unless you will have it to
differ really from it is self. Here then we have a transparent Fallacy.

You go on, and ask me if in good earnest I am desirous to know whom you mean,
and there you stop. Your question is imperfect and speaks out no sense. Mine
is plainly this, whom you mean by that p. 45.
ONE Rare Person, whose single Judgment is (upon Difference) to be preferred,
in the Point of Justification, and to whom; Quem quibus in Doctrina
Justificationis anteponat. You need not doubt but that I am in earnest here,
for I am ambitious of his Acquaintance. Now let us attend your Answer (and I
earnestly desire the Reader to observe it throughout.)

Why, first Pagnine, Buxtorf etc. are very good Hebraicians, Dr. Pocock is good
for the Arabique (He is so to a great Eminence in that, and many Languages
(with store of other good learning) besides, to say nothing of his rare
Christian virtues, the Crown of all.) Dr. Wallis for a Geometrician, (and so he
is in many singular endowments and abilities besides) Dr. Willis in Physic,
and so on. These, and such like Excellent men, are to be preferred in their way,
before such as never studied those sciences (a slender commendation for so
eminent and worthy Persons!) A whole Page and a half consumed in this ramble.
But now at last you will fall to the point, and tell me their names, who are
better Definers of Justification, Faith, and Imputation, and have delivered us
far more judicious, and digested thoughts of P. 47.
these things then my self. Indeed! your servant, was that ever any Question of
mine! And is this all you have to say in the matter, and in the audience of the
world too? not one syllable more. To save you farther labor, I yield to all
the worthy persons you have named (excepting only your own Disciples) I am not
worthy to be compared with them. I desire no man (young or old) to prefer me
before my Betters, least of all when I am singular, and walk alone.

But, Sr, with your favor, this will not do your work; we must have some other
account of, quem quibus, then what you have given us yet. I shall take leave to
present our indifferent Readers with a more ingenuous, and truer state of the
Question, far more suitable both to my plain meaning, and the clear purport of
your own direction. Let the case be this. There is ONE, who of late has raisd
much dust amongst us about the grand article of Justification, whether it be by
Faith without works, or by Faith and WORKS too. All our old renowned Divines on
this side, and beyond the seas, are unanimously agreed that Justification is by
Faith alone, i. e. without Works. This ONE Person has often published his
Judgment to the contrary. The matter is of very great concern by the
confession of both. So that a poor Academical Doctor may very rationally
enquire of you, who in this case is to be preferred; That ONE, or those Many.
If that ONE, then I am all most brought to the Person I sought for; and why
should he be so bashful to be willingly conceald? nay, why so injurious to the
Public? It Is true it would be some small reflection upon those innumerable
worthies who have gone before him, such as our Jewel, Rainolds, Abbot, White,
Field, Whitaker, Perkins, Andrews, Davenant, etc.

But Truth is Truth still, and men must not be over modest in it is cause, and
why may not ONE Lynceus, that can see through a stone wall, discover more then
a thousand that cannot? But now * See Mr Baxters Direct. (...).
if I am not to go along with him, then I am left still to herd it with the
illiterate Rulers and Majority: and if this be my duty, why should not that ONE
encourage me by his Example? nay suppose he is upon all occasions (as openly as
he yet thinks fit) persuading me, that they are more worthy to be directed by
him then he by them. To some such case as this, Sr, I expected your Answer, and
not a needless insignificant scorn of my poor endeavors in the cause of so
great a Truth.

There remains yet one small sub-question, and then I am quit at present from
the tediousest task I ever yet undertook. You desire me to tell you, whether
I differ from you in the rule of counsel, which you there gave your ignorant
people or no.

Sr, our young men in the University call this a Fallacy of several questions
in one. Your direction is built of various materials and several appartiments,
some of which I like well enough, others not. I am only concerned (as the blind
may see) about your matters of high and difficult speculation in the close of
your direction, wherein you would have that ONE man to be preferred before all
the rest. Amongst those in the Application of your rule you place the
Definition of Justification (i. e. undenyably (for all your mincing) the Thing
it self).

Now, Sr, without any rovings, wheelings, or evasions I give you this plain
Categorical answer, that I exceedingly differ from you, and that upon these two
Accounts:

1. Because I neither hold the Doctrine of Justification to be properly of
speculative concern, but wholly practical: nor 2. Do I think it to be so full
of difficulty, as your very discouraging suggestion to your ignorant People
imparts.

No matter of Speculation: For though in all Practical knowledge there be some
antecedent contemplation of the nature and properties of the End, or Object,
yet it is the End and scope alone, which gives the distinct and proper
denomination. In Ethics our scholars are taught the natures of moral acts,
virtues, and felicity it is self; yet we instruct them also that moral
Philosophy is a practical, not a speculative science, and that all they know of
these matters is to be referred and applied unto the great practical End, how
they may be morally happy, as the Philosopher tells us, (...) and if he did
not, all, that have but the ordinary use of reason, cannot choose but know.
Hence it follows, that Justification being at least the first step in order to
Eternal Happiness, the knowledge of this is no more of speculative concern,
then for a man to know his way home, especially when there is but One way, and
if that be mistaken he is in extremest danger of perishing in the way wherein
he goes. Indeed to know the certain number of the steps or paces between is a
speculative nicety, but to know his way thither, I am of opinion that every man
who has a home beleives it to be another thing; ask who comes next. We never
enter into the way of life till we are Justified, nor can we be Justified but
in the way and method of Gods own appointment. All other ways do but lead us
from our home.

Nor 2. Is the Doctrine of Justification so high and difficult, but that the
meanest christian may understand it sufficiently to Salvation, so far as words
can make it intelligible. And you have done little service to your weaker
christian (as well as to the great blessed charter of Salvation) to persuade
them otherwise, and to lead them out of the plain road into woods and mazes, to
that ONE Man of Extraordinary Judgment and clearness; no body must know what is
his name, or where he dwells; and so to whirle them about, till you have made
them so giddy, they know not whither to go.

Sr, I understand something at these years (without your Tutorage) of the duty
both of Pastors and People. But I know not what you mean to make the way to
heaven (revealed sufficiently to all, and wherein all are so much conoern'd) to
be a matter of high abstruse speculation, as if none but great scholars, and
men of extraordinary Judgment could by the right use of the Scriptures, and
other ordinary common means, be able to find it out, till they have met with
that Elias who is to solve all doubts; though here (blessed be God) there is no
doubt at all, whatever you have ill suggested to the contrary. The earth may
send up clouds enough to darken the noonday sun, but this does not hinder that
glorious Creature to be still both the Fountain of Light, and the most visible
of bodies. The Fancies, wits, Passions, and Interests of sinful men may put
strange colors upon the face of the clearest and most important truth, but
when the paint is brought to the fire, it melts off in a moment, to the just
reproach of such as daubed it on.

But, Sr, (to deal a little more freely with you) I cannot well swallow down
in the lump what you would have me and others to do, when you direct us to
prefer that ONE man before the Rulers and Majority of Votes, till you acquaint
us who that Gentleman is, and what sort of Rulers and Majorities you mean.

And first for the single Person (that Monarch in Divinity) to whom we are upon
differences to make our Appeals, I beseech you, Sr, how shall your Ignorant or
weaker Christian be able to Judge of fitness? If you think he may. I know no
reason he should be disgraced for an Ignorant. He had need to have a very
competent measure of abilities himself, who is to give his verdict of
another, even so far as to make him his super-Doctor of the Chair. Or must
he take all upon trust from that One man's Fancy of himself, or from others
that by many secret invisible Arts may be easily induced to cry him up? But
this is to make him a mere Tool, and to turn his discerning faculty into a
mechanisme of blind Obedience. Perhaps he may be no such Vnu^^ e multis, a
person, in the judgment of the most knowing and sober men, of no more then
ordinary parts, learning, or virtues, in all much exceeded by others, save in
the din of his name. He then cannot be your man, for that seems to be against
your own hypothesis.

Next it ought, I think, to be well considered in a case of so high
importance, quem quibus, to what Rulers and Majorities this ONE must be
preferred (and both plainly were my question) A learned intelligent Christian
(nay one of moderate abilities) in a case of Christianity before Heathens, no
doub^^ and little less for a judicious and pious Protestant before a packed
Synod, or Majority, who hang their eyes upon the lips of a Pope. But what
shall your Ignorant Protestant do? shall one single Protestants judgment in
such a case as Justification turn the scale upon the known declared judgment of
his own Church in conjunction with all the rest of the Reformed? I wish that be
no part of your meaning; and if it be, I like not your Balance; your direction
(at best) is a crude and dangerous Dictate, a Dividing, and not a Curing rule.
So you have my Answer to your question.

But, Sr, will you please to gratify me with your positive answer to one of
mine, for I despair of solving it my self: you desire me to tell you, p.
(...). whether in earnest I differ from you in your direction, or rule of
counsel you there give the ignorant peo^^ and without expecting my Answer one
minute, or hearing me speak one syllable for my self, I find presently your
dreadful sentence passed against me in this killing tone, are you not herein a
man singular even to admiration! are not all Protestants, Papists, P. 49.
christians, learned heathens agreed in the Rule I gave? what may be the
meaning of this outcry from a person of your veracity, meekness, charity etc.
which has almost driven me out from the society of men to eat grass with the
wild asses of the field? why, I must hold, whether I will or no, that a herd of
errant Ignoramns's is to be preferred before one learned Judicious man, and that
too in his own profession, as those that never read Logic, before Aristotle
etc. now let my answer prove what it will, I am condemned before hand, singular
even to admiration. Then I am set a telling I know not what, tell your
scholars, and the world, p. 48. Tell your scholars, you are but one and they
are many (which no doubt would be a great piece of news to them) ibid. Then
again, tell the world etc. p. 49. Doubtless there is something in that
unfortunate (though civil) request of mine, which galls you more then ordinary.
For these do not sound like words of mettle, but of pain, and Paroxysm.

But, Sr, will you please to let us walk out a little into the cooler air?
(for there is no breathing in this Stove.) What is it you would have m^ tell
all these people? why, to this effect (as before) that a child in his
horn-booke is to be prefe^d in his judgment of Latin, Greek, Hebrew etc.
before the ablest critics of the world in those Languages.

But pray, Sr, may not I be excused? whatever I think, it goes against me to
tell such stuff to the world, as my own mind and judgment. I would not trumpet
my own shame, (whoever do theirs) without a greater cause. I think my time may
be better employed by minding you that presses are a kind of sacred things, and
ought not to be profaned by the passions, interests, weaknesses, or
extravagances of men. In private and familiar discourses some greater liberty
may be allowed; but he that speaks to the whole world, owes reverence and
caution to it, without which every book we publish is little better then a
libel against our Reader; and even when we court him, we do but entitle him to
all the impertinencies and follies of our pens.

But above all, this can never be minded enough, that if of every idle word,
much more slanderous and reviling ones account shall be given in the day of
Judgment. Had you minded this (as you ought) you could not have vented those
very vain words (I will say no worse) you have done against me up and down this
preface; as also in the rest of your books where you mention my name.

You have yet a piece of another question, and then it will be high time for us
to make an end, and to think our readers may have some business besides. It Is
this, what mean you to bring in the intimation, Pref. p. 50.
that thus the great Truths of God will depend on humane suffrages; even
whether God shall be God. Sr, if you have not disused your Acquaintance with
the latin Tongue, and so mistaken, you might have englished the words I quote
out of Tertullian in the like case, with more sincerity. For any one may
quickly see, I make not the Divine Existence (as you would have me) an instance
of the great Truths of God (though I hope no harm if I did so) but as a
consequential dependent, whether it shall be so or no, upon the subjection of
the word of God to the will of man; especially of ONE man, in opposition to all
others.

Then you would have me to consider whether I do well to number Artificial,
Logical Definitions, controverted by the greatest Divines, with the great
Truths of God.

To which I answer 1. That I am ashamed you should thus over and over expose
your self with your most illogical evasion of logical and artificial
definitions; as if (supposing them true) they were not the same Re with the
definitum, as I have told you already. Good Sr, talk what you please in
private to such as understand not what you say, and let them give you a Grande
(...) for your pains: but you may do well to use more civility to the reason of
a scholar, though he has not yet worn out his freshmans gown.

2. I absolutely deny what you so rashly avow, that the definition of
justification is controverted by the greatest Divines. This is one of your
liberal Dictates. The Reformed Divines are all, I think, before your self
agreed about the nature of justification, its causes etc. and consequently
cannot differ about the Definition. Prove the contrary when you can, and let
these poor Fig Leaves alone; at least bestow them somwhere else.

The close of your Preface is a cover fit for such a Dish. You tremble not in
the audience of God and man to suggest again that hard-fronted Calumny P 52.
(how can any man call it less?) vz: that I prefer a majority of ignorants
before a learned man in his own profession; and thereupon sound your trumpet to
this tune, Is this fit Doctrine for a Doctor, and a Master of a Literate
society? you know not what the event of all this may be: for suppose now being
dragged in my scarlet (a habit more suitable for him that triumphs) at the
wheel of your chariot in the view of all men, I should happen to be degraded,
and turned out of my literate society; would it not trouble you? no doubt; but
then it might happen to be too late.

In the mean time, Sr, (without any disparagement to your own degree) the name
and quality of a DOCTOR and Master of a Literate society might have been
treated more civilly by you. And so let that go along with it is fellows. For
the pleasant speech to my hearers and scholars, you put into my mouth at
parting, I leave it as divertisement to any that has a mind to be merry upon so
sad an occasion: yet one Asteisme in it must not be omitted, which fronts it
thus; Hearers and scholars, this and that is the true definition of Faith and
Justification, even of the various sorts of Faith and Justification etc.

But, Sr, I fear your have has betrayed your memory, and made you forget that I
commend your own definition of faith (logical or artificial) with some needful
explanations; and therefore you might at least for my farther encouragement
have spared me there. As for the bringing all sorts of faith into one
definition, I confess my disability to do it, but shall leave it to such as are
skilled in making Definitions and their definitums two several things, with
whom it will be an easy work. So for your various definitions of Justification
constitutive, sentential, P. 50.
executive, in Foro Dei, in Foro conscientiae, etc. one would expect some more
then ordinary sense a coming by the train and rumble of words which attend it;
when indeed all looks like a mere artifice, to set people a gazing upon some
other matters while you are conveighing your self with the question out of the
way.

If it be not so, what need of this heap of distinctions here, when you know
the question betwixt us is of no other Justification, but the constitutive in
Foro Dei, that which makes us righteous in the court of heaven. I have nothing
to do with you yet in any else, as your own conscience will tell you when you
please. If you have not more justice and civility for your intelligent Readers,
I wish you would show more compassion to your ignorant homagers, and not thus
abuse them with your palpable evasions.

And now, Sr, if your pen can spare you a few minutes, I think you may do well
to reflect a little upon what you have done already. You have here and in
other places endeavored what you could to expose a person who had never been
uncivil to you, but rather had a fair respect for you; and indeed once took
you for a quite other man, then I have found you now. You have perverted the
plain sense of questions between us, hid your self from the ignorant in mists
and clouds, and impertinencies of words.

And are such WORKS as these the rounds of Jacobs ladders are these your steps
and stages to heaven; especially when upon all occasions, and even in this
Preface you tell us you are going to the great and dreadful tribunal? will you
go out of the world thus? I heartily pray you may not, and hope you will not.

I cannot end without begging the Readers pardon for this trouble I have given
him though in my just and necessary defense. I know it must needs be tedious to
him, which has been so in such a measure to my self.

One word more to you, Sr, and I have done. First, if any words have escaped
me, of greater plainness and liberty then I would otherwise have used, I desire
you would lay your hand upon your breast, and consider what (indeed
unsufferable) provocations you have given me, by your odious representations of
me to the world in all the material part of your Preface (such as if they were
true I were fit enough to be begged for a fool) Your vain triumphs and
insultings over me, from nothing but idle fancies of your own. Let the equal
reader judge between us.

Next, that being now so well acquainted with you, I intend no farther reply to
any thing your shall think fit to publish against me hereafter, nor indeed to
any other upon these controversies; contenting my self to have delivered my
Judgment thus far; wherein if you, or any man remain unsatisfied, you may, for
me, enjoy your opinions in peace; resolving to contend withno man for the small
vulgar triumph of the last or loudest word: yet not despairing, but God in his
time will infuse courage into men of far more abilities then my self to defend
his cause. So wishing you all the happiness (Temporal, and Eternal) I do to my
self, I bid you FAREWELL.

From my Country-Habitation, Jun. 18.
Prove. 9. 8. 9. Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee: Give instruction to a
wise man, and he will be yet wiser.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 12. lin. 10. read effect. page 14. lin. 6. read wriggles. page 29. lin.
17. read scholars. page 27. lin. ult. read imports.


