A GOOD DAY Well Improved, OR FIVE SERMONS

Upon Acts 9. 31. Two of which were Preached at Paul's, and Ordered to be
Printed.

To which is annexed a Sermon on 2 Timothy 1. 13. Preached at St. Mary's in
Cambridge, on the Commencement Sabbath, June 30. 1650.

By ANTHONY TUCKNEY D. D. and Master of St John's College in Cambridge.

The land had rest, and he had no war in those years, because the Lord had
given him rest: Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build, etc. So they built
and prospered. 2 Chronicles. 14. 6, 7. LONDON: Printed by J. F. for I. Rothwell,
1656.

To the Right Honorable Sr CHRISTOPHER PACK Knight, Lord Major, together with
the Honorable Court of Aldermen of the Famous City of LONDON.
Ever Honored,
THe ordinary excuse which many usually make for publishing their Writings; by
laying the fault upon the importunity of friends, is grown so threed-bare, that
it is now almost past wearing; and yet such is my poverty, that I have nothing
else wherewith to cover my nakedness in the putting forth of this poor piece
now presented to you. It contains a few Sermons, all first preached in the
Universitie, but two of them afterward at Paul's, before You and the rest of
that Honorable Audience, which by the Order of your Court, sent to me, I was
desired to Print; how unwillingly I best know, who should best know my own
weakness, and what course I took to avoid it, My Lord, you can very well
witness. But seeing by your Honors Command, they must come forth, be pleased
to understand that He who has Naomies field must Ruth. 4. 5.
have Ruth also. Those two, which you are pleased to call for, had their
Fellows, which they cannot part with: And therefore, as when Gehazi asked one
talent of Naaman, he bad him 1 King. 5. 22, 23.
be content, and take two; So when you ask but for two, I am more liberal, and
desire you to be content to take five or six: not to patronize the Truth in
them; that is Gods, which He will own and maintain; but to express the sense
of those obligations which your Honor has by many favors laid upon me, which
have forcibly drawn me to this, from which otherwise I had a very great
aversation: and if by the blessing of God hereby any further service may be
done to him or his Church, it will be the rejoicing of

Your servant in the Work of the Gospel ANTHONY TUCKNEY.
Cambridge Oct. 10. 1655.
A GOOD DAY WELL IMPROVED.
Act. 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and
Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the
comfort of the holy Ghost were multiplied.
IT is accounted to be a bad 1. Sermon preached in Paul's, July 16. 1654.
sign, if the sick man grow more sick after sleep: but if better, there are
then some hopes of his recovery. So here, The Churches of Christ, as to outward
respects, had been brought to a very low, weak, and sick condition by that
Calenture or fiery trial, which had dispatched Steven, Chap. 7. and afterward
brake out, and spread further to the persecution and scattering of the whole
Church at Jerusalem, Chap. 8. 1. And Saul still breathing out threatenings and
slaughter, did blow the coal to carry the flame as far as Damascus, in the
beginning of this Chapter, but his Spirit was happily cooled, in the sequel of
it, and with it the heat of that persecution, and now (...), (as the like are
called Chap. 3. 19.) cooling, refreshing times came from the presence of the
Lord, and so we find the heat of the fever abated, and the sick spouse fallen
to her rest, Then had the Churches rest, and then if He sleep, the Disciples
concluded he would do well, especially if upon it all proved better, John 11.
12.
as here it did; for when they had rest, they were edified, and walking in the
fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost were multiplied.

And so in the Text we may observe these three particulars.

1. The formerly afflicted and wearied Churches rest; Then had the Churches
rest, etc.

2. This crowned with two most happy Concomitants, or consequents; They were
edified, they were multiplied.

3 Both these set out by two as happy means and causes of them; viz. Their
walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost. Blessed
flocks of Christ's sheep! that thus come up Cant. 4. 2.
from the washing in the waters of affliction. None barren, whilst they are
thus multiplied; and all bearing twins, in these two lovely pares, walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, and so were both
edified and multiplied.

And happy we! if we could go in the footsteps of those flocks, that Cant. 1. 8.
seeing God in mercy has begun to give us (as he did them) rest, or (as the
word is) Peace, this peace (...).
may not make us proud and petulant, but that with them we may now, more then
ever, walk in Gods fear, and that fear not disspirit us, but may be sweetened
and animated with the comforts of the holy Spirit, that so in stead of those
many ruins and pullings down in our former blusters, now in this fair weather,
we may begin to think of building up and edifying our selves and others in
faith and love; and whereas in our former wars men have been minished, and
sins, and factions, and furies have swarmed, the true Churches of Christ, and
true Saints in those Churches, and true Graces in those Saints may be now
increased and multiplied. This indeed would be even an heaven upon earth, a new
Rev. 21. 2.
Jerusalem (the vision of peace) coming down from heaven.

A blessed remembrance of what was in those best and primitive Churches, in the
beginning of the Gospel, and a more happy first fruits, and pledge of what is
now hastening on in the most glorious Churches in the end of it, yea of what
shall never be ended, but perfected in glory.

I begin with the first blessing in those first words, Then had the Churches
rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, which need not much
explication.

Then, or therefore, (...). Calvin. Beza. Piscato^ and Tyndal. Numero plurativo
quod tum, etc. Erasm.


The Churches, which some read Congregations, in the plural number, the Church
in the first verse of this Chap. which was at Jerusalem, upon the dispersion
there mentioned became Churches, one multiplying into many.

Had rest, the Greek is (...), Grotius in locum, and de jure belli, etc. lib.
1^ cap. 2.
Peace, for so they called the rest they then had from persecution: as the
Psalmist phraseth it, rest from the days of adversity, Psalm. 94. 13.

Throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria. That is, throughout the whole
compass of Isreal's inheritance and possession, these three (as Geographers
tell Mr. Moore alii.
us) making up that whole Country.

Hence the Doctrinall observation is,

That after the persecutions and wearisome troubles of the Church, God has his
times for their peace and rest. It is Chrysostomes observation upon the Text.
(...). Post nubila Phoebus, Sunshine after showers, a calm after a storm, and
a Canaans rest, after a tedious wandering in the wilderness: So we read that
after Moses his tiresome conduct, Israel at last came to their rest, Deuteronomy. 12.
13. and after his successor Joshuahs many conflicts, it is added, that the land
had rest from war, Josh. 14. ^5.

But this with some difference, both of the foregoing trouble, and following
rest.

For the foregoing trouble.

1. Sometimes it is but short before rest comes, but a short cold blast, and
then a long fair summers day, Anger but for a moment (nay sometimes but for a
very little moment, Isa. 54. 7.) and weeping but for a night (and (...)
that no long winter night neither) and joy comes in the morning, Ps. 30. 5.
like Julian, a black pitchy (...).
cloud, but soon blown over: Or like a Summers shower, great and violent for
the present, but fair weather again presently.

2 But sometimes it is a long Winter storm, and yet at last a calm in the
close. Health after an Hectic. Israel comes at last out of Egypt, but it was
not till they had continued two hundred and fifteen years in that iron furnace;
and Judah afterward returns home from Babylon, but after seventy years
captivity, when those long since dead, and now dry Ezekiel. 37 2. 3.
bones lived again, of which some expound that in Cant. 2. 11, 12, 13. The
winter is past, the rain is over and gone, the flowers appear on the earth, and
the time of the singing of birds is come. And after the tedious winter of our
former too long war, such a Spring, both in a natural and politic sense, God
has pleased to send us this year, for which we are to be humbly and heartily
thankful.

For the following Rest:

1. After longer or shorter foregoing troubles, sometimes it is more firm and
lasting, as a settled consistency of health, after a former sickness: after the
215. years bondage in Egypt were above 900 years before Jerusalem was
destroyed, and for after times, when God in a little wrath had hid his face
from them for a moment, he promises with ever lasting loving kindness to have
mercy on them, Isa. 54. 8. And after 300. years of the Primitive Churches
hottest persecutions, at last the man child Constantine was born, who settled
Reyel. 12. 5.
the Church upon firm foundations of peace, which might have continued unshaken
much longer then they did, if their sins had not undermined them.

2. But sometimes this restored peace and rest of the Church looks liker a
Truce then a Peace: Some short lucida intervalla, as the Sun in a rainy day,
looking out now and then a little, but then presently again overclouded, as
Solomon says, clouds returning Eccles. 12. 8.
after rain; or like an aguish man's well-day, after a former ill-day, which an
after (and it may be worse) fit treads on the heel of: Thus up and down in
the days of Isreal's Judges, and Judahs Kings; so that these short abatements
or recoveries are but short breathing times only to recruit in, against (...)
Aeschyl. (...). Tertul. Apolog. Eusebii Chronic.
another bout; but refreshing bates by the way, presently after which we are
(it may be) to set upon the worst part of our journey both for weather and way
yet behind. Such was this rest or peace of the Church here in the Text, as
Calvin observes; for although Tiberius his better thoughts of Christ for that
time might a little cool the rage of enemies against Christians, to which Corn.
a lapide (I cannot say how fitly) reserreth this rest and quiet of the Church,
yet it was not long before this fire brake out more fiercely in Nero's first
general persecution; and before that, Paul who had with the first blown up
this fire, being now converted, is himself, together with the rest of of the
Church, sufficiently scorched with it in Judea, before he was sent bound to
Rome. So that these Halcyon days lasted not long before a storm came.

But (this premised) however, whether either the foregoing trouble, or
following rest be long or short (both which God in wisdom and faithfulness so
orders, as shall be for his own glory, and peoples good) yet it is his mercy
and indulgence, that in his own time and way he is pleased to give some respit,
and an issue 1 Cor. 10. 13.
with the temptation that we may be able to bear it, that we have not right
out, in this respect, an hell upon earth.

That as naturally we are evil, and only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.
5.
so we are not answerably miserable, that we are not only miserable, and that
continually. It Is best that with the Church it will be best at last, that
notwithstanding all the troubles of this life, the last article of the
Christian Creed, is life everlasting: That Is best, but this is well that in
this life, our Sun does not set in a cloud, but that Lamech at last begets a
Noah, of whom he can say, This same shall comfort us concerning the work Genesis
5. 28, 29.
and toil of our hands, as it may do us, that although it be very ill with us
for the present, yet it shall not be so for ever in another world, no, nor (it
may be) so always in this world: After wearisome troubles and persecutions,
God has his times for his peoples rest and peace. Then, or therefore, had the
Churches rest.

But you will ask, When, and wherefore is it, that God pleases it should so be?

In answer to which Queree, I

And first for the first question, 1. When.
When.

1. Then it was (say some) when Tiberius grew more favorable to Christ: and so
still, when Princes prove friends, enemies will not prove enemies, as when
Mordecai was advanced, Esth. 8. 17 or their enmity will not prove hurtful,
though they do, as when Ezra and Nehemiah were in place of government. If they
who are called the Shields of the earth will Psalm. 47. 9
protect the Church; the Archers either dare not shoot, or cannot hurt: when
Constantine that man-child Rev. 12. 5. 5.
before mentioned was born, and caught up to the throne of God, although the
Dragon casts out floods to drown all, the earth will help the woman; when kings
and Queens prove nursing Fathers and nursing mothers of the Church, the Rev.
12. 16. Isa. 49. 23.
happy Nursing then takes its rest, and sleeps sweetly in such strong arms, and
in so warm a bosom.

What great cause therefore have we according to the Apostles 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
exhortation to quicken our prayers and praises for such, that under them we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty? otherwise
the body will not take its rest, whiles the head aches, and is troubled with hot
and fiery vapors: Let Governors be Zamzummims, i. e. boisterous wicked ones,
(though they call themselves Rephaims, i. e. Healers or See the English Annot.
on Deu. 2. 20. See Manasseh ben Israel, council. in Number. quaest. 15. page 215.
Physicians) little health or ease is to be expected from them. But the Jewish
writers say that Israel was beholden to Moses for Manna, to Miriam for Water,
to Aaron for the Cloud; for such blessings of refection and protection we must
be beholden to God in his blessing of good Governors, which we are therefore
to seek to him, and bless him for: And if Lam. 4. 20.
Judah under Josiahs shadow might comfortably live even among the heathen, how
much more may we under such Solomon's, whilst we sit at home under our own
vines and fig tree? When magistrates are Abimelecks, not so much Kings as
Fathers of the Church, the house God is in safety: and when Melchisedeks Heb.
7. ^.
are kings of Salem, i. e. kings of peace, Jerusalem will make good its own
name, and prove a vision of peace. Jerusalem will be inhabited in Jerusalem, as
it is, Zech. 12. 6.

2. When persecutors prove preachers. So here in the two foregoing chapters,
and in the beginning of this, you had read of Saul's persecution, and afterward
of his conversion, and in the close of that relation comes in my Text, and
tells us that then the Churches had rest. Rest, when both such a restless
adversary as he was, for his part, was taken off and quieted.

As also when others, (though as much enraged, yet) from his strange change
were much stounded and discouraged.

It is promised to Gods Israel, that they shall dwell safely in the wilderness,
and sleep in the woods, (expressions of greatest peace and security) but it is
when the evil beasts cease out of the land, Ezekiel. 34. 25. especially if Wolves
become Lambs, and Leopards Kids, then none hurts or destroys in Gods holy
mountain, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Of later years we have with the prophet cried
Habak. 1. 2.
out of violence and confusion: but it was when the Ministers and people of God
had as sadly complained, that although too many were Sainted, yet too too few
were savingly converted. But how firmly, after all our woeful disturbances,
might our begun peace be established, if our great disturbers of it, being
indeed turned home to God, with Paul, did preach and maintain Gal. 1. 23.
the faith, which hitherto they have destroyed? Did such in this way make their
peace with God, we might more certainly expect to have more peace one with
another? How speedily was Egypt freed from the plague of Locusts, Exodus 10. 13.
with 19.
which an East wind brought, when a contrary West wind took them all away?
but as long as they swarm, expect (though as there, with some respites) a
continuance and increase of further plagues, which after an Egyptian darkness,
may at last end in a Red sea of blood.

3. But Calvin, and before him, Theophylact and Chrysostom refer this peace of
the Church in the Text, not to Paul's conversion but to his departure from those
parts, it being said in the verse before the Text, that when the Greek Jews
went about to slay him, the Brethren brought him down to Cesarea, and sent him
forth to Tarsus, and then immediately follow the words of the Text, Then, or
therefore, had the Churches rest throughout all Judea etc. For, although other
of the Apostles continued there still, (...). Theophyl.
yet the Jews were less troubled with them, as having had their mad rage
something abated toward them by their longer continuance with them, and often
appearing before them, and for that the people magnified them. But this new
upstart Paul, who labored more abundantly then them all, troubled them more
then all the rest, so that they could not be quiet for him nor the Churches for
them, till they were rid of his company, and then they being quiet, the
Churches had rest.

Nor was this any imputation to Paul, as though he had been a trumpet of
Sedition, and a 2 Samuel 20. 1. 1 King. 18. 17.
troubler of Israel, but rather a clear conviction that they had fore eyes,
which would not endure so great a light; and that on the contrary, he was the
sweet 2 Cor. 2.
savor of life even in them that perished, quod solo propinquitatis suae odore
impios ^gerit in rabiem, as Calvin well expresses it. He was not a guilty
fugitive Jonah Jonah 1. 12. 15.
who must be cast overboard, that the boistrous sea may be calmed, but they
were like a woefully distempered Patient, who raveth at the sight of his
Physician, as (we know) the Devil Mark 9. 25, 26.
raged and rent the man, when Christ came to cast him out of him.

Now the good Lord keep ours, and all the rest of his Churches peace, from ever
being founded in such a Solitude, pacem vocant, solitudinem faciunt, from being
like the Sybarite^ rest, that cannot endure the noise of the Cocks crow, or
the Smiths hammer, lest it should awaken them: such a peace would be built upon
a very sandy foundation, as Theirs, amongst us, was, who accounted not
themselves quiet and safe till they had driven thousands of the godly from
amongst us into a remote wilderness; which I doubt was one thing amongst
others, by which they hastened their own overthrow. However this by the way,
teaches,

1. Even the best, both Ministers and Christians, to prefer the Churches
public peace before their own private convenience, and when their presence
cannot consist with the Churches quiet, even to sacrifice (if it be only)
their own interest, that the people of God may have a peace offering, with
Jonah to be content to be cast overboard, that the sea may be quiet, and with
Paul not to Act. 19. 31.
adventure into the Theater, who was here willing to be sent away to Tarsus
when he and the Disciples of Christ, through the malice of his enemies, for his
sake could not continue quiet together in Jerusalem. In this case Athanasius
goes, and Chrysostom is sent into exile; and Clemens Epist. ad Corinth. 1.
page 69.
Romanus in his (...) etc. makes account that every generously minded and
compassionate Christian will readily say, (...) etc. (...), if Schism, and
contention, and sedition arise for my sake, I Will be gone whither ever you will
have me, only let the flock of Christ be in peace and safety. And thus as Abel
by his faith even being dead speaks, so a Minister or a Christian even in his
forced absence edifieth, and that (it may be) more then his Heb. 11. 4.
presence sometimes would. This therefore is his duty.

2. Hence also take notice of Gods wisdom, power, faithfulness, and mercy, who
knows how to provide for his peoples good by very unlikely means, as here for
his Churches peace by the absence of those that preached the Gospel of peace.

It is the absence of God only, which is the certain and necessary cause of
his peoples disquiet, who, whilst he is but present, may (as here in the Text)
have rest, when best either Men or Ministers are absent. How little need has
God of our best help in his work? and how all-sufficient is he, who can do all
for us, when all outward helps are wanting? He could at the first make the
earth bring forth, before there Genesis 2 5.
was any rain to water it, or man to till it; and here we find him laying down
his people to their rest after Paul's sunset.

4. I add a 4th time, (which the Text also affords) when God after trouble
gives his Churches rest, and that is when the persecution and trouble is grown
up to the height, and the burden of it now proves insupportable. Such was that
of this Church, which ushered in this peace here mentioned, for besides the
other Jews rage, little Saul made great havoc of the Church, Act. 9. 3.
and being (as he himself confesses) (...) more exceedingly zealous of the
traditions of his fathers, (...) hyperbolically or beyond measure Gal. 1. 13,
14.
he persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it, (...) the word is, and that is
quasi grassator and praedo, as Hierom interprets it, an unmercifull spoiler,
and cruel enemy he laid all wast. Very many, and as sad are the expressions
which we meet with in this book of the Acts, to this purpose, which set out his
rage against Christ and his Churches.

At the Protomartyr Stevens death we read, Act. 7. 58. that the witnesses who
stoned him laid down their clothes (that they might be more ready and nimble at
that devilish exploit) at his feet, who though he was (as is conceived by some
of the Ancients) both coaetaneus and cognatus, both of the same age, and also
of the same kindred with Steven, his Cosen, yet withal,

Being naturally acris and fervidi ingenii (as one says) of a quick spirit;

And also in the heat of his young blood;

And this yet more heated with zeal for his Jewish traditions, yea and (as some
think) with emulation of Stevens eminency, which amongst young men of the same
rank and age, (whilst they live together especially) is too frequent and
ordinary:

He grew so hot, that (as he himself confesses, Act. 22. 20.) he was (...),
two very sad words, the latter of which signifies that from his soul he was
very well pleased with it, and approved it, and the other, in the proper sense
of it, tells you, that he was not only a by-stander, looking on and taking
content in it, but that he was Dux and choragus, a principal Actor and
superintendent in that bloody action: so as that although he did not cast one
stone at him, yet in true Interpretation (as Austin observes) he stoned Vt in
manibus omnium ipse lapidare videretur. Sermon. 1. de Sanctis.
himby their hands.

Nor was this heat of his, or the other Jews rage quenched with Stephens
blood, but it flamed out to a (...), to a very great persecution of the whole
Church, Act. 8. 1. so as (if Dorotheus say true) no fewer then two thousand
disciples more were put to death about the time of Stephens Martyrdom; that
the Scripture says not, but this it does, that all the rest were scattered
abroad, v. 1. whilst Saul made havoc of the Church v. 3. the word here is
(...), answering to his (...) before, Gal. 1. 13. and a both express such a
vastation as a wild bore makes in a vineyard, when he rooteth up all, or as a
cruel enemy, when he has new broken into a besieged town or city, who with
fire and sword lays all waste.

Nor his only to them that are found in arms, or abroad in the streets, as is
usual in war, but those whom the savage Soldier spares, this then
persecutor Butchereth, for he enters into the houses, nay into every house
((...) domatim the words are) and there without pity of age or sex haleth and
draggeth men and women into prison, verse. 3.

Nor is this rage yet quieted, for chap. 9. you read (...). He still, and yet
further breathes out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the
Lord, like some roaring Lion, or fiery-breathed Dragon, he belcheth and spits
out fire, v. 1. and gets a blood inquisition Commission of the high Priest to
reach as far as Damascus, which they compute to be no less then five days
journey from Jerusalem, (How fast and how far do they go whom the devil and
their own malice drive?) that if he might find any (he meant none should
escape him) of that way, whether men or women, (none, it seems, must be
pitied by him) he might bring them bound to Jerusalem: and why to Jerusalem?
not only because there was the chief Judicature of such matters, but withal
because there the Judges were more enraged, and there he had more power, and
where he had been binding before, and delivering them into prison, yea and did
persecute them even unto the death, chap. 22. 4, 5.

And when they were put to death (...) he gave his voice against them, not (it
may be) as a Judge, he had not got up to the Bench, but as an Informer or
by-stander at the bar, he earnestly manifested his approbation; answerable to
his (...) before mentioned, or as a busy Pursivant or officer who carried the
sentence of the Court (that (...) may signify) and looked to it to see it put
in execucution, Acts 26. 10. To which add only what there follows, v. 11.
And I punished them often, in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme,
and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange
cities. Every word almost has a very heavy Accent and Emphasis.

(...), I punished them, and you may be sure it was not lightly, he laid on
load.

But you might think, to prevent his own weariness it was but seldom; nay
(...) it was very often: we that are so soon weary in Gods service, even when
weary are yet unweariable in the Devils drudgery, Isa. 41. 12. But although it
was often in one place, yet that little body could not be every where, yes the
more nim^le to skip up and down, and therefore it is added, that it was (...) in
every Synagogue, yea so as to persecute them (...) (...) to strange or remote
cities; Damascus (by what you heard before) was at a pretty distance.

But although in all this he sorely tyrannized over their bodies, and outward
man, yet (you may hope) he attempted not their souls; our Savior seems to
set bounds to these raging waves, Hitherto shall you go, and no further; and
therefore says, that when they have killed the body (...), they have nothing
more that they can do, Luke 12. 4. And blessed be God, that they have not in
that sense which our Savior there intends, and yet the devilish Assasinate
after he has made his wretched enemy blaspheme Christ, can then stab him, that
he may undo body and soul both together; our Saul arose not to that height of
hellish malice, but he went very far when he compelled them to blaspheme.

And might he not then well add (...), that he was raving mad, nay, (...),
exceeding mad, when he added a (...) (...), where our Savior said there was
not a (...)? Now truly this was a (...) Jam. 1. 21.
an abundant superfluity of malicious madness, so that where sin did thus
abound, unless (...) Romans 5. 20
(...), grace had not much more abounded, (as he humbly and thankfully
afterward acknowledged it did to him in his (...) that it was exceeding
abundant, 1 Timothy 1. 14.) he had been past hope of receiving any mercy from God,
who had showed so little, but the quite contrary to his people.

But it may be thought I have stepped too far out of the way, and insisted too
long on the view of this sad spectacle, you will more easily pardon me, while
ye think that such doleful objects sometimes make us stand still, and fix our
eyes on them, 2 Samuel 20. 12. 2 Samuel 2. 23.
as much as those that are more pleasing. But to return to what I intended, all
these sad passages of Paul's outrage I have the rather mentioned, and so largely
insisted upon, to show,

How far some may go in a desperate way, whom yet afterward God in mercy may
bring home:

And how far blind zeal, and seeming good intentions (such were in Paul all
this while) may carry men in such a way.

And how open, ingenuous, punctual, and abundant, such (as Paul here was)
should be in their 1 Cor. 15. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
humble confessions afterward.

But especially, and to my present purpose, to show when it is, that after
foregoing troubles and exercises, God uses to vouchsafe rest to his wearied
people and Churches, Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
and that is after the heaviest pressures; a birth after the sharpest throws;
daybreak, when it had been darkest a little before. So Christ tarrieth till
the fourth watch of the night, and comes in the height of a storm, to make a
calm of it, when the ship was now sinking, Mat. 14. 24, 25. as in the same
place when Peter was also sinking, he then immediately stretched forth his hand
and caught him, v. 30, 31. When their afflictions are so continued, multiplied,
aggravated, that they can bear no more, God will then stay no longer, but he
that shall come, will come, and then not tarry: Then a still voice comes, and
God in it, after the wind, earthquakes and fire; after an Hab. 2. 3. 1 King.
19. 11, 12. Genesis 26. 20, 21, 22.
Ezekiel and Si^nah, then a Rehoboth. Then (as it is in the Text) or Therefore,
the Churches had rest.

And if you ask why so? or Why.
wherefore Then?

I answer with the Psalmist, God remembers us in our low estate, because his
mercy endures Psalm. 126. 26.
for ever. Because his mercies endure for ever, therefore it is that our
misery; do not last always. The Churches affliction is not, because Gods
faithfulness and compassion is everlasting. And hence it is, that although (as
the Apostle says) (...), if need 1 Pet. 1 6.
be the people of God be in heaviness through manifold temptations, yet when
that Need is over, because he does not willingly (or from the heart) afflict or
grieve the children of men (much less his own children) when the child is
humbled, the Father more willingly casts away the rod, then ever he took it
into his hand; and therefore although (being constrained) he sometimes, and
that for our good causes grief, yet then he will have compassion, according to
the multitude of his mercies, Lam. 2. 32, 33. And if at any time we think he
tarrieth long before he shows mercy, it is only because indeed we stay long
before we are fit to receive it: Make we but haste, and he will not stay long,
he then tarrieth nor, and so reconcileth that seeming contradiction, Luke 18.
7. with 8. that although he bear long with them, viz. Till they be ready, yet
when once they are, he will then avenge them speedily; so that although (...)
He reserveth wrath for his enemies, Nahum 1. 2. yet it is expressly said, and
that in the same word, on the contrary, (...) he will not keep anger for ever,
toward his children, Psalm. 103. 9. they are his own words, I will for this
afflict the seed of David, but not for ever, 1 King. 11. 39.

Such, and so great is the sweetness of his goodness.

Such is the wisdom that is from above in us, and therefore infinitely more
transcendent that above all is in God, (...), gentle and easy to be entreated,
James 3. 17.

And such also his faithfulness and righteousness, not to forget his servants
work and labor of love, and patience of hope, in their former sufferings, but
to reward them with proportionable after rest, and comfort; and so we read,
Isa. 40. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my peopeople: double comfort, as they had
received of him double for their sins, v. 2. Nor this only at death, when they
shall most certainly rest from their labors; nor in Heaven only, where they
Rev. 14. 13
shall have an everlasting sabbath of rest from all their toilsome Heb. 4. 9
travel here; but oftentimes even in this life, Christ knows how to make his
flock to rest at Cant. 1. 7.
noon, as he took his Disciples aside, and bad them rest a while, when by their
wearisome employment they had not so much leisure as to eat, Mat. 6. 31. which
we have most elegantly expressed by the Prophet, comparing Gods tenderest care
of his wearied servants, to the wise and merciful Husbandmans care of his
wearied beast, Hose. 11. 4. I was to them as they that take off the yoke on
their jaws, (as the Plowman does from off his oxen, when come home from work)
and I laid meat unto them. This and much more there is in God that can afford
it.

And proportionably as much need (as we before heard) to be afflicted, then
when humbled and reformed, to be again relieved and comforted.

For otherwise,

1. The Church would be wholly wasted and consumed, which Christ in spite of
all the malice and rage of man or devils will have continued, Mat. 16. 18. Such
Skarefires therefore need be timely quenched, and that in Job 38. 11. said to
those overflowing seas, Hitherto shall ye come, and no further, and here shall
your proud waves be stayed, which otherwise would consume and overwh^lm all. So
he provides, that such days shall be shortened, because else, no flesh should
be saved, Mat. 24. 22.

2. Or in case by reason of his promise the Church should not f^^l* yet the
spirits of his servants would be very subject to faint and fail, and sink down
into despondency; and therefore to prevent that, he promises that he will not
contend for ever, nor be always wroth, Isa. 57. 17.

3. Or in case they sink not down, yet too ready they may be to start out to
some sinful and unwarrantable means for their ease, and safety. For so much,
and so long affliction may serve to try and express their grace, which God
desires, and therefore they shall have it; but if more and longer, it would
(it may be) occasion them to manifest their weakness and corruption, which God
would prevent, and therefore There and Then takes off his hand. So much burden
would serve to ballast the ship, but more would sink it. The one is their load,
to keep them from running out, and kicking; the other would break their back,
and therefore is not laid on, or if it be, is soon taken off again. Scripture
expressions to this purpose are very elegant and pregnant, as that of Gods
correcting his people (...) in judgment and not in anger, Jer. 10. 24. In
judgment? you will say, that is a heavy word, but when it is added, and not in
anger, that very much lightens it, and tells you it is put in a more gentle
sense; for modice, in modo, in wisdom and moderation, and not (as too often it is
with us) in rage and fury, which knows none.

Answerable to which is that other expression, Isa. 27. 8. In measure thou will
debate with it, he stays his rough wind, in the day of the east wind. The
words in the Original are somewhat difficult, and are diversely expounded by
Interpreters: amongst others this may be one way of unfolding them, that
although a piercing east wind may sometimes blow very cold upon Gods
inheritance, yet when it is once grown so rough, as if continued, it would
blast and blow away all, God then stays and calmeth it; and when in the
beginning of the verse he is said in measure to debate with it, we have him, as
it were, measuring out the afflictions of his people, and although sometimes
the measure may be full, yea and double, as the word (...) there used, is
doubled, yet it is still in measure, and never unmeasurable, In mensura ista,
and non supra, Schindler ad vocem (...)
as He paraphraseth it.

A third, and as strong an expression to this purpose, we have in the foregoing
Chapter of that Isa. 26 7.
Prophecy, and as in the former expression we had God measuring, so in this we
have him weighing his peoples affliction, Thou most upright do weigh the path
of the just; which some render by complanare, and understand it of Gods making
smooth and even those former rough ways which before they walked, and were so
subject to stumble in: and that way it will also serve to my present purpose;
but the word (...) there used, most properly signifies the weighing of any
thing in a balance; and so our wise and gracious Father deals with us in the
way of his judgments, like the careful Apothecary, who weighs every dose
prescribed to his sick Patient, to the least grain, that he shall not have so
much as the least scruple more or less then shall be truly medicinal: but what
ever they do, we may be sure that our heavenly Physicians course of Physic is
never so long, or strong, as to undo his Patient, but most wisely weighs,
and pondereth both what it is, and our strength is.

And therefore has promised that the rod of the wicked shall not rest on the
lot of the righteous, lest they put their hands unto iniquity, Psalm. 125. 3. A
most sweet and gracious promise! which as on the one hand it hints to us, that
not only infirmi the weak, but even justi, those that are righteous and more
confirmed, yet fracti tandem malis (as Calvin speaks) by over heavy and too
long continued burdens of themselves may be overborn, and so give out, (as a
strong wall may start out when too heavy a weight is laid on it) even so a
Samson may be overcome by a D^lilahs continued, Vt justonum manus quae p^ius
erant quasi devinctae, and quarum motus compositi erant ad Dei arbitrium, nunc
quasi solutae ad peccandi licentiam ferantur. Calvin in Psalm. 125. 3.
instant, and strong solicitations; so that those very hands, which were
before bound to their better behavior, may be stretched out to take of a
forbidden fruit.

So on the other hand to prevent this miscariage, God in much faithfulness and
tenderness so tempereth, lightneth, and shortneth such overgrown pressures,
that they may have an 1 Cor. 10. 13.
issue with the temptation, and so be able to bear it, and therefore when it is
once come to this, then (...), it is time then Psalm. 119. 126.
for God to work, and then (as it is in the Text) the Churches have rest.

Which comfortable Truth should help to wean us from this God may please to
indulge us in the way, yet our full and everlasting rest we shall never attain
unto, till we arrive at that our most happy journeys end. Sometimes we read
that Judge. 3. 11. 30.
Israel had rest forty, and sometimes eighty years: and so still the Church and
people of God have sometimes shorter, and sometimes longer breathing times; but
when best and longest, they are but more full Baits, and refreshments by the
way, and therefore to such, even then, the Prophet says, Arise, this is Micah.
2. 10. Deuteronomy. 12. 9
not your rest, as Moses before told Israel, ye are not come to your rest, when
yet they were, at that time, almost got through the wilderness: nay in that
last year of their travel, they had longest journeys and greatest exercises:
and so it may be with the latter days of particular Churches or Christians, for
outward matters, the last of their way may prove the foulest and deepest, yea,
in which some of them have met with greatest exercises of the inward man as
well as the outward: much variety herein is in Gods several dispensations with
his p^rticular servants, but in the general we may conclude, That it is in the
grave where the weary Isa. 57. 2.
are for altogether at rest, Job 3. 17. and in Heaven only (which was typed out
by Canaans rest) that a perfect and everlasting Sabbatisme or rest remains
for the people of God, Heb. 4. 9. Ruth Ruth 1. 9.
was to find rest in her husbands house, and so must the spouse of Christ only
in her husbands, and that is heaven, where only it is that we shall never be
troubled more. The world to come is the world (say the Rabbines) where all is
well. There, then the Churches once for all shall have rest, and therefore take
we not up our rest till we get thither, and meanwhile in this our distance and
absence; let this be the frequently reiterated wish and voice of every one of
our Souls, Vtinam domi essem, (as it is in the proverb) although; through Gods
mercy, sometimes here I may not be very ill at ease; yet I would that I were at
home though, I am sure I shall there be perfectly well in mine everlasting
rest: here sometimes we See Z' ne by in loucium.
may be (...), Phil. 2. 28. less sorrowful then at some other times we are,
but never altogether (...), wholly without all touch of grief and disquiet; and
therefore to that man who takes up his rest on earth, me thinks Drexelius
propounds a very fit question, An coelum desperasti? Ho^olog p^^t t. 2. in
Epilogo.
vain man but do thou wholly despair of heaven, that thou take up thy
statio^ here on earth? for shame up and be stirring, look and walk, pant and
breath after heaven, and what ever outward rest God sends thee, let it only
refresh and enable thee to unwearied restless motions toward thy best home,
where thou may rest in thy dearest Fathers and Husbands warm bosoms, never
more to be disturbed or disquieted. Long for heaven; that is the first.

And be looking long after some Christ, under Constantine and other Christian
Emperors, enjoyed many joyful Sabbaths of rest, but yet they have not been
without their soar working days. Pope and Turk and other enemies have proved
such cruel Talkmasters, that the Church has too sad occasion to take up again
the old Lamentation, Our necks are under persecution, Lam. 5. 5.
we labor and have no rest: and that other, Woe is me Jer. 4. 31.
now, for my soul is wearied because of murderers.

But yet after all this God promises a time, when his people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in quiet resting places, Isa. 32. 17, 18.
when the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of Finch. in
locum.
righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.

And after that both the Beast and false Prophet, and Gog and Revel. 19. 20.
and 20. 9, 10.
Magog, and together with them, the Devil that deceived them, shall be cast
into the lake of fire; we read of a new heaven and a Revel. 22. 1, 2. 4.
new earth, and of a new Jerusalem (a vision of peace) that shall come down
from God out of Heaven (and therefore is to be on earth) when God shall wipe
away all tears from his peoples eyes ((...), out of their Brightman
very eyes: so to dry up the spring, that as there shall be no outward
occasion, so no inward ability of weeping) and there shall be no death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain, all such former things being passed away.

This (indeed) the Scripture Dan. 12. 1, 2.
seems to express, may be ushered in with greatest troubles, as usually
greatest births of Gods bounty are wont to be: and should those happier times
(as some are ready to think) be now nearer and faster coming on, our present
days and tempers, or distempers are such as may make a very sad preface to so
happy a work; but yet this dark stormy night shall not hinder Sunrise, and that
clear morning and bright day, in which the Churches shall enjoy more rest, then
hitherto they have attained. But what I have thus said, I desire may not be so
understood and interpreted, as though

1. Either I hereby intend, with many now adays, to cry up a fifth Monarchy, to
introduce confusion and Anarchy; for even in those happy days the Prophet
speaks of Kings that shall be nursing Fathers, and of Queens as nursing Mothers
to the Church of God, Isa. 49. 23.

2. Or that I either think, or wish, that what David says of Dan. 7. 22.
the Saints possessing the kingdom, should be the lot of many such as in our
days have monopolized the Title of Saints, which is made of late a term of Art,
and a very juggle, and assumed by Quakers, Ranters, Adamites, and other most
abominable Sectaries, Saints per Antiphrasin. As the unnatural Sodomites in
the old Testament are called (...) which word signifies Saints or holy ones:
they were Saint Sodomites, and ours are Saint Ranters, which has made the very
name of a Saint, and much more the persons of those that are truly such, to
profane Souls odious. Should such Saints as these are, once have the rule, it
is to be feared the Churches would have little of this rest which the Text
speaks of.

However, their frenzies should not prejudice the truth of God with
sober-spirited Christians, who upon their best thoughts shall, in the
Scripture, especially in the Prophets, find many promises of such peaceable
days not as yet fully accomplished, which therefore it is our duty to look, and
pray, and prepare for, as the sweet close of the Churches troubles in this
world, and a most joyful both pledge and praeludium of the Saints everlasting
rest in heaven.

Mean while in the last place, us of this Nation both of Gods mercy, and our
duty in reference to his present dispensations.

Some years since it was but little rest and peace, which the Churches and
servants of Christ among us had, either of conscience or outward man, through
some men's restlesness: That quarrel of Gods Covenant (when those Disturbers
sat still and were at Zech. 1. 11.
rest) he undertook in the late wars, that he might at the last (as the prophet
speaks) give rest Jer. 50. 34.
to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

But mean while, in those sad commotions and concussions the State came to have
as little Rest as the Church, when Country was destroyed of Country, and City
of City, and one Neighbor of another, so that there was no peace to him that
went out, or came in, 1 Chronicles. 15. 5, 6.
but great vexation was upon all the inhabitants of the land.

Which also proved a catching fire, and spread abroad, and was blown over to
other lands, with such an heat as all the waters in the Seas between us could
not quench, but they were all on a flame, so that we were encompassed not only
(as before by God and Nature we were) with a wall of water, but of fire too,
and this not (as in the Scripture promise) for our defense, but Zech. 2. 5.
threatening our ruin. I need not tell you of the vastness of the expense of it
to a Nation so much exhausted by former wars, nor of the stoppage and loss of
Trade, which should have helped to have born that expense; nor of those many
other dangers and mischiefs which would have accompanied and followed the
continuance of those wars so unnatural as against our own bowels, and so
unchristian whilst with Brethren of the same Religion: it was little rest
which we then had, and should in that way have had less.

But the God of peace has in mercy at last quenched those flames, and so
calmed those storms, that what was said of Asa's times, is in some measure
applicable to ours, the land had rest, and he had no war in those years,
because the Lord had given him rest, 2 Chronicles. 14. 6. Which we are all with
humble thankfulness to take notice of as His gift; for it is He that makes
wars to cease, He breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear asunder, and He
burns the Charrets in the fire, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 49. 9. And
therefore calls upon enemies, v. 10. and says, Vacate, and videte, Be still,
and know that I am God, as before he had done on his own people, Come and
behold the works of the Lord, v. 8. it is his work, and his mercy, and
therefore calls upon us for our duty; which is,

1. To eye, and own, and acknowledge God in all. Vacate and videte, now that he
has in any measure given us rest, that we may be vacant for God, at leisure to
consider of his doings, and to see that in the still calm Sunshine day, which
we could not so well discern through the storm and tempest. For otherwise we
shall be ready to be (as Calvin notes on that Psalm) ignavi and maligni in
consider and is ejus operibus, Either stupid, careless, and senseless to take
notice of any thing of God, or perverse or malignant in making a false
construction of all; that what weakness, folly, and injustice of men which we
have discovered in the late troubles we shall impute to God, in which an humble
and wary eye of Faith will plainly see divine power, wisdom and righteousness.

And on the other side we shall be prone to ascribe this begun peace, either to
blind Fortune, or to the wisdom and policy of quick-sighted men, which has
been spyed out for us by a more gracious all-seeing eye of God. But a watchful
Christian will have a more wakeing eye, than when God has given him rest, then
to close it, but will look up to heaven, and say, Deus nobis haec otia.

2. And this with all thankfulness This Tertullus thought was little Acts 24. 2.
enough for Felix, because that by him they enjoyed great quietness, and that
very worthy deeds were done to their Nation by his providence, and how does he
flourish in his complement? (...), we accept it always, and in all places most
noble Felix: how does he flaunt it with his universals, and superlatives with
Felix? who at most was but an inferior instrument of all that good to them, if
it had been true that he ascribes to him, for Historians write the Josephus
Antiqu lib. 20. cap. 6.
quite contrary; and his trembling whilst Paul reasoned of righteousness, C.
Tacitus. Annal. 12. Ant. Felix per omnem saevitiam ac libidinem, jus regium
servili ingenio exercuit.
and temperance, and judgment, v. 25. plainly argues that he was in his own
conscience very guilty. It was therefore most likely the Orators fawning
flattery which gave him the thanks and praise of what he never deserved. But
without such fained glozing, with what humble zeal, and affectionate
thankfulness should we receive from the hand of God, (who ever have been the
instruments) this so universal and superlative a mercy? that for the present
we enjoy so great a quietness, and that by his Providence all these (...) such
most worthy deeds and achievements (never to be forgotten, but to be had in
everlasting remembrance) have been and to this day are done to this Nation?

A mercy, 1. So great. 2. Vouchsafed to a Nation so unworthy.

1. How great the mercy is, you may the better conceive, if you will but think,
what a quiet harbor is in comparison of a troubled sea, a calm after a storm
to the mariner at sea, and a quiet Psalm. 107. 29, 30. Job 7. 2. Isa. 32. 2.
repose and rest in the cool shade to a tired labourer, or a sweltred
travellour in a weary land, which whosoever is carelessly senseless of, deserves
with murmuring Israel to be brought back from Kadesh to the Red Sea again, from
a Canaans rest, to be again ingulfed in a Red sea of war and blood, that so
(as God says of 2 Chronicles. 12. 8.
Israel, they might know his service, and the service of the kingdoms of the
countries: So if we know not the benefit and blessing of peace by our enjoyment
of it, Judge. 8. 16.
(as Gideon taught the men of Succoth, with the thorns and briars of the
wilderness) we may be made to know it by its contrary; what health is by
sickness, and what the mercy and blessing of peace is, by the misery of a
continued or renewed war. What that may be, we might by this time have
learned, by what in part for our shares, we have felt, too much, and yet
blessed be God, that it has been no more; we, as well as others, have found it
a Colluvies of all evil* both of sin and misery, (...), if they call it the
father of all you may well ad mischief to make up the ense, the Mat. 24. 15.
with Luke 21. 20.
very abomination of desolation, abominable for the outrages committed in it,
and making desolate, in the sad and woeful effects of it.

And therefore by so much the greater is this our blessing of peace, in that
(if we would let it) it will bring all the contrary good with it, the word is
(...) in the Text, which imports an uniting and knitting together, and so the
Apostle calls it, (...), the bond of peace, that tyeth Ephesians. 4. 3.
and coupleth together our hearts, and with them all parts of our happiness,
so that the Hebrews may well call it (...) from its perfection: let us
therefore thankfully account and accept of it as one of Gods good and perfect
gif^s, and of his infinite goodness Jam. 1. 17.
and bounty, in vouchsafing it and (if our sins hinder not) many other
blessings, together with it: a troup comes; so Leah said Genesis 32. 11.
of Gad, and so may we of peace, with peace a more free passage for the Gospel
of peace, mutual love, the advance of Learning, Trades Increase, Piety,
Plenty, all; and therefore when the Psalmist could say no more, he ends all
with The Lord will bless his people with peace, Psalm. 29. 11. And can we do
less, then bless him for vouchsafing a mercy so great?

2. Especially to a Nation so wholely unworthy; for as our misery in those
dismal times of war was great, so our sin and guilt, both then, and before,
and since, was, and is much greater.

In that bloody war it could not be, but that much innocent blood was shed,
which so defiles Number. 35. 33.
the land, that nothing but the blood of Christ can cleanse it. Rapine, and
violence, and oppression, and that with an high hand was then practiced,
whilst many sucked the marrow out of those bones which others had broken.

All kinds of uncleanness grown brazen faced, and grown up to a Ranting
madness, from which (as they said of the iniquity of Peor) we are not cleansed
unto Josh. 22. 17.
this day.

And (what should have helped to purge away this filth) the Word and Truth of
God blasphemed and corrupted, with a greater confluence of all sorts of errors
and heresies, then all other Nations, and all former Ages put together can
parallel, and these yet too much suffered. Gods Ordinances, Ministers, and
Ministry melled and trampled upon by the basest foot of pride.

Reformation hindered, obscured and derided.

And (I wish I might not say) Reformers themselves too too loathsomly corrupted,
that it is come to a Medice cura teipsum.

But I shall not rake any more in this sink; I only say, may not not God
justly visit for these things, and should not his soul be avenged on such a
nation as this? we lift up our eyes to our Idols, and shed blood, and shall we
possess the land? we stand upon our sword, Jer. 5. 9. 9. 9 Ezekiel. 33. 25, 26.
and work abomination, and defile every one his neighbors wife, and shall we
possess the land? shall we Isa. 43. 24.
have rest, who thus weary God with our sins? shall we have peace with men, who
have expressed so much enmity against God? What have thou to do with peace,
(said Jehu to Joram, and his 2 King 9. 18, 19, 22.
messengers;) and it may justly be said to the people of this Nation, As long
as our whoredoms and witchcrafts are so many, and yet if notwithstanding all
this, God yet speaks peace to us his people, should not we speak much to his
praise?

3. Yea, and live to it? How this may be, this pattern of these first and best
Churches may direct us in the following particulars of the Text, which show how
they entertained and improved such a mercy. They then were edified, and walking
in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied,
which therefore remains as our duty, seeing we have received the like mercy.

These particulars are in the following Sermons to be further opened and
pressed; for the present I shall only touch upon that, which this first part
of the Text already handled, most directly points at.

The sum of all is in general, that if our Churches, through Gods mercy, have
rest in some kind and measure for the present, our prayer and care should be
that we may have it completed, and continued, every way, and for ever, that in
stead of that Surge Domine, and dissipentur inimici, Numb. 10. 35. when the Ark
was wandering in the wilderness, we may say, Surge Domine in requiem tuam,
Psalm. 132. 8. as it was then said, when it was settled in the Temple; and that
as here in the Text, the Churches in Judea, Galilee and Samaria, so that happy
day may come, wherein England, Scotland, and Ireland, may have their peace so
settled, that they may be edified and multiplied.

But in particular our care and endeavor should be:

1. That if we have peace with men, we may have also peace with God, and that
with a greater and firmer assurance of his reconciled love, then we can have of
theirs; for, Omnis homo mendax, and Romans 3. 4. ^.
the best men and friends are mutable: So Jacob when he makes a league with
Laban, offers sacrifice, Genesis 31. 44. with 54. that he might as well propitiate
God, as pacify man: And so in their Peace Offerings, God had his part, as well
as friends had a feast of it, that so every way there might be a perfect
Friendship and Atonement.

And there is great reason for it, Because in all our jarrs and bloody contests
with others, our quarrel first began with a provoked God, and therefore our
Atonement and Agreement should begin there also.

Else our making peace with an Inferior office, whilst the Commander in chief
continues our enemy, will be but a very poor security; nay, may become matter
of greater provocation because he is left out, who is most concerned and
interested; make we as fair weather either as we will or can here below, yet it
will in the issue not prove fair weather indeed, as long as Heaven frowne's,
showre's, and thunder's. If God indeed please to make peace in his high places,
(as Bildads phrase is, Job 25. 2.) then (as Elihu adds) If he give quietness,
who can make trouble? But when he hides his face, who then can behold him,
whether it be done against a whole nation, or against a man only, Job 34. 29.

2. If we have peace without, (to make it complete and lasting) labor we to
have as much, or more peace within, that our lusts may not war in our
members; Iam. 4. 1.
when enemies leave off warring in our countries, take heed of giving warmth to
any lust, which may soon grow so hot, to the provocation both of God and man,
as may easily break out into a new combustion.

In particular, Cease from anger, and forsake wrath, and fret not thy self in
any wise to do evil; as the Psalmist exhorts, Psalm. 37. 8. Take heed of
maintaining animosities, and of retaining old grudges, in remembrance of former
or later injuries; for, the seas do not leave rolling, as soon as the wind
leaves blowing; there may be great thoughts, and swellings of heart, when there
are great overtures of renewed love, and friendship, which (if so) are but the
skinning over of a cankred soar, which all that while eats in deeper, and at
last will break out, and then be more incurable; or like a smothered fire,
which burns more cruelly, and in the issue bursts out more violently, when
once the train is laid, and takes like Absoloms long concealing and disguising
his malice against his brother Amnon, till he could meet with a fit opportunity
to discover it, and then he did it to purpose, 2 Samuel 13. 20, 22. with 23. 24,
etc.

3. If we have peace in the state and Commonwealth, I pray let it be our
answerable care and endeavor, that (as it is in the Text) the Churches may
have rest also, that we may have an Ecclesiastical peace, as well as a Civil,
for sometimes when the Commonwealth is in greatest quiet, the Church has least
rest from enemies, Zech. 1. 11. with 12. And sometimes the more rest they have
from persecutions from without, the more leisure they have had for brangling
contentions among themselves; for prevention whereof take we care to lay aside
parties, and factions, private opinions and interests which redound to the
prejudice of truth, and the public peace, all vain janglings 1 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
and perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth,
either for Niceties, or against received (especially if fundamental) truths,
that it may not be, I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, and I of Apollo, I am for
this Minister, and I for that, till at last another steppeth out, and says,
and I am of Christ, i. e. for 1 Cor. 1. 12.
no minister at all, but am so caught up in the spirit, that I am now above all
Ordinances. At non sic ab initio, we see it was not so from the beginning, but
those Churches that are here said to have rest, in the 4th chapter, v. 32. are
said to have been of one heart, and one soul, and happy we! if we were so too,
that once at last we may prove indeed so happy, as either to attain to that
unity of faith, which the Apostle speaks of Ephesians. 4. 13. or at least, in the
mean time to that unity of Spirit which you read of in v. 3. of that chapter,
that either we may not differ from one another in judgment, or at least pity,
and with meekness bear with one another, in those things wherein at present we
cannot fully agree: otherwise, it will be,

1. Both very unworthy and unseemly for us to shed the blood of war in peace,
as the Scriptures phrase is, 1 King. 2. 5. and (...), in the depth of civil
peace, to continue in the height of Church contests* and so the peace of the
State should only in a manner build a Scaffold for the children of the Church
to fight upon, whilst strangers and enemies sit by looking on and laughing,
and it may be plotting their destruction; for,

2. It will also be very unlikely that the peace of the State should continue
long in such disquiets of the Church, the Temple using to be a bulwark for the
Townhouse, and therefore that earthquake which shakes the one, will be very
likely in time, if not suddenly, to overturn the other: It has been no strange
thing in the world, to see Church-heats bursting out into State-combustions.

Tantum Religio etc. zeal upon the account of Religion when once fiered has
often proved wildfire. Stories relate what the Jewish Zelotes in this kind did in
Jerusalem, and what flames such like Incendiaries in the former Age kindled in
Germany: may never such red lines hereafter be read in our Chronicles or
Calendar.

4. And because the Prophet tells us, that quietness and assurance for ever
is the effect of Isa. 32. 17.
righteousness, let it be the joint endeavor of us all, that in our practice
and pursuit of it, it may Isa. 33. 6.
prove the stability of our times, Let Daniels counsel therefore to
Nebuchadnezzar be mine to my self and to every one here present. Now break off
your sins by righteousness, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor,
if it may be the lengthning of our tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. Otherwise our sins
may soon disturb all, so as that even Halcyon days may but breed and usher in a
greater storm, and some short warm gleames may only serve to make an after
cold blast more piercing: A few drops in a drought helps the more to burn up
the grass, and a little water cast into a great fire makes it afterward burn
more fiercely; the Lord grant that our former and still continued sins may not
make this Interim of our present peace, even the fuel of an after combustion.
Oh that we might so keep our selves in Gods way, that our feet may stand fixed
within See Calvin in Psalm. 132. 2.
the gates of Jerusalem, or vision of peace, Psalm. 132. 2.

5. And because it is the increase of Christ's government and peace, of which
it is said, there shall be no end, Isa. 9. 7. To our utmost labor we to advance
it, that he may confirm us, that the stablishment of his Government, may be
the setlement of our peace, and that as his goings out to us have been
wonderful, so his rest may be glorious, Isa. 71. 10. Do Cant. 7. 4.
not we stir up, and disquiet him, and we may sit quietly and long enough under
our vines and fig trees. In sum; the way long and long to continue our rest, is
rightly to improve it, as the Churches here did, who when they had rest were
edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy
Ghost, were multiplied.

And were edified.
HAving in the handling of 2. Sermon preached at Whitehall, July, 23. 1654.
the first part of the Text dispatched the first great blessing, the Churches
rest; I come now to close with the two most happy concomitants or consequents
of it, that upon it, they were edified, and multiplied: and first of the former
of them, the words in the Greek are (...), which most properly are to be
rendered thus, They had peace being edified: which reading may admit of a
twofold Interpretation.

Either that their edification was a means of their peace, they being edified
had peace, as the Syriack renders it, as though their edification went before,
and so their peace followed upon it.

Or that their edification was a consequent and effect of their peace; and so
Beza renders the words, habentes pacem aedificabantur, having peace they were
edified; to which agree our Translators who read it, they had rest, and were
edified, as limiting their edification to have followed upon their rest.

Both readings may hold forth a wholesome Truth to us.

The former this.

That our edifying makes way for our rest, and our profiting by means to our
continued peaceable enjoyment of them.

For although sometimes Jerusalems Dan. 9. 25.
wall is built in a troublesome time, and the more that some of Gods people are
edified and thrive by the word, the less peace and rest, but the more trouble
and persecution they suffer for it, Matthew. 13. 21.

Yet it is pity that grace and peace should be parted, and therefore it is the
sweetness of Gods goodness when we have (as it is said Nehem. 4. 6.) a mind to
work, and to edify our selves and his Church, to grant us fair weather to build
in. So Solomon while he was building the Temple had peace, and Israel in
Canaan, when they thrice a year left their houses to come up to the Temple,
were not Exodus 34. 24.
assaulted by enemies, as at their first entrance into it, when they set upon
that intermitted ordinance of Circumcision, which how Josh. 5.
painful it was, and how it exposed them to danger, when they were soar of it,
the Instance of the Schechemites tells us, when Genesis 34. 25.
two men Simeon and Levi could come on a whole city and destroy it: but God
secured them, that in that time none of the Nations of Canaan set upon them,
whilst they had been so unable to have resisted them; and all this because God
delights not to pluck the child from the breast, when it thriveth by it, nor
to send nipping May frosts to blast a growing and forward spring. It is
certainly the best way to keep our candle light to do our work by it. Take we
but care of our edification, and building up in faith and grace, and then let
us trust God for our rest and setlement in either inward or outward peace. This
the former Reading of the words affords.

But I rather pitch upon the latter, which makes their being edified a fruit
and consequent of their having rest; that was their happiness, and it is our
duty to improve our peace to our edification. Christ were indeed savingly
edified in their holy faith, now that there are foundations laid of our outward
peace? God (I know) can lay the beams of his Chambers in the waters, Psalm. 104.
3. (a strange foundation, you would think, of any firm building) He can build
up his Church in the midst of storms and tempests, but as for us, it is ill to
lay our foundations, or to build upon quicksands or in an Earthquake; fair
weather is the fittest time for us to build in, which whilst God, for the
present sends us, and has built our Scaffold for us, it is best for us to get
the trowell into our hand, and to ply our work; for although David in his
trouble may prepare much for the house 1 Chr. 22. 14.
of the Lord, and desired to find him a Tabernacle, yet a peaceable Solomon
built him an house; Act. 7. 46, 47.
what therefore David said to Solomon* let me to you now, when (as in Solomon's
time) God has given you rest (almost) on every side, so that there is neither
Adversary 1 King. 5. 4. 1 Chr. 22. 16.
nor evil occurrent, Arise and be doing, and the Lord will be with you.

In the prosecuting of this particular, I shall endeavor to clear those two
things.

1. What it is to be edified.

2. What great reason there What Is to be edified.
is now that God has given us peace and rest, that we should so be.

First, then for this Phrase of being edified, all know it is a Metaphor taken
from material buildings, in which upon a foundation first laid, the
superstructure is laid on and carried up, till the top-stone added complete all.

So in this our Spiritual Architecture, Christ being first laid for the
foundation, (there can (and therefore must) be no other, 1 Cor. 3. 11.) and we
being spiritually but really united to him, we come to be settled on him, and in
him to grow up in grace and peace to everlasting life.

For edification in general imports Indicat augmertum and stabilimentum
Camer. Genev.
setlement and growth, establishment and increase.

Setlement, as when our Savior says, On this rock I will build my Church,
there is edification; so as the gates of hell shall not prevail against it,
Matthew. 16. 18. there is setlement.

Growth and Setlement together we have in Col. 2. 7. in those two words, (...),
built up and established, not only established or settled, but built up: built
and built upon, as the word is, i. e. the whole building upon the foundation,
and one grace, and degree of grace upon another, that at length we come to be
built up even to everlasting life; when thus confirmed and improved, then in
the general we may be said to be edified.

But more particularly this Edification is,

Either of the whole Church;

Or of particular believers.

The Church is Gods house, 1 Timothy 3. 15. and so he is said to build it, Matthew.
16. 18.

And Believers are Gods Temple, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. (...) Gods building, 1 Cor.
3. 9. and accordingly they as lively stones are said to be built up a
Spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2. 5. And accordingly,

The Church is said to be built up and edified, when either in the first
founding and erecting, or in after repairing and reforming.

1. His word is purely and orderly dispensed, when upon Christ 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12.
the foundation is built no wood, hay, stubble of false or frothy Doctrines,
but gold, silver, and precious stones of solid, and spiritual Ephesians. 4. 21.
truth, as it is in Jesus. So we find true instruction, to be called
edification, as 1 Cor. 14. 4. where he that Prophesies, i. e. instructs the
people, is said to edify the Church.

2. Sacraments and Church Censures are duly administered, and as is in a true
wrought building, Col. 2 5.
a due order, and Symmetry kept and observed.

3. In a word, when the Church in all the Ordinances, and outward constitution,
and state of it, is set up, and held up, enlarged, and settled, as we have it
fitly to our present purpose expressed of the Temple in Joash his time, 2 Chronicles. 24. 15. where it is said, that the work was perfected by them, or
healing went up upon the work, when all the ruins and breaches were repaired,
and they set the (...)
house of God in his state, or form, or upon his firm basis or foundation, and
strengthened it. So now when the Church of Christ shall prove so unhappy as to
have the breaches and decays of it made up, shall be firmly settled on its true
foundation, and raised up to its just stature and constitution, then it is more
completely built up and edified.

And the like proportionably is Believers, the true members of the Church, for
they also are edified, when by the Word and other Ordinances, by which the
Church it self was before said to be built up, they are

1. Brought to Christ, and built upon him as the only true Foundation, 1 Pet.
2. 4, 5. and in reference only to him upon the doctrinall foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ mean while continuing the cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.
20.

2. And thereupon are confirmed and grow up in grace both in themselves, and
with one another as it is added, Ephesians. 2. 21. in whom all the building fitly
framed together (...), etc.
grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. And thus we are said to be edified in
knowledge, 1 Cor. 14. 4. in faith, Jude v. 20. in love, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Ephesians. 4.
16. and the like may be said of all other gaces.

3. So that a good life, as the topstone, is laid upon good doctrine, an
outward holy conversation is added to all our inward grace, and holy
profession, then, and truly not till then, may we cry, Grace, grace to it, as
in the building of the second Temple, Zechariah 4. 7.

4. And when we are thus converted, and edified, we further labor to
strengthen, and build up our Brethren, Luke 22. 32. 1 These. 5. 11.

And therefore now for the applying negligent 2 Chronicles. 29. 11.
and idle, but to get up and be doing, that we may be edified, as they were.

And here our first great care must be, that Christ in all be laid Christians,
as though we had need to lay again the foundation, as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 6. 1. but that our unhappy times are most unhappily become like those,
which the Psalmist in his days spoke of, in which Psalm. 11. 3.
Foundations were destroyed. For now (that I may use the Apostles words) (...),
the very principles of the doctrine of Christ, the most Fundamental
Scripture-truths; such I mean, as are not only sufficient to build us up in a
good life, as some now Dr H. of Fundam. cap. 1.
mince it, but such as are absolutely to be believed and practiced to
salvation, are not only doubted of, but boldly and blasphemously denied and
impugned, and this for the most part impune, and without control. Whilst the
Papist robs Christ of his offices, the Socinian spoileth him of his Deity, the
Antiscripturist of the Scepter of his Kingdom, and others blaspheme him into a
Notion, a Form, a very Impostor. Lord! is thy Church edified, when foundations
are thus overturned? and what can? what should the righteous now do? But the
more that others pull down, the more they should labor to build up both
themselves and others, in their most holy faith, upon the foundations of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Jude 20. Ephesians. 2. 20.
Christ himself being the cornerstone, with whom whosoever gathers Math. 12.
30.
not, scatters, and on whom whosoever (be he othrewise never so great a
master builder) builds not, besides what he does to others, is certain to
ruin himself unavoidably, irrecoverably: we know (to this purpose) what became
of those Builders that rejected this precious Cornerstone, Matthew. 24. 42, 43.
and still, and ever that will prove true which follows, v. 44. That whosoever
falls on this stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it
will grind him to powder. He is sure to build a Babel of confusion, who lays
not Christ first, for the only foundation. It is said, Luke 17 28.
that in the days of Lot, they planted, they builded, but fire and brimstone
from heaven soon consumed all those buildings: and in this busy age of ours,
we are as intent to raise up Fabrics of our own, both in our opinions and
judgments, and in our other designs and practices, thereby to advance our
estates or esteems, and because Christ and his Truth and Grace will not,
cannot square with them, with those Builders we leave him out, and lay him
aside, as not for our turn; But what Castlecome-downs will all such buildings
prove that are daubed with such Ezekiel. 13. 10, 11.
untempered mortar? Certainly, such wood, hay, and stubble will burn. Such
buildings will not stand that are built upon the sand, Mat. 7. 24, 25, 26, 27.
and not on this rock. In the close it will be found that this is not to
edification but to destruction: let our first care therefore be to make Christ
our groundwork and foundation.

And then the second should Ordinances of Christ be set up, and kept up in
their purity and power. This is Gods building up of Zion, when he Psalm. 102. 16.
builds a Tower (a Temple) in the midst of his vineyard, Isa. 5 2. and setleth
all the Forms, Ordinances, Ezech. 43. 11.
and offices of his house. This is the building of the Church, both in
reference to the general constitution of the whole, as also to the saving
edification of the several members of it.

When the wholesome word of God is dispensed according to his will: for it is
able to build us up, Acts 20. 32.

And when Sacraments and Censures are administered according to his Word: for in
the steadfast continuance, and communion in these Ordinances, the first and best
Believers grew up, increased and multiplied, Acts 2. 41, 42, etc.

And from hence take we notice of our sin, and duty.

1. Our sin in this particular is Our sin.
very great; for although through Gods mercy the State has some rest, yet the
Church, according to those particulars, is very far from being edified. We are
still on the pulling-down hand, or if building up, it is of Babels, in which we
cannot agree, or understand one another; nay, of Temples and Altars to Idols,
which was not only Manassehs sin, 2 Chronicles. 33. 3, 4, 5. but even Solomon's, 1
Kings 11. 7. which the Prophets up and down cry out of in Israel and Judah, and
in the mean while of the neglect and ruin of Gods Temple: a sin which we are
sadly and deeply guilty of, whilst

1. The Fanatic Enthusiast is caught up so high in the Spirit, that he now is
gotten above all Ordinances, and does tanquam ex alto despicere, undervalue and
despise them as poor empty Forms, and weak beggarly Rudiments and elements for
those of lower Seize (as they in their gibberish are pleased to phrase
them) to be trained up with. The Lord humble the blasphemous pride of these
self-conceited men, who thus attempt to spurn down, (as much below them)
Christ's own Institutions, which he has appointed as fit and able by his
blessing to build up his people in faith and love, and by an humble and
faithful improvement whereof, many of their betters both dead and alive, have
attained to so much inward settlement and peace, and far more real and
substantial holiness, and the power of godliness, than ever any of these our
Transcendents in their high-flown way either have really attained, or can truly
so much as pretend to. Constant observation, and too sad experience have taught
us, that the Church of God has been poorly edified by these who have daubed up
their Babel with such untempered mortar, whilst Gods Temple and Ordinances are
thus despised and trampled upon by these Enthusiasts.

2. Whilst by our Atheistical Politicians, and other profane sinners, both
those Ordinances, and the desires and endeavors of all such as would advance
them, are either openly opposed and hindered, or at least inwardly maligned and
derided, as weak attempts of silly people to set and hold up sorry Bug-beares,
which which were at first only inventions of more crafty men to keep Inferiors
in aw, and blind obedience. Thus Calvin's course in the Reformation of Geneva
has with some but a little better interpretation. And so Tobiah of old jeared
R. H.
Nehemiahs building Jerusalems walls, Nehem. 4. 3. and Michal despised David in
her heart for dancing before the Ark in its ascent to Zion, 2 Samuel 6. 16. Now
the Lord grant, that such scornful malicious opposers and ruiners of the
Church of Christ, may in due time be as much cast down in their own eyes, as
they were Nehem. 6. 16. when they shall see this work to be wrought of God, and
as much then dejected, as they have been exceedingly grieved that there were,
or are any that seriously endeavor it, like them, Nehem. 2. 10.

3. But the Church is the more slowly edified, not only by reason of such
enemies malice and opposition, but also by other men's neglect through sloth
and self-seeking: for with the returned Jews we are so eager on building of our
own houses, that mean while Hag. 1. 2, 4.
we let the house of God lie waste, and with them persuade our selves that it
is not yet time to build it; many other fair houses we may see every day almost
every where going up apace, whiles Churches lie ruined, and shut up, or not
frequented: Do not some of us build our own houses upon the ruins of Gods? To
such the Prophets Jer. 22. 13
word is very heavy, whilst he cries Woe to him that builds his house by
unrighteousness and his chambers by wrong; against such Hab. 2. 11, 12.
the stone out of the wall will cry, and the beam out of the Timber. Such Eagles
feathers will consume all such men's stately plumes, which they so feather their
nests with, when they shall see them set on fire with such coals from the Altar
which they dreamed not of: but I leave them.

And desire that all of us, even the best of us may be humbled for our
remissness in setting upon, and carrying on this building up of the Church of
Christ, which (as other Church-work is wont) goes on very slowly, and may
complain as the Criple, who lay so John 5 7.
long at the pool of Bethesda, that while it is sometimes getting on, and in
some forwardness always some business or other (and usually of our own)
steppeth in before it.

But better men in Scripture have written us a better copy. David now chosen to
be King, and therefore had business enough, with what speed he could, to
settle his own house, yet in the first place takes care of Gods, would not
enter into his princely palace, nor lie down on his soft bed, nor sleep, nay
not so much as slumber, till he had found out a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132. 3, 4, 5. The Lord pardon us,
that whilst for these many years, we have been about this work, at least have
seemed to have been (God knows what from the heart we at first, and since
have really intended) we have been so often nodding and slumbering, that at
last, as to this business, we seem to be fallen fast asleep; and He in mercy
grant that some terrible judgment do not at last awake us. But David we see
had a more watchful eye upon it.

And Solomon in his first and best days trod in his fathers steps, builds
Gods house before his own, and although he was longer in building the latter,
yet (it may be) it was, because he employed more workmen, and more care and
diligence about the former that he might the sooner dispatch it, when he was
more desirous and earnest to enjoy it.

And afterward in Judahs return from Babylon, Ezra lays the foundations of
the Temple, before Nehemiah raises up the City walls: and truly if the Prophet
would be first served of the widow of Zareptahs provisions, 1 King. 17. 13.
before her self; is it fit that we should serve our selves before our God?
this is our Sin.

2. And therefore the contrary Our Duty.
is our Duty, that with one shoulder, with all our heart and utmost endeavor,
we would set about this great good work, that Gods Church at last may be
edified. It is said of Baruch, (...) flagranti animo instauravit, that he
earnestly repaired Jerusalems wall, Nehem. 3. 20. and truly we have need,

As of much wisdom, when we are now to build a Tower, to sit down, and to
account the cost, Luke 14. 28.

So of much courage and zeal to carry on, and to go through with this work, for
we may make account, Ezr. 4. 1, 2. 5. 3. Nehem. 2. 19. 4 3. 7. 6. 1, 2. etc.
with Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah to meet with all that scorn and opposition
that either man or devil, can help us with to hinder us: that we have need of
Baruchs (...) warmth and heat the more to quicken us, and to burn their cords
asunder, the zeal of Gods house should even Joh. 2. 7.
eat us up, as it did our Savior; so as to consume and break through all such
obstacles, that that word may never be said of us, those men begun to build,
but Luke 14. 30.
were not able to finish but that we may still advance and go through with it,
as it is often repeated in that story of their repairing of Jerusalem, that
they did not only build the walls, and lay the beams, but also set up the
doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, i. e. they rested not,
till they had completed all: Nehem. 3. 3. 6. 15. In which chapter from the
example of those builders of Jerusalems walls, we have many useful directions
in this like work of edifying the Church of Christ, and out of diverse others I
make choice to instance only in two, for our better direction in it.

1. That all are to be employed in this good work. 2. But every one according
to his own rank and calling.
This is a boon work which ages, sexes, degrees and conditions, are to have
their share, and accordingly to be engaged in. As in the rearing up of the
Tabernacle, the women spun, Exodus 35. 20, 21. etc.
and the men wrought, some brought gold and precious stones, others goats hair
and more inferior materials: So here in the building up of Jerusalems walls,
you have all employed.

Both sexes, not only men, but even women prove workmen, and so you read of
Hallush and his daughters, v. 12.

And the like you may there observe of all callings and conditions of the
people, not only the richer Goldsmiths, who had three shares, v. 8. 31, 32.
and the Merchants, who had two, v. 31, 32. but even the meaner Heards-men of
Tekoah, who had their double share, v. 5. 27. as Amos 1. 1.
usually it proves, that meaner men are the true laborers, not only in their
own work, but also in carrying on the public good.

But yet it is fit that the Governors of the Church and State should be
Principals, and so here they were.

For in the 1. verse we find Eliashib the High Priest, and his Brethren in the
first lot, and beginning the good work; and with them other Priests, v. 22. 28.
and Levites, v. 17. yea, even inferior Nethinims the Temple water-drawers,
verse. 26 so that amongst them they had five lots.

But the Princes and Rulers had eight, and amongst them v. 9. 12. 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19.
the Rulers of Jerusalem are set first, v. 9. 12. not (it may be) so much for
their place and dignity, as for their prime forwardness in so blessed a work,
and withal they have two lots of the eight (as more rich and able and willing
too, a good pattern for our chief Towns, and Cities in the like work) and the
Rulers of inferior places make up the other six. v. 14 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Only the ignoble Nobles of Tekoah (it may be some rich Grasiers, or Country
covetous Leards, amongst their Neighbor Heardsmen) were too good, or rather
too base, to put their necks to the work of the Lord, v. 5.

A fit Model for us in this building Ministers.
of the Church, to work by. The Priests had five lots in that, and the
Ministers have a very great share in this: from the high Priest to the lowest
Nethinim, all of greatest or least places, parts, graces, all Churchmen
especially have an interest in this Church-work, as they have that special
office in it, so they above all, should have a special care of it; Their (...)
or proper work is to be Builders, 1 Cor. 3. 9, 10. Psalm. 118. 22. And the very
end of their office, gifts, and authority, is the edification of the Church,
Ephesians. 4. 12. 2 Cor. 10. 8. Oh, therefore that as by our variance we have made
it a Babel, so by our union and joint endeavors Jerusalem may once be it self,
a vision of peace, and that now at last, as it was of old, it may be again
built Psalm. 122. 3.
as a City that is compact together. For our encouragement wherein, take we
notice of that remarkable providence, viz. that God did so graciously accept,
and highly esteem Eliashibs and the rest of the Priests beginning to build up
Jerusalems walls, that whereas they began that happy work at the sheep-gate, Neh
3. 1. that very place he so remarkably honored, that he miraculously blessed
it with that healing pool of Bethesda, which cured all comers, of which you
read John 5. Junius.
2, 3, 4.

I cannot promise miracles: but I should hope for a mavelous healing of our
breaches, if according to this pattern our Ministers would be foremost in this
blessed work of building up the Church of Christ.

In which Magistrates (as they Magistrates.
have most power, so they) have the greater share, as in that pattern they had
eight lots, to the Priests five, and so before we read, Then rose up the chief
of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin, with the Priests and Levites whose spirit
God had raised, to go to build the house of God, Ezr. 1. 5. and afterward, when
their spiri^s were somewhat down by reason of many discouragements they met
with, upon the Prophets stirring them up, chap. 5. 1. it is again said, Then
rose up Zerubbabel and Joshua, and began again to build it, the Prophets of God
helping them, v. 2. Ministers should be helpers, and Magistrates (especially
supreme Magistrates) should be Principals. So Cyrus confesses he had a charge
from God laid upon him to build his house, Ezra 1. 2. and how Christian
Magistrates, who have far more, and stronger ties, can be loosed and exempted
from this charge, I know not; this I find that Abraham, Genesis 12. 7, 8. Isaac,
Genesis 26. 25. Jacob, Genesis 33. 20. those great Patriarchs, where ever they
pitched their Tent, they there built an Altar. Micah, though none of the best
men, yet (as it seems by his story) one of some good rank, accounted himself
made when he had got a Jud. 17. 13 18. 24
Priest and a Teraphim, and utterly undone when afterward he had lost them; as
the loss of the 1 Samuel 4. 18. 20. Josh. 18. 1.
Ark brake Elies neck, and his daughter in laws heart. Joshua takes care to
place the Ark in Shiloh, which was in Ephraim, his Tribe. And although building
of Altars to God was but rarely thought of by Saul, 1 Samuel 14. 35. and the Ark
of God in his time but little looked after 1 Chronicles. 13. 3. yet he gets See
the English Annot. on 1 Samuel 21. 1. though B^rtram. conceives it to have been
removed from Nob before Saul's time. de Rep. Jud. cap. 15. page 248.
it to Nob in Benjamin, which was his Tribe. And afterward David when once come
to the Throne gets it to Zion, 2 Samuel 6. which was his own city, v. 16. It
seems these great men thought it best, and their both duty and security to
have the Ark of God by them: And it is worth such men's most serious thoughts to
consider, what both pains and cost David was at to settle it in Zion, and
Solomon afterward in Jerusalem, and with what solemnity they did it: David
gathers all the chosen men of Israel with all the people to bring it up with
all kinds of music: He himself dancing before it with all his might, though he
was laughed at by Michal as a fool for so doing, 2 Samuel 6. And Solomon to bring
it from Zion to be settled in his Temple has as great a convocation, 1 King. 8.
1, 2, 3. and He himself with the Princes went before it in the head of that
Procession, v. 5. where it is added that they offered so many sheep and oxen
that they could not be told n^r numbered for multitude. Indeed v. 63. they are
numbered to have been two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty
thousand sheep: but it was the greatest sacrifice for number of offerings, that
ever was heard of, or read either in sacred or profane writers; which shows
at what a rate they did (and all that are in their place, should value the
building up of Gods house, and the setlement of his ordinances, and be no
losers by them neither: for they will quit all the care and cost, which they
put them or any to, as the Ark fully satisfied Obed-edom for its intertainment,
2 Samuel 6. 12. and so still

1. Their settling of Gods house will establish their own, as Caesar did his own
statues by erecting Pompey's. God promises to build David an house, because he
did but only purpose to build him one, 2 Samuel 7. 11.

2. It will be the most Orient Gemme in their Crown, is it self, and will make
them most honorable in the sight of God and man. So we find that in all that
royal state of Solomon, which ravished the Queen of Sheba's heart, after the
meat of his table, and the sitting of his Servants, and all the rest of that
bravery, the last, as chiefest, is added, viz. His ascent into the house of
God, 1 King. 10. 4, 5. That made Solomon glorious while he lived, viz. the
building of Gods house more then his own: and Jehojada's doing good in Israel
both toward Ged and his house, gained him honor in a royal burial, when he
was dead, 2 Chr. 24. 16. Dead men's monuments use to be in Churches, but the
building of Gods true Church would be their most glorious and lasting monument.

3. Nor will it be more honor to them from others, then truest inward
satisfaction and comfort to themselves in the closing up of their lives, and at
their last account. After all that great good which Nehemiah had done for the
State in the foregoing Chapters, how sweetly and comfortably does he close up
all in the last Chapter of that Book, with reflecting upon his care and zeal
for the house and ordinances of God? in his taking care for the sanctifying of
the Sabbath, in his cleansing of the Temple, in his providing for the Priests
portions, and in his chasing away such as intended and defiled the Priesthood?
with what comfort and humble boldness could he say, Remember me, o my God,
concerning this, and again, Remember me Nehem.
concerning this also. What happy 13. 14. v. 22.
Items were these in his last reckonings? and yet again (not as though by his
so often putting God in mind he were subject to forget, but the more to assure
us that he will be sure to remember) again I say) he v. 31.
adds the third time, Remember me o God for good, and so he ends his Book:
and o happy all they who are in his place, if with such a word in their mouths
they can end their lives, as with a sweet air after a stroke struck by a
skillful hand on a well tuned instrument.

But although Magistrates in this People.
work have the greatest taks, yet the people, and all private Christians, yea
the least and meanest of them, have their proportionable share, as the least
stones, yea though they serve only for filling up the wall, in their place and
proportion conduce much to the getting up of the building, and that as well as
the chiefest corner stones, and they that lie in the foundation: He that
serves the Mason, helps up the building, as well as the Master-workman: The
poor widow may Mark 12. 42. Exodus 35. 26.
cast her two mites into the treasury of the Temple and the women that spun
goats hair helped on the work of the Tabernacle, as well as Bezaleel: The rich
Goldsmiths had three lots, Nehem. 3. 8. 31, 32. (as it was fit that their
proportion should be greater answerable to their ability) and yet the Heardsmen
of Tekoah had two, v. 5. 27. The Apostle speaks of a (...), and an (...) and an
(...), in every part of the body of Christ, in which the least member has its
measure of grace and ability, and answerable thereto it has its energy or
effectual working; and, proportionable to it, its (...) or supply that it
affords, and so by the joint acting of all the members, there is made an
increase of the whole body, unto the edifying of it self in love.

Let not therefore Gideon say, My family is poor in Manasseh, and I Judge. 6. 15
am the least in my fathers house, and wherewith shall I save Israel? let not
the poorest, and weakest, and most private Christian say, My body, parts,
estate, are all weak and poor, and how then shall I ever do any thing toward
the edifying of the Church, or advance the settling of the ordinances of Christ?
For,

1. All the Saints are in Circuitu, Revel. 4. 6. 10.
round about the Throne, and in point of Communion with Christ, the poor may be
as near to him as the richest, and therefore although such of you can otherwise
do but little, yet your prayers may do very much with 1 These. 5. 25. 2 These. 1.
3 Heb. 13. 18.
him, who alone must do all. This made Paul so frequently and earnestly beg
the prayers of all, when he was upon this work, though he was a Master Builder.

2. Their holy life may yet do more, as effectually prevailing with him to
continue and increase such means of grace, which they so thrive by, as long as
his servants watch and work, he is pleased to keep in the light, it was not
then so with Ephesus, when Christ threatened to remove her Candlestick, Revel.
2. 5.

3. As weak and mean as they are their particular indevours may much advance
the Churches common service. As in great men's families, so in the house of God,
there are variety of offices, some more mean and homely, and yet most
necessary, which persons of meaner parts and place are more fit for. A little
Piercer is fitter to make a hole to drive in a nail, then a great wimble, and
the little finger, may in some posture reach that which the greatest and
longest cannot: and so in the body mystical, as well as natural, the members
that seem to be more feeble, are necessary, 1 Cor. 12. 22. And therefore in
this building up of the Church, did we but seriously study it; and our selves,
we should find some lower services, which men of lower abilities, and
standings, like our selves, and so we with them, may be most fit to stoop to,
and never have occasion to stand Mark 20. 7
all the day idle with this excuse, that none has hired us, for every one of
us, the very meanest of us may do something.

4. But many such weak ones joining together, may arise to a considerable
ability. All buildings Joseph Antiqu. lib. 15. cap. 14.
are not m^de only of such vast square stones, as Solomon's Temple was, but
many of lesser bricks, nay little Flints (we see) if well laid together in good
mortar serve to make very strong building: and that great Beam which no one
strongest man can stir, many weaker hands may easily lift up: How great a
fire may little sticks make, if many, and laid together? Jor and Dan, though
lesser Rivolets whilst asunder, when met and joined in one Current, make an
overflowing Jordan. How fast might this Church-work go up, if many hands,
though but weak ones, would join in it? The children gathered wood, whilst
the fathers kindled the fire, and the women kneaded dough to make Cakes Iet. 7.
18.
for the Queen of heaven: and if many weaker hands with those that are stronger
were jointly put to this work, the house of the King of heaven would more
speedily be built up and edified.

5. Although it should be little or nothing that either singly or together we
could do of our selves, yet it might do much in setting others on work, who are
able to do more, as the Corinthians zeal provoked many, 2 Cor. 9. 2. little
sticks use to kindle great ones. In the Church of Christ, there are not only
(...), 1 Cor. 12. 28.
but also (...), Helps as well as Governments; and such helpers weak Inferiors
may prove, and so Paul the great Apostle calls Aquila and Priscilla, that
were but Tent-makers, his helpers, Romans 16. 3. Weak ones may help those that
are more able,

Either by encouraging them in their work, as Paul when he does but see the
Brethren is thankful, and takes courage, Act. 28. 15.

Or at least by shaming their backwardness, with their forwardness, and that
with this advantage, that herein the weakest are able to do the most, in that
the weaker they are, the more they shame the stronger, if they fall short of
their activity and diligence.

6. And yet the more, in that by provoking their strength, we shall improve our
own weakness to be able to act the more strongly, our little wheels being
carried about by their great ones, which we have set a going, and the great
sluice opened and set a running turns about our Mill; and the great Ship now
under Sail carries the Cock-boat along with it, which helped to weigh its
anchor. So Aquila and Priscilla by helping Apollos, Act. 18. 24. 26. v. 27.
mightily helped themselves, and others by his greater abilities, for it is
added, that he helped them much, who had believed through grace.

So that from these and the like considerations we see that private Christians,
and even the weakest of them are ingag^d in this great good work of edifying
the Church of God, in which, if they ply it, they may do much good.

I am sure, that by their contrary neglect, or practice they may both much
hinder it, and at last ruin all. For,

1. It is but a very weak hand that cannot more powerfully draw a great weight
down the hill, then a very strong arm can pull it up. How does a little Remora
stay a great ship in her full speed? and one stop in the least wheel or pin,
make an huge engine stand still in its swiftest motion? Very sorry men have
proved sad hindrances to the advance of the things of Christ and his Church,
through their boldness, and others baseness, whilst the devil can have more
active Agents against the Church, then Christ can have for it.

2 Or although such sorry adversaries strength and ability may be little, yet
their sins may be very great; they weak men, but theirs may be mighty sins;
Amos. 5. 12.
and so although in their private low standing they can do little with men, yet
by their horrid abominations they may most highly provoke God, and so one Achan
may trouble all Israel, Josh. 7. 25. Eccles. 10. 1.
and one sinner destroy much good, one otherwise weak hand pull down more, then
many abler can build up; And thus we see that not only Magistrates and
Ministers, but all even the most private and meanest Christians have an
interest and share in this blesed work of edifying and building up the Church
of Christ: which was the first lesson we were to learn from the example of
those repairers of Jerusalems walls, in Nehe. 3.

But so, as that we must second, which was, that although all are engaged to
act, yet every one according to his rank, and in his own proper calling and
station: for so we find it was in that pattern held out to us in the place
before mentioned, where we find that several persons and companies had their
several lots and quarters, and so they repaired their parts, Nehem. 3 20, 21.
31. and especially that part of the wall which was over against their houses,
as you may observe, v. 10. 23. 28, 29. which teaches us, that although in this
common work, we should all, of all sorts, join thy agree to be acting, yet so
as that every one of us keep within the bounds of our own stations and
callings, and so hold our selves to our own particular alotments, that we do
not, either out of a vain conceit of our own sufficiency, or a rash head
precipitancy (...), and being vainly puffed up with a fleshly mind, (...)
boldly intrude into other men's places and employments Col. 2. 18.
which we are not sitted to, and so neither by God or man called to.

I would have the house of God built, the Church of Christ edified, but I would
not therefore have all Ignaroes prove Preachers, or privy counselors, and
every Jac Ket get up into his Quercus Reformatoria, which will as much advance
the work, as Vzza did the settling of the Ark, by laying hold 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7.
Number. 45. 5.
of it, (who by the Law should not have touched it) who stopped it, and not
furthered it; or as much as a whole army will help on the victory, by running
all on heaps in a confusion, and so rather tread down themselves, then their
enemies. Mistake me not therefore, I only bid you all march on, but yet so as
that you keep your ranks. And for that purpose, mind and weigh well, the
ability, God has given you, the calling in which he has set you, and that
particular work and cue in it, both in your private and public relation, as
may keep you from invading an others province, which intrusions are usually
accompanied with the neglect of our own lot, and so with the public detriment,
as had Ierusalems repairers bin busy to look to other men's alotments, the
enemy might soon have come in at their breach, which they never looked to. Let
us therefore with them labor to build up Ierusalems wall, but so as that our
care be to look to our own Frontage, to that part of it which is over against
our own houses, which fitly leads me from this 2d part of edifying the Church,
in setting up, and settling public ordinances, to the

Third, and that is the edifying of our selves in our establishment and growth
in faith and all other saving graces: for the whole is made up of the parts,
and the growth of the body is in a proportionable increase of all the members.
If ever therefore we would according to the square of the word edify the
Church, we must take care to build up our selves in our most holy faith, as
Jude exhorts us, v. 20. that by faith coming to Christ the living stone, we
also as lively stones may be built up a Spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 4,
5. Otherwise we may gather Churches, as many now do, and build material
Churches, as in and after Constantines time, both He and many others did, and
yet for all this, the Church of God may be but a very little edified. They do
very ill, who cry down all Forms, although of Gods own making and institution;
and they do little better, who make them indeed but bare Forms, like painted
Churches, in a Lantskip. So the Jews of old made a charm of the Temple of the
Lord, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, Ier. 7. 4. as before they
made the Ark of God a (...), a bugbear to fright enemies, which they
themselves so long played with, that at last both They and It were carried away
captive, 1 Samuel 4. 3, 4, 5. It is not the crying up Holy Church, with Papists;
or Reformed Churches in the most refined Forms of them, with Protestants;
these rested in are but Names and Notions, Names indeed of God by which, in our
walking answerable to them, he is known, but horribly taken in vain, whilst
rested in, and will do us no more good, then Gehezies laying the staff on the
dead 2 King. 4. 31. 1 King. 1. 1.
child, could bring life into it, or David's clothes warmth to his spent body;
nay we shall prove worse by them, as (they say) the Cypress tree the more it is
watered, the more barren it grows, worst men have often been found under best
Ordinances. So in Penuel (which signifies the face and presence of God) we
meet with scornful Neuters, Judge. 8. 8. and in Bethel (the house of God) with
scoffing, Idolaters, 2 King. 2. 23. Bethel proves Beth-aven, Hos. 10. 5. (...)
is but (...), Circumcision the Concision, Philip. 3. 2. and the nearer we are
to the Church, the further from God, and nearer to a curse, and our end is to
be burnt; when after all shoures and Sunshines we bring forth only briars and
thorns, Heb. 6. 7. 8. The Church is indeed then built, when the members of it
are truly and savingly edified, and are (...) 1 Pet. 2. 5.
(...) as lively, or living stones, which do not only lie in the wall but grow
in the building: When inward grace thrives, according to outward means, and
when our communication, and whole conversation, is good to the use of edifying,
as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 29. When a good life is built upon good
Doctrine, then is the Church indeed edified.

But so as (in the last place) one another, Singuli singulos, 1 These. 5. 11.
and this mutually, (...), Romans 14. 19. that by our miscarriages we do not
edify them in sin; for such 1 Cor. 8. 10
a kind of untoward edifying the Scripture somewhere speaks of, but by pious
admonitions, and holy examples, and all other good means, we endeavor to bring
men to Christ the foundation and that then they may be settled upon him, and
grow up in him: and this also is held out unto us in that former expression of
living stones, which do not only live and grow our selves, but are also lively
and active to draw on others to the building: such a care the Apostles had of
any where they found any hopes or beginnings, and therefore as soon as ever
they heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they presently sent unto
them Peter and John further to bring them on, and build them up, Acts 8. 14,
15. which is excellently set down in that place of the Canticles, where Chap.
8. 9.
we see what tender care the elder Churches had of their little sister in this
holy Oecodomy; If she were a wall, they would build upon her a palace of
silver; If a door, they would enclose her with boards of cedar. If a door that
See Merce* in locum.
had opened to Christ, their enclosing her with boards, or bars of Cedar,
which never rotteth, expresses what care they had in confirming and
strengthening her: If a wall (i. e. more confirmed and settled) their building
upon her a palace of silver, holds forth their further endeavor for her
continued growth, ornament, and perfection: and these two take up what before I
said was generally contained in this duty of edification: and in particular,

1. When Christ as the foundation is first laid,

2. His Ordinances are set up and settled according to his Word.

3. We in the enjoyment of them established and grow in grace our selves,

4. And are means and instruments busily employed for the effecting of the like
in others, then in the sense of the Text, and other Scriptures the Church is
edified,

Which should the more earnestly be desired and endeavored by us,

1. As knowing the time; as the Apostle speaks, Romans 13. 11. Motive 1.
(for it is a duty very much incumbent on us in these last Ages to be
indevoured, because it is on Gods part) a mercy frequently promised to these
latter days. If you look into the several books of the Isa 58. 12. 61. 4.
Ier. 31. 4 Ezech. 36. 36.
Prophets; in the end of many (if not of most) of them, you shall find many
gracious and glorious promises made of the then building of the Church. In this
respect, it is the work of the day, and therefore, I hope we will not stand all
the day idle, but that it may be our happiness that these Prophesies and
promises may be most happily fulfilled not only upon us, but also by us,
whilst we thus diligently act for their accomplishments.

But in two other respects it is the work of this our day in England, according
to the two readings of the Text, which I before mentioned.

Either they then had rest, and thereupon were edified,

Or they were edified, and thereupon had rest; and accordingly we have two
strong arguments yet further to press this duty.

We have already through Gods mercy some rest, and therefore there is all
reason that we should now be edified according to the first reading.

And again we have need to be edified, that so we may have our rest confirmed,
and our begun peace continued, according to the second reading.

We have (with them) attained Gods gracious providence, we are now in so fit a
season, to endeavor that we may be edified: For fair weather, (as I said
before) is the fittest time to build both our own, and Gods house in Solomon
says, There is a time to break down, and there is a time Eccles. 3. 3.
to build. We have had a time of too much breaking down in time of war, and
therefore now, if ever, is a time to build up, in time of peace. A clear
shining after rain 2 Samuel 23. 4.
makes a growing season, such is ours for the present, and therefore let us up
and be doing: Gods Temple was built without axe and hammer, 1 King. 6. 7. but
it was beat down by both, Psalm. 74. 6. War hinders the building of Gods house,
1 King. 5. 3. but Peace should further it, v. 4. 5. And therefore let us lay
hold of this happy opportunity. In Heathen Rome, Janus his temple stood open
only in time of war, to sue to their gods for peace, which they then wanted,
most disingenuous! like a man that opens the door only so far to his friend
as to put out his hand to take in something from him, which he stands in need
of, and then to shut it upon him again. But true Christians are more ingenuous,
and therefore would have the Church doors opened as much in time of Peace,
that they may go in, and return thanks for mercy received Thus we read of Asa,
2 Chronicles. 14. 5, 6. That the kingdom was quiet before him, and the land had
rest, and he had no war in those years, because the Lord had given him rest:
whereupon it is immediately added, v. 7. Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us
build while the land is yet before us; for we have sought the Lord our God, and
he has given us rest on every side, and so they built and prospered: And so
let us say, and do, who have the like occasion, that we may have the same
blessing: Thus let us build, and so let us prosper, and this in building not so
much our own houses as Gods. This was wont to be the care of Gods people in
former times upon the like occasions; Israel when got out of Egypt, and through
the Red sea, (and have not we?) reared up the Tabernacle: Solomon, when in
peace, and no evil or adversary occurrent, builds God a Temple, which although
afterward their sins ruined, yet upon their return from Babylon, it was their
first work to build it again the second time: and the like was the Christian
Churches care upon the ceasing of the primitive persecutions. And so God now by
our present rest from former troubles tries

Both our ingenuity and gratitude, whether when he has thus wrought for us, we
will work and build for him.

And also our wisdom, whether we will take the fittest time for so needful a
work. What more necessary to be done then to build up Gods house, that thereby
we may edify our selves in faith and grace to salvation? and what fitter time
can we either have, or wish to do it in, then when the coast is clear, and we
may be at leisure for it, and have nothing but our own naughty hearts to hinder
us in it? But when shall we set about it, if not now? God has given us Rest,
but not to be restive, rest from outward trouble, that so we might be more
expedite and ready thus to set upon his work, and so to work out our own
salvation: Having Rest, as there is a fit season of it, so there is all reason
that we should labor to be edified, which was one Reading of the Words.

And being edified, we shall Motive 3.
have rest; which was the other Reading of them, and affords another strong
argument to enforce the duty, If edified, it will be a certain pledge and
means of the continuance, settlement and establishment of our begun rest and
peace. Read over Judahs story, and you shall ever find that all prospered,
while the Temple and Ordinances of God were upheld and honored: and it is to
be observed that when David had settled the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 16. 1. how in the
sequel of that Chapter, he calls upon heaven and earth, Sea, and fields, and
trees of the wood to rejoice, v. 31, 32, 33, etc. and how he puts together many
parcels out of several other Psalms unto that one, as though all were not
sufficient to praise God for such a mercy, into which so many are crowded. And
how v. 30. when the Ark and Church was thus settled, he makes account that the
whole world, with it, were established; and no wonder, Isa. 48. 18.
seeing that for its sake, it is continued: in this case the Prophet Isaiah
says, Their peace should be (not as a brook, which is soon dried up, but) as a
River, continually flowing, and their righteousness as the waves of the sea,
one still coming on in the neck of another: Were it our case, we might expect
an uninterrupted series of mercies.

But never shall I expect that at the long run, it shall be well with the
State, if the Church continue to fare ill, or that our houses will stand firm,
whiles Gods lies waste: we may in that case build castles in the air, or upon
a sandy foundation, which will not abide when the storm comes; with Cain Genesis
4. 7. 15. 5.
and Nimrod, we may build Nods and Babels, which according to the signification
of those names, will end in unsettlement, and confusion: They shall build, and
I will throw down, says the Lord, Mal. 1. 4.

The Jews tell us that the three last Prophets died all on one day, and that on
the very same day See Schinler. ad vocem. (...)
Alexander as a Conqueror entered Jerusalem; whether true or not, we may make
this use of it, to think and conclude upon it, that when thorugh the
unworthines of a people true Prophets cease, outward peace uses to cease with
them; and when the Church is not edified, fear lest the State be not thereby
ruined.

But work we with God (as the Scriptures phrase is) and God will 1 Samuel 14. 45.
work for us: Build we up our selves in our holy faith, and build up his house
according to his holy Word, and then prove him if he will not open to us the
windows of heaven, and pour us out such a blessing, that there shall not be
room enough to receive it, Mal. 3. 10. Build upon it, that he will Ier. 42. 10.
then build us, and not pull us down; plant us, and not pluck us up; even plant
us assuredly. (...). i. e. in truth and stability, (...) with his whole heart,
and with his whole soul. Let but the Churches of God be edified, and then
according to the Text we shall have rest, and that continued and established,
and our Churches not only settled, but also multiplied.

Were multiplied.
THis was the second choice blessing, which accompanied The 3d Sermon preached
at St. Mary's in Cambridge, Feb. 25. 1654.
or followed upon their peace, (...): which the Vulgar, Calvin, and some others
read, They were filled, and refer this word to those that immediately went
before, (...). Thus: They were filled with the comfort of the holy Ghost; which
reading in it self bears a good sense, but 1. breaks what (I think) is the
right contexture of the parts of the verse. 2. Nor does the word (...) so well
agree with a Dative case, as here it must according to that reading. 3. Nor
usually (if at all in the New Testament) put for to fill, but rather to
increase and multiply. And so I here take it, and with our Translators read
it; they having rest were 1. edified, 2. multiplied.

That is,

1. As the Apostles in the course of their Ministry converted many to
Christianity: so more Churches were gathered in new places.

2. The former Churches in the same place were so increased by the conversion,
and so accession of new members, that not being well able to meet in one
congregation, for order sake, and for their better edification, they were
either divided into more Assemblies in the same place, or as new Colonies were
from them sent abroad to stock and plant other places: and thus with the number
of Believers, the number also of Churches was increased and multiplied.

In the handling of this particular, I shall endeavor to make out these two
things.

1. That, as it is here recorded and reckoned, so indeed it is a very great
blessing to have the Churches of God multiplied.

2. That it is an happy fruit and consequent of their having peace, and being
edified, for so they lie in the Text. First they had rest, thereupon, next they
were edified; upon both which in the last place and close of all followed, that
they were multiplied.

It is a very great blessing to have the Churches of Christ increased and
multiplied, for as such it is here recorded and reckoned: viz. As a 2d happy
effect of their peace: Having rest, they were both edified and multiplied: And
for the further explaining of this particular, before the proof of it, I
premise this double caution.

1. This multiplication and Church, is a very great blessing, when and where it
may be had, but yet not so, as to be such a distinguishing note of the Church,
as that that should be no Church, where through the malice of Satan and his
instruments such multitudes are wanting. So indeed the Papists would
characterize the Church by its far spreading, and overgrown multitudes,
proving (as he says) the finenesse of the cloth by the Mr. Fullers holy war.
large measure, as Bellarmine in his Gemitus Columbae, will needs make his
society of Jesuits to be the right Doves, because of their fast and far
flight, and their multiplying brood, rather from any thing that they have of
Dovelike simplicity and Innocence, of which if he could prove them very much
guil^y, he would show more strength and art then he has done in all his whole
controversies.

Such vermin may multiply by swarms, whilst the Lion and Eagle, and other
more noble creatures (as Aristotle observes) are (...), bring forth but by
single unities; Christ once, when lost by his parents, was not found (...), in
the company, but Luke 2. 44, 45. Revel. 12. 6
the woman his spouse is too often to be found in the solitary wilderness,
whilst the waters whereon the whore sits, are peoples, and multitudes, and
nations, and Revel. 17. 17.
tongues.

The valley of the son of Hinnom is a (...), as Hierom On Jer. 2. 24.
observes, and such a Churchyard we may find in the Popish Churches, in which
more are buried, then are baptized into the true Church of Christ. For his dove
and undefiled is but one, whilst there are threescore queens, Cant. 6. 8, 9.
and fourscore concubines, and virgins (such as never had reference or
affection to him) without number: And therefore whilst they cry, Nos numerus
sumus, etc. let it satisfy us that we are of Christ's (...), little little
flock, to whom it is his Fathers Luke 12. 42.
good will to give the kingdom: Multitudes rightly ordered are a blessing, but
no infallible necessary distinguishing note of the Church, which is the first
Caution.

The second I implied, when Multitudes well ordered; and it is more plainly
expressed in the Text, when first it is said, they were edified, and afterward
that they were multiplied. For Multiplication without Edification breeds
only confusion; like the swarms of flies in Egypt, which corrupted the land,
Exodus 8. 24. So at first, when men began to multiply upon the face of the
earth, they defiled it, Genesis 6. 1, 2. Such multitudes may be more then a good
many; too many for God (as once Judge. 7. 2, 4.) to vouchsafe his gracious
presence to: of such multitudes we may say with the Prophet Isa. 9. 3.
Multiplicasti gentem, non magnificasti laetitiam; Thou have multiplied the
nation, but not increased thy joy: Little increase of joy to the Church by the
accession of such multitudes. As when

1. Either the bulk of the Church is swollen up with multitudes of hypocrites,
as Isreal's camp was with that mixed multitude, Exodus 12. 38. A great deal of
chaff may make a great heap on the floor, when there is never the more, but it
may be the less wheat in the garner, and many bad humors in the body may make
it swell and be greater, but never the healthier.

2. Or when the Church is rent in pieces by Schisms and Factions, and so of
one Congregation are made many conventicles of Heretics: many such are now
falsely called Churches, and they are multiplied, and the more the pity, because
far enough from the sense of the Text, in which the true Churches of Christ are
here said to be multiplied; nay hereby they are minished, weakened, if not in
some places wholely destroyed and ruinated. As in a demolished building the
parts of it pulled asunder, and broken in pieces take up a greater room, but
mean while the house is pulled down; and that liquor which is drawn out into
many open pots grows dead and vappid, which would have retained its spirits,
if it had been kept together in one vessel. But this Multiplication here was
without any Division; for these many had one heart, Acts 4. 32. in their
orderly divisions, they had no fractions, were multiplied, but both first were,
and still continued to be edified, and edification in the proper nature and
notion of it includes a compacted union, and accordingly they had peace in
Brotherly communion, as well as in freedom from enemies persecutions; Such a
multiplication as a consequent or concomitant of edification, the Text and the
point in hand hold forth for a very great blessing.

1. Multiplication is a blessing in Nature ever since God said, Gen 1. 22. 28.
Crescite and multiplicamini, at the first Creation. 9. 1. 7.


2. And promised as such in the Genesis 22. 17. Genesis 26. 4.
Covenant of grace, to Abraham Isaac and Jacob, and so all along, that their
seed should be as the stars of heaven for multitude. 28. 3.


3. A blessing to a Family: When the wife is as the fruitful vine by the house
side, and the children like olive plants, round about the table, Psalm. 128. 3.

4. And a blessing to the State: For in the multitude of the people is the
Kings honor, but in the want of people is the destruction of the Prince, Prove.
14. 28.

5. And why not as great or rather a greater blessing in the house of God, and
the Commonwealth of Israel?

As such, it has been desired and prayed for by the people of God, Let Reuben
live, and not die, and let not his men be few, Deuteronomy. 33. 6. and as such it has
been promised by God to his people, I will multiply them, and they shall not be
few, I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small, Jer. 30. 19.

The contrary to it has been frequently threatened on Gods part as a very heavy
affliction; that whereas they had been as the stars of heaven for multitude,
they should be left few in number, Deuteronomy. 28. 62. when the glory of Jacob is
made thin, and the fatness of his flesh waxed lean, and they left as the
shaking of an olive tree, Levit. 26. 22. Deuteronomy. 4. 27
two or three berries on the top of the uppermost branch, Isa. 17. 4. 6. or yet
more lonesome and solitary; As a single Beacon on the top of a mountain, or as
an ensign upon an hill, as the same Prophet elegantly expresses it, Isa. 30,
17.

And on his peoples part as sadly bemoaned and groaned under, as under a very
heavy burden. So David mournfully complains that the godly man cease, and
that the faithful failed, Psalm. 12. 1. and the wasted, consumed Church
piteously cries out, My leanness, my leanness, Isaiah 24. 16.

This truth the devil is convinced of, and therefore well knowing that the
enlargement of Christ's kingdom is the lessening of his, by himself and his
instruments he labors to hinder it: Come on, let us deal wisely with them,
lest they mult plie, says Pharaoh, Exodus 1. 10

And therefore God on the contrary, promoteth and advances it, when he intends
to give his people a signal evidence of his favor and love.

Whether in worse days as a pledge and means of their after deliverance, as
in that remarkable, place Exo. 2. 7. where speaking of Israel in Egypt, You
have six words or expressions in the Hebrew, (...). 1. They were fruitful, 2.
And increased abundantly, 3. And multiplied, 4. And waxed mighty and that 5. 6.
in two words, See Muis in his varia sacra in Exodus 1 7.
(...). Valde, valde, exceedingly, so that the land was filled with them. Not
to express that the Hebrew women bare six children at a time, as Baal Haturim
vainly Cabalizeth, quo nihil nugacius, but only to express a most wonderful
prosperous increase. The 1st. word signifying that none of them was barren. 2.
That they brought forth diverse at once, more reptilium, as the 2d word
signifies, Genesis 1. 20. And 3. those not short-lived: For else they had not
multiplied as the 3d word word says they did. 4. Nor weak and feeble, but
strong and mighty, and all this doubled as the words are, and that to a
superlative degree as the word there used in that language signifies: thus
then to the Church in that time of their bondage, as to the Christian Church in
their first uprising, whilst yet under Acts 2. 6. 4. 32. 8. 2. 14. 1. 17. 4.
21. 22.
persecution: How often do you read in the Acts of the Apostles of the (...), the
multitude of Believers? When (...) (...), etc. When the word of God increased,
and the number of Disciples multiplied greatly, and a great company of the
priests were obedient to the faith, Acts 6. 7. in that day of Gods power from
the womb of the morning, he had the dew of his youth: Psalm. 110. 3. i. e. The
world was overspread with Believers and Churches, as the drops of dew in a
morning cover Tertul. Apologet. cap. 37.
the face of the earth; then they could say, Vestra omnia implevimus, urbes,
insulas, castilla, etc. In those first best days, though under persecution,
their numbers filled all places.

As we hope and believe in the last best days, they will fill the world, as is
fully and magnificently expressed, Isa. 60. when multitudes of Believers shall
not be (as at first) like drops of dew that cover the earth; but as the
everflowing waters that cover the sea, Isa. 11. 9. Then will the Churches of
Christ have rest, and be edified and multiplied. All great blessings, and such
as with which God uses to crown the best times.

And in particular, this blessing of the multiplication of true Saints, and
Churches is very great. As by which,

1. A great deal of good is more easily done; much work by many hands, and
great assistance by many helpers. He has delivered my soul in peace from the
battle which was against me, for there were many with me, Psalm. 55. 18. Not
that God stands in need of multitudes to have his work done, or his people
preserved; for there is no restraint with him to 1 Samuel 14. 6. 2. Chron. 14. 11.
save by many, or by few: One God self-sufficient in himself, and
All-sufficient to all his people, in their straits, and want of all other help
is more then All: My God, and I are good company, was the Dr. Sibbs.
saying of a very good man.

But yet, as in ordinary course he works by means, so his work is often
retarded through the f^wness of workmen, 2 Chronicles. 29. 34. and on the contrary
is better carried on by many hands; How was the very place shaken where the
multitudes of Believers, were met together, and lift up their voices (...)?
Act. 4. 24. 31. 32. The public prayers of many met together in the Church are
the more prevalent, how much more joint the suffrages of many Churches? that
way evry way the more good men there are, the more good is done.

2. And the more mischief prevented or repelled. Many thieves are not so ready
or hardy to set upon so many honest men, or may be better resisted by a greater
number, if they do: a Isa. 31. 4.
multitude of shepherds called forth is able to withstand the Lion roaring on
his prey. And so when the godly prove numerous and potent, true enemies prove
seeming friends, as it is said, Esther 8. 17. many of the people of the land, in
that case, became Jews; or if they will still appear enemies, the Church of
God will appear terrible, when it is become like an army with banners, Cant. 6.
4. 10.

3. Hence also more comfort and joy to the godly, for here, the more the
merrier, and the better cheer too: thus the Jews who had returned from Babylon
prayed for thereturn of the test that stayed behind, whose accession to them to
fill up their number, they accounted would be as rivers in the South, i. e.
most refreshing and comfortable Psalm. 126. 4. and so before, it was with the
voice of joy and praise, when David went to the house of God with a multitude,
Psa. 42. 4. as elsewhere he greatly praises God when it was (...) in Psalm.
109. 30. Psalm. 22. 25
the midst of the multitude, (...) in the great congregation, if there be a
full number of them, the Communion of Saints is more full, and their joy in it,
more joy to them.

4. And (which is the greatest blessing of all more glory to God, when he is
praised, and blessed, and served by so many: as a King in the midst of his
army, or Job 29. 25.
a great Lord encompassed with a great retinue of his servants and followers.
This his praise will be most fully sounded out when the whole Chorus in Heaven
shall all together join in their Hallelujah's. A praeludium to which, even an
heaven upon earth, is when many Churches from all quarters of the world shall
sing their several parts, as well as they can, to make up the Consort;
Abundant grace, 2 Cor. 9. 12.
through the thanksgiving of many redounds much to the glory of God, 2 Cor. 4.
15. But it will be a most royal found which the Trumpet of the 7th Angel will
make, and will fill the whole earth with the glorious praises of God, when
there shall be great voices in heaven, saying, All the Kingdoms of this world,
are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever, Revel. 11. 15.

And thus we see, that in the multiplication of Churches, and true Believers in
them, is contained a multiplied blessing: we may then say with Leah, when such
a Gad is born, that a Troop Genesis 30. 11.
comes.

And (which was the second blessing of Multiplication comes upon the Churches
peace and edification.

Peace breeds plenty, as in other God may, and often does improve affliction
and persecution to the enlargement of his Church, and the multiplying Believers
in it, as sickness make's some young ones grow tall, and cold Northerly climes
use to be more prolificall; So Israel in Egypt most multiplied after Joseph's
death, Exodus 1. 7. 12.
and so had lost their best friend to support them, and when most burdned and
afflicted. And the scattering of the Disciples mentioned Act. 8. 1. appears
from the 4th verse following but to have been a sowing of the seed of the word,
and the Preachers as seedsmen for a following more plenfull harvest, as after
times made Tertullians word true, Semen est Apologet. cap. 50.
sanguis Christianorum, that the Christians blood became seed to beget many to
Christ: such trees of righteousness grow fast in winter, whose cold blasts and
blusters do not so much blow out, as like bellows blow up this divine flame;
times of persecution by Gods happy improvement of them, have proved times of
the Churches multiplication.

But yet (as you use to say) it is pity that fair weather should do any hurt,
nay it is pity if it do not a great deal of good.

And if in it vermin swarm, it is some bodies fault, if something better also
do not thrive, that the Churches of God be not multiplied.

1. When they have fewer and less discouragements and hindrances which
naturally and too usually like cold blasts nip and check an out-putting spring.
It was a very low Ebb, when there was no Smith found in all Israel, 1 Samuel 13.
19.
and as low when there are few or no Ministers left in the Church; very low it
was when five horses 2 King. 7. 13.
were as all the multitude of Israel, and yet lower when they are brought down
to the like number, who are the Charrets of Israel 2 King. 2. 12 2 King. 13. 14.
and the horsemen thereof.

2. When on the contrary they have many encouragements and furtherances, viz.

When Ministers with Paul, Act. 28. 31. may Preach not only (...) no man
forbidding and hindering, but also (...), with all confidence and boldness,
whilst Christian Magistrates command, maintain and countenance them in so
doing.

And Christian professors have the like vacancy and fre^dome, that they may be
as good as they will for any thing which they meet with coming cross either
from God or man. This freedom (I acknowledge) through our corruption and
perverseness may breed many hypocrites; yet it helps to nourish and cherish
multitudes of sincere hearted Christians, as the same fair weather which makes
bad weeds grow, helps more wholesome herbs to flourish and multiply. Foul
weather in the Church make's invenomed enemies (like Snailes, and Frogs, and
Toades) to creep out of their holes in abundance; but fairer and calmer days
give the people of God opportunity, and invite them to appear abroad in greater
numbers, as the men of Israel, who had before hid themselves, when they heard
that the Philistines fled, came forth and increased the host, 1 Samuel 14. 22.
as afterward in Solomon's reign, when the land had peace, and every man dwelt
safely under his vine and fig tree, the Pomoeria of the City of God were so
enlarged, and the number of its Citizens so much increased, that it was from
Dan to Beersheba, 1 King. 4. 24, 25. Churches are multiplied first when their
peace is settled.

And therefore all that I shall Psalmist; O pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
and say, Peace be within thy walls, and plenteousness within thy palaces, even
plenty of all other blessings, and above all of blessed Believers, which then
either do, or should increase and multiply; for whereas war inlargeth the
Territories of other Tyrants, a godly peace helps in a great measure to
enlarge the Kingdom of the Prince of peace, therefore all the sons of peace
pray for peace that the Gospel of peace may be all over preached, and the
Churches of Christ thereby multiplied.

2. But that with their peace they may be also edified, for so in the Text it is
said first they were edified, and then and thereupon it is added that they were
multiplied; The true edification of the Church makes much for the right and
orderly multiplication of it.

And this according to the double edification of it, before mentioned.

1. Whether we mean the edification of the whole Church, which was when the
Ordinances of Christ are set and held up in power and purity, the word being
purely preached, the Sacraments and other holy things of God duly dispensed and
administered: For as when God had at first created, and set all creatures in
their several ranks and orders, He then said, Increase and multiply, Genesis 1.
22. So when all things in his house are duly ordered, and dispensed, then we
may expect a multiplied increase; for the Ordinances are Christ's bed of love,
Cant. 3. 1.
in which many are begotten to him; and when that Marriage feast is made ready,
and guests are invited, then the house is filled, and the marriage furnished
with guests, Matthew. 22. 10. So it was in the first preaching of the Gospel,
there went out Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Regions about to John
Baptist, Matthew. 3. 5, 6. Matthew. 11. 12. Luke 16. 16.
and in that crowd the Kingdom of Heaven suffered violence, and every one
pressed into it; and afterward Christ said that when He should be lifted up (as
on the Cross, so in the ministry of the Gospel) He would draw all men John 12.
32.
unto him, which was fully made good in that wonderful confluence of
numberless numbers of Believers, which all the world over, even upon the swords
point, crowded in to Christ and to martyrdom together, when once in the
ministry of the Gospel He was lifted up as an Ensign, to Isa. 11. 10. 12. Genesis
49. 10.
this our Shiloh were then the gatherings of the people, as of Soldiers to the
colors of the Captain of their Salvation. Peter's net was then full, and he
takes 153 great fishes at one John 21 6. 11. Act. 2. 41.
draught, nay some thousands of Souls at one Sermon; when Ordinances were
rightly dispensed. But as Peter at an other time Luke 5. 5.
toiled all the night, and took nothing: So now with us while the word and
Ordinances of Christ have so woefully been either corrupted, or despised and
trampled upon, and so the house of God rather ruinated, then built up and
edified, we have had Professors enough, but how few sincere ones? but thin
congregations, and but slender account of any saving conversion, and coming on
to Christ in those few, the (...) have been of another way, Multitudes have
been and are the badge of Mahomets heard, and the Popes Synagogue, and with us
of such, as have been the frequent followers of greatest Seducers and
Corrupters, as where the Carrion is there the Kytes are gathered together.

And therefore the greater is our God has betrusted the care of his Church and
People, that his house may once be built, and at length better frequented and
filled, and that not by flights of Kytes to the Carrion, but of Eagles to that
dead body, that saw no corruption; and of Doves Isa. 60. 8.
to the windows, for such promises there are made, and yet in part, nay (it
may be) in a great measure, if not wholly, to be accomplished; that all Nations
shall come flying and slowing into Christ, when the mountain of the Isa. 2. 2.
Lords house shall be establ^shed in the top of the mountains; They then shall
be multiplied, when in this sense the whole Church shall be thus edified.

2. As also when the particular members of the Church shall themselves hereby
come savingly to be edified in faith and love, then and thereby Churches and
Believers come to be multiplied.

For as it is their duty, so it will be their care and endeavor with Peter,
when converted, to strengthen their brethren, and Luke 22. 32.
when they themselves are once edified and built upon Christ, to do what they
can (as we heard out of 1 These. 5. 11.) mutually to edify one another, for they
come to Christ (as before we showed out of 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5.) as living stones;
not to lie still as in a dead wall, no nor only to live and grow themselves,
but also to draw on others to the building, as in the place of Isaiah 2. when
all Nations are promised to flow to the house of the Lord, v. 2. it is added v.
3. And many people shall go, and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord; as before it was said of Zebulun and Issachar, Deuteronomy. 33. 19.
that they should call the people to the mountain, i. e. those two Tribes being
in the utmost Coasts, and so at a far distance from the Ark and Temple, shall
yet through their own pains and diligence in coming to it, by their example,
invite and show others that dwell nearer to do the like, yea and call on other
Nations (with whom by reason of their situation on the Sea coast, they had
occasion to traffic) to bear them company; so studious were they, and so
careful should we be, when we have acquaintance with Christ, to draw on others
to like communion with him. Our Savior says that the Scribes and Pharisees
compassed Matthew. 23 15.
sea and land to make Proselytes to themselves; and Paul foretold Act. 20. 30.
that after his departure Seducers would be studious to speak perverse things,
to draw away Disciples after them, and what Quoy-ducks Jesuits and other
Popish Emissaries now are, and how busy to bring whole Sholes and flights into
their Nets, we in part see, and I wish that we here were more aware of their
present practices.

But all that they do is only to fill the Synagogue of Satan by the emptying
(what they can) the Church of Christ; O that we might once prove as wise and
faithful and diligent for God and Christ, as they are for Satan and
Antichrist, that by building up our selves, and one another, the Churches of
God may be so edified, that at last they may be more multiplied!

But this tends to the 3d part of the Text in these words:

Walking in the fear of the Lord, etc.
Which words have a double aspect, and 4. Sermon preached in Paul's, April.
1655.
look either

1. To the peace they had, as the happy fruit of it: having rest they walked in
the fear of the Lord, etc.

2. Or to their edification and multiplication, as the cause or means of them;
so as the whole verse may be thus expressed, Having peace they upon it walked
in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, and thereupon it
came to pass that they were edified and multiplied: which double respect that
these words bear as coming between their peace and their edification and
multiplication, as the effect of the one, and the cause or means of the other,
in the handling of them will hold out unto us,

1. Our duty, viz. that upon our enjoying of peace and rest, we then especially
(then if ever, then more then ever) should labor to walk in the fear of the
Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost.

2. An effectual argument to enforce it, because thus doing will be the most
effectual way and means to have the Churches of Christ edified and multiplied.

I begin with the duty, and first with the first part of it, in those words,
walking in the fear of the Lord; and the Note thence is this.

That when God vouchsafes to his Churches rest and peace, it is their duty
then especially to walk in his fear.

And here I shall not need by way of explication to hint, that

1. By walking is meant their diligent and constant practice and course of life.

2. And by Gods fear,

Primarily and most properly is meant that sanctified affection or sanctifying
grace, both in the habit and act of it, whereby out of a filial and ingenuous
awfulness, we are afraid to offend God by sinning against him.

And Tropically the whole Eccles. 12. 13. Deuteronomy. 6. 2. 13. See Cartwright on
Prove. 1. 7.
worship and service of God, of which this fear as it is one great and especial
part, so also it awfully commands and puts us upon all the rest, and
withholds us from the contrary.

So that this their walking in the fear of the Lord, was their diligent and
constant course of obedience and service, out of an awful and reverential
respect to him, and an ingenuous and filial fear to offend him. This was their
practice when God had given them rest, and it is the duty incumbent now on us,
when the like mercy is vouchsafed to us: viz. now upon consideration of it to
Heb. 12. 28.
serve him with reverence and godly fear: indeed it must be without unbeleeving
and slavish fear of man, Luke 1. 74. but with as much, nay with more
Reverential fear of God then ever; for although perfect love casts out fear,
1 John 4. 18. yet in true filial fear there is as much, nay more love then
fear, and so, they who are said to fear God, Psalm. 145. 19. are in the 20th
verse immediately following styled such as love him. To have fear and joy meet
is a riddle to a carnal heart, yet to rejoice with Psalm. 2. 11.
trembling, is a piece of the mystery of godliness, which Grace teaches and a
godly heart is acquainted with. And especially upon the receipt of any greater
mercy, as at the Resurrection of our Savior, it is said of the two Mary's,
that they departed from the Sepulcher with fear and great joy. Matthew. 28. 8. So
in any other kind of Resurrection, wherein God pleases to raise us (as it
were) from the grave, such a sweet mixture of those seemingly contrary graces
should be felt in our hearts, and expressed in our carriages; so as at the same
time to rejoice in his goodness, Nehe. 9. 25. and yet to fear him and his
goodness, Hos. 3. 5. Slavish spirits may fear his greatness, but a good heart
will fear him for his goodness, will fear when enlarged, Isa. 60. 5. and with
such a Systole and Diastole does it breathe and live.

This being a great part of that Tribute which our Sovereign Lord requires for
all his bounty and blessings; And now Israel what does the Lord thy God require
of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God etc. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. and which a soul truly
subjected to Christ does most freely pay, from mercy takes an argument of fear,
There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130. 4. it
says, Let us fear the Lord who gives unto us rain, and reserveth to us the
appointed weeks of the harvest, Jer. 5. 24. fear's him for plenty, and fear's
him for peace, as in a peaceable Solomon's reign, when the mountains shall bring
peace to the people, Psalm. 72. 3. and so you might think to find them most
secure, it is added, that they shall fear him as long as the Sun and Moon
endure, v. 5. the less that in their peace they fear their enemies, the more
they fear their peaceable King. That in Solomon as a type, fore-prophesied what
should be under the more peaceable government of Jesus Christ: and in this Text
that prophecy was fulfilled, for when these his best subjects had rest and were
still, even then they trembled, walking in the fear of the Lord.

But you will say, Is fear consistent Psalmist says when the Seaman when he
Psalm. 107. 27.
is tossed and reeleth to and fro, and staggers in a tempest, is like a drunken
man, but is it not right out drunkenness, or rather madness to do so in a
calm, and when gotten on the shore?

To which I answer; It is so Gods servants are sometimes overtaken with, yea
and that sometimes when both for inward and outward man, they have all cause of
joy, and an holy confidence and security.

But (as the School observes) Biel.
there is a double act of a chaste and filial fear.

1. One when we avoid sin for fear of offending God, and so of being in any
measure separated or estranged from him, and thereby of losing of any either
measure or manifestation of that good which we enjoy through communion with
him. And thus Austin Tractat. in Johan.
defines fear to be Fuga animi ne perdat quod diligit.

2. The other is an awful Reverence of God, not as to any fear in us of our
loss of him, but only as in himself he is the most perfect and absolute good,
and so most worthy of all humble observance.

The first of these they truly say is only here in via, whilst we are here
travelers in our way because when we come to our journies end, and confirmed
in glory, there will be no danger, and therefore no fear of any such offense,
and loss and disjunction. But the latter abides, yea is perfected in heaven,
and so is both of in via and in Patria. I am sure both of them are (or at least
should be) found in us whilst we are here in the way, and that not only in the
foulest, but even in the fairest plat of it, where we should not only be
afraid of Gods judgments, Psalm. 119. 120. but also of his tenderest mercies,
not only in the time of our danger and trouble, but of our greatest rest and
security: even then we should walk in the fear of the Lord, and that upon a
twofold ground, answerable to that forementioned double act of this godly fear.

1. In the time of our rest and peace we have great need to put forth the first
A^t of it in taking heed of offending God, and so of being estranged from him,
because Then we are in the greatest danger of it.

2. And as great cause we have Then also to put forth that second Act of a
Reverential observance of him as the greatest and chiefest good, as having then
strongest engagements laid upon us, and we thereby being put upon the strongest
trial of our filial awful ingenuity.

First in time of peace, we have Gods fear, not only because of fear in the
night, but also by reason of the danger of the brightest day of prosperity and
peace; and that danger is double, both outward and inward.

1. Outward; for in that sense we have something to lose, and are not out of
all danger of losing it. It is true, that through Go^s mercy* with these
Churches in the Text, we have attained to some measure of rest from some of our
former troubles which we conflicted with in the height and heat of our former
wars; but yet Fortunam reverenter habe, me thinks may yet be to us a good
Memento. For as for your City, the very sad fires which have so frequently
broken out of late, may warn you that all the sparks of Gods displeasure are
not quite extinguished, and me thinks call loud upon you in way of public
humiliation, with Israel, to meet together, and draw water and pour it out
before the Lord in prayers and tears, which will be more effectual then all
your Engines to quench such skarefires. And for the whole land, were we more
settled then we are, we are not as yet arrived at that everlasting rest, which
shall Heb. 4. 9.
never be disturbed or interrupted.

And besides, our present peace is but very tender, and in a crazy condition.

At best, whilst we are here in this lower Region, clouds may Eccles. (...).
return after rain, one misery and mischief after another; yea after the
brightest Sunshine.

A lightsome and calm day may and in a gloomy and stormy evening, Isa. 21. 12.

Yea our Sun may go down at Noon, Amos, 8. 9. when we think it is gotten up to
its full height.

Nay in the morning, Jer. 20. 16. when it is now but newly up; for at that time
of the day, God rained down fire and brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19.
23, 24. And all this may be the more possible, if not probable: Because,

1. So unstable and inconstant are men's minds, and all our best outward
enjoyments, a very shadow, Psalm. 39. 6. 1 Cor. 7. 31.
a Scheme, a vain show that passes away, like the Sea which although (it may
be) calm now, yet may suddenly prove boisterous and tempestuous as soon as it
shall be again blown upon. But I shall not here enlarge on this Argument.

2. So provoking may our sins prove, that as they disquiet God, so they may
easily disturb and discompose our peace, when we may think it best settled. Hic
Davus perturbat omnia, as it is well observed Quo tempore maxim florueere
Tribus december, eodem Hoseas praedicat horum internecionem Anonymi Annotat. in v.
T. Cantabrig.
by one upon Hos. 1. 1. that in the time of Jeroboam the second when Israel or
the ten Tribes were then in the most flourishing outward condition, even then
for His and Their sins, the Lord, by that his Prophet, threatens their utter
destruction: That first verse tells you that he prophesied in his days, and
how sad and heavy that Prophecy was, you may read in the sequel of it, and yet
how outwardly prosperous for the present he and his times were, their story
will inform you, 2 Kin. 14. 23. ad finem. And shall we (as the Scriptures
phrase is) forsake Job 6. 14.
the fear of the Lord? Upon it, the Lord may yet so forsake us, that our
awlesse, fearlesse miscarriages may produce most fearful miscarriages in our
greatest concernments.

3. And this the rather, because God is wont to be very observant how we
intertain newly vouchsafed or restored mercies, and then proves more than
ordinarily severe in punishing our unworthy and unthankful receiving or abuse
of them. Partly the better to remember us of our former sins, which before
deprived us of them.

And partly to make us the more wary for the future, that we do not in the like
kind abuse them.

Instances of which we have in his dreadful proceeding against Achan, at
Isreal's first entrance Josh 7.
into Canaan,

Against the Bethshemites, at the 1 Samuel 6. 19.
return of the Ark.

And against Ananias and Saphira in the first preaching of the Act. 51. to 12.
Gospel.

The Lord in mercy grant, that it may not be exemplified in us upon our
unworthy returns for mercies newly either vouchsafed or restored to us. However
for the present it may be with us, yet let us not say with Agag, that the
bitterness of death is past, and then take heart the more bitterly 1 Samuel 15.
32.
to provoke God: for the bitterest of the cup may yet be behind in the bottom.
And therefore let the man that is now recovering out of a sickness, look well
to himself, that he fall not into a relapse, and so quite overthrow himself,
which in that crazy condition of his is soon done: whilst we stand, let us not
be high minded, but fear; Romans 11. 20.
even when we rest in peace, let us walk in fear and trembling, in our greatest
security let us fear God; for even then we lie at his mercy. Outward and
temporal danger then may be great.

But inward and spiritual is God by our sins, our danger, because Gods
indignation, will be very great.

And yet (which is our both sin and misery) then we are most subject to do so,
then as much, nay more then ever, to forget both our selves and him, and so by
our sins most bitterly to provoke him. As the man after a vein opened, at the
turning of the blood is most subject to sink down into a swoon, so we into sin
upon the return and our enjoyment of a lost mercy. The thorny ground is choked
with riches and pleasures, which could not with the stony ground be beaten off
by persecutions; and therefore our Saviors last and Mat. 4.
greatest temptation was with the glory of the world; and Joseph Genesis 39.
was most put to it by the charms of fleshly allurements, who as to
imprisonments and all other miseries was impregnable.

When peace and plenty is restored and continued, God does, and we may know how
prone we are to grow

Loose upon liberty When the prison door is set open, and we got out of the
deep miry lane, between the enclosures of the thorn hedges (which kept us from
starting out) into the open Common; how apt are we to run out of the way, and
so to lose our God, and our selves together? Job feared it Job 1. 5.
in his children, lest in their feasts they should blaspheme God: and Agur
feared it in himself, lest in Prove. 30. 9
his plenty he should deny him: Rehoboam as soon as ever he felt his own legg^,
and could stand on them, forsook God, as it is remarkably expressed, 2 Chronicles.
12. 1. and even Hezekiah himself did not make such a return as might have well
beseemed him, 2 Chronicles. 32 25.

More particularly, how subject are we in time of peace to grow

1. Secure and careless, when we are now about taking our rest to fall a
sleep, when we are (as we think) without danger, then to be without both fear
and care, as they of Laish, Judge. 18. 7. Babylon, Isa. 47. 8. and Nineveh,
Zeph. 2. 25. in their peace and prosperity are all of them said to dwell
carelessly; Feasting without fear, Jude v. 12. otherwise then we heard Job did.
Because they have not changes, therefore they fear not God, Psalm. 55. 19. Yet
they fear not God, so we have it in the Margin, which implies their Duty, that
then they should most of all have feared God. But our translators read it,
Therefore they feared not God, which shows their pract^se, and I wish it did
not ours. Our peace makes us secure.

2. Worldly: as the man recovering from a sickness often grows greedy, so
the returned Jews, when at quiet in their own houses so wholely minded them,
that they neglected Gods; which is notoriously our sin for the present, now
that we are a little thrust out of the storm at sea into the haven, we are so
earnest to make our own markets, that God and Religion, (and I wish none else)
are very great losers.

3. Nay proud and petulant, in our carriage toward men, yea and God too. This
Nehemiah in his prayer complains of, that after they had rest, they did
evil; Neh 9. 28.
and Moses before makes it his complaint of the same people, that even Jeshurun
(which signifies Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
an upright people) when waxed fat, kicked, alluding in the sense, and some
think in the very word to (...), an unbroken wanton Bullock, which the more
fed, proves the more petulant; of the Seamans Religion, who proves more
boisterous Not as they Jona. 1. 15, 16.
and outrageous when got ashore, then the sea it self was before in the tempest.

In general, we are not wont to be the same men in peace and prosperity, that
we were in our trouble and perplexity: Like Aeneas Sylvius when chosen Pope was
called Pius 2. who before he was made Pope was very strong and earnest for the
Councels authority and preheminency over the Pope, but when Pope once, he was
as much against it, which gave some occasion to say that Pius negavit, quod
Aeneas probaverat. It is too often the sin of better men, when God remembers
them, then most of all to forget him and themselves; and this not from any
defect in God, or his gift, but only from our abuse of it: as Ambrose says,
it is to be referred, non ad imprudentiam largientis, De Paradise, cap. 7.
sed ad male utentis errorem. And therefore then in an especial manner we have
need of this holy fear of God to ballast our vain light hearts, that they
overset not.

And if Fear in the general nature of it be mali probabiliter futuri, as Biel
conceives, or impendentis, as Tully expresses it, (...), as Aristotle
defines it, then according Rhetor. lib. 2. cap 5.
to all those expressions, in greatest peace, we have greatest need of this
holy fear: This evil of sin and thereby of misery and mischief, being not only
probable and at a distance, but very near and imminent: which makes this first
Argument to put forth the first forementioned act of filial fear in time of our
greatest pe^ce, because our danger, both in point of sin and misery, is then
very great.

But there was a second Argument viz. most awfully to reverence him as the
chiefest good; because that his goodness is very much then manifested, and
thereby grace has the strongest engagements laid upon it, and is put to the
greatest trial of its awful ingenuity: chains of afflictions being changed into
thick cords of love, to try which of them will more strongly draw and bind us
to obedience. In some kind to fear God when we are in outward danger or
misery, is but natural: As the good thief said unto the bad, Do not even
thou fear God? when he was now upon the cross, Luke 23. 40. A sl^v^sh fear in
such a case may aw us, and this only from self love, out of which principle
the Indians serve the D^vil, Ne noceat: But it is the love of God that
constrains us out of ingenuity to fear to offend him, when no terror either
from him or man frighteth us. This, this is that which they call Timor filialis,
Amicalis, Castus, and as Valentia styleth it, Gratus, quo Beneficiatus timet
offendere Benefacientem. The fear of a dutiful child, of a chaste spouse, and
of a thank full friend, that is afraid to offend his Benefactor: and does most
awfully Reverence God, ex intuitu amoris, and divinae perfectionis, from
consideration of his infinite perfection in him self, and bounty to us. This
fear is greatest in the holy Angels and Saints glorified, and in us here when
we are got nearest heaven, in a greatest likeness to them, and have received
choicest mercies from God, as inward or outward peace, etc. Then it is that we
are put upon the strongest trial, as when God rained down Manna from Heaven; He
then said, He would prove whether they would walk in his ways, Exodus 16. 4 As
a servant is not so well tried whether he will obey his Master, if he be sent
on a journey in a wet stormy day, or be set to a hard piece of work without
convenient tools or materials, when he has so much to plead for his excuse;
but if sent on a fair day upon an easy journey, and has all materials and
conveniences for his work laid by him, if he now hang off, and do contrary,
this will more fully try him, And so now does God us, when in our time of peace
and li^erty we have nothing besides our own sloathfull and sinful hearts to
discourage and hinder, but all requisites which may encourage and help us in
his service. And therefore seeing we are now upon this trial, it concerns us
much to look to it how we acquit our selves, that now in this time of our
peace, the less that we fear man, the more we fear God, so as to receive this
mercy with a trembling hand, as the Elders of Bethlehem did Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.
4. and Isaac did Gods manifesting his will to bless his son Jacob, Genesis 28. 33.

And then also to follow God trembling as Hos. 11. 10, 11. in a reverentiall
adoring of him for his goodness, and in an awful care that we do not ill
requite him by any unworthy miscarriages: that hence

1. Upon the trial we may be found faithful, and have this strong evidence
made out to us of our ingenuity.

2. We may in some measure answer to what is always found in God, and in such
like dispensations, viz. That there is greatest awfulnesse in his smiles; and
His is a dread when a most serene Majesty. Dominion and fear is with Job 25. 2.
him, even when he makes peace in his high places. He never more kindly
humbles and aweth the creature, then when he draws nearest to it, in a way
of mercy* So the Angels in heaven cover their faces, when in nearest approaches
they behold His; and the penitent sinner is never more low and lowly on his
knee, then when he prostrateth himself at the throne of grace, and God holds
out to him the golden scepter: God did so to Abraham, in his ready granting his
petitions and then Abraham in his own eyes was dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27.

3. That hereby also we may come to have a more sure and sanctified enjoyment
of this our peace, and whatever other mercies are wrapped up in it; which we
may with more considence expect, whilst this holy Fear stands Sentinel, and is
upon the watch, against security, pride, wantonness, and all those other
excesses which Peace is subject to breed in our hearts (as vermin are wont to
do in standing waters) which may corrupt it, and at last again justly deprive
us of it.

Which fitly leads me to the second walking in the fear of God in time of
peace, will be a special means of both edifying and multiplying the Churches
of Christ, as it was here in the Text, which affords two other arguments more
strongly to enforce this duty.

First, that walking in Gods fear

1. Whether of the whole Church in setting and keeping up the Ordinances of God
in their power and purity. For so Noah moved with fear built an Ark, Heb. 11.
7. And Nehemiah who was famous for building up Jerusalems wall, was as eminent
in Gods fear Chap. 5. 9. 15. and the like we read, Acts 13. 16. That those that
feared God gave audience to his word. And had we of late more feared God, we
should not have dared so boldly and impudently to have profaned his holy
Ordinances.

2. Or of the particular members of the Church in grace and holiness, whilst
they serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12. 28. and not
only work out their own salvation with for and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. but also
do as much for others, even save them with fear, plucking them out of the fire,
Jud. 23. and thus by these means the Churches of God being edified,

They will also be multiplied, according to that Isa. 60. 5. Thou shall see and
flow together, thy heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the abundance of
the sea shall be converted to thee, and the forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee, expressing the great confluence of people to the Church upon the
preaching of the Gospel, as it was here when they walked in the fear of the
Lord, they wanted not company of fellow-travellers, nor should we, if we took
the same course,

Partly by our careful endeavors laboring to gain strangers and enemies over
to Christ.

And partly by our holy examples (as the Apostle speaks of 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.
Christian women) winning them to God, whilst they behold our chaste
conversation coupled with fear.

Whereas on the contrary, our fearful impieties fright away strangers from our
communion, are an offense to Jews and Gentiles, as well as to the Church of
God. The abominable practices of Christians are a stumbling block in the way to
Jews and Turks, and Infidels without, as the unworthy and unchristian carriages
of Professors are to those that are estranged from the ways of grace within
the pale of the Church: And hence in part it is, that the ways of Zion mourn,
and her gates are desolate, and the high ways are unoccupied, Lam. 1. 4. Judge.
5. 6. This was a great part of their lamentation then, as being a fruit of the
enemies violence in time of war; but how much more sadly should it now be
lamented by us, when it is the effect of our most unworthy walking in these
times of rest and peace? we have rest, as they here had, but we do not walk in
the fear of the Lord as they did, and therefore it is that the Churches of God,
are not now as they were then, edified, and multiplied.

Which may show us our sin, and call upon us earnestly to be deeply humbled for
it: Let us therefore remember our fault this day; for Genesis 41. 9.
God has been graciously pleased to come out to us in mercy and peace, but we
have forgotten to walk with him, in reverence and godly fear. Indulsisti Genti
Domine, indulsisti genti, nunquid glorificatus es? So the Vulgar reads that
in Isai. 26. 15. He said it of that Nation, and we may as fitly apply it to
ours. Lord thou have increased, (or indulged) this Nation, thou have indulged
this our Nation with peace and plenty; but nunquid glorificatus es? art thou
thereby glorified? Nay, gravatus es, as Piscator reads it, (and the word
(...) there used will bear it) Lord, thou art burdened, and pressed by our
sins, as the cart is with sheaves. In stead of walking Amos 2. 13.
in Gods fear, we are boldly and presumptuously risen up against God, and that
in most horrid blasphemies, and m^st fearful, nay fearless daring ranting
impieties. Our rest has made us secure, and our plenty petulant, nay rampant,
and that against God himself. We do not say in our hearts, Let us now fear the
Lord our God, who gives us rain, the former and the latter, in his season, and
reserveth Ier. 5. 24.
to us the appointed weeks of the harvest, that establishes peace in our
borders, etc. Psalm. 147. 13, 14. And therefore the less that we fear man, the
more let us now reverence and fear God. No, but our greater plenty serves us
the more to fulfill our lusts, and occasioneth even our murmurings at his
overflowing bounty, which may constrain him to bring us to a low ebb in the
turning of the tide, that we may be punished with scarcity, who rest not
satisfied with his plenty, and by our peace and rest, we take the more liberty
to look about for our selves, and to oppress others. Such a requital this is,
as if any in the time of our former straits should have told us that we would
make, in case God should deliver us, we should have been ready to spit in his
face, and defied both him and it, with Hazaels words, but are we dogs that we
should do these things? 1 Kings 8. 13.
But it appears now that our hearts are dec^itfull above all Jer. 17. 9.
things, and desperately wicked, we did not know them, nor that bottomless
depth of abominable wickedness that was in them: Well, but our sin has found
us Number. 3^. 23. Psalm. 36. 2.
out, or rather God has found it out, and that to be very hateful. He has
discovered to us as the most base and unworthy ingratitude and disingenuity of
our Spirits, so our invincible perverseness, when neither mourning to us will
make us weep, nor piping dance. Mat. 11. 17.


He expected that our former peace should have quited our lusts, at least that
our after wars should have subdued them, as Austine observes, quae solit
corruptos hominum De civit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 1.
mores bello emendare, etc. But both he and we find that war cannot mend us,
and peace makes us worse. O foolish people and unwise! Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
But do we thus requite the Lord? by waging open war against him, when he has
made peace for us with our neighbors. Do we turn spiritual grace into
wantonness, and temporal peace Jude v. 4.
into rebellion? but what in the close of all will come of this? or as the
Prophet said, What shall we do in the end of it? Unless we betimes Ier. 5. 31.
bethink our selves and repent, will not God be provoked Psalm. 18. 26.
with the froward to deal frowardly?

1. With such disingenuous ones, not to deal (may I with reverence so speak?)
so ingenuously? Ingenuity does not use to upbraid courtesies vouchsafed, nor
does God, (who gives to all (...) liberally) upbraid any, for often either
asking or receiving, Jam. 1. 5. But yet such unworthy and base ingratitude does
enforce him, and so he did often to Israel, and not Deuteronomy. 32. 26. Judge 2. 1, 2,
3. 6. 8, 9. 10. 11, 12 1 Samuel 10 18, 19.
only to Baasha, 1 King. 16. 2. and Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14. 7, 8. and Saul, 2 Samuel 15. 17. but also to David himself, who was more ingenuous, and therefore
such upbraiding of him could not but be very grievous, and yet He had it, 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8, 9. and when he so inculcateth his mercies and favors to Eli and
his house, and aith Did I appear to the house of thy Father? and did I choose
him out of all the tribes of Israel? and did 1 Samuel 2. 27, 28.
I give him all the offerings? Every such question, especially so reiterated,
Did I, and Did I, and Did I? had a sharpened point, and no doubt gave a deep
thrust and wound in Elies tender heart; told him, that whereas God had done so,
and so, and so for him, he did not expect that he should have done so, and so,
and so against him, for which he thus sadly upbraided him; And may not God more
often, and more sadly repeat over and over the same or like words to us of this
Nation? But did I not in answer to the Martyrs prayers and hopes after the
popery and persecution of those days, restore the Gospel once more agan to
England, and gave peace and plenty with it?

And when upon your wantonness, some Task masters grew corrupt, and cruel,
did I not hear your cries, and eased you of those burdens?

And when in those changes your dangers grew greater, did I not make bare my
arm in the sight of all Nations, to pluck you as brands out of the fire, and to
reserve you to be a people, nay a praise, as at this day? This I have done, and
what have you done? Have you not, as the Lord said there to Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 29.
kicked at my sacrifice? trampled under foot all my holy Things, Truth,
Worship, Ordinances, All? and do you murder, commit adulteoy, Ier. 7. 9, 10
and swear falsely, etc. as though you were delivered to do all these
abominations? And is this my requital? As it is said of Abimelechs speech to
Sarah, thus she was reproved. So truly with such Genesis 20. 16.
like as these, if we have any ingenuity in us, we may be even consounded, and
all this, because that with our most unworthy carriage, we enforce God to
upbraid us with his mercies, which an ingenuous Christian should blush at.

2. Nay, to deprive us of them, which a more servile spirit may tremble at: and
this we may the rather fear, because the faithful and true God has in good
earnest threatened it, that because they served him not for the abundance of all
things, they should serve their enemies in Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48.
hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and in the want of all things; and truly
then, why may we not justly fear, because in this our peace and rest, we will
not fear God, that worse times will come, in which we shall fear and feel
something else which will be more uncomfortable? And to this purpose let me end
this with these two conclusions.

1. As on the one side, our fear of God is our security, our treasure, Isa. 33.
6. and the best means to secure it. According to that of Austin, Homo time
Deum, and minantem mundum ridebis: Man fear God, and then thou may laugh at
a threatening of a persecuting world; or if you will, according to that of
Moses, Exodus 20. 20. When at Sinai it so terribly thundered and lightened, etc.
He then says to the People, Fear not, for God is come to prove you, that his
fear may be before your face, that you sin not, as though he had said, Fear not
other things that you may fear God, and fear but him and then you need not fear
any thing else; fear God, and fear not thu^der, which some of the great
Emperors were so terrified with. As Gods fear (I say) on the one hand, is our
great security,

2. So on the other the want of Gods fear has these two undoing mischiefs
accompanying it.

It makes way for all the most fearful evils, for by this daring impudence we
enforce God to show himself that he may assert his soveraignity which by such
Braves is affronted.

And it also makes them most terrible and overwhelming when they come, as not
feared to be either prevented or provided for: And so this careless security
(as that of Laish) when such unexpected evils do indeed come, it Judge. 18. 7.
28.
makes them more astonishing and dreadful.

Which therefore should alarm supinity, and calls loud upon us in the words
of the Psalmist, Stand in awe and sin not; our wars Psalm. 4. 4.
have made us soldiers, and so less afraid of dangers from men, but let them
not withal make us Rebels in hardening us against God, but let us be so wise,
as in good earnest to be afraid of those terrible judgments which God uses to
inflict for mercies abused, nay let us prove more ingenuous, and with these in
the Text, let us walk in the fear of the Lord, for these favors vouchsafed and
enjoyed; for at the same time God is fearful in praises, as well for Exodus 15.
11.
peace and deliverance vouchsafed to his people, as for vengeance taken on his
enemies.

Never should an ingenuous and heavenly spirited Christian be more in the fear
of the Lord, as Prove. 23. 17.
Solomon's Phrase is, or as in the Phrase of the Text, walk in it, then when we
most walk in his Sunshine, never maintain a more reverential awe of him, then
when we receive most mercy from him, when we are most freed and loosed from the
fears of men, we are then most engaged and obliged to God: He well said, In
magna fortuna, minima licentia est; what ever a loose heart does, yet a
gracious spirit in greatest freedom takes least liberty to prove licentious,
as looking at himself by such cords of love bound the faster to a most awful
observance. And therefore seeing we now are in the very same case and
circumstances, should we not join with Nehemiah in saying with him the very
same words; and happy we, were it with the same spirit! and they are the very
words of this Text: Ought we not to walk in the fear Nehem. 5. 9.
of the Lord? if we well consider all, but ought we not?

If Danger escaped; thoughts of it, though past, naturally and usually are wont
to strike us with trembling.

If mercies and deliverances vouchsafed; as we should fear God, that it may be
well, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. so much more, when, and because it is well with us; we
should not with the Disciples fear only when we are entering into the cloud,
Luke 9. 34.
but it will be most ingenuous if we fear God most when we are got out of it:
If I be a Father, where is my honor? (says God) and if I be a Master,
(especially if Mal. 1. 6.
so good a Master as thus to protect, deliver and maintain you) where is my
fear? Servatus should be Servus, let every such birth of Gods goodness, be
named Obed, i. e. a servant, a Gotteschalck, i. e. a servant of God: Beneficium
officium, let every mercy be an obligation to duty, and let every prodigal Son
received into favor, make good Absaloms name, but not practice his Rebellion:
but when not worthy to be called a Son, let him Luke 15. 19.
desire his Father to make him (...) one of his hired servants, not as a
mercenary slave to serve for hire, but to be wholly at his dispose, though in
the lowest place or employment, as those hired servants were wont to be. And in
a word, when God has showen us so much grace, let us have grace to serve him
(...) (...), i^e. on Gods Heb. 12. 28.
part, so as that we may please him, and on ours, with an holy shamefacedness
as the word is, to blush at the least unseemlyness and unworthiness; and with
godly fear,

With a cautelous fear of losing and forfeiting that mercy we have received.

But especially with an holy godly fear of offending that God who has
vouchsafed it.

And therefore with an answerable care to walk worthy of it, which would be a
greater mercy, then the peace it self vouchsafed to us.

And therefore when ever such a gift, proves a blessing indeed, you shall find
these two meet both in Gods gifts, and his peoples desire and endeavor:

1. When God in mercy gives the one, he also adds the other as 2 Chronicles. 32.
22. He did not only deliver Hezekiah and Jerusalem from their enemies, but it
is also added, that He guided them on every side, Nor did he only bring up
David out of the horrible pit, and set his feet on a rock, but also then
ordered his goings, Psalm. 40. 2. Guiding mercy is as necessary as delivering
mercy, to make the blessing complete, and therefore in that case God gives it.

2 And his servants do as much desire and endeavor after it. So David when he
prays that God would deliver him from the oppression of man, promises then
to keep his precepts, Psalm. 119. 134. and when God had kept his feet from
falling, Psalm. 116. 8. he will not stumble again more dangerously, (as
sometimes after a recovery both we and our horses do) but he will then walk
uprightly, and therefore immediately adde's in v. 9. I will walk before the
Lord in the land of the living. Now the Lord who has upheld us of this Nation
in so many foul and dangerous stumbles, and to this day has kept us on out
feet, keep us from proudly strutting it, with Nebuchadnezzar, standing stiffly
on our own legs, and saying Is not this great Babel, etc. lest Dan. 4. 30.
it prove a Babel indeed, and at last end in confusion: But He help us with
David there to walk humbly and uprightly before God, and with these here in the
Text, who when they had peace, walked in the fear of the Lord.

And in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost.
Which is the last particular 5. Sermon preached at St Mary's in Cambridge.
June, 17. 1655.
to be observed in the Text, and is as the 2d effect of their peace, so the 2d
cause or means of their being edified and multiplied: for so the right method
is, God gave them rest, upon it, they walked as in the fear of the Lord, so
also in the comfort of the holy Ghost, and so they happily came to be edified
and multiplied: so that in handling of this, I shall much what follow the same
order that I did in the former particular, and labor to declare,

1. What is here meant by this comfort of the holy Ghost.

2. That it should be a consequent and concomitant of our outward peace and
rest.

3. That so it will be a special means of the Churches edifying and
multiplying.

For the first the word in the Greek is, (...) translated Comfort, answering to
(...), a name given to the Holy Ghost, John 14 16. and there and elsewhere
rendered by our Translators, See Dr. Hammond on. John 14. 16. and 16. 7.
Comforter. I acknowledge the word signifies an exhorter, a pleader, or an
Advocate, as well as a Comforter. And this word (...) in the Text, in diverse
places of the New Testament signifies Act. 13. 15. Romans 12. 8 Heb. 13. 22.
Exhortation, and accordingly some referring these words to the last word (...)
were multiplied, make this the meaning of the whole, They were multiplied See
Dr. Hammond on. the Text.
by the Admonition or Exhorting of the holy Ghost, i. e. many were converted by
the Apostles discharging their office and duty in Exhortation etc. to which
they were designed by the coming of the holy Ghost the true Paraclete: which
Paraphrase and Exposition holds forth a sober sense, but yet me thinks (...),
is something too harshly translated, The exhortation of the holy Ghost. And
therefore has need of that Paraphrase to smooth it: whereas if we read it as
our Translators do, The Comfort of the holy Ghost, (in which sense the word
(...) is m^st commonly taken in the New Testament) it runn's more smoothly, and
is understood more easily; and so I shall crave leave to take it, and
accordingly the meaning is, that they conversing as in Gods fear, so in the
comfort and joy of the Spirit, (viz. which he works and maintains) felt in
their hearts, and expressed to one another, and to all in their lives, they
thereupon were edified themselves, and were multiplied by the accession of
others.

The Second thing therefore to endeavor to walk in the comfort of the holy
Ghost. This the Scripture elsewhere calls the walking in the light of Gods
countenance, as Psalm. 89. 15, 16. Blessed is the people that know the joyful
sound, they shall walk o Lord in the light of thy countenance, and in thy name
They shall rejoice all the day. That joyful sound signifies the presence of
God with his people, as the sounding of the trumpets did in the Law, when they
went out to battle. When therefore Gods people hear and take notice of such a
joyful sound; so that as Balaam said, Numb. 23. 21. God is with them, and the
shoute of a King is among them, as overmastering their enemies, and giving them
rest and peace, then they are to walk and march on in the light of his
countenance, so as in his name to rejoice all the day. By it we should be able
to do as much in the darkest night, as Job says, when Gods candle show upon
his head, by his light he walked through darkness, Job 29. 3. but with how much
more joy in God, when in a brighter day the Sun of righteousness shines out in
brighter beams of love and mercy? In outward peace, we should have inward joy,
and spiritual comfort in temporal Psalm. 18. 19.
refreshments; and when in times of peace we may walk abroad at large we should
have hearts enlarged to walk as in the fear of the Lord, so in the comfort of
the holy Ghost.

First, that this tcomfort that Fear, and characterize and evidence it to be
the fear of God, when joined with the peace and comfort and joy of the holy
Ghost, a slavish fear has torment, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 18.
and therefore no joy, but in heavenly and more ingenuous tempers Godly fear,
and spiritual joy know the way how to meet, and embrace, and uphold one the
other. Natural, fear contracteth the heart, but an holy fear inlargeth it. Isa.
60. 5. in those happier days of the Church it is said, Thy heart shall fear,
and be enlarged, when taken with a reverential awe and admiration of Gods
wonderful goodness, then most enlarged in joyful praises and thanksgivings:
So it is, and will be most fully in heaven, God no where else so reverentially
feared, nor no where so much rejoiced in and praised: such a blessed heavenly
temper, we should be aspiring to here below: to fear God and his goodness, Hos.
3. 5. and to rejoice in his goodness, Nehem. 9. 25. together. Then especially
we ought to fear him, that our joy may not prove light and wanton, and yet even
then to rejoice in him, that our fear may manifest it self, not to be slavish,
but filial, becoming such blessed children of so great and good a Father. Thus
first in times of rest and peace, we should walk in the comfort of Gods Spirit,
to qualify that former fear.

Secondly, to answer, and to present peace, and so it proves (...) a duty
Eccles. 3. 11.
in its season, which makes every thing beautiful. God expecting that his
several dispensations should be entertained with suitable affections and
deportments, In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity
Eccles. 7. 14.
consider, and as there is a time to weep, so there is a time to laugh, Eccles.
3. 4. And what time more fit for that then when God smiles? As it is said of
the Jews upon the restoring and settling of Jerusalems peace, That they
rejoiced because God had made them to rejoice, Neh. 12. 43.

The contrary hereunto is one kind of taking Gods name in vain in crossing one
of those ends, which he intends in bestowing such mercies, which is, that we
should serve the Lord with joyfulnesse and gladness of heart, for the
abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28. 47. and to delight our selves in the
abundance of peace, Psalm. 37. 11. which being neglected, Gods end is
frustrated, and so his Name is taken in vain; for that is in vain, which
falls short of its end. And therefore it is, that there are so many and
frequent commands of God to his people Israel to rejoice Deuteronomy. 12. 7 12. 18.
14. 26. 16. 11. 27. 7.
before him in their Festivals, and in every good thing which he gave them,
Deuteronomy. 26. 11.

(...), Deuteronomy. 16. 15. Thou shall surely, or only rejoice. Now this a sour
lowering either out of discontent or dejectedness wholely frustrateth, and
takes out (as to us) the sweetness of Gods goodness, by the bitterness of
our spirits: For what good will a costly rich suite do on his back all whose
bones are broken within? and although it be never so fair weather above head,
yet deep foul way will make but uncomfortable traveling, and therefore such
uncomfortablenesse of spirit under such chearing providence is as suitable as a
mourning suite on a marriage day, or fasting on a Festival, or on a Lords day,
in the Die dominico jejunium n^sas ducimus. Tertul. de corona Milit. cap. 3.
esteem of the primitive Christians. It shuts out clear daylight, that we
may mope in the dark; and sends up foggs from a muddled heart to obscure the
clear Sunshine: This Nehemiah forbad his people, and would have them be of good
cheer on a good day, and told them that the joy of the Lord would be their
strength, Neh. 8. 9, 10. God would have our hearts keep time with his hand,
when there is peace without, would have a^ answerable serenity within. Job
expected that his bed should comfort him, Job 7. 11. and so they here, in the
Text when they had rest, they walked as in the fear of the Lord, so in the
comfort of the holy Ghost.

And its well said, in the comfort the holy Ghost, that it might not only be
suitable to their outward peace, but that it might also sanctify it, and
spiritualize all the comfort and joy which they had in it.

For otherwise most commonly in outward peace and prosperity we are ready to
take comfort enough, and in some kinds and cases too much, (as we shall see
more afterward in the application) we are very subject to make an idol of it
(as Israel delivered from Exodus 32. 6
Egypt made a golden calf) and with them then to eat and drink and rise to
play. How easy a thing is it to over joy outward comforts, and to forget God
by looking too much on his lovetokens? and so to spend and power out our delight
on the gift, that there is none left for the giver? as Nehemiah sadly
complains of that people, that although they delighted themselves in Gods
great goodness, Nehem. 9. 25. yet they could not find in their hearts to
serve him in his great goodness, v. 35.

And on the contrary how hard a thing is it, spiritually to rejoice in God,
when we have many temporal delights to intertain us? as it is with a man to
keep up his appetite, and to taste as much sweetness in his food, when he is
used to a constant high feed, as he did when he was kept to short pining
commons. In summer when it is warmest without, we use to be faintest within: To
what a blesed height and strength of grace has that Christian attained, who
can delight himself as much in God in more peaceable and prosperous times
amidst all other delights, as he did in harder times, when he had nothing else
but God to comfort him? That man lives much by faith, who by its hand can hang
as much upon God in a promise, when he has many other staves of comfort to
lean on, and to support him, as if he had none. This hard lesson God was
teaching Israel under the Law, when in the beginning and ending of their
harvest, and other times of outward mirth and gladness, He appointed them holy
Festivals, in which he so often (as you heard) called upon them to rejoice, but
still it was to be before the Lord, as the Apostle would have us to rejoice
again and again, but ever in him, Phil. 4. 4. As another Apostle, when we are
merry would have us sing Psalms, to keep our hearts in an heavenly tune, Jam.
5. 13. And this lesson as hard as it is, these prime Scholars in Christ's School
had happily taken out, who could rejoice in God both notwithstanding all
troubles, and also In, yea and above all comforts. So we find them eating
their meat with gladness, when under persecution, Acts 2. 46. and here walking
in the comfort of the holy Ghost in the midst of all those other comforts which
their peace and rest did afford them: Non inebriati sunt deliciis and terreno
gaudio, sed freti Dei praesidio plus animi and fiduciae ad Deum glorificandum
sumpserunt, as Calvin observes upon the Text. They were not drunk with these
outward contentments, nor so immersed in the comforts which their peace brought
them, but that this oil of gladness, the grace and comfort of the holy Spirit,
did still swim on the top of all, and was more to them, as it was to David,
Psalm. 4. 6, 7. then all corn, and wine, and oil in their greatest abundance.
The comfort of outward peace they thankfully received and made use of, but it
was the comfort of the holy Ghost that they walked in; this was their way and
walk, and the other but their viaticum; without this comfort, all other would
have been to them as Jobs friends were to him, very miserable comforters; Job
16. 2.
but thorns to choke the word, and entangle and pierce their hearts; and like
bird-lime have cleaved so fast, as to have kept their souls from being upon the
wing, and so imbase and defile them, that heavens light would not have been
able to shine through those windows so all over besmeared with such filth.

As therefore sweetest honey stands in need of being clarified, so do our peace
and sweetest outward contentments by these more spiritual and divine comforts
and joys of the holy Ghost, that our delight in them may be (...), more pure
and limpid, and spiritual, may not be as weights to press us down to the
earth, but be only as onus alarm, as understeps, nay as wings to lift and
mount us up to God, and so to enjoy him, in them, and above them: not as crass
earthy bodies to terminate our sight, but as transparent glasses to transmit to
our eyes and hearts the light of Gods countenance in the face of Jesus Christ.
This is right, and as it should be, when it is not meat but mercy that feeds
us, nor other sweetest music, but a better melody in our hearts that lays
us down to our rest, as here in the Text, they had Rest: But it was the comfort
of the holy Ghost that made their sleep sweet, in giving rest to their soul;
according to that blessing which God would have put on his Israel, Numb. 6. 26.
The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and so give thee peace. For these
Reasons in our outward peace, we should walk in the comfort of the holy Ghost,
which was the second thing propounded to our consideration in the handling of
this Point.

The Third was to show, That edifying and multiplying, as we here find in the
Text, that upon their thus walking, they were edified and multiplied, and this
will here also afford two arguments to enforce this duty.

First then, Christians walking in fair weather without, it is best to build
our own houses; and truly Gods house goes up fastest when we have serenity
within: For whereas fear, and grief, and dejectedness duls and deads the
spirits, weakneth the man, and makes him unfit for any thing: on the contrary,
The joy of the Lord is our strength: a cheerful spirit Nehem. 8. 10.
of our own brings life and strength to our own work, and proportionably the
joy and comfort of Gods Spirit will help to John 2^. 4.
make better riddance of his. So we see that when the heart is enlarged, the
foot runs the ways of Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. When the heavy-hearted
proves heavy-heeled, and comes fainting and lagging behind; a raised spirit,
enlarged with the comforts of Gods spirit, as John overran Peter, so He another
that faints and despondes, and Ilia ducit. Such an one waiting on the Lord
renews his strength, and mounteth up with wings like an eagle (flies
strongly and swiftly) runs and is not weary, walkieth and does not faint: or
Isa. 40. 31.
rather like the blessed Angels, who because they always behold the Matthew. 18.
10.
face of God, in one sense (viz. in joy) behold it also in another, viz. As the
eyes of a servant look to the hand of his Master, (as ready Psalm. 123. 2.
pressed to do his commands) so they to mark the least intimations of Gods will,
and so presently and speedily to go about it, whose joy in God adds wings to
their hands, and makes their feet sparkle for haste, as we have it in Ezekiels
vision; even so would this oil Ezekiel. 1. 7, 8.
of gladness oil our wheels in any way that God should send us; and in
particular in this great work of building up and edifying the Church of Christ.

1. Whether it be in helping up and settling his House and Ordinances: for it
never goes faster up, than when his servants lay the foundations of it with
joyful shoutings and praises; as it was Ezr. 3. 11. and so at last bring forth
the top-stone of it with like shoutfull acclamations, crying, Grace, Grace to
it, as we find it, Zech. 4. 7. So then in that second Temple, as before the
people were joyful and glad of heart in the dedication of the first Temple, 1
Kin. 8. 66. as the joy of Jerusalem was heard afar off when the walls of it
were afterward built up and finished, Nehem. 12. 43. Thus under the Law.

And in the beginning of the Gospel they were these that here in the Text
walked thus in the comfort of the holy Ghost, who were the first happy
promulgers of it.

And blessed Paul though he came in to this work after them, yet in this (as in
all else) he came no whit behind them. But he that labored more abundantly
then 1 Cor. 15. 10.
they all, was (as his story and Epistles every where testify) as cheerful,
rejoicing, yea triumphing 2 Cor. 2. 14
in God, as any.

Which, in part, may be the reason, why more ordinarily Gods Ministers are
less foiled with uncomfortable dejections, and more enlarged with the
consolations of his Spirit then diverse others, viz. That they may be in better
case more effectually to comfort others, 2 Cor. 1. 4. and more ably to help up
the house of God in the more lively dispensation of his Ordinances.

2. Or if we consider the edification of the Church in the building up of our
selves in our most holy faith, and the Graces of Gods, Spirit; truly the
comfort of the holy Ghost is a very great heartner and furtherer of those
graces, which as sweet flowers open themselves, and flourish most in this happy
Sunshine, but too often close up and droop, and hang down the head in a cloudy
rainy day; so that if this part of the Churches edification consist in pulling
down the old building and setting up the new, in our establishment and growth
in grace, and mortification of sin, nothing more effectually conduces to it
then this joy and comfort.

1. Nothing more furthereth the mortification of sin, and corruption.
Repentance indeed and godly sorrow does very much this way, whilst it makes
us sensible of the loathsomness and bitterness of sin, but this joy and comfort
of the spirit does more by its presenting us with the unconceiveable sweetness
of Gods favor and grace, in Christ; as Paul when he had been wrapped up to
heaven, was then most impatient of a thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12. In heaven
where there is all joy, there is no sin, and had we here more of heavenly
joys, we should be less troubled with sinful corruptions; these spiritual
comforts would so satisfy, yea swallow us up with delight in them, that we
should not need the supply of any sensual or sinful contentments, but they
would make us despise them as low, poor, and empty, yea abhor them as most
loathsome and abominable in themselves, especially to us then, when we are
ravished with more high and holy, and heavenly delights; such foggs would quite
vanish in the Noonday Sun, and this Summers heat would dry up even the springs
of these polluted streams. When a peaceable Solomon is settled on the Throne,
all enemies are subdued, 1 King. 5. 4. and 9. 21. and never more than when we
are settled and established in the peace of God, and the comfort of his Spirit,
are our corruptions mortified

2. Or our Graces confirmed and increased. The fruits of the spirit (says the
Apostle, Gal. 5. 22, 23.) are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: See what a duster there is of them, but
mark how love, joy, and peace are set in the head of them, as animating,
actuating and giving life to all the rest. The cheerful Christian, is the
fruitful Christian, most agile and active for God. And although in his more
nimble speed he may have oftener trips, yet the melancholic spirit, though it is
possible he may have fewer, yet usually they are more sad and heavy falls. The
sad Christian may, by reason of his watchfulness feldome do evil, but the
cheerful Christian, by reason of his activeness, usually does the most good.
When the Sun of righteousness thus arises on us with healing in his wings, we
then go forth and grow as calves of the stall, Mal. 4. 2. not for wantonness,
but for lively activity. So in nature our cheerful youth is the growing and
active age and part of our life, whereas sad old age sits still, shrinks up,
and grows, but it is downward. But as to the life and vigor of Grace, blessed
be God, that the aged decrepit Christian may be a hearty old man, and his
setting Sun may shine bright and warm, so that he may be warm at heart in that
cold winter of his old age. the comforts of Gods Spirits (in the decay of all
other natural, vital, and animal Spirits) may be then greater then ever, and
thereupon his Graces more lively then ever before; and so this plant of
righteousness which shot up so in the spring, does still grow even in winter,
and brings forth more fruit in old age, and is fat and Psalm. 92. 14.
flourishing and so like the Crocodile) grows as long as he lives: and the
more peace, and joy, and comfort of the Spirit that he has, the more grace he
has, the good old man thriving well with so good a Nurse, the more fruit he
bears, and the more sweetness, and less harshness it has: and thereby this
sweet comfort does not only thus help us to edify our selves, but,

Which is the 3d part of the edification of the Church, it much helps us also
to edify others. For as in Nature, grief and sadness make's us heavy and
listless to stir abroad, it contract's the spirits whilst joy and
cheerfulness dilate's them, and send's them out: so here, whilst the drooping
sinner sits moping in a corner, and the sorrowful Christian is retired in
private with Ephraim bemoaning himself, Ier. 31. 18.
and weeping over his own sins; the cheerful Believer inlivened and enlarged
with the comforts of the holy Ghost, with Elihu, is Job. 32. 18, 19.
full and must have vent; is lively, and so becomes active to do good to others
as well as to himself, and as the forehorse with the bells lead's on the rest
of the Teame. Thus David (as the choragus) with the voice of joy and praise,
went in the head of the multitude that kept holy day, Nehem. 4. 18.
Psalm. 42. 4. like Nehemiah who had the Trumpeter with him, and then the walls
of Jerusalem went up apace: never did Drum and Trumpet more animate the
Soldier to fight, then a cheerful Christian the rest of his company to Gods
hardest and hottest services. But this fitly leads me from the first benefit
of the comfort of the holy Ghost in edifying the Churches, to the

Second, viz. the multiplying edified, but also multiplied. It does not only
much help and edify them who are already come in, but proves a strong
attractive to them without; and so make's the company of Believers swell and
break out into multitudes.

For whereas the uncomfortable droopings of Christians like the evil spies
bring an evil report Numb. 13
on the good land, and make strangers believe, that Gods Eden is a howling
wilderness, and his Goshen a land of darkness, that there is no joy or comfort
to be found in the ways of God, when they who walk in them find, or at least
express so little, and so they are afraid to venture that way, and thereupon
leave them to walk, or sit down solitary in it, wherein they can meet with so
little comfort, and therefore with as little company.

On the contrary, however howling wildernesses are solitary, yet more pleasant
walks, and cheerful persons in them use to have more company: Music, we
know, gathers crowds about it; and so should we find about us, if we could
sing, and make melody in our hearts to God, we might then Ephesians. 5. 19.
hope to make up a fuller Consort. When an experienced Christian can say with
David, Come and I Psalm. 66. 16.
will tell you what God has done for my soul, indeed more then I can tell you;
has in this way of his Grace settled me in peace, and filled my heart with joy
unspeakable and full of glory ((...) 1 Pet. 1. 8.
the word is) even with glorified joy;

He can do no less then draw many to admiration and communion.

Thus the spouse by so pathetically Cant. 5. 8. ad finem with chap. 6. 1.
displaying her Beloveds love and loveliness, made the daughters of Jerusalem
to enquire after him, that they might seek him with her: and what think you did
those loud Proclamations made to all the world by Paul, and the other Apostles
and Disciples, of the unsearchable riches of Christ, and the length, and
breadth, and height, and depth of the knowledge of the love of God, Ephesians. 3.
8. 18, 19.
what (I say) did it, what could it do less then alarm the whole world, and
make them gather as clouds, and fly as Doves to the windows? as the Prophet
expresses it, Isa. 60. 8.

Whilst the spirit of fear and Romans 8. 15
bondage in the ministry of the Law, contracted it into the narrow bounds of
Palestina; the Gospel of peace, (when it was preached, and the love of God
thereby more plentifully shed abroad Romans 5. 5.
in Believers hearts) spread abroad in all the world, and instead of a few
Proselytes before, made all Nations Converts: How wonderfully ductile is this
pure gold? how abundantly efficacious would the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, shining out in the raised and enlarged hearts, and cheerful
carriages of Christians be to draw all men's eyes and hearts to it? No wonder
then, if when these first best Christians did thus walk as in the fear of the
Lord, so in the comfort of the holy Ghost, the Churches of Christ were thus
both edified and multiplied.

Which in the Application of it,

1. That some Christians at all Our sin: either we want comfort,
times, and most at some times, yea in the time of outward rest and peace are
too gloomy and dejected.

And therefore their duty is to labor to be more comfortable.

2. Our sin on the other hand Or ours is not the comfort of the holy Ghost.
is, that as at other times, so especially in times of peace and outward
prosperity whilst we are jocund and pleasant, our joys are carnal, and
sensual.

And therefore our duty is, that then especially we labor to have them more
spiritual, that if we then walk in comfort, we make sure that it be in the
comfort of the holy Ghost.

First then the sin that too many Gods people are to be humbled for is, that
contrary to this lovely example in the Text, they do not walk comfortably, or
in the comfort of the holy Ghost. They do indeed after a fashion walk in fear,
but not in the fear of the Lord, but in such a fear as Damascen makes segnities
and stupor to be the two parts of it, in a dejected stupid disconsolateness, or
(as the Prophet expresses it) in darkness, Isa. 5. 10.
where they see no light, or what they see, troubles them; as it uses to do
to weak or soar eyes, They have such an aguish distemper upon them, that (as
was said before) they stand shaking in a Summers Sunshine. So that when God
sends outward peace, and therewith also means and materials of inward
refreshment, in stead of this walking in the comfort of Gods Spirit, they sit
down in the most uncomfortable dejectedness of their own. Yea although his
Spirit be on purpose sent to be a Comforter, John 14. 16. 26. yet, (with
Rachel) they will not be comforted. Jer. 31. 15.

But (as the Prophet said) wherefore Jer. 30. 6.
do I see every man's hands on his loins, and so many faces gather Joel 2. 6.
blackness?

Is God who was wont to love a cheerful giver, and to take pleasure 2 Cor. 9.
7. Psalm. 35. 27.
in the prosperity of his servants, now become like those cruel Lords, which
make their laborers groan out of the City? Job 24 11, 12. Exodus 1. 14, 15.
Or an Egyptian Taskmaster, to make his servants lives bitter with hard
bondage? Is he become a wilderness, or a land of darkness: Jer. 2. 31.
so barren that no pleasant sent grows on it, or so dark that it cannot be seen
and found if any do, when so much gloominess is on his servants spirits, and on
their eyelids the very shadow of death? Or is his house, which used to be Job.
1. 16. Psalm. 110. 3. Psalm. 29. 9.
the beauty of holiness, and in which every one spoke of his glory, become now
a Trophonius's Den, after entrance into which we must never look for a smile
more, nothing in it to be seen but melancholic sad dumps, nothing to be heard
but wilderness howlings, in stead of Temple songs? for joyful praises, and
glorious triumphings in him, shall we only have uncomfortable bemonings of our
selves, nay discontented complaints made to him, yea and it may be sometimes of
him too? But (as Eliphaz said) are the consolations of God small to us: Job.
15. 11.
and the comforts of his Spirit not worth the looking after? are wisdoms
ways, all of which were wont to be pleasantness and Prove. 3. 17
peace, now turned quite out of that Rode? In a word, is the Spirit of God now
become no more a Comforter, when his people are no more comfortable? Of such I
desire this, that they would but consider, what folly and ingratitude this is,

1. That they are thus always, and in a manner only on the murmuring and
complaining hand, as though amidst all their sorrows, (and many of them not of
Gods, but of their own making) therewere no sweetness of God for either
outward or inward man to be felt, and which they might, yea and should rejoice
in, and praise him for; although we naturally are all, and always, and only
evil, yet is Genesis 6. 5.
God, are all, are any of his dispensations so too? Is hell broke loose upon
earth, that our cup should be like that, Rev. 14. 10. (...), of the wine of the
fierce wrath of God poured out (or mixed) without mixture, i. e. so mixed with
all sorts of most bitter and deadly ingredients, that withal there is no
mixture of any thing that may any way allay it from being altogether or only
grievous and vexatious? In thy bitterest cup was there no mixture of some
sweetness, for which thou may well take the cup of salvation, Psalm. 116. 13.
and bless God? Was it wholely and only bitter, that with more sowrness of
spirit thou only make such a sour face at it? Hezekiah could say of his
(...) It was bitter, bitter, very bitter, double bitter as his redoubled word
expresses it, but yet he could notwithstanding that, taste so much sweetness
of Gods love to his soul with it, and in it, that as in a double word he had
expressed the double bitterness of that cup, Isa. 31. 16. So in sense of that
intermixed sweetness he proportionably redoubleth his words of praise and
thanksgiving: The living, the living shall praise thee, as I do this day, v.
19. take thee at thy worst, yet as long as I hear thee complaining, I perceive
that thou yet art, alive and Hezekiah conceived that to be mercy: and therefore
say thou likewise, although I am very sick and poor, and despised from without,
and wounded within, yet for all this I yet live, and therefore although that
make me cry out (...), Oh bitterness, bitterness, yet this only, if I have
nothing else, is mercy that I live, and therefore I will with Hezekiah cry
(...) The living, the living shall praise thee, as I do this day. I'ts
ingratitude therefore, to be only complaining, there is some sweetness
certainly, nay unless thy palate were too much vitiated, thou would taste a
great deal, and many ways, for which thou should cheerfully give thanks.

2. Or in case it should be only and every way ill with thee, yet think here
again, might it not have been worse? Has God made such a way to his anger, as
to let it all out upon thee, Psalm. 78. 50. or rather is it not so with thee, as
the Psalmist in v. 38. of the same Psalm says it was with Israel of old, that
he has not stirred up all his wrath? Has God, think thou, as bad as thy
case is, done his worst to thee? So indeed said a desperate Woman upon the
loss Donna Maria de Castilia. See Gages survey, cap. 18. page 124.
of her Husband and children, and was soon confuted by an heavier hand of that
God whom she so defied upon her self and the very place where she so
blasphemed. But I hope thou art not arrived at the height of her blasphemy.
Thou can not but acknowledge that although it be very ill with thee, yet it
might have been, and thou have deserved that it might have been much worse, and
that is some comfort.

3. But if for all this, you will be only on your sad thoughts, then I pray
you, amongst many others of them, which will be worse and which your own
discontented hearts invent and buble up, let me suggest these few, which it
would be well if you would, and that very sadly think of, viz.

1. How much by this your unkind grief you grieve your Comforter, the Spirit
of God both in himself, and in the hearts of his people.

2. How much also you wrong and wound your own selves prove Heautontimorumeni
self-torturers and executioners, and this

3. Needlessly and fruitlesly, for which God will never thank you, but before he
has done with you, make you in a meeker way grieve over these distempered
griefs.

4. Nay, mischievously, whilst they too often kindle a smothered fire of hell in
your bosoms, and make you fierce to fret against others, your selves, yea God
himself. The whole frame of a man's spirits being no way made better, but every
way the worse by them, beside what was before mentioned,

God dishonored as harsh and tyrannical.

His ways, as wholly uncomfortable.

His children, as so many moaping fools.

To the disheartning of on comers, and the making of strangers and enemies
either to fly, or in a more full aversation, or more heavily to fall on with
fiercer blasphemies and opposition.

Now then if this be any of our sins,

We have the more cause seriously Our Duty.
to think, and set on our Duty, and that the Apostle prescribes us, Phil. 4.
4. to rejoice in the Lord always, and that always includes

The day of affliction: and so in the Saints coldest winter days their Sun
oftentimes shines very bright, as stars do in a frosty, and a clear Lanthorn
in the darkest night. Such could rejoice for the whip, Acts 5. 41. and sing in
the stocks at midnight, Acts 16. 25. and clap their hands in the flames, as
Hawks and Smith did amongst Fox Acts and Mon. Tom. 3. page 265. 266. 410.
our other Martyrs.

But especially when God sends peace and prosperity, our hearts should keep
time and tune with his hand, by rejoicing in his goodness, Neh. 9. 25. and by
walking comfortably and cheerfully in the light of his countenance: Let it not
be foul way below, when it is fair weather above head, let us not lowre when
God smileth. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy
all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 32. 11.

1. For this is comely for the upright, Psalm. 33. 1.

2. The badge of Gods, people according to that phrase of the Psalmist, The
gladness of thy nation, Psalm. 106. 4.

3. It proclaims to all the world, that we serve a good Master, and that
there is no unrighteousness in him, Psalm. 92. 14. that he is All-sufficient for
our good; for, Non perfect gaudet quis de aliquo, nisi cui perfect sufficit
illud de quo gaudet, as Aquinas truly ^2^ q. 79. art. 2. ad. 6.
determines it.

No man can perfectly rejoice in that person, who is not sufficiently and
perfectly possessed of that thing in which he most rejoiceth.

4. It is the sign and evidence of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. that our
debts are discharged, when we can be so merry, and that we have no inward
gripings, when we have so cheerful a countenance.

5. It is that which will enable us to service, Neh. 8. 10.

6. And render both us and it amiable and acceptable both to God and man. For
he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
men, says the Apostle, Romans 14. 18. And those things which he so commends,
in the 17. v. immediately going before you shall read to be righteousness and
peace and joy in the holy Ghost.

7. In which (he there says) the kingdom of God consists most fully in the
state of glory, where there is all joy and no grief, where David does not
groan, nor Psalm. 6. 6. Isa. 38. 14. Mat. 26. 75.
Hezekiah chatter, nor Peter weep bitterly. Sighs are then turned into
Hallelujahs most fully (I say) in the kingdom of glory hereafter; But very
comfortably, yea and gloriously now also in the estate of grace: where
righteousness is the root, and peace the pleasant blossom, and joy the
sweetest fruit.

Make we therefore sure of the first, that we begin with it, but rest not till
we attain to the last, till we be possessed of all that which this blessed
Kingdom consists in: For if Kings will fight, and meaner men will sue for the
least part of their kingdom and inheritance, why should not we as earnestly sue
to God, and fight against all the powers of darkness for the whole of ours?
not only for righteousness, but also for peace and joy in the holy Ghost? But
here that last clause must especially be taken notice of, and answerable care
taken, that it be the joy of the holy Ghost; which the kingdom of God (there we
see) in part consists in; and so here it was comfort, but the comfort of the
holy Ghost, which these Churches in the Text walked in: which leads me to the
consideration of

The second part both of our sin Our Sin.
a world, in which although there be too little of the comfort and joy of the
holy Ghost, yet there is too too much of other mirth and jollity. Hilary
somewhere distinguishes of a Palace and a Prison joy. Not only kings and great
ones can be merry in their Palaces, but even condemned malefactors can in their
prisons sometimes make a desperate mad merriment and frollick immedidiatly
before their execution, as we see in the example of Belshazzar Dan. 5. and the
rich Glutton in the Gospel, Luke 12. 91, 20. most joviall at their feasts the
very same night that they were called to their last great reckoning.
Particularly,

There is a feather-joy: as when two fools (who are used to be painted always
laughing) make themselves sport in blowing a feather from the one to the other;
to which I cannot but compare the vain froth of your Jokes and leasts, as in
other places, so especially in the Universities, and this both in private
meetings, and public Schools, without which Sales, in this wanton age, all
exercises a most are accounted insipid, and this not only by Juniors, but also
by others, whose greater standing should persuade them to give better example,
for the honor of God, and of the University. These which savor only, and
that so rankly of the vanity and rottenness of our hearts, are for certain,
none of the Divine Spirits breathings: Do you in your consciences think that
these vain jeasts and merriments have the least savor of the comfort of the
holy Ghost, which these best Christians walked in? had their communications one
with another been at the rate of these our vain and frothy jeastings, (the
vying and bandying of which is like Solomon's Prove. 21. 6.
vanity tossed to and fro of those that seek death) they might have gathered
company enough to them, but it would have been no gathering of Churches as the
Text here calls these, but (as Abimelecks Judge. 9. 4.
was) of light and vain persons; and if by them they might have been
multiplied, yet surely not so as therewith to be edified.

There is a Tavern or more roaring and revelling, and in stead of another
Minstrell, David must Psalm. 69. 12.
be the song of the drunkards; nor can the Philistines be merry, unless Samson
be made the fool in Judge. 16. 25.
the Play: unless they scoff and jear the ways and servants of God (as Mr
Greenham says) the fools cannot tell how to be merry, and then the Devil is
merry with them for company. But what? not merry without abusing their host?
This some must dearly pay for, when a reckoning is called for, or they rather
called to make it. Then they will be off from their merry pinnes, and will find
that this was very far from being the comfort of the holy Ghost, wherein and
whereby that good Spirit and our comforter was grieved, and holiness scoffed
and laughed at.

And the like we may say of all those joys and comforts which men take in any
sinful ways and practices; as in this kind Esau comforted himself in his
thoughts of revenge, Genesis 27. 42. The King of Israel was made glad with lies,
Hos. 7. 3. And when the Chaldeans could oppress, it is said, that then they
rejoiced and were glad, Hab. 1. 11. But as the Lord said of his peoples
idolatries, Should I have comfort in these? Isa. 57. 6. So may such say to
these their Idols, but can we have comfort in these, which provoke God, and
greive his Spirit, and for which we our selves also must grieve, either here
bitterly, or in Hell eternally? That was a smart expression of the Jesuit
Cotton in one of his Epistles to Chamier. Non est mi Chamire, non est Salus,
ruere in Epist. Jesuit. page 97.
sempiternum interitum alacriter. It is no true mirth thus to go leaping
merrily into hell. It is no comfort of the Spirit, which grieves the Spirit, no
joy of the holy Ghost, that is thus fed with such unholy practices. And then as
Joab asked David, Why delightest thou in this thing? 2 Samuel 24. 3. can thou
give a good reason for it? Me thinks this is a very strong one against it. That
in any thing, wherein God gives thee leave to rejoice and take comfort, thou
not only may, but thou ought before thy setting upon it to pray to him
for a blessing upon it, and afterward to return him thanks and praise for it:
But can thou, dare thou do so in these thy sinful delights? although thou
be so sensual and profane as to make bold with them, yet I hope thou art not
become so impudently bold, and desperate, as to pray to God, or to praise him
for them. Remember that the Kingdom of God is first in righteousness, and Romans
14. 17.
then in peace, and joy in the holy ghost. Gaudium in fine, as Bernard
observes upon that place, joy comes at the end, but so as to begin at
righteousness, and therefore we are not praecipiti saltu (as he there speaks)
by leaping over righteousness, or rather by despitefully trampling upon it, to
Commence Doctors of this mad Music per saltum, to be sure it is no joy or
comfort of the holy Ghost, which makes a mock or scorn of holiness.

Thirdly, there is a wordlings Amnons heart merry with wine, 2 Samuel 13. 2 Samuel
25. 36.
28. As they in Amos 6. 5. with their Music, and others with Zech. 11. 5.
their wealth, Hab. 1. 15. The honors, pleasures, and profits of the world,
are the things which worldly men take up, and make merry with, but as the
Prophet said in an other case, Is this your joyous Isa. 25. 7.
city? so may I in this, But are these the cordials which your hearts are
strengthened and cheered with? is this the joy which (I do not say as you are
Christians, but) as rational men you can take up with?

1. They are not fit to comfort you, being so vain, gross and sensual, which
the worst men most partake of, and the very brute Beasts in many of them exceed
you; such froth and dreggs are too course to be the flower of that cup that
should make thy heart glad, as either thou art Christian or Man, they as such
unfit to comfort thee.

2. And (it maybe) Thou, in such a condition as thou art, not fit to receive
comfort from them, for what ever they are, let me further ask thee, art thou
the man that art in case so much to rejoice in them? for then I hope thou art
sure that thy God is reconciled, thy sins pardoned, thy peace made. If thy
heart say No, then both it and God ask thee, But can thou then be so merry
and jolly? Before thou make thy self drunk with these sweets, there are other
greater matters soberly and sadly to be thought of; and to be taken care of.
Augustus wondered that a man deep in debt could Macrob. Saturn. lib. 2. cap. 4.
sleep, and therefore would needs buy his bed. And Chrysostom when he
considers that we must all stand before the judgment Seat of Christ, asks
how we can laugh? And may not then such wonder at themselves, that when they
are so deeply obnoxious to Gods wrath, and so certain to be brought at last to
a strict account should be so merry. What! walk a while and frisk it by the
light of these poor sparks, and at last lie down in sorrow? Isa. 50. 11.
laugh, and sing, and roar it here for a while, and roar in Hell to ^ernity?

Which therefore on the contrary Our duty.
should teach us our duty. As the Apostle speaks of marrying, so may we of
all our rejoicing, whatever our liberty otherwise be, yet it must be only in
the Lord. God 1 Cor. 7. 39.
envyeth not our joy, but he would not have us grieve him with it, He sometimes
gives us outward peace and prosperity, and with it free liberty and good leave
to rejoice in it; provided, that we write after our copy here in the Text, and
that especially in these 3 particulars.

1. That we begin at the right end, and use a right Method; that we begin with
righteousness, if we would end in joy, and let the Romans 14. 17.
first step in our walk (as it was here in the Text) be in Gods fear, before we
take this second, to joy and comfort, and to this end

2. That we be sure, that our joy be not in things unlawful, nor we inordinate
and sensual in our over doing in those that are lawful, as here they had rest,
but it was not after they had drunk drunk with present enjoyments, as before we
observed out of Calvin.

3. Nay that we Sublimate, and Spiritualize all our joy and delight in outward
and temporal enjoyments: that in the midst of them all not only (as it was
with Solomon, Eccles. 2. 9. our wisdom may remain with us) not as Hounds which
lose the sent whilst they hunt in sweet fields, it were well if we did not the
savor and relish of the things of Heaven whilst we are immersed buried in the
sweets of this lower region, but that whilst we enjoy them we may be our own
men, and enjoy our selves, nay enjoy God in them, and above them, nay yet more,
and by them, that they may be improved as helps and advantages to our more
spiritual and heavenly delights in Christ and the things of his kingdom, as by
their having rest and peace from the solicitations and oppositions of men,
they thereupon walked in comfort, but it is carefully added, that it was the
comfort of the holy Ghost. Oh let us not then be of the Serpentine brood that
feeds only on the Genesis 3. 14.
dust of the earth, nor let us drink drunk with the dreggs of earthly pudly
contentments, but let us draw the wine of our consolation off from these
feculent lees, and so have our pleasure and delight more limpid, spiritful,
even truly spiritual. Aristotle tells us that the pleasure of his
contemplative happiness is (...) sincere, sine cera, without the commixture of
corporeal dreggs; how much more should the Christians be so, who aspireth to an
higher happiness? and if our terrestrial bodies be not nourished, with the
massy and drossy pulp or bulk of what we eat, but with the more spirituous
juice of it, how much rather should the celestial souls of Christians be with
the spiritual comforts of the holy Spirit, even in the midst of all outward
enjoyments: which should not be instar velorum, (as Calvin somewhere expresses
In Hos. 6. 13.
it) as vailes over our eyes that we cannot see God in them, and so forget him,
as they there did, but rather as Frontlets to put us in mind of him, and our
duty, which is in the midst of temporal mercies, to maintain in them, yea and
by this blessed Art of divine Chemistry to extract out of them spiritual joys.
Our practice indeed herein is too often quite contrary, for when filled with
outward contentments we through a brutish sensuality make them contentments
indeed, i. e. such as we are fully content, and take up with, to the dulling at
least, if not the extinguishing of all spiritual joy, as fat men use to be
frigid, and when we are full fed, we grow drowsy; the lusciousness of these
feculent sweets taking away the taste of more divine and sweeter comforts, we
are so drunk with the one, that we are neither sensible nor capable of the
other; nay sometimes we prove worse, as some men when drunk grow fierce and
outrageous, so in this kind of drunkenness we do not only fall short of these
diviner comforts, but too often rise up against God himself the giver of them,
even Jesurun, when grown fat, begins to kick, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. At least the
heaping of such grosser fuel, keeps the fire from burning, as it was in
Ridleys Martyrdom, and so too often in Fox Acts and Mon. Tom. 3. page 204.
our hearts, those sparkling joys which should mount up to heaven, are
smothered and choked; as the thorns of pleasures and lusts of other things,
are said to Luke 8. 14. Mark. 4. 19.
choke the word, and so these stifle all our spiritual comforts. And what is
this but in the clear warm Sunshine to sit dulling over our culinary fire? and
to shut out Heavens light, that by such candlelight we may work the works of
darkness.

But such of us, as are children of the day, what ever our outward condition
be, let our delight be, to be in heavens light, in the shine of the Sun of
righteousness; and if others will have theirs to be in corn and wine, let ours
with David be in Gods lifting up the light Psalm. 4. 6, 7
of his countenance upon us, that not only his face may be toward us (for so
a man's may be, and yet, if held down, may not be seen by us) but so lifted up,
as to be beheld of us: that not only God may be reconciled to us, but that we
may see and know so much, and let the same David's prayer ever be ours, let thy
merciful kindness be for my comfort Psalm. 119. 76. not my estate, honor,
friends, or any thing else, but thy merciful kindness, Lord let that, let that
be for my comfort, and then as He adds in another Psalm, Thou have made him
exceeding glad with the light of thy countenance, Psalm. 21. 6. Glad we may be
of outward refreshments, even glad at heart in the sweet comfort of friends, as
Aaron was of Moses, Exodus 4. 14. but exceeding glad, the light of Gods
countenance shining out in the face of Jesus Christ only should make us, as in
this blessed example in the Text, they were no doubt joyfully thankful for
their outward rest and peace.

But the comfort of the holy Ghost was their most pleasant walk, which it is
therefore said, they walked in: in whose steps we should tread, and for our
encouragement herein consider that

1. On the one side this spiritual Motive.
joy in God will be more then able to fill up what ever shall be wanting (as a
great deal always will be) in our outward comforts: Have we never so much, if
there be never so little wanting, that little want troubles us more then all
that great deal else which we enjoy can satisfy, or in that case can pacify
us; at a little hole in the wall or window we feel a cooler wind come in then
if the window had been all open; Haman is in such a pett, for want of a cap and
a knee, as without it all the glory of his riches and the multitude of his
children, and that great deal more which he reckons up, Esth. 5. 11, 12.
avails him nothing, v. 13. but he that has this comfort of the holy Ghost,
has more then enough to answer and satisfy for all that otherwise he wants. I
have all, I abound, I am full says Paul, Phil. 4. 19.
he speaks at the rate of one that had now risen from a full and rich feast
or banquet, whereas this great all that he is so filled with, was but a present
that those Philippians had sent him, and Calvin thinks it was no great matter,
and yet as though he had received as much as all the world was worth, he cries
out I have all, I am full, viz. because he was filled with all joy and peace
Romans 15. 13. John 4. 32.
in believing: Such with their Savior, have meat to eat that others know not
of: even hidden Manna; as that was laid up in Revel. 2. 17.
the ark, so this hid in a Christians breast, and there it abides incorruptible
vinum in pectore, able to make us a full meal of hungry Commons, and to make up
what ever our dish or cup wants of full, as the air does all the Caverns, yea
and least chinks in the earth, so that there is no vacuum: on the one side I
say the comforts of the Spirit sweetneth and supplyeth what ever is bitter or
defective in outward comforts.

2. Whereas on the other hand, our sitting down, and taking up (and so
committing folly) with these outward mercies, takes out, yea imbittereth all
the sweet of them, as a child begotten of fornication or adultery may be a very
sweet and pleasant one, and how much comfort and joy says the parent should I
have in it, but that it is a bastard, and that dampeth all, and how much
refreshment (may others say) might we have in this estate, pleasure,
preferment, but that our hearts have gone a whoring from God after them, as
it is said of Ephraim, Hos. 13. 1. though when he spoke trembling he exalted
himself in Israel, yet when he sinned in Baal he dyed; or as it is said of the
King of Tyrus, Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast
created, till iniquity was found in thee, Ezech. 29. 15. that blasts and kills
all. And therefore as it is said of Abishag, that she ministered to David, and 1
King. 1. 4.
cherished him, but He knew her not. So with Gods good leave (and much good do
it you) let these outward comforts cheer and refresh us, but let us not commit
folly with them, that they do not befool us of better, i. e. of spiritual
delights, but that in their greatest entertainments, we may retain (nay have
quickened by them) a spiritual appetite and ability to taste more sweetness in
more blessed dainties, as here in their outward peace, amidst the crowd of
other comforts they had hearts not shrunk up and contracted but enlarged to
walk in the comfort of the holy Ghost.

A help hereto, would be in Means.
our Survey and valuation of Gods gifts to us, in temporal mercies to be
sensible of spiritual, as Jacob in his children of the Grace of God which had
given them, Genesis 33. 5. and accordingly the (...)
Psalmist all along in Psalm. 136. speaking of outward deliverances and
provisions, in redeeming from enemies, and giving of food etc. at the mention
of every one of them ends every verse, with this thankful Epiphonema for his
mercy indureth for ever. Labor we with him to see ever enduring mercies in
transitory enjoyments, that they come to us from a Fathers love, by the blood
of his Son, in the way of a covenant, proceeding from electing love, and
leading to everlasting life, and that will add to them more worth and weight,
not to abase and press down, and bury our souls under them, but so as to raise
up our hearts to God by them, and to that more precious love of the Giver,
which has put so much worth into them. So (with these in the Text) in outward
peace we may maintain yea and advance in our Hearts the fear of the Lord and
the comfort of the holy Ghost.

But there is yet one word more, which we must think of, and that Ambulans.
Vulgat. Vergentes. Beza.
is (...). They walked in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy
Ghost, and that contains and holds forth to us, Assiduity, constancy, and
Progress. It was 1. their daily practice. 2. And this in their constant
continued course, and 3. Which they advanced in: and so should we, join both
holy fear, and heavenly joy together, and then labor to be assiduous, and
constant, and increasing in both, for else either sudden uncertain pangs of
fear, or flashes of joy will be no evidence of such as walk with God to heaven
and happiness, but if both be joined, and daily and constantly held on, and
advanced in, it will be the due temper of a right travelour in the way, and a
sure pledge and first fruits of what we shall come to, and meet with at our
journeys end; where our fear shall be only and yet most fully reverential, and
our comfort and joy most spiritual, full, and eternal.

The form of Sound Words.
2 Timothy 1. 13. Hold fast the form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me,
in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus.
IN the 4th verse we find young Timothy weeping, not out of a childish
weakness, but from a sad apprehension of real danger. He a young Steersman in
his new office of an Evangelist was lanched out into the deep when winds were
loud, and seas went high, and (it may be) he might think of that (...) of some
making shipwreck of the faith which he had read of in the first chapter of the
former Epistle. And then wonder not, if Moses be loath that Jethro (who might
Numb. 10 31.
be in stead of eyes to him) should have been in a wilderness, if the Disciples
cry out for fear in the Matthew. 14. 26.
Tempest when they think Christ is absent; if Aeneas sigh, when Multa gemens
casus; animum concussus amici.
he has lost his Palinurus, and if Timothy weep when Paul his former Pilot had
left him. So hardly is this Nursling snatched, Aeneid. 5.
from the breast, ready (if not with the Galatians to pluck out, Gal. 4. 15.
yet) to weep out his eyes for such a loss. And therefore to buoy up his
spirit, that it might not sink in these deep waters, he writes this second
Epistle to him, in which, He

Partly incourageth him to keep up his heart, and to bear up against the storm
that lay upon him, in the foregoing verses, and partly he directs him in This,
to have his eye fixed on the card and compass which he had left with him, Hold
fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me in faith and love,
which is in Christ Jesus.

In which words we have these particulars.

1. A form of words, (...).

2. Set out by their excellent quality, (...) they are sound ones.

3. By the speaker or utterer of them, Paul himself (...), which thou have
heard of me.

4. From the Subject matter, (...), in faith and love.

5. From the Principal Author (...), which is in Christ Jesus.

6. By the Adjunct duty which we owe and must perform to them, in that word
(...), hold fast. It is to have and to hold; so have it, that he hold it; and
so hold it that he may ever have it. Hold fast the form of sound words, etc.

From the first it seems that 1 A form of words.
Forms so much decryed in our times, were not so undervalued in Paul's, who you
see had left with Timothy (...), a form of words, which the Greek
Interpreters, paraphrase Chrysostom. Theophylact. Oaecumen. Theodoret.
by (...), etc. a picture or pattern, etc. and make account that He alluded to
the Painters or Limmers Art; as Polycletes made a Statue according to the rules
of his Art, which he called his Canon, to be the stander or standing rule and
Sampler which others should work by. Such a copy had Paul written Timothy, both
for matter and form, things and words, in his doctrine and preaching, that
indeed it was not so much like the Painters (...), which most properly
signifies the first lines or ruder draught, as the Orators Grotius.
rather, which the Rhetoricians describe to be a Representing a thing Aretius.
by words, so fully to the life, that it is not so much heard as seen. Such was
that (...), that form of knowledge and truth Romans 2. 20. and that (...) that
System or short Model of the Principles of the doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 1.
Such were of old their ancient Creeds, Canons of Councils, and since the
Confessions and Catechismes whither of whole Churches or of particular men,
their Sums, Institutions, Systems, Syntagmes, Synopses, or by what ever other
name you call such Modells of Divinity, as orderly lay down together such
divine truths as are scattered up and down in the Scripture, or explain such as
there seem to be something obscure, and so present them, in a full and clear
distinct view, for the better help, especially of a weaker eye against the
fascinations of juggling Impostors. A practice,

1. Ever in use, since God himself Exodus 20. 31. 18.
wrote the Decalogue as the Summary of things to be done. And Christ taught us
his own Mat. 6. 9.
prayer, as a Pattern of ours, in what is to be desired. And the Apostles their
Canons, Act. 15. and the Primitive Churches and Fathers their Creeds, and so
along till the Arians and other Heretics, who were pinched by them, did
therefore complain of them, as in our times of deformity and confusion we have
systems and confessions of faith often twitted and slighted, but the best is
that it is by such as will in this, as other things tread in their dear friends
the Socinians and Arminians steps, who cannot endure such checks of their
extravagant corruptions, and it is but the wild ass that brayeth against such
enclosures, and treades down all fences, because she means to run wild in the
wilderness.

Of great use.

1. Not with the widow of 2 Samuel 14. 20.
Tekoah to fetch about (...) a form of speech, the better to deceive, or to
train up men to rest in Formalities, as the Jews did in that Form of knowledge,
Romans 2. 20. or as those Deceivers in a form of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. who yet
are not there blamed because they had a form, but because they wanted life and
power, we very readily subscribe to what Hierom says, that Scripture truth, is
in medulla, non in superficie, non in terminorum foliis, sed in radice
rationis, and say with Synesius that the holy Ghost (...) though every Title
and Iota in it is sacred yet it is the kernel of the doctrine, and not so much
the shell of the words, that we so much stand upon. And therefore if any shall
conceitedly affect and insist upon any forms of words of their own making as
are either merely leaves, or that cover some poisonous toad of error and
impiety under them, we will very readily call them (as Nazianzen Orat. 6. de
Spir. S.
did his Adversary) A. B. C. sophysters, and wording Sycophants; Such empty
shells of Formalities we leave to more empty vain hearts (like children) to
play with, and those (...) those formed feigned words (which the Apostle speaks
of) 2 Pet. 2. 3. to those deceitful Huksters to make merchandise with, which
some of them who now a days decry forms most, are most notoriously guilty of,
and in this kind of all others the most affected Formalists: who with their new
lights have got a set of newminted words, and phrases, a strain of high flown
canting in their (...) and (...) right out those (...), 2 Pet. 2. 18.
even swelling words of vanity, which Peter observed and noted in the Seducers
of his time, and Calvin in the Libertines and Instructio adversus libert. cap.
7*
Quintinists of his, and the Shiboleth of many in ours, by which although we
cannot understand their language, yet we may easily come to know them, whilst
their form of speech bewraieth them.

2. Nor to be only bare Declarations of what we believe: An ecce fidem meam,
or Apologies and Purgations of our selves from the Aspersions and slanders of
others, who either misconceive or wilfully misreport us: For this Prefat. ad
Confess. Atque etiam sit Res propria Remonstrantibus, qua ab omnibus aliis in
tota Christianit^te p^aecisis s^ctis disernuntur. Synod. Remonstra. cap. 3.
use the Remonstrants themselves will allow of them, and no wonder, because when
they are deservedly taxed, they have need to Apologize. But this is all that
they will allow them, because they do so dearly hugg that Helena of theirs,
their libertas prophetandi, as their main interest, and on which they have set
their property, as being their p^c^lium only, and so become impatient of any
such restraint: though I cannot but wonder that they should say, that the
Primitive Churches and Christians intended no more by their Creeds, Canons and
Confessions, Prefat. ad confess. in libro de fide ad Petrum.
then by them only to testify, Non quid credendum esset, sed quid ipsi
crediderint, when they read so often in Austin, Firmissime creed, and
nullatenus dubites; and when in their Synods and Councils, they did so
frequently (and I fear too too liberally) thunder out their Anathemaes
Remonstra. in exam. praefat. Censu^ae.
against those that taught contrary to their determinations, and when the
Remonstrants themselves do so cry out of Athanasius for pride, and in his
Quicunque vult salvari, etc. which he prefixeth before the Articles of his
Creed.

3. I add therefore in the 3d place, that these Forms of sound Words are
useful, and in some cases are necessary, and so have been used as Declarations,
not only of what we our selves believe, but also, of what we judge that all
should believe (unless we could think that others might rightly believe that
as true, which we in our conscience judge to be false, a goodly piece of our
ingenuous loving-hearted Arminians charity) and also desire and require, that
all should profess, or at least not openly contradict, with whom we join in
nearest Church Communion: So it was with the Apostles in their Canons, Acts 15.
And so it is with particular Churches in their Articles and Confessions to this
day; and so may it be always; Ringantur licet and rumpantur
Socino-Remonstrantes. Notwithstanding all the rage and invectives of Socinians,
Arminians, Libertines, and other Sectaries, Haec sacra aliter non constant.
Praefat ad Apologiam.
who will rather disturb, yea and ruin both Churches and States, and snap
asunder the sacred bond of Peace, then be thus hampred.

4. They are therefore in the 4th place Communionis Tessarae and Judices, not
only badges of our Christian Church Communion, but also great helps and
furtherers of it, whereby uncomfortable divisions may be prevented, and the
peace of the Church the better preserved, whilst we all profess the same
Truth, and speak the same thing, being perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10. The Remonstrants indeed tell us
that there are Non pauci pii, and probi, many honest godly men Praefat ad
Confess.
(they mean their own sweet selves and their dear party, for who so honest and
godly as they?) who dislike such Forms and Confessions as derogatory to the
Authority, Sufficiency and perspicuity of the Scriptures. 2. As a wrong to
liberty of conscience, and of Prophesying. 3. As a great cause of Schisms and
Factions in the Church.

For the first, They fear where no fear is. No fear of taking from the
Authority and Perspicuity of the Scriptures, by these confessions which are
wholly built upon them, and for matter wholly, and for Words and Phrases in a
great part taken out of them, not so much as by a single private Ministers
confirming and explaining of them in the course of his Ministry, which I hope
they are not against, unless they who are so chary and tender of the liberty
of Prophesying will quite take away both the office and gift of Prophesying,
which when Christ instituted in his Church, he sure never intended it should be
any blemish or prejudice to the Scriptures Authority or Perspicuity.

For the 2d let the Papists answer Solum pontificium atque Hispanum regnum
videte; jumenta ibi sunt non homines; quicquid imponitur id portat vulgus, ut
ascenus. Isidi. Sacra.
to God and man for their Tyranny over Gods Peoples Consciences and true
liberty: The Spanish Inquisition, when God makes inquisition for blood there
shed, in this kind will be sadly accountable. We that have been this way
pinched our selves I hope should never have imposed upon others the like yoke
of slavery. Some indeed (that their tongues might be as licentious as their
practices) lavish it at large, speak loud, as though they had hired a Tertullus
to help them with invectives, or some mercinary Lawyer to draw up a bill in
chancery with a most horrid charge that has never a word of truth in it:
General outcries against an intended acted Tyranny; but they should instance in
particulars and make them good; mean while as long as the skin is whole, though
they pour vinegar on us, it will not smart, and we think Paul was a sufficient
answer, Neither can they prove the things whereof they now accuse me. I only
here add Acts 24. 13
that whilst this liberty of conscience and Prophesying is so tendered in this
particular by those honest holy men the Remonstrants spoke of, we may conclude
that they themselves were those holy men they meant, because (as I showed
before) they have impropriated this plea for this liberty to themselves, and
therefore we only bring home these stray goods from the common, to the true
owners enclosure.

But (to return from this digression) the 3d danger of Schisms and Factions
which they suggest will be the fruit of those Forms and Confessions, is that
which in this particular I am especially to take notice of, and all that I
shall now say to it is, that when they have put the pen into an Episcopius his
hand, He knows how to flant and flourish it, make a great letter of it, and
make a terrible Gorgons head in it, and his pen and tongue here runs riot. To
all which, it will be sufficient only to say, Verba quid audio, facta quum
videam? Whatever either He or any of His may in umbra Philosophare vel
Rhetoricare, either write in his study, or talk to them that will believe him;
I suppose they that will believe him are such as are blind, and so cannot see
what is done in the world, and so cannot disprove him, but that confessions
breed Schisms and Divisions, whilst that liberty and Toleration which they so
much plead for, will conjoyn all in peace and Christian union, yet the sad
experience of the whole Church in several Ages, we might put them in mind of
their own, we are too sure that Ours in these woefully distracted times does too
sadly inform us of the contrary, and cries aloud, that the not keeping more
close to such Forms of sound Words, (which our Church was sometimes famous for
in point of Doctrine) but every one may speak and write the vain Phansies of
his own heart, and impune spread foulest heresies and blasphemies, has
miserably torn us in pieces, and divided us in semper divisibilia. The Lord in
mercy speedily heal these gashes and ruptures; Of which cure this will be one
special means of holding fast (...), the form of sound and wholesome words, for
so

5. That is a further spiritual end and use of it, that by the help thereof
present controversies as they arise may be the better understood and
determined. So Acts 15.

6. And so also they may be as memorials to posterity of their forefathers
faith, and be left as depositums (as they are called in the verse following the
Text) to be kept as their legacies or inheritances, and so to be intailed as to
be transmitted from father to son, ad natos natorum, and qui nascuntur Psalm.
78. 2, 3, 4.
ab illis, in all successions to the preventing of after innovations and
corruptions:

But more particularly they are especially useful

1. To weak ones (it was in relief to such the Apostles that first framed their
Cannons, Acts 15. 24.) whilst what is more diffusedly scattered up and down in
the whole Scripture is gathered together in a Synopsis for their better view,
and what may be there by reason of some Words or Phrases which we now are less
acquainted with, more obscurely expressed, is here more familiarly presented to
their weaker understanding: a right and fit closing of such weak infants heads,
as a Festuke in their hand to help them to spell, and pronounce right. Such
fluid metal has need of a mould to bring it to a consistent form, such weak
lambs and silly sheep need to be put into such enclosures (which loose heads
and hearts will call and esteem pinfolds) which otherwise will be ready to
wander and go astray in the broad Common.

2. To discover and repulse Seducers, and subverters of the souls of Gods
people, Acts 15. 24. As the same pale which keeps in the Deer, keeps out the
ravenous wild beast; and therefore although we do not make them either first
or second rules of faith, as the Remonstrants are ready to asperse us, yet for
Them to allow them, ne quidem ullum quantumvis infimum in Ecclesia locum (as
their Vbi prius.
words are) we cannot but think is too too illiberal, at least in Clemens
Alexandrinus his phrase, with their good leave, let them be (...), A fence to
the vineyard, and so they will be in some place in the Church, and of some very
good use too, indeed of more then they would willingly have them; and hinc
illae lachrymae. Because the foot is swollen, it therefore complains of the shoo
as too strait: and so none more cry out of these Forms, then they who have
formed to themselves some deformed monsters in opinion or practice, and then
the crooked piece of timber would have the square and straight rule cast away,
as the painter drove away the true Cock, that it might not discover the
fillinesse of his painted one. There are few but know what made the
Remonstrants such enemies to Synods and their determinations, whilst they
cried up the liberty of Prophesying. And with us, when times were fast hasting
to Popery, the word Institutions (because Calvin's) was scorned as proud with
more pride; and of late since Church affairs have been in a confusion, we here
have had Confessions of Faith, and such like Forms at every turn so taken up,
and flurted, and all upon the same account, which will make me like Forms
never the worse, because men of corrupt judgments, and such as make Grace and
Scripture, yea, Christ himself but Forms, think and speak slightly of them;
but rather the better, because they who would manifestly bring in corruption,
and all confusion are against them, because indeed such Forms are against
them. The dam stops and checks the violent stream, and that is it which makes
it swell and murmur. The eye is sore, and therefore cannot endure the Light;
the wares they would put off are sophisticate, and therefore like not too light
a shop. It Is a sign of the better physic, and that it meets with the peccant
humor, if it makes the distempered Patient sick of it, and the foul stomach
ready to cast it up with loathing.

But then the Physic must in it self be wholesome,

Which is the second particular 2. Sound Words.
in the Text. (...) but (...). a form of words we would have, but then they
must be sound ones: A word which our Apostle often makes use of, twice in the
former Epistle, Chap. 1. 10. and 6. 3. and twice in this here: in the Text, and
Chap. 4. 3. and four times in that to Titus, Chap. 1. 9. 13. and Chap. 2. 2. 8.
in all which that we may be sound in the faith; He calls for sound words: Sani
and Sanantes, Sound, and healing it must be sound speech, and wholesome healing
doctrine, and these two Readings take up all that I wou^^ speak of it, indeed
all that is co^ained in it.

These words must be (...), found in themselves, containing (...) Iliad. (...).
folid and savoury and saving truths, without trash and mixture of vanity and
error, especially such as are more poisonous and deadly: Sincere milk, 1 Pet.
2. 2. without the poison of malice and guile, v. 1. pure wheat, Jer. 23. 28.
without the chaff of vanity; perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. without defect. Right ibid.
without crookedness, pure without dross, v. 8. clear without spot, v. 9.
true, ibid. in a word (...) truth in the abstract, and (...) righteous
altogether, in the whole complex. Such and so sound are Gods words. But what is
Jer. 23. 28.
the chaff to the wheat? Such are not.

1. The writings of Philosophers in which, although some would now make us
believe they can find out a new way to heaven, yet if they would but look
better, or but read over Plutarchs book de Philosophorum placitis, whilst (with
Austin) they could not find Christ there, they would find so much error and
corruption, and folly there, as would fully make out Paul's (...), and (...),
Romans 1. 21, 22. and that they were become so vain and foolish, that there would
be no ground of hope left to any of their greatest Admirers, by them to be made
wise to salvation, but that every learned man, at least every spiritual
Christian may write Tertullians Motto on the backside of their books, Animam
non dant, quia non habent. Something Nota Ciceronis vox est, Vtinam tam facile
vera invenire possem quam falsa convincere Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 3. 2 King 5.
12, 13.
they were able to do in discovering false Religions, but not at all able to
manifest the true: Abana and Ph^rpar, and other rivers of Damascus, Naaman may
think are better then all the waters of Israel. But for all that it is Isreal's
Jordan that he must wash in, if he would be cleansed from his leprosy. They
are these wholesome healing words that must work that cure, not a Philosophers,
not a Socrates his dictates.

2. Such is not the Jewish Talmud, with all the rest of their Cabalisticall
difficiles nugae, and ridiculous Rabbinical fooleries; In which field whatever
good corn is to be found (which some are ready to over-rate) yet it is so thin
sown, and so overgrown with the gayes of their vain fables, and up and down
with the poisonous weed of their false doctrines and superstitions, with a
deadly enmity to Jesus Christ the Tree of Life, that it appears to be like that
earth which God has cursed: and although some of them dare blasphemously
compare the Law to Water, and their Mishne to wine, and their Talmud Vino
condito, yet this precious piece of theirs is so mixed with ridiculous fables,
and foolish conceits, that in such fooleries you may plainly read a Jew, who
has denied and crucified the Wisdom of God: and some men, it may be, have not
been much mistaken, who have observed an odd tincture in those Christians
spirits and notions, or Crotchets, who have too much doated on their Writings.

3. Such is not Mahomets Alcoran: which if learned men be beholden to for the
pure Arabic language, and so for Words, yet it is such an unlicked deformed
piece, that I cannot call it a Form of Words, especially so far from sound
ones, that except the often asserting of Gods Omniscience, and some few such
particulars, which here and there you meet with in it, in stead of these (...),
we may safely say there is (...). So confused and contradictory it is, both to
the Scripture, and to it self; so absurd and ridiculous, that it is one of the
great judgments of God upon this sinful world, that so great a part of it
should be taken with it; and but that it promises bodily delights and
pleasures, which best suits with sensual beasts, and keeps down Learning, and
so keeps them from being rational men, it would never have so taken with
Mahumetans abroad, or with us Christians, I had almost said us English men here
at home, that it should be so believed by them, or of late be translated and
printed by us in London Anno 1649
this fruitful season, and rank soil, in which every sprigg of any poisonous
weed so soon takes, whilst others elsewhere burn it. In France.


4. And lastly, such is not the golden Legend, which is all over dross, or if
there be any metal in it, Lud. Vives tells you what it is, when he says
that he who made it was plumbei oris, and ferrei cordis, and he might have
added aeneae frontis, for he had a brazen face, that could not blush at those
ridiculous lies which he heapeth up in it. Nor the diseased swollen body of the
Popes Canon laws, in which great heap is a great deal of chaff, which yet Pope
Eugenius will have swept up, and taken in to make up the full measure of their
iniquity, and to make the bulk the bigger, not only Gratians decreta, but also
the Cardinals Paleae must be pressed in: Totus liber approbatus est, etiam cum
omnibus Paleis, as Dr Marta tells us.

These and such like empty vanities, and rotten (...), are Ephesians. 4. 29
none of these sound words, which a heart sound in Gods statutes will Psalm.
119. 80.
close with, or stick to; neither Christianity nor common prudence would have
us magno conatu nugas, break our arm by throwing such light feathers with our
whole might, or lean with our whole weight on such broken reeds of Isa. 36. 6.
Egypt which will break and wound us; and yet such is our folly and vanity, that
falling short of that (...) that substantial sound Prove. 2. 7. 3. 24. 8. 14.
wisdom, which Christ is, and his word affords us, pro Iunone nubem, we grasp
such shadows, and having gone a whoring from God, and conceiving sin, the
woman's Pica is become both the man and woman's disease, we feed on trash, and
long for such strange Kickshawes. A distemper which not only this last and
worst is, but even the first and best was sick of, especially our Timothies
Ephesians, and Titus his Cretians, their (...) trained them up to curiosities,
and the others slow bellies could rise no higher then Tit. 1. 12 1 Timothy 4. 7
dull old wives fables, and some other such like trifles. And therefore you
shall find that in these Epistles to Timothy and Titus such toys are more
decryed then in all the rest of the Bible, and they in them more bett upon then
any other argument, as the earnest contending about

Endless Genealogies, 1 Timothy 1. 4. like some of our hot disputes about some
Punctilio in Chronology.

Jewish and profane old wives fables, 1 Timothy 1. 4. 4. 7. Tit. 1. 14. It may be
not much worse then the dust that is raised about some old Legend, or some
doubtful or false passage in Church History, strife about words, and
Logomachies, 1 Timothy 6. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 14. Such Tully says, made up the greatest
part of the sage Stoics disputations: and how much better are the high and
proud contests of those who account themselves the greatest Scholars about
their verbal Criticismes?

Oppositions of science falsely so called, (...), 1 Timothy 6. 20. answerable to
the ancient and our now present Gnostics, high flown sublimated speculations.

Foolish and unlearned questions, and perverse disputations and contentions
about the Law, 2 Timothy 2. 23. 1 Timothy 6. 5. Tit. 3. 9. paralleled by our busy
Questionists and Querists, with whom all that should prove fruit runs up into
the blade: the power of godliness evaporating into debates, debates indeed in
more senses then one, who study to dispute more then to live, and that usually
about doubtful Queries, whilst they deny confessed and grounded even
fundamental truths; or about the Mint and Anise of Church Discipline Mat. 23.
23.
and Ceremonies, and such Accessories, with the neglect of those (...) the
weightier things of the Law, more solid and substantial truths, and such as
contain in them the life and power of godliness. Quantum est in rebus inane? O
the vanity of corrupt minds, and destitute of the 1 Timothy 6. 5.
truth, that kindle such fires in chips and straw, to set all in a combustion!
Our Apostle in one 1 Timothy 6. 4.
place calls it a disease, (...), which our times are very sick of; in
another an Itch, (...) 2 Timothy 4. 3.
(...): for as that is seated in the outward parts of the body, so this in the
tongues and fancies of superficial Christians, who after their own lusts heap
to themselves teachers, not being able to endure sound doctrine.

But it is firm ground that a wise man treads hard on, good food that a good
stomach feeds heartily on, that which the faithful soul must hold fast is the
faithful word, Tit. 1. 9. The Form of sound Words, as here in the Text. First
Sani, in themselves Sound, and not trash.

Sanantes, in their use wholesome, 2*
and not poison: for too many such destructive words and doctrines there are,
which eat like a canker, and subvert the hearers, 2 Timothy 2. 14. 17. make them
err from the faith, yea so as to make shipwreck of it, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 6. 21.
Trent Canons are a Form of words, but so far from sound ones, that some have
not amiss expounded Brightman.
that in Revel. 16. 3. of them, that they made the sea become as the blood of a
dead man, that every living thing died in it.

H. Nichols his Evangelium Regni; A Raccovian Catechism; the Remonstrants
Confession, are forms of words too, but many of them dangerous ones.

Many such Forms are in these times of Deformation rather then Reformation
minted daily, which He would engage very far, who should give his word, that
they are such words of truth and soberness, that the soul which hungers Act.
26. 26.
after Christ may have wholesome food or Physic from them.

Some of them swelling the soul with the proud doctrines of perfection, and
self-exaltation.

Others (nay some of the same) 2 Pet. 2. 19
rendering it very caryon and rottenness, with their ranting Principles and
answerable practices of Libertinisme and loosnesse.

Some starving it by corrupting or denying the food of it, the holy Scriptures
and Sacraments.

All so poisoning it, that you may see those of this diet like Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.
or some other man who has some foul disease upon him, ill thriving color
fading, hair shedding, flesh decaying and putrefying, even his bones and marrow
consuming; the very outward profession of godliness blasted, and the inward
power of it, not so much neglected as despised; witnesses from Heaven against
such corrupt doctrines, and saddest evidences of Gods wrath from heaven Romans 1.
18
against such wretched men, whilst he thus sends leanness into Psalm. 106. 15.
their souls. But is this wholesome food that they no better thrive by? No, but
such as

1. A true savoury spirit relisheth; for although some poison be so subtle as
it is hardly at first discovered, yet as the ear tries words, and the mouth
tastes its meat, so Job 12. 1^* 34. 3.
the sheep of Christ's pasture, even by a divine instinct, discern what food is
wholesome, and what is otherwise: and not only they who have their senses
exercised to discern good and evil, but even the Heb. 5. 14.
newborn babe has such a taste, as soon as it is made partaker of the divine
nature, that it can tell 2 Pet. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4.
when the sincere milk of the word is adulterated, though, it may be, it cannot
tell wherein or wherewith: as that godly Christian (who had a better heart then
head) had his spirit rising against something which he heard in a Sermon, but
he could not tell why, which afterward was made out to him to be very corrupt
doctrine: and I think He said not amiss, who said, that in judging doctrines
and practices, he gave much, though not to vain Enthusiasmes, yet to the (...)
or propension of the spirits of sober believers; for although the Scripture be
the Rule, or the Pole-starre, yet the spirits of the faithful savingly touched
from heaven point to it; so that it is likely to be an unsavory or poisonous
weed, which the flock of Christ's sheep generally will let stand, and not feed
on; and I should much suspect that either Doctrine or practice, which the
hearts of the godly universally have an inward Antipathy against: as on the
contrary It seemed good to the holy Ghost and us, was the ground and tenor of a
Synodical decision in the best times, Act. 15. 28. and proportionably the
hearty complacential closing of those who have the Spirit of God, (though not
in the same kind or measure which those had) is a great help, and a good guide
to a right judgment of discretion, and to this conclusion, that it is like to be
wholesome food which healthful sound men do generally and in a manner naturally
relish and feed on.

2. Especially that, which they recover and gain health and strength, and so
thrive by. It is (...), sincere milk which the newborn babe batten's and
growe's by, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Jerichoes waters were healed, when the 2 King 2^. 21.
Lands barrenness was removed, and the Sun of righteousnenss is then risen with
healing in his wings, when they who are under his beams and influence, go forth
and grow as calves of the stall; and Mal. 4. ^*
they are planted in the house of the Lord, who flourish in the Courts Psalm.
92. 13, 14.
of our God, and still bring forth fruit even in old age, and are fat and
flourishing.

As on the contrary, it is but bad soil, in which good plants are starved or
cankered: Is it likely to be wholesome diet, which men, otherwise well and
healthful, do not thrive on?

But it is no other then heavens shine and showers that make the plants of
righteousness grow, and bud, and flourish, and bring forth fruit: for I cannot
in this respect assent to the Remonstrants dictates, Ex fructibus aestimandi
sunt homines, non semper doctrina, it is a good tree (our Savior Mat. 7. 17.
tells us) which brings forth good fruit, and the same may be said of good
doctrine too, and al though by the corruption of men's hearts, good doctrine may
not al ways bring forth good fruit in their lives, yet it is bad doctrine which
naturally brings forth what is bad and and abominable.

But wholesome food, even the bread of life let us ever esteem that, by which
the man of God lives, and thriveth, cheerfully does and suffers Gods will,
and constantly holds on in Gods way, and in the strength of it (with Elijah)
1 King. 19. 8.
walks 40. days and 40. nights, through the wilderness of this world, till he
come to the mount of God. In a word, that is sound doctrine, which a sound
heart relisheth and thrives by. But because man lives not by bread only,
Matthew. 4. 4.
but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God; it is not sufficient
that these sound words have man's approbation, if not withal Gods institution,
that as they are acceptable words, so also words of truth, words of the wise,
Eccles. 12. 10, 11.
but withal given by one Shepherd.

Which leads to the 3d. particular 3. Which thou have heard of me.
in the Text, viz. the Speaker by whom they were delivered, in those words,
which thou have heard of me. Non a quocunque magistro, as Lombard and
Espencaeus paraphrase it: not from every dogmatizing Master, but from an
Apostle of Christ, infallibly directed by the Spirit of Christ. Such truths as
have been delivered to us by Christ himself, the Prophets and Apostles,
immediately inspired by the Spirit of God, and now recorded in the Scriptures
of truth, either expressed in them, or plainly and directly by good and strong
consequence drawn from them: these are those words, and forms of sound words,
which we are to hold fast, and abide by, as a light to our feet, Psalm. 119.
105. 2 Pet. 1, 19. the rule of our faith and life, Gal. 6. 16. and therefore
called Canonical, the Foundation on which we are to build, Ephesians. 2. 20. that
(...) that mould of doctrine into which we are to be cast, Romans 6. 17. that
(...), that Form of knowledge and truth by which we are to be informed. No
other fallible Landmark, but the holy Scriptures Card and Compass and
Pole Star, which we are to steer our course by, if we would not make shipwreck
of faith and a good conscience. These, these only are the words of this life;
Act. 5. 20.
what ever therefore either they expressly affirm, or is from them soundly and
directly gathered and commended to us, whether by whole Churches, or particular
Persons, although they be not expressed wholly in Scripture words, yet if
according to the Analogy of faith, for the further clearing of Scripture sense,
and the better discovering of errors and heresies as they arise, we willingly
accept, and carefully hold fast. But what ever Creeds, Canons, Confessions,
Constitutions, Catechismes, etc. either of private men, or of whole Churches,
yea of that Church which now names it self Catholic, shall obtrude upon us
any thing directly or by good consequence contrary to the Scripture in any
thing, yea or but (...) besides what the Gal. 1. 9. 10.
Scripture teaches us in the parts and essentials of Gods worship, or in any
thing in doctrine or practice pretended as necessary to salvation, eadem
facilitate contemnitur Hieronym. in Matthew.
qua probatur, we stick not easily to reject it, and being backed with the
Apostles authority, to pronounce him (whether man or Angel) Anathema, who shall
teach and impose it: and in hoc sensu we particularly and especially reject, 1.
All humane unwritten Traditions: 2. All feigned Divine Revelations.

For humane unwritten Traditions, Bellarmine indeed applies Traditions. De
verbo Dei non scripto cap. 5.
to them this Text, and makes them at least a part of that Depositum in the
following verse: nor can I deny, but that Chrysostom upon the Text, and other
Greek Interpreters (after their manner following him) run their descant upon
the word (...), which thou have heard, as relating to what Paul had delivered
to Timothy by word of mouth; from which Canus loc. com. lib. 3. Corn. a Lapide,
Estius, Alii, in Textum.
Popish writers take a rise to cry up their unwritten Traditions, which being
the strongest stake in their rotten hedge they most highly cry up, and most
earnestly contend for.

In their Elogiums which they give them, they are their Homericum (...) their
Antidote against all infections.

Lydius Lapis, by which they will try all doctrines.

Sacrum Thesei filum, safely to guide you in all Labyrinths and Meanders.

Gladius Goliath, non est similis ei, the sword of their Goliath Pope to offend
and strike down all opposors.

Ajacis Clypeus, to defend them, and to ward off all blows from eheir enemies.

Nay Fidei fundamentum, the very foundation of their Popish faith, and the
only foundation of it so far as Popish, which if overturned, their Babel
comes down; and take but away, what partly we hold with them agreeable to
Scripture, and what they maintain only by Tradition, and what is besides left
of Popery would be a poor thin nothing, and therefore here they fight tanquam
pro aris and focis, or if you will we may leave out the tanquam: Elabor andum
est ut hic locus quam diligentissime Loc. com. lib. 3. cap 6 ad fiuem.
explicaretur and muniretur, says Canus: and good reason when he had before
(cap. 3.) said, Traditiones majorem vim habere ad Haereticos refellendos, quam
Scripturas; good reason that they should so earnestly fight for Traditions,
because by them they can better confute us whom they call Heretics, then by
Scriptures. We kindly thank him for this fair acknowledgement, they are not so
much the Scriptures as their Traditions, which they must knock us poor
Heretics down with. By which they rather appear to be the Heretics: for of
such Tertullian of old said, Lib. de Resur. carni.
nec stare se posse, si de solis Scripturis cogantur quaestiones suas sistere.

Tradition is their Helena and Venus, which they so paint and trim up. They are
modest men amongst them that will afford the Scriptures an equal share of
dignity and respect with them, for it is as little, as they can give them, to be
equal with the Scriptures: Aeque sunt observandae, says Eckius; and pari
pietatis affectu In Enchiridio.
and reverentia suscipit etc. says the Council of Trent, like him in
Nicephorus, whom they call Beatus Lib. 16. cap. 33.
Theodosius (two names too good for such a blasphemer) who getting into the
Pulpit denounced an Anathema, si quis quatuor Synodos quatuor Evangeliis non
exaequet, pronounced that man accursed who did not make the four first Synods
equal with the four Gospels: which yet he might better do, then the Cardinal
Julianus Fox Acts and Mon. Tom. 1. page 863.
in the Council of Basil, exhort them to give no less credit to the Council
then to the Gospel; Or the Council of Trent, anathematize all that did not thus
equal their vain Traditions with the books of the Old and New Testament. But
they stay not here, it is not enough with them to have their Traditions
equalled with the holy Scriptures, if they be not much preferred before them:

1. For their Antiquity, as being Bellarmine de Verbo Dei non Scripto, cap. 4.
before any Scripture was written; and therefore as first born must have the
pre-eminence of primogeniture.

2. Hereupon in point of necessity: as though the Church had more need of
Traditions then of the Scriptures, and accordingly Bellarmine in that chapter
(whose title is Ostenditur Necessitas Traditionum) in which he should prove
Traditions to be necessary, does take a great deal of more pains to prove that
the Scriptures are not necessary.

3. In point of authority: which they say the Scripture has only from the
Tradition of the Church, without which some of them are not afraid to say it
would be of no more authority then Aesops Fables: and the same Pighius who
durst call it a nose of wax, when over shoos over boots, and therefore durst go
on and say, haec Scripta non praeesse nostra religioni sed subesse; and as
Caranza adds, that the Scripture is to be regulaby the Church, and not the
Church by the Scripture.

4. In point of extent. Traditions according to them containing much more of
the word and will of God, then the Scriptures: for although Andradius be so
modest (and that is a wonder, for he is not usually wont to be found in that
fault) as to grant that maxima pars, the greatest part of Gods revealed will is
contained in Scripture, yet others of his Fellows cannot but account him herein
to have been over liberal; for on the quite contrary Hosius says, that multo
maxima pars, that the greatest part of it by far is contained in Traditions,
and others of them say that minima particula, it is the very least part of all
that is contained in Scripture, whilst Traditio omnem veritatem in se habet,
contains all the mysteries of faith and Religion, if you will believe Coster.

5. For point of continuance. The same Author would have you believe that this
unwritten word is more safely kept in their hearts, and not to be rased out of
the Popes, their high Priests breast plate, whilst moths and worms may soon
consume these written papers and parchments.

6. And so also in point of incorrupted certainty: whilst the written word is
but a dumb letter, speaks not its own sense, is a nose of wax and leaden rule,
which every heretic may bend to his purpose: on the contrary their Mufti, is a
live Judge, and the Tradition of the Church is safely locked up in his breast;
he gives the true authentic sense of it; and so preventeth both the Catholics
error, and the Heretics depravation.

7. In point of transcendent worth and usefulness. The unwritten word is of
more moment, say some of them, and multis partibus superat scripturas, says
Coster, as much as the fleshly tables of Believers hearts (in which no doubt
their Traditions are written) exceed the Tables of stone, or papers or
parchments in which the Old and New Testament are written.

And for use, Corn. a Lapide from those words of the Covenant of Gods writing
his Law in our hearts, Jer. 31. 33. would make such weak men, and silly Novices
as we are believe, that Traditions are more proper for the N. T. then the
Scriptures. Hoc si animadverterent Haeretici magis proprias esse N. Testamento
Traditiones, quam Scripturas intelligerent. Euge Jesuita! en pietatem Romanam!
In this his bold and blasphemous expression, we hear the voice of the Beast,
and see the whores brazen forehead, that blusheth not to prefer their own
dreams before the visions of God, and their lying Cabala before that (...) the
Scripture of truth, which alone is able to make us wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.
15.

8. In particular, Canus and most of them hold and say, that although things of
more common nature and concernment were written by Moses and other Penmen in
Scripture, yet the Arcana Imperii the higher mysteries, those holy things were
not to be cast to dogs (for so they speak) when they mean these rarities of
their should not be exposed to public view, as it was with the Heathen with
their Abdita in Adytis, and as Pythagoras, and some other Philosophers, and the
Dryades would not have their Dictates written for all, but only communicated
to their Scholars, such mysteria to their Mystae. So Christ and his Apostles
besides their (...), their more ordinary and common doctrine which they either
spoke or wrote to all, had their (...) their more secret mysteries of So also
our Enthusiasts and Castellio vide Beza. in 2 Timothy 3. 17.
more high and abstruse nature, which were only delivered by word of mouth to
their greater Intimates and Confidents. To which purpose Canus fears not
blasphemously to apply that, 1 Cor. 2. 2. but I determined to know (or make
known) nothing but Christ Jesus and him crucified, i. e. to you vulgar and
ordinary hearers, howbeit we speak wisdom amongst them that are perfect: No
doubt their high-flown perfectionists. Profane Blasphemer! as though Christ
crucified, whom in the foregoing Chapter, v. 23. he had said was the wisdom of
God, and the power of God, were but his ordinary and course every day doctrine,
which he preached to the meaner and vulgar, but that he had higher speculations
which he imparted to those of an higher Form, or (as our new minted word is)
dispensation and attainment, which our Enthusiasts boast of in their
Revelations, and the Papists (as it seems) promise us in their Traditions.

9. And therefore accordingly Lib. 4. de verbo Dei. c. 4.
in their practice, as the Jews (if you will believe Bellarmine) made more use
of traditions then of the Scripture; so the Papists plainly show that they set
more by them, then they do by the written Word of God, whilst they plead more
earnestly for them, and are more, sedulous and copious in this controversy
then in most, do most rigorously press them, and more severely punish the
neglect and transgression of them, then of the express commands of God in
Scripture, as the profaning (as they call it) one of their Traditionary Saints
days, much more heavily, then of the Lords own Day; and a Priests marrying,
then the committing of fornication or adultery: in this imitating not the true
Israelites indeed, but the degenerate Jews who made the word of God of none
effect through their Traditions: But Mat. 15. 3. ^.
those who have been savingly taught, as the truth is in Jesus, abhor such
blasphemies, and by all their sweet words cannot be brought to relish their
Traditions, which (as Irenaeus and other of the Ancients plainly show) have
been all along the subterfuge of Heretics, and of which, for many of them, it
is uncertain from whom in particular they first sprang; and for all of them it
is most certain that coming from men, at best, they are but fallible, and that
in continuance of time they may be much altered from what they were at first;
nor can Bellarmines four preservatives be able so to keep them in pickle, as to
prevent it. And therefore although the Truth of God was delivered from hand to
hand before Moses first writ the Law, and that Christ delivered to his
Apostles, and they to others the Doctrine of the Gospel, before the signing of
the Canon of the New Testament which we grant, and although the Apostle 2 These.
2. 15. (a place which the Papists much triumph in) commands his Thessalonians
to stand fast, and to hold the Traditions which they had been taught, whether
by word or his Epistle, yet for all that, they must give us leave to hold fast
to the Scripture, till they shall be able fully and clearly to prove,

1. That there is the same use and need of Traditions now, that the Canon of
the Scripture is perfected, as there was before.

2. That there are now as immediate and infallible inspirations, and
manifestations of Gods will as there was to the faithful before the writing of
the Old Testament, and to the Apostles before the writing of the New. viz.
Infallibly to direct about these Traditions, and to correct, in case there
should be any failure or corruption. Such extraordinary Manifestations, we, for
our parts, do not pretend to, and that we cannot think that they are made to
the Romish Antichrist, it is not from want of charity, but of ground of faith
to believe it, and indeed from sense and evident experience of the contrary.

3. That for the substantials of faith and life (for of eternal
circumstantials I now speak not) there be any such Divine or Apostolical
Traditions which the Apostles viva voce preached and delivered from hand to
hand, which were not for substance written in the Old Testament before, Acts
26. 22. or not in the New Testament afterward. Many indeed of their Traditions
which they obtrude, are not, as holding forth not Apostolical divine Truth, but
partly such errors and superstitions, and partly such ridiculous fooleries, as
are not fit to be much less in the sacred writings, much less in the sacred
Writ. But for what ever is necessary to be known or practiced in order to
salvation, we must believe Irenaeus, saying, Quod tunc praeconiaverunt, postea
per Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, till Lib. 3. cap. 1.
they be able to prove the contrary; and mean while we are confident, that this
expression of Irenaeus, in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, and yet more evidently
that place to the Thessalonians, which they so much urge, where they are
exhorted to hold the Traditions which they had been taught, whether by word or
Epistles fully evinceth, that what is written in Scripture may be, and is there
called Tradition. Such traditions, and so written we allow to be within the
compass of this Form of sound Words; but not (first) Humane unwritten, or
Popish forged Traditions.

Nor (2dly) The Enthusiasts Feigned Revelations
These the Papists decry as loud as we, Non enim novis revelationibus Deverbo
Dei non scripto cap. 9.
nunc regitur Ecclesia, says Bellarmine: though, by their favor, they cannot
so easily wash their hands of them, whilst according to their Doctrine, the
last resolution of matters of faith is to be made into the determination of the
Pope, and that as infallibly directed by Divine Revelation as his Sycophants
would flatter him: So that thereby he is made the prime and greatest
Enthusiast. An artifice which seducers in all ages have made use of to conciliate
the more credit to their delusions, by intituling them to Divine Revelation. I
do not here speak of Numae's Aegeria, or Mahomets Dove, or the practices of
other Heathen Founders of Commonwealths, who out of craft and policy to gain
more reverence and obedience to their laws and government have deluded their
silly people into a belief of their being appointed by divine inspirations: But
even in the Church of God, the Apostles in their times gave warning of such as
pretended the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. As also charge and direction how to try
them, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. 6. The Nicholaitans of old, Swenckfield
and the Familists of Germany in the former age, and their spawn both in Old and
New England in this age, have been all for immediate Revelations: with a
supine, nay a most scornful neglect, not only of other studies and learning,
but even of the holy Scriptures also, which to them is but a dead Letter, a
Covenant of works: etc. And before their new lights, such shadows must fly
away: They are but History to their mystery, and as the Papists, in their way,
and Castellio in his, so these in theirs make account that the Spirit reveals
to them higher and more hidden mysteries then the Scriptures teach or contain,
such indeed as are not only besides, and (as they think) above it, but
sometimes, nay oftentimes quite contrary to it: a most proud and dangerous
delusion, and therefore Austins watchword Prolog. ad Doctrinam Christianam.
in regard of such is, Caveamus tales tentationes superbissimas and
periculosissimas; the direct inlet of all corruption into the Church, and
confusion into the Commonwealth, as other places have felt, and the Lord grant,
that we who in this kind have already found so much, may not yet feel much
more. Purest Primitive times have been defiled with them.

The darkest and blindest times have talked much of such visions. In the times
of in-breaking light and Reformation, still a great noise of Revelation. But
for our better settling in the Truth, know, that Revelation we acknowledge and
humbly bless God for, if rightly understood.

1. It was a most happy revelation of God to the Prophets and Apostles, when he
made known to them his will, and directed them to write the Scriptures, one of
the Books whereof bears the name of the Revelation. But I pray know too, that
these Revelations were on purpose vouchsafed to give us a standard of
Scripture, by which we might discover the impostures of those other fained
Revelations.

2. The Scripture also calls it a spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1.
17, 18. that shows and seals to us our Interest in Christ, and the riches of
the glory of the Inheritance of the Saints in light: But now this Spirit is a
spirit of promise, v. 13. which only seals that, whch the Scripture writes.

3. I deny not, but that sometimes possibly there may be some more then
ordinary intimation of Gods will to some of his servants; For their persons,
holy, humble, faithful, and Orthodox.

For the things declared, ^t may be they may be helped to apply some general
word in Scripture to a part^cular case.

But never thereby put upon others either to believe or do any thing above,
much less contrary to the Scripture, in all which our chief pretenders to
Revelations are notoriously exorbitant; but the Scripture remains the square,
and standing rule still; which the more others slight, and neglect, and
blaspheme, the more let us honor, and study, and stick to. And therefore take
care that your otherwise well-furnished Libraries want not a Bible, as it has
been with some; that none of our Doctors may have cause with shame to confess,
as some of the Popish Schoole-Doctors have done, that when they were 50. years
old, they had never read any of the Scripture, but what only they met with in
Hierom and the Canon Law: See Voetii disp. page 26.
And as Carolostadius acknowledges that it was seven years after he was
Doctor, that he began to read the Bible. Nay, post galeros and infulas, after
some have been Bishops and Cardinals (Canus complains) Non Prophetas, Cani.
loc. com. lib. 9.
non Apostolos, non Evangelistas, sed Cicerones, Platones, etc. You should see
in their hands not the Bible but Tully, or Plato, or Aristotle. Quibus Averroes
Paulus est; Alexander Aphrodisaeus, Petrus; Aristoteles, Christus; Plato non
Divinus, sed Deus: to whom Averroes is their Paul, Aphrodisaeus their Peter,
Aristotle in stead of Christ, and Plato no longer only Divine, but a Deity: In
all whose books some now adays become so learned, that although they cannot
find Christ in them, yet they think they can spell salvation out of them. Sure
I am, that Paul could not in them find this Form of Sound Words in the Text,
for that Timothy had heard from him; and so it was Apostolical, not
Philosophical, and was in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

Which words contain the 4th In says and love.
Interpreters refer several ways;

Some to Paul's preaching, viz. That he had preached them out of a principle of
Faith, and out of that love which he bare to him in Christ Jesus.

Others to Timothy receiving: As telling him, that if he would hold them fast
(as in the first words he exhorted him) it must be by faith and love which is
in Christ Jesus.

I (as at first I said) with most and best Interpreters rather refer this
clause to the subject matter which these Sound Words hold forth. It Is faith and
love, and that in Christ Jesus: for quae circa alia sunt sane sana non sunt, as
Espencaeus expresses it.

Faith and love.

1. A most lovely pair, most loving sister Twins. Egregia biga, (...), and
therefore are Grotius in Philem. 5.
usually met going hand in hand together up and down in our Apostles writings;

Love with Faith, Ephesians. 6. 28.

And Faith with Love, 1 Timothy 1. 14. 6. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 6.

And Faith working by love, Gal. 5. 6.

The work of Faith, and labor of Love, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.

And what in Scripture are so joined together, let them not in our hearts or
lives be put asunder; All will prove Nothing if they be, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.

2. Of very large extent: And therefore from this very Text, made the two main
parts of Divinity, which is, (...); So Theophylact. (...); So Oecumenius
paraphraseth the Text, containing Credenda, Agenda, all things both concerning
Doctrine and Conversation.

3. Especially and most expressly containing the substantials of godliness;
whence (to omit many things which I might observe) I desire to hint to you,
what of all sound words, we are to hold fastest: Let Jet catch straws, but let
the Loadstone draw Iron; let want on stomachs be greedy of trash, but let more
healthful constitutions feed on more solid meat: Let Nominals and Rationals
dispute, but let Reals believe and love; let light heads and vain hearts busy
their brains with Notions and Niceties, (the only oil which feeds the blaze
of many of our Saints zeal, but eats out of them all the power of godliness)
but let Faith and Love be the exercise of every solid and serious Christian. Oh
had we more faith grounded on the word, we should have less error founded for
the most part on our own phansy; and had we more love, either we should have
fewer breaches, or they would be sooner healed and made up.

But we must be sure then that 5. In Christ Jesus.
this Faith and Love be in Christ Jesus, which words contain the 5th particular
of the Text, and which some refer only to Love. In love which is in Christ
Jesus; Grotius.
others to both Faith and Love and so In Christ Jesus, is For Christ. So some,

Which Christ has taught and expressed, so Erasmus: sicut Christus instituit,
so Lombard, (...), so Oecumenius.

But yet so as that most conceive Sausbout. Grotius.
this clause to add a restriction, telling us, that it is not every kind of
faith and love, that is to be held so fast, as here is prescribed, and so close
stuck to; for we have now adays a great variety of Creeds, Religions, and
misshapen bodies of Divinity, and of Families of love.

As in the Apostles times several combinations of Heretics, as there were
Sects and Fraternities enough of Heathen Philosophers and their followers,
whose books and disputes were often better then themselves, and yet both by
some now adays, thought so good, that their charity concludes for their
Salvation, and for every honest moral man's in every Religion, or of what ever
persuasion. But shall we wrong God, to gratify men? or be so charitable to
them, as to be injurious to Christ? by thinking that he would needlessly and
lavishly shed his blood to purchase that Salvation which they could compass
without him, or at best, only to set open a more convenient passage to life,
which they were able (though something about) to come to another way. For
certain, many of the Primitive Fathers were of an other persuasion, else so
many of them would never have so much disputed against them, and Justin Martyr
must be judged too prodigal of his life in provoking Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 25.
Crescens the Philosopher to be a means of taking it away, by calling them
Thieves and deceivers: and he said therein no more, then what Christ himself
had before said of others like them, that all that came before him were thieves
and robbers, and that the sheep did not hear them, John 10. 7, 8, 9. I wish we
did not too much, and so come to want that Eare-mark, that either we would not
read them so much, or the Scrptures more, and so prove either less
Philosophers, or more Christians, I mean more spiritual, and then this
Heathenish morality would appear, at least comparatively, a flat dull thing,
were we more acquainted with Christ, so as experimentally to know what that
(...), that super-excellent knowledge of him meant all other knowledge, and
things then would be nothing but loss and dung to us, Phil. 3. 7, 8. But it is
because some want children, that they so play with Puppets, and they who could
not obtain Penelope her self, took up with her Maids. But let divine sparks fly
upward and we that are so studious of truth, let us above all study the truth
of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 5. the truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21. hold fast
the faith which is in Christ Jesus, as it is in the Text.

And if it be that, Then be sure 6. Hold Fast.
to hold it fast, which is the last particular in the Text, which is our duty
to be pressed upon us as the Application of the whole, and as Christ said to
the Church of Thyatira, unto you and as many as have not this doctrine (viz. of
the Prophetess Jezabel) and which Revel. 2. 24, 25.
have not known the depths of Satan, I will put upon you none other burden, but
that which you have already, hold fast till I come. So all that I have at
present in Commission from the Text for you, is only to call upon you
carefully, and with an awakened heart to remember the Apostles watchword in
it: (...) be sure that we hold fast, take heed that we be not juggled out of
it, but that we be sure that we Have it; which is the first signification of
the word and that we hold it, as the word, is often taken, Revel. 6. 9. and
many other places (...), nay (...), Tit. 1. 9. hold we it so fast against all
opposition that no strength of man or devil may force us from it, but that we
may maintain it against all.

1. It is Heavens pledge v. 14. with which God has betrusted us, as our souls
are our pledge, v. 12. which we trust God with, be we as careful of his
pledge, as we would have him be of ours: and although we should prove careless
of ours, be sure we shall be called to an account for his: How sad will our
doom be if our case prove like his, 1 King. 20. 39, 40.

2. It is our godly forefathers bequest which they have conveyed to us their
posterity; should not our care be alike to transmit it to ours? Psalm. 78. 3, 4.

3. The martyrs have sealed it with their blood, which we shall prove guilty of
through our unfaithfulness, as they are accounted to tread underfoot the son of
God, and to account his blood an unholy thing who desert his truth, and
despited the spirit of his grace, Heb. 10. 29.

4. It will be the best part of our childrens inheritance: as the Law was
Jacobs, Deuteronomy. 33. 4. Look to it therefore, that at our last reckoning our
forefathers be not ashamed of us, and our posterity at the Resurrection do no
not rise up, and, I say not, call us blessed, as Prove. 31. 28. but curse us for
betraying Gods truth, and our trust, and their and our own souls all together.

5. And remember from this word (...) hold fast, that it is not the catching at
what we have not, but only the holding fast what through Gods mercy we yet
have; and therefore as Christ says to the Church of Philadelphia, Hold fast
what thou have, let no man take away thy crown. It has been the Crown of our
English Church, if that in any measure have fallen from our head, now woe to us
that we have so sinned, Lam 5. 16.
and if we have any whit loosned our hand, it is now time to lay on faster hold
then ever: if with those lovely Churches of Smyrna and Philadelphia, our proper
Cue for the present be not to hold fast what we have, having lost so much, yet
at least with the decayed Churches of Ephesus and Sardis, let us Remember from
whence we are Revel. 2. 5. 3. 3.
fallen, and how we have once received and heard, and hold fast and repent.
Repent that in any measure our hand-hold has been loosned, and now the Second
time take faster hold on that faith and truth, once delivered to the Saints:
Hold Jude v. 3.
Fast, is given in charge to many of those Churches, Revel. 2. and 3. both best
and worst, but to him that overcomes, etc. is said to all. This holding fast
may cost us tugging and contending; and this overcoming many and soar
conflicts, but be we faithful in the conflict, and then we may be sure of the
Conquest, Magna est veritas and praevalebit. For these things says he that is
holy and true, him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my
God, and he shall go no more out, but I will write upon him the name of my
God; and the name of the City of my God. He that has an ear, let him hear
what the Spirit says to the Churches. Amen.

Tibi Domine Jesu, qui via es and veritas and vita:
FINIS.
Reader before thou read the Book, be pleased to Correct these many faults
in the Printing of it.
IN the Epistle Marg. read 2 Kin. 5. In the Book, page 9. Marg. read (...) page
20 l. 25 r. as ^n, p. 22 l. 28. r. v. 3. p. 23 l. 8 r. this, p. 29 marg. Psalm.
r. 136. p. 33 marg. r. Mark. 6 p. 42 mar. Revel. 22. r. 21. marg. Brightman r.
Brightman on Revel. 7. 17. p. 44 l. 4. r. Daniel, p. 50 mar. dele Ant. p. 54 l.
12 r. nulled, p. 59 l. 20 r. takes, p. 66 l. 3 r. hinting, p. 95 l. 11 r.
intruded, p. 104 l. 20 r. jointly l. 28 r. heady, p. 112 l. 1, 4 dele the
Parenthesis, p. 113 l. 21 (...) r. (...) Jer. 32. 41. p. 123 l. 4 r. rather
then from, l. 27 (...) r. (...), p. 113. l. 10 r. the joint, l. 12 r. every, p.
134 l. 8 r. the return, p. 141 l. 24 r. Regions round about Jordan, to, p. 145
l. 14 r. nearer, the way to, p. 146 l. 21 r. leads, p. 152 l. 14. r. that, p.
153 l. 3 dele of, p. 163 l. ult. dele was p. 170 l. 5. r. quieted, l. 23 r.
solet, p. 179 l. 24 ^ele of a, p. 206. l. 29 r. seldomer, p. 208 l. 17 r.
whilst it, p. 234 l. 16 r. Joh. 14. p. 215 l. 3 r. fruit, p. 216 l. 26 (...)
r. (...), p. 217. l. 11. dele only, l. 22 r. Isa. 38 17. p. 220 l. ult. r. fly
of, p. 225. l. penult r. almost, p. 233 l. 5 dele not only, p. 241 marg. (...)
r. (...) p. 242. marg. r. Pergentes, p. 245 l. 1 r. leave him, p. 245 marg. r.
casuque p: 247 l. 7 r. standard. p. 251 l. 1 r. (...) p. 253 l. 26 r. Tesserae,
l. 27 r. indices, p. 255 marg. r. Asinus Isidis, p. 256 l. 9 r. Paul's, p. 257
l. 14 r. Philosophari Rhetoricari, l. 25 dele yet, p. 259 l. 8 r. that the
Apostles, p. 262 l. 19 r. (...), p. 263 l. 4 r. would, l. 20 (...) r. (...) l.
21 (...) r. (...) p. 265 l. 11 r. weeds, p. 267 l. 17 r. disseased, p. 268
marg. Pro. 3. 24. r. 21. and Pro. 8. 24. r. 23. p. 302 l. 7 r. extert nal, l.
23 much less in the sacred, r. to be recorded in any man's, p. 303 l. 10
Epistles, r. Epistle.


