A NEW METHOD OF Educating Children: OR, RULES and DIRECTIONS For the Well
Ordering and Governing Them, During Their YOUNGER YEARS.

SHOWING That they are capable, at the Age of Three Years, to be caused to
learn Languages, and most Arts and Sciences* which, if observed By Parents,
would be of greater Value than a Thousand Pounds Portion.

ALSO, What Methods is to be used by Breeding Women, and what Diet is most
proper for them, and their Children* to prevent Wind, Vapors, Convulsions, etc.

Written (to dis-engage the World from those ill Customs in Education, it has
been so long used to) By Tho. Tryon; Author of the Way to Health, Long Life and
Happiness.

Recommended to Parents, Nurses, Tutors, and all others concerned in the
Educating of Children.

London: Printed for I. Salusbury, at the Rising-Sun in Cornhill; and I.
Harris, at the (...), in the Poultrey, 1695.

Price bound One Shilling.

To Parents, Tutors, Nurses, and all others, concerned in the Education of
Children.
IT was for your Direction, as well as for the Advantage and Benefit of
Children, that this small Treatise was at first inended to be wrote and
published: It Is to you therefore that it is addressed, hoping that it may be
found serviceable to you in the Execution of your Duty in many Respects. For,

First, It will constantly remind you of the Necessity and Obligation you lie
under, in reference to the particular Management and Education of either your
own or others Children you have taken the Charge of. Nature puts upon you a
Necessity of taking Care of the One, and your own voluntary Act obliges you to
the Other.

Secondly, It will furnish you with Directions, that shall be much easier to
you, and more advantageous to the Children you are to instruct. I need not
undertake to show the Inconveniences of the common Method of Education. The
ill Success that generally attends it, sufficiently detects it to be guilty of
some grand Mistakes and Errors: It is not able to answer the end it proposes.
For after abundance of useless Pains, Turmoil, and Endeavors, Whipping,
Exercising and Instructing, when a Child arrives at the years of Maturity and
Discretion, (as they call it) he is not one Jot mere Virtuous, and scarcely (if
at all) more Learned than he was when he first set out.

I have seen in Holland, and other parts of the World, Children entered upon
Businest, and very capable also of managing it, at those Years, it may be, ours
here in England are learning to Spell and Pronounce.

Is it not a scandalous thing, to see a great Boy; of Fifteen or Sixteen Years
old, trudging to School, with a great Bundle of Books under his Arm, to learn
to decline a Noun and Conjugate Verb, and yet after all, remains uncertain,
whether the Genders of Nouns be Three or Seven? But by this time he is it seems
a hopeful Youth, and his Master thinks fit that he be sent to the University.
Now there is no help for it, he must be a Scholar: And yet perhaps, when he
comes to commence Batchelour of Arts, shall hardly be capable of determining
whether the Conclusion be part of a Syllogism.

This indeed is the Craft of your common School Masters, to keep Children (like
Spirits in a Circle) a long time under the Terror of their Jurisdiction and
Discipline, in order only to promote their own Profit and Interest. A
mischievous way this, and ought to be taken Nooice by the Government. Why
sh^u'd the Public for so many Years be deprived of the Service of so many
hopeful Boys, who are ter a great deal to be entered upon Action, and entrusted
with the management of Business, than to be compelled to sit in Torment eight
Hours in a Day under the grum and unpleasing Aspect of an harsh vnd ill-natured
Pedagogue.

We hope a great-deal of this may be prevented by the Rules and Methods we here
propose: For what we here offer to your Consideration, is neither so difficult,
nor so chargeable: There is little but what is in the Power, even of the
Poorest, to compass and accomplish, at least so far as concerns the making
their Children Virtuous, and teaching them to write and read, which will
mightily qualify, and enable them to get an honest Livelihood in the World. By
these, and such like Methods, Fathers and Mothers may in a Twelve-months time
teach their Children more of true and useful Learning at home in their Houses,
than they learn at the common Schools in five Years. December annos trivit legendo
Cicerone, To go ten Years to School to learn to construe a Latin Author, and
yet perhaps after all, not understand him to purpose. A very fine
Accomplishment, when in half the time he might have been taught to speak very
readily three several Languages.

I shall no longer forestall your Desires of Reading and Practicing these easy
and natural Rules that I have laid down. I had I declare no bye nor private
Respect in the Printing of them, but was wholly influenced by my Zeal to the
Service of the Public, that if it were possible I might contribute somewhat
toward the Ease, Convenience and Welfare of Mankind; which effect, if in any
measure these Papers shall obtain, I have all that I can desire.

To his very Worthy Friend Mr. Tho. Tryon, on his Discourse of Education.
LOng since I wondered what the Poets meant,
When they a Beard to Aesculapius lent,
and yet denied Apollo should have one,
^ho' he the Father was, the other Son.
^ut now the Wonder ceases, having known,
that Sons are wiser than their Fathers grown;
and what could never be done by Ages past,
^s to Perfection brought we see at last.
^hey made Essays, but never could arrive
^t the true Course and Method how to live.
^mperfect Rules their glimmering Light affords,
^dorn'd and Dressed in a fair Robe of Words,
Which please the Ears, from whence Contentment springs,
^n Reading, but never reach the Truth of Things.
their Art might somewhat toward the Platform yield,
^ut thou, my Friend, do the fair Structure build.
^uch difference is 'twixt their Attempts and Thine,
That Thou perform'st what they could but design.
Thou for Mankind, chalk'st out the fairest way
To Truth and Reason, where no Man can stray.
Each single Page such Influence does impart,
That it the Fancy fills, and sways the Heart.
Youth's best Conductor, and its safest Guide,
Steering a Course betwixt Contempt and Pride.
On this alone our Welfare does depend;
Here we see what is amiss, and how to mend:
What guilty Education has denied,
By these Instructions may be well supplied.
This does the Schools Pedantick Course o'er-rule,
And makes a Man of him they would make a Fool.
When a young Spark has run through all the Rules;
The Flogging Gantelope of hated Schools;
And to the University repairs,
To learn the Terms of Art and Jargon there,
The tedious Discipline of seven long Years.
What is he better than my Friend and I,
An Ant, or Emmet, or a Butter-fly,
Or any other thing beneath the Sky.
Who Reasons, Dictates, solidly pursue,
Without Regard to Terms, of Old or New:
Keep close to Nature in her own plain away,
By no new Lights and Notions led astray?
Whilst all their Art amounts to only This;
Nego Sequelam ergo Falleris.
A New Method. OF EDUCATIN^ Children. etc.
Of the Capacity of Children, together with a True Method of their Education.
IT is a Truth generally acknowledged by Christians, but seldom so well
considered as it ought. That Man is the complete Image of God and Nature, and
contains in himself the Principles and Properties of all things Corporeal and
Incorporeal: That he is endued with an Elemental or Palpable Body, actuated and
informed by an Ethereal Spirit, which directly answers to the great Soul of the
World from whence it is taken, and whereof it is an Epitome and Abridgment or,
if you please, the Son and Offspring.

And as the Soul of Man does contain all the true Properties of the Elements
^z. Earth, Air, Water and Fire, which are, as it were, the Mothers of the Body
that nourish and sustain it; so it has als^ the Principles of Fire and Light,
that is Spirit and Life, that gives Motion to the Body, which bears Relation to
the Sou^ of the great World, or that mighty Spirit which is the Moving,
Vivifying Creative, and Conservative Power o^ God.

Now Man being so wonderfully composed, his Soul and Spirit containing the true
Nature and Properties of every Being, he must consequently have a Simile or
Agreement with the innat^ Nature, Qualities, Dispositions and Inclinations of
all Beasts, Fowl, Fish Herbs, Seeds, etc. both in the Visible and Invisible
World, and is thereby become a Microcosm, a complete Image or Resemblance of
the Universe.

The Earth Essentially contains in i^ self the Virtues and Qualities of all
Seeds, Fruits and Grains; insomuch, that whatever is sown into it, immediately
takes root, and attracts to it self an agreeable Matter proper for the Support
and Nourishment of its own Body and Spirit. The like is to be understood of the
Soul; it being the Universal Humane Ground, wherein whatever is sown, whether
Good or Evil, takes root, and powerfully, though insensibly, draws agreeable
Matter out of all the Powers and Qualities of Nature, to nourish and improve
that Seed, whereby it obtains a strong Form in the Soul, the Essences whereof
can never be destroyed or defaced, especially if the Seeds are sown in the
first and tenderest Age of the Child. For then the Soul is most empty and
consequently most susceptible of Impressions, and receiving any thing that is
offered to it. All the Powers of Nature standing then, as it were naked,
unbiased by Custom and Prejudice, with an earnest and ardent Appetite,
desiring to be stamped with some Character or other, without any regard to
either the Beauty or Value o^ the Impression, having no Distinction betwixt
Good and Evil.

Upon this account, whatever a Child is first taught and accustomed to, not
only takes the deepest root in the Soul, but beget; Habits and Complexions, and
denominates the very Constitution it self. This no wise Man can deny, it being
Matter of Fact, and common Observation. Besides, all the Art and Industry of
the best Tutors can never wholly remove or alter Qualities and Dispositions so
earlily planted: Tho^ by continually representing to them good Examples, backed
with Wholesome and Moral Precepts, if the Soul be of a mild and gentle Nature,
they may, for some time, seem to be subdued; yet upon the least Intermission,
and Neglect o^ such a Method, they shall be ready to exert themselves afresh,
and perhaps, with redoubled Vigor.

Therefore Education and Examples, in the Infancy, and first Ages of a Child,
that is, from Two to Eight, Ten, Twelve Years, are the very Foundation of
Virtue or Vice, according as they are used or applied: For ^hen Good and Evil
are indifferent to ^he Soul; and that which is first im^ibed, takes the deepest
root, and begets the strongest habit.

From hence it is manifest of what ^mportance it is, for Fathers, Mothers,
Nurses, etc. to whom the Care of Children is committed, to be watchful that ^he
Precepts and Examples of Virtue, have the Honor in making the first ^mpression
on their Childrens Souls: That they labor to acquaint them be^imes with the
Excellence of Patience, Humility and Compassion: That they ^epresent to them
the Noble and Tran^cendent Dignity of Justice, and show them the Deformity of
the contrary Vice: That they make them understand, that there is as much
Injustice in Wrong^ng a Man of a Penny, as in Cheating ^im of a Pound: That
Writhing of the Neck of a Chicken with Delight, is as great an Evidence of the
Spirit of Cruelty, as the Stabbing a Man. They are to ^ccustom their Children
to a proper and distinct Method of Speaking: I am persuaded, much of the
Stammering and Lisping in many People, might have been prevented by a proper
and due Management in their Childhood. They ought also to be very careful to
Teach them Temperance in Eating and Drinking, and Moderation in their Sleep and
Exercises. By such Methods as these, the Seeds of Vice might more easily,
because timely, be subdued, and a Foundation laid for the building up an
Excellent and Accomplished Person.

But seeing that the common Custom of the World commands us, as soon as we are
born, to be submitted to the Care and Tuition of Women, on whose good or ill
Management of us in that tender Age, a great part of the Felicity or Misery of
our Lives depend. And considering the Impressions that Women make, whilst they
are Impregnate and go with Child, have a wonderful Influence upon their Issue,
I think it will prove no worthless Service to propose some Observations and
Methods whereby they may be better directed to discharge their Duty.

(1.) A good Diet ought to be observed; that is, they ought to accustom
themselves to simple Meats and Drinks such in which no manifest Quality is too
predominant; that is, not too sweet nor too bitter, too salt nor too sharp,
etc. For all Extremes beget their own Qualities and Complections. All Strong
Drinks are to be avoided; for nothing is more inimical to the Nature of
Children, than things wherein Heat has the Ascendant. All Spoon-Meats are very
proper and Natural, except such as are made of Spirituous Liquors, as Wine,
Ale, Beer, Cider, etc. but if sweetened with Sugar, as is commonly practiced,
they are exceedingly Hotter, and ought to be avoided by all that value their
own or their Childrens Health. But Gruels, Paps, Rice, variously dressed, are
very wholesome. Raw Herbs made into Sallads, and eaten with Bread, Butter and
Cheese, are excellently good; and for Drink; Midling Beer or Ale is the best,
except Water.

(2.) They are also, during their Impregnation, to abstain from all Foods that
are made Hot in their Preparation, by Boiling, Stewing, Roasting, Baking, and
the like. They ought to let them be quite Cold before they eat them; for their
fiery sulphurous Vapors do mightily generate windy Diseases, and that
Epidemical Distemper called the Scurvy, both in the Mother and Child: for those
fiery Fumes and Vapors that all hot Foods send forth, are of a furious and
unpeaceful Temper, and contrary to the Natural Heat both of the Stomach and the
Food it self. So that I affirm, the Eating solid Food hot, or before these
deadly Vapors have separated themselves, to be one of the grand Causes of
Wind, especially in Women and Children, (as we have largely demonstrated in our
Way to Health, and other of our Writings.)

(3.) They ought to refrain the eating of all sorts of Roots, as Turnips,
Pa^snips, Carrets, etc. For by reason of their Crude and Earthy Qualities, they
naturally beget Wind. Unripe Fruit, and all things sharpened with Viuegar
Oranges, Lemons, etc. are hurtful: For being unequal in their Parts, they
generate cold windy Humors, and afford a very small and imprope^ Nourishment,
especially to Persons u^ der the Circumstances we are no^ speaking of.

(4.) They must be very careful, n^ to exceed in Quantity. All Repletio^ does
in a very high degree obstruct the Course of Nature, and produces many
Diseases; and utterly destroys the Health and Harmony both of Body and Mind,
affecting both with some signal and irreparable Damage, being of far more
mischievous Consequence than most do imagine.

(5.) They ought to forbear all robust, masculine Labor and Exercises, as
likewise a soft and sedentary Life: Both the one and the other ought to be
gentle and easy; not too thoughtfully, engaging the Mind, nor over-burdening
the Body. Such a Course would strengthen Nature, by removing Obstructions, and
causing the Blood and Humors to circulate with more freedom and facility. For
it is observable in all Countries where Women live live Temperately, use
moderate Exercises, eat simple Foods and drink mostly Water, that windy
Diseases are hardly* ^wn to be found either in them or ^r Children.

^astly. Above all things, they ought ^beware that they do not give place
Passion, to suffer those irregular ^tions of the Mind to reign and get (...)
Dominion over them. These sort (...) Disturbances put the whole Constitution
out of Tune, and make fierce and violent Invasions on the Sweetness of the good
Powers and Qualities; making the deepest Impressions on the Child, and
powerfully incorporating with the ^erverse Seed of their Simile, whereby evil
Inclinations and Dispositions are begotten, and do arise; for there is a strong
and unconceivable Sympathy betwixt the Mother and the Child, both in Virtue and
Vice: so that there is no evil Indisposition that attends the Mother, but the
Child participates thereof, receiving the Nourishment both of Spirit and Body
from her. Nothing is more certain, than that every Passion, when it arrives to
Extremity, begets its own Complexion; for it penetrates even to the Center,
joins with its Simile, and be^es strengthened by it.

By this means, the irregular Me^ of Mothers affect their Children, (...) often
distempering their Minds and (...) dies; which in a very short time becom^ so
deep and central, that they are hard^ ever cured or eradicated.

This it is to be an ignorant Big^ to Custom and Tradition. So unco^ trollable
is the Dominion they have ob^ tain'd, that they sway and biass us against all
Reason and Experience. So preposterously is Mankind blinded and depraved, that
we can neither Hear, See, Feel, nor Taste Truth, nor the Simplicity of Nature's
Operations.

All Seed partakes of the Nature and Quality of the Ground whereinto it is
sown: If the Ground be good, and the Seed good, you may reasonably expect sound
and firm Fruit, without ble* mish or distemper. Proper Method^ must be
observed, or all will be spoiled. What Crop can the Husbandman hope for, if he
neglects to Till and Manure his Land, or sows it with improper and unsuitable
Seed? Or what Profit can he expect from his Horses, Cows, and Sheep, if
particular Care be not (...) about the well-ordering his Cattle, that ^hey may
bring forth their Young Ones with Strength and Health? The like is to be
understood of the Humane Ground, if that be not dressed and cultivated by good
Order and Temperance, you must not look for a healthy and vigorous Offspring.
In a word, the whole Education, Improvement and Accomplishment of Mankind, in a
great measure, depends on the Management and good Conduct of Women. For Proof
of which, let us a little consider what a powerful Influence, from our very
Infancy, they have over us, and what a mighty* Interest and Concernment they
have in those very things that conduce most to our well-being, and have the
greatest Effect upon our Constitutions and Dispositions.

Custom, and common Practice, has so ordered it, That as we spring from them,
we must be returned to them. No sooner are we born, but we are thrown into
their Hands. As they gave us Birth, it is judged reasonable they should give us
Education. It is not enough, ^at we must suffer under the Impressions we
receive so earlily from them, during the mistaken Methods they too generally
observe in the time of their Pregnancy; but we must be submitted to their
Discipline and Direction, after we are produced, stamped with the Image of God.
Do they not form in us our first Notions, and prepossess the Soul before it has
leisure to understa^d its own Power and Liberty? All the Nonsense of our
Conceptions, and Irregularity of our Morals, is derived from them, whilst
through an over-fond Tenderness they confirm and encourage those Seminal
Principles of Vice that they ought to discountenance and subdue. How many Souls
are ruined by Mothers and Nurses scaring their Children with horrid and
frightful Names, when they would bring them to comply with their own Humor?
Hereby the Seeds of Fear are planted, which continually subject the Soul to
constant and unavoidable Bondage. Besides, the Examples of their Passions, and
irregular Actions, have a mighty Influence upon our tender Souls, insomuch that
those first Impressions can never be obliterated or removed. They also prepare
Childrens Food, and order and appoint their Diet and Exercises. From hence it
appears how much we are under their Conduct and Management, as to Bed, Board,
and all things conducing to the Preservation of Life and manner of Living. For
this cause, it is possible to convince an Hundred Men of the Errors o^ Life,
before One Woman; they being the Mistresses of Intemperance, and mightily
espouse the Methods of that ancient Gentleman called Custom.

Hence it follows, that it is of great Importance. That particular Care be
taken about the Education of Women themselves, since they sow the first Seeds
in the Humane Ground. When you ask Children why they do This, or That? They
will answer, Their Mothers taught them, and they saw their Mothers do it. So
that the whole Care and Instruction of Children, especially whilst they are
most capable of Impression, is committed to them. For few or no Men mind it,
their secular Busi^ess calling them to the Management of other Affairs, which
some term Matters of greater Moment. But this (...) a great Mistake; for I
affirm, That ^rudent Education, and Early Discipline, are the Sinews of all
good Go^ernment. And no Man can reasonably ^xpect better Success in Public
Affairs, except a more methodical Regulation be observed in the Education of
Children, especially amongst the Females; for if they are well Brought-up, they
will naturally. Instruct and Teach their Offspring. No Tutors can Teach
Children to that Degree nor with that Ease, ^s Mothers. Besides, the Charge of
Tutors oftentimes becomes burthensom; an^ many neglect the learning of
excellent Things, because their Circumstances will not allow them wherewith to
pay their Masters. If the Mother or Nurse be a Linguist, and can well
understand and speak three or four Languages, the Child will quickly learn them
all with as great facility and readiness as the Mother Tongue. The same is to
be understood as to all Arts and Sciences.

It is a great Truth, though very little believed, That the Females are
naturally as fit for, and capable of all excellent Learning, as Men, even the
Mathematics it self; and if there be any difference, the Advantage is on the
Womens-side. They are of curious and apt Capacities, to apprehend all things
that depend upon the Power of the Fancy and Imagination, being of a more
delicate Contexture, and wrought with a finer Thread than Man. Pray tell me,
why were they thought fit, by the wise Ancients, to Prepare, Compound and Dress
our Food, which indeed is true Physic? On the due Composition and Proportion
of that, all the Health, Strength, nay, the Life it self of Men, depends. The
Art of Preparation is not only Deep and Mysterious, but Curious and Ingenious:
For, to understand Preparation and Composition, with the proper Quantity and
Quality of the Ingredients, is none of the least Points in Philosophy. I am
sure, what the Women fall short of in this Mystery, is not for want of
Capacity; for what they are once taught, and have made a Custom, they will hold
fast. Therefore, that City or Country is happy, whose Women have been taug^
good Customs, and the Orders of Temperance; and on the other side, that Country
is most unhappy, where the Women have embraced evil Custom. How preposterous
is it! You will trust Women with the most material Things, even the Government
of Life, and Health, and yet deny them to be capable of understanding meaner
Services. We affirm, they are as able to comprehend all Arts and Sciences to as
high a degree as Men, if not higher, provided their Education be equal. Indeed,
we do not approve of their being employed in Robust and Masculine Offices. Is
i^ not a pretty sight, to see a parcel of Women Carrying of Burdens, and
Crying of Things in Baskets upon their Heads, about the Streets? These are
unseemly Employments, which render Women Rude, Bold, Surly, and Unchaste. They
are to be applied to soft and gentle Exercises, more agreeable to their
Complexions. They are to be Tutored in Arts more suitable and proper for them,
as in good Writing and Arithmetic; to understand Accounts, and the keeping of
Books, and all other things that may be done within the compass of the House;
for if they have timely Instruction, they will soon demonstrate themselves to
be very Apt, Sharp and Ready in all curious Arts, and oftentimes exceed even
the Men themselves.

By these means, Daughters would become altogether as helpful and serviceable
both to themselves and Parents, as Sons; and many times more, because they are
not so apt and inclinable to Travel and Ramble abroad into Foreign Parts, nor
List themselves in the Armies of Princes. Besides, the true Learning of all
useful things, will render them fit and capable to answer the End of their
Creation, viz. to be Helps-meet to their Husbands. For timely Education, and
the teaching Children the Doing and Active Part, is, to sow in them the Seeds
of Temperance, Frugality, and Good Order. This would make them Thoughtful and
Serious, and teach them to have a Value for those Principles of Virtue that are
so timely implanted in them; the Practice whereof will be so far from being
difficult and hard, that (...) will be familiar and connatural to them: They
will take care to cherish, preserve and improve these noble Seeds, esteeming
them the Foundations of Peace, Comfort, and everlasting Serenity of Mind. Like
frugal Men, that get Money by their own Industry, they will know the true Worth
of it, and how they part with it: while others are like a wanton and
inconsiderate Spendthrift, who squanders away all he has, without any regard to
the Labor of those who got it for him, or considering that it might have much
better been employed in the charitable Relief of poor and better deserving
People.

For this Reason, most rich Persons Children are Foolish, Idle, Prodigal, and
very Expensive; and their Parents can never expect better Fruit from them, till
they give them better Precepts, and better Precedents. For, for the most part,
they teach them Wantonness and Extravagance from their very Cradles, till they
are Seven, Eight, or Ten Years of Age: Which ill Habits grow so very strong in
them, that they become (...) vincible, and no Art or Care possible can root out
or expunge them. Some few there are, indeed, that are born with more propitious
and favorable Natures, -- Queis ex meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan, --
whom Phoebus has formed of better Clay, that by the help of Instruction,
surmount the Difficulties of an ill and prejudicate Education. But these are
very little beholden to their Parents and Tutors for Good Manners and Sobriety,
but chiefly to the Portion of good Nature, and God's Gifts, that are born in
them.

The Fear of God, Temperance, Cleanness and Frugality, are taught by Precept
and Example, even as Arts and Sciences are; as also are Disobedience,
Intemperance and Disorder.

The principal Time of Teaching and Confirming Virtue and Vice, Temperance and
Intemperance, Arts and Sciences, Industry and Wantonness, is from Three Years
of Age to Ten: whatever is fastened to them within that time, will continue for
ever, and will naturally grow strong, and improve, with the least Industry
imaginable.

If this be true, as certainly it is, ho^ is it possible that the People of
thi^ Age should expect their Children should be Temperate and Industrious, when
they do all they can, both by Precept and Example, to make them Gluttons and
Debauched? Do not many Parents at least permit, if not force their Children to
Eat and Drink not only beyond the Necessity and Exactions of Nature, but also
more than they are willing to receive? And Persons of all Ages have an
Inclination to eat and drink more than the Stomach can with ease digest,
especially if their Meats and Drinks are well compounded and delicious; which
is often purposedly done, to entice Nature out of her own plain Way.

Now, if Persons of mature Age and Experience are apt to exceed in this
particular, and over-load the digestive Power of the Stomach, to the extreme
prejudice of their Body and Mind; what must Children suffer, that without any
restraint, eat and drink to the end of their Appetites? For the Palat^
continues the Pleasure of Tasting, many Degrees beyond the Necessity of the
Stomach, and the Requirements of the Digestive Faculty. Is not this teaching
Children, even in the very Cradle, to be Gluttons? Which being strengthened and
improved by repeated Practice, is at last so deeply radicated, that it becomes
a Second Nature. So that it is no wonder to see so many Men and Women
Intemperate and Debauched; nay, it is very hard to conceive it should be
otherwise, when there has been so much Pains taken, and so many Years spent to
confirm and corroborate the Habit; and that even in their Youthful Age, when
Impressions are soonest and deepest made.

For the Soul of Man is endued (as I said before) with an Universal Spirit both
of Good and Evil. There is no Property or Quality in the whole Nature of
Things, that does not find in Man somewhat wherewith to assimilate and affix it
self. Upon this account it is, that he is capable of learning all things Humane
and Divine; and those Precept and Examples that are first presented have the
strongest Effect, and take the deepest Root.

Temperance and Order are the fi^ things that ought to be taught Children being
the Foundation of all excelle^ Learning. It Is by their Direction a^ and
Influence that Man arrives to the Accomplishment of his Nature, an^ dignifies
his Species above the Rank o^ his Fellow Creatures. So that if Children are
accustomed to these things from their Birth, to Twelve or Fifteen Years of Age,
it is almost impossible then they should become Intemperate, without the hazard
of Sickness, or running the risque of many unpleasant Inconveniences. Which
Consideration, together with an early and habitual Practice of those Virtues,
will make it as easy and familiar for them to be Temperate, as Men are now
prone to be Extravagant and Debauched. Besides, this Method would
extraordinarily contribute to the Ease and Satisfaction of all Families,
keeping them from many torturing Diseases, and great Expenses, both in
Servants, Meats and Drinks, and render all things sedate, quiet and delightful.

Custom and Precept have wonderful and amazing Influences over all the Ce^
lestial Powers and Configurations of the Stars and Elements, and over innat^
Dispositions, Inclinations and Com^ plexions. So great is their Power bot^ in
the Good and Bad, that they lead Me^ to commit the highest Evils and Out rages,
even Murder it self, without any Trouble or Regret. For Example: Tak^ a Boy of
Two or Three Years old, tha^ is dignified in the fiery Trigon in hi^ Nativity,
under Mars, who consequently is, by his Complexion, addicted to practice all
manner of Wrath, Fiercenes^ and Cruelty,; let this Child be under the Tuition
of a Bannian Woman, o^ some other Person that scruples all Violence, or the
killing either Man o^ Beast, where they live temperately, an^ observe sober
Methods, and you sha^ soon discern, notwithstanding his Man tial Inclinations,
and the Power o^ Celestial Influences, that the Custom Religion and Example of
those People he is brought up among, will quickl^ insinuate and conform
themselves wit^ their Similes in the Child's Soul, an^ and gain an entire
Dominion over all the fierce and rude Dispositions he was ^earen'd with, from
his Nativity, or ^edominating Consteilation. For cer^n it is, That the Soul
contains the com^at and true Nature of all Things: and though one Quality or
Property be ^onger than another in the Soul, yet the other cling to it, and
come after, ^cording to their Degrees of Strength Weakness; and that Form or
Quality ^at is weakest, can easily be made strong^ by Custom, Precept and
Example. and so, on the other side, that Quality ^at in the Nativity was most
Strong, ^n by the same Rule be made Weak ^d Impotent.

This is further manifested in Religion, which is made up of great Varieties of
^otions, and Practical Ceremonies, there ^ing as much difference as there is in
^e Nature of Things; many of them ^antastical, Vain, and Irrational, and ^ost
of them Ridiculous; the Zealous ^pprobation whereof, and Formal Pra^ise, are
convincing and undeniable ^rguments of the Force and Power of ^ustom. Will not
those that have been ^structed in Base and False Notions, and constantly used
to conform with humane and detestable Ceremonies, as easily persuaded to die
for their R^gion (as they call it,) as those that h^ really embraced the Truth,
and l^ under the most sober and agreeable M^thods of God's Law? Without all p^
adventure they will; and the freque^ Instances mentioned in the Records of
Histories, determine the Question. Ha^ there not been Turks and Indians Childr^
that being educated in the Christian ^ligion, have proved as zealous and f^ward
in the Defense of that Cause, the Child of a Christian? And on (...) other
hand, are not the Ianizaries, (...) the most part, the Sons of Christian^ yet
there are not, within the Confi^ of the Ottoman Empire, more obstin^ and
inveterate Mussulmen. In sho^ Children may be brought to any thin^ Their Souls
are so cereous and flexib^ that they may, with the greatest facili^ be formed
into any Shape, or any Figur^ Good and Evil are alike to them, the know no
difference nor distinction: T^ that they are first taught, fixes the Cha^cter,
obtains the Ascendant, and de^n minates the Person either Virtuous or ^cious.

For this Reason it was, that our Savior ^mmanded little Children to be
brought ^to him. Which had not relation only their Innocence, but to their
Capacity; ^eir Minds being, as it were, Free and ^mpty, not yet bound
Apprentice to ^e Vanity of Custom and Prejudice: ^he Ground was clean, and
exempt from ^e Weeds of Di^der and Wickedn^; ^hereby they (...) rendered more
fit ^d capable to ^ve the Good Seed. ^id not our G^at Master likewise go ^to
the Streets and Highways to preach ^e Gospel to the Common and Ordi^ary sort
of People? Why did he not ^tner honor the Synagogues, and preach ^s Doctrine
to the Scribes and Pharisees, ^ose learned and strict Observers of the ^aw? No,
the former were not fastened (...) Prejudice, nor so deeply rooted in the
^ormalities of the Law, and Tradition, and therefore more likely to embrace the
truth: There were not those Obstacles and Impediments in them, as were in the
^tter. For the more free any Man is from ^e Power of Custom, the more room
there is in the Soul to entertain Ver^ As the Proverb has it, No Fool like the
Fool: Because Folly is so deeply gro^ded in him, that there is no place any
thing else.

On the other hand, Children, at the arrival into this World, are utter
Str^gers to Custom and Tradition; they (...) as it were, like the Incorporeal
Being their Imaginations and Fancies are (...) b^nded or misled (...) that we
call R^son; they penetra^ (...), and imitate^ things that they hea^ (...), o^
see done, a^ this without any Consideration whet^ it be good or evil, possible
or impossi^ being alike exempt from the fear of (...) learning, and hope of
future Bene^ they press forward and attain to (...) Knowledge of Things with
wonder expedition and accuracy. And t^ Younger they are, the more capable (...)
they of receiving Instruction, but A and Experience must improve the^ Early
Plants naturally take the surest a^ deepest root, and with great vigor a^
force attract the Virtues of the Earth (...) their Nourishment; and being dres^
and cultivated by the industrious H^ bandman, the good Juices soon grow ^ong,
insomuch that they will over^me the Weeds themselves.

Upon this Consideration, of the won^rful Nature and Aptitude of the Soul
receive any thing that shall be offered it, it appears of what Importance it
is, ^at particular care be taken to sow good ^ed at first. That if Parents
neglect to ^ant, Children will do it themselves: or the Soul will not be empty,
Empti^ess having no Being in Nature. So that you do not teach and show them
good ^ethods and Precepts, they will soon ^arn evil ones: For their whole
Em^oyment and Business is, to learn and ^itate what they see and hear. As we
^ave observed before, all Languages and Tongues are alike to them; the one is
as ^asie as the other: but that which the Child first learns, takes the deepest
root, and gets the government over all the ^est. So that it is in the Power of
the Mother, if she be a Linguist, to make Latin, or any other Tongue, the
Mo^her-Tongue, as well as English; and it ^ill be as easy, natural and
familiar for ^he Child to imitate her in three or four several Languages, as
one: Likewise, arrive at a proper and distinct Meth^ of Speaking, if the
Mother, Nurse, (...) whoever has the Care of the Child committed to them, be a
Person so qualify and accomplished. Which is also to b^ understood of the
attaining to all other Arts and Sciences.

Hence it follows, That the Female ought to have the principal and best
Education, they being the first Planters o^ Tutors, having the Children always
with them, whom they will imitate and observe. Besides, Women have a wonderful
Dignification in their Natures and Complexions; God having implanted Modesty in
their Constitution, which i^ the Foundation of all Excellence and Virtue. They
are of a quick, penetrating Fancy, apt to comprehend any thing that is fine or
curious, as the Ar^ of Housewifery, Needle Work, Painting, Music, Writing,
etc. In these things no Man can exceed them, if they have timely and proper
Education and Instruction; being both by their Genius and Complexions naturally
adapted for al^ easy Employments, and curious Arts: the Males are to Tillage,
the Manage^ent of Cattle, Building, and all Employments that require greater
Force and ^trength of Body to perform; which ^he Females ought by no means to
un^ertake, or meddle with.

Now, if the Women were thus instructed themselves, how easy and natural would
it be for them to begin an^ teach their Children all excellent Things, even
from the very Cradle? Wi^h how little difficulty might they temper and regulate
the Methods of their Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and Waking? For I must tell
you, That Sobriety, Temperance, and Cleanness, are taught even as any Art or
Science, though with much more Ease, and ^ess Fatigue, and with unconceivably
more Success and Benefit. Use and Practice are the Life and Spirit that give
Virtue and Skill to all Persons whatsoever. If the Children see no Disorderly
nor Intemperate Examples, but have the Representation and Character of the
contrary Virtues continually placed before their Eyes, they will undoubtedly
conform themselves to that Image, in Practice and Imitation. If these Truths
were thoroughly believed, and right^ managed, what an Healthy Off-spri^ should
we have, every way adorned wi^ Virtue, and the Knowledge of all use^ and
excellent Things? Thus you see ho^ much it depends upon the Care and Sk^ of
Parents, Tutors Nurses, etc. to for the Souls of Children, and make the^ what
they please to have them. Wha^ ever they see or hear, they will practio^ Do but
show them the Way of Virtue and hide from them the contrary Pat^ they will walk
in it, whether you wi^ or no, to the end of their Lives The^ will never depart
from such deep-roote^ Laws, and so timely implanted Precept^ For the Soul takes
the Biass and Tur^ of its future Inclinations from those fir^ and early
Impressions.

It is likewise to be considered, Tha^ Children ought not to be kept to any
Employment, or Art, too long: For the Humane Soul being compounded and endued
with the Nature of all Things (as we have before mentioned,) cause^ all People
to delight in Variety, it being most like her self; but especially Children do
mightily press after, and lov^ Variety, and there is nothing more ^rateful to
their juvenile and unbounded ^ancies. So that they will never dwell ^ong upon
any thing, nor be confined, ^ith Pleasure, even to that Sport or ^lay they seem
to take most delight in, ^urther than their own voluntary Incli^ations shall
sway and induce them. Be^ides, it would extremely dull and perolex, their
Understandings, and retund ^he tender Acumen of their Wit and Spirit. But when
they come to Years of Discretion, (as they call it,) they will apply themselves
closer and longer to some ^ne particular Employment, or Study; because then
Custom, Reason, and Self-^nterest, engage and persuade them ^o it.

Moreover, as any one sort of Grain, too often sown on any one piece of Land,
without Intermission, exhausts ^ts strength, and makes it weak, so that ^it
will bear but a poor Crop; because every sort of Grain does draw and attract
from the Earth a proper Juice suitable to the Nourishment of its own Body: For
which reason the prudent Husbandman will often change his Seed, to give the
Ground variety; by which means h^ obtains a fruitful and plentiful Cro^ every
Year, if other Causes do not im^ pede. The like must be conceived o^ the Humane
Ground. For Variety i^ the very Foundation and Compositio^ of our Lives;
nothing conduces more to the Health and Prosperity of Man^ kind, nor is more
agreeable to the Nature of Man, than Change of Diet, Exercise and Employment.

Besides, Children are more Inquisitive^ by many Degrees, and more violently
desirous of Knowledge the five first Years of their Age, than afterward; for
their Souls and Minds are, as it were; empty, and long to be filled; which
naturally moves the Spirit to Industry, and a^ Desire after Knowledge. But so
soon as those green Years are past, and the Fancy is filled up with the false
and mistaken Notions of Custom and Tradition, Men become, as it were, full and
satiated; more or. less dull and stupid, and consequently unapt to incline to
the Study of any sort of curious Learning. For this reason it is, That whatever
a Child is taught to imitate at Three or Four Years of Age, (it is to be
understood of ^ound and Healthy Children, which ^ost would be, were the Rules
before ^rescribed to Women, duly observed,) ^akes double the root, and makes
deeper ^mpressions upon them than what they ^re taught at Five; and that at
Five, double to what they are taught at Ten; and so on proportionably till
Fifty or Sixty Years of Age. For, as Persons grow up into Years, their Souls
and Minds are not only filled up and sullied with the irregular Dictates of
invete^ate Custom; but the Natural and Animal Spirits become muddy and impure,
whereby the Apprehension and Understanding are less quick and penetrating. For
the Fineness and Thinness of the Spirits, begets Acuteness of Wit, and supplies
the Fancy with more Curious and Noble Images of Things; seeing the finer any
Man's Spirits are, the more capable he is of understanding the Mysteries of
Arts and Sciences.

From hence it is evident, That Order and Method do mightily strengthen and
advance the Humane Nature, and render all Persons that observe them, more ready
and adapt to learn, than such a^ live Irregular Lives; especially Children who,
through the Fineness and Tenderness of their Spirits, cannot endure the
over-charging of Nature, without manifest Detriment and Prejudice. So that
those Parents, Tutors, etc. that press them on to a Debauch, or permit or
encourage them to Eat or Drink, or use any Exercise, beyond what the Necessity
of Nature exacts are guilty of horrid Impiety against God, manifest Breach of
Trust toward the Children, and accountable for all the sad Consequences of so
fatal a Miscarriage.

Again, Since Children, at first, do all that they do by Example and Imitation,
it must of necessity be the indispensible Duty of all Parents, or Others with
whom the Charge of their Education is entrusted, to be industriously careful
that they neither hear nor see any Unseemly Action. Such Precedents will be
quickly Copied and Transcribed by them, and in a short time be so deeply fixed
in the Imagination that all the Art and Pains they can administer shall never
be able totally to deface or remove them.

And if ever they would have their Children to bear any Character in the World,
and do any thing to Purpose, ^hey must be sure to avoid that foolish
Half-speaking and Lisping, when they would prattle with them, and divert them.
It is impossible to believe what Damage they do their Children by this absurd
and abominable Practice, pronouncing their Words by halves, and not one in an
hundred properly and truly as it ought to be; thereby putting the Children to a
double and treble Task and Inconvenience; first, by their own Example, fondly
instilling into them an huddle of imperfect and broken: Nonsense; and then,
after they have discerned the Folly and Mischief of stocking them with such
Trash, ridiculously hoping to make them unlearn it again by Whipping and
Beating them. They ought to be used to plain Discourses, and Words properly,
fully and distinctly pronounced; not with a grinning kind of Smile, and comic
Distortion of the Visage; but in a grave, folemn manner, and with a sedate and
calm Countenance, even as you would propound Questions, and male Answer to a
Judg^ or Senator. For when they are used t^ such a pertinent and handsome way o^
Speaking, they will apply their utmo^ Diligence to imitate and practice the
same. For it is the same thing to the Child, both as easy and natural to speak
Words distinct and pertinent, as lisping and abrupt. Many Children have reason
to condemn their Governors and Nurses, all the Days of their Life, for those
manifold Inconveniences they are exposed to by an uncomfortable Imperfection in
the Utterance of their Speech.

Their Governors also are sedulously to instruct them to avoid all Passion,
Anger and Violence; and as much as lies in their Power, keep them from seeing
any Acts of that nature. There is a contagious Infection in them, that ought as
carefully to be shunned, as the Plague or Leprosy. They ought to acquaint and
make their Pupils sensible, not only of the Danger, but also of the Ugliness
and Deformity of such preposterous and irregular Inclinations. Their Peace in
this World, and Happiness in the next, entirely depend upon it. All the
Preaching, Precept and Practice of our Great Lawgiver, tended to this End; to
in^ulcate into his Disciples a Principle of Meekness, Love and Unity; to
exercise a mutual Charity and Forbearance ^owards one another. A compassionate
Forgiveness of one another's Faults, is the highest Conquest we can gain over
our selves, and the nearest Approach we can make to Heaven; and the Occasions
of it, is the fairest Field Christianity has to display her self in with her
true and proper Colors. -- Ecce quam Christiani Amant! Behold how the
Christians Love! -- was the Heathen Persecutors Saying, of old, and ought to be
the Motto and Character of all that would be called Christians now. Therefore
our Great Master said unto Peter, Put up thy Sword: My Kingdom is not of this
World. Nothing but Peace, Love, and Concord, can open the Gates into those
blessed Realms of Light and Love. Except therefore the first Sallies and
Motions of the Soul toward these Irregularities be corrected and reformed,
nothing but the most fatal and irremediable Mischief will ensne. It is, I
confess, a Work of great Difficulty; yet that should not discourage our
Endeavors: nay, it is in the Infancy of our Children, if ever, that we can
reasonably hope for Success. Besides, the Practice of these Vices, rencounters
the Economy of the whole Creation: For all things both in the Animal,
Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, do proceed from one Ground; and though the
Multitude and Variety of them be beyond any humane Number, yet Each and Every
of them do, in one degree or another, contain the true Nature and Property of
the Whole; and in Man they have their Central Being and Existence, though not
in all alike, but in some one Quality is strong, in others another; from whence
proceeds Men's Difference in Dispositions, Inclinations, Love, and Hatred; but
the Property which is strongest in the Radix, ever sways and governs the whole
Life.

There is another base and depraved Custom too frequently used, viz. To scare
and affright Children with horrid and terrible Names; thinking thereby to bring
them to their Lure, and make them quietly comply with what they would have
them, not considering of what mischievous Consequence it is to the Child to
have its tender Soul so alarmed and prepossessed with such monstrous Images of
Things as keep Nature in a perpetual Agitation and Trembling. If the Child's
Soul be of a strong and vigorous Complexion, you thereby awaken the Seeds of
Envy, Hatred, Malice, and many other surly Dispositions; and so by mistakenly
endeavoring to lay One Devil, you raise a Thousand in his room. But if the
Soul be of a soft, meek, and gentle Temper, you utterly confound and ruin it.
It shall never be Master of one Regular Thought, and by consequence never
produce an Handsome and Commendable Action. It shall be eternally subjected to
doubt: Irresolute in its Designs, and Wavering in its Attempts. For those
Terrors and Amazements awaken the Internal or Central Spirits and Powers of
Nature; which incorporating and joining with their Similes, become, as it were,
Consubstantiate with the Soul; insomuch, that those dreadful Conceptions which
they formed in their Childhood, will never wholly depart; but though, for a
time, by a vigorous Exercise, and use of Reason, they may seem to be conquered,
yet upon any sudden Accident of Danger or Disaster, their Fears shall start out
a-fresh, and they shall soon be discerned to be yet under the Dominion of their
Youthful Terrors. Which timorous sort of Disposition, how Unfit it is for the
Business of the World, and how Fatal it has proved to many that have been
subjected to it, need not be insisted on; what we have already said, may be
sufficient to convict this abominable Practice of Ignorance, Cruelty and
Madness.

Another very great Evil and Prejudice to Children, is, To suffer them to play
up and down promiscuously at all all sorts of Sports, and with all sorts of
Play-fellows. Is it not lamentable, for Parents to let their Children throw
away that part of their Time in idle, fruitless and dangerous Exercises, that
is the only proper Season for them to learn the Rudiments of Virtue and
Knowledge in? For One Hour well employed, from Three Years of Age to Seven, is
of more avail toward the true learning of any one Art or Science, than Ten,
when they come to a maturer Age, (as they call it.) If they are not well and
thoroughly grounded then, it will be very difficult to improve and accomplish
them, when they come to riper Years. It is then the Seeds of True Knowledge and
Philosophy ought to be sown, if ever they expect to reap any Fruit from them
hereafter. Besides, the foolish and juvenile Pastimes fill the Imagination with
strange Images and Conceptions of Things, that like so many rank and useless
Weeds interrupt and divert the growth of Real Knowledge, and True Literature;
corrupting the Ground so much, that it will hardly be able to nourish and bring
forth any thing of Esteem and Value. Would it not raise a Man's Spleen with
Indignation, to hear an old doting Sot of a Father, cry out of his Son, This
Blockhead will never come to any thing: There is not such a Dunce again upon
the Face of the whole Earth: It has cost me the Lord knows what, and yet I can
make him learn nothing: I can make him understand nothing that is said to him.
Alas! Old Fool, why did not you begin sooner with him? Why did you suffer him
to squander away the best part of his Time in Idleness and Folly? Oh, then he
was an arch Young Rogue, a Witty, Forward Child, and you would warrant he would be no
Fool, if he lived; but now he is a mere Booby, a Dunce, and a Block-head. Take
him for your Pains, Old Gray-bearded Dotard! You may thank your self for all
this, and your Child is bound to Curse you.

Moreover, there are other ill Effects that attend this Custom. Their Sports
are oftentimes, especially if from under the Eye of their Parents and Tutors,
etc. so rude and boisterous, that they over-doe their own Strength, and in a
violent pursuit after their Play, strain it to a pitch many Degrees above their
Ability, to the extreme Prejudice, and often the irrecoverable Damage of their
Limbs and Body; which perhaps, though not presently discovered, yet if they
live, succeeding Years will give them many sharp and troublesome Remembrances of
it. Like the Effects of Hardships, and Youthful Colds, that will not be forgot
in the Winter of Old Age. Thus it is evident, what a disastrous and Calamitous
Influence these irregular Methods have both upon Mind and Body.

Now, those that would really promote their Childrens Welfare, and their own
Peace, must consult the Degrees and Abilities of Nature, else they will soon
run themselves into great Inconveniences. The Bodies and Spirits of Children
are young and tender, so that they cannot endure hard and laborious Exercises,
without the Imputation of manifest Folly and Damage to their Health. For all
Labor, or Exercise, ought to be measured in Proportion to the Strength of the
Body and Mind: so that those appointed for Children, ought to be gentle and
easy, such as will not strain the Body, nor dull the Spirit, together with a
simple Temperate Diet, rather partaking of Moisture than Dryness; because their
Growth requires more liquid Matter, by reason of their implanted Heat and Fire,
than maturer Age. Besides, those rustic and laborious Exercises do mightily
offend and retard the Growth of Childrens Limbs, far more than most People do
imagine.

Hence appears the Necessity of Teaching Children, from Three Years old, and
upwards, some easy and useful Things, instead of their idle and impertinent
Games and Sports, such as Music, Painting, Housewifery, etc. Also, to instruct
them to Read and Speak Properly and Distinctly, to implant in them the Seeds of
Virtue and Good Manners; likewise to Walk Straight and Upright, to Run
handsomely, and to make True and Proper Steps. This would be a great Ornament,
and of good Service to them, when they arrive to a more mature and adult Age:
It would cut off a great deal of their superfluous Time, and employ it much
better, and more advantageously than is generally practiced. Moreover, it would
soon discourage and discountenance the ill Custom of sending Children to be
instructed at public Dancing-Schools; where they many times receive more
Prejudice in a Month, than they can repair or remove, perhaps, all their Lives
after. For it should be the Care of Mothers and Nurses, to order the Gaite, and
direct the Steps of the Children; wherein if they are well instructed at first,
they will observe the same for ever. For by neglect of this it is, That so many
Men and Women make such an Odd and Clownish Figure in their Walking and Moving;
sometimes their Steps are too thick, sometimes too short, and sometimes too
long; with some extraordinary and irregular Motions of their Backs and Hips, as
if their Legs were too weak to support the weight of their Body; with many
other unseemly Postures; which might more easily and less chargeably be
prevented, were the Directions we prescribe but followed and observed. For it
is to be noted, That ill Postures, and other Habits, if they are taken up
betimes, become so strong and powerfully grafted in the Disposition, that it is
almost impossible to root them out, or unteach them again. This is an
undeniable Truth; and it is a thousand times better, if possible, that Children
should remain in an entire and and absolute Indifference and Neutrality,
without learning or doing any thing at all, than to be taught or suffered to
imitate preposterous Methods. For if the Child be born with Straight, Sound,
and Proportionable Limbs, there is but one True, Proper, and Handsome way of
Going; which they may be as easily taught and brought to, as they are to Speak,
provided a little Care and Pains be taken with them in the due time: For in the
Beginning every thing is alike to the Child, and one thing as soon learned as
another.

Neither should Children, by any means, be permitted to Ieer or Laugh at any
Person's Deformity either in Mind or Body. It is a vain and lewd Practice, and
generally tolerated; nay, you shall see a parcel of Old Fools stand by, and
please themselves extremely, to hear Children Revile and Reproach one another.
These are things that of all others, ought to be severely corrected and
punished. If once they are encouraged to Back-bite, Envy, Defame, or Belie one
another, there is no hopes of them; they will be Devils in spite of your Teeth.
For these are the Seeds of all Abomination, and will, upon Occasion, as they
grow up, break out into the most unlawful and criminal Enormities: Theft,
Murder, Blasphemy, Treachery, Dissimulation, Lying, Perjury, and all manner of
accursed Villainy, are the Offspring of such an unatural and unchristian
Connivance and Tolleration. It Is for want of Parents and Nurses taking care
timely to reform and destroy these mischievous Seeds of Vice that so many,
every Month, ride backwards up Holbourn-hill, to Tyburn.

We may say, That through Ignorance and Inconsideration, most People do, as it
were, entice and play their Children into all manner of Vice, laying such early
Foundations of Wickedness; which meeting with suitable Occasions, in time, grow
so strong, that they are never able to shake them off, or withstand them: all
which might, at first, with a little Prudence and Care, have been prevented.
For in lieu of these, they might with great Facility and Pleasure, have been
taught all sorts and kinds of Virtue, and Degrees of Temperance, the Fear of
God, Arts Sciences and Language, several useful and easy Works about
Houshold-Affairs; the Names, Virtues and Uses of Herbs and Plants; to
distinguish which are proper for Food, and which for Medicine; the Managing of
Gardens, and Art of Husbandry, with a thousand o^her-Employments more
honorable and more diverting than their idle Sports and Games, which they
usually practice, and whereof they are capable to a very high degree; and then,
in a short time, these little Seize, with small Industry, will grow to
very great Improvements, and accomplish them to bear the Character of Excellent
Persons in the World.

There are many other Enormities and great Evils, that Parents (even those of
the Best and Soberest sort) are guilty of, in the Education of there Children.
For, First, Though they will not allow them to run about the Streets, and play
promiscuously with the crowd of other Children, (which indeed is extremely
commendable,) yet at Home, in their own Houses, they use all possible Methods
to destroy and ruin them, by continually suffering them to stuff their little
Paunches with all sorts of Dainties, and richly compounded Meats and Drinks,
over-charging them both in Quantity and Quality; which undermines the very
Basis of Health, there being very few of so sturdy and strong Constitutions,
that are not wounded by it in one degree or another. What is this, but laying a
sure and lasting Foundation for Gluttony and Idleness? Secondly, They give them
all sorts of Liberty, Commanding their Servants to Humor and Obey them in all
their foolish and extravagant Whimsies; by which means they never or seldom
arrive at any true Discernment of Things, being indulged in every thing that
their extravagant Imaginations can conceive, or their undisciplined Appetites
desire. They very rarely put them to any kind of the abovementioned Exercises
or Employments; neither do they take care to set themselves before them as
Precedents of Temperance and Frugality, taking delight to see them hector and
domineer over those that wait upon and attend them; by which means they become
Haughty, Ambitious and Surly to all that are beneath them (as they conceive) in
Birth or Estate; given to Passion, Gluttony, Ebriety and Laziness; whereas they
ought to have the contrary Virtues of Affability, Courtesy, and Generosity,
founded even in their very Natures and Constitutions; which infinitely more
become and adorn a Noble Birth, and Fair Fortune, than an ill-natured and
untractable Pride. Besides, a nice and fond Education does, as it were,
suffocate and destroy all Knowledge, and True Understanding, even in the very
bud; and chiefly advances Folly and Ignorance, the greatest Evils in the World;
for where Folly and Ignorance join, (and they can never be separated,) pray
what Expectation can there be of any Great or Honorable Production? The Fruit
must of necessity be bad, when all within the Trunk of the Tree, the very Sap
it self, is poisoned and corrupt. For there are very small Hopes of that
Person's doing any thing to purpose, who has once indulged himself to an Habit
of Idleness.

Consider a while the wonderful Active Powers of God, the mavelous Operations
of Nature, the daily Motions of the Celestials, the glorious Company of Stars,
their Rising and Setting; the Variety of their Luster, Courses and
Configurations. Behold the Rivers and Streams of Water laboring continually,
though in in a long and difficult Progress, to pay their Tribute to the Ocean;
and the Ocean again, by industrious Tides, Fluxes, and Refluxes, striving to
supply the Land. Observe how the Sun, the bright Luminary of Heaven, by his
Circulations, and Mysterious Powers, does not only give Life and Being to all
Elemental Things, but exhales Moisture from Below, and wonderfully bottles it
up in the Clouds till the appointed Time, and then returns it, with Interest,
to refresh and replenish the Earth. There is no such thing as Idleness among
all the Works of God. An idle Person is none of God's Creature. Should the
Primum Mobile stand still but an Hour, the World would be at an End, and the
whole Globe of the Universe fall into its Original Chaos. All the
Accommodations of Life are procured by Labor; nay, Life it self cannot be
otherwise maintained: The Blood must be always in Circulation; and the Pulse,
Nature's Clock, continually striking: The Stomach must labor hard in her
Kitchen, to prepare and separate Aliment for the other Parts. You see then,
that there is nothing idle a Moment in the Greater or Lesser World: How much
then is it the Duty of Parents and Tutors, etc. to see that Children are
constantly and commendably employed; Idleness being a manifest Breach of the
Command of God, and an open Contradiction to the whole Course and Operation of
Nature? It is the Mother of all Oppression and Violence; an Inlet to all Sin
and Wickedness; and never goes alone, but is attended with a black train of
horrid and abominable Vices; rendering Men subject to the dominion of the gross,
inferior and spiteful Powers, and evil Demons, who incessantly prompt them on
to commit all kinds of Outrages against God, Man, and Beasts.

From hence have all unlawful Sports and Games their rise; such as Cards, Dice,
Billiards, Lotteries, Whimsie-boards, Stage Plays, Drolls, Hunting, Hawking,
Prize-playing, Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Cock-fighting, wanton and lascivious
Dancing, Racing, etc. with a thousand other Vanities that Parents and Elder
People, by their own Practice, teach their Children, whereof some are Rude,
Rustic, Unmanly, and Unseemly; others Cruel, Bloody, and Oppressive; others
Mean, Base, and Effeminate: but all Sinful and Detestable, and ought to be
condemned to the darkest and deepest Pit of Hell. And all this, forsooth, must
be excused with the ridiculous Name of Pastime: As if our Time, which is the
greatest Blessing we have, were so intolerable a Burden, that we must be
beholden to the Devil's Invention to help it off our Hands: Surely we shall,
one day, find, That all we had, was but little enough to do our Duty in.

Now, when I speak of Idleness, it is not to be understood of an utter
insensible Stupidity of Soul and Body, a state of absolute Inactivity, or the
doing nothing at all; but the doing of Evil, or that which Children ought not
to do; which is the worst sort of Idleness: for, in the other sense, there is
scarce any thing Idle in the whole Course of Nature. If Children be not
exercised in some useful Art and Things tending to Virtue, they will be always
doing the contrary. For in their First and Second Age, which is from their
Birth to Seven Years of Age, and from thence to Fourteen, their Spirits are
extraordinarily brisk and airy: Their Imaginations and Desires cannot stand
still, but will be endeavoring to penetrate into the Knowledge of Things. Upon
which account, good and wholesome Examples ought to be set before them: Their
particular Tasks ought to be assigned them, that they may betimes learn to
dress the Gardens of their Souls, and sortifie them against the over-spreading
Weeds of Vice and Ignorance, and keep their Bodies clean from Diseases and
Distempers. For Idleness and Ignorance are the most inhumane Tyrants in the
World; and Mankind's greatest Enemies, which this present Age has brought into
great Favor and Esteem: And because they are resolved to have their Children
entirely under their Subjection, most Parents accustom 'em to 'em even from
their Birth; and as soon as they beg^n to Speak, fill their Heads with a
Rhapsody of idle Prattle, Nonsense and Lies; and so, as it were, erect a School
in their own Houses for the Nurture of Ignorance and Vice, and take no Pains to
inform and instruct them in the Rudiments of Virtue and true Knowledge.

It is a grand Mistake, not to begin to teach Children any thing of Value till
they are Eight or Ten Years of Age: As if they ought to commence then, when
they should almost have done Learning. They are early and timely Plants that
take surest root, and thrive amain, (as the Experience of all Mankind can
testify.) In India they teach their Children to Spin fine Callico's and
Muslins at Three Years old: Nor could they ever bring them to Perfection, did
they begin later. Italy abounds with fine Painters; and Holland and England,
with curious Spinners of Thread and Wool: In which Arts, all that have any
Reputation, are very earlily instructed. Pray tell me, What Excellence can Age
attain to, in Writing, Reading, Speaking Languages, Music, Painting, etc. if
there have not been first some youthful Instruction implanted in them? It is a
certain Truth, That the sooner we begin, the surer and better Progress we are
like to make.

It is no wonder then, that the Princes, and Great Men of this World, are so
mightily given up to Wrath, Fierceness, and Fighting; when we consider, they
are bred to it from their very Cradles. As soon as they can handle a Sword,
they must have a small one provided; and when the Child shall in the least
degree imitate any Warlike and Fierce Action, his Tutor and People about him
praise him to the Skies; I Will warrant (say they) my little Master will be a
General before he dies. Then, when he is able to Ride, a Horse must be bought,
with Holsters and Pistols, and all other proper Furniture; so his little
Lordship must be forthwith mounted. Now his Ears are open to nothing but War
and Battles; he dreams of nothing but Fighting, Killing and Conquering; all the
Discourse about him, is of nothing but Armies and Sieges, of Battalions and
Squadrons, of Trenches, Bastions, Half-Moons, Parapets, and Counterscarps, with
such impertinent Iargon, that the little Warrier fancies himself already in the
Battle, just now a going to enter the Breach, and the Town's our own. By such
Methods as these, they animate and excite the Spirit of the Child, and stir up
the Seeds of Fierceness and Wrath in his Soul; which they ought, with the
greatest Care imaginable, to suppress and mollify. Thus all Children are
taught, from their Infancy, the Trade of Killing; and by practicing on
Inferior Creatures, arrive, by degrees, to the Perfection of Murder, in
killing of Men. This makes so many rash Young Men leave an honest and
profitable Trade, where they have all Things convenient and necessary, to run
heedlessly in the Wars of Princes; blindly, though voluntarily, submitting
themselves to almost intolerable Fatigues and Hardships, opening their Breasts
to Guns and Swords; and yet, after all, if they offer to quit their Colors,
they are sure to be Hanged, having bound themselves Apprentice to the worst
sort of Slavery in the World. And this also makes the Gentlemen leave their
Wives and Children, and all the Delights and Enjoyments of their Estates, to
travel into foreign Countries, and there fight like mad, and venture their
Lives against those they never had any Quarrel with. Now, I say, if Men are not
well fraighted with good store of this unlucky Commodity called Wrath, it would
be impossible for them to Act as they do, contrary to all Humanity, and True
Virtue: but the Power of Education is very great, and captivates all Mankind in
one degree or other.

Therefore, of whatever Spirit Fathers, Mothers, Tutors, etc. would have their
Children to be, let them take care to sow the Seeds thereof betimes in the
Child's Soul. Would you have your Child to Love and Fear God? You may easily do
it, to what Degree you please, provided he does not hear nor see contrary
Examples. Would you have him Temperate in Meats and Drinks? Then accustom him
to proper Quantities and agreeable Qualities in his Diet. Would you have him
Hardy, Strong and Healthy? Then use mean Foods, and give them in Order, and
with constant Exercise proportionable to the Strength of the Child. Or, Would
you have him a Curious and Excellent Artist? Then keep him constant to the
Practice of that Art, and where he may always see Examples of the same. The
like is to be understood of all other Things.

Some Rules concerning Proper FOODS for Children.
IT is agreed on by all prudent Men, That simple Meats and Drinks are most
friendly and acceptable to Nature, and Healthier than those that are rich, and
compounded of various Ingredients, but more-especially for the tender Nature of
Children. Did Mothers and Nurses truly understand and consider what was most
agreeable to the Simplicity of Nature, this Age would be happy; and the Pains
and Trouble of Bringing-up Children would hardly be felt. If their Foods were
made of Corn, as Gruel made of Oatmeal; Water-Pap, which is made only of
Wheat Flour and Water, with a little Salt and Bread in it; their Children
would be, for the most part, Plump, Brisk, Strong and Lively. When the Child is
Costive, then Water Gruel, with more or less Flower'd-Pap, eating a little
Bread and Salt with it, is very good and proper. This sort of Food is not only
Healthier than Pap made of Milk, but much more Strong, and every way more
substantial. It generates better Blood, and causes a more free and undisturbed
Circulation. For I affirm, If Children should never have any other Food for the
first Seven Years of their Age, than Water Gruel, and Pap made with Flower,
Bread, and Salt; their Constitutions would be much healthier and firmer, free
from innumerable Diseases wherewith thousands are now tormented; withal, adding
good Spring Water for their Drink.

The World is not so grossly mistaken in any thing, as in the due Preparation
of Meats and Drinks, especially as they relate to Children. Nothing is a
greater Evil than Ignorance. All Meats and Drinks that are rich and delicate,
are not in the least agreeable to the Nature of Children; such as Milk-Foods
mixed with Sugar and Spices; also Butter and Cheese, if not eaten sparingly:
all Fish, Flesh, and Foods wherein Eggs are mixed, as Custards, Cheese-cakes,
etc. are pernicious, especially to some Children; likewise Pies made with
unripe Fruit, mixed with Sugar, which must indeed be eaten sparingly.

But what unaccountable and preposterous Methods do we follow? Our Governors
Fondness and Ignorance destroys us. Mankind would be as Healthy as any other
Creature; and Healthier too, provided his Food was as natural and simple as
that of other Creatures. I say, and I affirm nothing but Matter of Fact, A Man
may do as good a Day's Work, nay, better too, that eats but a
Penny-half-penny's worth of Oatmeal made into thick Gruel, than he that stuffs
his Carcass with the greatest Varieties he can think on. A Gentleman of my
Acquaintance told me, That he lived for a Halfpenny a Day, on that sort of
Food, for 3 Months together. But be the Quantity what it will, I am sure a Man
may live very well on it; and be more Strong, Brisk, and Lively, than with Beef
and Mutton. Besides, if Childrens Diet were simple and natural, they would be
of larger Growth, finer and straiter Limbed, and every way more complete;
especially if their Exercises were gentle, and suited to their Strength. This
is evident, from the difference in Health and Strength between the Children of
Poor People, and those of Greater Persons.

Are there any People that have generally more or healthier Children than the
Scotch Women? Yet most of them live chiefly on Gruels made of Oatmeal; and
their Cawdles, when they Lye-in, are no better then Spoon-meats made of Oatmeal
and Water, sometimes boiling therewith a little Small-beer or Ale. Besides, in
those Northern Parts of the World, no People dandle, or carry their Children
less about in their Arms: They are compelled to it by their Poverty and Want,
being forced customarily to labor abroad in the Fields for their Livelihood,
as well as at Home; so that they have leisure to give but little more
Attendance on their Children, than just suckle and feed them at the usual
Times. For the constant carrying and lugging of Children about, is very
prejudicial to their Health, by oftentimes over-heating the Blood; especially
if Elder and Stronger Persons take upon them that Office; for by an
unaccountable Sympathy, they powerfully attract those fine Spirits from the
Child, which would abundantly nourish and strengthen it. For Children being
Tender in their Constitution, and their Spirits Volatile, every little Disorder
inflames and precipitates them into Feavourish Indispositions; from whence
proceeds a long train of other troublesome Diseases: (which I have often
labored to acquaint Mankind with, to very little purpose; so much is
inveterate Custom too powerful for me.)

Children are likewise very much prejudiced by lying in Bed with Old Persons;
and being kept too Hot, whereby they become Uneasy and Froward. For if things
were rightly and orderly managed, there would not be so much Business and
Perplexity to tend upon Four or Five Children, as there is now upon One. They
are preposterous in all their Methods; they over-Feed them, over-Cloath them,
over. Tend them, and over-Bind them: And in other respects they are as much
remiss as they exceed in this. If the generality of Women would but exercise
the least grain of Sense or Wisdom, or if their Infallible Doctors would be so
kind as to tell them the Truth, they might quickly give themselves more Ease,
and their Children more Health. Where there is no Order, there can be no good
Effect, but every thing tends to Division and Irregularity. If they will
observe no proper Methods, but do every thing without Order or Discretion, they
must take what follows: For the Child will do every thing it is accustomed to;
and that Custom that comes nearest the simplicity of Nature, will soonest and
easiest be embraced. If the Child be used to Suck and Feed at such and such
certain times of the Day and Night, it will soon be contented with it, and
expect no other Treatment.

There is another thing commonly practiced by Mothers and Nurses, every way as
ridiculous and hurtful as any of the rest; and that is, Whenever the Child is
out of humor, or any thing is amiss, presently to clap the Breast or a Spoon
into the Mouth of it; so inhumanely forcing it to Suck or Eat: Which, instead
of Quieting the Child, does the more Disorder it; and though, perhaps, not for
the present, yet afterward they shall find the Effects. For, the too often
Eating, when Nature does not require, must of necessity disturb, heat and
burden the whole Body. A lamentable piece of egregious Folly this, and never
enough to be exposed! Would it not look odly, if when a Man or Woman is out of
humor, or any thing else is the matter, they should immediately fall to Eating
and Drinking, when perhaps they have been at Dinner not above an Hour before?

There is another thing, of great moment, to be observed; viz. That to begin to
teach Children betimes any Art, Science, or other Employment, and keeping them
moderately to it for the most part of the Day, generates Better and more Manly
Thoughts in them; improves the Natural Genius, constantly supplying it with
good Notions, so that they become more Serious and Thoughtful: For, Necessity
is the Mother of Invention; which is ever increased by Exercise and Practice.
Now, at Play there is no such Necessity, but Children ramble from one thing to
another; and are no further obliged, than their own Fancy inclines them. For,
Constraint to any thing, dulls their Parts, fatigues and incapacitates them for
the learning of those things they stand most in need to know. This sort of
Instruction would abundantly advance and beget Frugality and Order, even to a
Miracle. For having obtained their Knowledge by their Pains and Industry, it
would be as valuable to them as an Estate or Money procured by a Man's own Toil
and Labor. So innumerable are the Advantages that would hereby accrue, that it
is impossible to do any more than hint at the many Benefits and Virtues that
result from an Early, Prudent, and Well-methodized Education. There would be
little Reason then to reflect, That Boys and Girls play away that Time with
Drums and Babies, which they might employ to more profitable Uses, and turn to
a far better Account. And the Reason hereof is evident; Because (as we have
already demonstrated) they do all Things by Example and Imitation. Having
before no Prepossession, or Prejudice, they must of necessity own that for
their Sovereign, and be subjected to its Conduct.

Methods and Institutions of a SCHOOL, for the advantageous Education of Young
Persons, Proposed.
FIRST, There must be a Skilful Master, or Governor.

1. One that has been well acquainted with the World, and knows the Mystery and
Intrigue of it. He must, in general, be a good Natural Philosopher; and have
some Knowledge of the Mathematics, and Astronomy; together with a competent
measure of Ethics, which is the Life of all. In short, He must be a Person
able to bear the Character he undertakes, and instruct the Inferior Tutors and
Assistants in all the particular Methods that contribute to the Promotion of
Learning, Virtue, and True Knowledge. It is not much insisted on, whether he
took his Degrees at the University; and his Learning (as to point of
Scholarship) is less to be regarded than his Discretion. For as the greatest
Scholars are not always the best Preachers, so neither are the Academicks ever
the best Tutors.

2. There must be a Sub-Tutor under the Governor, that can speak Latin and
French readily and properly. But if one that is a general Master of both
Languages cannot be found, there must be two chosen, one for each.

3. Twice a Week a Musick-Master must come and teach those that are willing to
learn that Science. There must be one in the School that understands it also,
to hear and keep them to their Business, and Tune their Instruments. Likewise a
Painter must come twice a Week, to instruct and give Patterns to such Children
whose Inclinations lead 'em to practice that Art.

4. Now, when such Masters are provided as are every way accomplished for this
purpose, you must proceed in a regular Order and Method: Which will not only
make all Learning easy to the Children, but also to the Masters and Tutors.

5. Take Ten or Twenty Children, from Three Years old, to Five or Six at most,
who are not to be suffered to speak one Word of English, but all keep silence
and observe: And as much as may be, the Master and Tutors must make it their
Business continually to speak Latin and French to them, commanding them to do
this, and fetch that: And when the Children do not understand them, they are to
teach them by Example, doing and fetching the thing themselves. By this means
they will understand the Names of most things about the House, in Six Weeks, or
Two Months; and in the interim, they must be taught to Read the Languages they
learn: So that in a Year's time they shall all speak both Latin and French, as
well as any Children shall do English at that Age. And when these first
Children speak the Tongues, then all that are admitted into the School will
naturally learn it of Course, by Conversation and Reading, as easily as any
learns English from their Mothers, etc. Nay, they shall Speak it better, and
more properly Pronounce it, than most Children do their Mother Tongue.

6. The Maids, and Nurses, and other Servants, shall not speak any other Tongue
but what is learned and taught in the School; and before they arrive to it,
they shall be silent, and do all things by Signs.

7. The Day shall be divided into so many Parts as the Children learn Arts or
Things. The Master and Tutors shall neither Whip, Beat, nor show Anger or
Passion toward any Child, be he never so dull: But instead of such Correction,
shall take the dull Child aside, and Commend and Praise him for his Endeavors;
inform him how many Men of mean Birth have advanced themselves to a Noble Pitch
of Eminence and Glory, by their Learning, Virtue and Sobriety; and by these
Means they shall excite and prompt him on to an honorable Ambition and
Emulation. This, no doubt will have a good Effect: For both Wise Men and Fools
do a-like love to be Praised. But other Methods shall be used for the executing
of Justice, if at any time the Children become vicious and criminal; such as
shall not irritate the Spirit, or provoke Passion; which is a great Enemy to
the Souls and and Faculties of most Children, and too too frequently practiced
in most Schools; which will be wholly prevented by the good and regular Methods
we prescribe. For Order, when Children are accustomed to it, has as great Power
and Influence as Disorder.

8. The School shall be at some Distance from other Houses, or any Town, that
there may be no Communication between the Children of the School and other wild
Children; that they shall not know what Swearing, or any such frothy Discourse
is, or that there is any such thing in the World. And so of all other evil
Communication. So that it will be easy to govern them, when Order and Custom
have their free Influences; and where there is nothing else seen or known but
the Practice of Virtue, and Study of Learning.

9. In the Winter, the Children shall go to Bed at Seven a Clock at Night, and
Rise at Seven in the Morning; and in the Summer, at Eight at Night, and Rise at
Six in the Morning. For, above all things, Children should have Rest enough,
and Sleep enough; which does mightily strengthen and refresh Nature, and
renders them brisk and alart at their Learning.

10. As soon as they are up in the Morning, they shall spend one Hour in
Reading, and then eat their Breakfast: After which, such as love Music, shall
play and practice one Hour, and those that are for Painting, the like: The
others shall walk in Gardens for the same time with their Tutors, and discourse
of the Nature and Virtues of Herbs, P^ants, and Flowers, and of the Art of
Husbandry and Gardening, all in the Language they then learn; then they shall
all return into the School, and learn their Books for one Hour. After which,
they shall be instructed in the Business of the House, and the Art of
Oeconomicks; also the Manner and Preparation of the Food they have each day for
Dinner, and have the Reasons of every thing discovered to them. Then they shall
all go to Dinner; after which, in the Summer time, they shall rest an Hour and
a half, sitting silent in a Chair, where they may sleep, if they are inclined
to it, which will greatly enliven, and sit them for the Afternoons Business.
After which, they shall read half an Hour, or an Hour, and then such as are for
Painting or Music, must spend one Hour in the Exercise of those Arts, and in
the mean while the others shall be employed in Writing; Arithmetic, and
Accompting. When this is done, they shall be employed again in Gardening,
Planting, Sowing, Weeding, Digging, etc. Every one having a little Garden of
their own, which they shall be taught to Dress and Cultivate; and such as are
not capable of that Exercise, shall walk among the others, and learn from them
to do it themselves, always having their Tutors along with them: After which,
they shall walk, run, and play about for half an Hour, their Tutors carefully
observing that they do every thing with Decorum, and handsomely; for all those
Exercises that are performed by the Motion and Activity of the Body and Limbs,
are to be used in the Afternoon, or near the time of going to rest, and not
after Fullness, or Dinner, as the Custom is.

11. Thus they shall all learn Latin and French by Custom and Conversation; for
there shall be nothing else spoke in the School. Likewise they shall learn to
read the same Tongue, which may be done a quicker and easier way, than the
common Method, and by many degrees more to the purpose: For after any Child has
learned the Letters, this will not take up above three or four Months at the
most, to teach the dullest Capacity to read tolerably well, and in any Book,
and some Mercurial Children will learn it in half the time. This Method of ours
will be natural, and furnish the Child with more Variety of Words than the
common way; by this way they shall lay a Foundation for the Knowledge of all
things that are convenient and needful for Mankind to know. French and Latin
shall be as their Mother Tongue, and in two Years they shall speak and read,
and understand it perfectly, and withal, in the same time learn many useful
Arts and Sciences: The day being divided into several pairs, they shall easily
pass out of one thing into another, without any Weariness or Lassitude, by
which means it will be like Play to them; for it is called Play, because
Children do with pleasure pass from one thing to another of their own
Inclination. But if they were confined to it, they would find it very hard
Work, and be more unwilling to continue at it, than others that are put to the
study of any useful Art.

12. Now the learning and practicing several Arts, will mightily acquaint them
with the knowledge of Words; for every Art or Science has particular Terms and
Proprieties of Expression, adapted to it, which they will be obliged to
understand in the reading Books, French and Latin, that treat on those
Subjects, so that they will have but little need of a Dictionary, when they are
put to write, or discourse of the nature of Things, which many great Scholars
are forced to have recourse to.

13. Thus, when they have learnt to speak these Languages perfectly, then they
shall be taught the true Grammar of them, which will be easily done. For to
Speak is one thing, and the Art or Reason of Speaking is another. The first
must be done by Imitation and Practice, the other is the work of Time, and must
be improved by Degrees. They that learn the Art of Speaking before they can
Speak, invert the true Method, and as they say, put the Cart before the Horse;
and I do affirm, that if there be a true Method taken, the dullest Boy alive
may be taught to speak good Latin and French, as well as he has the use of his
Mother Tongue. No Man can speak any Language well, and discourse handsomely of
all things, but he that learns young, and by Conversation, all the Rules in the
World can never make him a Master afterward. All other Methods of Learning are
like the Mystery of the Lawyers, who have used all possible Skill and
Endeavors to make Honesty and Justice intricate, and hard to be understood,
which the plainest Man upon Earth knows perfectly, without being beholden to
their Books, or being skilled in their Art. True Pronunciation and Speaking is
learnt by Hearing. Those Children that are accustomed to hear a Noble and
Elegant way of Speaking, will imitate the same. This is the way to make
Eloquent Orators, and good Artists. Pray tell me, if the best of Doctors of
them all would not be at a Loss, if they were called to assist a Person in the
Buying and Selling most sorts of the Commodities of Merchants and Shopkeepers,
to discourse of all the parts of Housewifry, Agriculture, Navigation, Ships,
their Tackle and Furniture, and a thousand other useful things? most of them I
believe would be forced to their Dictiona^ies, and I am sure in many respects
find but little assistance there neither. No Man can possibly be a Master of
any Language, but such as learn it very young, and by Conversation; neither is
he then a M^ster any farther than the custom of the Country allows him; for
it is that which makes all Words proper and improper.

14. It is believed by some, that if a Child should never hear Speaking, he
would never Speak; though there is indeed a real Ground in Nature for Language.
It is a noble thing, and distinguishes Mankind from the Beasts, and would do
much more, if Man had not lost the true Knowledge and Understanding thereof by
his Fall and Degeneracy, viz. The Language of Nature, which was the Original
Tongue that in the first Ages of the World the Ancients had some glimmering
Knowledge of, as appears by their giving such Names to their Children and other
things, that by the Word and Sound the Nature and Qua^ity of the Person, or
Thing named, might be understood, whereof there is now little or no Knowledge
remaining.

15. But the Fowls of the Air and Beasts of the Field do still retain their
Original Language, which the great Creator of all things at first endued them
with, for they have not degenerated nor broken the Law of God and Nature, but
have continued under the Government thereof; and though they cannot express their
Minds and Inclinations in Articulate Words; and though for the most part they
have but one Tone or Sound, yet they have by the various alteration of that
Tone a quicker, and more natural way of Communicating their Sentiments to each
other, suitable to their Occasions, and the respective State of their Minds and
Desires. than Mankind can, by Articulate Words. I am almost bold to say, that
if Mankind had not Education, he would be much more ignorant than the meanest
of Beasts. Now the chief difference between the Education of Men and Beasts is
this; the latter have their Education from Nature, and act according to their
first and necessary Law. and the former from depraved Custom and Tradition,
great part of which is Vicious and Devilish: He is hurried on with the Spirit
of Error into all Acts of Violence and Injustice, being the Devil's Slave, yet
boasting of his Knowledge and Understanding, which Knowledge and Understanding
is not manifested in any thing, so much as in the works of Darkness.

Thus I have given you a short Draught or Delineation of what I judge very
necessary to be Copied out into Practice. Many other useful Directions might be
laid down, which shall be made use of if ever these Proposals shall have the
good Fortune to be approved of, and encouraged. I am confident, such Methods as
these would abundantly contribute to the Improvement of true Learning, and the
Reformation of Men's Manners.

There is one evil Practice that I find Parents and Nurses generally, guilty
of, and cannot conclude without some Reflection upon the horrid and wicked
Consequences that attend it. From the very Cradle they use all means possible
to learn their Children Pride and Vanity: If they have any thing new or fine,
they never let them alone till they have made the young Things sensible of the
Worth and Value of it, thereby laying unremovable Foundations for Self-Conceit
and Flattery, which grows up in them by degrees, till they are seduced into
Presumption, and a Contempt of others, and so begets and nourishes Indignation,
Self-Love, Anger, Hatred, etc. which produces Irreligion, Unbelief,
Superstition, Impenitence, A^rogance, and a long train of D^abolical Mischiefs.
Pride destroys the faculties of the Intellect, and will never suffer it to make
a right Judgment. Is the Inlet to Credulity and Falsehood, the Gare of Error,
and the first step to Oppression and Violence, Inhumanity and Madness. It
blinds all the Inward Senses of the Soul, subjecting them to all Malignant
Influences, destroying the Image of God, poisoning the Imagination, and all the
good Virtues, and active Powers of God and Nature. It fills the Fancy with dark
Ideas, and destroys the Harmony of the Universe. It is a stirring Power and
Quality, and may be justly styled the Son of the Devil. Every Man hugs and
caresses it in himself, but abhors and abominates it in another. It is a mortal
Enemy to Mankind, and the Spring head of all War, Devastation, Depopulation,
Self-Murder, Lying, Distraction, and whatsoever is odious and wicked in the
World.

What Ignorance, Blindness and Madness then does posses Mankind, that they
should be at such continual Charge and Pains to improve and nourish this
Hellish Quality, that sets the World and all Nature in a Flame? Let all People
then in time consider the sad Effects of this Vice, and not intail on their
Posterity such a Distemper, which utterly ruins both the Soul and Body. Let
them consider what a Christian ought to be, and the Condition on which our
Eternal Salvation and Happiness depends, and examine whether the Educa^ion of
their Children be correspondent and agreeable to Christ's Rule. I say, when
this is considered, and compared, a Man must necessarily conclude, that Men do
not believe what they talk of, and p^etend to; for if they did, they could not
be contented with such Vicious Methods, in bringing up their Children.

Poor Peoples Children, for want of Necessaries, are brought up in Swinishness
and Beastiality, and the Rich educate their Children in all the Degrees of
Court Haughtiness, Intemperance and Idleness; so that a Man of 1000 l. per an.
that has four or five Children, ought to have an Estate better than the whole
for each of them, every Child beginning his Trade of Life, where the Father and
Mother left off; insomuch that if an Account were taken of all the Genmen's
Families in England, you would hardly find one in twenty of their Children that
live any thing handsomely in the World.

Of all the Youths that Yearly come up to London, to be Apprentices to Mer^rs,
Drapers, Silk men, etc. there is not one in twenty that serves his time out, or
lives on his Trade, which can be attributed to nothing else but the effects of
those: Poisonous Weeds of Pride and Arrogance, their Parents sowed in them in
their Childhood. The same is to be understood of common Servants; are they not
Bold, Surly, Nasty, and Ignorant? So that you must teach them every thing
before you can have any Service from them; and when they can do your Business,
upon any light Occasion they grow Sawey and Impudent, and will leave you,
without any Acknowledgment of your Kindness to them, which only proceeds from
the want of Public Schools, and due and timely Methods of Education.

Let no Person therefore that falls under this Character, think to excuse
himself, by murmuring at, and upbraiding his Creator, as if he had dealt
unkindly with him; but if the Blame must be laid somewhere else besides, than
upon himself, let him charge his Miscarriage upon his Father and Mother, who by
their Ignorance and Madness, have stif^ed and beclouded Virtue, and advanced
and encouraged Wickedness and Folly, whereby Men become Contemptible in this
World; and Miserable in the next.

The True and most Natural Method of teaching Children to read Latin, French,
Dutch, Italian, or any other Language, as well as their Mother Tongue, with
great Ease and Pleasure, so that they shall pronounce all their Words fully and
properly, which is the greatest difficulty in the Learning of Languages.
THE understanding Tongues and Languages is a sort of Learning, highly useful
and convenient, and unspeakably serviceable, as well in the management of any
Trade, Business or Employment the Divine Providence shall place us in in the
World, as in the Spiritual Advantages, in reading the Holy Scriptures, and
other good Books.

The common Method is not only tedious and difficult, whereby many are
discouraged, and grow weary before they are able to read tolerably, but also
very chargeable, so that poor People are not able to defray the Charge of
Schooling for their Children.

Upon consideration of these things I gave my Mind to think of some more
expeditious Course, and more natural Method, viz. A more easy, quick, and
familiar way of learning Letters, so that it be very delightful, both to
Scholar and Teacher.

First, Teach your Child the Letters, and to spell a little in the Primmer,
which may be done in a quarter, or half a Year, by often naming the Letters to
them, and asking what they are; for the frequent Sounding or Speaking them goes
in at the Ears, and penetrates to the Center, it being the Sense that records
what is spoken; so that the often repeating, and speaking of the Letters in the
hearing of of the Child, makes a deeper Impression upon the Powers of the Mind.

When this is done, take any Book that treats of Temperance and Ve^tue, and
distinctly read one, two, or three words, or so many as your Child or Scholar
can readily speak after you, and so proceed, making the Child point to each
Word, and look with the Eye upon them, expressing each Word distinctly after
you, and making a Pause after every Word, till the Child has done repeating;
and when you come to any Words or Word that the Child cannot easily pronounce
or express, then you ought to reiterate it with a plain strong Voice, assisting
and helping the Child in his pronouncing; but if it be still hard, leave it, go
on, it will perhaps be easilier done at another time.

Thus when you have read one Book, or as much of it as you think fit, choose
another, provided always that your Books be innocent and pleasant; by this
means you shall accustom your Scholar to a variety of Prints, Letters and
Words, which will be of great use to him; whereas in the common Schools you see
a Child that can read tolerably well in one Book, or one Chapter, and yet not
be able to read a word in another: but by practicing the Method we prescribe
two or three Hours in a day, in eight o^ ten Weeks time the Child shall be able
to read in most Books.

All the Senses have their appointed Offices. Now the particular Office of
Hearing is, to receive in, and distinguish Sounds, and bring them through the
proper Organs, and present them to the Memory, which is a Retentive Faculty of
the Soul, whose Office is to Register all the Ears have presented it with, that
they may be forth coming, when any Occasion shall call for them.

Now the Ears being the natural Organs to receive all Sounds and Words, that
Sound, Voice or Word that is spoken by another Person, and received by a Third,
makes a far deeper Impression on the Memory, than that which he reads himself:
So that he that reads aloud, remembers more than he that reads softly to
himself, because the strong Speaking enters the Organs more forcibly, and
conveys the Sound and Sense to the Memory, which records and presents it to the
Judgment, which is the guide of Actions, and judges of what passes and repasses
through the little World- Man.

For this cause never any Man did or can pronounce any Language or Tongue truly
and properly, by reading of it only, if he has not heard it spoke, and truly
pronounced to him, which is the reason that many speak most of their words
improperly, though they have read them a thousand times, but the Ears immediately
catch what they hear properly spoken, and convey it to the Memory, so that it
shall never be forgotten.

Now the Sense of Hearing is made good by Hearing; as in Musical Harmouy, by
the common use, and hearing of good Music and Singing, the Ear can distinguish
Sounds, and know when it is well performed, and the like, is to be understood
of the speaking of Tongues. For any Person shall learn to speak any Language by
ten Degrees sooner and better, by Hearing and Conversation, than by any other
Method.

Therefore Children should be taught to speak the Tongue or Language by Hearing
or Conversation, before they think of learning the Rules. For the Reason and
Philosophy of Speaking, is a great Art, and the work of Time, and not at all to
be taught Children. This preposterous Method does rather distract and confound
them, than improve and profit: So that by the Methods commonly used in the
Schools, very few ever arrive to speak of many things. It is Conversation that
givesChildren an Universal Tongue, or way of Speaking. By this means, viz. By
frequency of Speaking and Discoursing, the hardest words will become easy and
familiar; for as we said already, they, ought to speak and read perfectly,
before they enter upon the Reason and Rule of Speaking.

Now the Advantages of the fore mentioned Methods are: First, It saves Expense
of Time, which is of great Consequence; in our Schools, a Boy learns for seven
Years, and after all, can neither write nor speak a Line of true Latin. Besides
the difficulty in their way of Proceeding damps and discourages the Child's
Industry and Inclination to learn. Secondly, He shall pronounce his Words more
properly, and exactly. Thirdly, He shall more readily read in any strange Book,
offered him at first sight. Fourthly, It does wonderfully benefit and imprint
the matter on the Memory of the Teacher; so that there is as it were a
Co-partnership in Learning, between the Master and the Scholar. Fifthly, By
this way any Father, Mother or Friend, may with Ease and Delight teach their
own Children to read at home, without the Charge or Trouble of sending them
abroad to School where for the most part they learn nothing but lewd Words, and
ill Manners, and in short, lose all their time. Sixthly, This Method will not
be only beneficial to Children, but to those of maturer age, that would learn
to read well, who may hereby be improved in three or four Weeks, to admiration,
and be made capable of pronouncing all Words with their right tone and accent,
as well as if they had been bred Scholars. For example, when they have heard,
and been used to pronounce this word [Participate] short, they will never say
[Par-ti-ci pate] making the last Syllable save one long, which would be
ridiculous; yet these, and a many other Absurdities, are the effects of the
common Methods of Teaching.

A true Method of Teaching to Write a good Legible Hand.
LET there be Copies Engraven, and Printed on good Paper, not one line, only on
the top or side, as is usual for Writing Masters to place their Copies, but in
lines quite through the Books First, The beginning strokes of every letter, and
then the next added, and so on till the whole Letter is finished, that the
Child may know how and where each Letter is to be begun and made.

After that, let there be several lines of small Letters, and the like of
Capitals: and lastly, Copies of Joyned-Hand, all well writ or cut with the due
strokes of a neat mixed hand, which is now most in fashion, easily learnt, and
best for general use.

Then let the Child with a good Pen and the best red Ink, go over the Letters,
and make them red, and so proceed to the whole Letters, and then to the
Joining; only at the first it will be necessary that the Father, Tutor, or some
one that can write pretty well, should show the Child how to hold his Pen, and
guide his hand for two or three weeks, and not suffer him to run rudely and
hastily over the Copy, which is but wasting ^me and Paper, and spoiling the the
Child's hand; it must be done heedfully, and when he has made his Letter to
observe what is amiss, and mend it in the next, till he can make all his
Le^ters exactly, and then and not before let him proceed to the Joined-hand
Copies, and when the Book is writ out provide another in the like manner.

This Writing over the Copies, will by frequent use and cu^om bring his Hand to
an habit of making his Letters without them in a short time. For if you keep
him to this practice two or three hours in a Day, and make him diligent and
intent upon it, there is no question but in two or three Months he will be able
to write a very good Hand. And suppose now in that time he writes four or five
of those Copy Books, that will be but four or five Shillings charge in the
whole. Likewise People of Mature Age may learn this way with Ease, Secrecy, and
Expedition, it being a Method that cannot fail of Perfecting any that shall
carefully practice it for one half Year.

Of Retaliation, or Rewards and Punishments.
REtaliation both in Good and Evil, is the Original Foundation of the Law of
Justice ordained by God and Nature, which no Man can escape or avoid. The
secret and sure hand of Gods Justice will certainly meet and find the
Transgressor either publicly or privately in this World or in the next.

Upon this consideration Moses and all the wise Ancients founded and framed
their Laws of Government in Conformity to this Original Law of God in Nature,
which our Savior Christ has confirmed, saying Such Measure as you mete to
others, such shall be Measured to you again.

Pythagoras, and all the rest of the Philosophical Lawgivers endeavored by
all means to make their followers sensible of the importance of this Law, being
the first Principle and Foundation on which all true Religion and Virtue does
depend. So that it is imposible for him to be a Sober, Virtuous, Temperate, and
Good Man, that has no regard to this Law. Christ also told his Disciples, That
they must do unto all Men, as they would have others do to them. Which is the
complete fulfilling of all Laws both Divine and Humane.

Therefore there is the greatest necessity imaginable, that every Man be made
sensible of the Worth, Value and Bounty of this eternal ^aw, and that Children
should be instructed even from their very Cradle, that Rewards and Punishments
assuredly attend the observers and Violators thereof. For if little Children
were well Educated in the fear of God, and the Methods of Order, Temperance and
Cleanness, and taught that every Evil of what kind soever if not Repented of,
and forsaken must be Retaliated either in this World or the next, it would
immediately stem the Tide of those Enormities that are every Day committed
without either Reproof from their Elders, or Regret to Themselves. Now I say,
did Men firmly believe these things, the dread of Retaliation would keep them
from Oppressing either their own Kind, or Creatures of inferior Ranks and
Species. For all sorts of Intemperance and Oppression be they little or much,
must be retaliated, as well in private Families, as in public States. What
else is the occasion of changing and transferring of Governments, from one to
another, and the shifting of private Estates and Families; so that it is rare
to have an Estate continue in one Family for three Generations, which proceeds
from the neglect of living in, and observing God's Law in Nature.

Kings, Princes, and great Men, with force and power, break all Bonds and
Obligation of Justice, violate and oppress their Inferiors having no regard to
that Golden Law, of doing unto all Men as they would be done unto, with a
thousand other Evils they commit, as if no Mercy or Sense did dwell in them. So
that oftentimes they are depose from their Government, out off by violent and
immature Deaths, or else these Evils are retaliated upon their Posterity. The
like is to be understood concerning every private Family and Person.

When a sober industrious Person has got an Estate, what does he then but by
his own mistaken Conduct, together with the Women's idle and nonsensical
Methods in the Education of his Children, make way for the transferring of it,
and by this means sets it agoing much faster, and in a shorter time than it was
got? Now some think this swift motion of transferring Estates is occasioned by
the ill getting of them, which indeed is too often true, but not always; for it
is visible that the ill Conduct of Parents, in bringing up their Children, does
frequently do it: For all Idleness, Intemperance, and Mispe^t time are
certainly punished; and though it be done by Children, yet they must undergo the
Retaliation, both in the Good and Evil. No Creature under Heaven that breaks
God's Law can escape the punishment, due for such a Violation and
Transgression. And on the other hand, God is no Respecter of Persons; but
whoever lives and obeys this sacred Law, is blessed with the sweet Influences
of Heaven, and accepted of God, whether young or old.

Now if Parents did but give themselves Leizure to think, they would never
suffer their Children to run headlong to Destruction as they do; nay, many give
them Precedents and Examples for their evil Practices and Disorders. Which
plainly declares them to have no Faith, and that they do not believe one word
of the Scripture, or the Commandments of God and Christ, recommended to them.
For I must take leave to tell you, Believing is quite another thing; for
wherever Faith is, it is accompanied with great Power, which does as it were
compel those that enjoy it, to a Conformity and Obedience to its Commands. It
has a secret Sympathetick Operation upon the Inclinations, Gestures and
Intentions, and can powerfully change the innate Nature of the Mind.

Suppose any sober Person chances to be at some distance from home, and at the
same time a Servant or Messenger comes and tells him, that his House by some
Accident was on Fire, and that it burned so violently, that his only Child and
Wife were consumed to Ashes in the Flames. Now do you not think that this
Report would alter and change this Person from a Cheerful, Sedate Condition, to
a Melanchollick Anxious State of Mind, as not doubting the Truth thereof? How
many Examples have we of this kind? of Persons, that upon the News of ill
Events Accidents, have been so surprised, and overwhelmed with Grief, that they
could not be persuaded to Eat, Drink, or Converse with any Body. Some have been
so overcome, that they have entered into Vows of Abstinence and Selfdenial, and
others so disturbed, that they have through an innate Power of the Mind, and
strong Imagination of the Belief of the Truth of it, shook off the Bridle of
Reason, and broke the Chains of their Senses, and run mad and distracted; which
would never have happened, had they not firmly believed what was reported:
Which Instances are wonderful Evidences and Manifestations of the Power of
Faith. And it is clear in the business of Religion, that Men will hazard their
Lievs and Estates as freely, in the defense of a Diabolical Opinion, as for the
Truth it self; and the reason is, because they believe it to be true.

Pray therefore do but consider the Nature and Operation of undisturbed Faith,
and how powerfully it works on the Mind, and how it alters and changes Nature
to all Intents and Purposes. Now I say, if Faith has so powerful an Operation
on Man for the least of Momentary Enjoyments, what should be the Effects of
true Faith, for, and of things, that are durable and eternal? Especially if we
reflect that Mankind has not in any degree lived answerable to the Rule and
Condition, on which Salvation and Happiness is promised and entailed.

Hence it is plain, that most Men in the World do belly themselves, when they
say they have Faith, and that they believe; for Christ says, That if we had
Faith, though no bigger than a Grain of Mustard Seed, we might be able to remove
Mountains; that is, all Sins and Evils that lie in our way.

Faith is an ineffable Spirit and Divine Power. It is higher than all Heighths,
and deeper than all Depths. It is a Spiritual and Holy Virtue, that does
penetrate, even to the very Center of all Beings and Commands over all the
Celestial and Terrestrial Powers, having as it were the mighty Fiat in its
self, making something where there was nothing. Man's Soul is its Chariot,
where it rides in Glory and Triumph, altering and changing all Essences, Forms
and Qualities: All things submit to its Influences, and nothing is able to
withstand its Power.

Now the true Season of Sowing and Planting this true Faith in Children is from
three or four Years of age, to ten or twelve; and being well fastened and
secured to them in those young and tender Years, a small Industry afterward
will improve it to a very high degree. And as it lays a sure and deep
Foundation for all things, both in Virtue and Vice; so it is clear and most
true, tha^ the that believes God's Commandments, and his Law of Justice and
Retaliation, dares not abuse nor violate any of his Kind, nor inferior
Creatures, nor be Intemperate, Idle, Lewd or Disorderly. I say, and affirm,
That it is impossible for Men to be so extremely Brutified, and Act as they do,
had they but the least Grain of true Faith. It is only Talk, and nothing else,
there being no greater Evil in the World than the evil Education of Children,
and certainly Parents must, and are obliged to make a Retaliation for their
Neglects, and ill Management of their Children. All the great Wickedness,
Violence and Pollutions that are frequently committed in our parts, owe their
Original to Mistakes in this Point. And shall not there be a Reckoning? For
certain, there must be an Account given; and though Men forget themselves, yet in
God's Providence and his Law in Nature, there is no Forgetfulness. Raro
Ant^cedentem scelestium deseruit pede Poena Claudo. Though Justice and Punishment
come slowly oftentimes, yet they surely come. And Men shall then, when it is
too late, bewail their Neglect of that Duty, which now they might with the
greatest Ease and Satisfaction perform.

Some further Thoughts concerning the Education of Children. by another Hand.
In a Letter to a Friend.
Esteemed and Worthy Friend.
THE Subject you were pleased to recommend to my Thoughts, which was concerning
the Educution of Children, I have considered, and according to my Capacity,
have given here at present what has rise in my Mind concerning it, which I
humbly submit to your better Judgment, having engaged my self herein, not with
any Thoughts of my own Ability, to perform so great a Task, but purely in
Obedience to your Motion.

My first Consideration in this Matter is the great Benefits, which must
certainly accreu by the well performing so Noble and Worthy a Design, it being
the chief Means to attract the Divine Blessings on that Nation, that
universally and earnestly engage themselves therein. It lays a solid Foundation
of Virtue, Wisdom, Justice, Temperance, Industry, Ingenuity, Love to Mankind,
Truth, Humility, etc. and at the same time roots out the contrary Vices.

A Child in its tender Infancy is the most helpless Creature. Which by the way
teaches us that this is not our home. In this state the Mother has the Care
and Direction; and that her Tenderness and Love to her Infant may not run her
into Error, she ought to consider the Needs and Necessities of Nature, and
provide against them, what exceeds those Bounds, may prove burdensome to the
tender Babe. For good Nature has provided the Breast, and whilst the Infant
hangs there, it is well provided for; without fear of Surfeits and Excess.
Cleanness and Necessity ought to be observed in its Dress or Clothing, rather
than Custom or Fashion, and for Food where may we take a better Pattern than
from Nature? The Mother's Care extends ov^r the Child for near the first seven
Years, with respect to the Necessities and Weaknesses of Nature in those tender
Years: and here ought to bo great Care taken, both of Body and Mind, to lay a
solid Foundation of Virtue and Goodness.

What Children ought to be instructed in, the Method of it, the Grounds from
whence the Capacity of Children arises, ought to be taken notice of, and well
observed, of which I can give but brief hints, without enlarging beyond my
intended Bounds.

I conceive that a general Rule or Maxim, to be laid down for the Education of
Children, may be.

That Examples of what you would instruct them in, ought constantly to be
presented to them.

The Capacity of Children to receive and learn what Men are capable to offer to
them, may easily be apprehended; for that they participate of the same Power
and Faculties of Mind and Body with Men: it must be owned that they are in the
Bud, not yet come to ripeness: there is as certainly a growing in
Understanding, as well as a growing in Stature, also a growing in Virtue, or
gaining Strength in the exercise of Truth, Modesty, etc.

It must considered that there are opposite Vices, which the degenerate Nature
of Man is pro^e to embrace and entertain; and if they are used before Children,
the base Example prevails in viciating them, more than all precepts to the
contrary can oppose: For where Pride, Sloth, Voluptuousness, Fraud, Self-Love,
etc. are exercised; Children are readily infected, and become as Seed, sown
into a fertile Ground, that in time takes such rooting, that it is hard to be
weeded out, if not almost impossible: But according to the Nature of all Weeds,
spreads the whole Country, and on this occasion it is said by the Wise Man,
Prove. 24 31, 32. I went by the Field of the Slothful, etc. and lo! it was all
over grown with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the Face thereof, etc.
Therefore all Example of Vice ought most carefully to be suppressed; for that
they ruin the present Practicers, and sow a Seed for the corrupting and
spoiling the next Generation.

This consideration cannot be too much, nor too earnestly pressed; for
Knowledge, accompanied with Vice, serves but to exalt it to its Perfection; and
when a Nation or Person have thus filled up their Measures, they are fit
Objects for Ruin and Destruction. The Nature thereof is such, that it draws
Divine Vengeance on their Heads, except infinite Love and Forbearance steps
between, to give an Opportunity for Repentance.

This being premised, and due care taken to prevent the sowing of this evil
Seed, and also to root up as much, as may be such evil Weeds; as may arise of
themselves in Children, through the power of depraved Nature; then it may be
proper to offer to their Understandings Things worthy the Nature of Man to
receive.

We find that Speech or Discourse by words, used by Men to communicate their
Thoughts, to explain the Nature of Things, to detect Falsehood and Vanity, etc.
is only peeuliar to Man, and differences them from the rest of the Creatures,
being a Character of a Divine Stamp, and shows the Excellency of the Humane
Nature.

We find by common Experience, that Children learn Speech very early and
easily, and it is equal what ever Language is offered to them, they will with
the same ease acquire it, which I conceive is a clear Argument for what I
before offered, that Example ought to be presented to Children of what you
would instruct them in, and we find also, that whatever Language Children are
brought up in, and use till they come of Age, that becomes so natural to them,
that it is difficult to learn another Language, commonly the first is so
impressed, that many cannot express themselves in another Language, but it shall
have somewhat of the first mixed with it, which showsnot only how how easy it
is to instruct Children by Example, but also what is learned in Childhood, is
rooted so deep, that it is not easily Eradicated.

If for Example sake we here in England would instruct our Children in the
Latin Tongue, or any other Language, would it not be easier, quicker, and more
effectual to perform it after the same manner they learned their first Speech,
than by Artificial Methods, and Grammar Rules, which I conceive ought to be
offered them afterward? But this Notion has of late obtained with many Men,
who are proper Judges therein; and therefore the less may be said thereof, it
carrying so strong an Argument forit self, even in the very Proposal.

It is found by experience, that in some parts of Europe, where two or three
Languages are spoke, that the Children there commonly learn them together; as
in Flanders the Dutch and French; in Switzerland, the German and French.

What may be the reason that here in England we speak not the Latin so readily
as in some other Countries? May it not be for want of frequent Examples?
Another Instance may here be very fitly offered, to show the Capacity of
Children, and thereby induce us to an early Application for their Instruction,
and that as in Music, which formerly has been thought too hard and difficult
to instruct Children therein, and that it would rather oppress and burden,
than instruct or improve them; which Opinion has sufficiently been confuted of
late years, by a Person, not fettered by such common Thoughts or Custom, but
breaking through, has produced Examples in Children at four Years old, that
have attained a proficiency to be admired because not common, viz. Playing on
the Viol several things with great swiftness of Hand, and at six or seven Years
old, playing Divisions and Sonato's in Consort: Therefore I think, many words
need not here be added, for that Matter of Fact carries an undeniable Proof
along with it.

I might instance in that common Art of Spinning, and in that dare appeal to
those most knowing therein; if Children, instructed (...) that Art very Young,
are not capable to spin a finer, and more even Thread, than any elder Person can
possibly do, that was not put to it young; and although this may seem a mean
Instance, yet it is Pregnant, and the Art highly useful and acceptable with
Men, the making curious fine Linen and Lace. This is also Matter of Fact, and
not to be denied.

The like may be said in Painting, Drawing, Graving, etc. Such a Foundation may
be laid, if begun as well, might produce wonderful Effects.

That good Doctrine of the Wise Man may serve here in general; Prove. 22. 6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it.

We ought to desire that the whole Nation were a School of Virtue, and every
Family as a Branch of the whole, were found in the Exercise thereof; such a
School would certainly prove the most efficacious for the end proposed, but
this is rather to be desired than expected, and indeed it is to be lamented,
that public Examples should ruin private Instruction: For as the more public
and general Examples of Virtue are, so are they more teaching, and on the
contrary, the more public and general Examples of Vice are the more infecting:
Therefore it is that many Lovers of Virtue decline the public Ways and Methods
of instructing, for fear of being infected with the Vices, publicly practiced,
and so lose a benefit, to avoid a certain Mischief, retiring within the narrow
Limits of their own Families. And when Youth comes forth, virtuously educated
in Private, to see the Lic^ntiousness used in Public; the Danger is great, if
many are not corrupted therewith. This is not only incident to Youth, but also
to elder Years, till the Mind comes to be in love with Virtue for its own sake.

If for the attaining the end proposed to, viz. the well Educating of Children,
that at present a School might be erected, where such Children designed to be
taught, should constantly reside: That such Language proposed to be taught,
should there constantly be spoken, and no other. That such Arts or Sciences,
worthy the Knowledge and Practice of Men, were there duly and clearly proposed
and exercised. That Truth, Industry, Temperance, etc. were there strictly
observed, and in fine, all Vice studiously avoided, we might hope for a good
Effect and Issue in the thing designed, and that the more sublime Truths
relating to God and Immortal Life, might be more explained to us, which at
present is wrapped up in the Books of the Scriptures, Nature and our Selves.

It would very much contribute to the Im^ (...) ^th of Virtue; were it set in a
true Light, it ought not to be obscured with that frightful Vizard, as it is
commonly represented, as if there was no Beauty or Pleasantness therein, but
only Melancholy, Dullness, Unsociableness, and Folly: Therefore, Examples
should be set before Children in the Conversation of those about them; that as
they pursue Virtue in its many Excellencies, they may not forget that
Cheerfulness, Ingenuity, Affability, Generosity, etc. that complete the Harmony
of the whole, without which, instead of attracting the Affections of those
young Ones they should instruct, raise an aversion in their Minds against that,
which otherwise they would rejoice in, it being fasly exhibited to them. I will
only instance that great Saying of Solomon' s, Pro^ 3. 17. speaking of Wisdom.
Her Ways ar^ Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Pa^ are Peace, etc.

I beg your Candid Acceptance hereof, and pardon for such Weakness, as may
appear herein, and am,

Sept. the 4th. 1694. SIR, Yours Entirely,

FINIS.

