AFFECTVVM DECIDVA, Or DVE EXPRESSIONS In honor of the truly noble CHARLES
CAPELL Esquire.

(Son to the right honorable ARTHVR Ld CAPELL Baron of Hadham) deceased on
Christmas Day 1656.

Quis desiderio sit pudor, aut modus
Tam Chari Capitis? --
OXFORD, Printed Anno Dom. 1656.

To the Honorable HENRY CAPELL Esquire: Son to the Lord CAPELL, Baron of Hadham:
These ensuing ELEGIES are Most humbly Dedicated and Presented.
Most Honored Sr,
WHen I had wept so long, till all their store
Mine Eyes had spent, and so could weep no more;
My Hands turned Publicanes, t'recieveth' Arrears,
Such as were sent by other Volunteers.
I know what hazard They, and I may run,
Condemned perhaps for strange presumption;
But, view Those Hearts, which through the mourning Dress
Of reptile Elegies, are crept to the Press,
And You Will confess, as all the World beside,
It was our Duties Product, not our Pride:
Then think (for charity) that all was done
Out of Respect, not Ostentation;
And where the highest Auxesis You see,
Call it ambitious Realitie.
Believe but This; let Hell* and Earth let loose
Censures, which might Momus himself amuse:
Go angry Billows, cease to Roar, or Hiss,
Though Castor 's gone, Pollux my Patron is.
Your Honor's most faithful, most humble, and most obliged Servant FRANC:
TURNER.
From New Coll. Oxon March. 2. 1656.
To the Right Honorable The Lady CAPELL Baroness, by occasion of the death of
the highly accomplished her dear Son Mr CHARLES CAPELL.
Madam,
SHould I'curse Atropos for this,
Or damn Alecto to Whippe Lachesis;
Should I make huge Apostrophe's to Fate,
Or banne pale Death as too Importunate,
I know you would loath each line: Your Nobler sense
Honored by us, Worships a Providence:
You bow to the Justice, Goodness, and the Care
Of that Allmighty Guardian whose you are
And whom you serve* and could not choose but cry
Out Heathenisme! out Fledged Blasphemy!
But since your Honor knows our hearts are cold,
Pardon a sigh or two: We must be bold
To beg 't, and to conceive 't a Venial Sin
To let those go no Spirit can keep in.
The are all for Him of whom you think and dream,
For as small Brook's are Swallowed in the stream,
And the Plague devours Agues: so W' are grown
To have ten thousand greifs, and yet but One.
In Him Was (ah sad Was!) in Him was seen
Our all; more than all Nestor at eighteen:
In's Travails he indulged the World; He wan
Affections, gave the Copy of a Man:
At home, I cry to think how Coveted
In The Field, in the Schools, at Counsels, Board, and Bed.
We cannot guess our loss: The Spaniard know's
As well what ingot in Potosi grows;
Neptune may count his Treasures up as soon;
As we what Glory's buried here in one.
His worth cracks Fancy, and Hyperbolyes:
Fame would perform his Apotheosis,
But Finds her self too weak in the Lungs to hold
Till the Tith off him toth' listening world be told:
Men called him Heaven on earth; but Now we see
That Heaven on Heaven makes no False Heraldry.
This was his Scene: he came to be desired
And Blush, at's own deserts to be admired.
Yours, Madam, is the Next: and it is that Field
Must to your sexes Valor Trophee's Yield,
Whose tenderness hates steel: It Is this must be
Your Marston-moore, Edg-Hill, and Newbury:
Never came Passion so empowered, so strong,
Or Mad for Conquest: We here of the throng
All look at the Issue. Get the day: and then
Great Xander waits among your serving men.
You Would know how such a Battle might be won:
Hear what your Chaplain says, and it is done.
Your Ladyships with all Lowliness and Devotion to Serve you R. SHARROCK.

On the Death of the honorable CHARLES CAPELL Esquire;, deceased not long before
His intended Marriage.
ONe only Time (that happy Day,
From which I keep my Epoch)
I saw This Hero; such a sight
Might rival Heaven, and Earth benight.
Let those who knew Him better, praise
His noble Soul; my humbler Bays.
Aspire no further, then to show
The strangeness of that Interview:
Thus to behold the greatness of our loss,
His face shall serve me for a Looking glass,
Whose trickling Eyes did never see
In nature's proudest Imag'ry,
One of so rare a make as HE.
Methoughts His manly visage owned,
That Love, and Honor there were throned,
As if they Two should on that stage,
Get warriors for the future Age:
His Eyes they might be Venus hopes,
And yet Bellona's Telescopes:
One Glance could look us Dead, and then
Another call us back again.
Who this should be, my guess had straggled far;
He seemed both Phoebus, and the God of War;
But by instinct, at last I hit
That 'twas Prince Arthur's son, and yet
That HE himself was Charles the Great.
Who e're He was, the standers by
Were all Bedwarft, as well as I;
For what so ere He did, it all
Became Him as a General:
O had he bin the Giants Chief,
To range their Troops and bring relief,
To fetch them off, and lead them on,
(Though they cashiered Oromedon)
Maugre* the shrinking Gods, and their allies,
They might have sup't that very night in the skies.
And Jove the lesser, poor pedee,
Pressing to serve Him on the Knee,
Resigned His ill-got Sovereignty.
Say then, interpreter, whose Ey
Uncloud's the mistique Energy
Of things abstruse; come tell us how
Death overcame His courage now;
Was He tan'e napping (as it is said)
Upon His almost-Nuptiall bed?
Or did His haughty Soul disdain,
To fight the dastard Death again?
Esteeming Him but as a vanquished foe,
'Bove Sixteen Hundred Christmasses ago?
No, no such stratagem would take,
For all His valor would awake
For His betrothed Lady's sake.
But the Triumphant Church on high,
Wanted His presence in the Sky,
And now forsaken we must want
His presence in the Militant:
Think then He was unmanned to be
Made Part'ner in That Hierarchy:
And what we nick-nam'd Forward Fate,
A Prologue to His nobler State;
So like Aenaeas He made have to Die
The fitter to accept a Deity.
But, were not Heaven His Journey's End,
In One so High, I durst contend
'Twere Condescension to Ascend.
THO: HUSEY Col: Trinit. Gent. Com:

On the much lamented Death, of the honorable CHARLES CAPELL Esquire;
SO soon removed? can HE be winged Hence
And all the Muses dumb? can He commence
A Saint in Secret? Such a Sun as HE
Be thus invelop'd in the Canopie
Of profound Darkness, long, and dismal Night,
And shall not we all mourn in Black and White?
It cannot be! for even costive I,
Whose Hide-bound fancy dread's all Poetry,
Now strein to weep a Rythme, and needs must vent
My grief in uncouth language, and lament
The world's sad loss, and Towering Honor's Fall,
In This, so Great a Person's, Funeral.
General Catastrophe! the Nation
Seems to be almost Levelled, now He Is gone:
And, if His Brother did not live to be
All Ages Pattern, and Typographie
Of wondering Europe; Id'e believe henceforth
That there might be a Party in worth;
And none hereafter dare to plead pretense
To any, 'bove the vulgar Excellence:
But This prodigious HE, finding a Dearth
Of Hero's, made His Life equal His Birth;
And, not content with native Greatness, HE
Improved His richer Soil by Industry;
And ever husbanded His time so well,
He was become full Ripe before He Fell.
But Blasted are our Hopes, let us fruitfully
Water with Tears His Hearse; let every
Pen speak Him truly Great, and Good, and cry
Such are the Ruins of Nobility!
GABRIELL THISTLETHWAYTE. Fellow of New Col. Civ.

On The Truly Noble CHARLES CAPELL Esquire; immaturely taken hence, being with in
few weeks of Marriage
When Common men decease, it will serve then turns,
If with a sigh we wait upon their Urnes;
We 'l no such Mourning: who come's here, it is meant
He bring the Bottles of some Penitent:
His eyes and all, like clouds must pregnant be
With Showers to lament This Destiny,
That the Fair Lady, whom His Courtly charms,
Prevailed, e're long, to empale within His Arms,
Between Her self, and Her dead Lover (As
'Twixt Hero and Leander once it was)
May to bewail the Division, see there do'es
An Hellespont of Tears soon interpose.
Nor can we give less Passion to condole
The sudden Flight of so Divine a soul;
As disaffected with the baser ways,
Trod by the Gallants of these lewder days,
An higher Walk frequented 'bove the place
Where the Giant Planet trot's his lofty pace;
Shooting His thoughts (those arrows of the mind)
Up to the Palace of the Unconfined.
But this Elogium only shows we scan
His Christian Parts, Let Us speak Him as a man:
Since Madam Nature has Her Jewels too,
Those Minion Graces that she does bestow.
And breathing on This Theme, who will not suppose
IN me blowing open a most Fragrant Rose?
For looking thus into Him, what do I
But into a like Garden boldly pry
As that where Poets say men may behold,
A stately Tree laden with Fruit of gold?
His youthful years could we exactly trace
They 'd make a frosty Grandfire hide his Face,
To know the Prudence that enchas'd His breast,
More than by doting Rabbis is possessed.
His Temper was so sweet, His wit acute,
'Twould have made Fletcher, or Ben-Jonson, mute:
His valor too may well be understood,
When in such times as These, He durst be Good;
Who as in age, so still in virtue rose,
It is no wonder Heaven would Him engrosse.
Thus the bright Queen, That Regent of the Night*
As she advance's gathers Greater Light,
Yet must at length (if not dissolve) Away;
The World's not made without a Fatal day.
THO. HOWELL.

On the Death of CHARLES CAPELL Esquire; second Son to the Ld CAPELL of famous
memory, happening on Christmas Day.
COuld sable Drops from Pen and Eyes distill,
Or Briny Tears b' extracted from a Quill;
Could Grief with Colored Accents sighing groan,
Or Words put on a sad Complexion;
I 'ld writing weep, and weeping write; my Tears
Should speak Thy Death, my words bedew Thine Hearse.
My Genius ('it is confessed) vailes to the Rest
In writing Elegies: Mourne's with the best.
Should Heedlesse Grief some faults in Lines incur,
Tears should wash out the blot; Groans cleanse the blurre.
Presumptuous Death! to insult and Triumph then
On Men Renowned, and Nobler Spirits; when
Thine own Captivity thou should deplore
Gained by our Captains Birth, a Savior.
So storms a Calm deface: unhappy we
To mourn, not joy on the Nativity.
But stay; sure 'twas Thy Zeal, Divine desire
To solemnize this Feast among the Quire
Of Saints and Angels; where to Sing thy Part,
And fill the Chorus, these shall give thee Art.
Pardon, Dear Saint, since I Have presumed to be
Partner in Grief, grant an Indemnity
TO a Twilight-fancy, whose bright sun being sat
Shall cease to write, though not to imitate.
WILL: MILES Batch: of Arts in New. Coll.

On the Death of the truly Noble and no less virtuous CHARLES CAPELL Esquire; who
dyed of the Smallpox Upon ChrIstMas Day Last.
TO write your Life were it my Task Great Sir,
I fear I should subscribe your murderer:
To do 't to Halfes were fair; But to would be s'ed
I killed you, were 't but drawn and quartered;
Yet he 's Long-lived, dread Saint, who but procures
Life to improve like You the Tithes of Yours.
So that I dare not say, You Non-ag'd died:
Though it be true, the world would swear I Ly'd:
Nay, though by what You Lived, it might have known
Had You Lived still, You 'de never been over-growne,
Yet Under-age it wo'nte allow, but hold
Your Ripeness never was Non-age'd, but borne Old.
Were 't not that Innocents are Infants style'd
Who saw You Youngest never knew You Child:
Prose license me! For Him verse is not meet
Whose Life, though soon run* out, out-runs those Feet.
I would dare venture on it; but since I know
To speak to the Life is not to make Him so,
Nothing but Death I Will breath, I never did fear
The Smallpox could fore-run a Plague but Here:
'Twould Rack a Poet-parliament to sit
And club Invention to speak well of it.
Those spots His Body did bespangle, say
That they were stars fixed in the milkie-way;
Yet mourning His DECREASE, we must complain
Stars in this milkie-way prove'd CHARLES His WAINE.
Smallpox! Thou nick-name'd Evil! I dare not call
That Grape-stone which but choked Anacreon, Small,
And shall Thou be? Thou should have cast about
To play small games; then Here thou had stood out.
What? least that Noble Blood should still have gone
Untainted, must Thou bring Infection?
Could I spit venom to blemish thee, I Would try
To make thy spots more and of deeper Die.
And, Thou Black-day, scarce should I think it fit
To name thee under Black and White with it:
But that I find thee Checkcr'd, for I see
His Death falls in with Christ's Nativitie.
And thus 'twas fit. His Life and Death accord,
He lived, the Day speaks, to die in the Lord.
Then quit the day: And 'till we think of worse
We Will let the Pox that plagued us be a Curse.
EDW: LOW fellow of New Col.

On the Death of the Eminently Enobled CHARLES CAPELL Esquire; Who, after He had
honored Winton Coll. with His Education, and accomplished. Himself with a
voyage into FRANCE, Dyed of the Smallpox, at LONDON Last Christmas 1656.
Shower down your Ponderous Tears, who e're you be
Dare Write, or Read a CAPELL'S Elegy;
Spangle His Hearse with Pearls, such as are borne
'Twixt the blear'd Eielids of an over cast Morn:
And (but it is vain to expostulate with Death,
Or vilify the Fates with frustrate breath)
Pose Destiny with Why's, Why Such a Sun
Should set, before His Noonetide Stage were run?
Why This Fair Volume should be Bound so fast
In Wooden Covers, Clasp't-up in such have?
Was Nature fond of It Is Large Character,
And those Divine Impressions graven There?
Did she, least we should spoyl't (to wave that Sin)
'Cause 'twas the Best-Edition call-it-in?
Or would our Vaunting Isle that Saints should see
The utmost of all our Prodigality;
Fearing some detriment by long delay,
Send Heaven a New-Year's-Gift, Before the Day?
No: the Empyrean Philomels could sing
Without His voice; no Carolls to their King.
England's Metropolis (for 'twas in Thee
He died) We re-baptize Thee Calvarie,
The Charnel-house of Gallantry; henceforth
We brand Thy Front, with, Golgotha of Worth.
Had He bin Swallowed in that Courteous Deep
He Travailed over, He had bin lulled asleep
In the Amorous Sea-Nymphs stately Arms at ease,
His Great Name would Imposthumate the Seas;
That when the Waves should Swell, and Tempests rise,
(Strong Waters challenging the Dastard Skies)
Poor Shipwrack't Mariners, remembering Him
Should court His Asterisme, and cease to swimm;
Abjure the Fatall-Brothers glow-worme- Fires,
And dart at Him their languishing desires.
Had France entombed Him (what Our Land forbid's)
Nature had reared Him Stately Pyramids
The lofty Alps, where it had bin most meet
Their harmless Snow should be His Windingsheet,
That Alablaster-Coverture might be
An Emblem of His native-Puritie:
Had He fallen There, it had bin True perchance,
WICCHAM's Third College might be found in FRANCE.
But He returned from Thence, curbed Neptune's pride;
And, to our Fame and Grief, came Home, and Died.
Thus, when the Heaven has whee'ld it is Daily Race
About Our Earth; At Night it is glorious Face
Is Pox't with Stars: Yet Heaven admits no Blot,
And every Pimple There Is a Beauty-spot.
Shortliv'd Disease, that can be cured and gone,
By One sweet Morning's Resurrection!
Adieu Great Sir, whose Total He that will
Describe in Folio need's a Cherub's Quill.
Zealous Posterity Your Tomb shall stir,
Hoard up Your Dust, Rifle Your Sepulcher;
And (as the Turks did Scanderbeg's of old)
Shall wear your Bones in Annulets of Gold.
But my blasphemous Pen, prophane's His Glory;
I Will say but This to all His Tragique Story:
Were not the World well- nigh it is Funeral,
I Would never believe so Bright a Star could Fall.
THO. FLATMAN. fellow of New Col.

On the lamented death of CHARLES CAPELL Esquire; deceased last Christmas. 1656.
FIrst shall the Poles concur, and join in one,
And vaulted Snayles the light foot Hare outrun:
First shall the Ocean sink into a Drop,
And life, and Death to oppose each other stop;
E're Pen, or Tongue, or Thought, can comprehend
Our boundless losses by Great CAPEL's End.
Were the sage Antiquaries Here combined
In Him alone they would a Non ultra find.
Could now my power my heart but countermain,
I Would tread the Clouds to view Him in His Wain:
Were at my liberty to weep my fill,
Mines Eyes should Bloody Deluges distill,
That heaven, and Earth might both be died in Red,
'Caus Black's too Light to moan a CAPEL dead.
Thrice happy, Julius, may thy Year be termed,
Whose Rise and Fall Two Heroes have confirmed:
Thy January, and December, shall
Be writ henceforth in Letters Capital.
Royal approximation! These Two Themes
Tell us, the Virtues may be in Extremes:
What to One Montrosse's learned Sword once gave
The Other shall in our Hearts Engraven have
Methinks we all Circumferentiall seem,
Till meeting we Concentricate in Him.
Nature's Epitome, Our Blazing Star
In whom like Rays the virtues gathered were;
Thus much in Generals: for He Is like Stars
Too comprehensive for Particulars.
His fame (like the Eagle from a Roman's Hearse)
By Psaphon's Birds, shall fill the Universe.
Thrice happy Wicchamists! on Us were darted
The Morning Beams of This bright Sun departed.
Unhappy world under Death's fatal Law
Thou 'rt Plundered of Thy Cornucopia,
And spendthrifts we Our Stock being brought so Low,
May quite despair and now a begging go.
Thus our Penfeather'd Lives may seem to be
The Actors of our own Catastrophe.
Rare, and Divine! too rich for Inhumation
Fitter by far, for Enoch's high translation.
Boast not Antipodes, though You alone
May say you tread against Two Worlds for one,
Despair of Parallels now He Is in Heaven,
Till the next great Platonic Fifty seven.
THO: MUSPRAT fellow of New Col.

(...): Or An ELEGY On the Death of the Honorable CHARLES CAPELL Esquire; Who,
after He had graced Winton Coll. with His Society, made a Voyage into FRANCE,
And returning, upon Christmas Day, not long before His intended Marriage, Dyed
1656.
BUt it is true? Nay, then Entombed
Wisdom must lie, and Honor Doomed,
Those Royal Twins that might comprize
The Angels in their Hierarchies:
That Eagle-spread, those Lamps that die
The Azure-spangled-Canopie.
Lo! CHARLES is Dead, it is all in all,
The loss is Epidemicall:
Let Orpheus come, or Heraclyte,
Let England club Her Anchorite;
All Is inarticulate, as be
The speechless signs of Heraldrie.
Had I the Prophet's head, that Flood
Of Sacred Sorrow; could I Blood,
As Jove did Gold, distill a Pond,
And every drop a Diamond;
Then would I write, and richly conne
The Deluge of Deucalion;
Then would I blaze the glimm' ring Sun,
And Gild the Fate of Phaeton;
From 's Fall I Would Vigor take, as once
The Corpse did from Elisha's Bones:
So limbeck-like, I Would Rhet'rick drain,
And drop it by retail again.
Thus am I Tantaliz'd, and act
The Mute, within a Cataract:
Fame's Trump is full; but who can size
or Paramount Hyperbolies?
Yet (a) Atys -- like I Will speak, and chide
The Fate's disloyal Deicide; Croesus his dumb Son.

And He, as Christ in swathes, shall lie
Grip't up in This Stenographie.
View then His Nonage, and the store
Of WICCHAM's Mineralls, The Ore
So often refined, You Will change the list,
Our Pioner prove's Alchymist:
Nestor's survived; Here then descry
Old Aeson's Palingenesy.
View Him again, You Will find in the draught
A Planet, or an Argonaut:
The Fleece He gained, without a Spell,
Or Palisado 'd Sentinel:
His Hellespont was but a Creek,
His Cholcos, learned Armorik.
Correct your Maps; let Rome recall
The British Colonie: let Gaul
In Him confess she did descry
Re-romanized Britanny.
Hence then ye Dorres o'th 'Time, that prize
Your drousy-Gods Idolatries;
That Guard your Lar, and starve the name
Of never-dying Vesta's Flame:
Here Is He that grace's both the Crow
Of Pallas, and Diana's Bow;
His Dish was Knowledge, all His Meat
Carved Labor, and His Sauce was Sweat.
Was not One famed who once out-shone
The Blazing-starre of Macedon?
Whose Oriental Virtues made
Sol, Cancer-like, run Retrograde.
This, This is He, that Royal Gage,
Panaretus in 's Minorage:
He that Heaven's* Empress could disthrone,
And captivate Endymion.
This, This is He, His Heaven He saw,
His Hymen, and His Naamah.
But o the Fates! the greet is dear,
The Azure's turned a Sable Sphere,
And all reciprocally quaffe
An Hymen, and an Epitaph.
Is this, your promise, Fate? be gone,
It Is damned Prevarication:
Thy Syren's Voice, and Hyen's Guile,
Has vanquished Aegypt's Crocodile.
Fell Tiger Earth! dare'st re-inthrall
Thy Infant's? and turn Caniball?
Does not thy conscious Womb confess
An un accustomed Holiness?
How shall I rate my Grief? He Is dead,
How shall I be Inspirited?
Oh Niobe were Thy Fate mine,
I Would wring out Gore, and shower Brine,
I Would weep to Marble, and abide
His Tear* distilling Pyramide.
But Stay, it is true; the Prophet's come,
Heavn'd Herauld's borne: Delphos be dumb,
Thus Ganymede's arising Urne
Portend's the Fall of Capricorn*
He Falls, Alcides* like, to be
The Mirror of Astronomy.
Could Leo's-Taile a Palace spare
For wanton Berenice's Hair,
And Leo Fail? No, scan the Bliss,
It Is CAPELL'S Apotheosis:
The Hero's lispt, but who can conn
His Threno-thriambeuticon?
WILL. OLDYSS. fellow of New Col.

On the Immature Death of the worthily Honored, and truly noble, CHARLES
CAPELL Esquire; who died on Christmas day Anno Dom. 1656.
CEase Rocky Mourners, you whose Flinty eyes
Gush forth no Torrents at these obsequies
If Moses spare his Rod: may none view this
Rich Urne, who weep's without an Emphasis.
A CAPELL'S Set, or He his luster shrowd's,
Mounting to 's Apogaeum through the Clouds,
For who dares think He Is mortal, whose great name
Can Entheat Dull-wits, and nonplus Fame?
No, no, that hand that murther's others, is
To Him, but Enoch's Metamorphosis.
Imagine how flaming Elias went,
Coach't like bright Phoebus through the firmament,
Thus Soared our Seraphim: no period
Stopped his Career till Centred in his God.
When Heaven's Great Son unmaskt his newborn face,
And like a Giant, strong to run his race
Flew from the Barriers of the womb, and hurled
Down Pythons of faint glory, which the world
Adored, Augustus humbly ceast to be
Styled Lord, ecclipsed by Divinity:
So Our Augustus Hot with active Zeal
Plucked off His Body, then began to feel
More vigorous Heat, which made him scorn to be
Honored on Earth at Christ's Nativitie;
Wherefore undauntedly He cuts His way
Through the Earths Charybdis, Death's Bulimia:
But (like the Arc) at last he haven's at
The Top of that celestial Ararat;
Where He resides, a Representative
Able to make another world Alive.
Ascended then He is and now His face
Placed in a better Light, presents each grace
Fairer and more perspicuous to our Eyes,
Then nearness can, the Pencill's rarities;
Thus we admire, thus we adore the shrine
That comprehended naught but was Divine.
Farewell Brave Soul; O that Earth had a Nest
To lodge this Dove, where He a while might rest
And then return! Had He the Phaenix doom
We now might have another in His room:
Heaven lent Him but four Lustres, to which four
He added Myriads of Lustres more,
And sure this well-improved Talent may
Expect glad Euge's at the great Audit day.
Weep then sad World, and with rich Jove, each how'r
Drop from Thy Treasury a Golden shower.
He that lament's in usual tears, does try
To make a pesant of a Deity.
Once more Farewell High Spirit, we return
And bow in adoration to Thine urne,
Before Whose loud Memorialls shall cease,
The fast-barr'd Graves their Prisoners shall release.
In breife we lastly thus inscribe His Hearse;
Here lye's no Microcosm, but an Universe.
THO: KEN. Hart-Hall Com.

On the untimely Death of the honorable CHARLES CAPELL Esquire; (second Son to
the Lady CAPELL) deceased on Christmas day last.
BUt, shall I trust the Muses on a Theme
Where, if not cautious, they must need's blaspheme?
Will not those Pagans, when they tell His fate
Lowdly with God, and Man expostulate?
Apt to pronounce in one licentious breath,
O Tyrant Heaven, and O Traitor Earth!
Or, if I ought to hope their daring pride
By this sad accident is mortified,
Yet are They not so pin'de with grief, that all
Can scarce clubbe Verses for His Funeral.
Had I that Pen of Mars, His Father's Sword,
Not steept 'ith' Muses Hors-poole, but begoard
In vanquished Blood, then with the Point impress't
On the Virgin Paper of my naked-Breast,
I Would grave His Eulogy, but that I fear,
I should assassinate His Image There:
Cheap is the Eye's Hydrography, a Flood
Too low, unless (with Jove) we could weep Blood.
Mirror of Men! shuffled from Earth, and hurld
To Heaven, to be the Riddle of the World;
With whom rash Nature travailed in post-hast,
Borne an Old man, just like the Protoplast:
And, but for's Beauties, and refined parts,
Plundring the Caskets of poor Ladies hearts,
His charming graces, and what ever can
Complete Nobility, and write Man, Man;
One so Heroic, Pious, Just, and Good,
We should distrust Him to be Flesh and Blood;
But, here is the greatest wonder (strange, and true)
He was a CAPELL, yet a Mortal too.
Thus happy was His life, but nobler bliss
Attended on His Apotheosis:
Have you not seen the Starry Legions rowze
Themselves, to keep their Nightly Rendezvouze,
And all those Heavenly Janissaries rise,
To guard the Freckled Empress of the skies?
Till One (impatient to stand still, and hear
The charming Music of each warbling Sphaere)
Start's from His Ranks, and with disheveled Hair
Mak's an Excursion through the yielding Air,
Dancing to the Harmony, as if he He meant
To frisk Lavaltoes through the Firmament?
So His unshackled Soul, shooting through the Crowd,
Of Lower thoughts, rode trampling on a Cloud,
Through Convoies of bright Stars, while He out-vy'd
Their starveling glories, whose ecclipsed pride
Carried His Torches, but the lesser Seven
His Linke-boyes were to light him up to Heaven:
Atlas the Elephant preferred to bear
On 's brawny back, Heavens Castle in the Air,
Felt then new weight, groaned thrice, and by degrees
Sinking in Reverence, bent his humble knees,
Whilst lost Chronology, had naught to say
Wondering that Christmas was Ascension Day.
To my Lady.
But, pardon ( Madam) that our verses come
When grief should strike us dead, or manners dumb;
For though Your sighs perfume Him with a breath
Able to aromatize the Grave, and Death;
Yet, only such Confectioners as we;
Are able to preserve His memory;
And Your Joint-regent Eyes, whose every Tear
Can re-instate a Broken Jeweller,
(Those Christall-Seas, where when You weep, it is sai'd,
We need not Dive for Pearls, for there they wade,)
Do piously usurp Our share, when solely
You would monopolize all Melancholy.
But, if these froathy Torrents of Our Eyes,
Drown with their Roaring, those Soliloquies,
Snatched up to Heaven for matter to make Hymns
By myriads of attendant Seraphims,
Shed but one costly Tear, and You shall see
'Twill instantly Dissolve the Company.
FRANC. TURNER scholar of New Col.

FINIS.

