THE SOULS WARFARE Comically digested into SCENES, Acted between the SOUL AND
HER ENEMIES, Wherein she comes off VICTRIX with an Angelical Plaudit.

For we wrestle not against flesh and Blood, but against principalities,
against powers, etc.

Ephesians. 6. 12. Quomodo fabulasic vita, non quam diu sed quam been act a sit
refert. -- tantum bonam clausulam impone.

Seneca Epist. 78. LONDON, Printed by S. G. for Allen Bancks, at the Sign of
St. Peter, at the West end of St. Paul's. 1672.

TO The Right Honorable and no less virtuous MARY Countess of WARWICK.
Madam,
I Am sensible, that it is a great presumption in me, being an Obscure Person,
and altogether unknown to your Honor, to prefix that illustrious Name of yours
to this mean undertaking which has been already celebrated to the World, in the
works of your Honorable Brother; whose learned Pen, can give an immortality
to any thing it mentions. But to render my attempt herein, if not warrantable,
yet the more excusable* I must say that my chief design herein, was an Essay
of gratitude toward your Honor, as a poor acknowledgment of your favors,
toward some, the nearness of whose relation to me, has reflected a great part
of the Obligation, upon my self, and rendered me your Debtor. And under this
Character, I am bold to offer these sancies to your Honors Patronage, as a
Testimony to the World, of that real esteem and reverence the Author of them
bears to your admired virtues. The following lines were the unripe fruits of a
youthful fancy, and the divertisements of idle hours. They are innocent and
harmless, And that is the best I will say of them. Recommending them to your
Honors gracious acceptance from

Madam, Your Obliged Servant and Honourer, R. T.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
E^pirea, the Soul.
C^smus, the World.
Pe^^it, Pleasure, her two Minions.
Satan,
^^st,
(...), the Flesh.
Reason, Privy Consellor to Empirea, but disloyal.
Scandal, Poverty, Sickness Castigators.
Faith, Hope, Charity, the three Theological graces, and Attendants to the
Queen Empirea,
(...), Auditus, O^^^ctus, ^actus, ^u^tus, the five Senses.
PROLOG^E
THe Life of Man's, a Tragi Comedy,
Varied with Scenes of sorrow and delight,
The World's the Scene and we the Actors be,
Angels spectators, that behold the sight.
2. The prologue to it, is an Infants Cry,
(S^ ^ur first Scene begins Tragical,)
The Epilogue unto this Tragedy,
A dying g^^ne, Tears, and a passing Bell.
3. The C^mick part thereof, a Scene or two,
O^ Mirth and Laughter, in our frolic Youth,
Attend ^ill with far more Scenes of Woe,
And sadness; those are fictions, these are truth.
4. Heaven gives the Plaudit, when the Act is done,
Or else explodes it if it is done amiss,
Or Life, or Death, Damnation, or a Crown
Of Glory the reward of acting is:
He acts his part unto the Life indeed,
To whom Heavens Plaudit, shall his Act succeed.
THE Souls Warfare,
Actus primus.
Scena prima.
Empirea, Cosmus, Profit, Pleasure, dressed like Pages. Cosm. HAil fairest Queen!


Empir. who is there, the World?


Cosm. -- It Is I,
Madam your humblest servant, that am come
out of that Love and Duty that I bear
unto your Sacred Person, to present
Two of my faithful Servants, to attend
and wait upon your Highness:

Empir Pretty Lads,
What call you them?

Cosm. This in the Sarcenet suite
of diverse Colors, and a swelling Plume
of Ectritch-Feathers dancing on his Beaver,
is called Pleasure; that same other in
a Robe thick laid with Gold, Whose shining luster
outvies the Prince of Day in all his glory,
is Profit; the one a merry wag, and will
defend you from the mind-afflicting Charms
of Melancholy, that same Peevish Fiend,
He Will strew your ways with Roses, you shall ly
on beds of Violets, and shall surfeit too
on Aromatic sweets: both Heaven and Earth
shall yield their daynties up, the Stars shall serve
to make you Jelly; and the Pearly dew
perfumed with the choice attracting spirits
of Fl^ra's Officine, shall every Morn
be for your morning drink; then shall he run
into the Indies, and thence load himself
With richest spices to perfume the Air
When you shall walk abroad; Each morning he
shall wait upon you with a Heavenly Noise
of rarest Music, whose sweet harmony
shall pass that of the Spheres, and fill you full
of joyful ex^acies; Green shades bestrew'd
with Natures verdant Plush, and thickly laced
with various colored flowers: shall please your eyes
and bless your smelling too: then will he lead
you on your gentle Palfrey to the Park,
Where you shall follow brave Acteons mates
over the flowery Lawnes, and Crystal springs
after the light-foot Deer, till they shall fall
down Captive at your feet: then against your
returnrn, shall he new dress him in a Banquet
or when you would be private, he shall read
sweet Amorous Sonnets to you; such as are
Great Ovids bucksome Elegies: and then,
when as the Sun has in his Western Bed
shrouded himself and left his guard of Stars
to watch the slumbers of the universe:
he will lead your senses into Pleasant Dreams,
With the sweet lullaby of pleasant songs
from fairest Virgins such as Hellen was:
or rather such as that same Quintessence
Apelles drew, and who shall likewise mix
their amorous songs, With honyed balm of Kisses,
press on the Cherrys of their yiedling lips;
So shall he entertain you all the night,
Feasting your Grace with pastime and delight.
This other Youth, whose Visage altogether
is not so pleasing, but does seem to look
with a severer, with a graver aspect,
With eyes cast down upon his Mother Earth,
Born in America, where in the Mines
he sometimes dwelt, but since the western World
has fet^'d him thence, and now he flourishes
in the most splendent Courts and Palaces
of Asian and Europian Monarchies he
now with his pleasing Arms intwining round
Great Caesar's Brows, and makes his Majesty
look with a greater Grace; than they of old
did with their Laurel Boughs. He is
a Counselor to Kings; who will not dare
to enter upon any thing, till they
have first consulted him, It Is he must raise
their legions for them, and the metal is
that makes their Soldiers fight, and does inflame
their courages more than Drum, or Trumpet can,
He makes their Navies (like as Silva would
conquer the Ocean) cloud the unruly Main,
and spread themselves into these foreign Soiles,
that Fame her self nere knew, subduing all
the way they go, till all the World should stand
amazed at them; He alone it is,
that is the strength and sinews of the Land,
and does extend his divine influence,
into the darkest Corners of the Weal:
He it is that makes the great ones like to Suns,
each in his place, admired and adored;
That blazens forth their honorable Crests,
and decks their Names with reverence and esteem:
He is a comfort to afflicted ones:
and those afflicted persons, that have left
no Friends nor comforts, he can in a trice
create them both: when they are deeply plunged
in want or misery he helps them out,
When sad, he chears them, when imprisoned frees them,
When sick he cures them, when in pains does easc'm.
It Is for these glorious properties the World
adores him: People placing him in shrines
of well tew'd leather, built him temples of
hard Adamantine, time out-wearing metal;
Worshipping him as God, of whom they find,
so much of good to Body and to Mind.
And now (Great Princess!) see this Glorious wight
that rules the hearts of them that overruled
Great Monarchies here ready stand to beg
to be your Slave, daign him a Pages place,
Illustrious Queen! and in your Privy-Chamber
But let him wait, you will find him diligent
and trusty. He shall fetch the Indian Mines
into your Coffers, fill your Cabinets
with Pearls, more rich than Cleopatra's draught,
Prized at a Kingdom, -- this can Gold and more --

Empir. Nay here is enough;
Base Sycophant, I do not like your wooing;
thinks't thou to trap a pure immortal Soul,
with such inferior trifles? World, do know
who it is I am? Is not my Royal Father
the Great Creator of the Universe,
and King of thee, and all the World beside?
Is not my Country Heaven, of which I am
an heir, and where I have laid up a Crown?
Are not the Angels, whose pure beings are
Exempt from dross and grosser qualities,
Mighty and glorious, my attendants, and
shall I admit of Drudges, base born Slaves
(...) be about me? No, they are too foul,
(...) ^^rthly, too impure: Thy worldlings may
(...) them welfavored, but I can disc^^n
^o fairness in them: as for Pleasure let
him go serve Swine, or tend the bearded Cr^w
that climb the Mountains; whose bruit natures may
require those kind offices that you
have profer'd to me, but an heir of Heaven
slights them as Dirt and Trash: let profit go
again for me, into those durty holes
from whence he came, or to such Earth-worm's fly,
as love like Swine to wallow in their Mire;
But let not dirty clay, burnished ore,
dare to appear before a Heaven-born-Soul
pure as the Stars: I will not be defiled
with such base rubbish; my Choice faculties
will not away with their society,
Nor do I care they should then bear them hence,
I care not for their sight:

Cosm. Madam you are
Ignorant of their worth, you do not know
what comfortsthey will prove, when you shall be
afflicted, or with pains, or loss of Friends,
or any other malady, you will find
no such hearty Cordials as Sir Gold
can then administer; But let me know
upon what ground is your displeasure founded.

Empir. I need no Servitors, I have enough:


Cosm. Store is no sore,


Empir. But they will prove sores to me,


Cosm. Your reason for it,


Empir. To tell you plain they are
too like their owner they are too like to you:

Cosm. Madam is that your thought?


Empir. It is,


Cosm. you may
please to remember, I have not deserved
such usage at your hands, I did not think
you could be so ungrateful (parden me)
I say ungrateful, thus at last with scorn,
back to repay me those indulgencies,
whereby I have preserved you ever since
you were created; tell me, have not I
upheld thy being by my Elements,
have not I fed thee, clothed thee, housed thee, kept thee,
and more -- but I forbear -- you cannot but know
how the whole Microcosm depends on me,
and yet thus to abuse my love and kindness -- it is

Empir. What is it?


Cosm. High ingratitude,


Empir. Thou art deceived vain wretch, did ever I
receive such kindness at thy poisned hands?
Did I e're taste thy bounty? who a spirit,
am made unable ought to entertain
but what is likewise spiritual, these
Corporeal Elements, in me can no
reception find, my food is from above:
Celestial Manna, food from heaven, from whence I had
this being given, never to decay,
but by the same almighty power that did
Create me without other adjument,
I live a life that never shall have end.
Then Cosmus cease to twit
me with those courtesies I nere received,
and so farewell, I Have other business
to mind, then your impertinencies

C^sm. Nay Lady:


Empir, Sweet World forbear, indeed I cannot stay
I must to Court and you will obstruct my way

Scena Secunda.
Satan. Lust. Satan. Great Founder of our Hellish Monarchy!
that by thy power could bright Lucifer
unhinge from his imperial Station,
spoil the great universe, and overthrow
the Lord of this fair Frame, with all the rest
of his star-vying Issue; and thereby
enlarged the Confines of the infernal Crown.
There is great Potentate, a Beauteous thing
We call a Soul, of noble Progeny,
here boarding for a while upon this Earth,
and then bound for the Stars: now we that are
Griped with envy, when we any see
but reaching thither at that glorious Crown,
that we have lost by our rebellion;
have left a while the other great affairs
of this our Kingdom, and to feed revenge
have pre-ordained her a sacrifice,
unto the boiling anger of our breast:
and you Great Sir!
That of our Victor are become our Friend
and jointly labor with us to maintain
and hold up the joint-interest of our Realm
we must implore your aid -- She Is young as yet
and newly kindled and her bosom soft,
it is Virgin wax: and that will easily yield
to whatso'ere impression, let it bear
a Catalogue of thy infernal waiters,
let it be sullied, that what e're is good
may not be legible and then diffuse
thy secret Poison into her, that may
spread into every Veyn and Artery,
and make her foul to him that does so much
desire to win her; nor mean while will I
be idle, but will daily study how
to farther this our great design.

Lust. Illustrious Friend,
Ere since the time thou gave me a being,
and the Universe had cause to spend a curse
on my behalf, and since the time that we
brought down great Anthropos to that estate
whereto a while before, Nemeses had
condemned you: we have made it our design
to enlarge the limits of our new found Kingdom:
Witness, those Millions of Souls, that ly
in Chains of Horror in dark Acheron;
All which by force or cunning, we have won
from him that rules the Region of the Stars:
And shall we let this single animal,
go simple forward in her way to Heaven,
and have no pul-backs for her, frauds, nor slights
to ensnare her with, no Cloudie mists or fogs
to cast before her eyes? no Pitfalls laid
to interrupt her feet? could we have power
by the strength only of one single Sin
to pull down Angels from their sacred Thrones,
into this Pit of Sulphur? and cannot
the like do by this clay-informing fire?
half ours already, by that leprous stain
of hereditary corruption,
wherewith at first I poisoned her; whose guilt
washed of by Baptism and her Saviors Blood
yet habits still remains; her faculties
(Royal attendants to this Heaven-born Queen
already we have corrupted, and made swear
Fealty to our service, Knowledge first,
her great intelligencer, President
too of her Privy Council, and the Star
whose light should guide her to port of bliss,
we have robbed of its heavenly notions
darkened its luster, and instead thereof,
planted dim notions and deceitful lights,
that spread their rays on nothing but what is
Earthly and filthy; the affections
seem to stand neuter yet, so does the Will,
the one we have bribed with some gaudy trifles
as honors, pleasures, riches, and the like;
the Will seems to be governed by them,
but now and then draws back as though it smelt
some treachery, but that which most availes
is, we have gotten Reason in to be
a privy-Councellour, who will no doubt
carry our work on well; the Passions
have mixed themselves with the affections,
disordering and making them unruly:
aiming at nothing but a Tirany,
which all the other powers must obey.
And ^ith we know and policy informs
us, how the way to conquer first must be
by strengthening our selves by potent allies;
We have got the World to be on our side too,
who yesterday attended with a pair
of wily Lads (that can insinuate
into your bosom, and then cut your throats)
offered them to be pages to the Queen
Empirea, But she in a sullen fit,
I wish (It be not policy) refused
them both, but stay, here Cosmus comes himself:
-- Enter Cosmus, with a dejected look, and muttering somewhat to himself. --
Let him relate his embassy at large;
now Mischief! what a Vengeance ailes thy looks
to be so crabbed? don't thy Pitfalls take?
Do men grow wise and 'scape them? or return
thy favors as they would commodities
where they suspect a Cheat? has some sick Nun,
whose Queazy stomach could not well digest
thy fooleries, having but lately took
thereby a surfeit, shut thee out of doors,
and in some Abbey anchorized her self,
and vowed defiance against thee? this would make
Cosmus to frown indeed -- but waving this
prithee how came thou off the other day
with thy two Bastards? did the Queen except
thy courtesy?

Cosmus. -- No Sir, nor hardly would endure their sight,
though I used all the Rettorick I could,
to set them off, and yet me thought at first,
somewhat she did incline, but now and then
She Would turn her head aside, and look as though
some one were whispering somewhat in her ear
and then She Would sigh, and by and by would blush:
But yet no Creature all this while I see
till having finished my Oration,
(which she exploded as a little smoke,)
She with a stiff denial turned about
and left me.

Lust. Bafled! Sure this Soul is monstrous wise,
thus to outwit thee (World) what had thou never
a Rattle in thy hand (which honor some
will call) to gingle in her Ears, nor yet
some curious painted bubbles, such as boys
raise out of Nutshels, to allure her with?
These will do feats with others that declare
by such fond choices, what their Judgments are:
But wisemen with an unconcerned look
can see thy Apes scrambling for Nuts, and toys,
that thou in sport do cast among them, and
laugh at both them and thee --

Satan. What says Caro,
Pleads she not ought in their behalf?

Cosmus Poor Wretch!
She seems to long more than a Bridegroom does,
for the approaching nuptial night, to enjoy
their company, She says her Lady has
made her keep Lent this twelvemonth, and has pined
her with base cankring abstinence so long,
that She is almost ready to forsake
her service, and return to Earth her Mother:

Lust. Intolerable wrongs! as long as flesh
is thus kept under by her Tirannic,
We fight against the wind; but can there be
no way invented for to set her free?
Cannot we get her to rebel, and turn
to us? such treason cannot but delight,
and pleasing seem to mortifyed flesh,
cannot we promise her for hardened floors,
to sink in softer down, for darkened rooms
and solitary haunts, the pleasant walks
of Tempe and I Would; promise Elysium
and all the Joys of the Alcoran -- but tush,
She knows thee well enough -- no need of Bush
But Cosmus, what do think out -- prithee speak:

Cosmus. The Italian in his hottest Jealousy
pries not more narrowly into the ways
and actions of his new espoused wife,
though a Venetian, and not past eighteen,
then does Empirea watch th'inflaved flesh,
forbiding her whatever liberty
Reason might seem t'allow -- who dares not stir
once out of doors, but like a Recluse hid,
to all the world dark-Lanthorn'd as it were,
Nor dare once cast a glance aside, but straight
it is checked, lust charged with deceit and flesh,
be surely penanc't for it

Satan. O Cruel, Cruel as our self, what hope
have we as long as our friend Flesh is kept
thus in subjection to that stubborn dame?
yet we must help her, Reason is you say,
our friend:

Lust. -- He is,


Satan. May not we try,
If with his Oily language he perhaps
may with Empirea prevail to let
her have more liberty.

Lust. We may, and it is
good policy, Flesh shall begin to rail,
and clamor, so we will have the Plot, and then
Reason shall come and help her,

Satan. Very good;
And if that need require, our self will there
be present, and with Reason will aloud
rail in Empirea's Ears, till we shall fright
her into better thoughts,

Lust. it is done, and we
will go about it:

Satan. Fate auspicious be.
Exeunt.
Chorus of Angels. Angel. 1. Thus is our Heaven born sister, fain
To crowd her way through grief and pain,
Ere she can come with us to reign.

Angel 2. Thus do her cursed foes that were
(Once our colleagues) seek to ensnare,
her Heav'n-bound feet, and keep her there.

Chorus. But she shall overtop them all
And come to us when Heaven shall call.

Angel. 1. Mean while, while she thus struggles out
Her passage thorough fear and doubt,
Let Us go and camp ourselves about

Angel 2. her sacred shrine and keep her from
Whatever ill may chance to come
Unto her until she come home.

Chorus. When she shall overtop them all,
And live with us when heaven shall call

Angel 1. And let our gracious Sovereign grant
Whatever succors she may want
Or comforts when her Joys are Scant

Angel 2. That she may never seem to be
A prey left to the Enemy,
But still be Crowned with victory:

Chorus. Till she shall overtop them all
And come to us when Heaven shall call.

Actus Secundus.
Scena prima.
Empirea, Caro, Reason. Empirea. Flesh, pray keep in to day, we must to Court
and you must not be gadding as you use,
When we should thither take the milky way.
Pray stay at home and dress us, we must fast
to day; nay whine not Flesh, it must be so;
I Will tame your stubbornness, and bring you low;
What Is that you say?

Caro. I cannot fast,

Empirea. How Is that you cannot?

Caro. -- No,
Most cruel Mistress, do but see how I
am skelton'd and marcerated by
your fastings, almost quintessenc'd
to skin and bones: see but my Brawn-fal'n-limbs
how lank their skin hangs like to leather baggs;
shall I be martyred that from day to day?
I will not, nay I cannot, it is not
the way to have a servant of me long,
to use me thus, and pine me unto death,
against all reason --
Enter Reason, Satan.
Reas. Good morrow Lady, what is your waiting ma^l and you fallen out?

Empir. It seems so Sir, and't may be it is from you
we are, for even just but now she had
your name up.

Reason. Mine good Madam?

Empir. Yes, yours, good Madam,
you think it may be, we are ignorant
of your devices, and your tricks, to allure
her from our service.

Reas. Madam we that are
great moderatour of all humane things,
that hold the golden Scale wherein are weighed
all humane Actions, and Chief Counselor
to truth, hold this as a disparagement
to our high office, that have hitherto
been a Peacemaker: no, we never come
where there is brawling, 'xcept i be to end
the strife, and you do wrong us to suspect
what never yet occasion offered
to your hard thoughts. --

Empir. Reason, we honor thee, Mortals indeed
have cause to bless thee, and adore thy light,
whom the grave-Magi of all times, have courted;
and in all civil Bodies have a place:
Yea, we our selves are styled rational,
and this above the rest of ani^als:
Thy luster sets a goodly gloss upon
these worldly strifes, but in heavenly things,
thou art wholly blind, thy wisdom, folly, and
thy light but darkness, these are spiritual
that we are about, and you must leave us here:
They are above you, they are too high, too secret
for all your scrutiny.

Reas. how is that, too secret for us, we that are
Nature's Physician, have imbowel'd her
to all her woers; and by several clues
have winded every mistique maze within
the Universal labyrinth of the World
and traced their causes to their entities,
and then proceeding, find them all in one,
comprised and centred in perfection
can more be known to any one then this.

Empirea. Yes, Faith knows more, and tells us mysteries:
not to be fathomed by the utmost line
of all thy cunning, of the Trinity,
and that same Hypostatique union
of the two Natures; Humane and Divine
in one, The-anthropos, and of the great
Change at the final dissolution
these thou art ignorant of.

Satan. Reason 'ile help thee or thou art ore'thro^^^
what madness has possessed the Soul to throw,
dirt in the face of him to whom she owes
her exc'lencie, since to be rational
gives her the advantage of that nobler state
whereby she gloryeth over all the rest
of animals, if Reason lotted were
by the great Sovereign of beings, to
be Judge and President in chief over all
thy family of faculties, how durst
thou thus abuse her great authority,
and call her powers in question to, set up
some new usurping fancies of thy own,
bred in the breasts of melancholy folk,
and vented by tradition through the World.
If thou unthron'st thy reason thus, what will thou be surviving her authority?
irrational, a style that levels thee
But equal to the state of bruits and beasts

Empir. Base fe^nd thy bolt is shot, thy gin is laid,
I know thy wiles thy malice and thy spleen,
in tempting thus our faculties away,
from their allegiance to their Sovereign,
who is not Reason, but that God that gave,
her for a friend and helper to the Soul.
By whose authority she ruled and reigned,
and did dispose as pleased her best to do.
But when perverted, by the envious wiles
in Paradise she turned Rebel to
her God, she lost her self in tyranny,
by which over swaid, we hitherto obeyed,
and followed her dictates, running on
thereby unto our own destruction:
But since in mercy it has pleased God
(in order to that great Redemption
his Son by dying purchased for us)
to renovate our lapsed Natures by
secret infusions of diviner grace,
we find our selves lost to our selves, and not
able by any power of our own
to gain again that Innocence and peace
we lost. Reason has lost her power whereby
she would conduct us through those armed ways
that lead to happiness;
On this account do we disclaim her trust
yiedling ourselves unto a surer guide,
yet hereupon we merit not to be
styled irrational, we own her powers
where she is able and deserves to rule
in civil matters or in moral things.
But in Divinity we sore too high
for her to follow with those lamer wings,
the fall has left her, nor do we decline
her principles but rather would sublime
them to superior perfections;
no way divesting her but seeking to
invest her with more noble energies;
rendering our selves no ways irrational
but rather truly Metaphysical:
in seeking to regain that glorious state,
which others that would wise ones counted be,
and chiefest Friends to reason-slighting, and
instead thereof, choosing a moments space
of Pleasures, ending in eternal pains
before those sure and never-dying joys
show themselves most irrational of all,
and such art thou thy self, O Lucifer,
fine breaking thy allegiance to thy God
thou of an Angel art become a Fiend
Condemned to torments that shall have no end.
But now our reason is grown impotent
we readily submit her to the Will
of him, whose sole commands sufficient ar^
as they are revealed in his sacred word
to claim obedience to the authority,
of him who our Creator is and Lord:

Reason. But does that word that thou pretend'st to be
such an observour of exact such hard
and cruel usage as thy flesh sustains?
He is the God of soul and body both,
both a like tendered by his sacred care,
whose gracious disposition does prefer
Mercy before the goodliest sacrifice:
Nor would these bodies, that he lent unto
their Angel g^ests, should be abused thereby,
nor yet the Temples of his spirit* be
defaced or spoiled by cruel usages,
you are mistaken, God requires no such
things at your hands --

Empir. Reason thy talk is vain,
Thy Counsels frivolous, who does not know
the great concerns of an immortal soul,
were this our handmaid, such a friend to us
as she was first ordained to be, we should
use her accordingly but being now
turned our professed Enemy, we will strive
to keep her under, as we solemnly
have vowed in our Baptismal Covenant
And those rebellious member^ that are still
unruly under that same easy Yoke,
Our Savior has bequeathed unto ^^
shall by constraint be made obedient to
the Dictates of the heaven aspiring mind.
Thus we her by an En^mi^ shall subd^e,
and here^y win that great and glorio^s Crown,
w^ere^ith ou^ l^b^urs ^h^^l rewarded, be
in heaven with other of those blessed ones
that trampling on their clay'it Cottages,
did thence ascend into their several thrones
And thus St. Paul, we find to conflict with
more eagerness against these home-bred-foes,
then e're he did with Beasts at Ephesus;
keeping his body under, and by force,
subjecting it, lest by its fraud or strength,
he should his hope and glory lose at length.
What if these Tabernacles may be said
to be the Temples of the living God,
if he will daign to dwell in Tents of Clay
shall we not strive to make it an abode,
fit for his Majesty? we will sweep it clean,
although the scratchings make it bleed again.
Then hence you treacherous enemies of ours,
our ear hence-forward shall be deaf unto
your cunning whispers that pursue our ruin,
avoid our presence that intend to be
reserved a while unto employments, which
our purely aimed devotion calls us to.
Exeunt Manet Empirea. Sola. Can a Soul be alone and free from thoughts?
that like Court-flatt'rers dog us every where,
and with unwelcome noises still molest,
the peaceful calmness of an holy mind.
These busy Fiends continually attend
our walks, our motions, and retirements, when
we should be private, none but God and we,
then steal these enemies upon us, and
disturb the flights of our devotion,
by whispering unto our senses base,
unworthy things, that call aside our hearts
from its pursuits in meditation
of heavenly things. But though we know their force
to be more potent every way then ours,
yet in his strength for whose sake thus we strive,
we dare appose our force, and faith says yet
We shall come of a more then conqueror.
In the name then of him^ whose name we bear,
And unto whom we did Allegiance swear.
In entering first this military state,
defying those three enemies of his,
World, Flesh, and Devil, I conjure you all
my Senses, and my nobler faculties,
to summon all your strengths, and with me join,
against this threefold Enemy of ours,
whose force so great, and policy so deep,
r^q^ires the utmost of our power and skill,
to deal with, And my Senses, you that have
the greatest trust about us, (for by you
all objects are transmitted unto our
Superior faculties) have you a care,
of this your charge; our state depends on you:
If you prove false, by base confed'racy,
with those our Enemies (that still will by
their fly insinuations labor to
withdraw you from allegiance to your God)
you ruin us to all Eternity:
listen not to their Sirens songs, they will
easily tempt you to Intemperance;
but heed them not, however pleasantly
they look; if you embrace them, I Am undone!
and in my health, you only can be safe.
There are reserved better joys than these,
to feast you with, when ^his frail life is done.
These pleasures you delight in, can afford
no true contentment to a Death-less soul,
whose vaster appetites still thirst t'obtain
more solid joys, that know no date nor bounds,
freed from all interruptions of loss,
or casualty; our boundless aims can be
satisfied no ways, with inferior things,
which loose themselves even in fruition,
and are at best but perishing, and vain.
Those muddy pleasures that continually
^llure our sensual appetites, disturb
the pleasures of the Soul, who is designed
for nobler joys, and by the grosser fumes
that rise from thence, so cloud our faculties,
that we cannot discern those pure delights,
that in Reversion we expect to have,
after this life; when the remembrance
of earthly pleasures will but torture us,
when we shall see them gliding all away,
and leave us nothing but the stinging thought.
of an afflicted Conscience, to reflect
upon the woeful bargain we have made,
in changing an eternity of joys
for momentany dross -- my Senses then
enjoy the pleasures of this world, as they
were first designed, as your viaticum,
as the repasts our gracious father has
assigned us for our journey; let them be
accepted as the tokens of his Love,
Witnesses of his bounty, and the mean
t'inable us in this our tottering shed,
t'imploy our strength in serving of our God.
Who when you shall have no more need of them,
nor we of you, shall recompense our trust
with the rewards of never-dying joys,
and we for ever then shall sing his praise.
Exit.
Scena. Secunda.
Satan. What preaching still (thou Enemy of ours)
still plotting counter-workes to overthrow
our policies? then Satan thou art fooled,
gulled by a simple animal, and shamed
thou art but Beelzebub, the God of flies,
not he that is styled the Sovereign of the Air,
and this worlds prince, these are but mockeries,
and scofs, the sacred Oracles of truth,
have put upon thee, and our power is but
a trifle, while we thus grapple with her
that has victorious Jesus on her side.
But can the experience of so many years
serve us no better now instead, then thus
though crowned with so many victories?
has our employment been e're since the worlds
first ruin, daily to invent new wiles,
and stratagems, whereby to overthrow
the numerous issue of that woeful Sire,
that we at first unhinged from his free state
and brought into this Captive state of ours?
have we so long been conversant with hearts
and known their shifts, their inclinations,
and tendencies, have been so long a spy
unto the secret motions of their minds,
which we by the last word or action
can easily discover and then suit
temptations accordingly, to bring
about our great designs, and fail we now?
then the old serpent is a novice too,
we may lie down and fret our envious breast
to see victorious salvation,
befool our policies, and curb our powers;
yet not contented with an idle hate
though we are conquered we must show our spleen,
It is the fate our angry Sovereign,
has fastened to our malice that it should
make his almighty power more glorious
by those defeats it suffers thereby:
what? she is young, her loves are yet new fledged,
her resolutions not confirmed by,
yet settled habits, and her enemy,
the flesh, (blooming with youth) importunate,
for fuel to suffice its vagrant fires:
she may be tempted yet for all her nice
and strict behavior though her squeamish maw
cannot away with the worlds delicates,
though sugared never so finely, but prefers
a mortifying abstinence before
those fuller meals that others do as much
long to repast on, she may soon be tired
with dragging on through such thorny ways
of abstinence, while her impatient flesh,
makes exclamations of her cruelty.
Or if this fails and she victoriously
persist's in her renewed purposes,
we have another stratagem to act,
What our allurements cannot prevail to do,
Reproach and Scandal shall enforce her to.
We want not instruments that easily can,
bring this about whose tongues first kindled by
our fires, will dare to scandalize that faith
themselves pretend to, and by mocks and jeers
blemish the purity of those, whom they
care not to imitate -- Happy the times
for me, when goodness pass with men for crimes
nor while our agents thus we shall employ,
will be slack unto the utmost linck
of our controuling Chain, we will attend
her Closet, and be ready with the soil
of Vain and Idle thoughts, to mix the fumes
of the pure incense of her holy prayers;
to slay her comforts with her doubts and fears,
and turn her consolations into tears.
Thus any way shall serve to wreak our spite,
Weel hurt and wound her though we lose the fight.
Scena Tertia.
The Scene, a Garden in which walking Empirea, the Senses, attendant, Faith.
Empirea. O what a glorious subject have we here
to raise us into contemplation,
of our Creators Glory! while we see
in every thing, the footsteps of his power,
and wisdom manifested; O how great!
how rich and glorious, must the fountain be,
where these fair streams their flow and being have!
How great that wisdom that so orderly,
in the conjuncture of this goodly frame
of nature has disposed its several parts!
How great that power whose only fiat could
speak them all out of nothing into these
their several beings! and then give them Laws
for conservation by a constant chime,
of never ceasing generation,
by which I see the Plants that lately were
entombed within the Bowels of the Earth,
now to regain a Resurrection,
and lifting up their heads again to heaven,
as 'twere, in thankfulness unto that power,
that so redeemed them from their Winter sleep.
How beautiful, and lovely nature seems!
like to a Bride upon her nuptial day,
How gay the flowers, with what vari^ty!
of colors, tinctured by the artful hand
of their Creator, while their sweetness strives
in emulation for pre-eminence?
How rich a Sallad does the feilds aford,
as food for them, that then are food for us?
How wonderfully has his providence
inrich't the paths, on which we heedless walk,
with these innumerable plants, endued
each with 'its several property and use,
whose various knowledge he has granted to
the mind of man, to suit them to his ends
of Health, or Pleasure: amongst the branches see,
how cheerfully the birds express their joys,
for this sweet season by their merry notes,
sporting themselves in the light Region;
and then descending to the Earth for food,
or to the purling streams, to wet their throats,
when dry with chirping, and then lift their heads
unto the skies; in thankfulness as 'twere
for their Creators bounty! Pretty things,
how brisk they are, that lately hung the head,
oppressed with hardship of the Winter past,
yet then our heavenly father's providence
provided for them, not a Sparrow but
was the peculiar object of his care?
And how much more shall we partake thereof,
that have so great interest in his love,
we are more dear than sparrowes, so says he
that bought us; we were deer to him indeed!
then let distrust, or fretfull care, no more
oppress our spirits: while we have a God,
that cares for us, we will rest on him.
And now my eyes, that have the privilege
of other things; by a restringent nerve,
to have your sight enabled to ascend
into superior objects, that we might
so comprehend the whole Creation,
and therein contemplate your Makers Glory;
look to that glorious place, that is paved with Stars,
where those great Worlds of light, the Sun and Moon:
perform their courses, and give laws thereby,
unto our times and seasons, while the rest,
within their several Orbs do variously
point out such knowledge to the mind of Man,
whereby he see's how lower bodies are
governed, by their higher influence,
And yet this goodly spangled covering,
and Roof of this inferior Ball, whereon
we sojourn, but the outside is of those
same glorious dwellings of the Sovereign
of all, where he, compast with numerous hosts
of Angels, raigns in everlasting bliss.
There, there is our center, thither we aspire,
and long to leave this our imprisoning Earth;
that thither we might mount unto those joys,
that there attend our coming, purchased,
and then prepared by our gracious Lord;
Who keeping there possession for us, we
even long to meet with; he alone it is,
that is our Hope, our Life, our Crown, our bliss.

Visus. What goodly creature's that in yonder walk?
Some Angel sure in mortal habit, that
comes to invade us with astouishment
How well those brave attires become her neat,
proportioned limbs -- But what a Sirens face, --
Crowns all their luster, tempting smooth and fresh
enough to make the blood dance in the veins
of the most frozen-hearted Anchorite.

Empir. Whence this surprise? How came that amorous glance,
stolen from the serious contemplation,
of Natures far more innocent delights?
Thus treacherous still, forbear, too well we know
the danger in those secret glances ly,
we have an Enemy within our breast,
to whom these objects first transmitted by
your treacherous conveyance will embrace
them with the heats of base and lustful fires,
to you betray that holy purity,
of our intentions to a brutish Fiend.
Thus holy David by a wanton glance,
was foiled, and cast into the snares of Lust,
which made him when recovered to pray,
to have his eyes withheld from Vanity.
Thus patient Job, that knew the danger too
of these same spies, bound them by Covenant,
never to look or gaze upon a Maid,
O strange deceits of these our senses, how,
alas how often have we betrayed bin
by these adul'trous glances' When our eyes
have set our heart on fire, with flames of Lust,
lewd books, and images that have conveyed
wanton imaginations into us,
And stained the purity of our best thoughts,
O never may we see those days again!
What are these creatures, we so dote upon,
fine polish't dust that soon will cheat the hopes
of those that most desire them, with a quick
return to wrin^les and deformity,
Beautie's a fading flower that soon decays,
and ends at last in rottenness and stench,
And so my senses all you dote upon,
Will take their farewell in Corruption.

Faith. But I discern incorruptible joys,
suitable objects for a deathless Soul,
that when these temporary pleasures, shall
languish into their Sepulchers of dust,
shall bless them with an endless Vision
of the Creators Glory, whom thou then
shal't see no more by the reflection
of these same outward things, but face to face
there shall we see with ravishment of Joy,
Our Savior clothed with that precious flesh,
in which he suffered, glorified with all
the Royalties of his great Deity,
there shall we see in a full Vision,
all the great Counsels of our God revealed,
in Order unto our Redemption.
And all the secret causes of these things,
that here our understandings, blunted by
our fall, are impotent, in peircing through,
Whereby the Soul in Extafies of wonder,
rapt, shall behold her great Creators Glory,
and Joy therein for ever, these are sights
blessing the mind, with pure and true delights.

Audit. But what a voice was there, when now she sung
the Spheres did nere afford such harmony,
so ravishing as were those melting airs,
that in delicious quavers flowed from
the pretty lips of that same lovely Dame.

Faith. Is there such Music then in mortal breath,
that is scattered with the wind decays and dies:
what ravishment, and raptures must there then
need's 'tend the Ecch's of heavens londer Joys?
when in triumphant songs, those glorious hosts
of Saints and Angels, Halelu-jah's chant,
to their Creators Glory --

Tactus. -- O how soft,
and delicate are those plump lips of here is,
how would they melt in lushious Vapors to
the close impression of an amorous kiss.

Faith: O folly of a Youthful fancy thus
to tempt a Soul unto such sensual thoughts:
those amorous touches and embraces may
please you a while, but when your Idle Clay,
shall moulder into rottenness and dirt,
where will the pleasure of those touches be?
It Will not be long, ere the imprisoned Soul,
be loosed from this corruptible frame,
which she must render to her heavenly Spouse;
as a pure Vessel sanctified and free
from all the stains of Lusts impurity:
meanwhile let the ungoverned youth but think
upon the stripes and wounds of him, that dyed
to ransom him, whose martyred flesh was free,
from all Indulgencies of ease and sloth,
but used to labors, watchings, toils and smart:
Did then our head endure such misery,
and shall the members snort in luxury?

Olfact. Never the India's with their numerous stores,
of spices, could perfume the ambient Air,
with such a fragour as even now there came
from her rich-sented garments as she past.

Faith. Yet is the incense of a holy prayer,
perfumed by faith, more choice and sweet than they,
more sweet the Spikenard of the Church, when she
perfumed the Table of her King therewith.

Gustus. What ever pleasures, yet the senses have
admired in that goodly Paragon,
I count as nothing to the lushious sweets,
that in a well prepared Banquet, I
have feasted on, stored with the chiefest Wines
that France, or the Canaries could afford,
with rich Conserves and Viands intermixed.

Empir. Such are the thoughts of foolish Epicures,
that think no Pleasure comparable to
the gratifying of their Appetites,
with dainty morsels, or delicious wines,
but let those Enemies to Temperance,
but weigh the uses of these things aright,
for which they were intended, and they may
see their abuse to make them worse than Beasts!
whose need's the same with ours, yet use their food,
but to sustain their natures, not to excess,
and their Felld-salads serves their turn as well
as all our Arts of Cookerie can ours:
what are these meats and drinks, that we do so
abuse but daily reparations of
these our decaying cottages, that yet
will fail at length and both together be
turned to Corruption, he that daintier feeds,
at length makes but the fatter feast for worms,
Beasts feed on grass, and Man on Beasts, and Worms
devour the Man; All is corruption.

Faith. Labor not for the meat that perishes,
for there is incorruptible food for Souls;
the hidden Manna, and the Bread of Life.
Man lives not by Bread alone, but by
the sacred Word of the Eternal God.
That Word, that was more sweet to David's taste,
than Marrow, or the sweetest Honeycomb.
By this the Soul is nourished unto
Eternal Life, the other ends in Death.
Let not your Tables then become your snare,
but use your comforts to those sober ends
they were intended, not for surfeiting,
or pampering of your unruly flesh,
but with such moderation, as you may
thereby be fitted better to go through
the Labors of this Life, in serving him,
whose bounty you partake of, and return
Praise, Love, and Duty to him for the same.

Actus Tertius.
Scena Prima.
Cosmus. But what a peevish thing is this same Soul,
that thus disdains whatever kindness we
profess unto her, slighting all our gifts,
pretending falsness in them, that they are
but fair-fac't Monsters, with a stinging tail,
frights all her senses from imbraceing us,
soothing them up with hopes of fairer Joys.
Faith, is the spy that brings her messages,
of Rich Reversions, in a promised land:
a fair, and glorious inheritance,
the interest of which, now with the hopes,
of the Reversion, seems the only stock
on which she lives; She speaks of inward Joys,
and secret raptures, that do out-vy
the greatest pleasures that my Monarch's can
possess and thus she Vilifies and flights
our state, and tramples on our best delights:
But yet we will be revenged, and soon turn
the Courtship of my smiles, into a frown.
My proffers into pains, and make her know,
The world can punish where she cannot woo.
Exit. Scena. Secunda.
Empirea, Slander, Poverty, Sickness, Faith, Hope, and Charity. Slander. O what
a goodly Puritan is here,
squeezing out tears, and snotting of his Walls,
as though Religion only did consist,
in such a specious Piety as this:
to hunt a Conventicle, and then look,
demurely on it, with a starched face,
to say forsooth, and yea, and tell no lies
and swear no Oaths, though to decide a right,
or keep a law; what a fair Pharisce
is this; a cunning Fox i will warrant ye,
that makes the world believe him honest, and
yet dares not be so for his ears, for fear
he should not then be rich, let him alone,
and you will shortly have him preaching out
of some old Prison-Grates or other, where
for his deceits, the Lawyer should center him*
And then his feigned Piety shall be
Revealed, the mystery of Iniquity:

Empir: Rave on mad World, and spend your censures still,
we know your malice, and the object with
it always aimed at; Holiness could nere
find other entertainments yet then scoffs
and mockings, slanders and reproaches;
but it was my Saviors lot to find the same,
among those Jews, that would Blasphemously.
'ford him no better style then Beelzebub.
And may not we as well endure to be
Nick't-nam'd and scoft at? Did not he foretell
what we should look for? let the World mock on,
henceforth i will take it as my portion.
But is it my preciser living, that
give's the ostence, if that be scandal I Will
^ stand them more, and yet be Viler still
Let us ^e branded with Hypocrisy,
God knows our heart and that is enough for me.
The time will come, when they shall come to die,
That they will be found the Hipocrites not I.

^^ith. The time will come when all the World shall stand,
(...) Tribunal, to receive their Doom.
That these same Enemies of his, and thine,
shall see that Innocence, that here was fain
to seek out corners, to avoid the Rage
of their malicious Enemies, shall be made
the subject of thy Praise, and of his glory:
while they mean while shall for their malice be
Cast into gulphs of endless misery,

Charity. Yet let their malice, be required with
sweeter return's from thee, let them obtain
thy pardon, and thy prayers.

Empir. -- So they shall.


Poverty. Come Soul, do know me, in this ragged Garb?
I am no Courtier, thou may well perceive.
Thy house is like to be no Palace, while
I stay in it, thou must be content with poor
and naked Walls, my Dy^t too is spare*
my lodging hard, my Bolster stuffed with cares,
My Physic Labor, and my sauce is sweat:
With which I toil for whatsoever I eat.
Thus have I told you of my quality,
And further, I am called Poverty.

Empir. Poverty, welcome; here sit down by me,
upon this Dunghill, thou were once a Friend
to Job, his faithful Steward, did improve
then his estate to good advantage, and
perhaps thou may do mine so, I have long
Expected thee, yet net never did invite
thy company by any loose or vain
courses of spending, or neglect to get
by lawful ways. Thou come freely, sent
by the Almighty; welcome, though it be
to strip me of my best enjoyments, and
leave me as naked as at first I came
into the World, it is my God that gave
them to me and now he requires them back.
I freely render them to him again,
I know his goodness will not let me want
that which he gives to sparrowes and to flowers,
He is my God still, that is enough, and I
have better treasures stored in him than these,
-- have I not Faith?

Faith. Dear Soul thou have, and his
Bosom is thy Exchequer, whence thou may
Exhaust rich mines of Comfort; there is a Crown
and Kingdom for thee too; in Heaven thou have
Treasures laid up that thou can never be
bereaved of by any Casualty.

Empir. Blessed be God: and having such a store
henceforth my self I Will never reckon poor.
But what art thou, that look so pale and grim?
scarefull as death.

Sickness. A Pursevant to him:
his Messenger, that come to warn thy have
toward a Dissolution.

Empir. -- Welcome last
of all, yet welcom'st dearest Sickness, come
and lead we gently to my fathers home,
I Am weary of this World, and long to be
dissolved, that with my Savior I may be;
I long to have possession of those joys,
that I have waited for, and have my Eyes
wipt from those tears, that in this World find springs
still to add moisture to them, and to sing
-- my Halelu-jah's:

Satan. Soft a while you run
too swift, thin'kst thou thy work is fully done?
where are those evidences that should give
thee title to those Joys? thou may believe
amiss.

Empir. Yet Satan, this same word is sure
whereon I build my hopes and shall endure
to confirm this my faith, when thou and thy
accusing fiends shall be condemned thereby.

Satan. But thou may be mistaken in the ground,
Of this thy faith; it may be sandy found.
Thy faith may be presumption, and the rest
Of all thy graces, seeming, but at b^st.

Empir. No Satan, it is not as thou do suggest,
I Have built upon a Rock, that Rock is Christ.
Whose faithful servant I have been, and find,
The same suggested likewise to my mind.
By him that is the spirit of truth, whom I
Believing must return to thee the ly.
Then hence malicious fiend, and tempt no more,
or if thou dare (as I look to find,
thy malice greatest now, when it has least
time for to act in) yet O Satan, know
that ever conquering Enemy of thine,
with whom I now a going am to Reign,
that has protected me against thy spite
so long, will not now leave me, but will keep
me to the last, until my warfare's done,
Then Death shall give me Victory, and a Crown.
And now Vain World farewell; false Enemy,
Let these bones rest, and thou shall not hurt me,
No more henceforth, need I to fear thy spite,
For I have conquered and won the fight.
My Crown is ready and I only stay,
For my great Captains word, to call away.
Farewell, my flesh no more a shed to me,
But Feasts for worms, and yet how loath are we,
To part that have so long been partners here,
Yet we must part, thou to thy dust and there,
Rest for a while, and I to heaven, where I
Shall shortly too expect thy company.
When we shall reunited be again,
With Christ our head, for evermore to reign.
Farewell my Hopes, you blessed spies that have
still cheered us amidst our weary steps,
with sweet relations of that promised Land,
that we are now agoing to possess.
No more we need your help, but leave you for
a guide to those that follow us: and Faith.
Triumphant Faith, thou glorious instrument
of this so great acquired Victory,
The substance of our hopes, and evidence
of things before not seen, but now to be
discovered in full Vision, Farewell.
But Charity, greater than all the rest,
thou must go with us, and receive the Crown.
Thou art alone that grace, which shall receive
perfection in that place of happiness,
where thou united to the breast of him,
that is the fountain of all Charity,
shall thence flow back again in joys to me.

I have fought a good fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me, a Crown of Righteousness. etc. 2. Tim. 4,
7, 8.
Cujus Ovantis Animae faelicis status nullus.
FINIS.

