THE ADVENTURES OF FIVE HOURS.

A Tragi-Comedy.

Non ego Ventosae Plebis suffragia venor. Horat. Febr. 21o 1662.
IMPRIMATUR

JOHN BERKENHEAD.



LONDON, (...)

To the Right HONORABLE, HENRY HOWARD, OF NORFOLK.
SInce it is Your Pleasure (Noble Sir) that I should hold my Fortune from You;
like those Tenants, who pay some Inconsiderable Trifle in lieu of a Valuable
Rent, I humbly offer You this Poem in Acknowledgment of my Tenure: and I am
well pleased with this Occasion to Publish my Sense of Your Favors, since it
seems to me a kind of Ingratitude to be Thankful in Private.

It was bred upon the Terrace-Walks in Your Garden at Aldbury; and, if I
mistake not, it resembles the Place where it was Brought up: The Plot is
Delightful, the Elevations Natural, the Ascents Easy, without any great
Embellishments (...)

I designed the Character of Antonio as a Copy of Your Stedy Virtue; if it
appear to those, who have the Honor to know You, short of the Original; I take
leave to inform them, that You have not sat to me long; It Is possible,
hereafter I may Gratify my Country for their Civility to this Essay with
something more worthy of Your Patronage, and their Indulgence.

In the Interim I make it my Glory to avow, That had Fortune been Just to me,
She could not have Recompensed the Loyal Industry of my Life with a more
Illustrious Title, than that which You have been pleased to Confer upon me; of
YOUR FRIEND. To which (as in Gratitude I am bound) I Subjoyn that of

Your most humble Servant, S. TUKE.

The First SCENE is The City of SEVIL.
The Prologue Enters with a Play-Bill in his hand, and Reads, This Day being
the 15th of December, shall be Acted a New Play, never Played before, called
The Adventures of Five Hours.

A NEW PLAY.

They Are in the right, for I dare boldly say,
The English Stage never had so New a Play;
The Dress, the Author, and the Scenes are New.
This ye have seen before ye'l say; it is true;
But tell me, Gentlemen, who ever saw
A deep Imrigue confined to Five Hours Law.
Such as for close Contrivance yields to none:
A Modest Man may praise what is not his own.
It Is true, the Dress is his, which he submits
To those who are, and those who would be Wits;
Never spare him Gentlemen, for to speak truth,
He has a per'lous Cens'rer been in's Youth;
And now grown Bald with Age, Doting on Praise,
He thinks to get a Periwig of Bays.
Teach him what it is, in this Discerning Age
To bring his heavy Genius on the Stage;
Where you have seen such Nimble Wits appear,
That passed so soon, one scarce could say they were here.
Yet after our Discoveries of late
Of their Designs, who would Subvert the State;
You Will wonder much, if it should prove his Lot,
To take all England with a Spanish Plot;
But if through his ill Conduct, or hard Fate,
This Foreign Plot (like that of Eighty Eight)
Should suffer Shipwreck in your Narrow Seas,
You Will give your Modern Poet his Writ of Ease;
For by the Example of the King of Spain,
He resolves never to trouble you again.

THE PROLOGUE AT COURT.
He Addresses himself to the Pit. AS to a dying Lamp, This refers to the
Authors purpose of Retirement, at that time when his Majesty recommended this
Plot to him.
one drop of Oil
Gives a new Blaze, and makes it live a while;
So The Author seeing his decaying Light,
And therefore thinking to retire from sight,
Was hindered by a Ray from the upper Sphere,
Just at that time he thought to disappear;
He chanced to hear his Majesty once say
He liked this Plot: he staid; and writ the Play;
So should Obsequious Subjects catch the Minds
Of Princes, as your Seamen do the Winds.
If this Attempt then shows more Zeal, than Light,
'Tmay teach you to Obey, He looking up and seeing the King starts.
though not to Write.
HA! he is there himself. He Kneels. He Rises.
Pardon my sight,
My Eyes were dazzled with Excess of Light;
Even so the Sun, who all things else displays,
Is hid from us in the Glory of his Rays;
Will You vouchsafe Your Presence? You, that were given
To be our Atlas, and support our Heaven?
Will You (Dread Sir) Your Precious Moments lose
To Grace the first Endeavors of our Muse,
This with Your Character most aptly suits
Even Heaven it self is pleased with the first Fruits.

DRAMMATIS PERSONAE.
Porcia. Camilla.
Young Ladies. Don Carlos. A Kind Brother to Camilla. Don Henrique. A Severe
Brother to Porcia. Don Antonio Pimentel. Contracted by the Mediation of Friends
to Porcia before he saw her. Don Octavio. Secret Gallant to Porcia, but
feigning to be in Love with Camilla. Flora. Waiting Woman to Porcia. Ernesto.
Sancho.
Servants to Don Antonio. Diego. Servant to Octavio. Sylvio. Geraldo. Pedro.
Servants to Don Henrique. The Corigidor, and Attendants.
THE SCENE SEVIL. The Reader is desired to take notice of these Errors of the
Printer.
Page 6. line 4^. read, Does fully state the difference of our Fortunes. Page
12. line 8. read, These Descants on our Griefs, etc. Page 19. line 43. read,
And trusted to her Eyes when she did Wake.
The First Act.
THE SCENE DON HENRIQVE's HOUSE. Enter Don Henrique, who is immediately
followed by Sylvio. Sylvio. SIgnior, Don Carlos is without.

Henr. Wait on him in.

Enter Carlos. Car. Cousin, to me this day has longer seemed than usual,
Since it is so far advanced without our seeing one another.

Henr. Me thinks so too; but you repair your Stay,
By coming hither opportunely now;
You have so often born with my Distempers,
It Is fit that once at least you should partake
Of my Good humor.

Car. What ere the Cause may be (I Am sure) I joy
In the Effect, and may it long continue.

Henr. I can inform you by experience now,
How great a satisfaction it is to find
A Heart and Head eased of a weighty care;
For a Gentleman of my warm temper,
Jealous of the Honor of his Family,
(Yet never blemished) to be fairly freed
From the Tuition of an Orphan Sister,
Rich, Beautiful, and Young.

Car. You know, Don Henrique, that for diverse years,
Your Friend has been with the like Province charged,
A tender Sister, by our Parents will,
(When they were called from all their Cares below)
To mine committed; and though more exposed
Still to the world than yours; and (Sir) unless
Nearness of blood deceive me, short of few
In the advantages that draw Pretenders;
Yet thanks to my Temper, Cousin, as well
As to her Virtue, I have seen her grow
Up from her Childhood, to her Dangerous Age,
Without the least Disturbance to my rest:
And when with equal Justice I reflect
On the great Modesty and Circumspection
Of lovely Porcia, I conclude, that you
Might well have slept as Undisturbed as I.

Henr. Sir, I complain not of my Sisters conduct;
But you know well, young Maids are so exposed
To the Invasion of audacious men,
And to the Malice of their envious Sex,
You must confess the Confines of their Fame
Are never safe till guarded by a Husband;
The wisdom of Relations ought to use
Preventions of all sorts; but dear Carlos,
The Blemish once received, no Wash is good
For stains of Honor, but th'Offenders blood.

Car. Y' are too severe a Judge of point of Honor.

Henr. And therefore having not long since received
The news, that Don Antonio Pimentel,
Is likely to be here this night from Flanders;
To whom my Sister by Velladas means,
(Our common Friend and Patron) is contracted;
I will not close these eyes till I have seen
Her, and my Cares, safe lodged within his arms.

Car. I find you travels, Cousin, have not cured you
Of that innate Severity to Women,
Which grows to be a National reproach
Unto us all abroad; the world laments
That miserable Sex amongst us here,
Born only to be honorable Prisoners;
The more of Quality, the Closer kept;
Which Cruelty is revenged upon our selves,
Whilst by Immuring those whom most we Love,
We sing and sigh only to Iron Grates.
As cruel is that over-cautious use,
By Proxy to contract Parties Unknown
To one another; this is only fit
For Sovereign Princes, whose high qualities
Will not allow of previous interviews;
They sacrifise* their Love to Public good,
Consulting only Interest and Blood.
A custom, which as yet I never know
Used between persons of a Lower rank,
Without a sequel of sad Consequence:
Sir, understand me right; I speak not this
By way of Prophecy; I am no stranger
To Don Antonios great reputation,
Which I believe so just, I no way doubt
Your Sisters being happy in him.

Hen. Don Carlos, let us quit this Argument;
I now am going to our noble friend
And kinsman the Corigidor, to see
If he will honor with his Company
My Sisters Wedding; will you come along?

Car. Most willingly; as soon as I have brought
My Sister hither, and left her with yours.

Henr. I have some business, Cousin, by the way,
I Will go before, Henrique waits on him to the door.
and wait you in the Henrique waits on him to the door.
Piazza.
Your Servant, Cousin.
[Exit Carlos. This Kinsman is my bosom friend, and yet
Of all men living, I must hide from him
My deep resentments of his Sisters scorn;
That cruel Maid, to wound me to the Heart,
Then close her Ears against my just complaints;
But though as yet I cannot heal my wound,
I may, by my Revenge upon my Rival
Divert the Pain; and I will drive it home;
There Is in Revenged a Balm, which will appease
The present grief, and Time cure the disease.

[Exit Henrique. Enter Porcia. Porcia. My heart is so oppressed, with fear and
grief,
That it must break, unless it find relief;
The Man I love is forced to fly my sight,
And like a Parthian, kills me in his flight:
One whom I never saw, I must embrace,
Or else destroy the honor of my race.
A Brothers Care, more cruel than his Hate;
O how perplexed is my unhappy fate!

Enter Carlos and Camilla. Car. Cousin, I thought my Sisters company
Would not displease you, whilst I wait upon
Your Brother in visit.

Porc. Sir, you oblige me with a welcome favor;
aside. I rather should have styled it Charity,
To bring a friend to her, whose cruel fate
Has robbed her of her self.

Came. Me thinks, it is pity that a wall should make
The houses two, of friends so entirely one,
As you, and I, and our two Brothers are.

Porc. If it be true, that Lovers live much more,
There where they Love, than where they Breath, I Am sure
No walls can sever us, w' are still together.

Car. Were I not much engaged, I would not quit
So sweet a Conversation; but, Sister,
At my return, I Will wait upon you home.

Porc. For this night, Cousin, pray let her be mine,
I beg it of you both.

Car. You may command, we are both yours.

[Exit Carlos. Porc. My dear Camilla, Porcia throws her self on camillas neck
how I longed to have thee,
Where freely breathing out my Grief, I might
Some mitigation from thy Pity find;
But since there is no true Pity without Pain;
Why should I Ease, by thy Affliction gain?

Came. Ah Porcia! if Compassion Suffering be,
And to Condole be Pain; my Destiny
Will full revenge in the same kind afford;
Should I, but my unequaled griefs relate,
And you, but equally participate.

Porc. If yours, as mine, from Love-disasters rise,
Our Fates are more allied than Families.

Came. What, to our Sex, and blooming age can prove
An anguish worthy of our Sighs, but Love?

Porc. It Is true, Camilla, were your fate like mine,
Hopeless to hold, unable to resign.

Came. Let Us tell our Stories, then we soon shall see,
Which of us two excells in Misery.

Porc. Cousin, agreed.

Came. Do you begin then.

Porc. You know, After a little pause. Camilla, best, how generously,
How long, and how discreetly, my Octavio
Has served me; and what trials of his faith
And fervor I did make, ere I allowed
The least hope to sustain his noble Love.
Cousin, all this you know; 'twas in your House
We had our interviews; where you were pleased
To suffer feigned addresses to your Self,
To cover from my watchful Brother's eyes,
The real passion which he had for me.

Came. My memory in this needs no refreshing.

Porc. And how one Evening (O that fatal hour)
My Brother passing by Don Carlos house,
With his great Friend and Confident Don Pedro,
Did chance to see the unfortunate Octavio,
At your Balcony, entertaining me,
Whom not believing there, he took for you;
Where mad with Jealousy, his cruel nature
(To which all Moderation is unknown)
Resolves to stamp all your Neglects of him,
In's supposed Rival poor Octavio's heart;
He, and his Friend both draw, Octavio
Retires, they assault him, who in's own defense
Does kill Don Pedro, and is forced to fly.
My Brother cruelly pursues him still,
With such insatiate thirst after revenge,
That nothing but Octavio's blood can quench;
Yet covering still his Rage and Jealousy,
With the resentment of Don Pedro's death.

Came. Is this the sum of your sad story, Porcia? Is this all?

Por. No, no, Camilla, it is the Prologue only,
The Tragedy does follow; this Tyrant,
This cruel Brother, to The Impetuous Laws
Of whose Tuition, our deceased Parents
My Person and my Fortune have condemned,
In his unjust Suspicion restless grown,
(Which he to palliate Vice with Virtues name,
Does Sense of Honor call) takes an Allarm,
And starts at every shadow; as if reproach
Attended all the actions of a Sister,
Though never so Circumspect; and uses me,
As if the Honor of our Family
Were over-thrown for ever* should my Eyes,
Or Judgment, be but the least part allowed
In making choice of him should be my Husband.
Therefore to frustrate all my hopes at once,
He has already married me by Proxy,
To one in Flanders, whom I never saw,
Who is this very night expected here.

Came. Is such a rigor possible, dear Porcia?

Por. Was ever Misery like mine, Camilla?
Heightened to such extremes, past all relief?
If I acquaint my Brother with my Love
TO Octavio, the man he most does Hate,
I must expect the worst effects of fury;
If I endeavor to Forget Octavio,
Even that attempt renews his memory,
And fresh Disquiet gives; If I refuse
To marry, I am lost; If I obey,
I cast Octavio and my self away.
Two such Extremes of ill, no Choice admit,
Each seems the Worst; on which Rock shall I split?
Since if I marry, I cannot survive;
And not to marry; were to die alive.

Came. Your Story (I confess) is strangely moving;
Yet if you could my Fortune weigh with yours,
In Scales of equal Sensibility,
You would not change your Sufferings, for mine.

Por. What can there be in Nature more afflicting,
Than a Divorce from The Object of our Love,
For ever, to embrace the thing we Hate?

Came. Have you not known that Object of your Love?
And entertained the Person you esteem?
Have you not heard, and answered to his Sighs?
Has he not born his Part in all your Cares?
Do not you live, and reign within his heart?

Por. I doubt no more his Faith, that my hard Fate.

Came. But tell me, dearest Porcia, if I love
One, I never shall see, and suffer as much
Without the Means of ever expressing it,
As what I suffer is above expression;
If all my Sighs wander in fleeting Air,
And never can reach his ears for whom they are formed;
If all my Passion, all my killing Cares,
Must be for ever* to their Cause unknown;
If that their weight must sink me to my Grave,
Without one Groan that he can ever hear,
Or the least hope, that I should ever obtain
By Pity Ease, or Cure by his Disdain:
If this the state of my Misfortune be,
Say, dearest Porcia, do you envy me?

Por. What over-cruel Laws of Decency
Have struck you dumb? have you misplaced your Love,
On such a Subject, as you dare not own?

Came. No, the Cause is worthy of the Effect;
And though I had no Passion for his Person,
I were Ungrateful if I should not give
The first place in my Heart to such high Merit.

Por. If he has been so Generous, to deserve
Your Love, why are not you so Just, to let
Him know it?

Came. It Is impossible; Ah! that dismal word
Does full state the Difference of our Fortunes:
You, in your first Adventure have been crossed,
But I, before I can set out am lost.

Por. Pray make me comprehend this Mystery.

Came. It Is to open my wounds afresh, dear Porcia, After a little pause.
But You must be obeyed --
The Conde de Onniate being sent
Ambassador unto the Emperor;
We having the honor to be near allied
To him, by his Lady, (who likewise went
That Journey with her Husband) my Brother
Was desired by her to make that Voyage;
Whose tenderness for me, nor suffering him
To let me stay behind, I was engaged;
And treated by the Ambassadress, my Cousin,
With more respect than I could ever merit.

Por. She Is a Lady, famed for great Civility.

Came. We had not passed much time in the, Emp'ror'S Corut,
When my dear Brother unexpectedly,
By urgent business, was called back to Sevil;
And in our return (too near a Garrison
Of The Enemies) our Convoy was surpised,
And routed by a Party of their Horse.

Por. Camilla, you begin to raise my fears.

Came. We Prisoners made, were hurried straight away
To their Quarters, where my malicious Fate
Made me appear too pleasing to the Eyes
Of their Commander; who at first approach
Pretends to Parley in a Lovers style,
Protesting that my Face had changed our Fortunes,
And him my Captive made: But finding soon
How little he advanced in his Design
By Flattery, and his feigned Submission;
He shifts his Person, calls me his Prisoner,
And swears my Virgin-Treasure was his Prize;
And yet protests he had much rather owe it
To my Indulgence, than his own Good Fortune;
And so through Storms and Calms, the Villain still
Pursues his Course to his accursed End;
But finding me inflexible to Threats
As well as Fawnings, he resolves to use
The last, and uncontroled Argument
Of Impious Men in Power, Force.

Por. Ah poor Camilla! tell me, where was then
Your Brother, at a time of such distress?

Came. My Brother? he, alas, was long before
Born away from me, in the first Encounter;
Where having certainly behaved himself
As did become his Nation and his Name,
Remained sore wounded in another House.

Por. Pr'ythee make haste to free me from this fright.

Came. The Brute approaches; and by Violence
Endeavors to accomplish his intent;
I Heaven invoke, and strong Resistance make,
But with Unequal force, though Rage supplied
Those Spirits, which my Fear had put to flight;
Breathless at length with crying out, and striving,
I spied a Dagger by the Villain's side,
Which snatching boldly out, as my last refuge,
With his own Arms I wound the Savage Beast;
He, at the stroke, unseas'd me, and gave back;
( So Guilt produces Cowardice) then I
The Dagger pointing to my breast, cried out,
Villain, keep off, for if thou do persist,
I Will be my self both Sacrifise and Priest;
I boldly now defy thy Lust, and Hate;
She that dares Choose to die, may Brave her Fate.
Immediately the Drums and Trumpets sound,
Pistols go off, and a great cry, To Arms,
To Arms: The Lustful Satyr flies; I stand
Fixed with amazement to the Marble floor,
Holding my Guardian Dagger up aloft,
As if the Ravisher had threatened still.

Por. I fancy thee, Camilla, in that brave posture,
Like a noble Statue, which I remember
To have seen, of the enraged Juno,
When she had robbed Jove of his Thunderbolt.

Came. Freed from this Fright, my Spirits flow so fast
To the forsaken Channels of my Heart,
That those who by their orderly access
Would have Supported life, by Throngs oppress.
O're-charg'd with Joy, I fell into a Swoon;
And what was done in this Parenihesis
Is not within the Circle of my Knowledge.

Por. Y' have raised me to a mighty Expectation;
Will the Adventure answer it, Camilla?

Came. At my return to life, opening my eyes,
Think, dearest Porcia, how I was astonished,
To find there kneeling by my side, a Man,
Of a most noble Form, who bowing to me,
Madam, (says he) you are welcome to the world;
Pardon, I pray, the Boldness of a Stranger,
That humbly sues t'you to Continue in it;
Or if You needs will Leave us, stay at least
Till I shall have Revenged your wrongs, and then
I Will wait upon you to the other world,
For You withdrawn, this will a Desert seem,
And Life a Torment.

Por. High gallantry, Cousin, for a first Address.

Came. 'Twas so Surprising, that my Confusion
Checked my Reply: but I suppose my Looks
Did speak the grateful Language of my Heart;
For I perceived an Air of Joy enlighten
His manly Face; out, O! it soon was clowded,
By fresh Allarms; We heard the Soldiers cry,
Where Is Antonio, The Enemy is ralli'd,
And coming on to give Second Charge;
He started up, and with a Mien, that marked
The Conflict 'twixt his Honor and his Love;
Madam, (says he) the Soul was never yet
With such Convulsion from the Body torn,
As I from you; but it must never be said,
That Don Antonio Pimentel was seen
To Follow in Dangers those he ought to Lead;
And thus the Vanquished Conqueror Disappeared,
Leaving that Image stamped upon my Heart,
To which I all the Joys must Sacrifice
Of the poor remnant of my wretched Life;
If properly to live I may be said, She puts her Handkerchief to her Eyes.
When all my hopes of Seeing him are dead.

Por. What said you was his name, Camilla?

Came. Don Antonio Pimentel, I told you.

Por. O Heavens! Antonio Pimentel?

Enter Henrique. Hen. I Am pleased to find you Speaking of your Husband.

Came. What Is that I hear? Aside. her Husband?

Hen. Have you the Letter ready, I desired you
To write to him? I Will send a Servant with it,
To meet him on the way, 'twill show Respect.

Porc. You know my Obedience, Brother.

Hen. It Is well, Sister.

Enter Sylvio. Sylv. Sir, here is a Servant of Don Antonio,
Newly alighted at the Gate; he is come
Post from his Master, charged with Letters for You.

Hen. You never could bRing me a more welcome News;
Call him in, Sylvio: Sister, you may
Withdraw, and take this time to ask your Cousin,
How she likes my Choice of your Wedding-Cloathes.

Por. My Wedding-Cloathes? Ah! miserable Maid!
The Heathen so to their Feigned Deities
Adorned the Victims they did Sacrifice.

[Exeunt Porcia and Camilla. Enter Ernesto and Sylvio. Ern. Signior, Don
Antonio kisses your hands,
And sends me to present this Letter to you.

[He gives a Letter to Don HeNrique. Don Henrique opens it, and seeming to have
read it to himself, says, Hen. I Am glad you left him well; but yet me thinks,
He writes doubtfully of his being here
This night, as I expected.

Ern. His Letter, I suppose, declares his purpose.

Henr. I Will answer't, and dispatch you presently.
In the mean while go make him welcome, Sylvio.

Exeunt Sylvio and Ernesto at one door, and Henrique at the other. Enter
Sylvio, Ernesto, Geraldo, Pedro, with some Cups of Chocolate. Sylv. Meethinks,
Camerade, a soop of Chocolate
Is not amiss after a tedious Journey;
Your Master's Health, He drinks. Sir.

Ern. I Will do you reason, Sir.

Sylv. Pray how long is it, Brother, since you left Spain?

Ern. It Is now five years, and upward, since I went
From Sevil, with my Master, into Flanders,
The King's Fencing-School; where all his Subjects,
Given to Fighting, are taught the Use of Arms,
And notably kept in breath.

Sylv. Your Master, I am sure, has got the Fame
To be a Per'lous man in that rough Trade.

Ern. He Is a brave Soldier, Envy must confess it.

Pedr. If seems so in faith, since merely by the force
Of his great Reputation, he can take our Bright
Young Mistress so, without a Siege.

Ern. I hope she will be Revenged on him ere long,
And take him too, by the force of her Wit,
And Beauty.

Pedr. S'has more than a Child's Portion, Sir, of both,
I dare assure you.

Sylv. But, pr'ythee, Brother, instruct me a little,
Tell me, what kind of Country is this Holland,
That Is so much talked of, and so much fought for.

Ern. Why, Friend, it is a huge Ship at Anchor, fraught
With a sort of Creatures, made up of Turf,
And Butter.

Pedr. I pray, Sir, what do they drink in that Country?
It Is said, there is neither Fountains there,
Nor Vines.

Ern. This is the B^tler sure by his apt question. Aside.
Friend, they drink there a certain muddy Liquor,
Made of that Grain with which you feed your Mules.

Pedr. What? Barley? can that Liquor quench their thirst?

Ern. You Would scarce believe it did, had you but seen
How often they drink.

Pedr. But, methinks, that should make them drunk, Camera^

Ern. Indeed most Strangers do think so, but they
Themselves believe it not, because they are so,
So often.

Ger. A Nation sure of Walking Tuns; the World
Has not the like.

Ern. Pardon me, Friend, there is but a great Ditch
Butwixt them and such another Nation;
If these Good-fellows would but Join, and drink
That dry, in faith they might shake hands.

Ger. Pr'ythee, Friend, can these Dutch Borraccios Fight?

Ern. They can do even as well, for they can Pay
Those that can fight.

Sylv. But where, I pr'ythee, do they get their Money?

Ern. Oh, Friend, they have a Thriving Mystery;
They Cheat their Neighboring Princes of their Trade,
And then they Buy their Subjects for their Soldiers.

Sylv. Methinks our Armies should beat these Dull Fellows
Out of the World.

Ern. These Dull Fellows will sooner beat our Armies
Out of their Country; Why, Friend, ready Money
Will do much more, in Camps, as well as Courts,
Than a Ready Wit, I dare assure you.

Ger. What a Gods name could come into the Heads
Of this People, to make them Rebel?

Ern. Why Religion, that came into their Heads
A Gods name.

Ger. But what a Devil made the Noblemen Rebel?

Ern. Why that which made the Devil himself Rebel, Ambition.

Sylv. This is a pleasant Fellow; Aside.
I find that you Soldiers do not want Wit.

Ern. But I find he wants Wit that is a Soldier.
Gentlemen, your Company's very good,
But I have business that requires Dispatch.

Pedr. Will you not mend your Draught before you go?

Ern. I thank you, Sir, I have done very well.

[Exeunt. Enter Camilla, Porcia, Flora. Por. Was ever Misfortune like to mine,
Camilla?

Came. Was ever Disaster, P^rcia, like to mine?

Por. That I must never see Octavio more.

Came. That I again must Don Antonio see,
Never to see him Mine.

Por. I, to be married to the Man I HaTe.

Came And I, to have the Man I Love, torn from me.

Por. I am, by Robbing of my Friend, undone.

Came. And I (alas) by Yielding, ruin both.

Por. Ye Powers, who these entangled fortunes give,
Instruct us how to Die, She weeps.
or how to Live.

Came. Cousin, when we should Act, then to Complain,
Is Childishly to beat the Air in vain.
The sedescants on our Griefs do but Perplex,
Let Us seek the Remedy; You know, our Sex
This Honor beats from Men, in Exigents
Of Love, never to want Expedients.

Por. You have awakened me, give me your Veil,
Quickly, my Dearest, quickly; and You, Flora,
Run and see if my Brother be settled
To the Dispatching of Antonio's Man. Porcia takes off Camilla's Veil and puts
it on upon her self.


[Exit Flora. Came. What mean you, Porcia?

Por. If once my Brother be set down to write,
I may securely reckon one hour mine;
His Wits are only in his Choler quick
And his Hand ready in Revenge; he is so
Extravagantly Jealous, he distrusts
The Meaning of his own ill-chosen Words,
And so at length can hardly fix on any.
This Time I will make use of to go see
Octavio, and let him know that the last Term
Of all our Hopes is ready to Expire,
Unless his Wit, his Courage, and his Love,
Some quick Expedient find for our Relief.

Came. Why, How, and Where do you hope to speak with him?

Por. In his own House, where he does lie concealed,
It Is not far off, and I will venture thither.

Came. Know you the way?

Por. Not very well, but Flora's a good Guide.

Enter Flora hastily. Flo. O Madam! he is coming already.

Por. Ah spiteful Destiny! let us retire,
Corin, into my Chamber.

[ Exeunt Porcia and Camilla. Enter Henrique and Ernesto. Henr. If you desire
to speak with her, you may.

Ern. I should be very glad to tell my Master
That I have had the Honor to see his Bride.

Henr. Where'oyour Lady, Flora?

Flor. She Is in her Chamber, Signior.

Henr. Tell her, (...) does desire
To do his Duty to her, ere he goes.
[Exit Flora. Friend, you will find her there, without a Veil,
In her Home Dress, but you are privileged
For this free Access, by your Relation.
Whilst you wait on her, I Will go end my Letter.

[Exit Henrique. Enter Camilla, Porcia, and Flora. Por. If thou love me, get
him quickly away,
Before my Brother come, She gives Flora a Letter.
and give him this.

Ernesto addresses himself to Camilla, seeing her without a Veil. Ern. Madam, I
have been bold to beg the Honor
Of Seeing you, to make my self more welcome
To my Lord, at my return.

Por. A rare Mistake, Aside.
further it, dear Camilla.
Who knows what Good this Error may produce?

Came. Friend, in what state left you your Lord and mine?

Ern. As happy as the Hopes of being Yours
Ought certainly to make him, Madam.

Came. I would the Master were as easily deceived. Aside.

I pray present my Humble Service to him:
Flora, give him the Letter; Farewell.

[Exeunt Camilla, Porcia, and Flora. Ern. Now by my Life, she is a lovely Lady;
My Master will be ravished with her Form;
I hope the Bargain, which her Brother made,
By the interposal of Vellada's Power,
(Though founded only in Interest) may prove
As happy a Marriage, as any other
Made after the old fashion, chiefly for Love;
And that so rare a Beauty may have power
To bring him back to his right Wits again
From his wild Ravings on an unknown Dame,
Whom as he fancies (once upon a time)
He recovered from a Trance, that is,
From a sound Sleep, to make him Dreame'r since.
I Will hasten to him with this pleasing news.

[Exit Ernesto. Enter Camilla, Porcia, Flora. Came. My Melancholy could hardly
hinder me
From laughing at the Formal Fools mistake;
But tell me, did not I present your Per^^age
With assurance? the way for both to thrive,
Is to make me your Representative, Smiling.


Por. Most willingly, and I am confident,
When you, your Charms shall to his heart apply,
You all your Rivals safely may defy.

Came. I wish I could be vain enough to hope it.
But, Cousin, my Despairs are so Extreme,

I cannot be flattered, though but in a Dream.

Flo. Madam, do we go, or what d' you resolve on?

Por. I must resolve, I see, yet know not what.

Came. Cousin, take heed, I am afraid you venture
Too much, your Brother cannot tarry long;
And, if returning, he should find you missing --

Por. You Have reason, the opportunity is lost,
What is it a Clock, Flora?

Flo. I think near Eight, for the Clock struck seven,
Just as Camilla entered the Chamber.

Por. Quick then, Flora, fetch your Veil, you shall carry
My Tablets to Octavio, there he will find
The Hour and Place where I would have him meet.

[Exit. Flora. Came. It Is well resolved; but where do you design Your Meeting?

Por. In the Remotest part of all the Garden,
Which answers (as you know) to my apartment;
And Flora has the Key of the Backdoor.

Came. As the Case stands, you choose the fittest place.

[Flora returns Veiled. Por. Cousin, I beg your patience whilst I write.

Came. You, Porcia writes in her Tablets.
Flora, by this Accident may chance
To see your faithful Lover Diego.

Flo. He is a faithful Lover of himself,
Without a Rival, Madam.

Came. Damsel, your Words and Thoughts do not agree;
For could we see his Image in your Heart,
'Twould be a fairer far, than ere his Glass Reflected.

Flo. Madam, I am not yet so very Old,
That I should Dote.

Came. Nor yet so very Young, but you may Love.
Dotage and Love are Cozin-germans, Flora.

Flo. Yes, Smiling.
when we Love, and are not loved again;
For else, I think, they are not so near a kin.

Came. I Have tou^h'd a Nettle, Aside.
and have stung my self.

Por. Make haste, Porcia gives Flora the Tablets, having locked them.
dear Flora

Flo. Madam, I Will (...).
Aside. Should I not play my part, I were to blame,
Since all my Fortune's betted on her game.
Madam, has Octavio the other Key
Belonging to the Tablets.

[Exit. Flora. Por. Yes, yes, I pray make haste.
Let us retire, Camilla a little Rest,
And Meditation, may new aids suggest.

THE SECOND ACT.
THE SCENE, The City of SEVIL. Enter Don Antonio and Sancho in Riding-Cloathes.
San. SIr, we are arrived in very good time.

An. I did not think it would have been so soon,
By an hour at least, but Lovers ride apace.
Why smile you, Sancho?

San. Faith at the Novelty of your Amors,
To fall in Love with one, you Scarcely saw,
And marry one, you Never saw; it is pretty;
But we poor Mortals have another Method.

An. You Are very pleasant; this, Sancho, is the place,
Where I charged Ernesto to expect me,
Whom I sent before to my Brother-in-Law;
But with this Order, not to let him know,
That I intended to arrive this Evening:
Surprises in Love-meetings render Men
More welcome, and have more of Gallantry.

San. Since you are here, Sir, earlier than you thought;
Why might you not go shift you at the Post House?
And be back here, before Ernesto come,
However, it is better, that he wait for you,
Than you for him in the open Street.

An. It Is well thought on; come, let us to the Post House.

[Exeunt. Enter Don Octavio, and Diego. Oct. Come, Diego, it is time to quit our
Lurking-holes,
And to begin our Chase:

Die. Of what, Sir? Bats, or Owls, now the Sun's set?
Call you this making of Love? methinks, it is
More like making of War; marching all night
In Arms, as if we designed to Beat up
The Enemies Quarters.

Oct. Why would not thou venture as much for Flora?

Die. No in good faith; shall venture enough
If ever I Marry her; I Will run no hazard,
(By my good will) before hand.

Oct. That Is from your Fear, not Prudence, Diego.

Die. Sir, you may call it what you please, but I
Dare boldly say, there lives not in the world
A more Valiant Man, than I, whilst Danger
Does keep its Distance; but when sawcily
It presses on, then (I confess) it is true,
I have a certain Tenderness for Life,
That checks my Ardor, and enclines my Prudence
Timely to withdraw.

Oct. Your Style is wondrous civil to your self;
How you Soften that harsh word, called Cowardice;
But the Danger is not always evident,
When you are pleased, my Friend, to Run away.

Die. It may be so, Sir, not to Vulgar eyes;
But I have such a peircing sight, that can
Discover Perils out of others Ken;
Which, they not seeing soon enough to Shun,
Are forced t'Encounter; and then their struggling
Is, by th'unwarie world, taken for Courage.

Oct. You have more Light, Diego, I see, than Heat;
But I Will allow your Wit and Honesty
To come to Composition for your want
Of Courage; though it be a Quality
I may have use of; but we lose our time.
Was ever Lover's Fare so rude as mine?
Condemned to Darkness, forced to hide my Head,
As well as Love? and to do me a Spite,
Fortune has Contradictions reconciled,
I am at once a Prisoner, and Exiled.

Enter Antonio and Sancho. Ant. Methinks, Ernesto should not tarry long,
If not already come; Sancho, how call you
The (...) there just before us? where you see
You Gentleman with his Cloak over his face;
I have quite lost the memory of this place.

San. I am as much to seek, as you, Sir.

Ant. Let us golto him, Sancho, and enquire*
He has a notable good Mien; methinks,
I never saw an Air more like Octavio's

Oct. Unless my eyes do very much deceive me,
It Is Don Antonio; if it be he, Diego,
There is no danger in his knowing us; Octavio lets fall his Cloak from before
his face.

He ever was my faithful friend; It Is he.

Ant. You injure me, Octavio, no be so long
A knowing one, who is so entirely yours.

Oct. Your presence, here, noble Antonio, was So unexpected, They embrace.
that I hardly durst
Believe my eyes, When came you to this Town?

Ant. I am just (...) arrived

Oct. I joy to see you here, but should have thought
It likelier to have heard of you at Court,
Pursuing there the Recompenses due
To your transcendent Merit.

Ant. That is no place for men of my Morality.
I have been taught, Octavio, to Deserve,
But not to Seek Reward; that does profane
The Dignity of Virtue; if Princes
For their own Interests will not advance
Deserving Subjects, they must raise Themselves
By a brave Contempt of Fortune.

Oct. I Am glad to find in you some Seeds yet left
Of the Ancient Virtue; may they Fruit produce
Fit to Illu rate, and Instruct the Age.
Let me once more embrace you, Sir, Welcome,
Brave Leader.

Ant. Oh, you must spare your Servants, Sir.

Oct. He has not lived in the reach of public Fame,
Who has not heard your noble Character;
This is my house, be pleased, Sir, to go in,
And make it yours; though truly at the present
I am in a very ill condition
To receive the Honor of such a Guest;
Having by an unlucky accident,
Been forced of late to keep my self concealed.

Ant. I humbly thank you, Sir, but cannot yet
Receive that favor, for I here must stay
Expecting the Return of one, I sent
Before to town to my Brother-in-Law.

Oct. Have you a Brother-in-law in Sevil?
You surprise me much.

An. It is most true, Octavio, I come hither
A Married man, as far as friends can make me.

Oct. Since it imports you not to miss your Servant,
Let us stay here without, until he come;
And then go in, and rest your self a while.
But how go our public Affairs in Flanders?

Ant. I left our Armies in a better state,
Than formerly.

Oct. And our brave Vellada (I suppose) in great Reputation.

Ant. The Honor of our Country, and the Terror
Of others; Fortune consulted Reason,
When she bestowed such Favors upon him.

Oct. They say he did Wonders at the Relief of Juliers.

Ant. It was indeed a famous Action.

Oct. You Will much oblige me, if whilst you expect
Your Servant here, I might learn from your self
Some few particulars of your own Actions;
Fame speaks Loudly of them, but not Distinctly.

Ant. Fame, like Water, bears up the Lighter things, And lets the Weighty sink;
I am not used
To speak in the First person; but if needs
You Will have a story to fill up the time,
I Will tell you an Adventure of mine own,
Where you will find Love so intermixed with Arms,
That (I am confident) 'twill raise your wonder,
How being prepossessed with such a Passion,
I should (upon Prudential motives only)
Be engaged (as now you find me) to Merry
A Lady whom I never saw.

Oct. The Person, and the Subject, Sir, do challenge My best attention.

Ant. The following Evening to that glorious Day, After a little pause.

Wherein our great Vellada gained such Fame,
Against the cautelous Nassaw* some Horse
Were sent from th'Armie, under my command
To cover the Limbourg Frontiers, exposed
To The Enemies Inroads; scarce settled there,
I received intelligence, that a Party
Of theirs (about two hundred Horse) were come
That very Evening to a neighboring Village,
Intending there to lodge; I instantly
Cause Sound to Horse, and march to their Surprise
So luckily, that by the break of day
Their Quarters were on fire.

Oct. You had been taught, Sir, by our wise General,
That Diligence in Execution is
Even above Fortune, Mistress of Success.

Ant. They made but faint resistance; some were slain,
Some perished in the flames, other escaped,
Giving th'Alarm in Quarters more remote
To their Companions drowned in Sleep and Wine;
Who, at the Outcry, and the Trumpets sound,
Methinks I fancy starting from their Beds,
As pale and wan, as from their Dormitories
Those the last Trump shall rouse; differing in this,
That they awake to Live, but these to Die.

Oct. How Unsafe it is to be Secure!

Ant. Finding no more resistance, I made haste
To a lofty Structure, which I conceived
To be the likeliest Quarter for their Chief;
Led thither by desire to rescue both;
Him, from the Soldier's rage; That, from the Fire.

Oct. A care most worthy of a gallant Leader.

Ant. But think, Octavio, how I was surpised,
When, on the floor of a Pavillion,
Belonging to the Garden of that House,
I found a Woman of a Matchless Form,
Extended all along.

Oct. I easily can divine how such a Heart,
As harbors in the brave Antonio's breast,
May suffer at so Sad a Spectacle.

Ant. At the first sight I did believe her Dead;
Yet, in that state so Awful she appeared,
That I approached her with as much Respect,
As if the Soul had animated still
That Body, which, though Dead, scarce Mortal seemed.
But as the Sun from our Horizon gone,
His Beams do leave a Tincture on the Skies,
Which shows it was not long since he withdrew;
So in her lovely face there still appeared
Some scattered streaks of those Vermillion Beams,
Which used t'irradiate that bright Firmament.
Thus did I find that distressed Miracle,
Able to Wound a Heart, as if alive,
Incapable to Cure it, as if dead.

Oct. I no more doubt your Pity, than your Wonder.

Ant. My Admiration did suspend my Aid,
Till Passion joined to Pity, made me bold;
I kneeled, and took her in my arms, then bowed
Her body gently forward; with which motion,
A Sigh stole from her; O th'ravishing sound!
Which being a Symptom of remaining life,
Made me forget it was a sign of Grief.
At length she faintly opens her bright eyes;
So breaks the Day; and so do all the Creatures,
Rejoice, as I did, at the new born Light:
But as the Indians, who adore the Sun,
Are scorched by's Beams, ere Half his Race be Run;
So I, who did adore her Rising Eyes,
Found my self Wounded by those Deities.

Oct. How you have raised my Expectation!
Pray release me quickly.

Ant. From her fair hand a bloody Poniard fell,
Which she held fast during her Trance, as if
Sh'ad only needed Arms whilst she did Sleep,
And trusted to her Eyes whilst she did Wake.
What I said to her, being a production
Of mere Ecstasy, I remember not;
She made me no Reply, yet I discerned
In a Serener Air of her pale face,
Some Lines of Satisfaction mixed with Fear.

Oct. Such looks in Silence have an Eloquence.
But pray go on.

Ant. Raised from the ground, and to her self returned,
I stepped a fitting distance back; as well
To gaze upon that lovely Apparition,
As to express Respect; when at that instant
The Trumpets sound a Charge; my Soldiers cry,
Where is our Leader? where is Antonio?
My Love a while disputed with my Honor,
But that the longer settled Power o'r-came,
And fear of Future danger to her Person
Made me then seek the Present for my self;
I came up to my Troops, left in Reserve,
As they were ready to receive a Charge
From diverse Squadrons of fresh Horse, who being
Quartered in Neighboring Villages, had taken
Hotly th'Alarm, and came (though then too late)
In succor of their friends; Honor and Love
Had so inflamed my heart, that I advanced
Beyond the Rules of Conduct, and received
So many wounds, that I with faintness fell.

Oct. How can this Story end!

Ant. My Soldiers beat the Enemy, and brought me off,
Where Surgeons quickly cured my Outward Wounds,
But the remembrance of that Heroine,
My Inward Hurts kept bleeding still afresh;
Till by the business of the War constrained
To attend my Charge i'th'Army, my despair
Of ever finding her, concurring with
The powerful persuasions of Vellada,
I was at length even forced to an Engagement
Of Marriage with a Lady of this City,
Rich, Noble, and, as they say, Beautiful.
And so you have me here, come to Consummate
Those Nuptial Rites, to which my Interest,
And th'Importunity of Friends advice,
O're-rule my judgment, though against my heart.

Oct. A wonderful Adventure! but pray, Sir,
May I not take the liberty to ask you,
Who may this noble Lady be, to whom
The Fates have destined so much Happiness?

Ant. I have no Reserves for you, it is the Sister Of --
Enter Ernesto, and Octavio retires hastly, and covers his face with his Cloak.
Antonio hodding to Octavio. It is my Servant, Sir.


Oct. Step to Antonio, Diego, and desire him To send him off.

Ant. I will immediately; Diego goes to Antonio, and whispers.
Well, Ernesto,
What good news? speak freely.

Ern. Sir, as you charged me, I told your Brother-in-Law,
I thought you hardly could be there this night;
He kisses your hands, and bad me tell you,
That he expects your coming with impatience;
He charged me to present you with this Letter;
The Other is from your beauteous Bride, a person
The most accomplished that I ever saw.
My being yours gave me the privilege
Of a Domestic, in the free admission
To see her in her Chamber-dress, without
A Veil, either to cover Faults, or hide Perfections.

Ant. Tell me truly, is she so very handsome?

Ern. Handsomer far in my opinion, Sir,
Than all the Bruxels Beauties, which you call
The Finished Pieces; but I Will say no more;
Let your own Eyes inform you; here is a Key
Of the Apartment, that is made ready for you;
A Lower Quarter, very nobly furnished,
That opens on St. Vincent's Street.

Ant. Give it me; and go you to the Post House,
And take care that my things be brought from thence.
[Exit Ernesto. Octavio, will you go along with me,
And be a Witness of my first Address?

Oct. Sir, you choose in me an ill Companion
For Nuptial Joys, or any Happiness;
One, whose Misfortunes to such sad Extremes
Are heightened, that the very Mentioning
Of Happy hours serves only to Imbitter
The memory of my Lost Joys.

Ant. So deep a sense of your Misfortunes, Sir,
Is prejudicial to your Self and Friends.

Enter Flora in haste. Flo. Where Is your Master, Diego?

Die. There Is some Ill toward, Aside.
when this Bird appears,
Do you not see him? I have lived too long a Maid.

Flo. I have something to say to you in private, Goes to Octavio.
Sir,
That requires haste.

Oct. What new Accident brings you hither, Flora?

Flo. These Tablets will inform you, She draws Octavio aside, and puts up her
Veil.
Sir, Farewell.

Die. Will you not stay for an Answer Damsel?

Flo. It Is a Command, not a Question Diego.

Die. Short, and Sweet, Flora.

Oct. Good Flora stay a Minute; I much fear It is some new Misfortune.

Die. Nay, Sir, you may be sure it is some Disaster,
Else it would never have come so Easily,
And so Unsought for.

Oct. Will you allow me for a Moment, Bowing to Antonio.
Sir,
To step into my House, and read a Letter.

Ant. I Will attend you in, and wait your leisure.

[Exeunt all but Diego. Die. These little black Books do more Devils raise,
Than all the Figures of the Conjurers.
What can this be? I have not seen this Damsel
With so busy a face; but here she comes
Already, 'twas a quick dispatch.

Enter Flora, and seems to go away in haste. Die. A Word, Flora, or a kind
Glance at least,
What? grown cruel? Diego no body w'you?

Flo. This is no time for fooling.

Die. Nay, if you be so serious, fare you well;
Yet I Will perform the Honor of our Street,
And bring you to the end on it.

Flo. I shall be well holp up with such a Squire;
If now some wandering Knight should chance t'assault you,
To bear away your Damsel, what would you do?

Die. I Would use no other Weapon but a Torch;
I Would put aside your Veil, show him your face,
That, I suppose, would guard us both.

Flo. Why, do you think it would fright him, Diego?

Die. Oh no, 'twould charm him, Flora.

Flo. Well, such as it is, I Will venture it without Engaging your known Valor.

Die. Faith you may so;
The face, dear Flora, defends all below.

Flo. Away, you Fool; Goodnight to you.

[Exit Flora. Enter Octavio and Antonio. Oct. What may this be? O my Malignant
Fate!
The Warning's short, yet she must be Obeyed;
The hour draws near; Aside.
I must go seek a Friend;
Her words seem to imply need of a Second;
'Twere barbarous to engage Antonio
Newly arrived, and come on such an Errand.
Noble Antonio, my confusion's great
To tell you thus abruptly, I must leave you;
The occasion's indispensable.

Ant. I must not quit you, Sir, I know too well
The Laws of Honor, to desert you now:
When I my friend in such disorder see,
And all the Marks that he is called to Danger,
To leave him then --

Oct. It is a Summons from a Lady, Sir,
Whom I have loved with Passion and Success;
To meet her in her Garden presently:
All is propitious on her part and mine;
But she is so Guarded by a Tyrant Brother,
So Jealous naturally, and so Incensed
By that new Accident I told you of,
Which makes me a close Prisoner all the day;
That to persuade you there no Danger is
In this Adventure, were to abuse you;
But even for that reason I am bound
Not to consent to the Imbarking you
In an occasion that is so opposite
To what you come for; Antonio, We must
As well to Friends as to our Selves be just.

Ant. He ought not to pretend to Friendships name,
Who reckons not Himself and Friend the same.

Oct. Friendship with Justice must not disagree,
That were to break the Virtue's Harmony.

Ant. Who in his Friends Distresses takes no part,
His Friendship's only in his Tongue, not Heart.

Oct. You from a life of Perils hither come
To find a Nuptial Bed, not seek a Tomb.

Ant. My Friend engaged, it never must be said,
Antonio left him so to go to Bed.

Oct. Y are married, and expose what is not your own.

Ant. Wedded to Honor, that must yield to none.

Oct. I find, Antonio, you must still subdue.

Ant. I ow my Triumph to my Cause, not You.
Come, we lose time, your Mistress must not stay.

Oct. Who Is so accompanied, needs not fear his way.

[Exeunt. THE THIRD ACT.
The SCENE is, DON HENRIQUE's House. Camilla, Porcia, Flora appear in a
Balcone. Por. COme, Cousin, the hour assigned approaches.

Came. Nay, more than so, for it is already night.

Flo. And thanks to your Stars sufficiently dark.

Por. To the Clouds you would say, Flora, for Stars,
In this occasion, would not much befriend us.
Pray, Cousin, when Octavio shall arrive,
Do you and Flora watch above with care;
For if my cruel Brother should surprise us --

Came. Let us alone to play the Sentinels.

Flo. I Am confident he is abroad, and will not
Suddenly return; for I heard him say,
He Would pass th'Evening at the Corigidors;
And thence, you know, he seldom comes home early.

Enter Antonio, Octavio, and Diego, with their Cloaks o'r their faces, and
their Swords undrawn in their hands. Ant. Is it not something early for
Adventures Of this Nature?

Oct. It Is the Hour she appointed.

Ant. How dark it is grown o'th'sudden, there is not one
Star appears in all the Firmament.

Die. So much the better; for when I must fight,
I covet no Spectators of my Prowess.

Aside. Oct. Stay you here, Antonio, I Will step before,
And give the Sign; when you here the door open,
Then come on, and follow me in.

Enter at the other side of the Stage Henrique and Carlos. Henr. The Corigidors
is a pretty place.

Car. The Walks do so entice me, I always
Weary my self, before I can retire.

Henr. Indeed we have staid longer than we thought,
And therefore let us go home the shorter way;
The back door of my Garden's here at hand.

Car. It will be better than to go about.

Por. Would he were come, Above.
I fear the Rising Moon
Will give us little time.

[Octavio knocks upon the Hilt of his Sword. Por. I think I hear his usual
Knock; Above in the Balcone.
Who Is there?

Oct. It Is I.

Por. I hope you are not alone.

Oct. No; here is Diego with me, and a Friend.

Por. It Is well; I Will open the door presently.

Henr. Come; Porcia comes down.
we are now hard by the Garden gate.

Oct. Let Us to the door; sure she is there by this time;
Be not afraid Diego.

Die. Agree that with him that made me, who has Given me a Heart no bigger than
my Thumb;
You Had as good command me not to Breath.

Oct. Come on; what art thou thinking on?

Die. That I see Company, or that my Fear does

Oct. Y' are in the right; The noise of a Lock.
let us to avoid suspit on
Walk on at large, till they are out of distance.

Car. I think I heard your Garden door open.

Henr. I think so too; Ha! at this time of the night?
What can be the meaning on it? It Is so.

Ant. They have opened the door; it is time for me
To follow, surely Octavio is gone in.

[Antonio moves toward the door. Por. What stay you for? Holding the door half
open.


Henr. What Is that I hear? sure it is Porcia's voice.

Por. What mean you to stand there? come in, I say.

Henr. Hell and Furies!

Carl. Be patient, He goes to draw his Sword.
Sir, and you will make a clearer Discovery of your Affront.

Por. You may come in securely, Setting open the door.
Octavio:
I have set those will watch my Brothers coming.

Ant. Madam, I am not Octavio.

Por. Not Octavio? who are you then? and who is
That Shadow there?

Henr. I can hold no longer; Draws his Sword.
I Am thy Chastiser,
Vile Woman, and his Mortal Enemy.

Ant. Ha! my Mortal Enemy?

Henr. Yes, Villain; who ere thou art, thou shall pay
This Treachery with thy Life.

Ant. Vain Man; who ere thou art, know, the Life thou
Threaten'st, is Guarded by too good a Sword.

Carlos draws, and they all enter the Garden fighting. Henr. Make fast the
door. To Carlos.


Henr. Thou art some desperate Villain hired to murder. In the Garden.


[Octavio and Diego come to the door. Ant. Hired by Friendship, and Honor's my
Sallary.

[A noise of fighting within. Oct. That Is Antonio's voice within the Garden;
Runs to the door and finds it shut.

What! the door shut! my Friend engaged, and I
Excluded! cursed Fate! this Tree may help me
To climb over; if not, I Will fly to him.

Die. You may do so; your noble Love has Wings,
And's ever Fledge; He climbes up.
it is Molting time with mine;
Yet I Will up too; the hazards not in climbing,
Here I will so, and out of dangers reach
Expect the Issue.

The Scene changes to a Garden, out of which they issue fighting. Oct. Courage,
brave Friend; you have Octavio by you.

Ant. So Seconded, a Coward would grow firm.

Henr. What! is there more of your crew? then it is time
To call for help; Ho! Sylvio, Geraldo,
Pedro, come forth; and bring out Torches with you.

Enter Sylvio with his Sword drawn. Sylv. Here am I, Sir; my Camerades will
follow
As soon as they have lighted their Torches. They fight.


Ant. How I despise these Slaves Octavio,
Having you by me! In the Tree.


Die. Their Swords do clatter bravely in the dark.

Sylv. I Am slain.

[Sylvio falls. Die. Good; that is Sylvio's voice; I have owed that Fellow
A Good-turn this Twelvemonth for a Mistake,
Breaking my Head, when he should have Broke a Jest;
Now he is paid.

Henrique stepping back falls over Sylvio, and loses his Sword, and Carlos runs
in to him. Car. What! are you hurt?

Henr. No, only I fell; Help me to find my Sword.

Oct. What? do you give back? you do well to take breath,
Whilst you have any left; The Rising Moon appears in the Seen.
'twill not be long,
Now that the Rising Moon lends us some light.

[Porcia runs out to Octavio. Por. O Octavio! let not this moment slip
To Free me from my cruel Brother's Fury,
Or never hope to see me any more
Amongst the living.

[Octavio leads her away by the Arm. Oct. Ah! Noble Maid, he that is once
possessed
Of such a Treasure, and safe-guards it not,
Let him live Wretched, and Detested die;
Where Is my brave Friend?

Ant. You have me by your side, lead off your Mistress,
I Will secure your Retreat. In the Tree, pointing to those who are going off.


[Exeunt Octavio, Porcia, and Antonio. Die. That doubtless is my Master, who
victorious
Is bravely marching off with his fair Prize;
I Will down, and follow, inventing all the way
Some handsome Lie t'excuse my Cowardice;
Why lived not I five thousand years ago,
Being never made for this damned Iron Age?

Diego comes down from the Treee, and follows Antonio. Car. But whilst my care
led me to succor you, Having helped up Henrique.

Our Enemies, I fear, are got away;
I heard the door open, and see none here,
Although the Night's much brighter grown than it was*
I Will follow, and trace the Villains if I can
To their Dens; mean while take care of your Sister;
And (pray) till my return be Moderate.

Henr. How! Moderation in this case! what ho!
Geraldo, Pedro, ah ye cursed Rogues,
Enter Servants with Torches. Durst ye not show your heads till they were gone?
Geraldo, light me in, whilst Pedro looks
To his hurt Companion; ah Porcia! Porcia!

Exeunt Henrique and Geraldo; Pedro carries out Sylvio fainting with his hurts.
The Scene Changes to the City of SEVIL. Enter Octavio, Porcia, Antonio, and a
little after Diego, and after him Carlos. Die. Sure, Pointing to Carlos.
that is Antonio bringing up the Rere;
Sir, they are but just before us; he bears her
Most gallantly away; lose not sight of me.

Car. This Fellow takes me for one of his Crew;
He will by his mistake help me to harbor 'em.

[Exeunt. [Camilla and Flora appear in the Balcone. The Scene changes to Don
Henrique's House. Came. Was there ever such a Disaster, Flora?
Sure, they are all dead, so great's the Silence.

Flo. Madam, if mistake not very much,
I heard your Brother's voice amongst 'em.

Came. Ah! my dear Brother, how thy ill-plac'd Friendship
Upon that Brutal Kinsman has abused
Thy Goodness; though my Natural affection
Moves me, Flora, to Pity him in Danger,
Yet my Concernment for my Cousin Porcia
Does prevail at present; Porcia, Porcia;
No body answers.

Flo. Madam, let us go down into the Garden.

Came. Take heed of that; 'twere to involve my self
In this unlucky Scandal; it is possible,
Affrighted with the Scuffle, she is returned
Into her Quarter by the other door;
Let us have thither. They go down and enter upon the Stage.


Flo. Oh! Madam, I see a Light, and Don Henrique
Coming this way with his Sword drawn, what shall
We do?

Came. Peace; They go behind the door.
let us hide our selves behind the door,
Till we discover his Intentions.

Enter Henrique, and Geraldo with a Torch, and Pedro with a Light; Henrique and
Geraldo their Swords drawn. Pedr. Sir, I have searched all the Rooms of the
House,
And cannot find her.

Henr. Base Infamous Woman; may be she is fled
To the Quarter ordered for Antonio.

Pedr. That door is locked, his Servant has the Key.

Henr. Ah this unworthy Woman! thus to rob
A Brother of the Fruits of all his Care;
And cast this Stain on the Honor of our House;
But if I ever get the Fugitive
Within my reach, I Will Sacrifice her Blood
To the Offended Spirits of my Ancestors.

Flo. Madam, d you hear?

Came. I, and tremble, Flora.

Henr. Call out for her Woman.

Pedr. Flora, Flora.

Enter Flora. Flo. My good Angel Guard me; what would you have Sir?

Henr. Where Is your Mistress, Hussy?

Flo. She told me, Sir, 'bout half an hour since
She would go down into the Garden.

[Exit Flora. Henr. My Shame is certain; ah! the sad condition
Of us Men of Honor! how unequally
Our Crosses and our Comforts mingled are!
Our Orphan Sisters are no sooner grown
Above the Follies of their Childish Age;
During which Season Custom does exact
Our Watchful Caution over all their Actions;
But they are Grafted on some Stranger Stock,
Where they do change both their Aboads, and Names,
Without Reflection in the least Degree
Of Gratitude, on those, who Pained themselves
To Cultivate their Youths; or else become
An Hourly Torture to us, whilst the best
Continued in our Care do never cease
To give the Fears at least of what I feel.
O unjust Heavens! why suffer you that they,
Who to our Joys of Life such Bubbles are,
Should add such Weight unto our Griefs, and Care?
Ah Porcia, Porcia!

Enter Carlos. Car. Cousin, I Am much mistaken, or I have
In very Little time made a Great Progress
Toward your Revenge; I come from harboring
The Villains, who have done you this Affront.

Came. It imports to be attentive now.

Henr. Oh, you revive me, may I but once enjoy
The Pleasure of my Revenge, though the next
Moment were the last Period of my Life,
I should depart contented; are the Villains
Within our reach?

Car. Be patient, Sir, and I Will inform you fully;
You were no sooner up, but I pursued
Your flying Enemies, hoping the night
Grown somewhat Lighter, would enable me
(At a convenient distance) to discover
The place of their Retreat; one of their Party,
Who was behind the rest, mistaking me
For one of his Camerades, bad me come on;
Saying his Master was but just before;
That he had born his Mistress bravely off.
We had not past above a Street or two,
Before he stopped, and at the second House
Beyond the Church in St. Iago's Street,
He entered, and desired me to follow him;
I making a stand, he grew suspicious,
And from my Silence guessing his Mistake,
He slipped into the House, and locked the door;
I having well observed the street and House,
Returned with speed to give you this account.

Flo. Oh, Madam, this is Don Octavio's House;
Without all doubt they have carried Porcia thither.

Came. Peace, Flora, and listen to the sequel.

Hen. Come, Cousin; we loose time; call all my Servants;
I will besiege the House; if they refuse
To render; I will reduce that Theater
Of my Shame to Ashes, and make their Fort
Both Theirs and its own Sepulcher; There are
Such Charms in Vengeance, that I do not wonder,
It is reserved for him, who formed the Thunder.

Car. Have patience, Cousin, and consult your Reason;
'Twill soon convince you, how Unpracticable
And Vain your Proposition is, t'attempt
At this time of the night, within a City,
A House so Guarded, That, indeed, would prove
Very like Thunder, which the Clowd destroys
Wherein 'twas formed, producing only Noise.
What can the Issue be, but to Allarm
The Town; expose your Person, and your Fortune
To the Rigor of the Law; publish your Shame;
And frustrate your Revenge for ever?

Henr. What! would you have me tarry till these Villains,
Who have invaded my House; Affronted
My Person; Murdered my Servant; and Robbed
Me of a Sister; may evade my Vengeance?

Car. No; fear not that; let me alone to find
A certain way to hinder their escape;
I Will instantly to the Corrigidors,
And beg the assistance of his Authority,
To secure these Criminals for the present,
That afterward the Law may punish them.

Henr. A fine Proposal! why, Cousin, can you think
That I Will submit a Personal Injury
Unto a tame Decision of the Law?
And having been Affronted by the Sword,
To pray the Aid of the Long Robe, and take
An Advocate for Second?

Car. Your Provocation's great, Resentment's just;
But, Cousin, the Greater they, the More you stand
In need of Moderation, and The Advice
Of such a Friend, as you have always found me;
Nor can I ever express it more than now,
In freely telling you, you must not suffer
Your Passion to Command in this Occasion;
Passion, which wheresoever it contends
To Govern most, there most Destroys its Ends.

Henr. Oh! how I hate your dry Morality!
To treat a Friend with Sentences, that is raging
In a Fever; you may as well pretend
To teach a Man to Sing his Part, that is stretched
Upon a Rack; no, Sir, I Will sooner die,
Than ere consent to publish my Disgrace,
Before I have Revenged it.

Car. It Is far from my intent; all my design
Is only how we may Conceal your Shame,
Till we have got these Villains in our Power.
Which can be brought about by no such means,
As by demanding Justice against those,
Who did assault your Person, and have slain
Your Servant; a most plausible pretense.
Will this content you? trust my Conduct Cousin;
Is not my Interest the same with yours?

Henr. Well, since it must be so, I pray make haste.

Car. Doubt not my diligence; by this I Will prove
Friendship has Fire, and Wings as well as Love.

Hen. If you could F^^e, you would move with too much Leisure;
Ah tedious Minutes which Revenge does measure!

[Exit Carlos. Flo. Madam, you have heard their mischievous design.

Came. Yes, Flora, out of question Porcia's there;
And if they find her, she is lost forever.

Flo. I Will try to Hinder it, though I were sure
To Perish in the attempt; I am confident,
The House at present is in such confusion,
I may run thither without being missed.

Came. It Is well thought on; in the interim I Will retire
To Porcia's Chamber.

[Exeunt from behind the door. Enter Geraldo. Ger. Sir, Don Antonio is just now
arrived.

Henr. Ha! what is that you say Sirrah?

Ger. That Don Antonio, Sir, your Brother-in-law
Is without, walking in the Hall, and bad me
Give you notice of it, shall he come in?

Henr. Antonio arrived! O Heavens! this Circumstance
Alone was wanting to complete my Shame.
When he desires to See his Wife, shall I
My self inform so generous a Person
That she is Run away? where shall I find
A Heart, a Tongue, a Voice, or Breath, or Face
To utter this unparallel^d Disgrace?

Ger. What is your pleasure, Sir? Don Antonio
May think it long.

Henr. Wait on him in, but at the same time tell him
You cannot find me; I will leave my House,
And the discovery of my Shame to Fate;
And any Censure rather undergo,
Than be Relater of my own Disgrace;
Till first I have my Honor's Ransom paid
In the Vile Blood of that perfidious Maid.

[Exit Henrique. Enter Antonio and Ernesto. Ant. My Friend and his fair Mistress
safely lodged,
And free from their Adventure; it is now fit
To mind my own Engagement; But Ernesto,
What can the meaning be of this indecent
Suffering me to remain without thus long
Upon my first Arrival? come, let us go on
Into the other Rooms.

Ern. I swear, Sir, I Am amazed at this great change;
It Is not above two hours, since I found here
A numerous and well-ordered Family,
In all appearance, now I see the Pages
Boult out of the doors, then start back again
Into their holes, like Rabbets in a Warren;
The Maids lie peeping at the Garret windows,
Like The Upper Tire of Ordinance in a Ship;
All looks disordered now; nor can I guess
What may have caused so strange an alteration;
But there I see the Servant you sent in.

Enter Geraldo. Ant. Friend, where is your Master?

Ger. I cannot tell, Sir.

Ant. Where is his Sister?

Ger. In truth I know not, Sir; we Menservants
Have little to do in the Ladies Quarters.

[ Exit. Geraldo. Ant. This looks but odly; are you sure Ernesto,
You Have not misguided me to a wrong House?

Ern. If you are certain that we are awake,
Then I am certain this is the same House
Wherein this afternoon I saw, and spoke with
Don Henrique and your Bride; by the same Token
There was a Lady with her in a Veil;
And this very Room is the Ante-chamber
To her Apartment.

Ant. I should be finely served, if after all
This Negotiation, and a tedious Journey,
My Pains and Patience should be cast away
On some such withered Sybil for a Wife,
As her own Brother is ashamed to show me. Ernesto goes toward the door.


Ern. You Will soon be freed from that fear, Sir.

Ant. How so?

Ern. Because I see her in the Inner Room,
Lying along upon her Couch, and Reading;
Her face is turned the other way, but yet
Her Shape, and Clothes assure me it is she.

Ant. Art sure it is she?

Ern. There are not many like her.

Ant. If thou be'st sure it is she, I Will venture in,
Without her Brother's help to introduce me.

Ern. She Is coming this way, Sir.

Camilla Enters Reading. Came. You Have reason, Dido, and it is well remarqu'd,
The Woman, who suffers her self to Love,
Ought likewise to prepare her self to Suffer;
There was great Power in your Charms, Aeneas,
T'enthrall a Ladies heart at first approach,
And make such early and such deep Impressions,
That nothing, but her death, could ere deface.
Alas! poor Dido!

Ant. What do I see; Antonio seeing her, stands as if amazed.
or do I waking dream?
Sure I am asleep; and it is a Vision
Of her, who is always present to my Thought;
Who fearing my Revolt does now Appear
To Prove and to Confirm my Constancy.
When first I saw that Miracle, she seemed
An Apparition, here it must be one.

Ern. What fit of Frenzy's this, Sir? why it is Porcia*
A Lovely Living Woman, and your Bride.

Ant. The Blessing is too mighty for my Faith.

Ern. Faith! never trouble your Faith in this occasion,
Approach her boldly, Sir, and trust your Sense.

Ant. As when we dream of some Transporting Pleasure,
And finding that we Dream we fear to Wake,
Lest Sense should rob us of our Fancie's Treasure,
And our Delightful Vision from us take;
Blessed Apparition, so it fares with me.
That very Angel does once more appear,
To whose Divinity long since I raised
An Altar in my Heart, where I have Offered
The constant Sacrifice of Sighs and Vows.
My eyes are open, yet I dare not trust 'em;
Bliss above Faith must pass for an Illusion;
If such it be, O let me sleep for ever
Happily deceived; but Celestial Maid,
If this thy glorious Presence Real be,
O let one word of Pity raise my Soul
From Visional Delights, and make me die
With Solid Joy instead of Ecstasy.

Ern. 'Slife! he is in one of his old Fits again;
Why what do you mean, Sir? it is Porcia herself.

Came. I am that Maid, who to your Virtue owes
Her Honor then, and her Disquiet since;
Yet in my Pain I cannot but be Pleased
To find a Stronger Passion justified
By Obligation; I may avow the Fire,
To which both Love and Gratitude conspire.

Ant. Incomparable Creature! can it be?
That having Suffered all, which mighty Love
Did ever inflict, I now should be repaid
With fuller Joys, than Love could ever give;
Fortune to make my Happiness complete,
Has joined her Power, and made me find a Bride
In a Lost Mistress, but with this Allay,
Of leaving me no Means my Faith to prove,
Since Chance anticipates the Hopes of Love.

Came. The Servant's Error has misled the Master,
He takes me too for Porcia, blessed Mistake;
Assist me now Artful Dissimulation;
But how can that consist with so much Passion?
Aside. It Is possible the Sense of my Distressed
Condition might dispose a Gentle heart
To take Impressions then, which afterward
Time, and your Second Thoughts may have Destroyed;
But can a Constant Passion be produced
From those Ideas Pity introduced?
Let your Tongue speak your Heart, for should y'abuse me,
I shall in time discover the Deceit;
You may Paint Fire; Antonio, but not Heat.

Ant. Madam --

Came. Hold; be not too Scrupulous, Antonio;
Let me Believe it, though it be not True;
For the chief Happiness, poor Maids receive,
Is when our Selves we happily Deceive.

Ant. If, since I first those Conquering Eyes beheld,
You have not reigned Unrivaled in my Heart;
May you Despise me now you are my Own,
Which is, I think, all Curses summed in one.
But may your Servant, Madam, take the boldness
To ask, if you have ever thought of him?

Came. A Love, so founded in a Noble Heart,
Has need of no Remembrancer, Antonio;
You know your self too well; those of your Trade
Have skill to Hold, as well as to Invade.

Ant. Fortune has lifted me to such a Height
Of Happiness, that it may Turn my Brain,
When I look down upon the rest of the world.
What have I now to wish but Moderation
To Temper, and to Fix my Joys?

Came. I yield as little t'you, noble Antonio,
In Happiness, as Affection, but still
Porcia must do as may become your Bride,
And Sister to Don Henrique, in whose absence
A longer Conference must be excused.
And so I take the freedom to withdraw.

Should I have staid until Don Henrique came,
His presence would have marred my whole design.

Aside. [Exit Camilla. Ant. Where Beauty and Discretion so combine,
It Is Heaven, methinks, to find that Treasure mine.

Enter Henrique. Henr. Sure Don Antonio, having long ere this
Found out the infamous Flight of my vile Sister,
Will be retired to meditate Revenge
Upon us both: ah Curse! he is there still;
I Will slip away; but, O Heavens! it is too late,
He has perceived me.

Ant. How, Don Henrique! avoid your Friend? that is come
So long a Journey to embrace you, and cast
Himself at the feet of your fair Sister?

Henr. Noble Antonio, you may well imagine
The trouble I am in, that you should find
My House in such Disorder, so unfit
The Honor to receive of such a Guest.

Ant. It Is true, Don Henrique, I am much surpised
With what I find; I little did expect
Your Sister Porcia should have been --

Henr. Oh Heavens! Aside.
I Am lost, he has discovered all.
It Is not, Antonio, in a Brothers power
To make a Sister of a better Paste,
Than Heaven has made her.

Ant. In your case specially; for out of doubt,
Heaven never made a more Accomplished Creature.

Henr. What means the Man?

Ant. I come just now from Entertaining her:
Whose Wit, and Beauty so excel all those
Of her fair Sex, whom I have ever known,
That my Description of her would appear
Rather Detraction, than a Just Report
Of her Perfections.

Henr. Certainly he mocks me; he never could
Have chosen a worse Sufferer of Scorn;
But I will yet contain my self awhile
To see how far he will drive it; Say you, Sir,
Aside. That you have Seen, and Entertained my Sister?

Ant. Yes, Don Henrique, and with such full Contentment,
So raised above Expression, that I think
The Pains, and Cares of all my former Life
Rewarded with Excess, in the Delight
Of those few Minutes of her Conversation;
It Is true, that Satisfaction was abridg'd
By her well-weigh'd Severity; to give me
A greater Pleasure in the Contemplation
Of her discreet Observance of the Rules
Of Decency; not suffering me, though now
Her Husband, any longer to enjoy
So great a Happiness, you being absent.

Henr. I am confounded; Aside.
but I must dissemble
My Astonishment, till I can unfold
The Mystery; She might have spared that Caution,
But I suppose you will easily Forgive
An Error on the Better side.

Ant. Sir, I have seen so much of her Perfections
In that short Visit, I shall sooner doubt
All Definitions in Morality,
Than once suppose her capable of Error.

Henr. This Exposition makes it more Obscure: Aside.

I must get him away. Sir, is it not time
I bring you to your Chamber? it is late,
And I believe that you have need of Rest.

Ant. I should accept your offer, were I not
Obliged, as late as it is, to see a Friend
Before I go to Bed.

Henr. I Will wait on you, Sir, if you I give me leave.

Ant. I humbly thank you, Sir, but cannot consent
To give you so much trouble; I Will return
Within an hour at farthest.

Henr. When ever you please; you are wholly Master here.

Ant. I never saw a man so Discomposed, Aside.

What ever the matter is.
Ernesto, I must make a step to see
A Friend near hand; bid Sancho follow me;
And stay you in my Chamber till I come.

[Exeunt Antonio, Ernesto. Henr. Your Servant, Henrique waits on him to the
door.
Sir; this sudden Salley hence
At this time of the night, and newly arrived
From a long Journey, does imbroil me more.
But now I will not long be in Suspense;
I Will to my Sister's Chamber.

Enter Carlos as Henrique is going into Porcia's Chamber. Car. Ho Don Henrique,
there is haste required; all is
Prepared, and if the Quarrie lodged shall prove
Worthy of our own Swords, we may employ them;
If not, the Sword of Justice shall revenge
Our Injuries; for the Corrigidor
Is ready with a Band of Sergeants.

Henr. Speak softly; Don Antonio is arrived,
And some of his may over-hear us.

Carl. That Is very unlucky, but does he know
That Porcia's missing?

Henr. I think not yet.

Carl. Come, let us away; we have no time to lose.

Henr. Pray stay awhile; I labor with a Doubt
Will burst me if not cleared before I go.

Carl. What Cousin! will you loose an Opportunity
Never to be recovered? are you mad?
Will you permit the Villains to escape, He pulls

And laugh at us for ever? come away.

[Exit Carlos, him. Henr. Well, I must go; and let time make it out;
The worst Estate of Human Life is Doubt.

THE FOURTH ACT.
The SCENE is DON OCTAVIO's House. Enter Octavio angrily pushing Diego, and
Porcia following. Oct. VIllain, thou have undone us, cursed Villain;
Where was thy Soul, had Fear quite Banished it?
And left thee not one grain of common Sense?

Porc. Was there ever so fatal an Accident?

Oct. Why, Traitor, did thou not let me know it,
As soon as we were come into the House?

Die. What would y' have done if ye had known it then?

Oct. I would have fally'd out, and Killed the Rogue,
In whose Power thou have put it to Destroy us;
Can it be doubted, but that long ere this
He has acquainted Henrique where we are?
From whose black Hage we must immediately
Expect to encounter all the pernicious
Effects of Malice, backed by Seeming Justice;
Curse on all Cowards! better far be served
By Fools, and Knaves: they make less dangerous Faults.

Die. Am I in fault, because I Am not a Cat?
How could I tell in the dark whether that Rascal
Was a Knight Errant, or a Recreant Knight?
I thought him one of us, and true to Love;
Were it not for such Accidents as these
That mock Man's Forecast, sure the Destinies
Had never been placed amongst the Deities.

Oct. Peace, cowardly Slave; having thus played the Rogue,
Art thou Sententious grown? did I not Fear
To Stain my Sword with such Base Blood, I Would let
Thy Soul out with it at a thousand wounds.

Die. Why then a thousand Thanks to my Base Blood
For saving my Good Flesh. Aside.


Oct. Pardon, my dearest Mistress, this Excess
Of Passion in your presence.

Por. What shall we do Octavio? we are lost
For ever; if we should stay here, my Brother
Will be upon us instantly. Alas!
My own Life I value not Octavio,
Where yours, my Better life, such hazard runs;
But O my Honor! O my Innocence!
Exposed to Scandal; there is my deepest Sense.

Oct. Though the Complexion of your Brother's Malice.
Resemble Hell, it is not Black enough
To cast a Stain upon your Virgin Whiteness.
As Contraries compared set off each other,
The sister's Brightness will expose the Brother.

Por. O my Octavio! he is still my Brother;
But what do you resolve to do?

Oct. I must resolve and suddenly, but what
I swear know not, there have been such Turns
In my Misfortunes, they have made me giddy.

Por. You must determine, time wastes Octavio.

Oct. If I should lead you through the Streets, and meet
Th'in quisitive Justice, I daring not
T'avow my self upon the other score
You know of, you might that way be in danger;
We must not venture 't; To Diego.
Run Rascal, and fetch
A Chair immediately.

Die. A pretty Errand at this time of the night;
These Chair-men are exceedingly well natured,
They Are likely to obey a Servant's Orders
After ten a clock.

[Exit Diego. Oct. Ye Powers above, why do ye lay so great
A Weight on Human Nature, and bestow
Such an Unequal Force to bear our Loads?
After a long pursuit through all those Storms,
Which Hell-bred Malice, or the Power of Fate
Could ever raise, to oppose a Noble Love;
To be at length posse s'd of the Rich Mine,
Where Nature seemed to have lodged all her Treasure;
And in an instant have it ravished from me,
Is too rude a Trial for my tired Patience
To su^^ain; I cannot bear it.

Por. My Sense of this Misfortune Equals yours,
But yet I must conjure you to submit
To Heavens Decrees; such Resignation
It Is possible, their Justice may induce
The mischief to divert, though never so near.

Oct. Ah Porcia to part with you!

Por. Loose not your self with me, though we are forced
To Separate, yet we are not Divorced.

Oct. Whilst our Souls act by Organs of the Sense,
'Twixt Death and Parting there is no difference.

Por. Consult your Reason, then you will comply;
Making a Virtue of Necessity.

Oct. Ah lovely Maid, 'twas not allowed to Jove
To hold at once his Reason, and his Love.

Enter Diego. Die. The Chair is come, Sir, just as I expected.

Oct. Where is it?

Die. Even where it was; they are deeply engaged
At New Cut, and will not leave their Game,
They swear, for all the Dons in Sevil.

Oct. A curse upon these Rogues! I Will make 'em come,
Or put some of 'em in a condition
To be carried themselves.

[Octavio runs out. Die. Madam, though I was never yet Unkind
To my own Person, I am so much troubled
At the Disquiet my Mistake has brought you,
That could I do it conveniently, in faith,
I could even cudgel my self.

Por. Away Buffon, is this a time for fooling?

Enter Antonio and Sancho. Ant. Where is my noble Friend Octavio?

Die. Did you not meet him at the door, Sir?

Ant. No.

Die. He went out just as you came in.

Ant. Madam, Addresses himself to Porcia.
I might have gone to Bed, but not
To Rest, without returning to enquire
Anew of Yours, and of my Friends Condition;
And once more offer you my Service.

Por. I take the boldness in Octavio's absence
To return his with my most humble Thanks
For your late generous Assistance of us,
And for this new Addition to our Debt.

Ant. Madam, though I have not the Happiness
To be Known to you, yet my constant Friendship
With Octavio is of an ancient Date;
And all Occasions where I may express
The Fervor of it, are most welcome to me.

Enter Flora in great haste. Flo. O Madam -- I Am out of breath with running.

Por. What Accident, Flora, brings you hither?

Flo. A sad one, Madam, and requiring haste,
To give you timely notice on it; Don Carlos,
Assisted by the light of the Rising Moon,
And by a Mistake of some of your Train,
Has Traced you to this House, and in my hearing,
Informed your Brother of the Place, and Manner
Of your Retreat, who is now coming hither
Accompanied with the Corigidor,
To seize on whomsoever shall be found
Within these Walls, upon pretense of Murder.

Por. O cruel Accident!

Flo. Madam, make haste, get out at the back door;
Or you will certainly be met withal.

Por. How vile a Creature am I now become!
For though in my own Innocence secure,
As to my self, to others I shall appear
Some wicked Woman, that has sold her Honor
To purchase Infamy.

Flo. They Will instantly be here.

Por. O that Octavio should just now be absent!
But to expect till he return were madness.

Ant. Y' have reason, Madam, and if you dare trust
Your Person to the Conduct of a Stranger,
Upon my Honor, Lady, I Will Secure you,
Or Perish in The Attempt.

Por. Generous Sir, how shall a wretched Maid,
Abandoned by her Fare to the pursuit
Of an Inhumane Brother, e'rbe able
Either to Merit, or Requite your Favors?

Ant. Madam, they are more than Paid in the Admission,
And your Acceptance of them will transfer
The Obligation, making me the Debtor.

Por. To your Protection I resign my self,
With equal Gratitude and Confidence.

Ant. Come Madam, there is no time to be lost;
Diego, find out your Master presently,
And tell him, that the Danger not allowing
Our Stay till his Return, I shall convey
His Mistress safely to a Nunnerie.

Por. And Flora, stay you here to bring me word,
What he resolves to do in this our desperate Condition.

[Exit Diego. Flo. Madam, I shall.

Ant. But stay; Going out returns.
I swear I Would like to have committed
A foul Mistake; the Monastery Gates
Will not be opened at this time of Night,
Without a strict Inquiry into the Cause;
Besides, it is possible, that once Lodged there,
She may be out of my Friends Power, or mine,
Ever to get her thence if it be known.
Lady, I have thought better on it; I shall
Conduct you to my Brother-in-law's house;
A Person of such Quality, and Honor,
As is fit to engage in your Protection;
And there my Wife may have the Happiness
TO accompany you, and pay the Offices
Due to your Virtue, and distressed Condition:
And going to a House that is so much mine,
Make account, Madam, it is to your own Home.
Sancho, stay you here to attend Octavio,
And guide him the next way to my Apartment; Turning to Sancho.

Here is the Key; I shall have little use on it,
Having left Ernesto waiting for me there.
One word more, Sancho; let Octavio know
It Is my advice that he come in a Chair;
He by that means may escape Examination,
Should he be met with.

Por. Flora, I pray do you continue here,
And if by any accident Octavio
Should hindered be from coming after us,
Observe his Motions, and where he Fixes;
Then return home; and I shall find some way
Of sending to you to inform my self.

Flo. I shall not fail t'observe your Orders, Madam.

Ant. Madam, I Am ready to wait on you.

Por. An cruel Brother! ah my dear Octavio!
O how perverse, and rigorous is my Fate!
Thus to torment me betwixt Love and Hate.

[Exeunt Antonio, Porcia. San. It Is no small Compliment my Master makes
Your Lady, and her Gallant, at this time
Of The night to quit his Brother-in-laws, and leave
So fair a Bride as Porcia all alone.

Flo. What? is his Mistris's name Porcia too?

San. Yes; and if she has but as fair a Handmaid
As your self, I shall soon forget my Damsel
In the Low Countries.

Flo. If your Low Country Damsels resemble us,
You would not be put to it to forget first;
But I believe that you are safe enough;
I have not heard such Praises of their Wit,
But that we may suppose they have good Memories.
Enter Diego.
Die. Is not my Master yet returned?

Flo. No.

Die. Well; now have we an Honorable Cause
To wear the Beadles Livery; faith, Flora,
If your tender Sex had not been privileged
From this harsh Discipline, how prettily
Would the Beadles Crimson Lace show upon
Thy white back.

Flo. 'T will not do so well as on a darker ground;
'Twill suit much better with your Tawney hide.

San. I pray, Camerade, is it the Mode in Sevil
To be Whipped for Company?

Die. Oh! a well-bred Soldier will never refuse
Such a Civility to an old Friend;
This is a new way of being a Second,
To show your Passive Courage.

San. We Soldiers do not use to show our Backs.

Die. Not to your Enemies; but, Sir, the Beadle
Will prove your Friend, for your Blood being Heated
With your long Journey, Breathing of a Vein
Is very requisite.

San. Would to Heaven that I were in the Camp again:
There we are never stripped till we are dead.

Enter Octavio, and the Chair-men appear at the door. Oct. Be sure you stir not
thence till I return. To the Chair-men.

Sirrah, where is Porcia?

Die. She Is fled away i'th'dark, with a Young man Of your acquaintance.

Oct. Rascal, leave your fooling.

Die. There Is none in the case, Sir, it is the wisest thing
She ever did, had she staid your return,
She would have fallen into those very Clutches,
In which you will immediately be gripped,
Unless you make more haste: Flora is come
With all possible speed, to let you know
They Are coming with the Justice to lay hold
Of all within this House, upon pretense
Of a most horrid Murder; be quick, Sir;
And save your self. She Is safe in a Nunnerie;
Conducted thither by Antonio;
Where, poor Lady, she is dropping for you now
More Beads, perhaps, than Tears.

Oct. Peace Screetch-Owl; Fire consume that Tongue of thine.
What say thou Villain? in a Nunnerie?
Porcia in a Nunnerie? O Heavens! nothing
But this was wanting to make me Desperate;
What hope's there left ever to get her thence,
After such Accidents as these made Public?
Ah Flora, is it true that my dear Porcia
Is gone into a Monastery?

Flo. Once, Sir, 'twas so resolved, and Diego sent
To give you notice on it; but afterward
He being gone, they changed their Resolutions:
There Is one can tell you more --

San. My Master bad me stay to let you know
He has conveyed her to his own Apartment, Pointing to Sancho.

In his Brother-in-laws House, a person
So eminent in Quality, and Credit,
That the engaging him in her, and your
Protection, Sir, may much avail you both;
Besides, she will have the pleasure there of being
Very well treated by my Master's Bride.
There he will expect you, Sir, and does advise
Your coming in a Chair, to avoid Question
In case of any Encounter.

Flo. And my walking by, Sir, as an Attendant,
Will pass you without scruple for a Lady.

Oct. I Will take his counsel, he is a generous Friend,
Come Chair-men, away. To Sancho.
Pray, friend, do you guide us.

Die. Up with your Burden Beasts, and fall forthwith
To your Half-Trot.

[Exeunt. The Chair is carried over the Stage, Diego, Sancho, and Flora follow.
A Noise within, Follow, follow, follow.
Enter Carlos, the Corigidor, and Sergeants, pursuing Sancho, Flora, and Diego.
Die. This is one of Don Cupid's pretty Jeasts.
We Are struck upon a Shelf before we could
Put out to Sea.

Flo. Oh, we are undone Diego!

Car. You find, To the Corrigidor.
Sir, my Conjectures not ill grounded.

Cor. What are you, Sirrah?

Die. A Living Creature, very like a Man,
Only I want a Heart.

Cor. You Are pleasant, Sir, pray Heaven your mirth continue.
Who is that Woman with the Veil?

Die. Let her answer for her self, sh'has a Tongue,
Set it but once a going, and she will tell
All that she knows, and more.

Cor. Make her discover her face.

[One of the Sergeants goes to lift up her Veil. Car. Hold Friend; Cousin, if it
should be Porcia,
'Twere not fit to expose her here.

Cor. It Is very well considered, go you to her,
And speak to her in private.

[Carlos goes toward Flora. Flo. It Is I Sir, Flora, who being commanded
By my Lady --

Carl. Speak softly prithee Flora, it is enough;
I understand the rest, and pity her;
Bid her sit still in the Chair, I Will do my best
To save her from the Fury of her Brother.

Aside. Flo. He thinks it is Porcia there, a good Mistake,
It may secure Octavio for the present
From the hands of this rude Rabble; To Octavio in the Chair.
Sit still,
They take you for my Mistress Sir, I Will follow
The Chair, and have a watchful Eye on all
Occasions, that may further your Escape.

Car. We have found our wandering Nymph.

Cor. Is it Porcia her self?

Car. No, it is her Woman Flora following
The Chair, wherein they were conveying her
To some other place.

Cor. We arrived luckily, had we but staid
A moment longer, they had all been fled.

Ser. Will you have us see, Sir, who is in the Chair?

Cor. Forbear Fellow! To Carlos.
Her own Folly's punishment
Enough't'a Woman of her Quality,
Without our adding that of Public shame.

Carl. 'Twas luckily thought on, when you obliged
Don Henrique to expect us at your House;
For had he come, and found his Sister thus,
'T had not been possible to have restrained
His Passion from some great Extravagance.

Cor. I could not think it fit to let him come;
For one of such a Spirit could never brook
The sight of those had done him these Affronts,
Without invading those strict Rules, which might
Render his Life obnoxious to the Laws.
It Is better that a business of this nature,
(Chiefly 'twixt Persons of such Quality)
Should rather be reduced by Mediation
(If it be possible) to some fair Agreement,
Than to a public Trial by the Law,
Or, which is worse, some Barbarous Revenge.

Carl. This Fellow (if I am not much mistaken)
Is Don Octavio's Man. Looking upon Diego.


Cor. Who do you belong too, Friend?

Die. To no body, Sir.

Cor. Do not you serve?

Die. Yes Sir, but my Master is not himself.

Cor. Take his Sword from him Sergeant. The Sergeant goes to take away his
Sword.


Die. Diego disarmed by any other hand
Than by his own? know Friend, it is a Weapon
Of such dire Execution, that I dare not
Deliver it, but to the hands of Justice.

The Corrigidor receives the Sword, and gives it to one of his Sergeants.
Signior, pray call for it, when you come home,
And hanged up in your Hall, then under-write,
This is bold Diego's Sword; O may it be
Ever from Rust, as it is from Slaughter free.

Cor. Thou art a Fellow of a pleasant humor.

Die. Signior, I never pain my self for Love,
Or Fame, or Riches, nor do I pretend
To that great subtilty of Sense to Feel
Before I am Hurt, and for the most part
I keep my self out of Harms way.

Carl. The Definition of a Philosopher.

Cor. Come, leave your fooling Sirrah, where is your Master?

Die. I am afraid we are not to be parted.

Cor. Whom do you mean?

Die. My Master, my Self, and the Fool your Worship
Mentions, for sure one that had any Wit,
Would never serve a Lover Militant;
He had better wait upon a Mountebank,
And be run through the Body twice a week
To recommend his Balsom.

Cor. This Fellow's an Original.

Die. But of so ill a hand, I am not worth
The hanging up, Sir, in my Masters room,
Amongst the worst of your Collection.

Enter Sergeants with two Footmen, and two Maidservants. Serj. An't please
your Worship, we have searched the House,
From the Cellars to the Garrits, and these are all
The living Cattle we can find.

Cor. Friends take a special care of that same Varlet,
And the Waiting Woman; we will find a way
To make them tell the Truth, I warrant you.

Flo. O Diego! must we be Prisoners together?

Die. Why, that is not so bad as the Bands of Wedlock,
Flora.

Cor. Come, let us away; but whither to convey her --
To her own House certainly were not fit,
Because of her incensed Brother.

Car. If you approve it, Cousin, I Will carry her
To mine; for since we seek (if possible)
The business to compose, she will be there
With much more Decency, and Satisfaction,
And less exposed to Censure of the World,
Being in a Kinsmans House, and having there
My Sister to accompany her.

Cor. This business cannot be in better hands,
Than yours; and there I Will leave it, and bid you
Goodnight.

Carl. Your Servant Cousin, As the Corrigidor goes out.
I wish you well home.
Cousin, you may be please to take your Sergeants
Along with you; there are without two Servants
Belonging to Don Henrique, they will suffice
To guard our Prisoners, and with far less notice.

Cor. Come Sergeants, follow me.

Carl. Well, To the Footmen and Maids.
you may go about your business, Friends,
I Will not be troubled with ye; I am glad
We did not find Octavio here; though I
Might unaffected Ignorance pretend,
I would not bring him (though by chance) to his End.

[Exeunt Servants. San. Well, I am now sufficiently instructed,
And since there is no notice taken of me,
I Will fairly steal away, and give my Master
Account of this Misfortune.

[Exit Sancho. Carl. Take up the Chair, and follow me.

[They take up the Chair. Die. A Lovely Dame they bear, it is true, she is
something
Hairie, but that is a sign of Strength.

Carl. Make haste, I long to let Don Henrique know,
That his lost Sister is by my dexterity
Recovered, and I hope to find some means
To calm his Fury, and to repossess
My Cousin Porcia, and (if it be possible)
Octavio of his good Graces. Come away.

[The Chair is carried off. Die. How like an Ass he will look, when opening the
Shell,
His Worship finds within so rough a Kernel.

[Exeunt omnes. The Scene Changes to Don Antonio's Apartment in Don Henrique's
House. Enter Antonio and Porcia. Ant. Madam, banish all your Fears, you are now
Safe in this House; be pleased to remain here,
Till I shall bring some Lights, and acquaint Porcia
With the Honor she receives in entertaining
So fair a Guest.

Por. Who is it you say you will advertise Sir?

Ant. My Wife Porcia; have but a little patience;
And she shall wait upon you.

[Exit Antonio. Por. Is her name Porcia too? I pray Heaven send her
A better Fate than her distressed Names-sake.
O Octavio! O Love! how dear do you
Cost me! where am I brought? what House is this?
What with my Fears, and Darkness, I have lost
All my measures; I cannot so much as guess
What Quarter of the Town it is we are in,
For to avoid the Encounter of my Brother,
And his Revengeful Train, we have been forced
To make so many Turnings, I am Giddy.
But thanks to Providence I have this comfort,
That I am in a place out of his reach.

Enter Antonio with two Lights, and sets them on the Table. Ant. Madam, my Wife
will presently attend you.
Pardon I pray my absence for a moment.

[Exit Antonio. Por. Now I begin to hope my Sighs, and Tears,
Have in some sort with the just Heavens prevailed
At length to free me -- Looking about her.
But what do I see!
Am I awake, or is it an Illusion?
Is not this my Brother's House? Is not this
The Quarter joining to my own Apartment?
There is no room for Doubt, and my Misfortunes
Are always Certain; Miserable Creature,
That I should be thus Bandi'd up and down
From one Hazard t'another, greater still.
Ah cruel Heavens! what have I ever done
To deserve this lasting Persecution?
But how came I here? brought by Octavio's friend,
Upon whose Virtue I did so rely
That I my Brothers Malice durst defy.
Can he betray me? sure I am in a Dream.
But if Octavio -- O vile Suspicion!
Octavio false? no, Truth and He are one.
It Is possible his Friend may guilty be;
But to what end so base a Treachery:
And if Perfidious, how could he be his Friend.
I am confounded with the various forms
Of my Misfortunes, Heightened still the more,
The less I can their Hidden Cause explore.
This onely's evident, that I must fly
Immediately this fatal place; But why
Struggle I thus with Fate? since Go, or Stay,
Death seems alike to wait me every way. She weeps.


Enter Antonio and Camilla. Came. I wonder much what Lady this can be
Antonio mentions. Aside.


Ant. Pardon, my dearest Mistress, the Liberty
Which I so early take; but I presume
Such is your Generous Tenderness to those,
Whose sad Misfortunes, not their Faults, have driven
Into Distress, that you will think your self
Obliged to him, who gives you the occasion
To exercise those Virtues which do Visit
Others, but Reside with you; This fair Lady --
But she will best relate her own sad Story;
Whilst I seek out Don Henrique, and engage him
Both to Protect and Serve her with his Credit.

[Exit Antonio. Upon Camilla's approach Porcia takes the Handkerchief from her
Eyes. Came. Ha! She runs after Antonio.
what is that I see? stay, stay Antonio.
It is not fit Don Henrique, -- but he is gone,
And we are lost for ever.

Porc. O Heavens! is this Antonio, the same Man
To whom I am Betrothed? then my Destruction
Is inevitable.

Came. Are you an Apparition? or are you
Porcia her self? speak, that when y' have said it thrice
I may not yet believe you.

Por. You well may Doubt even what you See Camilla;
Since my Disasters are so new, and strange,
They sever Truth from Credibility.

Came. How is it possible you should be here?

Por. I know not how, only of this I Am sure,
I have not long t'expect the dismal end
Of my sad Tragedy; since it is evident
The Person that has led me to this Place,
This fatal Place, is the abused Antonio;
Who with my Cruel Brother has conspired
To take away my wretched life, and chose
This Scene as fittest for their Cruelty.
And thus, strange Fate! (through ignorance betrayed)
I have Protection sought from the same Party,
Whom I have Injured, and have made my Husband
The Only Confident of his own Affront:
Who to accomplish his too just Revenge,
As well upon my Family, as Person,
Gives me up to be Murdered by my Brother.
So whilst I Am branded as a Faithless Bride,
He Will be detested as a Particide.

Came. Prodigious Accident! but were thou blind
Not to know thine own House unhappy Porcia?

Por. Alas, how could I in so dark a Night,
In such Confusion, and so full of Fear?
Besides, he brought me in by the Back way,
Through his own Quarter, where was neither Light,
Nor any Creature of the Family.

Came. Although I cannot comprehend the steps
Of this your strange Adventure, yet dear Cousin,
Your case (as I conceive) is not so desperate.

Por. We easily persuade our selves to hope The things we wish; but Cousin, my
condition
Will not admit Self-flattery, and what
Can you propose to temper my Despair?

Came. Don't you remember, how this very Evening
Antonio's Man finding me in your Quarter
Without a Veil (you having put on mine)
That he applied himself to me, and I
By your command, your Person did assume?

Por. Yes very well.

Came. The Master since has by the Man's Mistake
Been happily led into the same Error,
And I not disabus'd him yet, in hopes
It might produce Advantage to us both.

Por. Oh! he has spoken with my Brother since;
Who sure has Undeceived him long ere this.
No, without doubt they having found themselves
Affronted both, have both conspired my death.

Came. How Cousin can that be? if Don Antonio
In your Protection has engaged himself,
And is Octavio's Friend.

Por. Cousin, if you impartially reflect
On the Affront which I have done Antonio,
You will not wonder much if he recede
From the scarce-troden Path of rigid Honor
To meet with his Revenge; and to that end
Proceeds thus cautelously, and does seign
Not to know me, that he may disavow
Both to Octavio, and to all the world,
Th'Infamy of Betraying a poor Maid
To loss of Life and Honor.

Came. Misfortunes make you rave; this vile Suspicion
Is inconsistent with Antonio's Fame:
You may as well believe that Nature will
Reverse the order of the whole Creation,
As that Antonio, a Man, whose Soul
Is of so strong, and perfect a Complexion,
Should ere descend to such a slavish Sin.
And if we had the leisure, I could give you
Such reasons to convince you of your Error,
That you would easily acknowledge it.

Por. I had forgot her near Concernments for
Antonio. Aside.
Pardon and Pity me Camilla;
My mind is by Afflictions made so Weak,
I Am ready to believe Impossibilities.

Came. I Pity thee with all my heart; but Cousin,
If Antonio not knowing you, nor your
Relations, should chance to find your Brother,
And him inform of what has passed, and that
He has conveyed the distressed Party hither,
He Will presently imagine it is you;
And then (I fear) 'twill be impossible
(Though he should interpose with all his power)
To stop the Torrent, or divert his Rage
From breaking in, and executing on us
That horrid Parricide, which (though too late)
It may be he himself would execrate.

Por. There Is too much ground for what you fear Camilla:
But if we could secure our selves this night,
There were some hopes that we tomorrow may
Engage both Don Antonio, and your Brother
To find out some Expedient to redeem me
From this deplorable condition.

Came. Were you only in pain for your Security
This night, I know an easy Remedy
For that.

Por. Which way my Dearest?

Came. Why what does hinder us from making use
(On this occasion) of the secret Door,
By which (you know) you have so often past
Into our House (upon more pleasing Errands?)
By this we shall these Benefits obtain;
Of Safety from your Brothers present Fury,
And time to try if Carlos, and Antonio
May be engaged to mediate in this Business.
And I have cause to think you will not find
Antonio so implacable, as you
Imagine.

Por. I conceive you Cousin; Fool that I was,
To think a Heart once Conquered by your Eyes
Should ever become another Virgin's Prize.

Enter Antonio. Ant. So late; a Guest in's House; that is come so far;
On such a Business; and not yet come home? Aside.

There Is something in it I cannot comprehend.
I cannot, Madam, yet find out your Brother,
But sure 'twill not be long ere he return.
Then i will acquaint him with the Accident
Has made his House this Lady's Sanctuary.

Aside. Por. Here is a glympse of comfort, for I see
He takes my Cousin for Don Henrique's Sister;
O blessed Mistake so luckily continued!

Came. I am by his permission Mistress here,
And since that I am pleased Sir, it is enough,
Without our troubling him with the Account
Of her sad Story.

Ant. Yes, Madam, as to th'Excuse, but 'twere fit
He knew it too, that we might serve our selves
Of his Credit in this Lady's Protection.

Enter Henrique. Henr. Though I did promise the Corrigidor
Not to stir from his House, till his return,
Yet I could not obtain it of my self;
I Am so impatient to unfold the Riddle
Of Don Antonio's seeing of my Sister,
And entertaining her in her own Lodging;
Aside. I shall not now be long in the dark. He sees her.
O Heavens!
It Is she her self, and Camilla with her:
Were all my Servants mad, or all agreed
To Abuse me, in affirming she was fled?
But Don Carlos, was he mad too, to swear
That he had traced her to an other House?
Certainly I, or they must be Possessed;
Or some Enchantment reigns within these Walls.

Ant. O here comes Don Henrique, I Will now acquaint him
With your sad Story Madam.

Came. I fear we are undone.

Ant. Don Henrique --

Por. I Am dead if he proceed, but how to hinder him --

Ant. Here Is a Lady with your Sister Porcia --

Henr. Yes, Sir, I see who it is.

Ant. Since you know her Sir, you will the eas'lier
Excuse my boldness.

Henr. Boldness, in what Sir?

Ant. To have been the occasion of your finding her
Here, with your Sister, at this time of night.

Henr. Lord Sir, what do you mean?

Ant. Truly there was a Necessity in it,
Which will, I hope, excuse my Intercession
With you in her behalf.

Por. Now all comes out.

Henr. I understand you Sir, she does desire
To pass this night with Porcia, to assist her
In ordering her Nuptial Ceremonies:
Let her stay here a God's name.

Por. If he does not dissemble, my Condition
Is not so desperate as I imagined.

Aside. Ant. I hope you will pardon this great Liberty;
So early a Confidence will need it, Sir.

Henr. It Is more than enough Sir, that you desire it,
The Occasion too does justify her stay.

Ant. It Is most true Sir, the Occasion did enforce me
Thus boldly to presume upon your Friendship.

Henr. Have done for Heavens sake, is it a Novelty
Think you for Porcia, and her Cozin-Germin
To pass a Night together?

Ant. Is she so near a Kinswoman of his?
Strange Inadvertence in her not to tell me
Her relation to him, when I named him first.
I Would made fine work on it had I told him all.

Aside. Henr. She knows I owe her many a Good-turn
Upon Octavio's score, Looking on the Ladies.
and hope ere long
To be able to repay her to the full.

Por. Can he declare his mind in plainer terms?

Came. I cannot tell which of us two he means,
But I begin to fear that he knows all.

Henr. Since it is so late, pray give the Ladies leave
To retire to their Chambers; Go in Sister.

Ant. My Brothers Words, and his Behavior
Imply some Mystery; I must be silent
Till I discover more.

Aside. Por. Let us begone, we are lost if we stay here;
I Am confident he counterfeits this Calm
To disguise his Revenge, until Antonio,
And the rest of the House are gone to Bed.

Came. But we shall never be able to get out
Whilst they continue in the outward Rooms.

Por. Yes, by the Garden-dore, but I Am afraid It Is shut.

Came. No; now I think on it, Flora went that way,
And left it open.

Por. Come, lett's be gone; I hope Heaven does ordain
Ease by that Door which first let in my Pain.

[Exeunt Porcia and Camilla. Ant. I Will only make a step Sir, to my Lodging,
And then return to you immediately.

Henr. Pray give me leave to wait on you.

Ant. I humbly thank you Sir, I know the way,
And shall not stay above a Moment from you.

Henr. You Are Master here, Sir.

Ant. I Will now go see whether my Servant Sancho
Has brought Octavio to my Apartment,
As I directed him.

[Exit Antonio. Henr. Heavens! was there ever so strange a Mystery!
Don Carlos he affirmed that those we fought with
Had conveyed Porcia away, and when I come
To seek her in the House I find her missing,
To second this, her Waiting woman Flora
Tells me that she went down, about that time,
Into the Garden; Antonio, not long after,
Affirms that he both saw, and entertained her
In her own Apartment, where I now find her,
And Camilla with her: What can this be?
These sure are Riddles to pose an Oedipus;
But if by my own Sense I am assured
My Honor's safe, which was so much in doubt,
What matter is it how it is brought about.

THE FIFTH ACT.
The SCENE is DONCARLOS's House. Enter Diego, Flora, and Geraldo accompanying
the Chair, greaping as in the dark. Ger. DAme Flora, and Signior Diego, go in
there.
And you my Friends, set down the Chair in th'door;
And when the Party's entered, pull it to;
'Twill lock of 't self; that done, you may be gone:
There Is Money for you; I Will go fetch a Candle.

[Exit Geraldo. Diego, and Flora go in, and the Chair being set in the door,
Octavio goes out into the room, the Chair-men clap to the door, and go away.
Enter Octavio, Diego, Flora, at another door. Oct. What! Groaping as in the dark
put in all alone here in the dark!
And the door shut upon me! Diego, Flora.

Die. Here am I Sir, and Flora too, unless
My Sense of feeling fails me.

Oct. I cannot conjecture where we are; I durst not
So much as peep out of the Chair, since Flora
Gave me the warning; but where ever I am,
It Is better far than in the Sergeants hands.

Flo. Though now in the dark, I know well where we are:
I have too often walked the Streets, Octavio,
From your House hither, upon Cupid's Errants,
Not to know the back door of Carlos's
Apartment; it is there I am sure w' are now.

Oct. Curse on thee, Flora! had thou lost thy wits
Not to let me know it sooner! think thou
I should have tamely suffered them to bring me,
Like a poor Bird shut in a Cage, to a place,
Where I must look for nothing but Destruction.

Die. A Gypsy told me by my Palm long since,
A sour-fac'd Damsel should be my destruction.

Flo. Suspend a while your Apprehensions, Sir;
You may escape before the Candles come;
The door was wont to open on this side;
If not, I have another way in store.

[Octavio goes to the door. Oct. Flora, Striving to open the door.
I cannot make the Lock go back.

Ger. unlocks it on the other side, and coming in with a Candle, meets with
Octavio, and starting back and stumbling lets the Candle fall, then running out
again locks fast the door. Die. Nay then, in faith, we are fast; I heard him give
The Key a double Turn.

[Diego takes up the Candle. Here Is a fair Trial for your Maiden breath,
Flora blow 't in again, let us owe your Mouth
More Light, than yet your Eyes could ever impart.

Flo. Light's cast away on such an Owl as you;
But yet I Will try.

[Flora blows the Candle in. Die. Thanks, gentle Flora, to your Virgin Puff;
It Is a Strong breath that can o're-come a Snuff. [Aside
But I had rather 't had been let alone:
If I must needs be slain, unless it were
Behind my back, I Would have it in the dark;
For I hate to be killed in my own presence.

Oct. What must we do Flora? all my hope's in you.

Flo. There is yet room for Hope; there is Back-stairs
Beyond that inner Chamber, that goes down
Into the Garden, if the door be open,
As certainly it is, the way is easy.

Oct. Come, let us lose no time; prithee guide us Flora.

[Exeunt. The Scene changes to Don Henrique's House. Enter Don Henrique. Henr.
As well pleased as I am, to find my Honor
Less Desperate than I thought, I cannot rest
Till I have drawn from Porcia a Confession
Of the whole Truth, before she goes to bed;
She Is in her Chamber now, unless by new
Enchantments carried thence.

As he is going toward Porcia's Chamber, Enter Carlos in haste. Carl. I cannot
imagine what should make Don Henrique
Quit the Corrigidors till we returned:
One of his Servants tells me he is come home.
O here he is; now shall I raise a storm
Which (if we do not take a special care)
Will scarce b' allaid without a shower of Blood;
Yet I must venture't, since it so imports
Our Friendship, and the Honor of our House.
Aside. Happiness is a stranger to Mankind,
And like to a Forced Motion, it is ever
Strongest at the beginning, then Languishing
With time, grows weary of our company;
But to Misfortunes we so subject are,
That like to Natural motion they prove still
More Vigorous in their Progress.

Henr. What means this Philosophical Preamble?

Carl. You I'know too soon I fear.

Henr. Don Carlos, I am now so well recovered
From all m'Inquietudes, that for the future
I dare defy the Malice of my Stars
To cause a new Relapse into Distemper.

Carl. Cousin, I Am so surpised with this great change,
That my Confusion does suppress my Joy;
But since you are so much Master of your Passions,
I Will spare my Ethics, and proceed to give you
In short the Narrative of our success;
The Corrigidor (as we did expect
Forward to serve you in th'Affair I mentioned)
Was pleased to go along with me in person,
With a strong Band of Sergeants, to the place,
Where I attended by your Servants led him:
Cousin, 'twas there; it wounds my heart to speak it;
And I conjure you summon all your Patience:
'Twas there I found --

Henr. Whom Cousin did you find? for since I Am sure
You found not Parcia there; my Concernments
In your Discoveries are very unlikely
To discompose me.

Carl. I would to Heaven we had not found her there.

Henr. What Is that you say, Cousin, my Sister there!

Carl. Yes Sir, your Sister.

Henr. My Sister! that is good in faith: ha, ha, ha.

Carl. Why do you laugh? is the Dishonor of
Your Family become a Laughing Matter?
This is a worse Extreme methinks than the other.

Henr. How can I choose but Laugh to see you Dream;
Awake for Heavens sake; and recall your Senses;
Porcia there said you?

Carl. Yes Sir, Porcia I say; your Sister Porcia;
And which is more, 'twas in Octavio's House.

Henr. Why sure you are not in earnest, Cousin.

Carl. As sure as you're alive I sound her there.

Henr. Then you transport me, Sir, beyond all patience:
Why Cousin, if she has been still at home,
Antonio seen, and entertained her here,
Accompanied by Camilla; if even now
I left them there within; Is It possible
You should have found her in Octavio's House?
To be here, and there too, at the same time,
None sure but Janus with his double face
Can ever unfold this Mystery.

Carl. Sir, let me advise you; Abuse not your self:
I tell you positively I found her there:
And by the same Token, her Waiting Woman
Flora was there attending her.

Henr. Flora! dear Cousin, do not still persist
Thus to affirm impossibilities.

Carl. Sure you are making some Experiment
Upon my Temper, and would fain provoke
My Patience to some such high Disorder,
That I should never hereafter have the face
When you are in you Fits to play the Stoic.

Henr. Cousin, I swear to you upon my Honor,
It Is not above a quarter of an hour,
Since I did speak with Porcia, and your Sister
In that very Apartment, and am now
Returning to them in my Sister's Chamber.

Carl. And Sir, I swear to you upon my Honor,
It Is not above a quarter of an hour,
Since I left Porcia carried in a Chair
From Don Octavio's House, your man Geraldo
Conducting the Chair-men to mine, and followed
By Flora, whilst I came to find you out
TO acquaint you, Sir, with this unpleasing news:
But fit for you to know as soon might be.

Henr. This Question, Cousin, may be soon decided,
Pray come along, her Chamber's not far off.

Carl. And my House is but the next door, let us in.

Henr. You Will quickly find your Error.
Here comes your Servant, whom I left to Guard her;
He Will instantly convince you of the Truth.

Enter Geraldo. Ger. O Sir!

Henr. What brings you hither Geraldo?

Ger. O Sir, I bring you such rare news, your Enemy,
Your Enemy Octavio -- I Am out of breath.

Henr. What does the Varlet mean?

Ger. Sir, I suppose Don Carlos has informed you
That he left me to see your Sister P'rcia,
With Flora, and Diego Octavio's Man
Safely conveyed to his House.

Carl. See now Don Henrique, who was in the Right.

Ger. I did as he commanded me, and put them
All three into Don Carlos's Antichamber;
Porcia in the same Chair which brought her thither;
And for more safety made the door be locked;
Whilst I went down in haste to fetch a Light.

Henr. As sure as Death this Madness is Infectious;
My Man is now in one of Carlos Fits.

Ger. Returning with a Light a moment after,
No sooner opened I the door, but Heavens!
Who should I see there standing just before me
In the same place where I left Porcia, but
Octavio, your Enemy Octavio.

Hen. Here is some Witchcraft sure; what can this mean?

Ger. Amazed at the sight, I let the Candle fall;
And clapped the door to; then I double-lock'd it,
And brought away the Key.

Carl. But how could he get in, if you be sure
You locked the door, when you went out for Lights?

Ger. I know not whether he was there before,
Or got in after, but of this I Am sure,
That there I have him now, and safe enough.

Carl. I am sorry for it.

E Aside' Henr. Let Us not, Don Carlos, now perplex our selves
With needless Circumstances, when? and how?
Those Queries are too Phlegmatic for me;
If the Beast be in th'd Toil it is enough;
Let us go seize upon him; he must die.

Enter Antonio. Ant. Good Brother, what unhappy Man is he,
Whom you so positively doom to death?
I have a Sword to serve you in all occasions
Worthy of you, and me.

Henr. His intervening, Carlos, is unlucky,
How shall we govern our selves toward him
In this Affair? so unfit for his knowledge?

Carl. Antonio is a Man of shining Honor;
But having such a share in this Affront,
If once he know it, I am afraid he will bring
Fuel, not Water to Don Henrique's Fire.
Aside. Don Henrique, To Henrique
you must suddenly resolve
What answer to return, he is not a Man
To be put off with any slight Pretenses;
Nor yet to be engaged in such an Action,
As bears th'appearance rather of Cruelty,
Than Honor, and you know, Antonio needs
No fresh Occasions to support his Name;
Who Dangers seek, are indigent of Fame.

Ant. I find my coming has disordered them,
There Is something they would fain conceal from me;
All here is discomposed, what er's the matter.

Aside. Carl. Perhaps 'twere better to suspend a while
The Execution of your just Revenge:
Time, and mature weighing of Circumstances,
Never did harm in Actions of this Nature;
Where one has still the Party in his Power.

Henr. A Curse on your Tame Proposition Carlos!

Carl. He, who the Rules of Temperance neglects,
From a Good Cause may produce Vile Effects.

Henr. To Antonio.
I doubt not of your kind Concurrence, Sir,
In all the near Concernments of a Person
Allied to you as I am; but Noble Brother,
It were against the Laws of Hospitality,
And Civil Prudence to engage a Guest
(Newly arrived after so long a Journey)
In an occasion, Sir, of Blood, and Hazard.

Ant. If such be the occasion, I must then
Acquaint you freely, that I wear a Sword,
Which must not be excluded from your Service;
I Am sure you are too Noble t'imploy yours
In any Cause not justified by Ho^^r;
But I confess there are Affronts so great,
And heightened by such odious Circumstances,
As do release us from the usual Forms
Of Generous Revenge; and set us free
To take it on any Advantage.

Henr. Though with Regret I see, Sir, I must yield
To your excess of Generosity;
This only I shall say to satisfy
Your just Reflections; that my Resentments
Are grounded on Affronts of such a Nature,
That as nothing but the Offender's Life
Can ever repair them, so as to the Forms
Of taking that Revenge, they cannot admit
Of the least scruple.

Ant. Honor's my Standard; and it is true, that I
Had rather Fall, than Blush for Victory;
But you are such a Judge of Honor's Laws*
That 'twere Injurious to suspect your Cause.
Allow me, Sir, th'honor to lead the way.

Exit Antonio and Henrique. Carl. If Porcia be there too, (as I believe)
'Twill prove, I fear, a fatal Tragedy;
But should she not be there; yet it is too much
For such a Heart as mine, through Ignorance
To have betrayed a Gentleman, though Faulty,
In to such Cruel hands; I must go with them;
But so resolved, as in this Bloody strife
I Will salve my Honor, or I Will lose my Life.

[Exit Carlos. The Scene changes to Carlos's House. Enter Octavio, Diego, Flora
with a Candle. Flo. O the unluckiness! I vow t'you Sir,
I have scarce known that door ever locked before.

Oct. There Is no Remedy Flora, I am now
At the Mercy of my Enemies.

Die. Having broken into another's Ground,
It Is just in faith* you should be put in the Pound.

Oct. The Tide of my ill Fate is swollen so high,
'Twill not admit increase of Misery;
Since amongst all the Curses there is none
So wounds the Spirit as Privation.
For it is not where we Lie, but whence we Fell,
The Loss of Heaven's the greatest Pain in Hell;
When I had sailed the doubtful Course of Love,
Had safely gained my Port, and far above
My Hopes, the precious Treasure had secured,
For which so many Storms I had endured;
To be so soon from this great Blessing torn,
That Is hard to say, if 'twere first Dead, or ^orn,
May doubtless seem such a transcendent Curse,
That even the Fates themselves could do no worse;
Yet this I bore with an erected face,
Since Fortune, not my Fault caused my Disgrace;
But now my Eyes unto the Earth are bent,
Conscious of meriting this Punishment,
For trusting a fond Maid's Officious Care,
My Life, and Honor's taken in this Snare;
And thus I perish on this unseen Shelf,
Pursued by Fate, and False unto my self.
Flora, He pulls out his Tablets.
when I am dead, be sure that you
These Tablets give to Porcia; there she will find,
That to th'Extremest Moment of my Life
I constantly pursued those Noble Ways,
Which might Deserve her, though I could not Have her.
Give me the Candle.

Octavio sets the Candle on a Table, and sits down as to write in his Tablets.
Die. A double Curse upon all Love in earnest,
All Constant Love; it is still accompanied
With strange Disasters; or else ends in that
Which is the worst of all Disasters Marriage.

Flo. Sure you could wish that every body living
Had such a Soul of Quicksilver, as yours,
That can fix no where.

Die. Why 'twould not be the worse for you, dear Flora,
You then might hope in time to have your Turn,
As well as those, who have much better Faces.

Flo. You, I presume Sir, would be one o'th'latest
Which I should hear of, yet it is possible
That one might see you, before you should be welcome.

Die. She has Wit, and good Humor; excellent
Ingredients to pass away the time;
And I have kindness for her Person too,
But that will end with Marriage, and possibly
Her good Humor; for I have seldom known
The Husband, and the Wife make any Music,
Though when asunder they can play their parts;
Well, friend Diego, I advise you to Look
Before you Leap, for if you should be Coupled
To a Yoke instead of a Yoak-fellow,
It Is likely you may wear it to your Grave.
Yet, honest Diego, now I think on it better,
Your Dancing, and your Vaulting days are done,
Faith all your Pleasures are three Stories high,
They Are come up to your Mouth, for you are now
For Ease, and Eating, the only Joys of Life,
And there is no Cook, nor Drie-Nurse like a Wife.

[Flora over-hears him. Flo. I could find Reasons too for Matrimony,
A Stale Maid is a horrible reproach,
I must confess it; and a Waiting Woman
Does only change a Mistress for a Master;
I may quit her, it is true, but not my Husband,
And on the other side she may quit me,
And turn me off, when old, and good for nothing.
A Husband's bound to keep me still; In fine,
For ought I can perceive the Scales are Equal,
I may throw Cross and Pile, which Life I Would have,
The Single Beggar, or the Married Slave;
But hark! the Door within, from whence we came
Is newly opened, or my Ears deceive me.

Die. Methoughts I heard it too, let us peep in.
[They look into the next Room, and start back. O Sir, Runs to Octavio.
we are lost, I see two Female-Giants
Coming most terribly upon us.

Oct. Away you troublesome Fool.

Enter Camilla and Porcia, the one with a Key, the other with a Candle. Por.
I Am confident no body saw us pass
From the other House.

Came. However, let us go through my Brother's Quarter,
And open the Backdoor into the Street;
It Is good in all Events to have a Retreat
More ways, than one.

Por. O Heavens! A door claps behind, and both look back.
our surest is cut off, the Wind
Has clapped that door to thorough which we came.

Came. The Accident's unlucky, it is a Spring-lock,
That opens only on the other side.

Por. Let Us on the faster, and make sure of the other. Octavio here!

Octavio hearing them starts up with the Tablets in's hand. Oct. Porcia in this
place! may I trust my Senses,
Or does my Fancy create these Chimeras?

Die. Either we Sleep, and Dream extravagantly;
Or else the Fairies govern in this House.

[Flora runs to Porcia. Flo. Ah! dearest Mistress, you shall never make me
Quit you so again.

Por. But can that be Octavio?

Oct. I was Octavio; but I am at present
So much astonished, I am not my self.

Came. What can the meaning of this Vision be?

[Octavio approaches Porcia. Oct. My dearest Porcia, how is it possible
To find you in this place, noble Antonio
Having so generously undertaken
Your protection?

Por. Did he not yours so too? and yet I find
Octavio here, where he is more exposed
Than I, to sure destruction; I am loath
To say it is he, who has Betrayed us both.

Oct. Antonio false? it is impossible.

Die. It is too evident.

Oct. Peace Slave; he is my Friend, of Noble Blood,
Whose Fame's above the Level of those Tongues,
That Bark by Custom at the brightest Virtues,
As Dogs do at the Moon.

Por. How hard it is for Virtue to suspect.
Ah Octavio! we have been both deceived;
This vile Antonio is the very Man,
To whom my Brother without my Consent,
Or Knowledge has Contracted me in Flanders.

Oct. Antonio the Man to whom you are Contracted,
Porcia the Bride whom he is come to Marry?

Por. The very same.

Oct. Why did you not acquaint me with it sooner?

Por. Alas, I have not seen you since I knew it;
But those Few hours such Wonders have produced,
As surpass all Belief, and do require
More time, than your unsafe Condition here
Will allow us to make you understand it.

Came. Dear Friends, I cannot blame your Apprehensions,
Nor your Suspicion of Antonio's Friendship:
But I am so possessed with the Opinion
Of his great Virtue, that I shall as soon
Believe Impossibilities, as his
Apostacy from Honor.

Oct. What Is her Concernment in Antonio, Porcia?

Por. O, that is the strangest part of our sad Story;
And which requires most time to tell you.

A Blaze of Light appears at the Window, and a noise within. Por. See, Flora,
at the Window, what is that Light,
And Noise we hear.

[Flora goes to the Window. Flo. O Madam! we are all undone, I see
Henrique, Carlos, and their Servants with Torches
All coming hither, and which is wonderful,
Antonio leading them with his Sword drawn.

Came. Thou dream'st, distracted Wench; Antonio false?
It is impossible.
Camilla runs to the Window, and turning back says, All she has said is in
appearance true,
There Is sure some hidden Mystery which thus
Abuses us; for I shall never believe
Antonio can transgress the Rules of Friendship.

Oct. Friendship's an Empty Name, made to Deceive
Those, whose Good Nature tempts them to believe;
There Is no such thing on Earth, the best that we
Can hope for here is faint Neutrality.

Por. Ye Powers above! what pleasure can ye take
To Persecute Submitting Innocence?

Oct. Retire, dear Porcia, to that inner Room,
For should thy cruel Brother find thee here,
He Is so revolted from Humanity,
He Will mingle thine, with my Impurer Blood.

Por. That were a kind of Contract; let him come;
We Will meet at once Marriage, and Martyrdom.

Oct. Soul of my Life retire.

Por. I will not leave you.

Oct. Thou preserv'st me by saving of thy self;
For they can murder only half of me,
Whilst that my better part survives in thee.

Por. I will die too, Octavio, to maintain,
That different Causes form the same Effects;
It Is Courage in you Men, Love in our Sex.

[Octavio takes hold of her to lead her away. Oct. Help me Camilla.

Came. You must be ruled, your Presence will increase
Your Brother's Fury, and Octavio's Danger.

Por. That Argument is Irresistible.

They retire to the other Room, and Octavio waits on them to the door. Die. Nay
if you are at that, Taking Flora by the hand
the Devil take
The hindmost; it is for your sake, dearest Flora,
I shun these Honorable Occasions.
Having no Weapon, As he goes out with Flora, turning to Octavio.
Sir, it is fit that I
March off with the Baggage.

[Exeunt Diego, Flora. Oct. I Am now upon the Frontiers of this Life,
There Is but one step to Immortality;
And though my cruel fortune has allowed me
No other Witness of my Tragic end,
But my Inhumane Murderers; yet my Death
Shall not Disgrace either my Life, or Love;
To the other World this Honor I will bear,
That as I still have Lived, and Loved, so I
Encounter Death with the same Constancy.

Enter Antonio, Henrique, Carlos, and Geraldo, with their Swords drawn, Antonio
before the rest. Ant. Where is the Man whose Insolence, and Folly
Has thus misled him to Affront my Friend?

Oct. Here is the Man thou seek'st, and he, whom thou
So basely have Betrayed.

[Octavio draws. Ant. Oh Heavens! what is it I see? It is Octavio My Friend.

Oct. Not thy Friend, Antonia; but it is Octavio,
Who by thy Perfidie has been betrayed*
To this forlorn Condition; but vile Man,
Thou now shall pay thy Treachery with thy Life.

[Octavio makes at Antonio. Ant. Hold Octavio; though thy Injurious Error
May transport thee, it shall not me beyond
The Bounds of Honor; Heaven knows I thought
Of nothing less, than what I find, Octavio
In this place.

Henr. What pause is this, Antonio? all your Fervor
In the Concernments of your Friend, reduced
To a tame Parley with our Enemy?
Do all the Promises, you have made to me,
T'assist my just Revenge, conclude in this?

Oct. Do all the Promises you have made to me,
T'assist my Virtuous Love, conclude in this?

Hen. Where is your wonted Bravery? where your Kindness
To such a near Allie?

Oct. Where is your former Honor? where your Firmness
To such an ancient Friend?

Ant. What course shall my Distracted Honor steer
Betwixt these equal, Aside.
opposite Engagements?

Henr. What, demur still? nay then I Will right my self.

Henrique makes at Octavio, Antonio turns on Octavio 's side. Ant. Wh'attaques
Octavio must pass through me.

Carl. I must lay hold on this Occasion. Aside.

Good Cousin, I conjure you to restrain
Your Passion for a while, there does lie hid
Some Mystery in this, which once unfolded,
May possibly produce the Means of making
That Reconcilable, which now seems Desperate.

Henr. Sweetly proposed, Sir, an Accommodation?
Think thou my Anger's like a Fire of Straw,
Only to Blaze, and then expire in Smoke?
Think thou I can forget my Name, and Nation,
And Barter for Revenge, when Honor Bleeds?
His Life must pay this Insolence, or mine.

[He makes at Octavio again, Antonio interposes. Ant. Mine must protect his, or
else perish with him.

Henr. Since neither Faith, nor Friendship can prevail,
It Is time to try what proof you are, Antonio,
Against your own near Int^rst; Know, that Man,
Whom you protect against my just Revenge,
Has seconded his Insolence to me
By foul Attempts upon my Sister's Honor;
Your Porcia's Sir, if this will not inflame you.

[Porcia endeavors to come out, Camilla holds her. Por. This Injury's beyond
all Sufferance.

Carl. To what excess of Folly does our Rage
Transport us Men! Aside.
this most Important Secret,
Which Tortures could not have made him discover,
He (only to advance his blind Revenge)
Has now unforced declared to that Person,
From whom, of all men living, he ought most
To have concealed it.

Oct. How! I attempt your Sister's Honor Henrique?
The Parent of your black Designs, the Devil,
Did never invent a more malicious Falsehood;
It Is true, that I have served the Virtuous Porcia,
With such Devotion, and such Spotless Love,
That, though Unworthy, yet she has been pleased
To recompense my Passion with Esteem:
By which, she has so chained me to her Service,
That here I vow either to Live her Prize,
Or if I Die, to fall Loves Sacrifice.

Ant. O Heavens! what is that I hear? thou blessed Angel
Guardian of Honor, I do now implore
Thy powerful assistance to preserve
That Reputation, which I hitherto
By Virtuous Actions have maintained unblemished;
In vain, Don Henrique, you design to change
My Resolutions; it must never be said,
That Passion made Antonio recede
From the strict Rules of Honor; Sir, I tell you,
Nothing can make me violate my first
Engagement.

Henr. Nay, then thou shall Die too, Perfidious Man;
Ho! Geraldo, Pedro, Leonido.

Enter Geraldo, Pedro, Leonido, with their Swords drawn, and join with
Henrique, Carlos interposes. Carl. For Heaven's sake, Cousin, draw not on your
self
The horrid Infamy of Assasinating
Persons of Noble Blood by Servile Hands.

Henr. Do you Defend them too? Kill 'em I say.

Ant. Retire Octavio, I Will sustain their shock.

Oct. Octavio retire?

Ant. Trust me you must, they will surround us else;
Through that narrow Passage they will Assail us
With less advantage.

They retire fighting off the Stage: Henrique and his Men persuing them, and
Carlos endeavoring to stop Don Henrique. Henr. What do you give back, ye Men of
mighty Fame?

Ant. Don Henrique, you shall quickly find it is Honor,
Not Fear makes me retire.

[Exeunt. Enter presently Antonio and Octavio at another door, which Antonio
bolts. Ant. Now we shall have a breathing while at least
Octavio, and time to look about us;
Pray see yon other door be fast.

Octavio steps to the door where they went out, and Henrique bounces at the
door they came in at. Henr. Geraldo, Within.
fetch an Iron Bar to force The door.

[Camilla and Porcia peep out. Came. Heaven has heard our Prayers; they are both
safe here.

Por. Let Us go to 'em Camilla.

Came. It Is better to stay here a while, and hearken
What Resolution of themselves they take.

[Antonio goes to both the doors to see if they be fast. Ant. So, it is now as I
could wish.

Oct. What do you mean, Generous Antonio?

Ant. To Kill thee now my Self, having performed
What Pre-engagement did exact from me
In your Defense against Others; my Love now
Requires its Dues, as Honor has had his;
There Is no Protection for you from my Sword,
But in your Own, or in your frank renouncing
All Claim to Porcia; She is so much mine,
That none must Breath, and have the Vanity
Of a Pretender to her whilst I Live.

Oct. My Claims to Porcia I shall never renounce,
But still assert them by all noble ways;
Yet, Sir, this hand shall never use a Sword
(Without the last Compulsion) against that Man,
Who has so much Obliged me; no Antonio,
You are securely Guarded by the Favors,
You have conferred upon me.

Ant. Sir, let not your pretended Gratitude
Enervate your Defense; it is not my custom
To serve my Friends with Prospects of Return;
I therefore, Sir, do freely here acquit you
From all the Obligations, you are pleased
To own from me.

Oct. You may, Sir, if you please, forbear to add
New Favors to my' account; but you can never
Substract those, which are past; and till that Debt
Be fully paid, I shall not dare to appear
In The Lists against so Generous a Creditor.

Ant. Your Scruples are ill grounded; 'twas Octavio
(My ancient Friend) whom I designed to Serve;
Not that Disloyal Man, who has invaded
My Honor, and my Love; It Is the Intent Creates the Obligation, not the Event.

Oct. I call those Powers, who both Discern, and Punish,
To witness for me, that I never knew.
You ever pretended to Don Henrique's Sister,
Before I came within these fatal Walls:
This I declare, only to clear my self
From th'Imputation of Disloyalty;
And to prevent the Progress of your Error.

Ant. How can I think you should speak Truth to me,
Who am a Witness you have been False to her,
To whom, you now profess so high Devotion.

Oct. I false to Porcia! take heed, Antonio,
So foul an Injury provokes too much;
But, Sir, I must confess I owe you more,
Than the Forgiveness of one gross Mistake.

Ant. Rare Impudence! I must not trust my Senses.

Oct. If we cannot adjust this Competition,
Let us our Fortunes, not our Passions charge
With this our breach of Friendship.

Ant. Leave your Discourses, and Defend your self;
Either immediately Renounce all Claims
To Porcia; Shaking his Sword.
or this must speak the rest.

Oct. Nay, They fight.
then, this must Reply.

They without bounce at the door, as if they were breaking it open. Por. Why do
I doubt? there is no means to save him
From the present danger, but by another,
Perhaps as great, but something more remote;
I Will do it.

Whilst they fight, Porcia breaks from Camilla, and unbolis the door, then runs
back into her place. Enter Henrique, Carlos, Leonido, Geraldo, with their
Swords drawn. Hen. What Is this! Antonio fighting with Octavio!
This Bravery is excessive, Gallant Friend;
Not to allow a share in your Revenge
TO him, who is most concerned; he must not die
Without some Marks of mine.

Henrique makes at Octavio, and Antonio turns to Octavio's side. Ant. Nay, then
my Honor you invade anew,
And by Assaulting him, Revive in me
My Pre-engagements of Protecting him
Against all others.

Hen. Why were not you Antonio fighting with him?
Were you not doing all you could to Kill him?

Ant. Henrique, it is true; but finding in my breast
An equal strife 'twixt Honor, and Revenge;
I do in just compliance with themboth
Preserve him from your Rage, to Fall by mine.

Carl. Brave Man, how Nicely he does Honor weigh!
Justice her self holds not the Scales more Even.

Henr. My Honor suffers more as yet than yours,
And I must have my share in the Revenge;
Either he must renounce all Claims to Porcia,
Or Die immediately.

Ant. It is agreed: that he must Do, or Die:
But by no other hand, than mine.

Oct. Cease your Contention, and turn all your Swords
Against this Breast; whilst Porcia' and I have breath,
She must be mine, there is no Divorce but Death.

Henr. I Will hear no more, protect him if thou can

Antonio. Kill the Slave, kill him, I say.

Henrique makes at him, and Carlos endeavors to enterpose. Carl. For Heaven's
sake hold a Moment; certainly
There Is some Mistake lies hidden here, which cleared,
Might hinder these Extremes.

Henrique and his Servants press Antonio and Octavio. Came. These Errors must be
cleared, before they grow
Too fatal, but I fear your Brother's fury
Will not admit of Reason.

For. I Am sure I Will try, though it should cost my life.

Enter Porcia and Camilla from the Inner Room. Por. Don Henrique.

Came. Antonio, Carlos

Por. Octavio.

Hear us but speak, Camilla and Porcia together. Henr. Ha! how came she here?

Carl. Did not I tell you that she was brought hither
By my Directions? you would not believe me.

Henr. But how then could Octavio come hither?

Carl. Nay, that Heaven knows; you heard as well as I
Your Man's Relation.

Henr. Ah thou vile Woman! that I could destroy
Thy Memory with thy Life.

Ant. Hold, He offers to run at Porcia, Antonio interposes.
Sir, that must not be.

Henr. What may not I do Justice upon her Neither?

Ant. No Sir; although I have not yet the Honor
To know who she x's, I have this night engaged
My self, both to Secure, and Serve her.

Carl. He knows not Porcia; who was in the right
Don Henrique, You, or I?

Henr. He not know Porcia? whom not an hour since
I saw, and spoke with, entertaining her
In his Apartment; sure we are Enchanted,
And all we see's Illusion.

Came. Allow me, Henrique, to dispell these Charms;
Who is it, Octavio, you pretend to? speak.

Oct. You might have spared that Question; since none
Knows so well as you, It Is Porcia I adore.

Ant. Porcia's my Wife; Offers to make at Octavio.
Disloyal Man thou Di'st.

Came. Hold Sir; which is the Porcia you claim too?

Ant. Can you be'n doubt of that? you know too well
The Conquest, that you made so long ago
Of my surprised heart in Flanders.

Carl. Conquest! Surprised! Flanders! what can this mean?

Henr. New Riddles every moment do arise,
And Mysteries are born of Mysteries.

Came. Thanks be to Heaven, our work draws near an end;
Cousin, it belongs to you to finish it.

Por. To free you from that Labyrinth, Antonio,
In which a slight Mistake, not Rectified,
Has involved us all; know, th'suppos'd Porcia,
Whom you so long have loved, 's the true Camilla.

Came. And you, Don Henrique, know, Octavio
Has always been your Sister's faithful Lover;
And only Feigned a Gallantry to me,
His real Passion to Disguise from you.

Ant. Octavio and Antonio run to one another and embrace.
Generous Octavio.

Oct. Brave Antonio, how happy are we both!
Both in our Loves, and Friendships!

Ant. Man's Joys do never to their Perfection rise,
Till when by Crosses heightened, they surprise.

Came. Camilla takes Antonio by the hand and leads him to Carl. Don Carlos.
This, my dear Brother, is that brave Commander,
To whom you owe your Life, and Liberty;
And I much more, the safety of my Honor.

Carl. Is this the Gallant Leader, who rescued us
With so much Valor from th'Enemy's hands?

Came. The very same.

Carl. If you knew him so well, why did not you
Acquaint me with it sooner? 'twas a fault Camilla.

Came. Alas, Drawing Carlos aside.
my dearest Brother, Gratitude
Conspiring with the Graces of his Person,
So soon possessed him of my Heart, that I
Despairing ever again to see him; and
Ashamed of such a Visionary Love,
Durst never trust my Tongue with my own Thoughts.

Carl. It Is enough.
Take here from me the Hand of her, Don Carlos presents Camilla to Antonio.
whose Heart
Heaven, and your Merits have long since made yours
Without my Knowledge; may her Virtue pay
Some part of that, which we both owe to yours.

Ant. Here with your leave, Antonio takes Porcia's hand, and kisses it with
great respect.
and hers I seal the Vows
Of my Eternal Faith unto you both.

Carl. But let us take heed, Antonio, lest whilst we
Are Joying in our mutual Happiness,
Don Henrique's scarcely yet composed Distemper
Revive not, and Disorder us afresh:
I like not his Grim Posture; you know well
After a Tempest, though the Wind be laid,
There often does remain for a good while
A dangerous Agitation of the Waves;
He must not yet be trusted with himself.

Ant. It Is well thought on, let us go to him.

Oct. Here with Respect we wait the Confirmation
Of Heaven's Decrees from your Indulgence, Octavio holding Porcia by the hand
advances toward Henrique.
Sir.
This Lady* your Incomparable Sister,
Can witness that I never did invade
Your Passion for Camilla; and Pedro's death
Happened by your mistaken Jealousy;
The Causes of your Hate being now removed,
It Is just, Don Henrique, the Effects should cease.

Henr. I shall consult my Honor.

Carl. You cannot take a better Counselor
In this Case, than you Own, and Sister's Honor;
What, to secure them both, could have been wished
Beyond what Fate has of it self produced?

Henr. How hard it is to Act upon Constraint.
That, which I could have Wished, I now would Fly;
Since it is obtruded by Necessity.

Ant. Noble Don Henrique, make account of me
To be as truly yours by this Alliance,
As if a Brother's Name subsisted still.

Henr. I must consent, Aside.
I see, or worse will follow.
He is a Fool who thinks by Force, or Skill
To turn the Current of a Woman's Will
Since fair Camilla is Antonio's Lot,
I Porcia yield to Don Antonios Friend.
Our Strength, and Wisdom must submit to Fate.
Script of my Love, I will put off my Hate.
Here, Henrique takes Porcia by the hand and gives her to Octavio.
take her hand; and may she make you, Sir,
Happier, than she has done me.

Enter Diego and Flora from the inner Room. Flo. Had such Disorders ever such a
Come-off?
Methinks 'twould make a Rare Plot for a Play. They all embrace, but Henrique
coldly.


Die. Faith Flora, I should have the worst of that;
For by the Law of Comedy 'twould be
My Lot to Marry you.

Oct. Well thought on, Diego, though spoken in Jest;
We cannot do, I think, a better thing
In Earnest, than to make them Two Join Hands.
What say thou to it, Flora?

Flo. Indeed I have had so many Frights this night,
That I am e'n afraid to lie alone.

Die. Give me thy Hand Flora, Diego takes her by the hand.
it is a Bargain;
I promise thee, dear Spouse, I Will do my best
To make thee first Repent this Earnest Jest.

Flo. That time shall try.

Carl. Since this last happy Scene is in my House,
You Will make Collation with me are we part.

Ant. Agreed, agreed, agreed.

Oct. Agreed, agreed, agreed.

Die. Sir, you had best make haste, else what you call
Collation, may prove a Breakfast, for it is
Near twelve a Clock.

Ant. Thus end the Rare Adventures of Five Hours;
As sometimes Boisterous Storm's in Gentle Shours.

THE EPILOGUE.
Diego comes stealing in, and is followed by Henrique, who stays at the Door,
and Listens. Die. Come Gentlemen!
Let the Dons, and Monsieurs say what they will;
(...) our parts, we are for Old England still.
(...) e's a fine Play indeed, to lay the Scene
(...) th^ee Houses of the same Town, O mean!
(...) we have several Plays, where I (...) fie.
(...) Devil to tell where the Scene does lie:
^imes in Greece, and then they make a step
^^^nsilvania thence at one Leap
To Greece again: this shows a ranging Brain,
Which scorns to be confined to a Town in Spain.
Then for the Plot;
The possible Adventures of Five Hours;
A copious Design, why' in some of ours
Many of the Adventures are impossible,
Or if to be achieved, no Man can tell
Within what time; this shows a rare Invention,
When the Design's above your Comprehension:
Whilst here you are treated with a Romance Tale,
And a Plot covered with a Spanish Veil.
As for the Style;
It is as easy as a Proclamation,
As if the Play were Penned for the whole Nation.
None of those thundering Lines, which use to crack
Our Breaths, and set your Wits upon the Rack.
Who can admire this Piece, or think it good;
There Is not one Line, but may be understood.
The Raillerie;
As innocent, as if it had past the Test
Of a full Synod: not one Baudy Jest;
Nor any of those Words of Double Sense,
Which makes the Ladies, to show their Innocence;
Look so demure; whilst by a simp'ring Smile,
The Gallant shows he understands the Style.
But here you have a Piece so subtly Writ,
Men must have Wit themselves to find the Wit:
Faith that is too much; therefore by my consent,
We Will Damn the Play.

Henr. Think thou, Pointing to the Pit.
Impertinent,
That these, who know the Pangs of bringing forth
A Living Scene, should ever destroy this Birth.
You never can want such Writers, who aspire
To please the Judges of that Upper ^ire.
The Knowing are his Peers, and for the rest
Of the Illiterate Crowd (though finely dressed)
The Author hopes, he never gave them cause
To think, he would waste his Time for their Applause.
You then (most equal Judges) freely give
Your Votes, whether this Play should Die, or Live.
THE EPILOGUE AT COURT
We Have passed the Lords, and Commons; and (...)
At length, Dread Sir, to hear Your Final Doo^
It Is true, Your Vassals (...) may Vo^e the Laws,
Their (...) Divine Applause.
This Shining Circle then will all sit Mute,
Till one pronounce from you* Le Roy le Ven^.

FINIS

