A MANUEL OF CONTROVERSIES: CLEARLY Demonstrating the truth of Catholic
Religion By
Texts of holy Scripture, Councils of all Ages, Fathers of the first 500 years,
Common sense and reason.
AND Fully answering the principal Objections of Protestants, and all other
Sectaries.

By H. T.

DEUTERONOMY. 32. 7. Remember the old days, think upon every Generation: ask thy
Father, and he will declare to thee; thy Elders, and they will tell thee. At
Doway, by Laurence Kellam. 1654.

TO The truly Noble, Sir C. F. Knight and Baronet, And the perfectly virtuous,
Mistress S. H.
Dear and honored friends!
HE is accounted a good Master of Rhetoric who can make much of a little: but
I think him a better Friend of Truth (especially in controverted points) that
makes a little of much, by summing up the substance of things disputed into
heads, proving his Positives, and solving others Negatives, with short
intelligible Arguments and Answers, which I have aimed at in this little
Manuel. If I have done it well, I have my wish; if not, at least accept my
endeavor. You were the first whose patience perused it, in a rough hand: I
have now somewhat smoothed it by the Press, and chiefly in obedience to your
commands: give me therefore leave to offer it, as a pledge of my affectionate
respects to both, under the shadow of your ingenious Patronage: and as you once
were pleased to think well of it, being unpolished; so give it your protection,
being perfected, and you abundantly shall crown his labors, who is ambitious
to be styled

Honored Friends, Your most devoted, and very humble servant, H. T.

To the Reader.
IF the unusual method of this little Treatise seem less accommodated to
Vulgar capacities (it being indeed the proper form of Schools) at least I hope
the matter will so far please all, and suit with all, as to rectify some
mistaken judgments, if not possessed with too much passion, prejudice, or
interest. That which moved me to draw it in this form, was the desired
satisfaction of some judicious and strong reasoning friends, who could not
perhaps have so easily been persuaded to their own good by any long Rhetorical
argumentation, as by this short and syllogistical way. The wished effect it
wrought in them, gives me some hope, if seriously perused, it may also work the
like in many others: the proposed object of my weak endeavors.

Finding it then agreed by all parties, that Christ our Lord has founded and
built a Church in his own blood, which was the only Mistress of divine faith,
and sole Repository of all revealed Truths, at least for an age or two: where
can I better initiate my following Arguments, then from the Controversies of
the Church, the most important doubtless of all others; since on the notion
and eviction of her Authority, all other points essentially depend, for their
knowledge and decision? My first essay therefore shall be to prove the Roman
Catholic Church to be the only true Church of God, by showing all the most
conspicuous marks, and eminent properties of the Church, assigned us by Christ
himself, to have been verified in her, and none but her. This done, I shall
proceed to vindicate her particular and principal doctrines, wherein she has
been most impugn'd by Sectaries.

H. T.

APPROBATIO.
LIbrum hunc cui Titulus ( A Manuel of Controversies, etc.) diligenter legi, in
quo nihil Orthodoxae and Christianae fidei dissonum deprehendi; immo methodo
facili, compendiosa, and ad docendum accommodata, Veritas Catholica, Catholicis
fundamentis stabilitur, Haeresesque solid, ac erudite in eo refelluntur;
ideoque dignum judico, qui in communem utilitatem imprimatur.

Onuphrius Eliseus S. T. Doctor nuper Collegii Anglorum Ulissiponensis
Professor and Praeses.
Datum Duaci 14 April. 1654.
Ad H. T. post visum Euchiridion ipsius.
PLures singula scripserant, and volumina inflaverant: laborabamus copia, and
multitudo prolixitasque Scriptorum e^a^^onerosa. Deficien^^s Protestantiae
^e^^^^* Concinentes Scripturas and Pa^res (...) Catholicis propter^a
objecta^a^^, quia in (...) non (...). T^m(...)is, de (...), qui ^^nipulos (...)
C^e^ubinorum su(...)um ve^e^anda suffragia, (...) picula slagitaverit, ad
(...), tua opera illi adsunt. (...) Christianae per t^ armatae; (...) and ^^^um
in Caelis te manentem (...), and (si qua tibi adeo levis est cura) (...)
Patriae plausum and admirationem: (...) stare and audire, and gaudio gaudere
^^^^ter vocem sponsi

Amico tuo Thomae ex Albiis East-Saxonum.
Datum Pridie Kalendas Aprilis 1654.
APPROBATIO.
LIbrum, cui titulus a Manuel of Controversies, Authore H. T. Viro Docto,
cordato, probato, haereo dicere an majore cum gustu perlegerim, an fructu
imbiberim; utrumque aequo Lectori ausim promittere: nimirum inveniet, quisquis
ille fuerit, Fidem Apostolicam, Catholicam, Romanam, non solum sa^tam-tectam
ubique custoditam, sed and Orth^d^xis quidem suaviter reboratam, Heterodoxis
autem, cujusvis fuerint maniae, non minus fortiter inculcatam, and, nisi
tenebris suis immori velint, meridiana luce irradiatam. Habent in hac sylva
Fideles, hinc gladium quo hosts feriant, scutum inde quo sese protegant,
ubique armaturam fidei qua ignea Inferni tela, modo frangant, modo propellant,
semper ipsi incolumes extinguant: sed and habent Sectarii ex Scripturis,
Conciliis, Patribus Collyria quibus oculos inungant; vident tela sua facta es^e
sagittas parvulorum, aut fracta aut retorta, semper cassa: quare vel nova
cudant vel lassum Brontem Steropemque relinquant. Velim magis, arma animosque
submittant, veritati magnae, praevalenti cedant, Matrique Ecclesiae ac Deo sese
suosque concilient. Prodeatitaque saeculi nostri Monit^rium Aureum, and non
imprimatur cuntaxa^, sed and manibus omnium prematur, teratur, quibus vel
veneranda arridet Authoritas, vel constat Ratio, vel quibus denique cordi salus
eterna est: sic censet, sic optat

Ed. Daniel, S. Theologiae Doctor ejusdemque Professor.
Datum Duaci Kal. Maiis, Anno salutis humanae, 1654.
A Table of the Contents of the several Articles.
THe true Church of God demonstrated by her continued succession Article 1.
page 1 That Protestants have no continued succession Art. 2. p. 43 The
Catholic Churches visibility asserted Art. 3 p. 53 The true Church
demonstrated by her unity and universality Art. 4. p. 61 The Churches
infallibility demonstrated Art. 5 p. 68 The true Church demonstrated by her
Sanctity and Miracles Art. 6. p. 8^ The P^pes supremacy asserted Art. 7. p. 90
Of Apostolical Tradition Art. 8. p. 103 Of Schism and Heresy Art. 9. p. 121 Of
the real and substantial presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Blessed
Sacrament; wherein the captious Objections of Dr. Tailor are fully answered Art.
10. p. 127 Of Transubstantiation Art. 11. p. 182 Of Communion under one kind
Art. 12. p. 209 Of the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass Art. 13 p. 221 Of the
Liturgy and public prayer in an unknown tongue Art. 14. p. 236 Of
Sacramental Confession and Absolution Art. 15. p. 244 Of Purgatory Art. 16. p.
252 Of Prayer for the dead Art. 17. p. 258 Of Indulgences Art. 18. p. 266 Of
sin, both mortal and venial Art. 19. p. 275 Of the worship and Invocation of
Angels and Saints Art. 20. p. 284 Of Relics Art. 21. p. 300 Of sacred Images
Art. 22. p. 307 Of Free will Art. 23. p. 324 Of saving or justifying Faith Art.
24. p. 333 Of the merit of Works Art. 25. p. 344 Of Vows Art. 26. p. 353 Of the
possibility of keeping the Commandments Art. 27. p. 361 Of the Sacraments Art.
28. p. 368 The Appendix, wherein an unauthentick citation out of Spelman, de
Conciliis, (which is vainly made use of by Dr. Hammond and others, to defend
their party from Schism* and to prove the nonsubjection of the ancient Britans
to the Sea of Rome) is clearly confu^ed p. 401

ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 13. Felix. p. 11. l. 21. Altar. p. 24. l. 1. 900. p. 27. l 8, 9.
Lateran Council under P. Nich. 2. Anno 1057 l. 10 penances. and l. 16. Simeon.
p. 33. l. 4. Suso. p. 54. l. 18. ( his Church) p. 58. l. 26. connection. p. 59.
l. 11. parity. p. 83. l. 13. Ephesians. 5. 27. p. 85. l. 9. multitude. and l. 27.
Mark 16. 17. p. 86. l. 12. Assissium. p. 109. l. 5. I frame my. p. 119. l. 12.
all divinely. p. 123 l. 23. defined. p. 141. l. 4. lively. p. 160. l. 21. 1
Cor. 11. p. 168, l. 8. bring. p. 172. l. 13. do not you. p. 187. l. 2. fore no.
p. 190. l. 14. the bread his body. p. 199. l. 5. time being. p. 238. l. 8. you
all to* p. 277. l. 20. the last. p. 372. l: 17. salvation is necessary, as. and
l. 21. dele is necessary. p. 407. l. 14. bfudddod.

A MANUEL OF CONTROVERSIES.
ARTICLE I. The true Church of God demonstrated by her continued Succession.

OUr Tenet is, That the Church now in Communion with the Sea of Rome, is the
only true Church of God: which we prove thus.

The Argument.
1. Major. That is the only true Church of God, which has had a continued
Succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time. 2. Minor. But the Church
now in Communion with the Sea of Rome, and no other, has had a continued
Succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time. 3. Conclusion. Therefore
the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome, and no other, is the true
Church of God.
The Major, or first Proposition, is proved out of the Prophets and promises of
Christ.

My Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed for ever.
Isa. 59. 21. Arise, be illuminated, O Jerusalem, because thy light is come,
etc. and the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, etc. and thy Gates shall be open
continually day and night, they shall not be shut, that the strength of the
Gentiles may be brought to thee, etc. Isa. 60 1,3,11. Upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, I have appointed Watchmen all the day, and all the night for ever,
they shall not hold their peace. Isa. 62. 6. An everlasting Covenant shall be
to them, I will found them, and multiply them, and give my Sanctification in
the midst of them for ever, Ezech. 37. 26. All Nations, Tribes, and Tongues,
shall serve him, his power is an eternal power that shall not be taken away,
and his kingdom shall not be corrupted, Dan. 7. 13,14.

Go ye, teaching all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. And behold I am with you all days, even
to the cousummation of the world, S. Math. 28. 20. I will ask the Father, and
he will give you another Paraclite, that he may abide with you for ever, the
Spirit of truth, S. John 14. 16. Christ gave some Apostles,

A MANUEL OF CONTROVERSIES.
ARTICLE I. The true Church of God demonstrated by her continued Succession.
OUr Tenet is, That the Church now in Communion with the Sea of Rome, is the
only true Church of God; which we prove thus.

The Argument.
1. Major. That is the only true Church of God, which has had a continued
Succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time, and shall have from hence
to the end of the world. 2. Minor. But the Church now in Communion with the Sea
of Rome, and no other, has had a continued Succession from Christ and his
Apostles to this time, and consequently shall have to the end of the world. 3.
Consequence. Therefore the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome, and no
other, is the true Church of God.
The Major, or first Proposition, is proved out of the Prophets and promises of
Christ.

My Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of
the mouth of thy seeds seed, from hencesorth, and for ever, says the Lord,
Isa. 59. 21. And again, Arise, be illuminated, O Jerusalem, because thy light
is come, etc. and the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, etc. and thy Gates
shall be open continually day and night, they shall not be shut, that the
strength of the Gentiles may be brought to thee, and their Kings may be
brought, etc. Isa: 60. 1. 3. 11. Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, I have appointed
Watchmen all the day, and all the night for ever, they shall not hold their
peace, Isa. 62. 6. An everlasting Covenant shall be to them, I will found them,
and multiply them, and give my Sanctification in the midst of them for ever,
Ezechiel 37. 26. All Nations, Tribes, and Tongues shall serve him, his power is
an eternal power that shall not be taken away, and his Kindome shall not be
corrupted, Dan. 7. 13, 14.

Go ye teaching all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. And behold I am with you all days, even
to the cousummation of the world,. S. Mat. 28. 20. I will ask the Father, and
he will give you another Paraclite, that he may abide with you for ever, the
Spirit of truth, S. John 14. 16. Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, s^^^ Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints,
etc. unt^^ we all meet in the unity of Faith, etc. that now we b^ not children
wavering and carried about with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13,
14.

The minor, or second Proposition of the Argument is proved by this ensuing
Catalogue of the Roman Churches chief Pastors, Councils, Nations converted, and
public Professors of h^^ Faith.

From the year of Christ 30.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 30 Our B. Savior Jesus Christ. The Council
of the Apostles at Jerusalem, S. Peter presiding, Acts 15. 34 S. Peter
Apostle. 69 Linus. 80 Cletus. 93 Clement.

From the year 100.
103 An^cletus. 112 Euaristus. 121 Alexander. 132 Sixtus I. 142 Telesphorus.
154 Higinius. 158 Pius 1. 165 Anic^tus. 175 Soter. 179 Eleutherius. 194 Victor.
In this first Age or Century after Jesus Christ, we find the primacie in S.
Peter, as is manifest by the said Council in the Acts, where (after a serious
debate, whether the Jewish Ceremonies ought to be imposed on the Gentiles) S.
Peter defined in the Negative, saying; Men, brethren, you know that of old, God
amongst us chose, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear the Word of the
Gospel, and believe, and God who knows the hearts gave testimony, giving to
them the Holy Ghost, as well as to us, and has put no difference between them
and us, by faith purifying their hearts; now therefore why tempt ye God to put
a yoke upon the necks of the Disiples, which neither our Forefathers, nor we
have been able to hear? Acts 15. 7, 8, 9, 10.

S. James (who was Bishop of the place) seconding by his sentence what Peter
had decreed. All the multitude (says S* Hierome) held their peace, and into
his (Peter's) sentence, James the Apostle, and all the Priests did pass
together, Epist. 89. to August. ^. 2. Peter (says he in the same place) was
Prince and Author of the Decree. That S. Peter translated his Chair from
Antioch to Rome, is proved. First, because he remained not always at Antioch,
as all that Church acknowledges, nor did she ever challenge the first Chair in
any General Council, as appears in the Councels. Secondly, by the Decrees of
Councels, Popes, and other Fathers, giving the primacy to the Roman Church.

The Council of Sardis (An. Dom. 400. Western Fathers 300. Eastern 76.)
decreed, That in cases of Bishops for the honor of S. Peter's memory, it should
be lawful to appeal from whatsoever other Bishop to the Bishop of Rome, Can. 3.

The Council of Calcedon (An. Dom. 451. Fathers 600.) We thoroughly consider
truly, that all primacy and chief honor, according to the Canons, is to be kept
for the Archbishop of old Rome. Action 16. And in the relation of the said
Council to Pope Leo, We have confirmed (say they) the rule of the 150. Fathers
in the first Constantinopolitan Council Anno 381. which has commanded, that
after the most holy and Apostolic Sea (of Rome) the Constantinopolitan should
have honor. Pope Antherus, Anno 238. (being asked by the Bishops of Bettica and
Toletum, whether it were lawful for a Bishop to be changed from one City to
another?) answered affirmatively, as Peter (Prince of the Apostles* was changed
from Antioch to Rome. Decret. 7. q. ^ And S. Greg. says, He knows no Bishop
but is subject to the Sea of Rome, Epist. 62.

Catholic Professors to the year 100.
THe B. Virgin, S. John Baptist* S. John Evangelist, etc. Ma^tha, Magdalen, S.
Paul, S. Steven, Timothy, Barnabas, Tecla, Dennis, Martial, Ignatius, Clement,
etc. The Church was spread in this Age over all those Countries to which S.
Paul wrote his Epistles; as also France, Spain, England, etc. See Baronius.

Catholic Professors to the year 200.
EVstachius, Hermes, Getulius, Policarpe, Concordius, Justin Martyr, Eusebius,
Iraeneus, Vincen^^us, Potentianus, Sophia, Fides, Spes, Charitas, S. Fe^city,
with her seven children, Lucius King of ^ngland, etc.

The Apostles Canons define, That if any Bishop ^ Priest (the Oblation (Mass)
being made) shall not ^^mmunicate, he should be excommunicate, as giving
^^spition of him who has sacrificed, that he has not ^t rightly offered. Can.
9. approved in the sixth Ge^^ral Synod.

From the year of Christ 200.
Chief Pastors. General Council^. 204 Zepherinus. 221 Calixtus. 1. 227 Vrbanus.
1. 223 Pontianus. 238 Antherus. 239 Fabianus. 254 Cornelius. 255 Lucius. 257
Stephanus. 1. 260 Sixtus. 2. 261 Dionisius. 1. 273 Faelix. 1. 275 Eutychianus.
284 Caius. 296 Marcellinus.

The second and third Ages, (whether by reason of the Churches great
persecutions, or the not stirring of any famous Heretics) produced no
Councels, yet a Succession of Popes, Martyrs and Confessors we have, which is
sufficient for ou^ purposes?

The Decrees of Popes in these Ages.
Anacletus Decreed, That Priests, when they sacr^fice to our Lord, must not do
it alone, but have wi^ness with them, that they may be proved to have
sacrificed perfectly to God in sacred places, etc. so the Apostles have
appointed, and the Roman Church holds. 1. Epist. de consecrat. d. 1. c.
Episcopus. And in the end of the same Epistle; If more difficult questions
shall arise, let them be referred to the Apostolic Sea of (Rome) for so the
Apostles have ordained by the command of our Lord. An. Dom. 101.

Alexander decreed, That Bread only, and Wine mingled with water, should be
offered in the sacrifice of the Mass. Epist. Orthod. de consec. d. 2. c. in
Sacrament,

Sixtus decreed, That the sacred mysteries (the B. Eucharist) and sacred
Vessels should not be touched, but by sacred Ministers, and that the Priest
beginning Mass, the people should sing Holy! Holy! Holy! etc. in his Epist. to
all the faithful of Christ, Anno Dom. 129.

Telesphorus commanded the seven weeks of Lent to be fasted, Epist. Decret.
Anno Dom. 139.

Pius in his Epistle to the Italians, enjoined penance for him, by whose
negligence any of the Blood of our Lord should be spilt. q. 1. c. Qui
compulsus. An. D. 147.

Anicetus tells us, That James was made Bishop of Jerusalem by S. Peter, James
and John, in his decretal Epist. to the Bishops of France, and cites Anacletus
for it. Epist. 2. did. 25. c. Prohibet fratres.

Soter decreed, That no man should say Mass after he had eaten or drunk. De
consec. did. 1. c. Vt illud.

Zepherinus decreed, That the greater causes of the Church are to be determined
by the Apostolic Sea, because so the Apostles, and their Successors had
ordained. Epist. to the Bishops of Sicily, 217.

These were all Popes of Rome, but no true Protestants, I hope.

Catholic Professors to the year 300.
SImplicius, Callepodius, Abdon, Sennen, Pamachius, Tyburtius, Valerianus,
Marcellinus, Dorotheus, Gordianus, Pudentiana, Triphon, Blasius, Maximianus,
Clemens, Barbara, Agatha, Apollonia, Cyprianus, Hyppolitus, Gregorius,
Thaumaturgus, Laurentius, Tharsus, Cecilia. Victorius, Nemesius, Olympius,
Adrianus, Georgius, Pantaleon, Agnes, Barlaam, Gereon, with his companions,
Cosmas, Damianus, Mauritius, with the Theban Legion, etc.

Catholic Professors to the year 400.
DOmnus with 2000. Martyrs, Lucianus, Theodorus, Paul the first Eremite,
Jacobus Nissibitanus, Spiridion, Macharius, Nicholaus, Helena (the Mother of
Constantine the Great) Constantine (the first Christian Emperor) Marcus,
Arethusius, Nycetas, Theodorus, Antonius, Hilarion, Athanasius, Paulus
Constantinopolitanus, Hilarious, Martianus, Basilius, Hieronimus, Epiphanius,
Patianus, Ambrose, Cyril of Jerusalem, etc.

Nations converted.
Dacians, Gebes, Bessi^es, Scythians, Morines, Armenians, Hunnes, Indians,
Ethiopians, etc.

From the year of Christ 300.
Chief Pastors. General Councels. 304 Marcellus. The 1. Nicene Council (Fathers
328.) approved by Pope Sylvester, An. Dom. 325. against Arrius. 309 Eusebius.
312 Melchiades. 314 Sylvester. Authors, Cedrenus, Potius, Socrates, Eusebius.
336 Malchus. 337 Julius. The 1. Constantinopolitan Council (Fathers 150.) Pope
Damasus presiding, Anno Dom. 381. against Macedonius. 352 Liberius. 358 Faelix.
2. 367 Damasus. 385 Siricius. Authors, Socrates, Photius, Baronius. 398
Anastasius.

402 Innocentius I. The 1. Epbesine Council, (Fathers 200.) Pope Celestine
presiding, Anno Dom. 431. against Nestor. 417 Sozimus. 419 Bonifacius. 1. 424
Celestinus. 1. 432 Sixtus. 3. Authors, Nicephorus, Baronius. 440 Leo Magnus.
461 Hilarious. The Calcedon Council, (Fathers 600.) Pope Leo presiding, Anno
Dom. 451. against Eutyches. 468 Simplicius. 483 Faelix. 492 Gelasius. 1. 497
Anastasius. 2. Authors, Leo, Epist. 50. Baronius, etc. 499 Symmachus.

Anno Dom. 500.
The 1. Nicene Council defined against Arrius, That the Son of God is
consubstantial to his Father, and true God. 2. That he who holds the Sea of
Rome, is the Head and chief of all the Patriarchs, seeing he is the first, as
Peter, to whom power (Ecclesiastical) is given over all Christian Princes, and
all their people, etc. and whoever shall contradict this, is excommunicated by
the Synod. Can. 39. Arab. 3. That by Baptism a man is freed from the servitude
and corruption of sin, l. 3. decre^. 4. That the Lamb of God, which takes away
the sins of the world, is placed on the sacred Table (the Author) to be
sacrificed by the Priest unbloudily, and that we receiving his precious body
and blood, do believe these things to be signs of our Resurrection, l. 3.
decret. de Divina mensa.
It decreed, That a Bishop dying, notice shall be given of his death, to all
Churches and Monasteries in the Parish, that prayer be made for him, c. 65.
Arabico. And, that Deacons (who have no power to offer Sacrifice) ought not to
give the Body and Blood of Christ to Priests, who have such power, Can. 14.

The 1. Constantinop. Council defined against Macedonius, who denied the Holy
Ghost to be God, and decreed the Bishop of Constantinople to be chief, next the
Bishop of Rome.

The 1. Ephesine Council defined against Nestor, who denied the B. Virgin to be
the Mother of God, c. 1. 2. 3. 4.

It defined, that S. Peter was the Head and Prince of the Apostles, and that
the Power of loosing and binding sins, was given by our Lord to S. Peter, who
(in his Successors) lives and exercises Judgment to this very time, and
always, A^^. 3.

The Council of Ca^cedon defined against E^tyches and Dioscorus, who denied two
natures in Christ, affirming, that the humane nature was changed into the
Divinity. In the third action of this Council, Pope Leo is called Universal
Archbishop and Patriarch of old Rome, and sentence is pronounced against
Dioscorus in the names of Leo, and S. Peter, to acknowledge Leo to be S. Peter's
Successor.

The Eleberine Council in Spain, subscribed by Osius, and others, who were
present at the first Nicene Council* defined, that Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons should abstain from their wives, or else be degraded, c. 33. Age the 4.

The 2. Council at Arles under Pope Sylvester defined, that no man, who was
married, could be made a Priest, unless a conversion were promised. Can. 2.

Catholic Prof^ssors to the year 500.
SEverinus, Tigrius, Exuperius, Eutropius, S. John Chrysostom, Paulinus,
Mauritius, S. Augustine, Maximus, Sofimus, Vincentius Lyrinensis, Jacobus
P^rsa, Alexius, S. Cyril of Alexandria, Vrsulae with 11000* Virgins, Prosper,
Honoratus, Palladius, Bonifacius, Euthimius, Simon Stelites, Chrysologus,
Patricius, Eugenius, Fulgentius, Bo^tius, Epiphanius Tycinensis, Severinus,
etc.

The Scots converted by Palladius, the French by S. Remigius and Ved^stus.
4979. Martyrs of Africa, and many others.

From the year of Christ 500.
Chief Pastors. General Councels. 514 Hormisda. 524 Joannes 1. The 2.
Constantinopolitan Council, Pope Vigilius presiding (Fathers 165. Anno Domini
553.) against Anthimius, and Theodore. 526 Faelix 4. 530 Bonifacius 2. 532
Joannes 2. 535 Agapetus. 537 Sylverius. 540 Vigilius. Authors, Zonorus,
Nicephorus, and Baronius. 556 Pelagius 1. 560 Joannes 3. 573 Benedictus. 1. 578
Pelagius. 2. 590 Gregorius Magnus.

This 2. Constantinopolitan Council defined, That our Lord Jesus Christ
crucified in the flesh, is both the true Lord of glory, and one of the Holy
Trinity. Can. 10. against Peter the Arch*bishop of Constantinople, who held,
That the whole ^rinity was crucified for us, as appears, Acts 1.

It defined, One Divine Nature to be in all the three Persons* Can. 1. Two
Nativities in Christ. c. 2 One only Person to be in Christ, though two distinct
Natures, against Anthimius and Theodore. Can. 4. 5.

It defined against Theodore, That Christ was not troubled with passions of the
mind, or concupiscenses of the flesh. Can. 12.

In this Age, the third Counc^l of Carthage decreed, That the Sacraments of the
Altar (Mass) should not be celebrated, but by such only as were fasting. Can.
29. It approved the whole Catalogue of Canonical Books by name, as they are now
published in our Bible, and approved by the Catholic Church, (except only
Baruch* which is not named, because an Appendix to Jeremie, whose Secretary he
was) Can. 47. This Council was subscribed by S. Augustine, and approved in the
sixth General Synod.

In this Age, the Milevitan Council defined, That whoever denies children newly
born to be baptized, or say^s they contract nothing of original sin from Adam,
which may be cleansed by the Laver of Regeneration, etc. Anathema. c. 2. it was
subscribed by S. Augustine.

In this Age the Caesaraugustan Council decreed, That Virgins (who had vowed
themselves to God) should not be vail^d, till after forty years probation.

In this Age Pope John 1. decreed, That Mass ought not to be celebrated, but
in places consecrated to our Lord, unless great necessity should enforce it. In
his Epist. to the Bishops of d^vers places, giving this reason, Because it is
written, see thou offer not thy Holocausts in every place, but in the place
which thy Lord thy God has chosen, Deuteronomy. 12. An. 525. For as no others but
Priests consecrated to our Lord, ought to sing Masses, and ^ffer Sacrifices to
our Lord upon the Altars, so in no other but consecrated places. De Consecrat.
did. 1. c. Sicut non alii.

Catholic Professors to the year 600.
GErardus, Genou^^a, Columbus, Oportuna, Germanus Parisiensis, Mary of Egypt,
Brigitta, Simeon Salus, Leander, S. Benedict. (institutor of the Holy Order of
Benedictine Monks) Rupertus, Maurus, Placidus, Arnulphus, Radegundis* Leonard,
Columbanus, John Climachus, Isaac, Hermenigildus, Fortunatus, Agricola,
Bonifac^us, Victor, Elutherius, Gregorius Turonensis, etc.

Nations converted.
S. Augustine the Monk, sent by Pope Gregory, converted England. The Northern
Picts, Goths, Bavarians, and Burgundians, were also converted in this Age.

From the year of Christ 600.
Chief Pastors. General Councels. 605 Sabinianus. 606 Bonifacius 3. The 3.
Constantinopolitan Council. Fathers 289. Pope Agatho presiding. An Dom. 680.
against the Monotholites. 615 De^sdedit. 618 Bonifacius 4. 626 Honorius. 639
Severinus. 640 Joannes 4. 642 Theodorus 1. Authors, Cedrenus, Baronius, etc.
649 Martinus 1. 654 Eugenius. 655 Vitalianus. 669 Adeodatus. 676 Domuus 1. 678
Agatho. 683 Leo 2. 684 Benedictus 2. 685 Johannes 5. 686 Conon. 688 Sergius.

In this 6. Age, in the 3. Council of Constantinople, celebrated in Trullo,
were condemned, Sergius, Paulus, Petrus, Cyrus, and Theodore, who most
impiously taught, but one will and operation to be in Christ.

It defined, under Anathema, That all things should be held, which had been
defined in the first six General Councils, together with 85. Canons, called the
Apostles Canons, and certain other Provincial Councils there specified. Can. 1.
2.

It defined, That no Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon, after they had taken Orders,
could marry, c. 6. and this in conformity to the Apostles Canons, ( Can. 27.)
where they commanded, That none but Lectors and Cantors should marry, after
they had received Orders.

It decreed, that grapes (an abusive custom in some places) should not be
given to the people, together with that unbloudy Sacrifice of the Oblation.
Can. 28. de consec. distinct. 2. Verbo didicimus.

It decreed, That water ought to be mingled with the Wine in the unbloudy
Sacrifice of the Mass, according to S. James the Brother of our Lord, and
Bishop of Jerusalem in his mystical Sacrifice delivered to us (say they) in
writing. De consecrat. distin. 1. verbo Jacobus, c. 32. Contrary to the
Heresies of the Hydroparastes, who consecrated in water only, and of the
Armenians, who did it in wine only.

It decreed, That we ought to give inferior adoration to the Cross, and forbad
it to be made on pavements, for reverence sake. Can. 73.

It decreed, That such as have received power from God to loose and bind, ought
attentively to consider the quality of the sin, and the disposition of the
sinner, that so they may apply a fit remedy for the discase, lest, if they judge
of the sin without difference, they hinder the health of the sick part, Can.
102. This required confession, and a particular knowledge of the sins to be
absolved.

It decreed, that a Christian adoring only God his Creator, may invocate
Saints, that they would vouchsafe to pray for him to the Divine Majesty. C. 7.

Catholic Professors to the year 700.
ANastasius, Persa, Walburga, Attala, Eustatius, Joannes Elimosinarius,
Isidorus, Claudius, Theodorus, Arnulphus, Ald^gund, Eligius, Severus,
Caesarius, Maximus, Oswaldus, Odoenus, Lambertus, Guagericus, Anhelmus,
Betulphus, Berta, Cunibertus, Aidanus, Cuthbertus, Julianus, Marinus, Eugenius,
the two Edwaldies, Andonius, Damianus, Tienenfis, Killianus, Joannes
Bergoniensis, Cedda, Projectus Paulinus, with diverse others.

Nations converted.
The Flemins converted by Eligius, the Westphalians by the two Edwaldies, the
Franconians by Killianus; multitudes of the Spaniards by Andonius* the Frisians
by Willebrord.

From the year of Christ 700.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 702 Johannes 6. The 2. Nicene Council;
Fathers 350. Pope Adrian presiding: An. Dom. 787. against Image-breakers. 705
Joannes 7. 708 Sisimus. Constantius. 714 Gregorius 2. 731 Gregorius 3. Authors,
Sedrenus, Zonoras, Baronius* 742 Zacharias. 752 Stephanus 2. Stephanus 3. 757
Paulus 1. 768 Stephanus 4. 772 Adrianus. 796 Leo 3.

This second Nicene Council in the second Action, approved the Epistle of Pope
Adrian to Tarasius the Patriark, in which he teaches the Roman Church to be the
Head of all Churches.

In the third Action it receives and approves the Apostolical Tradition of the
Church, by which veneration and worship of the Saints is taught, viz. as the
servants, children, and friends of God; With these also (say they) we worship
the relics of Martyrs, and holy Images of Christ and his Saints, since we
know (according to the sentence of Basil the Great) honor exhibited to the
image, redounds to the prototype.

In the sixth Action Tom. 1. it declares the Constantinopolitan Synod (under
Le^ the Heretical Emperor) which condemned images, to be no true Synod, because
neither the Pope, nor his Legates, nor the Eastern Patriarc h^ were present at
it.

In the seventh Action, it approves the first six General Councils, defining
all to be Heretics whom they condemn for such: as also that the images of
Christ, the B. Virgin, the Angels and all the Saints ought to be dedicated and
kept in the holy Temples of God, that by them we might come into the memory of
the prototypes. It defines likewise, that we may give the said images a
salutation or honorary worship, not that true Latria (or Sovereign honor) which
we give to God only; so the Discipline of our Forefathers, or Tradition of the
Catholic Church teaches. Thus the Council.

And again, We confess with one consent, that we will keep Ecclesiastical
Traditions, whether by writing, or custom, being in force, and decreed, etc.
Who shall dare to think or teach otherwise, or (after the custom of wicked
Heretics) violate Ecclesiastical Traditions, let him be excommunicate, Acts
the 7. p. 686. Tom. 3.

In the same Age the Council of Se^'s decreed, That it was a dangerous thing to
be in that error, that nothing is to be admitted which is not drawn from
Scripture; for many things are derived from Christ to posterity, by the hands
of the Apostles, from mouth to mouth, etc. which are to he holden without all
doubt. Decret. 5.

Catholic Prof^ssors to the year 800.
Venerable Bede, Bonitus, Grimaldus Guthalchus, Joannes Damascenus, G^rmanus,
Winocus, Hermingildus, Bonifacius, Plectrudis, Lioba, Iodocus, Odillia,
Gertrudis, Hubertus, Lullus Burchardus, and many others.

Nations converted.
The Hassites, Thuringians, Erphordians, and Cattians, converted by Boniface
the English Monk; the Lombards by Sebaldus; the Jews in the City of Berito by
the bleeding of a Crucifix, which was stabbed by them, the blood whereof cured
diseases; the two Saxon Dukes, Withkindus and Albion converted by a miraculous
sight of the B. Sacrament.

From the year of Christ 800.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 816 Stephanus 5. 817 Paschasius 1. 824
Eugenius. 827 Valentinus. 328 Gregorius 4. The fourth Constantinopolitan
Council, (Fathers 101.) Pope Adrian presiding, An. Dom. 869. against Photius.
844 Sergius 2. 847 Leo 4. 855 Benedictus 3. 858 Nicolaus 1. 868 Adrianus 2.
Authors, Nicephorus, Platina, Baronius. 873 Joannes 8. 883 Martinus 2. 884
Adrianus 3. 885 Stephanus 6. 891 Formosus. 897 Bonifacius 6. 900 Stephanus 7.
Romanus.

In this fourth Constantinopolitan Council Photius was condemned for usurping
the Chair of Constantinople, and expelling Ignatius the lawful Bishop; as also
for disobeying the authority and Decr^es of the Apostolic Sea of old Rome,
Action 1.

In this Council they recited the Acts of a Synod, made by Adrian Pope of Rome,
upon the very intrusion of Photius into that Chair; and in Adrians third
address to the Synod, his words are, We have read that the Bishop of Rome has
judged the Bishops of all Churches, but we have not read that any one has
judged him. In the same Epistle was read the definition of Pope Adrian in the
said Roman Council, against that unlawful Council at Constantinople, called by
Photius (Michael the tyrant being Emperor) and all the Acts thereof,
condemning them to the fire, etc. The whole Epistle was approved and ratified
with a new Anathema by this Council, Action 7.

It condemned the said Photius and his Council, against Images, Action 8.

It commanded the definitions against Photius and his Councils to be observed,
Can. 1.

It defined, That the Images of Christ and his Saints are to be worshipped with
a certain relative worship, Can. 3.

It declared Photius never to have been a Bishop, Can. 6.

It decreed, That temporal Princes ought to honor the holy Patriarchs, and
especially the most holy Pope of old Rome, next the Constantinopolitan, then
the Patriarch of Antioch, and lastly of Jerusalem. Can. 21.

It defined under Anathema, That no temporal Prince, or Lay*man, should meddle
in the election or promotion of Patriarchs, Metropolitans, or Bishops, as
having no power at all therein, Can. 22.

It approved all the seven former General Councils.

It anathematized Photius for the causes abovementioned, Can. 6.

Catholic Professors to the year 600.
SAbinus, Ansgratius, Ludgerus, Gerfridus, Geroldus, Joannicius, Ida, Nic^tas
M^nolphus, Withgungus, Adelardus, Mervardus, Rumoldus, Ausgarus* Rembertus,
Withinus, Atalphus, Seinandus, and many others.

Nations converted.
The Danes and Swedes converted by Ansgratius, the Bulgarians by Joannicius,
the Rugians by the Monks of Corbeia; the Moratians by Withgungus, the Russites
by a Priest sent by the Emperor Basilius.

From the year of Christ 900.
Chief Pasto^s. General Councils. 901 Theodorus 2. Ioannes 9. 905 Benedictus 4.
907 Leo 5. 608 Christopherus. Sergius 3. 910 Anastasius 2. 912 Laudo. Johannes
9. 928 Leo 6. 929 Stephanus 8. 931 Ioannes 11. 936 Leo 7. 940 Stephanus 9. 943
Agapitus 2. 956 Ioannes 12. 965 Benedictus 5. 966 Ioannes 13. 972 Domnus 2. 973
Benedictus 6. 975 Benedictus 7. 984 Ioannes 14. 985 Ioannes 15. 995 Ioannes 16.
996 Gregorius 5. 999 Sylvester 2.

In this tenth Age, or Century, I find no General Council, nor yet Provincial,
in which any controversy of moment was decided, a Succession of Chief Pastors,
and some Nations converted we have.

Catholic Professors to the year 1000.
O Do Cluniacensis, Wenc^sla^s, Adalricus, Bruno Coloniensis, Guibertus,
Majolus, Dunstanus, Romoaldus, Elphegus, Adelherdes, Wolfangus, Poppo,
Berualdus, Adelbertus, Aegidius, Tusculanus, and many others.

Nations converted.
The Polonians converted by Aegidius Tusculanus, sent by Pope John 13. The
Sclavonians converted by Adelbert; the Hungarians converted by another Adelbert.

From the year 1000.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 1003 Joannes 17. Joannes 18. 1009 Sergius 4.
1012 Benedictus 8. 1024 Johannes 19. 1034 Benedictus 9. 1044 Gregorius 6. 1047
Clemens 2. 1048 Damasus 2. 1049 Leo 9. 1055 Victor ^. 1058 Stephanus 10. 1059
Nicolaus 2. 1061 Alexander 2. 1073 Gregorius 7. 1086 Victor 3. 1088 Vrbanus 2.
1090 Paschalis 2.

In this eleventh Age* about the year 1049. Berengarius an Archdeacon of
Ghent, began to broach his Heresy concerning the B. Sacrament, affirming it to
be only a sign, or figure of the Body and Blood of Christ, not his true Body
and Blood; for which he was condemned in the Council of Vercellus, under Pope
Leo 9. 1053. As also in the Roman Council under Pope Gregory 7. Anno 1073.
where he abjured his Heresy in open Council, and died a Catholic, after
diverse penance done for his sin. See Guli^lmus Bibliothecarius, l. de gestis
Anglorum.

Catholic Professors to the year 1100.
ODilo Cluniacensis, Henricus the Emperor, Kunigund^^ his wife, Colomanus,
Petrus Damianus, Oddas, Simeo the Eremite, Brado, Dominicus, Loricatus,
Gothardus, Edwardus, Wigbertus, Lanfrancus, Gerardus Gaudanensis, Anselmus,
Stanislaus, Answerus, Godfridus Ambianensis, Ivo, Bruno Carthusianus, Hugo
Cluniacensis, Hugo Gratianopolitanus, etc.

The Vindicians and Prussians converted.

From the year 1100.
Chief Pastors. General Councels. 1118 Gelasius 2. 1. Lateran Council. (Fathers
300.) for instauration of Discipline, Pope Calixtus 2. presiding. Anno 1122.
1119 Calixtus 2. 1125 Honorius 2. 1130 Innocentius 2. Authors Sugerius,
Platina, Onuphrius, Baronius. 1143 Celestinus 2. 1144 Lucius 2. 1145 Eugenius
3. 2. Lateran Council (Fathers 1000*) for the right of the Clergy. Innocent the
2. pr^siding. Anno 1139. 1154 Anastasius 4. 1155 Adrianus 4. 1160 Alexander 3.
Authors, Platina, Onuphrius, Baronius. 1182 Lucius 3. 1185 Vrbanus 3. The 3.
Lateran Council (Fathers 300) for reformation, Pope Alexander the 3. presiding.
An. Do. 1179. 1187 Gregorius 8. 1188 Clemens 3. 1191 Celestinus 3. Authors the
same, as before. 1198 Innocentius 3.

The two first Lateran Councels defined little in matters of controversy. The
third condemned Waldensis the Merchant of Lions, who taught the Apostles were
Laymen, that Laymen and women might consecrate and preach, that Clergymen
ought to have no possessions or properties, that oaths were unlawful in all
cases, that Priests and Magistrates by mortal sin fell from their dignity, and
were not to be obeyed, etc. His Tenets were here defined against, and he
himself anathematized.

Catholic Professors to the year 1200.
AGnes Romana, Noribertus, Malachias, Bernardus Abbas, Gulielmus Dux
Aquitaniae, Gerardus, Hildigardis, Thomas Cantuariensis, Hugo Lincolniensis and
others.

Nations converted.
The Pomeranians and Norvegians converted by one Nicholas a Monk, who was
afterward Pope, and called Nicolas the third.

From the year of Christ 1200.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 1216 Gelasius 2. The fourth Lateran Council
(Fathers 1285.) Pope Innocent the third presiding. Anno 1215. 1222 Gregorius 9.
1241 Celestius 4. 1242 Innocentius 4. 1254 Alexander 4. Authors, Onuphrius,
Platina, Genebrard, and Spandanus. 1261 Vrbanus 4. 1265 Clemens 4. 1271
Gregorius 10. Innocentius 5. 1276 Adrianus 5. Joannes 20. 1277 Nicolaus 3. The
Council of Lions. (Fathers 100.) Pope Gregory the 10. presiding. Anno 1274.
against the Grecians. 1281 Martinus 4. 1285 Honorius 4. 1288 Nicolaus 4. 1294
Celestinus 5. Authors, Guli^lmus de Nangis, Onuphrius, Platina, Spondanus. 1295
Bonifacius 8.

The fourth Lateran Council defined in the profession of faith, 1. That all men
at the Resurrection shall receive according to their merits, whether good or
evil. 2. That the universal Church of the faithful is one out of which no man
is saved. 3. That the true Body and Blood of Christ is in the Sacrament of the
Altar, under the forms of Bread and Wine, the Bread being transubstantiated by
the Divine Power into the Body, and the Wine into the Blood. 4. That no man can
make this Sacrament but a Priest, rightly ordained by the Keys of the Church,
which Jesus Christ himself gave to the Apostles and their Successors. 5. That
Baptism profits little ones, as well as those, who are of riper years unto
salvation. Can. 1.

It condemned the Heresy of Abbas Ioachim, who denied the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost to be one highest thing, essence, or nature, though three distinct
persons. Can. 2.

It condemned all such for Heretics, as erect themselves against the faith by
them expounded in the first Canon. Can. 3.

It defined, That all the faithful should at least once a year confess their
sins to their own Parish* Priest, or to some other by his approbation, and that
they should receive the B. Eucharist at Easter. Can. 21. extra de poenitentia.

The council of Lions defined, That the Holy Ghost proceeds eternally from the
Father and the Son, not as from two principles, but one, not by two spirations,
but by one. This hitherto (says the council) the holy Roman Church (the Mother
and Mistress of all Churches) has preached and taught, This the unchangeable
and true sentence of the Orthodox Fathers, as well Greek as Latin holds. Can.
6. de Sum. Tri-Nitate and fide Catholica.

Catholic Professors to the year 1300.
S. Dominick and S. Francis, Institutors of their holy Orders of Friars* Maria
Oguiaca, Christina Mirabilis, Eugelbertus Coloniensis, Petrus Mediolanensis,
Luitgardis, Elizabeth Lantgranensis, Anthonius Paduensus, Gulielmus
Bononiensis, Hyacinthus, Alexander de Hales, Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventura,
Nicolaus Novesiensis, Hedingis, Medardes, Nicolaus Tolentinas, Mech^ildis,
Gertrudis* Angela de fulgineo, and many others.

Nations converted.
The Livonians converted by Medardes, the Lituanians by the Knights of S. Mary,
the Emperor Cassanes, with innumerable Tartarians, converted also in this Age.

From the year 1300.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 1303 Benedictus 9. The Council of Vienna,
(Fathers 300.) Pope Clement 5. presiding. An. Dom. 1311. 1305 Clemens 5. 1316
Ioannes 21. 1334 Benedictus 10. 1343 Clement 6. Authors, Platina, Onuphrius,
Spondanus. 1352 Innocentius 6. 1362 Vrbanus 5. 1371 Gregorius 11. 1378 Vrbanus
6. 1389 Bonifacius 9.

This Council defined Baptism to be necessary as well for infants, as those of
riper age. Habetur in Clementina, de Sum. Trinitate and Fide Catholica.

It condemned the Begardes and Beguines, who held carnal lust done out of
temptation to be no sin, and that we ought not to show reverence at the
elevation of the Body of Christ, etc. Habetur in Clementina, ad nostrum de
haereticis.

Catholic Professors to the year 1400.
IVe Jurisconsulius, Rochus, Christina, Sumlensi^ Venturinus Rergomensis,
Gertrudis de Est^n, God* fridus Eptingensis, Henricus Supo, Catharina Senensis,
Albertus Alobrogensis, Andreas Fesulanus, Gerardus Groet, and many others.

Nations converted.
Azatines, Emperor of the Turks, the Isles of the Canaries, the revolted
Lit^anians, the Cunians, the Bosnians, the Lipuensians, the Patrinians, and the
S^lavonian Nations converted by the means of Pope Clement the 6. and Lewis King
of Hungary.

From the year of Christ 1400.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 1404 Innocentius 7. The Council of Constance
An. 1415. against John Wickl^ff, John Husse, and Hierome of Prague, Pope John
22. and Martin the 5. presiding. 1406 Gregorius 12. 1409 Alexander 5. 14010
Joannes 22. 1417 Martinus 5. 1430 Eugenius 4. 1447 Nicolaus 5. 1455 Calixtus 3.
The Council of Florence (Fathers 145.) Pope Eugenius 4. presiding. All. 1439.
against many heresies. 1458 Pius 2. 1464 Paulus 2. 1471 Sixtus 4. 1484
Innocentius 8. Authors, Palmerinus, Volateran, Platina, Spondanus. 1492
Alexander 6.

The Council of Constance defined against, and anathematized John Wickliffe,
John Huss, and Hierom of Prague, for teaching, 1. That all Priests and
Magistrates fell from their dignity by any mortal sin, and ought no longer to
be obeyed. 2. That the Body and Blood of Christ are not really present in the
Sacracrament. 3. That God must obey the Devil. 4. That it is against Scripture
for Priests to have any possessions. 5. That temporal Lords might take away
Churchlivings at their pleasure. 6. That all things happened by inevitable
necessity, etc. Sess. 8.

It defined, That Communion under one kind was sufficient to salvation; and
Heresy, to say, that a tyrant Prince might lawfully be killed by his own
subject. Sess. 13.

The Council of Florence defined, That the souls of such as die in state of
grace, not having fully satisfied for their sins by worthy fruits of penance,
are purged with purging pains. And, That the holy Apostolic (...) and Roman
Bishop has a primacy over all the world, and is the Successor of S. Peter,
Prince of the A^^stles, and Head of the whole Church. In decret. Eu^^nii Pap. 4.

It defined, That by the force of the words of Consecration, the substance of
the Bread is changed into the Body of Christ, and the substance of the Wine
into his Blood, and that whole Christ is under either kind, and every particle
of either kind, if divided.

It defined, the Books of the Machabees, etc. Canonical. In decret. Unionis.

The Grecians, Jacobites, Armenians, and Patriarch of Constantinople subscribed
this Council, and were reunited to the Church of Rome.

Catholic Professors to the year 1500.
COlecta, Vincentius, Valentinus, Bernardinus Senensis, Joannes Capistranus,
Laurentius, Justinianus, Anthonius Florentinus, Didacus ab Ascala, Andreas
Chias, Maria Toletana, Dominicus Pisciensis, Margarita Ravennatensis, Nicolaus
Eremita, Jacobus Pic^nus, Jacobus Alemannus, Columba, Osanna Mantuana, and many
others.

Nations converted.
The G^mog^sians, the people of the Kingdoms of Betonine, Guinea, Angola, and
Congo converted in this age.

From the year of Christ 1500.
Chief Pastors. General Councils. 1503 Pius 3: Julius 2. The last Lateran
Council, Pope Julius 2. and Leo 10. presiding. An. Dom. 1512. I find not the
certain number of the Fathers; it was a General Council. 1513 Leo 10. 1522
Adrianus 6. 1523 Clement 7. 1534 Paulus 3. 1550 Julius 3. 1555 Marcellus 2.
Paulus 4. 1560 Pius 4. The Council of Trent, Pope Paul the 3. and Pius 4.
presiding against Martin Luther, and his fellow. Protestants. An. 1546. 1566
Pius 5. 1572 Gregorius 13. 1585 Sixtus 5. 1590 Vrbanus 7. Gregorius 14. 1591
Innocentius 9. 1592 Clement 8. 1605 Leo 11. Paul 5. 1620 Gregorius 15. 1623
Vrbanus 8. 1645 Innocentius 10. now living 1654.

The last Lateran Council defined, The soul of man immortal, and that there be
as many humane souls as bodies, anathematizing all such as obstinately defend
or hold the contrary. Sess. 8.

What the definitions of the Council of Trent are I shall not need to relate,
they are conformable to those of all precedent General Councils, for us, and
against Sectaries, as our adversaries well know, and cannot deny.

Catholic Professors to the year 1600.
CAtharina Genovensis, Franciscus a Paula, Andreas ex Olivo, Franciscus
Zimondus, Gentilis Ravennatensis, Ignatius Loiola, Franciscus Zaverius, Faelix
Capucinus, Carolus Borromeus, Antonius Pestana, Edmundus Campianus, Philippus
Nereus, Caesar Baronius, Gulielmus Alanus, etc.

Nations converted.
Great multitudes were converted in this Age, both in Italy, France* Spain,
Germany, Polonia, India, Iaponia, China, by Priests, and Religious of the Roman
Church: and likewise some considerable persons of the English Nation, even in
the heat of persecution.

I have omitted multitudes of Provincial Councils, all establishing and
defining our Tenets over the whole world, a sure eviction of the consent of
Nations, as well as Ages, in our behalf.

Now let any rational and disinteressed man be judge, whether the Fathers of
these foresaid councils were true Protestants or Roman Catholics, (that is,
whether they have taught and defined, Protestant, or Roman Catholic
Doctrines) and doubtless, he will say, Roman Catholics: And so by consequence
were all the Ages and Countries which have received, and approved them for
Orthodox, by humbly submitting to their Decrees, to wit, all Ages, since
Christ's time: Therefore let no Protestant, or other Sectary delude himself, and
his ignorant and credulous followers, with a pretense to Councils, seeing there
is no one to be found for them (speaking of General and ecumenical Councils)
which has defined, or taught their Negative Doctrines, but all have more or
less condemned them, according to the Heresies then emergent. So impossible a
task it is for them, to make a Catalogue of their Chief Pastors and Councils in
all Ages, which notwithstanding must, and will be always required of them, to
the eternal confusion of their novelties.

Fathers for the Churches continued Succession.
IN the second Age Irenaeus. Where is it then, that a man shall find such
Pastors as S. Paul teaches us, when he says, God has placed in his Church,
first Apostles* secondly Prophets, thirdly Doctors, etc. There then, where the
gifts of our Lord are placed, must we seek for the truth, amongst whom the
Succession of the Church from the Apostles, and the purity of Doctrine is
maintained in its integrity. lib. 4. ca. 45.

In the third Age Tertullian. What the Apostles taught, I will prescribe ought
no otherwise to be learned, then by those Churches which the Apostles founded,
lib. praescrip. c. 21. And again, What I believe, I received from the present
Church, the present Church from the Primitive, that from the Apostles, the
Apostles from Christ, c. 37.

In the same Age Origin. In our understanding Scripture, we must not depart
from the first Ecclesiastical Tradition, nor believe otherwise, then as the
Church of God has by Succession delivered to us. In his 27* Treatise on the
23. of S. Mat.

In the same Age S. Cyprian. How can he be acknowledged for a true Pastor, who
without succeeding to any one, begins from himself, Ep. to Magnus.

In the fourth age S. Athanasius. Behold we have proved the Succession of our
Doctrine, delivered by hand to hand, from Father to Son, but as for you
(Arians) new Jews, and children of Caiphas, what Progenitors can you show for
your speeches? in the Decree of the Nicene Synod against the Arians.

In the same Age S. Pacian. For my self, holding my self secure, upon the
Succession of the Church, and contenting my self with the peace of the ancient
Congregation, I have not learned any studies of discord Epist. 3.

In the fifth Age Optatus Melevitanus, reckons ^p the Bishops from S. Peter to
Siricius then Pope, saying to the Donatists, Show the original of your Chair,
you who challenge the holy Church to your selves. lib. 2. con. Parn.

In the same S. Augustine. The Succession of Priest^, from the very Seat of
Peter the Apostle, etc. to the present Bishopric, holds me in the Church.
Co^^* F^^d. Ep. ca. 4. Number the Priests (says he) even from the Seat of S.
Peter, that is the Rock, which the Gates of hell overcome not. And in another
place, If the Church shall not continue here on earth to ^he end of the world,
to whom did our Lord say, Behold I am with you to the consummation of the
world? Lib 3. d^ bapt. cont. Don.

^n the same Age Vincentius Lyrin^usis. Faith is that which then have received,
not that which thou have devised, a thing not of private usurpation, but of
public Tradition, whereof thou ought not be the Author, but conserver,
etc. in his admonition against Heresies ca. 27.

Objections against the Churches continued Succession solved.
Ob. ELias complained that he was left alone, 3 King. 19. therefore the Church
then failed.

Answ. He spoke figuratively, for God himself told him in the same chap. v.
18. that he had 7000. at that time in Israel (where he was) who had not bowed
their knees to Baal: and in the Kingdom of Juda there was then public
profession of the true Religion in Jerusalem. Paralip. 22. 14. 15. so that
consequence is false.

Ob. The Arian Heresy infected the whole world. Ergo, etc.

Answ. You mistake, the fury of that lasted not full four years, viz. from the
Council of Ariminum, to the death of Constantius and that only in the Eastern
Churches, the W^stern feeling little or nothing by it. S. Augustine answers the
Donatists objecting the same, That even the Canonical Scriptures have this
custom, that the word seem^ to be addressed to all, when it reaches home only
to some few. Epist. 48.

Ob. S. Hier^me says, The whole world groaned and wondered to se^ it self
become Arian (in his book against Luciferius.)

Answ. If she wondered, she knew not when it was done; if she groaned, she
approved it not being done; therefore the major part were still Catholic. Let
S. Hierome answer for himself. The Bishops (says he against Luciferius) that
did the fact at Ariminum were d^luded, (viz. by the new Creed there made, which
might have born a good sense) few defending the fact, and some lamenting it.
And S. Augustine tells us, that the Church then appeared in her most constant
members, Athanasius and others. Epist. 48.

Ob. The Church will fail in the time of Antichrist, christ, according to that,
unless there come a revolt first, etc. 2 These. 23.

Answ. No, she will not; she shall then s^ffer great persecution, Apoc. 20. 8.
and therefore shall be to suffer.

Many will revolt, all shall not.

Ob. What if men would not persever? how then? you hold ^^ee* will I hope?

Answ. With S. Augustine to the Donatists, as if the Holy Ghost were ignorant
what would be the Free Will of men, which yet foreseeing, he foretold, That the
Church of Christ should endure for ever. De V^it. Eccles. ca. 12.

ARTICLE II. That Protestants have no continued Succession.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. THe true Church of God has had a continued Succession from Christ to this
time, and shall have from hence to the end of the world, as has been proved.
2. But the Protestant Church (and so of all other Sectaries) has not a
continued Succession from Christ to this time. 3. Therefore the Protestant
Church is not the true Church of God.
The minor (which only remains unproved) is cleared by the concession of our
most learned adversaries, who freely and unanimously confess, That before
Luther made his separation from the Church of Rome, for 900. or 1000. years
together, the whole world was Catholic, and in obedience to the Pope of Rome,
there being no Protestants any where to be found, or heard of. Let therefore
our very enemies be our Judges, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 31.

John Calvin. All the Western Churches have defended Papistry. Respon. ad
Ve^sipell. p. 154.

Hospinian. Luthers separation was from all the world. Epist. 141.

White. Popery was a Leprosy, breeding so universally in the Church, that
there was no visible company of men appearing in the world free from it.
Defense c. 37. p. 136.

Bennet Norton. The whole Christian world knows* that before Luther, all
Churches were overwhelmed with more then Cymerian darkness. Treatise of the
Church. p. 145.

Bancroft. The Priests, and all the people too were drowned in Popery. Censure
4.

Jewel. The whole world, Princes, Priests, and people, were overwhelmed with
ignorance, and bound by ^ath to the Pope. Sermon on Luke 11.

Chamierus. Apostasi^ averted the whole Body from Christ. Epist. 49.

Brochard. When the first assault was made upon the Papacy by Luther, the
knowledge of Christ was wanting in all, and every of his members. On the 2. Rev.
pa. 41.

Whitaker. In times past no Religion but the Papistical had place in the
Church. Controversy 4. q. 5. c. 3.

Bucer. All the world erred in that Article of the Real Presence, p 660.

Calvin. They made all the Kings and people of the earth drunk, from the first
to the last. Institu. b* 4. c. 18. par.

Perkins. During the space of 900. years the Popish Heresy had spread it self
over the whole world. Exposit. Symb. p. 266.

Bale. From Phocas ( who lived A^^. Dom. 602.) till the renewing of the Gospel,
the Doctrine of Christ was in lurking holes. Centur. 1. p. 47. 65.

Simon Voyon. When Boniface was installed* then was that universal Apostasi^
from the Faith, which was foretold by Paul. Catalog. Doctor* Ep. to the Reader.

Bibliander. It is without all question, that from the time of Gregory the
Great, the Pope is Antichrist, who with his abominations has made drunk all
Kings and people, from the highest to the lowest. In orat. ad principes
Germaniae. c. 72. Hospinian has the very same expression. Hist. Sacrament. l.
2.

A second Argument.
1. WIthout a continued number of Bishops, Priests, and Laics, succeeding one
another in the profession of the same Faith, from Christ and his Apostles to
this time, a continued Succession cannot be had. 2. But Protestants have no
continued number of Bishops, Priests, and Laics succeeding one another, from
Christ and his Apostles to this time, in the profession of the same Faith or
Tenets, the 39. Articles, or any other set number of Tenets, expressly holding
and denying all the same points. 3. Therefore Protestants have no continued
Succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time.
The major is manifest, because it proceeds from the definition to the thing
defined.

The minor is proved, because Protestants have never yet been able, nor ever
will, to assign any such number of men, whom they have succeeded in their 39.
Articles, or Luther in his Augustan Confession, when he revolted from the
Catholic Church, no nor yet one single Diocese, or Bishop.

If any man pretend to such a Catalogue, let him name none but only such, as
held explicitly the 39. Articles, all granting and denying the same points,
that the late Protestants of England granted and denied, or that our new
Reformers deny and grant; for if they differ from them in any one material
point, they cannot be esteemed Protestants. Let him not name the Waldenses, for
they held the real presence, that the Apostles were Laymen, that all
Magistrates fall from their dignity by any mortal sin, that it is not lawful to
swear in any case, etc. Illiricus in Catalog. Waldens. Confess. Bohem. ^. 1.
and Waldo, an unlearned Merchant of Lions, lived but in the year 1160.

Let him not name the Hussites, for they held Mass, Transubstantiation, and
seven Sacraments with us. See Fox in his Acts. protest. Apol. Tract. 2. ^. 2.
Sect. 4. 5. They held, the universal Church consisted only of the predestinate,
That all the works of the predestinate are virtues, and that they cannot fall
from the Faith, they held all the errors of John Wickliff, and were condemned
with him in the Council of Constance. Sess. 6. 7. and 15.

Let him not name the Albigenses; for they held all marriages to be unlawful,
and all things begotten ex coitu, to be unclean. S. Bernard Homil. 66. in
Cantica* They held two Gods, a good and an evil, teaching, that the evil God
made all visible things, they rejected the Old Testament. Rogerus Hoveden. ex
actibus Tolosanis* An. 1178. and Rainerus. c. 6.

Let him not name the Catharistes or Puritan Waldenses, for they held, that the
Devil made the world, and denied the resurrection. Rainerus. c. 6. parag. 5. p.
Secta Catharorum.

Let him not cite the Wicklefians, for they held, That all things came to pass
by fatal necessity, that Princes and Magistrates s^ll from their dignity and
power by mortal sin. Council. Constable. c. 8.

Let him not name the Grecians, for they rejected the Communion of Protestants.
Censur. Eccles. Orientalis. They were at least 700. or 800. years in the
Communion of the Roman Church, as witness the first eight General Councils, all
held in Greece, and approved by the Popes of Rome. The first revolt was made by
the Grecians, denying the procession of the Holy Ghost from God the Son, they
were united again to the Church of Rome in the council of Florence Sess. last.
they held Transubstantiation, seven Sacraments, unbloudy Sacrifice, prayer to
Saints, and for the d^ad. censur. Eccles. Orientalis. c. 7. 10, 12, 13, 21.

Let him not name the Egyptians, for they held Transubstantiation, and unbloudy
Sacrifice, as is manifest by their Liturgies, but denied the procession of the
Holy Ghost from the Son; and held but one will in Christ. Godingus. l. 1. c.
28. de rebus Abyssinorum.

Let him not cite the Armenians, for they hold but one nature in Christ, and
that his flesh was changed into the Divinity. Euthimius in his panop. part. 2.
tit. ^0. they were condemned by the Council of Calced. Acts 5.

Protestants pretense to the Fathers of the first 500. years is very idle,
because were it true, as it is most false, that those Fathers were Protestants,
yet could not that suffice, to prove them a continued Succession of 1600. years.

Secondly, because those of the sixth Age must needs know better what was the
Religions and Tenets of them, who lived in the fifth Age, by whom they were
instructed, and with whom they daily conversed, then our Protestants can now
do, who have protested on their salvation, that it was the very same with
theirs, received from them by word of mouth* and so from age to age: and
finally because:

A third Argument.
1. If our Tenets in which we differ from Protestants, and are opposed by them,
be taught and approved by the Fathers of the first 500. years, then it is
wholly impossible they should be for Protestants, and against us. 2. But our
Doctrines (in which we differ from Protestants, and are opposed by them) are
taught and approved by the Fathers of the first 500. years. 3. Therefore it is
wholly impossible the Fathers of the first 500. years should be for them, and
against us.
The major is manifest of it self, the minor is proved; first, by what has been
already cited out of those Fathers, as also by what shall be cited out of them
in my ensuing arguments. Secondly* by the ingenuous confession of our
Adversaries.

Fulk; I confess* Hierome, Austin, Ambrose, etc. held the Invocation of Saints.
Riot. Briston. p. 36.

Kemnitius. Most of the Fathers did not dispute, but avouch, that the souls of
Martyrs heard the Petitions of those who prayed to them; They went to the
Monuments of Martyrs, and invocated Martyrs by name. Examine. Council. Trident.
par. 3. p. 200.

Whitguift; All the Bishops and learned Writers of the Greek and Latin Church
too, for the most part, were spotted with the Doctrines of Free will, Merit,
Invocation of Saints. in his defense p. 473.

Calvin; It was a custom 1300. years ago to pray for the dead, but all of that
time, I confess, were carried away into error. Institut. b. 3. c. 5. parag. 10.

Whitaker; It is true, which Calvin and the Centurists have written, That the
Ancient Church did err in many things, as touching Lymbo, Free Will, Merit of
works, etc. contro. 2. q. 5. c. 7.

Peter Martyr; As long as we stand to the Councils and Fathers, we shall remain
always in the same errors. De voto. colum. 1559.

Duditius; If that be true which the Fathers have professed with mutual
consent, it is altogether on the Papists sides; Apud Bezam Epist. 1.

Raynolds; If all the Fathers held a point n^w in question, and not only held
it, but also taught, not darkly, but plainly, etc. this consent of theirs were
unsecure; Confess. c. 5. divis. 1.

Jewel; The way of finding truth by God speaking in the Church and Councils is
very uncertain, and in a manner fanatical. Apolog. part. 4. p. 117.

Therefore the Fathers of the first five hundred years are not for Protestants,
but for us; therefore Protestants are utterly at a loss in the point of a
continued Succession.

Objections solved.
Ob. IN all the ages before Luther, Protestants had a Church, though it were
invisible.

Answ. This is a mere Midsummer-nights dream, that a Church (which is a
Congregation of visible men preaching, baptizing, and converting Nations)
should be extant for a 1000. years, and yet be all this while invisible,
neither to be seen nor heard of in the world.

Ob. The Church in communion with the Sea of Rome was the true Church, till she
Apostatized and fell from the Faith.

Answ. If she were once the true Church, she is and shall be so for ever; she
cannot fail, as has been proved, nor err in faith, as shall be proved
hereafter.

Ob. The Catholic Succession was our Succession for the first five centuries.

Answ. You may as well tell me of a white Blackmoore; a Catholic is not a
Protestant, nor a Catholic Succession a Protestant Succession. Who ever heard
of a Protestant Pope? the Catholic Church was always governed by a Pope in
the first five centuries, as now it is, and has defined our Tenets, and
condemned yours, as you have seen. It is the very essence of a Protestant (as a
Protestant) to protest against the Catholic Church, as Lutherans and you have
done.

Ob. We protest only against her errors.

Answ. Yes against manifest revealed Verities, (as has and shall be proved)
and the very fundamentals of our Faith.

Ob. S. Augustine, S. Hierome, and many others, are divided in their opinions,
whether Linus or Clement immediately succeeded S. Peter.

Answ. Be it so, yet they all agreed in this, that the Succession was morally
continued, to which it is a thing indifferent, whether Clement immediately
succeeded him, as he well might, being his Scholar, or first Linus, then
Cletus, and then Clement, which is now the more common opinion of the Church.

ARTICLE III. The Catholic Churches visibility asserted.
OUr Tenet is, That the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of God, has had
not only a continued, but also a visible Succession from Christ to this time,
etc. which we prove thus.

1. A society of men, which has always in it exterior consecration and
Ordination of Ministers, preaching, baptizing and administering Sacraments, must
of necessity be always visible. 2. But the Church of Christ is a society of
men, which has always in it exterior consecration and ordination of
Ministers, preaching, baptizing, and administering Sacraments. 3. Therefore the
Church of Christ must of necessity be always visible.
The major is proved by evident reason, because those are all outward and
sensible actions, which are inconsistent with an invisible society of actors.

The minor is proved by Scripture, Go ye teaching all Nations, baptizing them
etc. And, behold I am with you all days; etc. S. Mat. 28. v. 20. He gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and other some Pastors, and Doctors
to the consummation of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

A second Argument.
1. A light always shining to the world, and a City so seated on a hill, that
it cannot be hid, must needs be always visible. 2. But the Church of Christ is
a light always shineing to the world, and a City so seated on a hill, that it
cannot be hid. 3. Therefore the Church of Christ must needs be always visible.
The major is manifest by the very terms.

The minor is proved by Scripture; The mountain of the House of our Lord shall
be prepared on the top of mountains, Isa. 2. 2. You are the light of the world,
a City seated on a hill cannot be hid, S. Matthew. 5. 14. He has put his
Tabernacle, his Church, in the Sun, Psalm. 18. 4.

Fathers for the Churches visibility.
IN the second Age Irenaeus; Where is it then, that a man shall find such
Pastors: as S. Paul tells us of, when he says, God has placed in his Church
first Apostles, etc. 4. Ephesians. l. 4. c. 45.

In the third Age Origin; The Church is full of brightness, even from East to
West. Homil. 3. on S. Mat.

In the same Age S. Cyprian; The Church being clothed with the light of our
Lord, spreads its beams through the whole world. De unit, Eccles.

In the foutth Age S. Chrysostom, It is easier, that the Sun should be
extinguished, then that the Church should be obscured. Homil. 4. on Isay 6.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine, The Church is seated on a mountain, and cannot
be hid, etc. they are blind that see not so great a mountain, that shut their
eyes against a light set on a Candlestick. Lib. 3. con: Parmenian. And again,
The Church has this most certain mark, that she cannot be bid. con. Petilian.
c. 104.

Objections solved.
Ob. THe Church is believed, therefore not seen.

Answ. She is believed in the sense of her Doctrines, and to be guided to all
truth by the Holy Ghost, but seen in her Pastors outward Government and
preaching; wherefore I deny the consequence.

Ob. The Woman (the Church) fled into the Wilderness, Apoc. 12. 6.

Answ. But is followed, and persecuted by the Dragon, v. 17. therefore visible.

Ob. The Church of the predestinate is invisible.

Answ. There is no such thing as a Church of the predestinate, Christ's Church
is the Congregation of all true Believers, as well reprobate as predestinate:
There is in his floor both wheat and chafe, S. Mat. c. 3. and in his field
both corn and tares, which shall grow together till the harvest (the day of
Judgment) S. Mat. c. 13. The predestinate are as visible as the reprobate; it is
true indeed, their predestination is invisible, and so is also these men's
reprobation.

ARTICLE IV. The true Church demonstrated by her Unity and Universality.
Unity being essentially presupposed to Universality, I thought it not improper
to join these two in one Article. Now that the church of Rome is both
perfectly one, and also universal for time and place, is thus demonstrated.

The Argument for Unity.
1. The Church of Christ is one body, one fold, or flock (of which he himself
is the supreme invisible head, and the Pope his Deputy on earth the visible, or
ministerial.) 2. But the Roman Catholic Church, and no other, is this one
body, one fold, or flock. 3. Therefore the Roman Catholic Church, and no
other, is the Church of Christ.
The major is proved, We are one bread one body, as many as participate of one
bread, 1 Cor. 10. 18. He has made him (Christ) Head over all the Church, which
is his body, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. There shall be made one fold, and one Pastor,
Joh. 10. 16. I besee^h you that you all speak one thing, and that there be no
Schisms among you, but that you be perfect in one sense, and one judgment, 1
Cor. 1: 10. The multitude of believers had one heart, one soul, Acts 4. 32.
Christ prayed, that his Disciples might be one, S. Joh. 17. 11. I believe one
holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. The Nicene Creed.

The minor is made evident (even to the weakest understanding) by the present
manifold Schisms and divisions, which are now among Protestants, and all other
Sectaries, as well in Doctrine as Government, whereas Catholics are perfectly
one, both in Discipline and Doctrine, all the world over, even to the least
Article or point of Faith, being all united to one supreme invisible Head,
Christ Jesus, and all subordinate to one visible and ministerial Head, the
Pope, his Vicar on earth. We all resolve our selves in points of Faith into one
safe and most unchangeable principle, I believe the holy Catholic Church; we
look on her, as the immediate and authorized proponent of all revealed
Verities, and the infallible Judge of controversies; God himself being the prime
Author, and his authority the formal motive, and object of our Faith.

A second Argument for its Unity.
1. AS a natural unity and conversion of the parts among themselves, and to the
Head, is necessary for the being and conservation of a natural body: So the
spiritual unity and connection of the members amongst themselves, and to the
Head, is necessary for the being and conservation of a mystical body. 2. But
the Church of Christ (as I have proved) is a mystical Body. 3. Therefore a
spiritual unity and connection of the members amongst themselves, and to the
Head, is necessary for the being and conservation of the Church of Christ.
The major is proved by the purity of reason, which is between a natural and
mystical body; for as a natural body must needs die, if all its parts, by which
it should subsist, be torn and divided from one another; so also a mystical
body perishes, if all its members be divided from one another, and from the
head (whence it has its spiritual life and motion) by Schism and Heresy.

The Argument for Universality.
1. TO be universal for time and place, is nothing else, but to be coexistent
with all time, and to be spread or diffused over all places. 2. But the Church
of Christ, from the time he founded it, has been coexistent with all time, and
shall be to the worlds end, and has, and shall be spread over all Nations. 3.
Therefore the Church of Christ is universal (or Catholic) for time and place.
The major is proved, because the definition, and the thing defined are
convertible.

The minor is proved by Scripture, for time thus, Go ye* etc. and behold I am
with you all days, even to the consummation of the world, S. Mat. 28. 20. He
gave some Apostles, etc. to the consumm^tion of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
The Paraclete shall abide with you for ever, S. John 14. 15, 16. He (Christ)
shall reign in the House of Jacob ^o^ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be
no end, S. Lu. 1. 33.

For place thus; All Nations whatsoever thou have made shall come and adore
before thee O Lord, Psalm. 85. 9. All Nations shall flow unto it, Isa. 2. 2. Go
ye teaching all Nations* etc. S. Mat. 2^. 20. Their sound went out over all the
earth, etc.

I resume the Argument, and make it thus.

1. That Church which is not universal (or Catholic) for time and place, is
not the Church of Christ. 2. But the Protestant Church (and the like may be
said of all other Sectaries) is not universal (or Catholic) for time and
place. 3. Therefore the Protestant Church is not the Church of Christ.
The major has been proved before.

The minor is proved, because before Luther, (who lived little above sixscore
years ago) there were no Protestants to be found in the whole world, as has
been proved by us, and confessed by our adversaries. To which you may add, they
have never yet been able to convert any one Nation from Infidelity to the Faith
of Christ, nor ever had communion with all Nations, nor indeed any perfect
communion among themselves; therefore they cannot be the Catholic Church.

Fathers for Unity and Universality.
IN the second Age Irenaeus; We must obey those Priests that are in the Church,
those that have a succession from the Apostles, etc. and all the rest who have
departed from the original Succession (where ever they be assembled) to have
suspected as Heretics, or Schismatikes, and all these fall from the truth, l.
4. c. 43.

In the third Age Origin; Let the Doctrine of the Church be kept, which is
delivered from the Apostles by order of Succession, and remains in the Church
to this very day. praefat. in lib. periarchon.

In the fourth Age Lactantius; It is only the Catholic (or universal) Church,
that has the true worship and service of God, etc. from which whoever departs
has no hope of life, l. 1. c. ult.

In the same Age S. Cyril of Jerusalem, The Church is called Catholic (or
universal) because it is spread over all the world from one end to the other.
Cataches. 18.

In the fifth Age S. Austin; We must hold the communion of that Church, which
is called Catholic, both by her own and strangers, l. de vera relig. And
again, Whoever is divided from the Catholic Church, how laudable soever he
seems to himself to live, etc. he shall be excluded from life. Epist. 152.

Objections solved.
Ob. THe Roman Catholic Church is a particular Church, therefore it is not
Catholic or Universal.

Answ. I distinguish your antecedent, the Roman Church, as taken only for the
congregation of Rome, or Italy, is a particular church, I grant, as taken for
the whole collection of churches, holding communion with the Sea of Rome, I
deny it: For so it is an universal church, containing all particular churches,
as all the parts are contained in the whole, and in this acception also it is
called the Roman Church, because the particular Roman Church is the Mother
Church, and has a power of Headship and Jurisdiction over all the rest.

Ob. How can a church of one denomination be universal?

Answ. I have told you already, by the extent and latitude of her power, which
is over all. So a particular man is called a General, by reason of his power
over all the Army.

Ob. You communicate not with us, and many others; therefore your communion is
not Catholic or Universal.

Answ. I grant the antecedent, but deny the consequence, for universal
communion requires not communion with all particular Sects or persons, but only
with all true Believers, no, A man that is an Heretic, after the first and
second admonition avoid, Titus 3. 10, 11.

ARTICLE V. The Churches Infallibility demonstrated.
OUr Tenet is, That the Roman Catholic Church is the highest visible Judge of
controversies, and that she is infallible, both in her propositions, and
definitions of all points of Faith; having a power from God to oblige all men
to believe her, under pain of damnation; proved thus.

The first Argument for her infallibility.
1. No man by hearing (or believing) Christ, can hear an ^rrour in Faith. 2.
But every man by hearing the church hears Christ. 3. Therefore no man by
hearing the Church can hear an error in Faith, therefore she is infallible.
The major must be granted, otherwise you charge Christ to be the Author of
damning lies.

The minor is proved; He that hears you (the Church) hears me, and he that
despises you, despises me, S. Luke 10. 16. The consequences are both
unavoidable.

A second Argument for her Infallibility.
1. NO man can be damned for not believing an error in faith. 2. But every man
shall be damned for not believing the Church. 3. Therefore no man can believe
an error in faith by believing the Church.
The major is proved, because otherwise God were a tyrant, in damning us for
not believing a lie, which contradicts himself.

The minor is as evident; He that will not hear the Church, let him be to thee
as an Heathen and a Publican, S. Mat. 18. 18. He that knows God, hears us,
and he that hears us not, is not of God; in this we know the spirit of truth,
and the spirit of error, 1 John 4. 6. Go ye preaching the Gospel to all
creatures, etc. He that believes not shall be condemned, S. Mark 16. 16.

A third Argument for her Infallibility.
1. IF Christ be always with his Church, and have made her the pillar and
firmament of truth, against which the gates of hell (Heresies) shall not
prevail, and given her the Holy Ghost to assist her to all truth, so that her
definitions in an approved General council are the very dictates of the Holy
Ghost; then is it impossible the church should err in Faith. 2. But all this
Christ has done for his church. 3. Therefore it is impossible the church
should err in Faith.
The sequel of the major is manifest by the very terms of the supposition.

The minor is proved; Go ye teaching all Nations, etc. and behold I am with you
all days, (he is with her teaching) S. Mat. 18. 20. The house of God, which is
the pillar and firmament of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, S. Mat. 16. 18. He will give you another Paraclete that he
may abide with you for ever, etc. He shall teach you all things, and suggest to
you all things whatsoever I shall say to you (all points of Faith) S. John 14.
26. He shall teach you all truth (no errors) S. Joh. 16. 13. It has seemed
good (say the Apostles in council) to the Holy Ghost, and to us, Acts 15. 28.

The consequence is confirmed, because were not the church infallible in things
of faith, we could have no infallible assurance at this distance, What were the
Word of God, what not; or what the true sense and meaning is of any one book,
or chapter in the whole Bible, nor consequently of our salvation, since without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.

The fourth and last Argument for her Infallibility.
1. THe church has a power from God, to oblige all men under pain of damnation
to believe her in her Proposals and definitions of Faith. 2. But she could not
have such a power from God, unless she were infallible in her Proposals and
definitions of Faith. 3. Therefore she is infallible in her Proposals and
definitions of Faith.
The major is proved by all those texts abovecited, in the first and second
argument, as also by the councils of all ages, which command all men under pain
of damnation to believe and subscribe to her Decrees and definitions of faith,
which has accordingly been done, both by the Fathers, and all true believers.

The minor is proved by reason, because it were not consistent with the
justice, mercy, or veracity of God, to give a fallible and erring Judge such a
power in things of that high consequence.

An Argument for the Churches Supreme power of Judicature.
1. THat is the supreme Judge in every cause, who has an absolute power to
oblige all dissenters to an agreement, and from whom there can be no appeal in
such a cause. 2. But the Catholic Church has an absolute power to oblige all
that disagree in controverted points of Faith, nor is there any appeal from her
decision. 3. Therefore the Catholic Church is supreme
Judge in controverted points of faith.

The major is manifest by induction in all Courts of Judicature; the minor has
been proved above, by the first, second, and fourth arguments.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second age Irenaeus, Where the Church is, there is the Spirit, and
where the Spirit of God is, there is all grace, l. 3. c. 40. And again, We must
believe those Priests that are in the Church, those that have a succession from
the Apostles, who together with Episcopal power, have according to the good
pleasure of the Father received the certain gift of truth, l. 1. c. 49. and*
62. The Church shall be under no man's judgment, for to the church all things
are known, in which is perfect Faith of the Father, and of all the dispensation
of Christ, and firm knowledge of the Holy Ghost, who teaches all truth.

In the third age Origin, That only is to be believed for truth, which in
nothing disagrees from the tradition of the church. And in our understanding
Scripture, etc. we must not believe otherwise, then as the church of God has
by succession delivered to us. Praefat. in lib* Periarch.

In the same age S. Cyprian, The Spouse of Christ cannot be defiled with
adultery, she i^ pure and chaste, De unitat. Eccles. And a little after, Whoever
divides from the Church, and cleaves to the adulteress, is separated from the
promises of the church: he cannot have God his Father, that has not the Church
his Mother. And again, To Peter's Chair, and the principal church, infidelity or
false faith cannot have access, Epist. 55.

In the fourth age Lactantius Firmianus: It is only the Catholic Church that
has the true worship of God, this is the wellspring of truth, the dwelling
place of faith, etc. l. 3. c. ult.

In the same age S. Cyril of Jerusalem: The Roman Faith commanded by the
Apostles cannot be changed, l. 3. c. 4. in apolog. cont. Ruffin.

In the fifth age Vincentius Lyrinensis: All those that will not be accounted
Heretics, must conform themselves to the decr^es of ecumenical councils, l.
advers. hae^es. c. 41.

In the same age S. Augustine: I know by divine revelations, that the Spirit of
truth teaches it (the church) all truth* l. 4. de Baptism c. 4. And again, To
dispute against the whole church is most insolent madness. And I my self would
not believe the Gospel, were it not that the authority of the church moves me
to it, cont. Epist. fundam. c. 5.

I now resume the principal argument, and retort it thus upon our adversaries.

1. The Catholig^e church is infallible in her proposals and definitions of
faith. 2. But the Protestant church (and the like of all other Sectaries) is
not infallible in her proposals or definitions of faith. 3. Therefore the
Protestant church is not the Catholic church.
The major has been fully proved before: The minor must be granted by our
adversaries, because they have no other way to excuse themselves from being
Heretics in their revolt from our church, but by falsely pretending the whole
church erred in faith, and taught idolatry and superstition for 900. or a 1000.
years together, till they began their blessed reformation: a most blasphemous
evasion (as has been proved before) by which they have excluded themselves
from all possible assurance of true faith or salvation; and therefore to
arrogate infallibility to themselves, which they deny to the whole church, were
a most frontlesse impudence.

Note here for your better understanding this whole question, that when we
affirm the church is infallible in things of faith, by the word ( Church) we
understand not only the church diffused over all the world, unanimously
teaching, whose doctrines of faith we hold to be infallible, but also the
church represented in a council perfectly ecumenical (that is to say, called
out of the whole world, and approved by the Pope) whose definitions of faith we
hold to be infallible.

Objections from Scripture and Reason solved.
Ob. ALl the Israelites adored the golden calf, therefore the whole church
erred.

Answ. Moses and the Levites did not, who were many thousands, Exodus 32. Numb.
3. 39. therefore both those Propositions are false.

Ob. The Jews council erred in condemning Christ.

Answ. No wonder it was not perfectly ecumenical, for Christ himself was then
Head of the church on earth, and the highest authority was in him, not in the
Jews council; and if the Jews church could err, it does not follow that the
church of Christ can; for it was built (as S. Paul says) on better promises.

Ob. S. Peter erred in faith, when S. Paul contradicted him to the face.

Answ. No, it was only in a matter of fact or conversation, according to
Tertullian, l. praescrip. c. 23. by withdrawing himself, and refusing to eat
with the Gentiles for fear of the Jews, Gal. 2. 12.

Ob. Christ blamed the incredulity of his Disciples in not believing his
Resurrection, S. Mark 16. 14.

Answ. He only blamed their slowness in believing it, not any error in faith,
or loss of faith in them, seeing they had it not before, for they understood
not what Christ had said to them of it, as appears S. Lu. 18. and S. John 20.
they did not know all points of faith at once, but by degrees.

Ob. Every man is a liar.

Answ. In his own particular be it so, yet the Holy Ghost can and will teach
the church all truth, he is no friend to truth that contradicts it: and albeit
man of himself may err, yet by the Holy Ghost he may be guided so, that he
err not.

Ob. Try all things, hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. Believe not every
Spirit, but try the Spirits, if they be from God, 1 John 4.

Answ. Try them by the churches authority and Apostolical tradition, that is
the touchstone, not the dead letter, humane reason, or the private Spirit.

Ob. The church may err, at least in point^ which are not fundamental.

Answ. All that God has revealed is fundamental, at least for the formal
motive of belief, to wit, the divine authority revealing (though not always
for the matter) and if it be once sufficiently proposed to us by the church, as
so revealed, we are then bound to believe it; so that their distinction of
fundamentals and not fundamentals, is idle: Besides, if the church be
infallible in fundamentals, then Protestants are Schismatiques at least, in
revolting from her for points not fundamental, or necessary to salvation, and
sin against charity, by accusing us of idolatry.

Ob. Those things only are fundamental which are absolutely necessary to
salvation, and every man is bound explicitly to know and believe.

Answ. If this were true, the Bible, or written Word (which you will have to be
the only rule of faith and Judge of controversies) were not a fundamental; for
faith depends not essentially on writing, but on hearing: Many were good
Christians and saved, before any of the new Scripture was written, or received
among them, the first Gospel not being written till seven or eight years after
the death of Christ.

Ob. In Gregory the Greats time the Discipline and Doctrine of the church was
altered and corrupted.

Answ. That cannot be, for from S. Gregory the Greats time to this day, even
the least substantial part of either has not been lost, or changed, as is
visible in all the councils, Liturgies, and constitutions of the church.

Ob. That which may happen to any one particular man or church, may happen to
all: But it may happen to any one particular man or church to err in faith,
therefore to all.

Answ. I distinguish the first Proposition, that which may happen to one, may
happen to all, in a divisive sense I grant, in a collective I deny, and so
granting the second Proposition, I deny the consequence; for it proceeds from a
divided to a compounded sense, and is as equivocal as this: That which may
happen to any one egg in the Parish, may happen to all; but it may happen to
any one egg in the Parish to go into your mouth at once, therefore it may
happen to all the eggs in the Parish to go into your mouth at once.

Ob. The Apostles were not each of them to depend on the decrees of the church.

Answ. True, the church was to depend on them, as on the first Masters and
Proposers of faith, who had each of them a peculiar prerogative of divine
assistance, and infallibility in matters of faith, yet were they each consonant
to other in all their doctrines of faith, and whatever was taught by any of
them, was steadfastly believed by all.

Ob. The church has now no new revelations, nor can she make any new points of
faith, therefore we are not bound to believe her definitions.

Answ. I grant the antecedent, but deny the consequence; for though she can
make no new points, yet she can explicate the old, and render that clear, which
was before obscure, and can define against new Heresies.

Ob. The spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 15.

Answ. By the rule of Apostolical Tradition, I grant, by humane reason or the
private spirit I deny, and such a spiritual man is in the church, as a part in
the whole, not out of it, with Sectaries.

Ob. Right reason is the only Judge of controversies, therefore every man's
private reason must be Judge for himself.

Answ. The antecedent I have already sufficiently refuted, and I also deny the
consequence, as the most gros^ and unreasonable assertion of all others,
(though Mr. Chillingworth's chief ground) which appears thus;

First, as contradicting the Word of God, wherein we are taught, That the
things which are of God, no man knows but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. No
man can say our Lord Jesus (with true faith) but in the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.
3. By grace we are saved through faith, and that not of our selves, for it is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. We are not sufficient to think any good thing our
selves, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is from God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We must
captivate our understanding to the obedience of faith.

Secondly, because divine revelations are not to be admitted, or rejected, for
their seeming consonancy or repugnance to every man's private reason; but for
the authority of the church proposing, as the immediate motive, and the
authority of God revealing, as the highest motive of our faith, into which it
is ultimately resolved; nor can any thing be more rational* then to captivate
and even renounce private reason, where God the Author of reason commands it.

Thirdly, because if every man's private reason is to judge for himself in
matters of Religion, then all the Heresies that ever yet* were in the world,
were good and sound doctrines; for there was never any Sect of Heretics, who
did not pretend both to reason and Scripture for their Tenets (how damnable
soever) and some of them, such as were unanswerable by humane reason, setting
aside the churches authority and Apostolical tradition. For who can prove by
private reason, or by all the reason of man against the Arians, that a
spiritual and indivisible substance (such as God is) could beget a natural Son
of himself, without a mother? or against the Sabellians and Trinitarians, That
the same indivisible Essence or Divine Nature can be at once in three distinct
Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? or against Nestor and Eutiches, That
one person can subsist in two different natures, the divine and humane in
Christ, which notwithstanding are high fundamentals in Christianity. In all
these, and many others, private reason must either bend the knee, and be
captivate to faith, or become Atheism.

Finally, because if private reason were the only Judge of controversies, it
would evidently follow, the General councils of all former ages, (which have
commanded all persons under pain of damnation to obey their definitions, and
submit to their Decrees) were the most tyrannical and unjust Assemblies that
ever were, in usurping such a power over men's consciences, and consequently
that there neither is, nor ever was any such thing on earth, as a church (or
obliging guide in matters of faith) and churchgovernment.

Ob. You therefore believe the church to be infallible, and whatever else you
believe, because you judge it reasonable to believe it, and your very act of
faith it self is an act of reason; therefore reason is the only Judge of
controversies.

Answ. The discourse and approbation of reason is always a previous and
necessary condition, to our deliberate and rational acts of faith, and the very
acts themselves are acts of reason, not discoursing, but simply assenting: All
this I grant, yet I deny your consequence, because our acts of faith are not
ultimately resolved into private reason (which often is enforced to captivate)
but into the authority of God revealing* and the church proposing. I believe it
(says Tertullian) because it is impossible (viz. to humane reason.)

Ob. There is no Apostolical Tradition for the churches Infallibility.

Answ. Yes, a more universal one, then for the very Canon of Scripture it self:
(which notwithstanding you believe on that score, if at all) For there is not
any one book, either of the Old or New Testament, which has not been rejected
by some Heretic or other: if therefore it be sufficient proof of an universal
tradition for the whole Canon of Scripture, that some one or two General
Councils only have set down the number and names of all the books of Scripture,
though not without some variety, and that the Fathers have given testimony to
them, some to some books, some to others, but few to all, and that the church
in after* ages has accepted them for such, how much more universal is the
tradition for the churches infallibility, which is vertually decided and
attested by the Anathema's, and definitions of all the General Councils that
ever were, condemning all who did not humbly obey and subscribe to them, every
decision being attested by all the Fathers, (no one contradicting or condemning
the style) and most unanimously accepted by the whole church of after ages.

Objections from Fathers and Councils solved.
Ob. THe Council of Frankford condemned the second Nicene Council for giving
Sovereign honor to Images, as you may see in the preface of the Caroline books.

Answ. The second council of Nice allows no such honor to images, but only a
salutation or honorary worship, not true Latria (or Sovereign honor) which it
defines to be due to God only, Acts 1. 7. The Caroline books are of no
authority, they say that council was not approved by the Pope, which is false,
and that it was held at Constantinople in Bythinia, whereas Constantinople is
in Thrace.

Ob. The Lateran Council under Pope Leo 10. Sess. 11. defined, a Pope to be
above a Council, and the Council of Constance Sess. 4. defined a council to be
above a Pope.

Answ. Neither part was ever yet owned by the church for an ecumenical decree
or definition, and if it were, it would be answered, that the Lateran Council
defined only a Pope to be above a Council taken without a Pope, or not
approved, and that the Council of Constance only defined a Council approved by
a Pope, to be above a Pope without a Council, which definitions are not
contradictory, no more then to say, one part of any thing is bigger then
another, and the whole bigger then both; so that from hence it cannot be
inferred, that either Council erred; nor was either decree approved by the Pope.

Ob. The Council of Basil defined, That a Council was above a Pope.

Answ. The Decree was not approved, nor any other of that Council, but only
such as concerned Church-benefices. See Eugenius with Turrecremata. l. 2. c.
100.

Ob. The Council of Ariminum defined Arianism.

Answ. It did not, and that equivocal decree which was there made, was never
approved by the Pope; and the Fathers themselves, (who were deluded by the
Arians, with words that bore a double sense, when they perceiv^d the fraud)
lamented, and renounced the fact.

Ob. The Council of Trent er^'d, by adding to the Canon of Scripture.

Answ. It did not: The third Council of Carthage approved all the same books by
name, excepting Baruch, whom they comprised with the Prophet Hieremy, whose
Secretary he was, and this 1200. years ago.

Ob. The Fathers erred some in one thing, some in another.

Answ. A part, I grant, all together (speaking of any one age) I deny, and they
all submitted to the church; and so do likewise our Schoolmen, who differ only
in opinion concerning School-points undefined, not in faith.

Ob. S. Austin tells S. Hierome, that he esteems none but the writers of the
Canonical books to have been infallible in all they write, and not to err in
any thing.

Answ. Neither do we, we esteem not the writers of Councils infallible in all
they write, nor yet the Councils themselves, but only in the ecumenical
decrees, or definitions of Faith.

Ob. S. Augustine Epist. 112. says, We are only bound to believe the canonical
Scriptures, without dubitation; but for other witnesses, we may believe, or not
believe them, according to the weight of their authority.

Answ. He speaks in a particular case, in which nothing had been defined by the
church; namely, Whether God could be seen with corporal eyes? but the Decrees
of general councils are of divine authority, as we have proved; and therefore
according to S. Augustine, to be believed without dubitation.

Ob. S. Athanasius (in his Epistle to the Bishops of Africa) tells the Arians,
they in vain ran about to seek councils, since the Scripture is more powerful
then all councils.

Answ. He says it was vain for them, who had rejected the general council of
Nice, nor doubt we but the Scripture has in many respects a pre-eminence above
the definitions of general councils, and a higher degree of infallibility, yet
these also are infallible in points of faith.

I conclude this Article with that Decree of the council of Basil, The
Catholic Church is enriched with so great privilege by Christ our Savior,
etc. that we firmly believe she cannot err in those things which are necessary
to salvation, Anno Dom. 1431. respons. Synod. de authoritate Consilii Generalis.

ARTICLE VI. The true Church demonstrated by her Sanctity and Miracles.
OUr Tenet is, That the Roman Catholic Church is known, and evidently
distinguished from all false Churches, not only by the marks and properties by
us premised, but also by her sanctIty and power of doing miracles; and is
proved thus.

THE ARGUMENT.
1. THat is the true Church, and lawful Spouse of Christ, which is eminent for
Sanctity of Discipline and Doctrine, and for Miracles. 2. But the Roman
Catholic Church, and no other, is eminent for Sanctity of Discipline and
Doctrine, and for Miracles. 3. Therefore the Roman Catholic Church, and no
other, is the true Church, and lawful Spouse of Christ.
The major for Sanctity is proved by that Article of the Apostles Creed, I
believe the holy Catholic Church, as also by these texts of holy Scripture;
Christ gave himself for his Church, clea^sing her by the laver of water
(Baptism) in the Word, that he might present her to himself a glorious Church,
not having spot or wrinkle, but that she might be holy and unspotted, Ephesians.
26. 27. These things ye were (says S. Paul) but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. A good tree brings forth good fruit, by their
fruit ye shall know them, S. Mat. 7. 17. 20. Strait is the gate, and narrow the
way which leads to life, etc. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all thou
have, and give to the poor, etc. and come and follow me, S. Mat. 19. 21. There
be Eunuchs who have gelded themselves for the Kingdom of heaven, he that can
take, let him take, S. Mat. 10. 12. Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them,
etc. Heb. 13. 17.

Now that the Roman Catholic Church has abounded with, and brought forth
Saints in all ages (which is a pregnant and convincing proof of our second
Proposition) is manifest by the Chronicles and Martyrologies of the whole
Christian world.

S. Augustine, and his fellows, who converted England, when they were received
into Canterbury (says Hollinshed part 1. p. 100.) began to follow the trade of
the Apostles, exercising themselves in continual prayer, fasting, watching, and
preaching, despising all worldly things, and living in all points according to
the doctrine which they taught.

S. Francis, S. Bennet, and S. Dominick, were all eminent for sanctity of life,
as the Magdeburgian Centurists confess, Centur. 13. col. 11. 79. but I never
yet heard of any Protestant Saints in the world: Add hereunto what the
Catholic Church teaches, That the Commandments are possible, nay must be
kept; she teaches the necessity of contrition, confession, and satisfaction,
with many other penal practices of self-denial; she teaches obedience to
Priests and spiritual Pastors, in things belonging to the soul, and the
Government of the church; she teaches much fasting, prayer, and mortification;
she exhorts to good works, voluntary poverty, chastity, and obedience.

The contrary to all which holy doctrines are taught by Protestants, and other
Sectaries.

Her churches are open, and divine Service said not only on all Sundaies and
Holy days, but every day in the week, and that the greatest part in the
forenoon* There is five times more preaching and catechizing, and ten times
more fasting and praying in the Catholic Church, then in the Protestant; her
Sacraments are more and more frequented, and instead of an innumerable
multitudes of religious men and women that are in the Catholic Church, who
have freely forsaken all things to follow Christ, and totally relinquished the
riches, pleasures, and preferments of this life to serve him the remainder of
their days, in vows and practices of holy poverty, obedience, and chastity*
Protestants have an innumerable company of Sects and Sectmasters, that daily
spring out of their stock, such as are continually broaching new heresies, and
always at defiance one with another.

The major, as to the power of miracles, is proved by these promises of Christ,
He that believes in me, the works that I do, he shall do, and greater, S. John
14. 10. Those that believe in me, these signs shall follow, in my Name they
shall cast out devils, they shall lay hands upon the sick, and they shall be
whole, S. Mark 6. 17.

The minor is proved by these ensuing undeniable testimonies; first
Protestants, and other Sectaries pretend, that miracles have ceased ever since
Christ and his Apostles time, because they and their Sect-masters have never
yet been able to do any, a sure conviction that they want this Mark. Secondly,
histories (as well of enemies as friends) have recorded many famous miracles
wrought in all ages by the Catholic Church. The Magdeburgian Centurists,
although Protestants (such is evidence and force of truth) have recorded many
great miracles done by Catholics in their 13. c. of every century for 1300.
years together after Christ.

S. Francis of Assisinna, fifteen days before his death, had wounds freshly
bleeding in his hands, feet, and side, such as Christ had on the Cross and this
by miracle, Man. Paris. page 319. One Paul Form having stolen two consecrated
Hosts of the B. Eucharist out of a church, s^ld one of them to the Jews, who
out of malice and contempt stabbed it, saying, If thou be the God of the
Christians, manifest thy self, whereupon blood miraculously issued out of the
Host, for which fact 38. of them were burnt at Knoblock in Brandenburg, and all
the rest of the Jews were banished out of that Marquisate. This is recorded by
Pontianus in his fifth book of memorable things, and by John Mandevil a
Protestant, in his book de locis communibus* page 87. as also by Osiander.
Epist. 116. p. 28. notwithstanding this confession of adversaries, I will also
add some Fathers.

Fathers for this point.
IN the third Age S. Cyprian, A certain woman (says he) when she would with
unworthy hands have opened her coffer, wherein was the holy thing of our Lord
(the B. Eucharist) fire sprung up, whereby she was so terrified, that she durst
not touch it. Sermon de lapsis.

In the ^ourth age Optatus relates how the Heretics caused the Eucharist to
be thrown to dogs, which dogs thereupon all raging tore their Masters in
pieces, as guilty of the holy Body. l. 2. contra Donatist.

In the same Age S. Gregory Nyssen recounts how S. Gregory Neocesa^iensis by
his faith and prayers removed a mountain to make room for the foundation of a
church, according to that promise of Christ; If you have faith as a Mustard
seed, you shall say to this mountain, remove from hence thither, and it shall
be done, and nothing shall be impossible to you. S. Mat. 17. 20. for which
miracle he was called Thaumaturgus, in l. de vita S. Gregor. Nicephorus has
recorded the same miracle, l. 6. c. 7.

In the same Age S. Chrysostom affirms, that not only the relics of S. Peter
anid Paul did miracles, and cured diseases, Acts 5. 12, 15, 19. but also the
relics of many other Saints; and he exemplifies in S. Babilas the Martyr,
whose miracles he records, l. de Babil. Martyr. tom: 5. inferring from thence
against Infidels, that Christ is God; who has wrought such wonders by the dust
of his servants.

In the same Age S. Ambrose reports, That his Brother Satyrus was miraculously
preserved from drowning in a shipwreck by the B. Sacrament of the Eucharist,
which he had fastened in a stole about his neck. Funeral Oration on the death
of Satyrus. c. 7.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine, having recounted many miracles wrought at S.
Stephens Monument, which he himself was an eyewitness of, affirms at length,
that if he should record all that he knew to have been done, he must fill
books. l. de civitat. Dei 22. c. 8.

Objections solved.
Ob. MIracles have ceased eversince Christ and his Apostles*

Answ. You contradict the plain promises of Christ made to his church without
limitation, as also the Histories and Records of all Christendom.

Ob. Signs and miracles were given to unbelievers, not to believers, therefore
they are now unnecessary.

Answ. No, they are not, for they very much confirm the immediate care and
providence of God over his church, they excellently demonstrate his
omnipotence, and there be many disbelievers still, the more's the pity.

Ob. Why do not then your Priests do miracles? we would be glad to see some of
their doing.

Answ. Because of your incredulity, as o^ Savior told the Jews, S. Mat. 17.
19. yet they do many in Gods appointed time and place, (as the Records of the
church will testify) though not to satisfy your sinful curiosity. See Francis
a S. Clara in his Paralipomena, who recounts many great and evident miracles.

ARTICLE VII. The Popes Supremacy asserted.
OUr Tenet is, That the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, is the true Successor of S.
Peter, and Head of the whole Church of God, which has in part been proved
already, by our Catalogue of Chief Pastors, (who were all Popes of Rome) and
by the Councils of all Ages, approved by them, and owning them for such, and is
yet farther proved thus.

The first Argument.
1. THe Foundation has a pre-eminence of firmitude and stability before the
rest of the building which is founded on it, and the Shepherd is Head of his
Flock, and above his Sheep. 3. But S. Peter, next after Christ himself, was
the foundation of the whole church, and Pastor of the whole flock. 3. Therefore
S. Peter next after Christ, had a pre-eminence over the whole church, and was
Head of the whole flock, and above all the other sheep, of which number were
the rest of the Apostles.
The major is proved, because the foundation supporteth the rest of the
building; ( We are built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20.) and the Shepherd
has a power to feed and govern his whole Flock.

The minor is proved, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church, S. Mat. 16. 18. (the whole was built on him) and for a reward of Peter's
special dilection, (for he loved Christ more then the rest of the Apostles) he
said to him; Feed my lambs, feed my lambs, feed my sheep. S. John 21. 16, 17,
18. (a Commission to feed all without exception.)

Another Argument.
1. HE that is by Gods appointment to confirm others in the Faith, and is
generally set before others in the Scripture, must needs be greater then those
others in power and dignity. 2. But S. Peter by our Saviors own appointment.
was to confirm the Apostles in the Faith, and is generally preferred before them
all in holy Scripture. 3. Therefore S. Peter was ^^ve the rest of the Apostles
in power an^ dignity, and therefore the Head and Primate of the rest.
The major is proved, because the stronger is not confirmed by the weaker, nor
the less worthy to be set before the more worthy, generally speaking.

The minor is proved, I have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith fail not;
and thou being at length converted, confirm thy Brethren, S. Lu. 22. 31. The
names of the twelve are these, the first Simon, who is called Peter, etc. S.
Mat. 10. 2. S. Mark ^. S. Lu. 2. and Acts the 1.

What has been said to prove S. Peter's primacy, proves olso the primacy of his
Succefsour, the Pope of Rome.

Fathers for this point.
IN the first Age S. Dionysius, the Areopagite affirms, That he and Timothy
were both present at the B. Virgi^ Mary's death, to behold that Body (...) gave
the beginning of life; and that there was ^l^o present, both James the Brother
of our Lord, a^^ Peter the Supreme, and most ancient top of Divines: He is
cited by S. John Damascen, Orat. 2. de dormit, deipar, sub finem.

In the second Age Irenaeus; All Churches round about ought to resort to the
Roman Church, by reason of her more powerful principality, l. 3. c. 3. And
again, The Roman Church is the greatest and most ancient, founded at Rome by S.
Peter, and S. Paul, l. 3. cont. Valent. c. 3.

In the third Age Origin; When the chief charge of feeding Christ's sheep was
given to S. Peter, and the Church founded upon him, etc. there was required of
him the confession of no virtue, but of charity. in c. 6. Epist. ad Roman.

In the same Age S. Cyprian; We hold Peter the Head and Root of the Church.
Epist. ad Julian. And in another place, he calls the Church of Rome S. Peter's
Chair. Epist. 55.

In the fourth Age S. Basil calls S. Peter, That blessed one, who was preferred
before the rest of the Apostles. Sermon de Judicio Dei.

In the same Age S. Athanasius; Thou art Peter, and upon thy foundation the
Pillars of the Church, that is the Bishops, are fortified. in Epist. ad Felicem.

In the same Age S. Epiphanius; He chose Peter to be the Captain of his
Disciples, Haeres. 51.

In the same Age S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Peter the Prince (says he) and most
excellent of all the Apostles. Cateches. 2.

In the same Age S. Chrysostom; The Pastor and Head of the Church was once a
poor Fisherman. Homil. 55. in Matthaeum.

In the same Age Ecumenius; Not James, but Peter rises up, as being both more
servent, and also the President of the Disciples. in ^. ^. Actorum.

In the same Age Optatus Milevitanus; In this Chair sat Peter the Head of all
the Apostles. l. 2. cont. Parmen.

In the same Age Eusebius Emissenus, He first committed his lambs, afterward
his sheep to Peter, because he made him not only Pastor, but Pastor of the
Pastors. Sermon de Nativ. S. Jo.

In the same Age S. Ambrose; Andrew first followedour Savior, yet Andrew
received not the primacy, but Peter. in 2 Cor. 12.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine speaking of S. Peter's penance, says, He cures
the whole bodies disease in the very Head of the Church. Sermon. 12. de 4.
temporibus. And again, Peter the Head of the Apostles, the Gate-keeper of
heaven, and the foundation of the Church. Epist. 86. And in another place, Of
whom Peter the Apostle, by reason of the primacy of his Apostleship, bore the
person etc. Tract. ultimo in Ioannem.

The first Nicene Council defined, That he, who holds the Sea of Rome, is the
Head and chief of all the Patriarchs, se^^ng he is the first, as Peter, to whom
power is given over all Christian Princes, and all their people, as he who is
the Vi^ar of Christ our Lord over all people, and the universal Church of
Christ, and whoever shall contradict this, is excommunicated by the Synod. Can.
39. Arab.

The Council of Calcedon; We thoroughly consider truly, that all primacy, and
chief honor, is to be kept for the Archbishop of Old Rome. Action 16. See more
above in the Councils.

Objections solved.
Ob. PIlate had power over Christ himself, Thou should not (says he) have
any power against me, unless it were given thee from above, Jo. 19. 11.
therefore temporal Princes are above the Pope.

Answ. I distinguish your antecedent, he had a power of permission over Christ,
I grant; a power of jurisdiction, I deny, and so do all good Christians. Nor is
your consequence less to be denied, speaking of spiritual things, and things
belonging to Church Government, in which we only defend the Popes Supremacy,
and that without all prejudice to Princes and chief Magistrates in their
supremacy of temporal affairs.

Ob. S. Paul says, At Caesar's Judgment Seat I stand, where I ought to be
judged, etc. I appeal to Caesar: therefore the Emperor is above the Pope.

Answ. S. Paul appealed to Caesar, as to a Judge of fact, not of right, so that
your consequence is false.

Ob. The Kings of the Gentiles overruled them, but you not so, S. Lu. 22. 25.

Answ. Christ there forbids spiritual superiors to lord it over inferiors, so
the Greek word ((...)) signifies, yet he there expressly mentions a greater
and a lesser, a superior and inferior among them.

Ob. Christ is the foundation (of the Church) and other foundation no man can
lay, 1 Cor. 3. 11.

Answ. Other principal foundation no man can lay, I grant, other subordinate, I
deny; for he himself has laid Peter (Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, S. Mat. 16. 18.) and the rest of the Apostles, were built on
the foundation of them all, though not equally, Ephesians. 2. 20.

Ob. S. Cyprian (de unit. Eccl.) says, The Apostles were equal in dignity. And
S. Hierome affirms the Church was equally founded on them all. l. cont. Jovin.

Answ. They were equal in their calling to the Apostleship, I grant, in their
power of Government and Jurisdiction, I deny: And the Church was equally
founded on them all before a Head was constituted, I grant; after a Head was
constituted, I deny, and so do those Fathers; S. Cyprian saying in the same
place, Tha^ Christ disposed the Origin of Unity beginning from one, (Peter.)
And S. Hierome tells us, He chos^ one of the twelve, that a Head being
constituted, the occasion of Schism might be taken away.

Ob. One body with two heads is monstrous.

Answ. Not if one be principal, and the other subordinate, or ministerial only,
as in our present case. So Christ is the Head of the man, and the man of the
woman, 1 Cor. 11. without any monstrosity.

Ob. S. Gregory rejects the name of Universal Archbishop as Antichristian. l.
7. indict. 2. Epist. 96.

Answ. He rejects it as it excludes all other^ from being Bishops, I grant; as
it only signifies one to be supreme, and above all others, I deny, and so does
he himself, saying in the same book ( Ep. 62.) If there be any crime found in
Bishops, I know no Bishop but is subject to the Sea Apostolic. And l. 4.
indict. 13. Epist. 32. The care and principality of the Church has been
committed to the holy Apostle, and Prince of the Apostles S. Peter, yet is not
he called Universal Apostle, as if there were no other Apostle but he. You see
in what sense he rejects the word ( Universal.)

Ob. The first Constantinopolitan Council, and the Council of Calcedon, decreed
the Constantinopolitan Sea to be equal with that of Rome.

Answ. In certain privileges, I grant, in original Authority or Jurisdiction,
I deny, and so does the said Council of Calcedon, saying, We thoroughly consider
truly, that all primacy and chief honor is to be kept for the Archbishop of
Old Rome. Action 16. nor was that Canon of the Council of Constantinople ever
approved by the Pope, though it owned the Church of Rome to be the Sea
Apostolic, and sought but primacy in the second place, and after it.

Ob. The Council of Nice says, Let the ancient custom be kept in Egypt,
Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria has power over all those,
because the Bishop of Rome also has such a custom^* Can. 6.

Answ. The Bishop of Rome had a custom to permit such a power to the Bishop of
Alexandria; the Greek Text says, Because to the Bishop of Rome also this is
accustomed, which argues him to be above the other.

Ob. The Emperors heretofore called and presided in General Councils.

Answ. They called them instrumentally, I grant; by way of spiritual
Jurisdiction, I deny. And they presided also in them for peace, and ornament,
true; for definition or judgment, it is most false: That always was reserved to
the Popes, I will not sit among them as Emperor (says Constantine in his
Epist. to Pope Leo about the sixth General Council) I will not speak
imperiously among them, but as one of them, and what the Fathers shall ordain,
that I will execute. Emperors subscribed councils, not in order to
constitution, but execution. God (says Constantine to the Nicene council) has
made you Priests, and given you power to judge us, but you may not be judged of
m^n. In Rufino.

Ob. What think you of Pope Joane? was she an Universal Bishop also?

Answ. I think him rather a particular fool, who can believe so gross a fable:
'Twas the credulous relation of one Martinus Polonus, ^ silly man, (the only
Author for it, though Protestant Writers have falsely cited others) who has
sufficiently discredited his own Narration; For he tells you, she was born at
Mountes in England; (there having never been any such place heard of) and that
she was bred up at Athens, an University not then in being, but destroyed many
years before, a pretty likely tale.

Ob. You Roman Catholics, as I have heard, (if the Pope excommunicate a
Tyrant or Heretical Prince) hold it lawful for his own subjects to kill him.

Answ. You have heard a loud slander, we abhominate and detest the Doctrine. It
is defined by the council of Constance, and therefore of faith with us, That
it is Heretical, to affirm it lawful for a Subject to kill his Prince upon any
pretense whatsoever. Sess. 15.

Answ. Mariana the Jesuit printed the Opinion.

Answ. True, by way of Problem he did; but his book was condemned, and
publicly burnt by a Provincial council of his own Order.

Ob. At least you hold, the Pope can dispense with your Allegiance to Princes,
and if he dispense, you are not bound to keep any Faith with them, or any
Heretics.

Answ. We hold, That our allegiance to Princes is not dispensible by any
authority on earth; and are as ready to defend our Prince, or civil Magistrate,
with hazard of our lives and fortunes, even against the Pope himself, if he
invade them, as against any other enemy. We esteem our selves obliged to keep
Faith even with Infidels: And the council of Trent has declared, That to
violate any least point of public Faith given to Heretics, is a thing
punishable by the Law of God and man. Sess. 15. 18. What this or that
particular Doctor may hold, or the Popes flatterers, if he have any, adds
nothing to the Creed of Catholics, nor is it justly chargeable on the whole
church.

We conclude this whole Treatise of the church by way of corollary, with one
short Argument.

1. That is the true Church* and no other, to which all these foresaid marks
and properties plainly agree (viz. a continued Succession from Christ to this
time. 2. Visibility* 3. Unity. 4. Universality. 5. Infallibility. 6. Sanctity.
7. The Power of Miracles, and to be governed by one Supreme Head, and he a
Bishop.) 2. But all these foresaid marks and properties agree plainly and
unde^iably to the Roman Catholic Church, and no other, as has been proved.
3. Therefore the Roman Catholic Church, and no other, is the true Church.
Having thus charactered and pointed out the Church, we come now to vindicate
her particular and most principal Doctrines from all aspersions cast on her by
Heretics. And for our clearer performance of this task, we shall first show
you the Churches Rule of Faith, by which she has conserved herself infallible,
and in the purity of Apostolical Doctrine, to this time, and shall do so to the
worlds end.

ARITCLE VIII. Of Apostolical Tradition.
OUr Tenet is, That the true Rule of Christian Faith is Apostolical Tradition;
or a delivery of Doctrine from Father to Son, by hand to hand, from Christ and
his Apostles, and that nothing ought to be received as Faith, but what is
proved to have been so delivered, which we prove thus.

The first Argument.
1. That is now the true Rule of (...) which was the essential means of
planting and conserving it at first. 2. But Oral and Apostolical Tradition, not
written books, was the essential means of planting and conserving it at first.
3. Therefore Oral and Apostolical Tradition, not written books, is the true
Rule of Faith.
The major is proved, because the Rule of Faith must be immutable, and the same
in all Ages, as the Faith it self is.

The minor is proved, because the first Gospel was not written till eight years
after the death of Christ, or thereabouts; in which space the Apostles had
preached, and planted the Faith of Christ in many Nations, over almost all the
world. Add to this, that many Ages were passed before all the books of
Scripture were dispersed and accepted for Canonical by the whole Church; so
that when any difference arose in points of Faith among the Christians of the
first Age, they were not to enquire what had been written* ^u^ whether the
Apostles had (...).

A second Argument.
1. That is the true Rule of Faith, by which we may infallibly be assured, both
what Doctrines Christ and his Apostles taught, and what books they wrote, and
without which we can never be infallibly assured of those things. 2. But by
Apostolical Tradition we may infallibly be assured, both what Doctrines Christ
and his Apostles taught, and what books they wrote, and by no other means. 3.
Therefore Apostolical Tradition is the true Rule of Faith.
The major is manifest, because in the Doctrines which Christ and his Apostles
taught, and the books which they wrote, are contained all things that are of
faith; therefore the infallible means of knowing them, is the infallible and
true rule of Faith.

The minor is proved; because a full report from whole worlds of Fathers, to
whole worlds of Sons, of what they heard and saw, is altogether infallible,
since sensible evidence in a world of eyewitnesses, unanimously concurring, is
altogether infallible, how fallible soever men may be in their particulars; and
such a report, such an evidence, is Apostolical Tradition, for all the
Doctrines Christ and his Apostles taught, and all the books they wrote;
therefore infallible.

A third Argument.
1. If Christ and his Apostles have given to the Church of the first Age
[together with all points of Faith] this for the Rule of Faith, that nothing on
pain of damnation ought to be delivered for Faith, but what they had received
from them as such, then it was impossible that they should deliver any thing
for Faith to the second age, but what they had received from them as such, and
so from age to age to this time. 2. But Christ and his Apostles did give the
Church of the first age [together with all points of Faith] this for the Rule
of Faith; that nothing on pain of damnation ought to be delivered for Faith,
but what they had received from them as such. 3. Therefore it was impossible
that the Church of the first age, should deliver any thing to the Church of the
second for Faith, but what they had received as such from Christ and his
Apostles, or consequently, that they should err in Faith.
The major is proved; because to make her deliver more for Faith then she had
received in this supposition, the whole Church must either have forgotten what
she had been taught from her infancy in matters of salvation, and damnation,
which is impossible in a whole world of ear and eye-witness^s, as has been
showed; or else the whole Church must have so far broken with reason, which is
the very nature of man, as to conspire in a notorious lie to damn her self, and
her posterity, by saying she has received such or such a point for Faith,
which in her own conscience she knew she had not so received; and this is more
impossible then the former, even as impossible, as for men not to be men; as
shall be showed in the next argument.

The minor is proved by these positive texts of Scripture.

Therefore Brethren stand ye fast, and hold the Traditions which ye have
learned, whether by word, or by our Epistle, 2 These. 2. 15. Th^se things which
ye have been taught, and heard, and seen i^ me, those do ye, Phil. 4. So we
have preached, and so ye have believed, 1 Cor. 14. 15. How shall they believe
in whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans
10. 17. The things that thou have heard of me before many witnesses, the same
commend thou to faithful men which shall be fit to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.
2. If any man shall preach otherwise then ye have received, let him be
Anathema, Gal. 1. 9. Although we, or an Angel from heaven preach to you,
besides that which we have preached to you, be he Anathema, Gal. 1. 8.

The last Argument for Tradition.
1. To make a whole world of wise and disinterested men break so far with their
own nature, as to conspire in a notorious lie to damn themselves, and their
posterity (which is the only means remaining to make an Apostolical Tradition
fallible) such a force of hopes or fears must fall upon them all at once, as
may be stronger then nature in them. 2. But such a force of hopes or fears can
never fall on the whole world or Church at once, which is dispersed over all
Nations. 3. Therefore it is impossible for the whole world, or Church at once,
to conspire in such a lie, or consequently to err in Faith.
It Is the assurance of this impossibility that moves the Church of the present
age to resolve her Faith and Doctrines into the precedent age, and so from age
to age, from sons to fathers, up to the mouth of Christ and his Apostles
teaching it, saying; We believe it, because we have received it.

But if we refer the whole trial of Faith to the arbitrament of Scripture, I
see nothing more evident, then that this one Argument ad hominem gives the
cause into our hands, since it clearly proves either many controverted
Catholic Doctrines are sufficiently contained in Sripture, or many Protestant
ones are not: and thus I prove my discourse.

ALl Protestant Tenets (say you) are sufficiently contained in Scripture; but
many Catholic Doctrines (say I) denied by Protestants, are as evident in
Scripture, as diverse Protestant Tenets; therefore many Catholic Doctrines
denied by Protestants are sufficiently contained in Scripture.

He that has hardiness enough to deny this conclusion, let him compare the
texts that recommend the Churches authority in deciding controversies, and
expounding Articles of Faith, with those that support the Protestant private
spirit, or particular judgment of discretion; let him compare the places that
favor Priestly absolution, with those on which they ground the necessity (not
to stand upon the lawfulness) of Infant Baptism; let him compare the passages
of the Bible for the Real presence of our Saviors body in the Eucharist, for
the primacy of S. Peter, for the authority of Apostolical Traditions, though
unwritten, with whatever he can cite, to prove the three distinct persons in
the B. Trinity, the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, the
procession of the Holy Ghost from both; the obligation of Sunday instead of the
Sabbath, so expressly commanded in the Moral Law; and when he has turned over
all his Bible as often as he pleases, I shall offer him only this request,
either to admit the argument, or teach me to answer it.

The same Syllogism may with equal evidence be applied to the negative, as well
as positive doctrines, on either side.

All Catholic points denied by Protestants, are sufficiently (say you)
condemned in Scripture: But many points embraced by Protestants, are as clearly
(say I) condemned in Scripture, as diverse they deny in opposition to
Catholics; therefore many points imbr^c'd by Protestants, are sufficiently
condemned in Scripture.

Where does the Bible so plainly forbid Prayer for the Dead, as this darling
error and fundamental principle of Protestancy, that any one, however
ignorant, however unstable, ought to read the holy Scriptures, and unappealably
judge of their sense by his private interpretation? where is it so plainly
forbidden to adore Christ in what place soever we believe him to be really
present, as it is to work upon the Saturday? Thus if the Bible be constituted
sole Rule of Religion, Protestants clearly can neither condemn the Catholic,
nor justify their own.

Testimonies of Antiquity for Tradition.
IN the second age Irenaeus. If the Fathers had left us no Scripture at all,
ought we not to follow the order of Traditions l. 3. c. 4.

In the third age Tertullian. What I believe I reo^ived from the present
Church, the present Church from the Primitive, that from the Apostles, the
Apostles from Christ. l. de praescrip. c. 21. 37.

In the same age S. Cyprian. Know that in offering the Chalice (viz. by
mingling water with Wine) we are admonished to observe our Lords Tradition.

In the same age Origin. In our understanding Scripture, we must not depart
from the first Ecclesiastical Tradition. Tract. 27. in c. 23. S. Matthaei.

In the fourth age S. Athanasius. This Doctrine we have demonstrated to have
been delivered from hand to hand, by Fathers to Sons, l. 1. de decret. Council.
Niceni.

In the same age S. Chrysostom. It is evident that the Apostles did not
deliver all things by writing, but many things without, and these be as worthy
credit as the others. On 2 These. 2.

In the same age Epiphanius. We must use Traditions, for the Scriptures have
not all things. Haeres. 61.

In the fifth age S. Augustine: The Apostles commanded nothing hereof
(Rebaptization) but that custom which was opposed against Cyprian in it, is to
be believed to proceed from their Tradition, as many things are which the whole
Church holds, and are therefore well believed to be commanded by the Apostles,
though not written. l. 5. de baptism. c 23.

The second Nicene Council defines thus: Whoever shall dare to think otherwise,
or teach after the custom of wicked Heretics, to violate Ecclesiastical
Traditions, let him be Anathema. Act. 7. p. 686. Anno Dom. 781.

The Council of Sens thus. It is a dangerous thing to be in that error, that
nothing ought to be admitted which is not in Scripture; for many things were
delivered from Christ to posterity by the hands of the Apostles, from mouth to
mouth, etc. which are to be held without all dubitation. Decret. 5.

Objections solved.
Ob. YOu have made frustrate the Commandment of God for your Tradition, S.
Mat. c. 15. v. 4. Beware lest any man deceive you by vain fallacy, according to
the traditions of men, Col. 2.

Answ. These texts are both against the vain Traditions of private men, not
against Apostolical Traditions.

Ob. There is no better way to decide controversies, then by Scripture.

Answ. Then by Scripture expounded by the Church, and according to the rule of
Apostolical tradition, I grant: then by Scripture according to the dead
letter, or expounded by the private spirit, I deny. For so (as Tertullian
says) there is no good got by disputing out of the texts of Scripture, but
either to make a man sick or mad. De praescript. c. 19.

Ob. All Scripture divinely inspired is profitable for teaching, for arguing,
for reproving, and for instructing in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, instructed to every good work, 1 Timothy 3. 16, 17. therefore Traditions
are not necessary.

Answ. S. Paul speaks only there of the old Scripture, which Timothy had known
from his childhood, (when little, if any, of the new could be written) as is
plain by the precedent verse, which we acknowledge to be profitable for all
those uses, but not sufficient; neither will any more follow out of that text,
if understood of the new Scriptures: so that your consequence is vain, and of
no force.

Ob. If any one shall add to those, God shall add to him the plagues written in
this Book, Apoc. 22. 18, 19. Therefore it is not lawful to add Traditions.

Answ. It follows immediately, And if any one shall diminish from the words of
this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, verse. 19.
By which S. John evidently restrains that text to the book of his own
Prophecies only; which is not the whole rule of faith, and therefore by that
you cannot exclude either the rest of the Scriptures or Apostolical Traditions
from that Rule.

Ob. We may have a certain knowledge of all things necessary to salvation, by
the Bible, or written Word only.

Answ. No* we cannot; for there have been, are and will be infinite disputes
about that to the worlds end, as well what books are canonical and what not,
as what the true sense and meaning is of every verse and chapter. Nor can we
ever be infallibly assured of either, but by means of Apostolical Tradition:
so that if this be interrupted, and have failed for any one whole age together
(as Protestants pretend it did for many) the whole Bible, for ought we know,
might in that space be changed and corrupted: nor can the contrary ever be
evinced, without new revelation from God; the dead letter cannot speak for it
self.

Ob. Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of his Disciples, which are
not written in this book, but those are written, that you may believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that believing, you may have life in his
name, S. John 20. 30, 31. Therefore S. John's Gospel contains all things
necessary to salvation.

Answ. I deny your consequence; for S. John omitted many things of great
moment, as our Lords Prayer, and his last Supper, which are both necessary to
be believed. And though he say, These things are written that we may believe,
and have life, he says not that these things only were written, or are
sufficient for that purpose, which is the thing in question; so that he
excludes not the rest of the Gospells nor Apostollical Traditions. And it is no
unusual thing in Scripture to ascribe the whole effect to that which is but the
cause in part; thus Christ promises beatitude to every single Christian
virtue, S. Matthew. 5. and S. Paul, salvation to every one that shall call on the
name of our Lord, or confess with his mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe that
God has raised him from the dead. Rom: 10. 4. 9, 10. yet more then this is
requisite to salvation.

Ob. S. Luke tells us, He has written of all those things which Jesus did and
taught. Acts. 1: 1. Therefore all things necessary to salvation, are contained
in his Gospel.

Answ. He writ of all the principal passages of his life and death, I grant,
(and that was the whole scope or intent of the Evangelists) of all absolutely
which he did and taught, I deny; for in the same chapter he tells us, that
during the forty days which Christ remained with them after his Resurrection,
he often appeared to them, instructing them in the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, very few of which instructions are mentioned by S. Luke, nor
does he or any other of the Evangelists say any thing in their Gospels of the
coming of the Holy Ghost, or of the things by him revealed to the Church, which
were great and many, according to that; I have many things to say to you, but
you cannot now bear them, but when the spirit of truth comes he shall teach
you all truth, etc. and the things that are to come he shall show you, S. John
16. 12, 13, 14. Add to this, That, if all things which Jesus taught and did,
should be written, the whole world would not contain the Books, S. John c. 21.
v. last. therefore your consequence is false, and that saying of S. Luke is to
be limited.

Ob. At least the whole Bible contains all things necessary to salvation,
either for belief or practice for all forts of men whatsoever, and that
explicitly and plainly. Therefore the Bible is the rule of faith.

Answ. I deny both antecedent, and consequence. The three Creeds are not there;
the four first Councels are not there; there is nothing expressly prohibiting
Poligamy or Rebaptization, nor expressly affirming three distinct Persons in one
divine nature, or the Sons Consubstantiality to the Father, or the procession
of the H. Ghost from both, or that the H. Ghost is God, or for the necessity of
Infant* Baptism, or for changing the Saturday into Sunday, etc. all which
notwithstanding are necessary to be known for the whole Church, and to be
believed by us in particular (as Protestants will acknowledge) if they be once
sufficiently proposed to us by the Church. Nor is it sufficient, we believe all
the Bible, unless we also believe it in the true sense, and be able to confute
all Heresie^ out of it, (I speak of the whole Church) which she can never do,
without the Rule of Apostolical Tradition, in any of the points forementioned.

Ob. Doubtless for speculative points of Christian doctrine, Books are a safer
and more infallible way, or rule, ^hen orall Tradition.

Answ. You are mistaken; Books are infinitely more liable to casualties, and
corruptions, then Traditions, as well by reason of the variety of languages
into which they are translated, as the diversity of Translations; scarce any
two Editions agreeing, but all pretending one to mend the other; besides the
multiplicity of Copies and Copists, with the equivocation, and uncertainty of
dead, and written words, if captiously wrested, or literally insisted on, who
can prove any one Copy of the Bible to be infallible, or uncorrupted, (those
that were written by the Apostles own hands, we have not) or who can convince,
that any one text of the Bible can have no other sense or meaning, then what is
convenient for his purpose, insisting only on the dead Letter? all which
dangers and difficulties are avoided by relying on Apostolical Tradition,
which binds men under pain of damnation, to deliver nothing for faith, but
what they have received as such by hand to hand from age to age, and in the
same sense in which they have received it. Think me not foolish (says S.
Augustine) for using these terms; for I have so learned these things by
Tradition, neither dare I deliver them to thee any other way, then as I have
received them. l. de utilit. cred. c. 3.

As to your difficulty of speculative points, I answer, That the whole frame of
necessary points of Christian doctrine was in a manner made sensible and
visible by the external and uniform practice of the Church. The incarnation
and all the mysteries thereof, by the holy images of Christ erected in all
sacred places; the passion by the sign of the Cross used in the Sacraments,
and set up in Churches. The death of Christ by the unbloudy sacrifice of the
Mass, which is a lively commemoration of it. The Trinity and Unity, by doing
all things in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
etc. Now who can doubt, but that orall tradition thus seconded by the outward
and uniform practice of the whole world, is a much safer and more infallible
rule, for conserving revealed veritles, then books, or dead letters, which
cannot explicate themselves.

Ob. If all things necessary to salvation be not contained in the whole Bible,
how shall a man ever come to know, what is necessary to be known, either by the
whole Church in general, or by himself in particular?

Answ. For the whole Church in general, she is obliged to know all timely
revealed verities which are necessary to the salvation of all mankind, she
being made by Christ the depository of all, and having the promise of divine
assistance to all. And for each particular man, so much only is necessary to
be believed, as is sufficiently proposed to him by the Church, and her
Ministers, for the Word of God, or would at least be so proposed, if he himself
were not in fault; all which we may easily come to know, by means of
Apostolical tradition, without which we can have no infallible assurance of any
point of Christian doctrine.

Ob. You dance in a vicious circle, proving the Scripture and the Churches
infallibility by Apostolical tradition, and tradition by the Scripture and the
Churches infallibility.

Answ. No: We go on by a right rule toward heaven. We prove indeed the
Churches infallibility, and the credibility of the Scriptures by Apostolical
tradition, but that is evident of it self, and admits no other proof. When we
bring Scripture for either, we use it only as a secondary testimony, or
argument ad hominem.

ARTICLE IX. Of Schism and Heresy.
NOthing intrenching more on the rule of Faith, or the authority of the Church,
then Schism and Heresy: We shall here briefly show what they are, and who are
justly chargeable therewith.

OUr Tenet is, That not only Heresy (which is a wilful separation from the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church) b^e also Schism (which is a separation from
her government) is damnable and sacrilegious, and that most Sectaries are
guilty of both.

The Argument.
1. All such as are wilfully divided both from the doctrine and discipline of
the Catholic Church are Schismatics and Heretics, and consequently in a
damnable state. 2. But most Protestants and other Sectaries are wilfully
divided both from the doctrine and discipline of the Catholic Church. 3.
Therefore they are Schismatics and Heretics, and consequently in a damnable
state.
The major is manifest out of the very notion and definition of schism and
heresy; the sequel of it is proved thus by Scripture. A man that is an
Heretic after the first and second admonition avoid knowing that he that is
such an one is subverted and sins, being condemned by his own judgment,
Titus 3. 10. There shall be lying masters which shall bring in Sects of
perdition, and deny him that bought them, the Lord, bringing upon themselves
speedy perdition, 2 S. Pet. 2. 1. S. Jude calls them raging waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own confusion; wandering stars, to whom the storm of darkness
is reserved for ever, Epist. v. 13. I beseech you, brethren, observe these who
make schisms and scandalls contrary to the doctrine which you have been taught,
and avoid them, for such men serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly, and by kind speeches, and blessings, seduce the heart of the simple,
Romans 15. 17. Woe to the world because of scandalls, for it must needs be that
scandalls come, but notwithstanding w^e to that man by whom scandalls come, S.
Mat. 18. 7, 17. If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the
Heathen, and the Publican, S. Mat. 18. 18. If any obey not our word, do not
company with him, that he may be confounded, 2 These. 2. 14.

The Minor is proved, because Luther and his fellow Protestants divided
themselves from the communion of all Churches, therefore from the communion of
the Catholic Church, and that as well in points of doctrine, as matters of
government, as plainly appears by all we have said, and is yet confirmed,
because when they began their separation, Luther in Germany, Tyndall in England
etc. the Catholic Church was in most quiet possession of her Tenets, in
perfect peace and unity, her Doctrines and government being the very same they
had been, not only to the time of Gregory the great (as Protestants confess)
but to the very time of the Apostles, as is manifest both by the public
Liturgies, Councels, and Records of all Ages, in which no one Doctrine of
Faith, or substantial point of Discipline, then professed by the Roman
Catholic Church, and opposed by Protestants, had ever been censured and
condemned as heretical or schismatic, but all for the most part actually
designed and established against ancient heretics, as you have seen in the
Councils.

Fathers for this Point.
IN the 2. Age Irenaeus: God will judge those who make schisms in the Church,
ambitious men, who have not the honor of God before their eyes, but rather
embracing their own interests then the unity of the Church, for small and light
causes divide the great and glorious Body of Christ, etc. for in the end they
cannot make any reformation so important, as the evil of schism is
prejudicious. l. 4 c 62.

In the third age S. Cyprian: Do they think Christ is amongst them when they
are assembled out of the Church of Christ? No, though they were drawn to
torments and execution for the confession of the name of Christ* yet this
pollution is not washed away, no not with blood; this inexpiable and
inexcusable crime of schism is not purged away even by death it self. De unit.
Eccles.

In the fourth Age S. Chrysostom; There is nothing so sharply provokes the
wrath of God, as the division of the Church, insomuch that though we should
have performed all other sorts of good things, yet we shall incur a punishment
no less cruel, by dividing the unity of the Church, then those have done, who
pierced and divided Christ's own Body. In Ephesians. Hom. 11.

In the same Age Optatus; The unity of the Episcopal Chair is the prime
endowment of the Church. L. 2.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine; If any man be found separated from her (the
Church) he shall be excluded from the number of Children, neither shall ^e have
God for his Father, that would not have the Church for his Mother: and it will
nothing avail him to have rightly believed, or to have done never so many good
works without this conclusion of the sovereign good, de Symbol. ad Catechum. l
4. c. 10. And again, Whosoever has charity is assured, but as for charity, no
man transpor^eth that out of the Church, in Psalm. 21. And in another place,
Out of the Church an Heretic may have all things but salvation; he may have
the Sacraments, he may have the Faith and preach it, etc. only salvation he
cannot have, sup. gest. Emar. And to the Donatists he says, You are with us in
Baptism, in the Creed, and in the other Sacraments of the Lord, but in the
spirit of unity, in the bond of peace, and finally in the Catholic Church you
are not with us, Epist. 48.

Objections solved.
Ob. WE separated only from the Church of Rome's errors.

Answ. Yes, from her Catholic and Apostolical Doctrines: She does not err in
Faith, as has been proved. I answer therefore with S. Augustine to the
Donatists* ^ object to you the crime of schism, which you will deny, and I will
presently prove, because you do not communicate with all nations, cont. Petil.
Add, no nor with any Nation before Luther.

Ob. We refused only the Church of Rome's innovations and superstitions.

Answ. You slander. Her Discipline and Doctrines were the same then, that they
had been in all precedent ages. Did the Church perish (says S. Augustine to
the Donatists) or did she not? If she did, what Church then brought forth the
Donatists? (or the Protestants?) If she did not, what madness moved you to
separate your selves from her, on pretense of avoiding the communion of bad
men? l. 1. cont. Gaudent. c. 7. And again; We are certain no man can justly
separate himself from the communion of all Nations, (yet Martin Luther and Mr.
Tyndall did it) Epist. 48. And in another place; All separation made before the
drawing the not on the shore (at the day of judgment) is damnable, and the
sacrilege of schism, which surpasses all other crimes. L. 2. cont. Epist.
Parmen.

Ob. We did but separate from the particular Church of Rome. Therefore not from
the whole Church.

Answ. I told you in the question of the Churchs Universality in what sense the
Church of Rome is Universal or Catholic, and in what sense she is particular,
take it in which acception you will, your consequence is false, for whosoever
separates from an acknowledged tr^^ member of the Catholic Church (and such
the Church of Rome then was in her particular) he consequently separates from
the whole, and is an heretic, or schismatike.

ARTICLE X. Of the real and substantial presence of Christ's Body and Blood in
the Sacrament of the B. Eucharist.
IN this most important controversy of the B. Eucharist, or Sacrament of our
Lords Supper, our Tenet is;

1. That it is a Sacrament; a visible sign, type, figure, or symbol of the
true Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, as also of his death and passion. This is
agreed upon by all, and therefore not to be disputed. 2. That it is not an
empty sign, type, figure, or symbol only (as Sectaries pretend) but also the
very natural and substantial Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, true God and
Man, under the said outward signs and symbols of bread and wine; Which we
prove thus, against Doctor TAILOR, and his adherents.
The first Argument.
We receive in the B. Sacrament of the Eucharist the same Body which was given
and broken for us, and the same blood which was shed for the remission of our
sins.

But the body which was given, and broken for us, and the blood which was shed
for the remission of our sins, was the true natural and substantial body and
blood of Jesus Christ, and not an empty sign or symbol only of it.

Therefore we receive in the B. Sacrament of the Eucharist, the true natural
and substantial Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, and not an empty sign or
symbol only of it.

The major is proved by the plain words of the Institution. This is my Body,
S. Matthew. 26. 27. S. Mark 14. 22. This is my Body which is given for you, S.
Luke 22. 19. This is my Body which shall be delivered for you, 1 Cor. 11. 24.
This is my blood of the new Tostament, which shall be shed for many to the
remission of sins, S. Mat. 26. 28. S. Mark 14. 24. This is the chalice the new
Testament in my blood which shall be shed for you, S. Luke 22. 20. This chalice
is the new Testament in my blood, 1 Cor. 11. 25.

The minor is proved; Christ gave himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5. 26. He
entered by his own blood into the Holies, Heb. 9. 12. To say Christ gave a
fantastical body for us, or shed any other then his true natural Blood for
the remission of our sins, is the Manichean Heresy, long since condemned; nor
is it less an Heresy to say, He gave only common bread, or shed only common
wine, (being made sacred signs and symbols) for the remission of our sins.

A second Argument, proving that the words of Institution ought to be taken
literally and properly.
All those plain texts of the Gospel, which are not there expressed to be
figurative, and being literally and properly understood imply no sin or
contradiction, ought to be understood literally and properly.

But these plain texts of the Gospel, This is my body, this is my blood, S.
Math. 26. 27. 28. are not there expressed to be figurative, and being literally
and properly understood, imply no sin or contradiction.

Therefore these Affirmative texts of Scripture, This is my body, this is my
blood, ought to be understood literally and properly.

The major I take for a Rule admitted by Protestants and is proved, because
otherwise it were not possible to prov^ by Scripture, that any one text of the
Gospel ought to be taken literally and properly which our ^dversaries cannot in
their Principles allow.

The minor is also manifest for the first part, to whosoever shall peruse the
text, there is no mention of any figure in it. And the second part I prove
thus; because it was possible to Christ to verify those affirmatives in the
literal and proper sense of the words if he had so pleased, by changing the
Bread and Wine into his own Body and Blood, as our very adversaries themselves
grant, although they obstinately contest he has not done it; therefore these
affirmatives, being literally and properly understood, imply no sin or
contradiction; for sin and contradiction are not possible to Christ, who is by
essence, Truth and Sanctity.

That our adversaries grant this change possible to Christ, is proved by these
ensuing testimonies.

Luther says: What proof have they (the Sacramentaries) to prove these
propositions contradictory; Christ is in heaven, and Christ is in the Supper?
The contradiction is in their carnal imagination, not in faith, or in the Word
of God, Tom. Wittenberg. an. 1557. defens. verbi Coenae, page 388.

You hear where all Doctor Tailors pretended contradictions are, if Martin
Luther, that first and greatest light of true Protestancy, be worthy to be judge.

John Calvin says, We do not dispute what God can do, but what he will, Init.
Institut.

Jewel confesses, God is able by his omnipotent power to make Christ's Body
present without place or quantity, in his Reply against Harding, page 352.

Cranmer confesses, That Christ may be in the bread and wine, as also in the
doors that were shut, and stone of the sepulcher, in his answer to Gardner and
Smith, page 454.

Whitaker says, That Christ can make the bread his Body we grant, only show
that he will do it, and the controversy is ended, in his Answer to Reyner,
page 192.

John Fox saye^, That Christ abiding in heaven is not let, but that he may be
in the Sacrament also. Acts and Monum. page 998.

Melanct hon says, I had rather die, then affirm with the Zuinglians, that
Christ's Body can be but in one place. Epist. ad Martinum Gerolitium.

Doctor Tailor himself says, God can do what he pleases, he can change or
annihilate every creature, and alter their manner and essence; in his Book of
the real and spiritual presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, page 244.
He can indeed make a body to be a spirit, page 213. And again, Let it appear
that God has affirmed Transubstantiation, and I for my part will burn all my
arguments against it, and make public amends, page 240. Fairly promised,
Doctor, I subsume.

But he has plainly affirmed the real and substantial presence of his Body
and Blood in the Sacrament; as has been proved both from the institution and
possibility, and shall be proved from the performance, and reasonableness of it.

Therefore recall your arguments against it; together with that long
impertinent catalogue of seeming contradictions, and impossibilities, which you
have maliciously heaped together etc. merely to scandalize and turn the brain
of an unlearned Reader. Your own friends, that are Scholars, have long since
detected the nullity of them, and your own conscience tells you, that you have
drawn them all from this false supposition, That Christ's Body has situall and
local extension in the Sacrament, which you know we deny; the manner of being
is spiritual and Sacramental.

A second proof that those affirmatives, This is my Body: This is my Blood,
imply no sin or contradiction, is made from the solution of your Objections.

A third Argument.
Ma. All which Christ has plainly and expressly said in Scripture, ought to be
understood by us in the literal and proper sense of the words.

Mi. But Christ has plainly and expressly said in Scripture, that what he
instituted at his last Supper, was his true natural Body and Blood.

Cons. Therefore it ought to be understood by us in the literal and proper sense
of the words.

The major is confessed by Doctor Tailor, saying, Let it appear that God has
expressly said it, etc. and there is no more to be said in the business, all
reasons brought against it are but sophisms, page 189. and for this only
reason he concludes, the mystery of Christ God and Man, and the mystery of the
Blessed Trinity ought to be understood in the literal and proper sense of the
words, although more seeming contradictions and impossibilities are brought
against it, then against Transubstantiation, page 200, etc.

The minor is proved from the promise of Christ, thus.

Ma. The flesh which Christ gave for the life of the world, was his true
natural Body and Blood, in the literal and propersense of the words.

Mi. But Christ has plainly and expressly said in Scripture, that what he
instituted at his last Supper, was the flesh which he gave for the life of the
world.

Cons. Therefore Christ has plainly and expressly said in Scripture, that what
he instituted at his last Supper was his true and natural Body and Blood, in
the literal and proper sense of the words.

The major has been proved above by all those texts cited in the first
argument.

The minor is proved. The bread which I will give (at his last Supper) is my
flesh for the life of the world, S. John 6. 51.

Another Argument in proof of this verity.
Ma. The Body which Christ gave for us, and the Blood which he shed for the
remission of our sins, was his true natural Body and Blood, in the literal and
proper sense of the words.

Mi. But Christ has plainly and expressly said in Scripture that what he
instituted at his last Supper was the Body which he gave for us, and the Blood
which he shed for the remission of our sins.

Cons. Therefore Christ has plainly and expressly said in Scripture that what
he instituted at his last Supper was his true natural Body and Blood in the
literal and proper sense of the words.

The major is manifest, and must be granted by all, unless perhaps we may dare
to say, that mere symbols, signs and figures only of his Body and Blood were
given for us and shed for the remission of our sins, which God forbid.

The minor is proved, by the texts above cited, nor will it be tedious to
repeat them, to the conusion of our enemies.

This is my Body. This is my Blood which shall be shed for many unto the
remission of sins, S. Mat. 26 27, 28. This is my body which is given for you.
This is the chalice the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you,
S. Luke 22. 20. This is my Body which is broken for you, (so the Greek text
has it.) This chalice is the new Testament in my blood, 1 Cor. 11. 25. Broken,
that is, sacrificed, says John Calvin and Chamier on that place.

Now let Doctor Tailor at his leisure bring the Antithesis of these
Affirmatives ou^ of the mouth of Christ, viz. This is not my body: this is not
my blood: this is not my body which is given for you: this is not my blood
which is shed for you.

Or these at least, which are his very Theses. This only signifies my body:
this only signifies my blood: this is only a sacred sign, type, or figure of
my body: this is only a sacred sign, type, ^r figure of my blood: which he can
never do so long as Christ is Christ, and Gospel Gospel. These are not the
words of God, but the words of men, of Doctor Tailor, and John Calvin, what we
assert is from the mouth of Christ, the Doctor is not able to deny it; but
openly, to my best judgment, condemned himself, and his own cause, by making an
ingenious confession, that if the words of the institution be taken literally
and properly, they prove our Tenet, and therefore he endeavors to detort them
to an improper figurative sense. This is, (that is says he) This signifies,
this represents my body, what is this else but to confess the Scripture, which
is the only judge with him, to have given sentence on our side, at least in all
the principal and essential places, that appertain to this controversit? what
shall become then of his spurious doctrine, which is supported only by the
fancy of his and M. Calvin's idle brain? the Church having long since condemned
it. He is not able to produce one General Council, or the consent of any one
whole age, or yet the sentence of any ancient Father not wrested and depraved,
for his Apocripha, This only signifies my body: this only signifies my blood:
this is only a sacred sign, type, or figure of my body, etc. But we can cite
him many for our Canonical; This is my body: this is my blood. This is my body
which is given for you, etc. This is my blood which is shed for you: which
being done, I think, It is concluded, against the Manichees.

Note here for your better understanding the precedent argument as also the
words of consecration, that the Pronoun ^oc, or this (when it is made the
subject of a Proposition, in which substance is predicated of substance,
especially if the proposition be practical, and make what it signifies, as
here it does) signifies only substance indeterminately, till the predicate be
also added, to determine it to this or that particular substance, according to
that Axiom of Philosophy, the subjects are such as they are permitted to be by
their predicates; this is the literal and proper acception of the word hoc, or
this.

Secondly, the verb est, or is, signifies in its literal and proper acception
the real identity of the predicate with the subject.

Lastly, the words Corpus meum, my body, or Sanguis me^^, my blood, spoken by
Christ, or in the person of Christ, signify in their literal and proper
acception, the true natural body and blood of Christ.

By this you plainly understand the literal and proper sense of those words,
This is my body, this is my blood: that is to say, This substance contained
under the species, or outward form of bread, is my natural body. This
substance contained under the species or outward form of wine is my natural
blood. This is that which we believe it to be; and this is that which Christ
has plainly and expressly affirmed it to be, as has been proved.

Qu^re. When is this change of the bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ effected?

Answer. Immediately after the words of consecration are completed, and by
force of the words.

You reply. Doctor Tailor says, We cannot prove by any good reason, that those
words, This is my body, this is my bleud, etc. are the essential words of
consecration, and efficient of the whole change, S. Matthew. 26.

Answ. Yes we can. First, by the Churches authority, affirming it to be so. She
is a competent Judge in the case (being the Mistress of Apostolical traditions)
and better worthy our belief then D. Tailor.

Secondly, Because generally speaking in all miraculous and substantial
changes made by the Word of God, those words only are efficient of the change,
which signify the change, as appears in these in stances. Let the light be
^^d^, and the light was made: Let the firmament be th^^, etc. Young man I say
to thee arise. I will, be thou bealed, etc. and many others. Now that these are
the only words in S. Matthew, which signify the substantial and miraculous
change made in the Sacrament, is proved thus; because the precedent words, He
took bread, blessed it, brake it and gave it to his Disciples, are all
indifferent to a substantial or accidental; to a miraculous or moral change,
and therefore cannot signify or cause the change there made, but are a
disposition only to it; the following words, suppose it already made, therefore
it is most consonant to reason as well as to authority, that these words only,
should be essential to, and efficient of, such miraculous change, nor am I able
easily to guess what good meaning the Doctor had in starting this difficulty,
unless^ it were to let himself and all men loose to infidelity in this so holy
and necessary a point; for if it be altogether uncertain what the true words of
the form are, whether any of the Evangelists have delivered them to us or not;
(as this Doctor insinuates page: 67. 68. 69.) then is the Sacrament altogether
uncertain. If the words of the institution subsist not, the thing instituted
cannot subsist. If there be no true form, there can be no true Sacrament; but
it should seem he cares not, so he may prejudice the Catholic Church, though
he ruin Christianity by doing it.

A fourth Argument from Reason.
To make the signs and figures of a thing more excellent and noble then the
thing it self, is to detract from the wisdom and providence of the workman.

But Doctor Tailor makes the signs and figures of the Sacrament, more
excellent and noble then the Sacrament it self.

Therefore he detracts from the wisdom and providence of the workman, that is
to say of Christ himself, ordaining it.

The major is proved, because to make words more excellent and noble then
conceits or things; shadows, then substances; or the means more excellent and
noble then the end, were a preposterous way of working, and contrary to the
rule of true wisdom and providence.

The minor is proved, because, if the Sacrament were nothing but a sacred
sign, type, or figure only of Christ's Body and Blood (as Doctor Tailor
teaches,) then the signs and figures of the old Law were more excellent and
noble then it. The Manna for example, which was a sign or figure only of the
Sacrament, would be more excellent and noble then the Sacrament it self, as
having a more excellent manner of signifying, because that was made by Angels
ministry, and had twelve special miracles upon record belonging to it, this
has no miracle at all belonging to it in D. Tailors thredbare way, and is
composed by the hands of sinful men. It is no miracle for signs to signify.
Again the Paschal Lamb was a more timely type or figure of our Redeemer and
his passion, flesh of flesh, blood of blood, killing of killing, and that Lamb
without spot of our innocent Savior, then is their consecrated bread and wine,
if it be only a mere sign or figure, as he pretends, but in our way the case
is far different; it being the fountain of all grace and miracles, and far
excelling the types and figures of it.

A fifth Argument from Reason.
What no rational or prudent man would ever do, were great blasphemy to charge
Christ with doing.

But no rational or prudent man would ever seal or complete his last will and
testament with figurative, equivocal, and improper words.

Therefore it were great blasphemy to charge Christ with doing it.

Therefore these words, This is my Body, This is my Blood, with which Christ
sealed and completed his last will and testament, are not figurative,
equivocal, and improper, but to be taken in the literal plain and proper
sense, and consequently convince the real presence of Christ's true natural
Body and Blood under the signs.

The major is more manifest then to need proof.

The minor is proved, because that were a certain way to set his posterity at
variance about it, which no rational or prudent man would ever willingly be
guilty of.

You will tell me here perhaps to make all whole again, that Doctor Tailor
asserts the real spiritual presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament
page 7. Nay that his Body and Blood are there really, substantially,
corporally, verily and indeed, page 18. That body which was broken, that Blood
which was powered forth, page 19. That Body that was crucified the same do we
eat. ibidem. So far we all agree.

Answ. Stay, friend, not too much of agreement neither, that he asserts those
words I am not ignorant, but how he asserts the thing signified by the words,
let disinteressed Christians judge. He affirms Christ's Body to be really
present, but denies the reality of his body to be present, is not this, to be
his real Body and not to be his real Body? to be really present, and not to
be really present? He says. It is substantially present in the signs, and
consequently in the mouths of the receivers. ( He cites the Church of Englands
Catechism for it, page 8.) and yet the substance of his Body is neither in the
signs nor in their mouths, no nearer then the right hand of the Father in the
emperial heaven. Is not this again to be the substance of his Body, and not to
be the substance of his Body? to be substantially in the signs? and not to be
substantially in the signs? His true body, he assures you, that which was
given, broken, and crucified for us, is in the Sacrament corporally, verily,
and indeed, and yet indeed his true body neither is nor can be there at all. It
is in every consecrated Host, which are as many as there ^e Comunicants, and
that really, substantially, corporally, verily, and indeed; and yet the
reality, substance, and verity of his body cannot be in two places at once, no
not by Gods omnipotency, without a multitude of contradictions and grand
impossibilities; he can demonstrate it as he thinks, to common sense, and
reason. If this be not to be, and not to be in many places at once, according
to the same substance, reality, and entity; then sense is nonsense, and reason
stupidity. If this be not a gin to catch woodcocks for the Devil, then the
Devil never went a birding. If this I say, be not a list of grosser
contradictions and impossibilities (how ever smoothly patched together) then
all those seeming ones wherewith he charge us, then white is black, and good
evil, then to be, and not to be, (although affirmed of the same thing, in
respect of the same thing, and at the same time) are not contradictory.

Ob. You do not distinguish, betwixt the being of a thing, and the manner of
its being.

Answ. Yes I do; but your Doctor will not understand, that any real manner of
being, which a body has, must of necessity presuppose the real being or entity
of the said body. A thing cannot be there after any real manner, where its real
being or entity is not, for Peter to be in any place sitting or standing, in a
corruptible or incorruptible manner of being, must of necessity presuppose the
real being, or entity of Peter in that place. So Christ's body cannot be said to
be really, where the real being or entity of his body is not, nor substantially
or in a substantial manner, where the substantial being, or entity of his body,
is not etc. no nor yet spiritually, without abuse of terms, because to be any
where, even spiritually, or in a spiritual manner, without dependence on the
understanding (as Christ's body is in the Sacrament) must of necessity
presuppose, the real being, or entity of the thing, there. A man's Soul is in
his body spiritually, or in a spiritual manner of being, yet can it not be said
to be so there, longer then the real being, or entity of his Soul is in his
body; If that be driven thence by death, neither any real sign of it, as heat,
motion etc. nor your beliveing it to be there, (or all the friends he has) can
make it to be really and truly there.

You reply, the Doctor affirms Christ's body to be in the Sacrament, really,
substantially, corpoyally etc. as in a sign, figure, or symbol only.

Answ. He does indeed, by which he very grossly abuses terms, and contradicts
his own affirmatives in the very state of the question, because by this he
affirms it to be there no more, then a But of Sack is in a bush of Jvy at the
Tavern door, or the Kings head in the Picture on the sign-Post, these are
signs, figures, or symboles of Sack and the Kings head, yet who ever should
seriously and obstinatly affirm, that a But of Sack is really, substantially,
corporally, and verily in the Jvy bush, or the Kings head in the Picture on the
sign post, would worthily be esteemed to have more Sack then reason in his
head, and not much more brains, then the head upon the sign Post, yet D.
Tailor affirms the Sacrament to be the body and blood of Christ, really,
substantially, corporally, etc. although it be but a mere sacred sign or
figure of it, according to his doctrine, and this must pass for sound and
sober Christian doctrine, but not with any sound, or sober Christians.

You reply yet, that when he calls the Sacrament the body and blood of Christ
really, substantially, and corporal^y, his meaning only is, That it is a real,
substantial, and corporal sign of his body and blood, as he himself expounds
it; and therefore may be called his body and blood. The sign in Scripture is
sometimes called by the name of the thing signified. So the Rock is called
Christ. And the Rock was Christ.

Answ. This is still a very Juggle, an implicatory abuse of terms. The
Sacrament as it is a sign, figure, or symbol precisely, is not a real,
corporal, or substantial, but only a moral or artificial entity, made by the
imposition and agreement of reason, the whole reality, body and substance of
bread was presupposed to it, and nothing was added by its being made a sign,
but only a relation or order of reason. So that an artificial corporal sign is
something like a substantial shadow; that is to say, a body without body; a
substance without substance, a contradiction. His meaning therefore is, if he
dare speak it, that it is real and substantial bread and wine, and a sign
only, an artificial sign of the true body and blood of Jesus Christ, which is
notoriously false, as has and shall be proved, for after consecration it is no
longer real and substantial bread and wine, but the real and substantial body
and blood of Christ, under the outward forms of bread and wine, and in this
sense it may be truly called the body and blood of Christ, really,
substantially, corporally, verily and indeed; but not in Doctor Tailors
chymerical way.

To his instance out of Scripture, I Answer, that the sign may be, and is
sometimes called by the name of the thing signified, but not with such abusive
attributes, as he makes use of. So the Rock is called Christ, but not really,
substantially, corporally, verily and indeed, as he calls bread the body of
Christ, nor was it ever so expounded by the Church, but figuratively, and
typically only.

Ob. The true body of Christ is therein effect, that is in order to all the
effects and purposes of his death and passion, which is enough to verify his
words.

Answ. It is not; for so a counter is a pound of money, when it stands for a
pound on a table of Arithmetic; So a man's writings are his Lands in effect,
that is, in order to effects and purposes, yet no man well in his wits will
ever say a counter is a pound of money, or a man's writings his Lands, really,
substantially, corporally, verily and indeed, these are as wild expressions as
the former; causes are not their own effects, nor effects, causes, as every
young Logician can tell you. Nor is there any warrant in all the Gospel, that
a mere sign, type or figure of Christ's body and blood, should be his body in
effect, or avaliable to us in order to all the benefits and effects of his
passion, this is only gratis said by the Doctor.

Ob. You urge yet out of S. Paul, that in Christ all the fullness of the
divinity is said to dwell corporally. Therefore Christ's body, and blood may be
said to be substantially and corporally in the Sacrament, sign, or figure only
of his body and blood.

Answ. I deny your consequence; the disparity is, 1. That all the substance,
and essence of the Divinity is really and truly in Christ; whereas the
substance and essence of the Body and Blood of Christ is not at all in the
Sacrament, sign or figure, according to your doctrine. 2. That all the
substance and essence of the Divinity is in Christ hypostatically united in one
person with his humane nature, which consists of a real body and soul, and
therefore by reason of that union of the natures, and communication of their
properties, the Divinity may be truly said to dwell in him corporally. But
there is no such union of natures, or communication of properties, betwixt
Doctor Tailors Sacrament, and the Body and Blood of Christ: Therefore this
instance comes not home to the purpose.

Your last shift is (and this no better then the former) to tell us, That the
body of Christ is only in the Sacrament, really spiritually, substantially
spiritually, corporally spiritually, that is (says he) the reality, substance,
and body of Christ is in the Sacrament in the receivers spirit, by virtue of an
act of faith, by which he believes it to be there.

Answ. You still dance in the same net of contradictions. No act of faith in
the receiver can make the reality, substance, and verity of Christ's body and
blood to be there truly present, where it implies contradictions to be present,
as you affirm it does in the Sacrament. If you believe it to be substantially
and corporally, where it is impossible for his substance and body to be, you
feed your soul with a false faith. Where is it revealed to us in the Gospel,
that Christ's body is in the Sacrament by faith only? What Apostolical Tradition
have you for it? or in what country did our Savior teach it? The chapter and
verse could never yet be cited nor ever will; the land is yet unknown; it is a
mere fiction: take but off the mask from these abusive terms, which was first
made by John Calvin at Geneva, but lately furbusht up by D. Tailor, to carry on
the disguize, and you will clearly see the nakedness of his mock-Sacrament, by
the bright-shining lamp of those plain words; This is my body; this is my
blood of the new testament, which is shed for many to the remission of sins, S.
Matthew. 26. 27, 28. The whole coat, or rather cloak, which he has made for this
divine and holy Body; or to say better, for his own deceiptful heresy, is
better in the trimming, then the stuff, which argues him to be but a
fallacious and superficial workman. Nor has he made it after the true
Protestant but rather after the true Presbyter cut. Bishop Andrews has given
his Prelatique Protestants a much better measure of the real presence, but yet
not true in all things neither.

The rest of your eloquent and learned Tailors Arguments you shall find
unstitcht in the solution of Objections; Pardon this freedom of expression; for
I truly love his person, though unknown, and honor his great literature,
looking on him as the very Hector of his Party, and doubtless,

-- Si Pergama dextra
Defendi possent, etiam hac defensa suissent.
Nothing but the badness of so ill a cause could have disparaged him.
Nevertheless, I cannot choose but hate and slight his Doctrines, as a mere idle
dream, dishonorable to God, and his Church, and destructive to poor ignorant
souls. But all this only obiter, and by occasion as it relates to D. Tailor.

My design was not in this Work to oppose any man in particular, but to
establish Catholic verities, and impugn heresies in general, by drawing a
compendious sum of both. Leaving him therefore to his more learned Adversaries,
(the Disciples of renowned Bellarmine) whom he by name has challenged into the
lists; I now pursue my Method.

Fathers for the real and substantial presence of Christ's Body and Blood in
the Sacrament.
In the second Age Justin Martyr; As Jesus Christ incarnate had flesh and blood
for our salvation, so are we taught, that the Eucharist is the flesh and blood
of the same Jesus incarnate. Apolog. 2. ad Antoninum.

In the third Age S. Cyprian; The bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples,
being changed not in shape, but in nature, by the omnipotency of the word is
made flesh. Sermon* de Coena Dom.

In the same Age Origin; Then (in the old Law) the Manna was meat in an
Aenigma, but now the flesh of God is meat in specie, as himself says, My flesh
is meat indeed. Homil. 7. in Levit.

In the same Age Tertullian; The bread taken and distributed to his Disciples
he made his body. l. 4. cont. M^rcion. c. 40.

In the fourth Age S. Ambrose; Before it be consecrated it is but bread, but
when the words of consecration come it is the body of Christ. l. 4. de
Sacrament. c. 5.

In the same Age Optatus Melevitanus; What else is the altar but the seat of
Christ's body? You have broken the chalices, the bearers of Christ's blood. 6.
cont. Parmen.

In, the same Age S. Gregory Nyssen; We truly believe, even by the Word of
God, that the sanctified bread is changed into the body of God the Word. Orat.
Catechis. c. 37.

In the same Age S. Chrysostom; He that sits above with his Father, even in
the same instant of time is touched by the hands of all, and gives himself to
all such as are willing to receive him, etc. Whereas Christ leaving his flesh
to us, yet ascending to heaven, there also he has it. L. de Sacerdotio.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine; How David could be carried in his own hands we
find not, but in Christ we do, for he was carried in his own hands, when,
giving his body, he said, This is my body: For then he carried that body in
his own hands. In Psalm. 33. concione 1.

The first Nicene Council has defined, the Lamb of God to be placed on the
sacred table, and to be sacrificed unbloudily by the Priests, and that
receiving his sacred Body and Blood, we must believe them to be signs of our
resurrection. l. 3. Decret. de divina mensa, an. 325.

It defined also, that Deacons who have no power to offer sacrifice, ought not
to give the Body and Blood of Christ to Priests who have that power. Can. 14.
The Councils above cited will show you more.

Objections from Scripture solved.
Ob. The pronoune hoc, or this, in that proposition, This is my body, signifies
determinately bread, and therefore cannot but make a figurative proposition,
for bread is not the body of Christ.

Answ. I deny your antecedent, it signifies of it self only substance, without
determinating either bread or body till it be determined by the words
following, to signify and be the body of Christ, the subject of any
proposition is such as it is permitted to be by the predicate. For example,
when I say, this, or this is, as yet the word ( this) signifies nothing
determinately, but when I say, this is paper, this is ink, this is a good hand;
now it is determinated to signify, paper, ink, a good hand; and not till now,
wherefore your consequence is also false, Christ did not say, this bread is my
body, but, this (that is the substance contained under these accidents) is my
body, which is true in the literal and proper sense of the words.

Ob. If the word hoc, or this, do not signify, and demonstrate bread, the
proposition is identicall, and nugatory, and signifies no more, then my body is
my body, ergo.

Answ. I deny your antecedent, there is an accidental difference betwixt the
subject and the predicate in the manner of signifying, which suffices to a
formal predication.

Ob. The pronoune demonstrative hoc, or this, must needs demonstrate something
then present, when it is uttered, ergo.

Answ. I deny your antecedent, speaking of any determinate thing, things past,
and to come, may be demonstrated as well as things present; for example, This
is my commandment, that you love one another, Joan. 15. there, this,
demonstrats a thing to come; So likewise in our case the demonstrative this,
when all the words are uttered, demonstrates the body of Christ which is made
by the words; if you will not credit me, believe Chamier a grand
Sacramentarian, it is false (says he) even in the pronoune or adverbe
demonstrative, that a present thing is required, for that is not always, l.
10. de Eucharist. c. 18.

Ob. Those words of S. Luke, 22. 20. This is the chalice, the new testament in
my blood, etc. which (chalice) shall be shed for you, cannot be literal but
figurative, ergo.

Answ. We deny not all figures in the mystery, but only such as exclude the
verity of Christ's true and natural body and blood; there is a figure in the
word, chalice, not excluding but asserting the verity of our Saviors true, and
natural blood; It is the thing containing for the thing contained, and ought to
be expounded by the words of S. Matthew, which are plain, literal, and proper,
according to that generally received rule; That hard and figurative places of
Scripture are to be expounded by plain and easy ones. Add to this, that the
thing signified to be shed is evidently the same in both, to wit the true and
natural blood of Christ, though the manner of expressing it be diverse, literal
in S. Matthew, and figurative in S. Luke. So when we say, I drink sack and I
drink a cup of sack or in sack, the thing signified to be drunk, is evidently
the same in both, to wit sack, though the manner of signifying it be diverse.

Ob. The Sacrament, ofter consecration, is some times called bread. Therefore
it is bread still.

Answ. I grant your ant^cedent, but deny your consequence. It is sometimes
called bread, because it was made of bread, and still retains the outward
form of bread, though it be now the body of Christ. So Eve when she was now a
woman is called a Bone, Genes* 2. because God made her of a Rib of Adam. And so
a Serpent is called a Rod, because it was made of a Rod. Aarons Rod eat up all
the Magicians Rods, Exodus 7.

Ob. It is the spirit, that quickens, the flesh profits nothing, Jo. 6.
Therefore Christ did not give his flesh in the Sacrament.

Answ. I distinguish your antecedent, The flesh profits nothing, given or eaten
in a fleshly and corporal manner, or in dead morsels, as the Capharnaites
grossly understood he meant to give it them, I grant; Given or eaten in a
spiritual and Sacramental manner, as Christ gave it his disciples and we eat
it, I deny; let S. Augustine expound this text; O my good master (says he) how
does the flesh profit nothing seeing thou say, unless one shall eat my flesh
and drink my blood he shall have no life in him, does life profit nothing? etc.
what is this then, it profits nothing, but as they understood it, for they so
understood flesh as it is borne in the carcass, or sold in the shambles, not
as it is quickened with the spirit. Thus he on this very place. And again, They
thought our Lord would cut certain pieces of his body and give it them, and
they said, this is a hard speech; but they themselves were hard, not the
speech, etc. in Psalm. 98.

Ob. The Sacrament is a memorial or memory of Christ, do this for a
commemoration of me, S. Lu: 22. 19. Therefore Christ is not really present in
it, for memory or commemoration is made of things absent, not present.

Answ. What Christ would have us commemorate S. Paul has taught us, saying: As
often as ye shall eat this bread and drink the chalice ye shall d^clare the
death of our Lord until he come, 1. Cor: 11. 26. wherefore, granting your
antecedent, I deny your consequence, his death is now 1600. years since and
upward; and the same thing in one time or circumstance may be a representation
or memory of it self, as in another. His body as unbloodily offered in the
Sacrament, is a memory of it self as bloodily offered and dying on the Cross.

Ob. His death was future and to come when he ordained the Sacrament at his
last Supper. Therefore it could not then be a memory of his death.

Answ. I grant your whole argument, the words, Do this for a commemoration of
me, immediately follow the words of Consecration, and make this sense,
consecrate ye bread and wine into my body and blood, as I have here done, in
memory of my death; now it is certain, he did not command his Apostles to
consecrate then, nor did they ever do it till after his death though he then
ordained the sacrifice, and gave them power to do it. The Sacrament is not only
a memory of his death, but also of his life, and in this sense, those words
might be fulfilled at the last Supper.

Ob. Christ calls the cup the fruit of the vine, therefore it is common wine,
and not his blood.

Answ. I grant your antecedent, but deny your consequence. for the words, I
will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, S. Lu. 22. 18. relate to the legal
cup, and are set immediately after the division of that, before the Sacramental
cup was consecrated, and therefore plainly prove the sacramental cup not to be
the fruit of any earthly vine. If you reply, that in S. Matthew they relate to
the sacramental cup, and are set immediately after the division of it. I say,
by the fruit of the vine, is there signified a celestial fruit, and of a
heavenly vine; Such as was to be drunk by them in the kingdom of his Father,
there is no Vintners wine, nor are you ignorant who said, I am the vine.

Ob. He that eats my flesh has life everlasting, S. Jo. 6. 54. Therefore the
reprobate, according to your sense, shall have life everlasting, for they eat
his flesh in your opinion.

Answ. I distinguish your antecedent; He that eats it worthily, that is, with
worthy preparation, I grant. He that eats it unworthily, as the wicked do, I
deny your antecedent, and consequence also; it is the Apostles own distinction,
For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself,
1. Cor, 11. 28.

Ob. Not as your Fathers did eat Manna and died, he that eats this bread
shall live for ever. S. Jo. 6. 58. Therefore no man can eat the bread there
spoken of unworthily, otherways there would be no difference betwixt it and
the Manna, for such as eat the Manna worthily had life everlasting.

Answ. The disparity is evident, and consists in this, that the principal
effect of the Manna, as sacramental, was but a temporal nourishment toward
arriving to the land of Promise, even in those who took it worthily, whereas
the B. Sacrament of the Eucharist really contains and exhibits the grace it
signifies in order to eternal life: besides the words mortui sunt, import not
only a bare temporal death, but such as implied an exclusion from ever setting
foot on the land of promise.

Ob. Christ affirmed bread to be his Body.

Answ. No; he affirmed that which had been bread to be changed into his Body.

Ob. What Christ took, he gave; But he took bread into his hands etc. Therefore
he gave bread.

Answ. I distinguish your major: What he took, he gave; unchanged, or in the
same manner he took it I deny: What he took he gave changed, and made his
Body, I grant* and so agreeing he took bread, I deny your consequence: It is as
fallacious a^ to say, What I bought, I eat; but I bought raw flesh, Therefore I
eat raw flesh. The kitchen-boy will tell you where the fallacy lies.

Ob. The Sacrament is as plainly affirmed to be bread, and that three several
times in one Epistle, 1 Cor. 10, 11. as it is affirmed to be the Body of Christ
in the three Gospells. Therefore the balance is equal in respect of Scripture.
Ergo.

Answ. You will play at small game, rather then not be fencing against the
truth; if this were so as you pretend, then nothing at all could ever be proved
touching this point, according to your grounds, who will admit no other Judge
or Rule then Scripture only; and so the mystery were quite destroid, and
brought to a non liquet; but your antecedent is false, for though S. Paul
thrice calls it Bread, yet he no where determines it to be natural or earthly
bread, but the contrary. The bread (says he) which we break, is it not the
participation of the body of our Lord? 1. Cor. 10. 16. Let a man prove himself,
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup; for he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Judgment to himself, not discerning the body
of our Lord. v. 28. 29.

Natural and common bread is not a participation of the body of Christ, it
requires no such examine of our selves to a worthy eating of it, nor can we be
damned for not discerning the Body of our Lord in it, where it* is not. So that
the very circumstance of the text, determines the bread there spoken of to be
that Heavenly bread promised in the sixth of S. John. That bread which Paul
tells you Christ took and made his body, saying, This is my body which shall be
delivered for you, in the same, 6. v. 24. Therefore the balance is far from
being equal; where the dispute is, what it is Christ instituted; no other
places whatsoever can counterbalance those of the institution, it is partial,
and irrational, to say they can.

Ob Christ says, This is my body which is broken for you (so the Greek text
runs) 1. Cor. 11. Therefore he did not give his true natural Body in the
Sacrament, because that would not be there naturally broken.

Answ. I grant your antecedent, but deny your consequence; and for proof I
answer, that though his natural body be there, yet the manner of its being is
spiritual and sacramental, and the manner of its breaking follows the manner of
its being. The Sacrament is broken naturally and properly, according to the
species or accidents of bread, but the body of Christ contained under them is
broken only by accident, improperly, and sacramentally. His body is there
broken in the sign, not in the substance, and this suffices to represent and
signify its natural and proper breaking on the Cross.

Ob. Our Fathers did all eat the same spiritual food and drunk the same
spiritual drink, 1. Cor* 10. 3. and S. Austin says, as the Fathers did eat
Christ's body, so do we under a diverse Sacrament, tract. 26. In Johan. But they
only eat and drunk a figure of his Body and Blood, not the very thing it self.
Therefore we eat and drink no more.

Answ. The Apostle speaks there only of the Jews, and says, they compared
among themselves, did all eat of one bread, and drink of one rock, which was a
figure of Christ, he does not say they all eat the same spiritual meat, or
drunk the same sprituall drink with us (as your objection would pretend) there
is no such word in the text. That which we eat and drink was not instituted in
their days. They eat and drunk the figures and effects only, we the things
figured. The law had but a figure of the good things to come, not the very
image of things. Heb. 10. 1. boggle not at the word, image, for it is the proper
title of Christ, who is the image of God, 2. Cor. 44. It excludes not the
verity of his divine, or humane nature. He is the very image of God in both,
the grand image or word, by which all things were made. S. Jo. 1. besides, all
things happened to them in a figure, but to us in verity. To S. Augustines
words, I Answer, they infer but a similitude, not an identity betwixt the
Fathers and our eatnig Christ's body: They eat it in effect, by eating the
figure only, we eat it in the verity of the thing it self, by eating both the
figure, and the thing figured; wherefore, granting your minor, I deny your
consequence. Besides S. Austin expressly names diverse Sacraments, though both
seem bread, so that his meaning concludes somewhat more then bread in our
Sacrament.

Ob. Whatsoever enters into the mo^th g^^th into the b^lly and is cast forth
into the draught, S. Math. 15. 17. Therefore the Sacrament is not the true body
of Christ, but only a figure of it.

Answ. Christ speaks there only of what goes into the mouth after a visible and
corporeal manner, which ^enders the consequence absurd; His body in the
Sacrament has an invisible and Spiritual manner of being, and is not subject
to any intrinsecal alteration, and therefore cannot be changed into draught, as
you impiously imagine, and if it could be sent forth that way in some possible
case, that would not prejudice the dignity of his person, or reality of his
presence in the Sacrament, no more then did the old Heathens blasphemous
suppositions of his being eaten by a Bear, or some other wild beast* by which
they sought* to infirm the verity of ^is Incarnation; as you do of his real
presence: but all in vain.

Ob. Vnless^ I g^e hence the Comforter shall not come unto you, S. Jo. 16. 7.
The poor you have always with you, but me you have not always* S. Math. 26.
11.

Answ. He speaks there only of his withdrawing his corporeal, and visible
presence from his Church, which hinders not, but that he may be always with
her in a spiritual, invisible and sacramental manner.

Ob. We read the verb is, often put for signifies in holy Scripture, as appears
by all these places. The seed is the word, the field is the world; the rock is
Christ, I am the door, I am the vine, my Father is the husbandman, I am the
way; Sara and Agar are the two testaments etc. Therefore is in this
proposition, This is my body, may well be taken, for signifies.

Answ. I grant your antecedent, but deny your consequence, the disparity is,
that in all those instances brought for proof of your antecedent, different and
disparate natures are affirmed of one another, which cannot be identified, and
therefore must of necessity be figuratively understood, or else the
propositions will be false; But when Christ said This is my body, he did not
affirm one disparate of another, as has been proved, the substance contained
under those accidents, and signified by the word, this, is really identified,
and the same thing with his body, and therefore may, and ought to be understood
in the literal and proper sense of the words.

But as we look nearer upon the places, we shall discern in the first examples
an evident explication of a parable, in the later property and signifying, for
the sense is not, I signify a vine, or a door, etc. but I truly am the vine
of life, door of heaven etc. and the last of all is purely an interpretation
of an Allegory.

Objections out of Fathers solved.
Ob. TErtullian says on those words, The flesh profits nothing, S. Jo. 6. that
is, it profits nothing to give life, d^ resurrect. car. ^. 37.

Answ. His meaning only is, that it profits nothing, if received without faith
and preparation, but if eaten worthily, so it profits much. He that eats my
flesh has life everlasting, S. Jo. 6. 54. Tertullian denies not this, much
less does he deny it, to be Christ's true flesh.

Ob. S. Athanasins says, the things that he speaks are not carnal, but
spiritual, for to how many might his body suffice for meat etc?

Answ. The manner of their being is not carnal but spiritual, we grant, and
this is all he intends, which excludes not the reality, and true substance of
his body and blood from being there. And though Christ's body, if eaten in a
carnal and bodily manner, like other common meats, could suffice but to a few
for food, yet eaten in a spiritual and sacramental manner, it may and does
suffice for all the faithful.

Ob. Origin says, if we understand those words, unless ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, etc, Jo. 6. literally the letter kills, in Levit. cap. 10.
Homil. 7.

Answ. If we understand it literally touching the manner of being or eating
which the flesh eaten has in the Sacrament, it kills, true; for that is
spiritual, and sacramental. If we understand it literally, touching the verity
and substance of the flesh eaten, I deny it kills; nor does he affirm it. So
it gives life, as has been proved.

Ob. Origin in ^. 5. Math* says, that the Sacrament, according to that which
it has material, is cast forth into the draught, ergo.

Answ. By that which it has material, he means only the outward forms, or
accidents of bread, which is not against us. If you reply, the accidents of
bread cannot be changed into our substance or nourish us. Therefore it can not
be Origens meaning, that they only are cast forth into the draught. I deny your
antecedent, because the accidents of bread have still the same nature they had
before, and therefore as they could naturally be corrupted and changed into our
nourishment, whilst they were in the substance, so likewise they may now, and
because the quantity has by force of the miracle of consecration obtained the
property of substance, by being it self without a subject, and made the
subject of all the other accidents, it may now be changed both into substance
and quantity: or how can you prove, but he, who miraculously changed the
substance of the bread into his own body, does also miraculously, at the
instant when the accidents are changed, supply substance again to them, by
means whereof, the mutation, and nutrition, may be natural?

Ob. S. Augustine says, the Sacrament is after a manner the body and blood of
Christ, Epist. 23.

Answ. That is after a spiritual, and saeramental manner, (yet real and
substantial) not after a visible, corporeal, or carnal manner. So he says,
that place, (unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood
etc,) seems to command a horrible crime (l. de doct. Christ. c. 26) viz. If we
understand it to be eaten in a visible and carnal manner as we eat other common
flesh, but we understand it not so, as you have often been told. And for the
verity of the thing done, S. Augustine is clearly on our side. We receive
(says he) with faithful heart and mouth (mark the word mouth) the Mediator of
God and men, man Christ Jesus, giving us his body to be eaten, and his blood to
be drunk, though it seem more horrible to eat man's flesh then to kill, and to
drink man's blood (viz. in a visible and carnal manner) then to shed it, l. 2.
cont. adversar. leg. and. Prophet. c. 9 and it is to be observed, that S. Aug.
in explicating this Sacrament often applies his speech to the Church, the
mistical body of Christ.

Ob. S. Augustine brings in Christ himself saying, That which I have spoken,
understand ye spiritually, you shall not eat this body which you see, I have
commended a Sacrament to you, which being spiritually understood will give you
life, in Psalm. 98.

Answ. By this body which you see, He understands his visible body, or his body
in a visible manner of being, that he affirms they were not to eat, and so do
we; but the same body being in a spiritual and invisible manner in the
Sacrament they were to eat. Christ had commanded it. Take, eat, this is my
body, so it is said, that flesh and blood shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, that is, flesh and blood in the state of corruption and mortality shall
not, but the same flesh and blood, having put on incorruption, and inmortality,
shall.

Ob, S. Augustine says, he that disagrees from Christ (viz. by sin) neither
eats his flesh, nor drinks his blood, though to his own damnation be daily
receive the Sacrament of so great a thing, cited by S. Prosp. Sent. 339.
Therefore the body of Christ is not really and substantially in the Sacrament,
but by faith only and to the worthy receiver.

Answ. S. Augustine means only, that such an one does not eat his flesh or
drink his blood effectually, that is, in order to the effects of grace and
life, as worthy receivers do, not that his flesh and blood are not really and
orally received by him.

Ob. S. Augustine and Rib^ra say that the sign or figure is wont sometimes in
Scripture to be called by the name of the thing signified or figured. Therefore
though the Sacrament be called the body of Christ, it is not really his body,
but a sign or figure only of it.

Answ. I admit your antecedent, and in this they say no more, then that some
places in Scripture are figurative, which we willingly grant, but not all,
where fore I deny your consequence, the instances they being are all plainly
figurative.

Ob. The Fathers often call the Sacrament, a sign, type, figure, or symbol.

Answ. True, so do we, but they in no place call it a sign, type, figure, or
simbol only, so as to deny or exclude the verity and substance of his body and
blood, from being contained under them.

Ob. The Fathers say sometimes, that Christ called and confessed the bread and
wine to be his body and blood.

Answ. They speak of his practick call, or confession, (viz. the words of
consecration) by which he made the bread and wine to be his body and blood.

Ob. By the council at Constantinople celebrated in Trullo it was decreed, that
in the holy mysteries nothing should be offered, but the body of Christ as our
Lord himself delivered, bread and wine mingled with water.

Answ. This Canon is expressly against you, for it defines, 1. That the oblation
in the sacred mysteries, is and ought to be nothing else, but the body of
Christ, as our Lord himself has delivered, this is evident in the words by
you objected. Secondly that the necessary and essential matter of which the
Sacrament or offering is made, is bread and wine mingled with water, which we
acknowledge, not wine only without water, as the Armenian Heretics, (and you
Protestants) hold, nor water only without wine, as the Aquarii taught, who were
both condemned in that Canon, (and you with them) but wine mingled with water,
as the Catholic Church has ever taught, and practiced; if any other matter
should be used; but only bread and wine mingled with water, that could not be
consecrated, and so something more would be offered then the body of Christ,
contrary to our Saviors institution, and this Canon. If you dream that it is
bread and wine still after the consecration, the report of the Canon is
sufficient to awake you, it is then nothing else but the body of Christ; Can.
32. I blush to see, you urge this Canon against us; which has defined it also,
to be an unbloody sacrifice.

Objections from pretended reason solved.
Ob. IT is impossible for the same body to be in many places at once, ergo.

Answ. Naturally, and in a corporeal and quantitative manner, I grant; By the
omnipotency of God, and in a spiritual or sacramental manner, I deny it, for
this is not to be in place properly or by it self, but improperly and by
reason of another thing, viz. the quantity and accidents of bread under which
it is.

Ob. If Christ's body could be in many places at once, it would be divided from
it felfe, which implies a contradiction, ergo.

Answ. I distinguish your antecedent, by an intrinsecal division of its own
entity, from its own entity, I deny it; that is still one and undivided, in how
many places soever it be put, by the extrinsecal and accidental division of the
places, in which it is from one another, I grant it; nor is this any
contradiction, more then for one place not to be another.

Ob. If Christ's body were really in many places at once, it would follow that
it might at one and the same time be moved, and not be moved, be moved upward
and downward* above and below, and round about it self, which are gross
contradictions.

Answ. It would follow, it might be moved with all those contrary motions at
the same time, by it self, properly, and according to the same thing, I deny
your antecedent. By accident, improperly, and according to diverse quantities or
outward forms of bread in which it is, I grant it; nor is this any
contradiction. A contradiction is defined to be an affirmation, and negation of
the same thing* concerning the same thing, according to the same thing, and at
the same time, which happens not in our case. So your Soul, though one and
indivisible in it self, may in your two hands at one and the same time, be
moved, and not moved, be moved upward and downward, above and below, and round
about it self, without any danger of a contradiction, viz. by accident and by
reason of the diverse hands, in which it is so moved, improperly speaking.

Do you chafe now not at the bit, and tell me that the Soul is not in two
diverse places in the two hands; for the whole soul is both in the right hand,
and left hand, nay it is whole in every finger of each hand, (it has no parts)
unless perhaps you be wiser, and more an oracle in this point, then the
generality of the whole world* Philosophers, as well Heathen as Christian)
neither is the place of the right hand, the place of the left, no more then the
motion of the right, is the motion of the left hand; they may be moved at one
and the same time, with the contrary motions of upward and downward, which is
not possible in one and the same place, without either penetrating or stopping
one another; the example, I believe, is homer then you would have it, or will
be able easily to solve.

Ob. The Body of Christ was made many hundred years ago by the Holy Ghost:
therefore it cannot now be made by the Priest.

Answ. It was made a natural Body, and present in the B. Virgins womb many
hundred years since I grant: this hinders not but that it may be made a
Sacrament* and present under the outward forms of bread and wine, by every
lawful Priest, as often as he consecrates and says Mass. Therefore in this
sense I deny your consequence.

Ob. God cannot make a finite Body remaining finite to be in infinite places at
once. Ergo.

Answ. I grant all you say, speaking of infinite places in Act: for there is no
such thing in nature; nothing can be infinite in Bodies, that implies a
contradiction indeed. All that we affirm of Christ's Body in the Sacrament is,
that it may be in many places at once, by accident and improperly speaking, by
reason of the many consecrated Hosts in which it is: and that it never is
actually in so many, but that it may be in more; not that this Potentiality can
ever be reduced to an infinite Act. So natural Philosophy teaches, that every
least continued quantity is divisible into infinite parts, but withal it
demonstrates, that this Potentiality can never wholly be reduced into Act: for
then that which is only infinite in Potentiality, would be infinite in Act*
which is a contradiction.

Ob. Christ's Body in the Sacrament may be every where, according to you, which
is one of Gods properties: Therefore it may be God.

Answ. Your antecedent is false; it can be no where, but only in the place of
consecrated Bread: And there will always be something else in the world besides
that, I warrant you. But to favor your argument all that may be, let us press
on the supposition grossly as you do, and I suppose for once, that God will
annihilate all other things, and fill the whole corporeal space of the Universe
with nothing else but consecrated Hosts, were this enough to make it have Gods
property, and to be every where as He is every where? No, nothing less: For it
would still be limited and finite, and shut up under the accidents of bread;
whereas it is Gods property to be every where, not as contained, but containing
all things, after an infinite, and unlimited manner. Nor is your consequence
less absurd, seeing nothing may, or can be God, but what is God in Act from all
eternity. He is an infinite, uncreated, eternal, and most pure Act, compatible
with no Potentiality.

Ob. If the same body at the same time, and according to the same thing, could
be here (at London) and there (at York) properly speaking; It would be here and
not here, there and not there, etc.

But the body of Christ in the Sacrament (according to you) at the same time,
and according to the same thing, is here (at London) and there (at York)
properly speaking.

Therefore the body of Christ, in the Sacrament, at the same time, and
according to the same thing, is here and not here, there and not there, etc.

Answ. I deny first your major, for though to be at London, and not at London,
is a clear contradiction, yet to be at London and York at the same time, is as
clearly none at all. And secondly I deny both your minor and consequence, for
they both proceed on this false supposition, viz. That the body of Christ in
the Sacrament, is in place properly and by it self, that is, by the
intrinsecall determination of its own situal or local extension; which we deny.
It is in the Sacrament after a spiritual and sacramental manner of being; and
is in place only by accident, or improperly, that is, by the extrinsecal
determination of the diverse quantities or outward forms of bread, under which
it is, and this implies no contratiction, because the affirmation and negation
are not verified according to the same thing, but according to those diverse
quantities or outward forms of bread.

You reply, It is determined to be here and not to be here, by its own
intrinsecal entity or nature. Therefore according to the same thing.

Answ. I deny your whole argument, substance or a spirit is not determined to
place, of it self, or by its own entity, but by reason of some accident. It is
the common opinion amongst wise men (says Boethius) that incorporeal things be
not in place. l. an. omne quod est bonum sit? The soul is only in place by
accident (says Aristotle) 4. Phys. tex. 45. And again, Neither are those
things that are there (viz. above the unequal superficies of the highest Heaven)
apt to to be in place. l. 1. de coelo tex. 99. and 100. Christ's Body has a
substantial and spiritual manner of being in the Sacraments. You fret again at
this, but who can help it? It Is the received Philosophy of the world, and all
wise men, and therefore will not be altered or discredited upon your whimsical
and heretical fancy. When Aristotle's Philosophy will serve your turn, you
triumph in it, but when it contradicts you, then you slight it, and set your
self up in the chair, both against Him, and all wise men.

This solution rightly understood with that of the argument concerning contrary
motions, will serve to uncouple the whole pack of seeming contradictions, which
bark so loud, and furiously, against the real presence, and Transubstantiation.

Ob. Your real presence is a very idol, for it makes Christ have eyes and not
see, ears and not hear, etc. ergo.

Answ. I told you, you were angry, your antecedent is a very blasphemy, for
though the actual exercise of these corporal faculties be suspended in the
Sacrament for a greater good, by reason of its spiritual manner of being there;
yet the powers are not taken away (but still the same, and subjected in the
soul,) no more then they were taken away by his sleeping in this life, or being
in his mothers womb. And this kind of explication you must know is but an
opinion among some Divines; others, in my judgment, upon better grounds, affirm
Christ's hearing and seeing to be in the Sacrament as truly as his body, though
both alike imperceptible to our senses; nor does this hinder, but that he
always is a seeing, hearing, knowing, and living God, he hears your blasphemy,
and will punish it if you retract it not by timely penance.

Ob. ^f the body of Christ have a spiritual manner of being in the Sacrament,
it cannot nourish our bodies. Therefore the oral receiving of it is to no
purpose.

Answ. It cannot nourish our bodies, by being changed into our bodies, as other
common meats are, I grant; it cannot nourish them by a vertual contact, I deny
both your antecedent, and cons^quence, for as to the unworthy eater, it causes
sickness and death, 1. Cor. 11. So to the worthy eater it brings health and
life. Nor could the wisdom of God ever have invented a more forcible motive of
devotion, or more effectual means of comfort to his Church, then this of his
real and substantial presence always with her.

Ob. All the benefit accrues to us by the action of the soul, not of the body.
Therefore it is only received by the soul and by faith, not by the mouth.

Answ. It accrues to us indeed more principally by the action of the soul, but
not wholly, the body also has an instrumental share in it, by making Christ's
body really and substantially present in our bodies, which could not be
effected by the soul or by faith only without oral receiving it, which very
oral receiving it increases charity by the help of our senses.

Ob. You pray in the Mass that giving thanks for the Sacrament received, you
may receive greater benefits, and tend to the fullness of the heavenly
Sacrament. Therefore Christ is not really and substantially in the Sacrament,
for nothing is greater then he.

Answ. I grant your antecedent, but deny your consequence, because though
nothing can be greater then he, and the same Christ be received both in heaven
and in the Sacrament, the manner of receiving him shall be fuller and more
perfect there, then here; here we receive him veiled or clouded under the
accidents of bread and wine; There in the clear and beatifique vision of his
divine and humane nature, which is the fullness of the heavenly Sacrament.

Ob. Christ has no where commanded the Sacrament to be adored, therefore if
his body were really there, yet ought it not to be adored.

Answ. I grant your antecedent, but deny your consequence. So Christ has no
where commanded his natural body to be adored, yet he that should deny it
adoration, were an Arian. The reason of this is, because both had been
sufficiently commanded before in those words, The Lord thy God shall thou
adore, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Which command is unlimited and reaches to all
times and places where he is really, and truly present. And therefore it was
enough for him to declare himself to be God and really present in the
Sacrament, to infer a necessity of our adoring him in it. If at the name of
Jesus every knee bow, Phil. 2. 10. much more at the real, and substantial
presence of his divine and humane nature.

Ob. By adoring the Sacrament with divine adoration, you adore a creature (
viz. the outward forms of bread and wine) with divine adoration, which is
idolatry.

Answ. We adore not the outward forms of bread and wine for themselves, or
properly, but by accident only and improperly, inasmuch as they contain Christ
God and Man, in whom our adoration is properly and essentially terminated. Nor
is this any more idolatry, then it was in the holy Saints, when they adored
Christ on earth, to adore also his garments by accident, as they contained his
Person; with whom he was so pleased, that he wrought special miracles for many
of them; witness the woman whom he cured of the bloody flux, for only touching
his garments hem.

Ob. You are not certain that Christ is really there, because if the Priest
have not a right intention, the consecration is not valid: Therefore you expose
your selves to great danger of idolatry by adoring it.

Answ. I deny your antecedent, we have a moral certainty of it by the outward
action of the Priest applying the true matter to the true form, and then
elevating, and adoring the Host himself, to signify to us that it is
consecrated; which is enough to warrant the lawfulness of our act, and all that
God requires of us. To your probation, I answer, that great Doctors, and those
as yet uncensured by the Church, tell us, that the practical intention, which
consists only in the performance of the foresaid outward actions, suffices to
the validity of the consecration, whatever the speculative or inward intention
of the Priest may be: therefore your consequence is not valid. And if in any
possible supposition, the Priest should not consecrate, yet could not our
adoration of it be formal idolatry; because that is still terminated properly,
and essentially in Christ, where ever he be.

Ob. The Apostles sat when they communicated, therefore they did not adore the
Sacrament.

An. I grant your antecedent, but deny your consequence: they adored in spirit,
by acts of faith and charity, (which is the best and chiefest adoration) though
not with outward genuflection, which is not always necessary, though very
requisite in fit time, and now generally commanded by the Church. Let S.
Augustine speak the mind of Antiquity: Of earth (says he) Christ took earth,
inasmuch as flesh is earth, and of the flesh of Mary he took flesh, and walk^d
here in that flesh, and has given us the same to be eaten to salvation; and no
man eats that flesh (viz: worthily)) unless he first adore it, in Psalm. 98.
in illum versic. Adore ye the footstool of his feet.

Ob. You have no warrant for keeping or reserving the Sacrament.

Answ. Yes; we have both in the first Nicene Council, Can. 12 14* and infinite
examples of Antiquity. See S. Greg. Nazianz, in Gorgon. S. Ambrose oratione
obitu fratris Satiri, etc: Add to this the authority and practice of the whole
Church.

ARTICLE XI. Of Transubstantiation.
OUr Tenet is, That though the accidents or outward forms of bread and wine
remain the same after consecration, yet the whole substance of the bread and
wine is changed by the words of consecration, into the whole substance of the
body and blood of Christ; which we prove thus.

The first Argument.
Ma. Transubstantiation is nothing else but a change of one whole substance
into another.

Mi. But by the words of consecration the whole substance of the bread and wine
is changed into the whole substance of the body and blood of Christ.

Cons. Therefore by the words of consecration is made a Transubstantiation.

The major is proved by the Churches declaration, both in the Councils of
Florence, Lateran, and Trent, that she intends nothing else by it.

The minor is proved by all the texts of Scripture above cited, which signify
a real change of the substance of the bread and wine into the body and blood
of Christ, but not of the accidents; for they remain the same, as is evident to
sense, and granted by our Adversaries; nor is there any mention of them at all
in the words of consecration.

A second Argument.
Ma. If the substance of the bread and wine remained the same after
consecration, the pronoune this (in those words This is my body) must of
necessity demonstrate the substance of the bread and wine, after consecration.

Mi. But the pronoune this, in those words, does not demonstrate the substance
of the bread and wine after consecration, but the substance of the body and
blood of Christ.

Cons. Therefore the substance of the bread and wine does not remain after
consecration.

The major is proved, because the pronoune demonstrative this, after the words
of consecration are spoken, signifies of necessity the substance then present,
as all, grant.

The minor is proved, because if it should then demonstrate the substance of
bread and wine, the proposition would be evidently false, and signify bread
and wine to be the body and blood of Christ, which is impossible.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second age S. Cyprian, the bread which our Lord gave to his disciples
being changed, not in shape (outward form) but in nature (substance) by the
omnipotency of the word is made flesh, Sermon. de coena Dom.

In the third age Origin, We eat the bread offered by prayer made a certain
holy body (the body of Christ) l. 8. cont. Celsum.

In the same age Tertullian, The bread taken and distributed to his disciples,
he made his body, l. 4. cont. Marcion. c. 40.

In the fourth age S. Ambrose, If humane benediction could change and convert
nature (he had exemplified in Moses converting a rod into a Serpent) what say
we by the divine consecration where the very words of our Savior do work, etc.
shall not the word of Christ prevail so far as to change the species or nature
of the Elements, l. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. De iis qui myster. c. 9.

In the same age S. Cyril; Once in Cana of Galil^^ he changed water into wine,
etc. and shall he not be worthy to be belcived of us, that he has changed wine
into his blood, Cateches. Mystagog. 1. c. 4.

In the same age S. Gregory Nissen; Christ through the dispensation of his
grace, enters by his flesh into all the faithful, etc. and these things he
bestows, transelementing (transubstantiating) by virtue of his blessing the
things that are seen, into it, Orat. Catechist. c. 37.

In the fifth age S. Augustine; they (the rest of the disciples) did eat the
bread which was our Lord himself, he (Judas) did eat the bread of our Lord
against our Lord. Tract. 59. in Joan.

If you infer out of this text, that Judas did not at all eat the Bread which
was our Lord, because he wanted true faith; Therefore no man receives the Body
of Christ in the Sacrament by the mouth, but by faith only. I Answer; Judas had
before at least, if not in this place, received the Bread which was our Lord
himself, according to S. Augustine, Our Lord (says he) suffers Judas, a devil,
a thief, he that sold him, he lets him receive among the innocent desciples,
that which the faithful know to be our price, l. 5. De Baptism. c. 8. when he
says Judas ^at the bread of our Lord against our Lord* it is probable he speaks
not of the Sacrament (though Judas eat that also against our Lord, because
unworthily to his own damnation) but rather of the dipped s^p which Judas is
said to eat against our Lord, because he then renewed his purpose of betraying
him, so that the Divil entered him, and he went forth immediately to act his
treason, Judas did not then (says S. Augustine) receive the body of our Lord,
as some, who read negligently, think; for we must understand that our Lord had
already given the Sacrament of his body to them, where Judas also was, (tract.
62. in Joan.) So that your consequence is null.

The Council of Folrence defined, that by virtue of the words of consecration,
the substance of the bread is converted into the body of Christ, and the
substance of the wine into his blood, decet sup. union. Jacobinorum, and
Armenorum. Anno 1439.

The Lateran council under Jnnocent the third defined, that bread is by divine
power transulstantiated into the body, and wine into the blood of Christ, ca.
1. an. Dom. 1215.

Objections out of Scripture solved.
Ob. What Christ promised in the sixth of S. John, is bread and flesh too. The
bread which I will give is my flesh. Therefore the Sacrament is bread and flesh
too; therefore transubstantiation.

Answ. It Is bread (in the outward likeness) and flesh too (in the inward
substance) thus I grant your antecedent. It Is bread in the inward substance, so
I deny it, or It Is heavenly bread and flesh too, I grant it, earthly or common
bread, I deny it: and so granting also your first consequence, I deny your
second.

Ob. If by those words this is my body, the whole substance of the bread be
changed into the substance of Christ's Body, you cannot prove by any good
reason* that the accidents of the bread are not changed by the same, into the
accidents of his body. Therefore since the accidents are not changed, neither
is the substance.

Answ. Nor need I take much pains to prove by reason that the accidents remain,
since they are evident to sense, however I deny your antecedent; one reason is,
because the word hoc or this signifies only substance indeterminatly and as
abstracting from all time or accidents, so that when the Predicate my body is
added, the whole proposition is sufficiently verified, by the only change of
the substance into his body, without any change of the accidents.

A second reason is, because, if the accidents were also changed into the
accidents of his body, it were an identical and not a formal predication, and
would signify only my body is my body, there being no difference at all
betwixt the subject and the predicate, whereas the accidents remaining the
same, and the substance only being changed, it makes this sense, the substance
contained under these accidents is my body, which imports an accidental
difference betwixt them, and suffices to a formal predication, these reasons
we have from the very words of the institution. And for reasons of convenience,
one is, because we should have a horror to eat Christ's flesh in its own proper
shape, nor could we do it without mangling it, and therefore he has given it
us in the outward shape of bread, in which we may eat it without any such
inconvenience. A second reason is, that so there might be something frangible in
the Sacrament, to signify and represent the real breaking of his body on the
Cross. These and many other reasons may be given, without much rubbing our
foreheads, wherefore I deny your consequence.

Objections out of Fathers solved.
Ob. SOme primitive Fathers say, We must undoubtedly believe the real presence,
but ought not to inquire how, or search into the manner of it; therefore the
Church did ill in defineing Transubstantiation.

Answ. They say well, but you infer ill. So we must humbly believe the mystery
of the B. Trinity, without curiously enquiring how three distinct persons can
be in one indivisible nature, and yet the Church did well both in defining that
there are three, and how there are three, against the Arians, and
Antitrinitarians, and therefore I deny your consequence. A general Council,
assisted by the Holy Ghost, may safely enquire into and define those things,
which private men and Doctors ought rather to believe, without enquiring. Had
not the inquisitive and overcurious why's and how is of Sectaries enforced her
to it, by obtruding their false glosses on the words of consecration, it is more
then probable to me, the Church had never defined so far in it as now she has.

Ob. Tertullian says, God in the Gospel called bread his body, that hence we
might understand, he gave to bread the figure of his body, whose body anciently
the Prophet figured by bread. Lib. 3. cont. Marcion.

Answ. The sense of Tertullian is plain: His question against Marcion was,
whether Christ's body were true and real, which he proves by this argument; That
which is not true cannot have a figure, but bread is the figure of Christ's
body, therefore Christ's body is true. Now this Father (as it is confessed by
all) having a cross manner of expression, delivers himself in the words
alleged, whose sense is, that Christ, by saying, This is my Body, verified the
saying of the Prophet, who had figuratively called his body bread; for bread
could not be truly a figure, till there was made a body, whose figure it might
be, which was then done. This he calls, that he gave bread the figure of his
body, not meaning to that particular bread which he had taken in his hand, but
the nature of bread, of which the Prophet spoke, and by which he figured the
body of our Savior; So that if our Savior had done nothing but called the
body his bread in words, he had done no more then the Prophet, and not
fulfilled the figure of the Prophecy, but repeated it. But Tertullian will
have us understand, that by these words of our Savior, the nature of bread,
which the Prophet spoke of, got truly to be the figure of Christ's body, to wit,
because Christ's body by these words became truly alimental to us, and therefore
with great propriety to be figured by bread, as the Prophet had done.
Tertullians argument therefore speaks of the figure which the Prophet made
(which now began truly to be a figure) not of a new figure which our Savior
made. And by this you may understand that other place objected out of him, viz.
The bread taken and distributed to his Disciples he made his body by saying,
This is my body; that is, a figure of my body, l. 4. cont. Marcion. c. 40. That
Christ made bread his body, he plainly and positively affirms; how he made it
his body, is no less plain, viz. by saying, this is my body; and that he made
it likewise a figure, sign, or Sacrament of his body, is agreed upon by all:
The difference is, that you would have these words, that is a figure of my
body, relate to the predicate, my body, whereas indeed they relate to the
subject, hoc, or this, and make this construction. This, that is, a figure of
my body, is my body. Bread was a figure of his body in the old Law, and he made
the outward form or accidents of bread, to be a figure, or Sacrament of his
body in the new, at his last supper: Nor is this form of speech unusual in
him. He says in another place, Christ is dead, that is, the Anointed, for,
Christ, that is, the Anointed, is dead, l. cont. Prax. c. 19. Or if nothing
will serve you, but your own way, know that we allow his very body, as
unbloudily offered in the Sacrament, to be a figure of his body as bloudily
offered on the cross; what does this place advantage you, or prejudice us?

Ob. Clemens Alexandrinus says, The blood of Christ is twofold, the one is
carnal by which we are redeemed from death, the other spiritual, by which we
are anointed. Paed. l. 2. c. 2.

Answ. He calls the Blood of Christ carnal, as it was shed on the cross,
because it was there shed in a carnal manner; He calls it spiritual, as it
annoints us in the Sacrament, because it is there after a spiritual manner, all
this we hold. Neither does he deny it to be the same blood in substance in both
places; the diversity is only in the manner of being.

You reply, That in the same chapter he brings in Christ saying, Take, drink,
this is my blood, the blood of the vine.

Answ. He means of a heavenly, not of an earthly vine.

You urge, it follows, But that the thing which had been blessed was wine, he
showed again, saying to his Disciples* I will not drink of the fruit of this
vine, until I drink it new in my Fathers Kingdom.

Answ. It was heavenly wine, proportionable to the Vine it came from, as
appears by those words, Until I drink it new in my Fathers kingdom: the fruit
of no earthly vine is drunk there.

Ob. S. Cyprian says, Christ, at his last Supp^r with his Disciples, gave
bread and wine with his own hands, but on the cross he gave the soldiers his
body to be wounded. Tract. de Unct.

Answ. He calls the things signified (viz. his body and blood) by the names of
the signs: He expounds himself, saying, Christ did this, that in the Apostles
the sincere truth, and true sincerity being more secretly imprinted, he might
explain to the Gentiles how bread and wine should be his flesh and blood (mark
what it was that he called bread and wine) and by what reasons diverse names and
kinds (bread and wine, flesh and blood) might be reduced into one essence (one
Sacrament) and the signifying and the signified be reckoned by the same words,
(viz. bread and wine.) Thus his own exposition, which to my best understanding
is rather for, then against us. We know the Fathers sometimes call the
consecrated Hosts symbols, types, figures, but never so as to exclude the
verity of the thing typified and figured, as Sectaries do. So that Objections
of this nature are mere trifling and of no strength against us.

Ob. S. Chrysostom says, For as before the bread is sanctified we name it
bread, but the divine grace sanctifying it by means of the Priest, it is freed
from the name of bread, and deemed worthy to be called the Lords Body, although
the nature of the bread remain in it. Epist. ad Caes. cont. haeres. Apolin.
^itat. p^r Damascen.

Answ. This Objection is clearly against you, excepting only those words,
Although the nature of the bread remains in it, by which he only means the
Qualities or Accidents of the Bread, not the Substance of it, as appears by
those precedent words, The bread is sanctified by the divine grace, by means of
the Priest, it is freed from the name of bread, and deemed worthy to be called
our Lords Body, (which could not be, if the substance of bread remained.) The
word Nature is often taken for the qualities and properties of a thing. So we
say in common speech, he is of a good nature, he is of an ill nature, I love his
nature, I hate his nature, meaning his good and evil qualities, or properties,
not his substance.

Ob. S. Ambrose says, It is a wonderful power of God that makes the bread
remain what it is, and yet be changed into another thing. ^. 4. de Sacrament.
c. 4.

Answ. The sense of S. Ambrose is, that the bread perishes not, but remains
virtually in that into which it is changed; an effect that certainly requires
no less then a wonderful power. But it were no wonderful power if it should
make the bread no other thing, then what nature and the Baker made it, but
only change it into a sign or figure of his Body* This requires no
omnipotence for doing it. You might in much modesty have spared this Objection,
as also that of the same Father: How much more operative is the word of Christ,
that the things be what they were (viz. in the outward shape) and yet be
changed (viz. in the substance) into another thing (the body of Christ) and so
that which was bread before consecration is now the Body of Christ, (he tells
you plainly what it is changed into.) L. 4. de Sacrament* c. 4. What frontless
confidence is it in you to triumph in these texts?

Ob. Some of your Schoolmen, as Durand, Scotus, Peter Lombard etc. say,
Transubstantiation was not heard of till of later times.

Answ. They quarrel at the newness of the word, not at the meaning of it; but
tell not us in controversies of Faith of the placita of Schools, or what this
or that particular Schoolman says, who deliver but their own private opinions,
and those also with submission to the Churches judgment. Tell us what is
plainly said in Scripture, and so expounded by the Church, or what has been
delivered by Apostolical tradition from age to age, or what the Fathers have
plainly and unanimously taught, or what has been defined in Councile perfectly
oecumenicall. These, and nothing less are testimonies sufficient, to prove a
controverted point to be of faith, or not.

Ob. Transubstantiation was not heard of til the Council of Lateran.

Answ. The word was not agreed upon in any general Council before that, I
grant; the meaning or thing signified by the word, I deny it: that was believed
and taught from the first institution of the Sacrament, as has been proved;
see the Councils above.

Objections from reason, and sense, answered.
Ob. TRansubstantiation is not expressly in the Scripture. Therefore we have no
reason to believe it with divine faith.

Answ. The meaning of the word is, though the word be not, and it suffices to
a point of faith, that it be any way in the Scripture, either plainly or
obscurely, expressly or implicitly, the Churches authority and exposition, or
definition being added. Otherwise the mystery of the Trinity, the necessity of
infants Baptism, etc. would not be points of faith, they be not expressly and
plainly in the Scripture; nor be the words there at all, no more then
transubstantiation, therefore your consequence is false.

Ob. It is imposible for one whole substance to be changed into another, ergo.

Answ. Naturally, or by a mere natural agent, whose activity is limited and
always presupposes a subject to work upon, I grant it; By a supernatural
agent, whose power is infinite, and unlimited, I deny it; Christ is always the
principal agent in this work, the Priest is but his instrument only.

Ob. If the whole substance of the bread were changed into the Body of Christ,
the accidents of bread could not remain as they do, they cannot be without a
subject.

Answ. Naturally or by the force of nature, I grant it, by miracle and the
omnipotency of God, I deny it. Actual inherence in a subject is not of essence,
of quantity, or any other accident, but only to be apt to be in a subject; to
be in, in all absolute entities (such as quantity is) must of necessity
presuppose to be; at least, in the essential notion of it.

Ob. The same body cannot be in many places at once.

Answ. Circumscribed, or locally extended, I grant; In a spiritual and
Sacramental manner, I deny it.

Ob. Quantity is essential to a body. Therefore if his body be in the
Sacrament, his quantity must needs be there.

Answ. I distinguish your antecedent, quantity extended metaphisically,
inwardly or in order to it self, is essential to a body I grant; Quantity
extended phisically, or in order to place, I deny it, that is only a property
of Quantity, and therefore separable from it by Gods omnipotence. It is most
proper to quantity (says Aristotle) to be equal, 5* Metaphis. that is to be
locally extended with some determinate figure. Quantity is an absolute entity,
and therefore cannot essentially consist of order to place, which is a mere
relation, I give the same distinction to your consequence.

Ob. For the same body to be here and there at the same time implies a
contradiction.

Answ. You mistake; for the same body to be here and not to be here, implies a
contradiction, or for the same body to be here, and to be there properly (that
is locally extended) at the same time and according to the same thing, implies
a contradiction true, but not to be here and to be there, improperly (that is
sacramentally) and according to diverse things (to wit diverse quantities) as
Christ's body is in the Sacrament. The soul is here (in the head) and there (in
the foot) at the same time, improperly and spiritually, by reason of the diverse
parts of the body, without any contradiction.

Ob. A body is destroid, if it be not in some determinate place.

Answ. That Proposition is not universally true. Aristotle says and proves,
that the universe, or highest heaven is in no place, because nothing is
without, or above it, to contain it, 4. Phis. text. 45. Yet we grant that
Christ's body in the Sacrament is always in some determinate place improperly
and by accident, viz. in the place of the quantity, under which it is, it is so
determinated to place by the dimensions or outward forms of bread and wine as
never to be out of the place of the said dimensions or outward forms.

Ob. nothing can be in two diverse times at once. Therefore nothing can be in
two diverse places at once.

Answ. I deny your consequence; the disparity is because diverse times cannot be
together or at once, (by me being essentially successive) but diverse places
may, and are.

Ob. A spirit which is naturally indivisible, cannot be made divisible even by
Gods omnipotence. Therefore quantity which is naturally divisible in order to
place, cannot be made indivisible in order to place even by Gods omnipotence.

Answ. I grant your antecedent but deny your consequence, the disparity is,
that it is not only natural, but essential to a spirit, to be indivisible, and
have no parts, but it is not essential, though it be natural to quantity to be
divisible, or have parts extended in order to place, but only in order to it
self. And he that could make the Sea a solid path to his own feet, S. Math.
14. enter to his disciples the doors being shut, S ^o. 20. make a bush burn
and not consume, Exodus 3. make Iron swim on the water, 4. Kings. 6. make the Sea
stand like a wall about his people Exodus 14. can doubtless change the natural,
and common manner of being which things have, and yet be able to conserve their
essences, your Scholars know this to be possible and confess it, and so do you
when you forget your self, as I have showed above; your shifts in eluding
these places are too poor to merit an answer*

He that can make material substances, which of their own nature are
indivisible in order to place, divisible by means of quantity, even by his
ordinary power, and way of working, can doubtless by his extraordinary, make
quantity, which naturally is divisible in order to place, become indivisible,
by giving it a supernatural, and sacramental manner of being.

Ob. Bread might be called the body of Christ by only being made one thing with
his body, although it were not transubstantiated into his body.

Answ. No it could not. The soul of man is made one thing with his body, and
yet the body cannot be called* the soul, nor the soul the body.

Ob. Man in Christ is called God, and God man. Therefore bread in the Sacrament
may be called the body of Christ.

Answ. I grant your antecedent, but deny your consequence, the disparity is,
because God and man in Christ are united in one person. Bread is not so united
to the body of Christ in the Sacrament.

Ob. The thing containing may be called the thing contained; so we call a
barr^l, sack, a purse, Gold etc. Therefore bread containing only the body of
Christ, may be called the body of Christ, though it remain unchanged.

Answ. Your antecedent is true in a figurative sense, because a barrel, and a
purse are of their own nature made to contain, and suppose for sack and gold,
but bread was not of its own nature and primary institution, made to contain
and suppose for the body of Christ, (this was superadded to the accidents or
outward forms of bread only by Christ at his last Supper) but to contain and
be the nourishment of man's body.

Ob. S. Austine says, it is impossible for Christ to be at once according to
his corporal presence, in the Sun, and in the Moon, and on the Cross.

Answ. We maintain not his corporal, but real and spiritual presence in the
Sacrament, the manner of being is spiritual, and sacramental, you have been
often ^old it. He speaks there against the Mani^hees, who held the body that
was ^rucified to be a fantastical body, and that the corporal light of the Sun
and Moon were the true body of Christ, which S. Augustine proves to be false,
because a body cannot be in many places at once, after a bodily manner; this is
not against us,

Ob. Sense cannot be deceived in its proper object, and sense tells us it is
bread after consecration, ergo.

Answ. Substance is not the proper and immediate object of sense, but color,
quantity etc. nor can sense judge at all of substance, though it be under
sensible accidents, unless it be the subject of those accidents, and have a
sensible and corporal manner of being; which the body of Christ neither is, nor
has in the Sacrament. It has a spiritual manner of being, and is not the
subject of the accidents of bread, they are without a subject by miracle,
therefore no wonder if sense be deceived in this matter. Here sense and reason
must veil bonnet to faith, and submit to the authority of God revealing and
the Church propounding; they are no competent Judges, what God can do by his
omnipotence.

Ob. S. John proved the verity of the incarnation, and God made man, against
Cerinthus and his accomplices, by the evidence of sense. That which we have seen
with our eyes, and our hands have handled, we declare unto you, etc. 1. Jo. 1.

Answ. You deceiptfully leave out the first, and principal part of his proof,
viz. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, etc. v. 1. his
chief probation of that mystery was not grounded on seeing and feeling only,
as you pretend, but on hearing, faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God revealing. He had heard that which was from the beginning, viz. Christ
revealing those things, and therefore believed them, and declared them to us to
be believed. The other part of his proof from seeing and feeling, was only ad
Hominem, against Cerinthus, and such as you are, who will believe nothing,
without a sensible experiment of it; whereas true faith is an argument of
things not appearing.

Ob. If the notions and evidence of sense be not infallible about its own
proper object, there can be no certainty in the knowledge of bodies, and sense
must needs be the perpetual cause of deception in this mystery to all the
world, which is absurd, ergo.

Answ. They are infallible about the proper objects of sense, if they be duly
proposed, and reason consider rightly of all circumstances, but the body of
Christ in the Sacrament is not the proper object of sense, but of faith, it
has a spiritual, and supernatural manner of being, and we have a more
infallible assurance then that of sense, to regulate our assent by, in this
matter; viz. the divine authority revealing; he that will credit that, and
captivate the uncertain notions of sense to the obedience of faith (as all good
Christians ought to do) is n^^ in the least dainger of being deceived by sense
in this mystery, but such as will obstinately prefer the seeming evidence of
sense, before the certain authority of God revealing, and his Church
propounding (as you do) are worthy to be slaved for ever to the deception and
fallacy of sense, may God deal better with you, then you deserve, which is my
hearty prayer for you.

Ob. If the doctrine of Transubstantiation were true, and Christ's body were
whole in the whole host, and whole in every part of the host, if you divide, or
break it, it would follow, your Laics can consecrate, as well as Priests,
because when they divide the host in their mouths, they make Christ (who
before was present only in one place) to be now present in many; riddle me
this riddle.

Answ. You please your self with your own mistakes. I deny the sequel of your
argument, that action of the Laics of it self and properly speaking reaches
only to the division of the signs, or accidents, not to the presence of Crists
body to the signs, or in many places, the efficient and proper cause of that,
are the word^ of consecration spoken by the Priests, by which the whole
substance of his body is made present in place of the whole substance of the
bread, and by a necessary consequence, in every part of the signs or accidents
if you divide: the Laities division of them is only Conditio sine qua non, a
condition, without which the effect of his presence in many places is not put,
not the efficient cause thereof.

Ob. Christ proved the verity of his own Resurrection by the evidence of sense,
when he said to his disciples: see my hands and feet, that it is I my self,
handle and see, S. Lu. 24. 39.

Answ. The evidence of sense was infallible in that case, to prove the Body of
Christ to be his true body, and not a phantasme, as the mistaken disciples
thought his body had there a sensible, corporal, and natural manner of being,
not so in the Sacrament; nevertheless the verity of his resurrection, as it is
an article of faith, has a much higher and more infallible proof then that of
sense, viz. the authority of the Prophets and Christ himself revealing it.
They will kill him, and on the third day he shall rise again, S. Lu. 18. 33.

Ob. In the profession of faith prescribed to Berengarius by the Pope, it is
said; That the Body of Christ is sensibly touched by the hands and chewed by
the teeth. Therefore the manner of its being is sensible, and not spiritual.

Answ. I deny your consequence, the words of the Profession run thus. I
Berengarius profess, etc. The bread and wine which are set on the altar after
consecration, to be not only a Sacrament, but also the true Body and Blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and I profess it (the consecrated bread and wine says
the relection of that Council) to be sensibly touched by the hands of Priests,
and chewed by the teeth of the faithful, not only in the Sacrament, but in
verity, etc. all this we grant in a sound sense. His body is said to be
sensibly chewed by the teeth and touched by the hands in this respect, that the
whole substance of his body remains and is present in verity and without
fiction under every part of the divided host; that is, his body is said to be
sensibly touched by the hands, and chewed by the teeth, not by it self or
according to its own entity, but by accident and by means of the signs or
accidents of bread under which it truly is; thus the relection of that very
Council expounds the Council. Berengarius was there condemned for denying the
true and real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament or signs, not for
holding it to be there after a spiritual manner of being, this was ever most
true and Catholic doctrine, therefore it cannot without absurdity be imagined
that the meaning of his profession should be, that Christ's Body is in the
Sacrament after a sensible, and corporeal manner.

You reply; His body is sensibly touched and chewed not only in the Sacrament,
but in verity.

Answ. We grant it; for by the words* In verity, is meant no more, then truly
and without fiction. That which we sensibly touch and chew is not only a
Sacrament or sign, but also the body and blood of Christ in verity, that is,
truly and without fiction, and therefore his body may be said to be sensibly
touched and chewed in verity, that is, without fiction, not by it self, or
according to its own entity, but by means of the Sacrament or signs, which are
so touched and chewd, and under which it is in verity, that is truly and
without fiction. I declare this by an example: Jonas was sensibly swallowed by
the Whale, both soul and body, and this in verity, that is truly and without
fiction; yet he was not sensibly swallowd according to both, but according to
his body only, and his soul is said to be sensibly swallowed by means of the
body, in which it was in verity and without fiction.

You reply, though Jonas his soul may be said to be sensibly swallowed by means
of his body in which it was, or by accident, yet it can no ways be said to be
sensibly eaten or chewed. Therefore though Christ's body be in the Sacrament,
yet it cannot be said to be sensibly chewed or eaten in it, seeing the manner
of its being is spiritual.

Answ. The disparity is, that Jonas was not chewed or eaten either according to
his soul or body; But Christ's body is sensibly chewed or eaten in the
Sacrament, according to the Signs or Sacrament, though not according to its own
substance.

Now let any impartial Christian judge what good meaning Doctor Tailor could
have, in enumerating such a rabble of seeming contradictions, (which are indeed
none) upon falls imaginary suppositions: Or in exaggerating such an imminent
danger, nay moral certainty, (if he may be our judge) of gross and horrible
Idolatry in our doctrine and worship of the B. Sacrament (the known and
constant belief not only of this Nation, but the whole world, except some few
Sectaries in the last Age, even from its first conversion to Christianity:)
What other end could he probably propose to himself (especially in this
conjuncture of time) then to lay his whole weight of malice upon persons that
live innocently by him, and who for their Religion, have already burdens
enough to satisfy the uncharitableness of any ordinary envy. He is one that
pretends sometimes to much moderation and charity in his writings: I wish he
had them in his heart, but am sure he has showed neither in this Treatise; let
him that judges all things be his judge; I only set this Motto on our Tenet,
Veritas in aeternum stat, and God can find protection for his people, or if it
be his will to have us sufferers for justice sake, we know he will reward our
sufferings with a most full and overflowing measure. His will be done: Amen.

ARTICLE XII. Of Communion under one kind.
OUr Tenet is, That there is no necessity for the Laity to communicate under
both kinds, but that it is lawful for them to do it either under one or both,
as the Church of God appoints: which we prove thus.

The first Argument.
Ma. If to communicate under one kind only be sufficient for the Laities
obtaining everlasting life; then it is not necessary for them to communicate
under both.

Mi. But to communicate under ono kind only is sufficient for the Laities
obtaining everlasting life:

Cons. Therefore it is not necessary for them to communicate under both.

The major is proved; Because that, without which a thing may be had, is not
absolutely necessary for obtaining it.

The minor is proved by, This is a bread coming down from heaven, that if any
one eat of it, he dies not, S. John 6. 50. He that eats of this bread shall
live for ever, verse. 52. If any one eats me, the same shall also live by me,
verse. 58. You hear eating only will suffice.

A second Argument.
1. If Christ himself and his Disciples gave the Sacrament under one kind, then
it is lawful also for us to give it under one kind. 2. But Christ himself and
his Disciples did sometimes give it under one kind: 3. Therefore it is lawful
also for us to give it under one kind.
The major is manifest, because their actions are our examples and best
warrants.

The minor is proved: And it came to pass^ whilst he (Christ) sat at the
table with them, he took bread, and blessed, and brake and did reach it to
them, and their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of
their sig^^, S. Luke last, verse 30.

And they were pers^vering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and the
communication of the breaking of bread and prayer* Acts 2. v. 42. And in the
first of the Sabbath, when they were assembled to break dread, etc. Acts 20.
17. A plain Synaxis; Here is no cup in any of these places, which are all
expounded of the Sacrament, by S. Austin, l. 49. de cons^ns. Evangel. c. 25.
Venerable Bede, and Theophylact on the said places.

A Third Argument.
1. If the whole substance and essence of the Sacrament with all the ends
thereof be had under one kind, both are not necessary to salvation. 2. But the
whole substance and essence of the Sacrament with all the ends thereof, is had
under on kind.
Therefore both are not necessary to salvation.

The major is proved, because the pr^^ise institution of a thing infers not a
necessity of doing or receiving the whole, when the end of the institution may
be obtained by a part only; for example; God instituted all kinds of meats for
man's s^stenance, yet neither any one particular man, nor the whole collection
of men are bound to eat all kinds of meats, but so much only as is sufficient
to sustain them; so God ordained marriage for the holy propagation of
mankind, yet all men are not bound to marry, because mankind may sufficiently
be propagated without this or that particular man's marrying.

The minor is proved, because, under one kind, there is the matter, the bread,
there is the form, the words of consecration; there is the sign of Christ's
unity with the faithful, many grains making one paste; there is the thing
signified, the body and blood of Christ and divine grace, there is a memory of
his death and passion, the bread divided from the cup, to signify how his body
and blood were divided for us on the cross, and hence it was that after the
consecration of either kind, he recommended to us the memory of his death and
passion; to show that either was a sufficient memorial thereof, 1. Cor. 11. 24.
25. And finally by receiving under one kind we are spiritually nourished, made
partakers of the merits of Christ, and fast united to him* For we are one
bread, one body, all that do participate of one bread, 1 Cor. 10. 13. which is
all that appertains to the substance, essence, or ends of of this Sacrament.

A fourth Argument.
1. That which is not commanded either in the written, or unwritten Word of
God, is no divine precept. 2. But the Laities Communion under both kinds is not
commanded either in the written or unwritten Word of God. Therefore the Laities
Communion under both kinds is no divine precept; and it is lawful for them to
communicate under one, or both, according as the Church appoints.
The major is manifest by the very terms.

The minor is proved by the solution of all such objections as shall be brought
out of the Scripture to the contrary: And as for the unwritten Word, which is
Apostolical Tradition, let these ensuing testimonies be heard.

Fathers for this point.
In the second Age S. Dionysius asserts the Communion of Infants under one
kind, l. de Eccles. Hierarch c. ult. prope finem. See also c. 4.

In the third Age Tertullian tells us, it was then a custom to carry the
Eucharist home to their houses for private Communion ( ^. ad Vxorem) which
could be done but under one kind, because Chalices were not permitted to be in
Lay* men's houses. S. Athanasius Apol. 2. cont. Arianos.

In the same Age S. Cyprian affirms, it was given to Infants and to the Sick in
one kind only. Sermon. d^ lapsis number. 10.

In the fourth Age S. Ambrose asserts* They kept the Eucharist after
con^ecration, and that his brother Satyrus in a shipwreck was miraculously
delivered from the waters, by having the Eucharist tied about his neck in a
stole. Orat* de obitu Satyri.

In the same Age Eusebius testifies; They were wont to send the Sacrament by
Sea into far countries, l. 5. Histor. which could not be done but under one
kind.

In the fifth Age S. Austin teaches the practice of communion under one kind
for infants. L. advers. Julian. Pelag. c. 4. prope finem. and tom. 2. Epist.
106. post medium.

In the same Age it was so indifferent a thing for the Laity to communicate
either under one or both kinds, that the Manichees (who held Christ had no true
blood, and that wine was the gall of the Devil, and therefore would not receive
the cup) lurked among Catholics, by communicating under the form of bread
only, and could not be distinguished from them, till Pope Leo the first made a
special Edict, commanding all the Laity to receive once a year under both
kinds, and that at the public Communion of Easter, by which means he detected
the said Manichees, and excluded them from the Catholic Communion. See Leo
Sermon. 4 de Quadrages. and Baronius A^^als An. 490. number. 21, 22.

The Council of Clarem^nt under Pope V^ban. 2. decreed against an abusive
custom of dipping the bread in the cup, That no man should communicate of the
Altar, unless he took the bread apart, and the cup in like manner; unless
through necessity or caution (as in case of sick and infants) Can. 28. An. Dom.
1095.

The Council of Constance has decreed against all such as rashly presume to
say, That Christian people ought to receive the Sacrament under both kind, etc.
That as the custom of the Layties receiving under the form of bread only, had
been lawfully brought in for avoiding some dangers and scandalls, and very long
observed, etc. so it ought to be held for a Law, which it is not lawful to
reject, without the Churches authority. Sess. 13. 14. An. Dom 1415. The Council
of Basil has defined the same, Sess. 30.

Objections solved.
Ob. DRink ye all of this, S. Matthew. 26.

Answ. That was only spoken to the Apostles, whom he made Priests, none else
were present; And they all drank, S. Mark 14. That those words concerned not
the Layty, but the Apostles only* appears in S. Luke, who has expressed it thus;
Take ye and d^vide it amongst you, S. Luke 22. 17.

Ob. Do this for a commemo^ation of me, S Luke c. 22. 1 Cor. 11.

Answ. By those words Christ made his Apostles Priests, and gave them power to
consecrate his Body and Blood, as he had there done, which cannot appertain to
the Laity; unless perhaps you would have them Priests also, and then we shall
have Priests enough. Besides, S. Luke has those words after the consecration of
the bread immediately, not after the consecration of the Cup, and S. Paul has
them absolutely after the consecration of the bread, but conditionally only
after the consecration of the cup, and with limitation Do this as often as y^
shall drink, in commemoration of me, both which circumstances rather evince a
non-necessity of communion under both kinds, then otherwise.

Ob. Christ ordained it in both kinds.

Answ. True; but precise institution, as has been proved, obliges not all men
to do all that was instituted: Besides, it was instituted not only for a
Sacrament, but a sacrifice; and so I grant both kinds are requisite to make a
perfect representation of the body and blood of Christ, as actually divided on
the cross; and therefore Priests have a command to receive it both kinds, but
not the Laity, to whom it appertains not to sacrifice.

Ob. Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you shall
have no life in you.

Answ. Such as deny the real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, say,
that Chapter concerns not oral and sacramental, but only mental, and spiritual
communion; and so nothing to your purpose. But to such as allow the real
presence with us, I answer, This imports a command obliging the whole Church,
but not each particular man, and so it is fulfilled by the whole Church, by
Priests receiving in both kinds, and by the Laity receiving in one, or both, as
it is appointed.

It is not said, unless every one, etc. but unless ye eat, etc. So when
Christ said, Go ye teaching all nations, baptizing them, etc. he did not
command every particular Apostle to teach and baptize all Nations (that were
impossible) but that it should be done among them, according to their several
allotments. So in the old Scripture we read, Ye shall circumcise the flesh of
your foreskin, Genesis 17. 11. And let every one take a lamb etc. the whole
multitude ^f the sons of Israel shall sacrifice it, Exodus 12. 3, 6. These were
precepts obliging the whole Synagogue, but not each particular man; every one
was not bound to circum^ise, but such only as were deputed for that office; nor
was every one obliged to sacrifice the lamb, but only the father or chief of
every family. The reason of this is given us by S. Austin, Because the moral
pr^cepts of Christ oblige all and each particular man of the same state or
calling his sacramental precepts not so; but the whole mul^itude only,
according to their different callings and capacities. That nothing can be
proved out of this Chapter, for the necessity of communion in both kinds, is
evident, because in three or four special texts it affirms one kind to be
sufficient to salvation, verse 50, 52, 58.

Ob. Let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of
this cup, for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, 1 Cor. 11. 28, You hear S. Paul injoyns both.

Answ. This probation, or trial of our selves is necessary for all sorts of
men, and at all times, as often as they communicate, and therefore he extends
his speech to all, as well Priests as Laics; That he knew it to be lawful for
the Laity to receive under one kind only (if holy Church should so command) is
evident by the precedent verse, in which he says, For whosoever shall eat this
bread, or drink this cup of our Lord unworthily* (the Greek word is (...)) he
shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, verse. 27. And after the
consecration of the bread he says absolutely, Do this for a commemoration of
me: But after the consecration of the cup, he says, Do y^ this (not
absolutely, but with a limitation) as often as ye shall drink, for a
commemoration of me, verse. 26. so to intimate, that it was not necessary for
all sorts of Communicants, or at all times, to receive the cup.

Ob. By denying them the cup, you rob the Laity of the blood of Christ.

Answ. No; there is both body and blood, whole Christ under either kind: his
body and blood cannot be now divided; for he is now immortal and impassible, he
cannot die nor suffer any more, Romans 6. And as the Church heretofore commanded
the Laity to receive in both kinds, so to exclude the Manich^es (who held the
cup to be unlawful, and not the blood of Christ, but the gall of the Devil)
from the communion of the faithful; so now she commands them to receive under
the form of bread only, to exclude and detect such heretics as hold that whole
Christ is not under either kind.

Ob. The cup is the Legacy of Christ to his Church, and therefore belongs to
all.

Answ. No, it is a part of his Will or Testament, and the Will is not his
Legacy. His Legacy was everlasting life. That being justified by grace we may
be heirs according to hope of everlasting life, Romans 8. 17. Or if you will
needs have the cup a Legacy, at least it was but a part of his Legacy, and
appertains not to all by any precept or necessity, but to those only to whom
the Overseers of his Will (the Pastors of the Church) have been appointed to
deliver it.

Ob. S. Cyprian says, The Law forbids the eating of blood, the Gospel commands
it, de Coena Dom.

Ans. This is against, not for you. He speaks of eating, not of drinking; if
you will have it understood of drinking, I answer, it commands Priests, but not
the Laity.

Ob. S. Austin says, All that will have life are exhorted to drink blood, q.
57. in Levit.

Answ. Counsel is no command, and you must note here, that whenever the
Fathers say the Laity have a right to the cup, and ought to receive it, they
speak of times in which the Church so appointed and commanded, which is not
against us.

Ob. The Priest receiving in both kinds, receives but one whole Sacrament:
Therefore both kinds belong to the integrity of the Sacrament.

Answ. I grant the antecedent, but distinguish the consequence, therefore both
kinds belong to the integrity of the Sacrament, and make but one whole
Sacrament, when they are taken together, and ordered to one refection, I grant;
of necessity, always, or when they are taken apart, I deny. For so either kind
is an entire and perfect Sacrament of it self. So many dishes of meat, if eaten
of together and ordered to one refreshing, make but one meal, but eaten of at
several times, and ordered to diverse refections, they make several whole
meals. Christ ordained both kinds, and left it in the power of his Church, to
make them one or two distinct matters of the Sacrament, as the necessity of
times and persons should require.

ARTICLE XIII. Of the unbloudy Sacrifice of the Mass.
EXternal Sacrifice, properly so called, is a worship that belongs to none but
God; and hence it is, the Devil has been long endeavoring, by Heretics and
Sectaries, utterly to abolish the Mass, (the daily sacrifice of Christians)
which Antichrist in the later days shall take away, Dan. 11. 31. The thing
offered and sacrificed in the Mass, we have already demonstrated to be the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, true God and man, under the outward forms of
bread and wine. And, for the action, by which it is sacrificed to God, which
chiefly is discussed in this Article, you are to note,

1. That by the word Sacrifice in this place we understand not a sacrifice in
general, or improperly so termed (such as are all the actions of the mind, or
any work of virtue whatsoever) but a special sacrifice, truly and properly so
called* 2. That the sacrifice of the cross is an absolute, bloody, and general
sacrifice, propitiatory for the sins of the whole world, but the sacrifice of
the last Supper, or the Mass, is a representative, unbloudy, and particular
sacrifice, applying the said general and bloody sacrifice to us.
OUr Tenet is, That the oblation of our Lords last Supper, or the Mass, is a
true and proper unbloudy sacrifice, and propitiatory for sins.

The first Argument.
1. A commemorative sacrifice is the oblation of a sensible thing made to God,
testifying (by force of divine institution) the supreme dominion of God, and
passion of Christ. 2. But Christ at his last Supper (and the same is done in
the Mass) made the oblation of a sensible thing to God, testifying (by force
of his divine institution) the supreme dominion of God, and his own death and
passion. 3. Therefore Christ at his last Supper (and the same is done in the
Mass) offered a true and proper commemorative sacrifice.
The major is manifest of it self, and allowed by all.

The minor is proved; because Christ at his last Supper made the oblation of
his body and blood to God for us, under the visible forms of bread and wine.
This is my body (says he) which is given for you, S. Luke 22. 19. He did not
say, Which is given to you (though he also gave it to them a Sacrament) but
which is given for you; (to show, he first offered it to God for them, a
sacrifice.) This is my blood which is shed for many to the remission of sins,
S. Matthew. 26: 28. It represents the supreme dominion of God, because the things
offered are broken, shed and destroid, according to the outward forms; to show
his power over life and death. It testifies the passion of Christ by force of
his own institution; Do ye this (says he) for a commemoration of me, S. Luke
22.

A second Argument.
1. Christ is a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 7.
11, 15, 17. 2. But the order of Melchisedech's Priesthood consisted principally
in this, That he offered to God the pacifick and unbloudy sacrifice of bread
and wine. 3. Therefore Christ at his last Supper offered to God the pacifick
and unbloudy sacrifice of bread and wine.
The minor (which only requires proof) is proved; And Melckisedech King of
Salem brought forth bread and wine, and he was sacrificing to the most high
God, Genesis 14. 18. The Hebrew word is Cohen Leel, which word Cohel (as often as
it is joined with a Dative case in holy Scripture, as it is here) signifies the
Participle sacrificing, and not the Substantive, a Sacrificer.

The consequence is confirmed, because a similitude in the rite of sacrificing
is that which chiefly pertaines to the similitude of Priesthood.

A third Argument.
1. To offer God a propitiatory sacrifice, is nothing else, but to offer an
Host to God for the remission of sins. 2. But Christ at his last Supper offered
an Host to God for the remission of sins, as I have proved:
Therefore Christ at his last Supper (and the same is done in the Mass)
offered a propitiatory sacrifice.

A fourth Argument.
1. What Christ did in the oblation of his last Supper, he gave his Apostles
and their successors both power and command to do. 2. But Christ in the
oblation of his last Supper offered to God a true and proper commemorative, and
unbloudy sacrifice: (as has been proved by the first and second Arguments:) 3.
Therefore he gave his Apostles and their successors (that is, all lawful
Priests) both power and command to offer unto God a true and proper
commemorative, and unbloudy sacrifice.
The major is proved, Do ye this (which I have done) for a commimoration of me,
S. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11. How long this power was to last, and this command to be
in force, S. Paul has taught us, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye shall declare the death of our Lord until he come, 1 Cor. 11. 16.
which words have been expounded by three general Councils, to signify, that we
do not worthily eat the bread, and drink the cup of our Lord, unless we first
denounce his death, by the consecration and unbloudy sacrificing of his body
and blood. 1. Ephesine, 2. Chalcedon, 3. Constantinopolitan Councils.

The consequence is established, because Christ could not be truly called
Priest for ever according to the Order of Melchisedech, (Psalm. 109. Heb. 5. 10.
and Heb. 6. v. last) unless he had ordained some unbloudy sacrifice, which was
to last to the end of the world, and to be offered by inferior Priests,
subordinate to, and succeeding him in his unbloudy Priesthood, seeing his
bloody Priesthood ceased at his death; neither could that return after his
resurrection, because it was incompatible with his immortality.

Add to this that of Malachy 1. 10, 11. From the rising of the Sun, even to the
setting, great is my name amongst the Gentiles, and there is sacrificed and
offered to my name in every place a clean oblation. The Hebrew word is Mi^cha,
which in Scripture always signifies (when offered unto God) a proper and
unbloudy sacrifice; and cannot otherwise be verified, then by the Priesthood of
the new Law, and the unbloudy sacrifice of the Mass; without which having taken
away all the sacrifices of the old Law, Christ had not increased, but
diminished his Fathers honor. Thus the Doctors and Fathers of the Church proved
the eternity of our Saviors Priesthood, against the Jews, which Sectaries
endeavor to rob him of.

Fathers for this point.
IN the first Age S. Andrew; ^ daily sacrifice an immaculate lamb to almighty
God, who (when he is truly sacrificed, and his flesh truly eaten) remains whole
and alive. In the book of S. Andrew's passion, written by his own disciples,
with Surius.

In the same Age S. Ignatius, S. Peter's Scholar; They (the Saturnian Heretics)
admit not (says he) of Eucharists and oblations, because they confess not the
Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior, who suffered for our sins. In Epist.
ad Sminoum citat. apud Theodoret. Dial. 3.

In the second Age Irenaeus; How can they be assured, the bread in which thanks
are given (a pacifick sacrifice) is made the body of our Lord, and the chalice
his blood, if they acknowledge him not to be the Son of the maker of the world?
lib. 4. cap. 57.

In the third Age Origin; You think your selves guilty, and worthily* if any
part of the consecrated Host be lost through your negligence. Homil. 13. in
Exodus

In the fourth Age Epiphanius; Never shall you find our Lord or his Apostles,
or the Fathers say, that the unbloudy sacrifice which is offered by the Priests
is an image, but his very body and blood. In disputat. cum S. Greg. in 7.
Synod. general. action. 6. tom 3.

In the same Age S. Chrysostom; The wisemen worshipped him in the manger, thou
see him not in the manger, but on the Altar, etc. and the Spirit abundantly
powered out on the sacrifice presented there, in 1. ad Cor. And in another
place; In regard it is offered in many places, be there many Christ's? No: for
as he who is every where offered, is one body, and not many bodies, so the
sacrifice is one. Homil. 17. in Epist. ad Heb.

In the same Age S. Hierome; He is the inviter, and the banqu^t, we drink his
bl^ud, etc. and in his sacrifices we daily press ruddy sweet wines from the
true grape. Q. 2. Epist. ad Haediber.

In the same Age S. Ambrose; When we sacrifice Christ is present. In cap. 1. S.
Luc. And in another place; Though Christ is not seen to offer now, yet he
himself is offered on earth, when the body of Christ is offered, nay he
himself is manifested to offer in us, whose speech* does sanctify the
sacrifice which is offered. In Psalm. 38.

In the fifth age S. Augustine; When now we see this sacrifice offered to God
in every place by the Priesthood of Christ according to the order of
Melchisedech, and the Jews sacrifice to cease, why do they yet expect another
Christ? Tom. 5. de civitat. D^i cap. 35. And (l. 9. Confess. c. 3.) he tells
us, His another Monica desired on her deathbed, that memory should be made of
her at the Altar, from whence she knew the holy sacrifice to be dispensed,
wherewith the indictment against us was blotted out.

The first Nicene Council decrees, By says let us understand the Lamb of God,
who takes away the sins of the world, to be placed on the sacred Table, to be
sacrificed by the Priests unbloud^ly, etc. L. 3. Decret. de divina Mensa. An.
Dom. 315.

Objections solved.
Ob. WHen Christ said, This is my body which is given for you. This is my blood
which is shed, etc. He spoke only of what was given, and shed the day
following on the Cross.

Answ. No; He spoke of what he himself there gave and shed at his last Supper,
commanding his Apostles to do the same, Do y^ this, etc. They were not
commanded to give his body or shed his blood the day following on the cross;
the words are, Which is given, which is shed, in all the Greek and Syriack
Bibles, as also in your English versions. And S. Paul has prevented that
evasion, by saying, This is my body which is broken (unbloudily sacrificed) for
you, 1 Cor. 11. 24. and S. Luke also by saying, this is the chalice the new
Testament in my blood, which (chalice) is shed for you, S. Luke 22. 20. So the
Greek text has it. His body was not broken on the cross, ( They did not
diminish any bone of him, S. John c. 19.) but only at his last Supper under the
outward form of bread; neither was his blood shed out of the cup on the cross,
but only the night before, under the form of wine. This argument was used by S.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Echumenius above a thousand years ago, to prove
the Mass a true unbloudy sacrifice, in 1 Cor. 10. 16.

Ob. The vulgar Latin Edition reads, which shall be given or broken, which
shall be shed.

Answ. True; and this proves, that it was not only thus given and broken at his
last Supper, but also to be given, broken, and shed by his Apostles and their
successors, to the end of the world; which we acknowledge. This does not
prejudice the Greek and Syriack texts.

Ob. Christ's body is not broken in the Eucharist, nor his blood shed.

Answ. Bloudily, visibly, or in its own form, I grant; unbloudily,
representatively, and in the form of bread and wine, I deny. The bread which we
break, is it not a participation of the body of our Lord? 1 Cor. 10. 16. and
his blood, as under the form of wine, was shed and powered out of the cup, in a
sacramental and unbloudy way. A farther conviction of this verity is, because
Christ at his last Supper instituted and sealed his last will and Testament.
This is the chalice, the new Testament in my blood, S. Luke 22. This chalice is
the new Testament in my blood, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 25. Now a Testament cannot be
made betwixt God and man, without shedding of blood. Neither was the first
(Testament) dedicated without blood, Heb. 9. 18. And again, Without shedding of
blood there is no remission, verse. 22. Therefore at his last Supper Christ shed
his blood, at least in an unbloudy manner.

Ob. Christ entered once by his own blood into the Holies, eternal redemption
being found, Heb. 9. verse. 12.

Answ. True; he entered once, and but once, by his own blood, bloudily shed, and
to redeem us, but often by his own blood shed unbloudily, and to apply the
redemption to our souls. First by himself at his last Supper, the rest by his
Ministers on the Altar, where he sacrifices invisibly, they visibly; they as
the instruments, he as the principal cause.

Ob. If we sin willingly after the knowledge of the truth received, now there
is not an Host for sin, Heb. 10. verse. 26.

Answ. He speaks only there of such as apostatize from the faith, and forsake
the true Church, out of which there is no true sacrifice: so all the Fathers
expound this place, and this is not against us.

Ob. Christ offered one Host for sins, Heb. 10. 12. By one oblation he has
consummated for ever them that be sanctified, ver. 14.

Answ. The Host or Oblation is one and the same on the cross, and all the
altars of the world, though the manner of offering be diverse, there bloody,
here unbloudy; And wheresoever S. Paul says, that Christ offered himself once,
or but once, he apparently speaks of the bloody offering, using the words
(...), and (...), which signify a bloody sacrifice, and to sacrifice bloudily.

Ob. If a living thing be sacrificed, it must be killed.

Answ* If it be sacrificed in its own proper form, I grant; if in the form of
an inanimate thing (as the body of Christ is in the Eucharist) I deny.

Ob. The bloody sacrifice was sufficient for all; therefore the unbloudy is
superfluous.

Answ. I grant the antecedent* but deny the consequence. For though the bloody
sacrifice were sufficient for all, yet it is not efficient to all, unless it be
applied to us by the unbloudy.

Ob. The Eucharist is a commemoration of the bloody sacrifice; therefore not a
sacrifice it self.

Answ. Your antecedent is true, but your consequence false. All the unbloudy
sacrifices of the old Law were true and proper sacrifices themselves, and yet
commemorations or representations of the unbloudy sacrifice of the last Supper,
which was to come. The same thing in one time or circumstance may commemorate
and represent it self as in another.

Ob. You equalize the sacrifice of the Mass, to the sacrifice of the cross.

Answ. No, we do not, speaking of the action of the sacrifice; for we confess
the sacrifice of the cross to be an absolute sacrifice, and propitiatory for
the sins of the whole world, in order to redemption; but the sacrifice of the
Mass is only a particular representative and applicatory sacrifice, and has
its worth and efficacy from it.

Ob. Christ remains a Priest for ever: therefore all Priesthood is translated
into him alone.

Answ. I deny the consequence; for he is not only a Priest, but a high Priest
for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech; And therefore must have
others under him, to the worlds end (as has been proved) of the same order.

Ob. If Christ be a Priest for ever, he sacrifices for ever.

Answ. Invisibly, and by his subordinate Ministers, I grant; so Christ
baptizeth, teaches, and governs the Church for ever, invisibly, and by his
Ministers; by himself, I say, invisibly, by them visibly.

Ob. S. Paul knew nothing of unbloudy sacrifice, otherwise doubtless he had
mentioned it in his Epistle to the Hebrews*

Answ. Yes, he did; for he says the Priests offered for sins (...) ( Heb. 5.
1. cap. 8. ver. 3. c. 9. v. 9.) that is, unbloudy and bloody offerings. And for
the unbloudy sacrifice of the new Law, he has given ample testimony in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, above cited. It Is true, in his Epistle to the
Hebrews he did not dispute with the Jews concerning the unbloudy sacrifice of
the new Law, because they would not yet believe the bloody, and therefore it was
requisite he should as yet conceal this greater mystery from them: this was the
reason, why, speaking to them of Christ, as high Priest for ever according to
the order of Melchisedech, he said* Of whom we have great speech, and
inexplicable to utter, because y^ are become weak to hear, Heb. 5. 11.

Ob. S. Paul proves, that the Jews sacrifice of expiation did not cleanse from
all sin, and make the offerers thereof perfect, because it was repeated yearly.
Therefore the sacrifice of the Mass which is so often repeated, is not
propitiatory for sin.

Answ. I grant the antecedent: The Jews yearly sacrifice of expiation was not
propitiatory for all sin past, present, and to come, as the sacrifice of the
cross was, otherwise it could not need to have been yearly repeated, or to be
offered more then once; yet I deny the consequence; for though the sacrifice of
the Mass be not propitiatory for sins to come, or in order to redemption, yet
it applies the sacrifice of the cross to us, and is propitiatory for sins past,
if truly sorrowed for: and as we are daily prone to sin, so need we a daily
sacrifice for sin.

S. Paul's principal intent in his Epistle to the Hebrews, was to show the Jews,
that no sacrifice of the old Law was general, and propitiatory for all sin, or
able to reconcile the whole world to God, as the sacrifice of the cross was; so
that it had been impertinent for him to have disputed there of the unbloudy
sacrifice of the Mass, which is not of such universal force or efficacy.

Ob. Where there is remission of sins, now there is not an oblation for sins,
Heb. 10. 18.

Answ. Where there is a general remission of sins, such as was on the cross,
now there is not a general oblation for sins, such as was there made, I grant.
Now there is not a particular and applicatory oblation for sins, such as is
made in the Mass, I deny. Or thus, now there is not a bloody oblation for sins,
or with yearly change of the Host, I grant: Now there is not an unbloudy
oblation for sins, made always with one and the same Host, I deny, and so does
S. Paul, saying in the person of Christ, This is my body which is broken
(unbloudily sacrificed) for you, etc. Do ye this for a commemoration of me, 1
Cor. 11.

ARTICLE XIV. Of the Liturgy, and public Prayer in an unknown Tongue.
OUr Tenet is, That though it be not of divine command, yet it is good, lawful
and expedient for the Mass, or public Liturgy of the Church, to be in a
Tongue not generally understood by the people, proved thus.

The first Argument.
1. What the Apostles did and practiced in this behalf, is good, lawful, and
expedient for us to do and practice. 2. But their Liturgies were in sacred
languages, and such as were not generally known by all the Nations they
converted. 3. Therefore it is good, lawful, and expedient for our public
Liturgies to be in sacred Languages and tongues not generally understood by all
the Nations they are used in.
The major is evident of it self.

The minor is proved, because their public Liturgies were all in Hebrew,
Greek, Syriack, or Latin, as is manifest in History, which were not the
generally known languages of all, not half the Nations by them converted. And
the like argument holds in the Fathers of all succeeding ages, whose public
Liturgies were for the most part in Hebrew, Greek or Latin.

A second Argument.
1. That which is praised in holy Scripture, and may be proved by Scripture to
be both pleasing to God, and profitable to our souls, is good, lawful, and
expedient for us to practice. 2. But prayer in an unknown Tongue (speaking in
general) is praised in holy Scripture, and may be proved by Scripture to be
both pleasing to God, and profitable to our souls. 3. Therefore prayer in an
unknown Tongue (speaking in general) is good, lawful, and expedient for us to
practice.
The major is more evident then to need proof.

The minor is proved. He that speaks with tongue [unknown] speaks not to
men, but to God, for no man hears, but in spirit he speaks mysteries, 1
Cor. 14. 2. I would have you to speak with tongues, but rather to prophecy,
verse. 5. Thou indeed give thanks well [in an unknown tongue] but the other is
not edified, verse. 17. If I pray with tongue [unknown] my spirit prays but my
understanding is without fruit, ver. 14. I will pray in the spirit [in a tongue
unkown] and I will pray in the understanding [in a tongue unknown] verse. 15. To
speak with tongues forbid ye not, verse 40. Why then are Sectaries so bold to
do it?

A third Argument.
1. In matters of discipline and government, where God has commanded nothing,
the command of the Church ought to be followed and obeyed. 2. But God has
commanded nothing concerning the language of the public Liturgy* 3. Therefore
as to the language of the public Liturgy, the command of the Church ought to
be followed and obeyed, which ordains it to be in sacred languages.
The major is proved, because, under God, she is our chief Mistress, Lady, and
Governess. If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as the Heathen,
and the Publican, S. Matthew. 18. 18.

The Minor shall be proved by the solution of Objections.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age S. Dionysius tells us, The sacred mysteries were kept secret
from the common people, Eccles. Hierarch* c. 1. A certain proof they were not
celebrated in the common languages of the people.

In the third Age S. Cyprian testifies, the public Liturgy was in Latin, In
Exposit. Orationis Domin. number. 13.

In the fourth Age S. Hierom affirms, All the Eastern Church was served in
Greek, and used S. Basils Greek Liturgy. Praefat in Paralip.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine witnesses, That all the Western Church was
served in Latin, and used the Latin Liturgy. De don. perse. c. 13. de Doct.
Christian, l. 2. ^. 13. in Psalm. 123. and Epist. 173.

Objections solved.
Ob. IF I come to you speaking with tongues [unknown] what shall it profit you?
1 Cor. 14. 6. And again, If then I know not the virtue of the voice, I shall be
to him to whom I speak barbarous, and he that speaks barbarous to me, verse.
11. And a third time, So you also speaking with a tongue, unless you utter
manifest speech, how shall that be known that is said, for you shall be
speaking into the air? verse. 9.

Answ. S. Paul in those places speaks only against the public use of strange
tongues miraculously inspired, and not intelligible, but by the special gift of
interpretation, not against tongues gotten by industry, and well understood by
the more learned sort of all Nations, such as Greek and Latin are* Besides, he
only speaks there against speech addressed to the people by way of exhortation,
and instruction, in strange tongues, not against speech in unknown tongues,
which is addressed to God only by way of prayer, such as the public Liturgy
is; that he allows, at least in general terms, as you have heard. That this
is S. Paul's scope and mind, appears partly by the very texts objected; for it
follows in the first of them, What shall I profit you, unless I speak to you
in revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophecy, or in doctrine, verse. 6. And a
little before, For he that prophecieth speaks to men, unto edification, and
exhortation, and instruction, verse. 3. So that this makes nothing against us.

Ob. He that speaks with tongue (uknown) let him pray that he may interpret;
the same Epist. v. 13.

Answ. This concerns neither prayer, nor the public Liturgy, but exhortation;
and if it did concern prayer, our answer would be, Our public Liturgy is well
understood by all the Priests, and well interpreted for the Laity, word by
word, many hundred years ago.

Ob. If thou bless in spirit (a tongue unknown) he that supplieth the place of
the vulgar, how shall he say Amen? Because he knows not what thou say, 1 Corinthians. chapter 14. ver. 16.

Answ. He speaks there only against extemporarie prayer in an unknown tongue,
and that not interpreted, not against set form of prayer in an unknown tongue
(such as the public Liturgy is) and that expounded and approved by the
Church; to this the Clark may boldly say Amen. Let him explicate his own
meaning: He that speaks with tongue, let him pray that he may interpret, ver.
13. And if there be no interpreter, let him hold his peace in the Church, and
let him speak to God and himself, verse. 28. This is not our case, our public
Liturgy has many great and good Interpreters. Our exhortation and instruction
of the people, as also our extemporary prayer, addressed to them before
Sermons, or after, is always in the known, and common Language of the people.

And for your better apprehension of the grand abuse of Protestants, in urging
these texts to the people, against the public Liturgy in an unknown tongue,
please to note,

First, There is not any one text or word in all that chapter, concerning the
public Liturgy, or set form of prayer, which is addressed to God only, but
merely concerning exhortation and instruction of the people, and extemporary
prayer addressed to them in an unknown tongue: that, and only that is there
forbidden, not absolutely, but with limitation, If there be no Interpreter.

Note secondly, That the Laity in our Church are not commanded to pray in an
unknown tongue, but have their Offices and Devotions in their own vulgar
Language and such as will, may also have the Mast translated for them, and pray
in the same words with the Priest, what then is here to be complained of? By
keeping the Liturgy in the sacred Languages (which are the same in all ages)
it has been kept free from the corruptions, and mutability of other common
Languages; so that the whole Church is able to judge of her own Liturgy, when
any differences arise about it, which otherwise it could not.

ARTICLE XV. Of Sacramental Confession, and Absolution.
OUr Tenet is, That true, and lawfully ordained Priests have a power from God
to b^nde, and loose from sins, and that the Laity are obliged to confess their
sins to them, as also the Priests themselves to one another.

The Argument.
1. If the Apostles were made spiritual Judges by Christ our Lord, and had a
power from him to bind and loose from sin, it follows by a necessary sequel,
that the Laity were obliged to confess their sins to them. 2. But the Apostles
were made spiritual Judges by Christ our Lord, and had a power from him to bind
and loose from sin. 3. Therefore the ^^ity were obliged to confess their sins
to them. And the same argument holds in their Successors, that is, all true,
and lawfully ordained Priests.
The major is proved; Because the very institution and investure of a power of
Judicature in Superiors, inferres a necessary command to all inferious, of
giving obedience to such power, otherwise the institution and investure were
altogether vain and idle, neither could they absolve them from what they knew
not.

The minor is proved; Amen I say to you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, it
shall be bound also in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed also in heaven, S Matthew. 18. ver. 18. There he made them Judges. Receive
ye the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye shall forgive they are forgiven, and whos^
sins ye shall retain they are retained, S. John 20. ver. 23. There he gave them
commission to remit sins. S. Paul gives testimony to his Master, saying; God
has given us the ministry of reconciliation, and has put in us the word of
reconciliation; for Christ therefore are we Legates, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20.

Add to this the figures of the old Law, The judgment of the Leprosy, which
was a type of sin, was committed to Priests only* Levit. 13. 14.

The consequence is confirmed: Confess your sins to one another, S. James 5*
16. And if we confes^^^r sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our ^^ns,
1 John 1. 9. You hear confession is a necessary condition.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age S. Clement; But if perhaps ^^vy, or infidelity, or any other
evil have crept h^d^enly into any ones heart, let him, that has a care of his
soul, not blush to confess these things to him that rules him, that he may be
cured of him by the word of God (that is, the words of absolution instituted by
Christ) and good counsel. And again S. Peter taught us to break the evil
thoughts coming to our hearts upon Christ, and to manifest them to the Priests
of our Lord, Epist. 1, 2.

In the third Age Tertullian reprehends those who for humane bashfulness
neglected to confess their sins. l. de poenitent.

In the third Age Origin; There is by penance the remission of sins, when he
washes his bed with tears, and blasheth not to show his sin to the Priest of
our Lord. Hom. 2. in Levit. And again, Peter and Paul, and all such as have
been placed in the Church after the Apostles, are also Physicians, to whom the
discipline of curing wounds has been committed, etc. because God wills not the
death of sinners, but their repentance Hom. 1. in Psalm. 37.

S. Cyprian in the same age, Let every one of you, I beseech you brethren,
confess his sin, whilst he ^^ yet in this life, whilst his confession may be
admitted, whilst every ones satisfaction and rem^ssion made by the Priest is
grateful with our Lord. Tract. de lap^is.

In the fourth Age S. Athanasiu^; If thy bonds are not yet loosed, comm^nd thy
self to the Disciples of j^^u^; for there be those that can absolve thee, by
the power they received from our Saviou^, when he said, Whatsoever ye shall
bind, etc. Sermon in illa verba, Invenietis pullum.

In the same Age S. Ambrose; Confess freely to the Priest the hidden secrets of
thy soul and sh^^ them, as th^^ would thy hidden wounds to thy Physician.
Orat. in mulierem peccatricem.

In the same Age S. Hierome, As there (in the old Law) the Priest makes the
leprous person clean, or unclean, so here the Bishop or Priest binds or
loses. in c. 16. Matthew.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine: Our God, because he is pious and merciful,
will have us confess our sins in this world, that we may not be confounded for
them in the next, Homil. 12. And again, I^ murder be committed by a
Catechumen, it is washed away by baptism* if by one baptized, it needs penance
and reconciliation. l. 2. de adulterinis conjug. c 16.

The first Cabilon Council has defined, That their confession being made,
Penance ^e enjoined to penitents by Priests, Can. 8. above 1000. years ago.

The Council of Florence defined Penance to be a Sacrament, and that the effect
of it is absolution from sin. Decret. super Union. Jacobin. and Armen. An. Do^.
1431.

The 3. Council of Carthage decreed, That the time of Penance should be
appointed penitents by the arbitrament of the Bishop, according to the
difference of their sins. Can. 31. 1100. years ago.

Objections solved.
Ob. CHrist gave the power to absolve from sins, to none but his Apostles.

Answ. He gave it immediately to them, and in them to their lawful successors,
as he did also the power to preach and baptize. Go ye teaching all nations,
baptizing them, etc. was said immediately to none but the Apostles, but
mediately to all true Priests* And so was that, Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven.

Ob. Who can forgive sins but only God?

Answ. 'Twas the Jews objection against Christ, S. Mark 2. which he confuted
with a miracle, by healing the Paralitique, to prove that he had power even as
man to remit sins: and would bestow this power on men: For the multitude
glorified God, who had given such power to men (viz. in and through Christ) S.
Matthew. 9* 8. It Is true, none but God can forgive sins of himself, or by his own
proper power, man's power in this being only ministerial, and delegated from
Christ.

Object. Come unto me all ye that labor* S. Matthew. 11.

Answ. In vain pretend they to come to Christ, who refuse to come to his
Ministers, and to make use of such means as he appointed for our coming to him,
amongst which sacramental confession and Priestly absolution from our sins is
not the least, as has been proved. Some have rejected baptism on the same
score, but such as really intend to come to Christ, must not neglect or slight
his constitutions.

Ob. Pope Innocent the third was the first that ordained auricular confession.

Answ. Christ himself ordained it, nor had it ever otherwise been possible to
have persuaded the world to it: Innocent only determined the time of confession
to be at Easter, or thereabouts. The Iacobites An. Dom. 600, which was six
hundred years before his time, were condemned for holding, men ought to confess
their sins to God* and that confession to a Priest was not necessary.

Ob. You think then the Priest can save your and pardon your sins without
Christ.

An. I doubt you wilfully mistake: we think and know the Priest is able to do
nothing in order to it, but as the Minister, and through the merits of Christ,
and by commission received from him.

Ob. At least you believe, though your sins be never so great and enormous, if
you do but only confess them to a Priest, all is well again.

Answ You are again in an uncharitable mistake* we believe, and are taught,
that not only a faithful and sincere confession of our sins to a Priest, but
also hearty grief and sorrow for them, with a steadfast purpose of amendment and
a desire to make all possible satisfaction (by doing such penance as shall in
the Sacrament be enjoined us) is requisi^e for the re^ission of them; and that
if any of these things be wanting, as w^ll our confession, as his absolution,
is of no validity

Ob. What needs all this, when the Pope for a little money can g^ve you a
pard^n to commit what sins you list for forty or a hundred years together?

Answ. You sl^nder very much: the Pope ha'^ no such power, nor did he ever yet
pretend to it: might he have all the kingdoms of the earth for doing it, he
could not warrant ^s to commit any one sin, we should deride such pardons,
should he offer them, and look ^^ them as horrid blasphemies. The pardons ^o^
aim at, are only Indulgen^^^, which concern not the remission of ^ine, but
only the release of Canonical penances, or tempora^ punishments due to such
^ins, as have already been remitted by penance and contrition.

Ob. We do not read the Apostles exacted auricular confession of any.

Answ. Nor do we read they absolved any* yet they did both, we have an
Apostolical Tradition for it: otherwise they made voi^ the Ordinance of Christ,
or gave the mad ma^s absolution, by absolving from they kn^w not what: and
that, I hope, you will not charge them with*

Ob. Christ's passion is sufficient for all.

Answ. True, but not efficient, unless applied, and this is one effectual mean^
of doing it.

ARTICLE XVI. Of Purgatory.
OUr Tenet is, That there is a third place of temporal punishment, where some
souls are purged and punished after this life; which we prove thus.

The Argument.
1. By Purgatory we only understand a penal prison, or place of temporal
punishment and payment after this life. 2. But there is such a penal prison, or
place of temporal punishment and payment after this life. 3. Therefore there is
a Purgatory.
The major is evident, by the Churches declaration of her own meaning in it.

The minor is proved; Thou also in the blood of thy Testament have let forth
thy prisoners out of the lake wherein there is not water, Zach. 9. 11. (He
speaks of Christ) He shall sit as purging fire, and shall purge the sons of
Lev^, Mal. c. 3.

The work of every man shall be manifest, for the day of our Lord will declare
it, because it will be revealed in fire, and the work of every one of what sort
it is the fire shall tri^; if any man's work abide, he shall receive a reward
(as Innocents, and Martyrs, and perfect Christians do, who go immediately to
heaven) if any ones work burn, he shall suffer loss, but himself shall be
saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 13. 14. 15. See a purging and punishing,
yet saving fire: Be at agreement with thy adversary betimes, whilst thou art
on the way (in this life) with him, lest thy adversary deliver thee to the
Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Jailer, and thou be cast into prison,
Amen, I say to thee, thou shall not go out from thence, till thou repay the
last farthing, S. Matthew. 5. 27. (A place of payment, and yet delivery at
length.) Some sins shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come, S. Matthew. 12. 32. Therefore some, according to our Savior, are forgiven
in the world to come, to wit, venial sins.

That the guilt of temporal punishment may and does sometimes remain after the
guilt of sin is pardoned, and the eternal punishment remitted, is proved by
these examples of holy Scripture. First by Adam, who was cast out of paradise
for ever, and had his whole posterity punished with concupiscence, death, and
many other miseries, after his sin of disobedience was forgive^ him, by means
of that only sin. Secondly, By David, whose ^^n of adultery was punished with
the death of his child, after his sin had been remitted, ^ Kings 24. Thirdly,
By Mary, Moses his sister* who after her sin had been forgiven her, was
enjoined a penance for it of seven days, Number. 12. O King (says Daniel) redeem
thy sins with alms* c. 4. Do ye the worthy fruits of penance, S. Luke 3. 8.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age Tertullian; Seeing we understand that prison which the
Gospel demonstrate^ to be places below, and the last f^rthing we interpret
every small ^ault there to be punished, by the delay of the resurrection, no
man will doubt but that the soul does recompense something in the places below.
L. de anima c. 58.

In the third Age S. Cyprian; It is one thing, being cast into prison, not to
go out thence till he pay the utmost fa^thing, another, presently to receive
the reward of faith, one thing being afflicted with long pains for sins to be
mended, and purged long with fire, another to have purged all sins by
sufferings. Epist. 52. ad Anto^^.

In the fourth Age S. Ambrose; But whereas S. Paul says, yet so a^ by fire, he
shows indeed that he shall be saved, but yet shall suffer the punishment of
fire; that, being purged by fire, he may be saved, and not tormented for ever,
as the infidels are with everlasting fire. in c. 3. Epist. ad Cor.

In the same Age S. Hierome; This is that which he says, thou shall not go out
of prison till thou shall pay even thy little sins. in c 5 Matthew:

In the fifth Age S. Augusti^; Neither could it be truly said of some, That
they are neither forgiven in this life, nor in the life to come, unless there
were some, who though they are not forgiven in this life, yet should be in the
life to come l. 20. de civit. Dei c. 24 and l. 21. c. 13. And again, With that
transitory fire whereof the Apostle said, He shall be saved, yet so as by fire,
not capital, but little sins are purged. Sermon. 41. de Sanctis. And in a third
place, He shall be safe, yet so as by fire: And because it is said, He shall be
safe, that fire is contemned, yet that fire shall be more grievous then whatever
a man can suffer in this life. Purge me, Lord, in this life, and make me such
an one as shall not need that mending fire. in Psalm. 37.

The Council of Sens has defined, That the fault by penance being taken away,
there often remains the guilt of temporal punishment, etc. which ^^ to be
purged by fruits of worthy penance, Decret. 12. An. Dom. 1431.

The Council of Florence has defined, That such as shall die truly penitent in
the charity of God, before they have satisfied for their commissions and
omissions by worthy fruits of penance, their souls are purged with purging
pains. Sess. ult. An. Dom. 1431.

Objections solved.
Ob. THe impiety of the impious man shall not hurt him, at what day soever he
shall be converted from his impiety.

Answ. It shall not hurt him, so as to exclude him from grace, and everlasting
life, I grant; but may make him guilty of temporal punishment.

Ob. If the tree fall to the North, or to the South, or in what place soever it
shall fall, there it shall lie.

Answ. North and South may signify Hell and Purgatory (for ought you know) and
then nothing against us, but if you will needs have it signify Hell and
Heaven, yet is not Purgatory excluded by that text; for it allows of other
places, Or in what place soever it fall, etc.

Ob. Blessed are the dead who die in our Lord* from henceforth now says the
spirit, they rest from their labors, for their works follow them, Apoc. 14.

Answ. This may be understood of Martyrs only, who have no Purgatory. Calvin
expounds, Who die in our Lord; for our Lords cause; but it is rather spoken of
the day of judgment, when it is said from henceforth: and after that there shall
be no Purgatory.

Ob. When he shall give sleep to his Beloved, behold the inheritance of our Lord
Psalm. 126.

Answ. That may be meant of the peculiarly Beloved, who need no Purgatory; but
S. Augustine expounds it of the general Resurrection, after which Purgatory
shall cease.

Ob. Come O ye blessed* etc. and go ye accursed, etc. conclude all.

Answ. A^ relating to the day of judgment, of which they are spoken I grant it;
as relating to the hour of death, I deny it; all do not presently either
possess heaven, or enter hell.

Ob. S. Augustine says, Beware brethren, let no man delude you, there are but
two places.

Answ. There is not any third place of everlasting rest for infants, who die
without Baptism, (as the Pelagians held) I grant: There is not any third place
of temporal punishment, I deny; and so does S. Augustine in several places
above cited.

ARTICLE XVII. Of Prayer for the Dead.
OUr Tenet is, That it is a holy and charitable custom, to offer prayers and
oblations to God, for the souls of the faithful departed: which we prove thus.

The Argument.
1. If there be a place of temporal punishment, where some souls are purged,
and venial sins remitted after this life, then that charity which binds us to
pray that the living may be saved, will bind us also to pray that the dead may
be freed from their punishments. 2. But there is a place of temporal
punishment, where some souls are purged, and venial sins remitted after this
life, as has been proved in the precedent Article. 3. Therefore the same
charity that binds us to pray the living may be saved, binds us also to pray
the dead may be freed from their punishments.
The sequel of the major (which only needs proof) is evinced, because the souls
of the faithful departed, not being now in a capacity to merit, nor
consequently to help themselves, have greater need of our assistance then the
living; therefore '^is greater charity to relieve them.

A second Argument.
1. To deny obstinately what is revealed in holy Scripture is no less then
heresy. 2. But it is revealed in holy Scripture, that the prayers and
oblations of the Church are available for the souls of the faithful departed,
3. Therefore to deny this obstinately can be no less then heresy.
The first proposition is granted by all.

The second is proved: Judas Machabe^s sent twelve thousund drams of silver
to Jerusalem for sacrifice to be offered for sins (viz for those that were
slain) well and religiously thinking of the resurrection, etc. It is therefore
a holy and a healthful cogitation to pray for the dead, that they may be loosed
from their sins, 2. Machab. c. 12. v. 43, 44, 45. King David mourned, wept, and
fasted after the death of Saul and Ionathas, 2 King. 1. The men of Iabes Gal^ad
fasted and mourned for it seven days together without reproof, 2 Kings 14. 21.
What shall they do who are baptized for the dead (by weeping, fasting, giving
alms, and praying for them) if the dead rise not at all? Why then are they
baptized for the dead? 1 Cor. 15. 29. In this sense the Fathers expound the
word baptism, or baptize, S. Cyprian de coena Dom. Nazianzen orat. de
Epiphania. And Christ himself saying, I am to be baptized with a baptism,
meaning his passion, and sufferings for our sins.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age S. Clement tells us, S. Peter taught them, among other works
of mercy, to bury the dead, and diligently perform their funeral Rites, and
also to pray and give alms for them; Epist. 1. de S. Petro.

In the second Age Tertullian, We make yearly ^blations for the dead, de corona
militis.

In the third Age Origin, Though a releasement out of prison be promised, (S.
Matthew. 5.) yet it is signified, that none can get out from thence but he who
pays the utmost farthing, in Epist. ad Roman. and Hom. 35. in S. Luc.

In the fourth Age S. Cyril of Jerusalem, We beseech God for all those who
have died before us, believing the obsecration of that holy and dreadful
sacrifice which is put on the altar, to be the greatest help of the souls for
which it is offered, Catech. mystagog. 5.

In the same Age S. Hierom, These things were not in vain ordained by the
Apostles, that in the venerable and dreadful mysteries (the Mass) there should
be made a memory of those who have departed this life: they knew much benefit
would hence accrue to them, Homil. 3. in Epist. ad Philip.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine; Neither is it to be denied, that the souls of
the dead are eased by the piety of their living friends, when the sacrifice of
the Mediator is offered for them, in Enchirid. c. 110. and l. de cura pro
mortuis, c. 1.

Again, We read in the Books of the Machabees of sacrifice offered for the
dead, but though it were no where read in the old Testament, yet not small is
the authority of the universal Church, which shines in this custom, where the
commendation of the dead has its place in the prayers of the Priest, which are
powered out to our Lord God at his altar, l. de cura pro pro mort. c. 1.

The first Nicene Council decreed thus, When a Bishop dies, let notice be given
of his death t^ all Churches and Monasteries in the Parish, that prayers be
made for him, c. 65. Arab. anno Dom. 325.

The second Cabilon Council decreed; I^ further seems good to us, that in all
the solim^ities of Masses our Lord be prayed to in due place for the souls of
the dead, etc. therefore the holy Church keeps anciently this custom, etc. c.
79.

The Council of Florence defined, That the suffrages, Masses, prayers, and alms
of the living profit the souls of the faithful departed, that they may be
eased of their pains. Sess. ult. An. Dom. 1439.

Objections solved.
Ob. TThere is a sin to death, for that I say not that any man ask, 1. S. John
5. 16. Therefore we must not pray for the sins of the dead.

Answ. By a sin to death, the Apostle signifies final impenitence, or a mortal
sin persever'd in till death, and for such a sin we are not taught to pray; so
that I distinguish your consequence. Therefore we must not pray for the sins of
the dead who die impenitent, I grant; who die penitent and confessed, I deny;
and so does S. John in the words immediately preceding; He that knows his
brother to sin a sin not to death, let him ask, and life shall be given him,
sinning not to death.

Ob. Whatsoever thy hand is able to do, work it instantly; for neither work,
nor reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge shall be in hell, Eccles. 9. 10.

Ansm. S. Hierome tells you that place is either understood of the impious, who
believe there is no hell at all, or of such as go immediately to the hell of
the damned, for whom there is no comfort or relief in the prayers and offerings
of the Church; (which we grant) Comment, in hun^ locum.

Ob. We must every one receive the proper things of the body, according as he
has done either good or evil 2 Cor. 5. 10. Therefore the prayers of the
living cannot profit the souls of the dead.

Answ. Your consequence is false; for as S. Augustine says, The souls in
Purgatory receive more or less benefit by the prayers and sacrifices of the
Church, as every soul is worthy either ^ase or misery, according as she has
wrought living in the flesh. L. de cura pro mort. c. 1.

Ob. Souls cannot merit in Purgatory: Therefore they cannot satisfy in
Purgatory. Therefore vain are their sufferings there, and vain our prayers for
them.

Answ. Your first proposition is true, but your consequences are both vain and
false. A man cannot merit without liberty, but he may satisfy, though compelled
to it by the Judge; and so do souls in Purgatory: Therefore our prayers are
available for them, to free them from that compulsorie punishment.

Ob. The very thief that was saved from the cross was in heaven with Christ the
very same day: This day thou shall be with me in paradise, S. Luke 23. 43.
therefore doubtless there is no third place, nor prayer for the dead.

Answ. By Paradise in that place is signified Limbus Pa^rum, or the prison of
the ancient Fathers, which was then made a Paradise, or place of blessedness,
by reason of the presence of Christ's humane Soul, and Divinity in it. For
Christ, being dead, immediately descended thither, according to that, He
descended into hell.

Ob. I do not believe a Limbus Patrum, or that the Fathers were kept in prison
till the coming, and death of Christ.

Answ. No, nor the Scriptures, nor the Apostles Creed, farther then it pleases
your fancy: The Scriptures teach: Thou (Christ) in the blood of thy testament
have let forth thy prisoners out of the lake in which there is no water, Zach.
9. 11. The Fathers of the old Testament died according to faith, not having
received the promises, Heb. 11. 13. God has provided for us some better thing;
that they without us should not be consummate, Heb. 13. 40. That Christ rose
from the dead, the first fruits of them that sleep, I Cor. 15. 20. The first
begotten of the dead, Colos. 1. 18. That the way of the Holies (heaven, Heb. 9.
24.) was not yet manifested, the former tabernacle (the old Testament) yet
standing, Heb. 9. 8. That the Son of man was in the heart of the earth three
days and three nights, S. Matthew. 12. 40. That God did not leave his soul in
hell, Acts 2. 27. That, ascending on high, he led captivity captive, and gave
gifts to men, having first descended into the lower parts of the earth, Ephesians.
4. 8. That he holds the primacy in all things, being the beginning and first
born of the dead, Colos. 1. 18. That being slain he came in spirit and preached
to them that were in prison, who had been incredulous in the days of Noah,
when the Ark was building, 1 Pet. 3. 19. Yet all this you will not believe, who
can help it? All true believers do, and know your consequence to be false.

The fourth Toletan Council defines, That Christ descended into hell, that he
might take out from thence the Saints that were kept, and overcome the power of
death, etc. This is the faith of the Catholic Church, etc. c. 1. an. Dom. 681.

ARTICLE XVIII. Of ^ndulgences.
NOte, for your better understanding this question;

First, That Indulgences, or Pardons (as some call them) concern not at all the
remission of sins either mortal or venial, but suppose all mortal sins remirted
by contrition and the Sacraments (otherwise they profit us nothing) and respect
only the remission of canonical penances, and such temporal punishments as are,
and may be enjoined us by the Church. Secondly, They no way exempt or free us
from natural infirmities, or from the punishments of outward Courts, or in the
inward Court of God, but only in the Court of Penance. THis presupposed, our
Tenet is, That the Church has a judiciary power from God (our sins being first
remitted by the Sacraments) to release all canonical penances, with all other
temporal punishments which are or may be enjoined us by the Church in the Court
of Penance, whilst we are under her jurisdiction. Proved thus.
The first Argument.
1. That power which can bind, can loose. 2. But the Church has a power from
God to bind and oblige us in the Court of Penance to some temporal punishments,
after the sins themselves are forgiven. 3. Therefore the Church has a power in
the Court of Penance to release and loose us from the said temporal
punishments.
The major is evident by induction, in all judiciary and obliging powers, or
Tribunals, whether spiritual or temporal.

The minor is proved, by that Commission first promised S. Peter: To thee will
I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatever thou shall bind on earth
shall be bound also in heaven, and whatever thou shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed also in heaven, S. Matthew. 16, 19. and afterward to all the rest of the
Apostles, S. Matthew. 18. 18.

It was by virtue of this commission, that S. Paul enjoined the incestuous
Corinthian Penance, and after remitted part of it after the sin it self had
been remitted by sorrow and contrition, 1 Cor. 5. 3. To whom ye forgive any
thing (says he to the Priests of Corinth) I forgive also: for if I forgave any
thing to whom I forgave it, for your sake forgave I it, in the person of
Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 10. Sufficient to such a man (being now contrite) is this
punishment (or Penance) 2 Cor. 2. 6.

Ob. But you will say perhaps, if this be all that is of faith concerning
Indulgences, we are but in a sad condition, as having no effectual means
whereby to remit the temporal punishments remaining due to our sins after the
sins themselves are forgiven.

Answ. You mistake in this; for the reason why sometimes there remain
temporal punishments due to our sins, after the sins themselves are pardoned,
is, because in the Sacraments we apply not the superabundant merits and
satisfactions of Christ so perfectly and fully to our Souls as we might, and
ought, if we our selves were not in fault, through want of worthy preparation,
and perfect contrition, when we come to them: otherwise they are of force, and
would remit, not only all our sins, but all the punishment due to them; proved
thus.

The second Argument.
1. What ever may hinder our entering into Heaven and obtaining everlasting
life, whilst we are under the Churches jurisdiction, the Church has power by
virtue of the Sacraments (if there be no impediment on our part for want of
perfect preparation) to release us of. 2. But temporal punishments remaining
due to sin after the sin it self is forgiven will for a time hinder our
entering in Heaven and obtaining everlasting life. 3. Therefore the Church by
virtue of the Sacraments, (if there be no impediment on our part) has power to
remit such temporal punishments.
The major is proved by that commission given to S. Peter and the rest,
Whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, it shall be loosed also in heaven, S.
Matthew. 16. 19. and 18. 18. It extends to whatever may hinder our entering into
heaven.

The minor is proved; Because we shall not be delivered out of prison
(Purgatory) till we repay the last farthing (the least debt of temporal
punishment) S. Matthew. 5. 26, 27. Now that the superabundant merits and
satisfactions of Christ (if fully and perfectly applied to our souls by the
Sacraments) are of force, and do remit all guilt, as well of sin as punishment,
is of undoubted faith with Catholics; because any one drop of his blood (much
more the whole, shed for us on the cross) by reason of its hypostatical union
with the Deity, is of infinite value, and a sufficient price for the whole
world. If therefore through our own default we enjoy not this means of making
satisfaction for temporal punishments, we must betake our selves to fruits of
worthy penance.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age Tertullian mentions pains and penances remitted to such as
were penitent* at the request of Martyrs: Which peace (says he) some not
having in the Church, were went to b^g it of the Martyrs who were in prison, L.
ad Martyrs, c. 1.

In the third Age S. Cyprian; A penitent working, and asking, he (the Pope) may
clemently pardon whatsoever both Martyrs have asked, and Priests have done for
such men. Sermon. de lapsis. And again, That Martyrs had begged such peace for
them who were fallen, Epist. 15. (By peace is meant reconciliation, or
admission to the Sacraments.)

In the fourth Age S. Chrysostom; It has been committed to those that inhabit
the earth, to dispense th^se things which are in heaven, etc. The Father has
given all power to the Son, and I see the very same power to have been
delivered to them by the Son, l. 2. de Sacerdot.

In the fifth Age the fourth Council of Carthage decreed, That a Priest should
injoyne the laws of penance to one imploring penance, without exception of the
person, c. 74.

The first Nicene Council decreed, That such as had denied the faith should do
many years penance, yet it should be in the power of the Bishops (if they saw
them do penance, and bewail their error from the heart) to deal more
courteo^sly with them, and receive them to communion, Can. 11. An. 325.

The Ancyran Council decreed, That Bishops ought to have power, considering the
conversation of all, to shorten or prolong the time of their penance, c. 5. an
Dom. 308.

The Council of Sen^ decreed, That the fault being taken away, there often
remains the guilt of temporal punishment, etc. which is to be purged by fruits
of worthy penance, Decret. 12.

The Council of Constance condemned John Wickliffs error concerning
Indulgences, Se^^. 8. See also the Council of Florence, Decreto Vni^nis, where
this doctrine is defined.

Objections solved.
Ob. THe merits and satisfactions of Christ (as you confess) are infinite:
Therefore those, being applied to us by the Sacrament of penance, remit not only
all our sins, but all punishments due to them.

Answ. All the eternal punishments, I grant; all the temporal, I deny, speaking
universally, and of all; though sometimes they do, in case of very perfect
contrition, and application of them. The reason of this is, because though they
be infinite of themselves, yet the application of them to us is finite, and
according to the measure of our contrition, and disposition, which is seldom
so perfect as it might, and ought, or as the whole gravity of our sins
requires; hence it was, that Christ gave his Church power to enjoin us
penances, and to release them also, if we were heartily contri^e, and gave
sufficient signs of our amendment.

Ob. If there were any such thing as Indulgences, they would be rather hurtful
then good, seeing they release men from good works, and penances enjoined for
sin.

Answ. They are very good, and much conducing to true piety, because though
they free men from some outward penal works, they always presuppose, and most
effectually invite men to inward acts of charity and contrition, as also to
works of mercy, which are of a more excellent and high nature. Indulgences are
never given but to such as are first confessed, and contrite for their sins.

Ob. Christ has fully satisfied for all our sins, and all the punishments due
thereto.

Answ. True, but that excludes not the application of his satisfactions to our
souls.

Ob. You hold, that you can free souls out of Purgatory at pleasure by the
Popes Indulgences.

Answ. The Church holds no such Doctrine*

Ob. I forgav^ th^^ all the debt, because thou besoughtest me, ought not
thou therefore also to have mercy on thy fellow servants, even as I had mercy on
thee? S. Matthew. 18. 32.

Answ. In some case, as of Martyrdom and very perfect contrition, we grant,
all the debt, not only of sin and eternal, but of temporal punishment, is
forgiven; but not always.

That text of S. Matthew is a parable, and concerns only the debt of sin, as
is manifest by those words of our Savior following: So also shall my heavenly
Father do^ to you, if you forgive not every one his brother from your hearts,
verse. 34. Nor has every one power to give Indulgences, but only Bishops and
Ecclesiastical persons; therefore this place is nothing against us.

Ob. You buy and sell Indulgences.

Answ. No, those abuses are long since ^eformed, and were never allowed by the
Church.

Ob. The incestuous Corinthian was impenitent, and his sin not forgiven, when
S. Paul enjoined him penance, 1 Cor. 5.

Answ. True; but he was penitent, and his sin remitted, when he remitted part
of the said penance; a certain argument, that the gui^t of punishment may
remain, after that of sin is taken away.

Ob. David says, A brother cannot redeem a brother, Psalm. 48. 8.

Answ. From sin, eternal punishment, or temporal death, I grant; (and this is
all that David means) from temporal punishment remaining due to sin, after it
is forgiven, I deny; if he be able to apply the merits of Christ to our souls,
as the Church does by Indulgences.

Quere. Are Indulgences available for souls in Purgatory by way of suffrage,
though not by way of jurisdiction?

Answ. Some hold it probable; but nothing is defined in this matter; let i^
suffice us, they are available and beneficial to the living.

ARTICLE XIX. Of sin, both Mortal, and Venial.
OUr Tenet is, That some sins are mortal of their own nature* and ro^ the soul
of just^ce, and spiritual life: Others but ve^ial, and deprive not the soul of
justice, but only weaken it, and charity in us.

The first Argument.
1. All those sins which rob the soul of justice, and spiritual life, are
mortal sins. 2. But all those sins which are directly contrary to the
commandments of the decalogue, rob the soul of justice and spiritual life. 3.
Therefore all those sins which are directly contrary to the comm^ndements of
the dec^logue* are mortal sins.
The major is manifest, because by mortal sin we understand nothing else, but
sin causing in the soul a privation of justice, by which the soul lives to God,
and without which she is dead as to him.

The minor is proved: because without repentance God damnes whoever breaks the
Commandments of the Decalogue. If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments, S. Matthew. 19. 17. He that shall break one of these least
commandments, and teach men so to do, he shall be called least in the kingdom
of heaven, S. Matthew. 5. 20. and in the 20. chapter of Exodus, and many other
places, he threatens grievous punishments to such as break them.

Now it is most certain, it is inconsistent with Gods justice, to damn a just
man, so long as he remains so. Therefore these sins rob the soul of justice and
spiritual life, and so do likewise all deliberate sins, either of thought,
word, or deed, in things of any notable consequence, and causing any notable
offense toward God, our neighbor, or our selves. The stip^nd of sin (says S.
Paul) is death, Romans 6. 23. And again, Know ye not that the unjust shall not
possess the kingdom of God? Do not err: neither fornicators, nor servers of
idols, nor adul^erers, etc. nor thieves, nor the covetous, nor drunkards, nor
r^ilers, nor extortioners shall possess the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

A second Argument.
1. All those sins, which rob not the soul of justice, and make her not guilty
of damnation, are not mortal, but ve^ial sins. 2. But there be many kinds o^
sins* which rob not the soul of justice, and make her not guilty of damnation:
3. Therefore there be many kinds of sin, which are not mortal, but only
venial.
The major is manifest because a venial sin is defined, to be a small sin,
which deserves not death, ^ut ^s ^asie to b^ pardon^d*

The minor is proved. Whosoever shall be angry with his brother* shall be in
danger of judgment, Whoso^ver shall say to hi^ brother, racha, shall be in
danger of council, and whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be guilty of ^ell
fire, S. Matthew. c. 5. v. 23. Here Christ himself distinguishes three sorts of
sin, of which the least only renders a man guilty of damnation. Blend guides
(says he) that strain at a Gnat, and swallow a C^mel, S. Matthew. 23. 24. Here
he teaches, that some sins, in comparison of others, have the proportion of a
Gnat to a Camel; now sure no mortal sin can fitly be compared to a Gnat; those
are all Camels at the least.

And in another place: Hypocrite, cast out the beam (the mortal sin) out of
thine own eye, and then thou shall ^l^^ly see to take forth the ^ote (the
venial sin) out of thy brothers eye, S Luk* 6* 42. Do Sectaries think mortal
sins but motes? Thou shall not go out from thence (Purgatory) t^ll thou repay
the last farthing, S. Matthew. 5. 27. That, is for the least venial sin.

And S. Paul tells us, That some bu^ld on the foundation of Christ, wood hay,
stubbl^, etc. for which they shall suffer detriment, but themselves shall be
saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Co^. 3 13, 14, 15. Therefore those are not mortal,
but venial sins Co^cupiscenc^, when it has conceived, brings faith sin (there
is venial sin) but sin when it is consummate, ingendreth death, S. James 1. 14,
15* (There is mortal sin.) Though all delight, even with imperfect deliberation
in the motions of concupiscence and thought of sin be venial sin, yet by Gods
mercy it is not mortal sin, til i^ be consummate, either by deliberate delight,
voluntary consent, or outward act.

A third Argument.
1. All mortal sins are directly contrary to the law of God, and sufficient to
break charity betwixt him and man. 2. But there be many sins, which are not
directly contrary to the law of God, or sufficient to break charity betwixt him
and m^n. 3. Therefore there be many sins which are not mortal.
The first Prop. has been already proved.

The second is proved; in regard an idle word, a j^sting, or officious untruth
which h^^t* no m^n; a very small excess in ^eat or drink, more then is
necessary for natures sustenance; a little overplus of joy, grief, or sudden
p^ssion, a little distraction in time of prayer, the theft of a pin, or apple,
are not directly contrary to charity, nor sufficient to break it betwixt man
and man, much less betwixt God and man. For as ^is goodness^, so is his
charity, far greater then ours, yet all these we acknowledge to be sins, though
not mortal. Nay we must r^nder an account for every idle word, S. Math. 12. 37.
Yet every idle word is not a damning sin, otherwise it were better to want a
tongue, then have it, and we were all in a most desparat condition, since idle
and superfluous words, (morally speaking) cannot be avoided; yet are we bound
under damnation, not to si^ mortally.

Add hereunto, That the just man falls seven times and rises up again, Prove.
24. 16. (not mortally, for then he were no longer just.) We all offend in many
things, S. James 3. 2. (not mortally by Gods grace, for some have been just
even before God, and walked in all his commandments, S. Luke 1. 5.) And S.
John speaking of himself and others who were cl^ansed in the blood of Christ
(from all mortal sin) adds notwithstanding; Yet if we shall say that we have n^
sin (to wit venial) we seduce our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 Epist.
of S. John 1. 8.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age Tertullian terms venial sins little, small, and daily sins,
l. de anima c. 17.

In the third Age Origin; By wood, hay, and stubble, which Paul speaks of (1
Cor. 3.) is manifestly discovered, there be some sins so light, that they are
compared to stubble, to which, as soon as fire is brought, it cannot long
continue. Hom. 14. in Levit. and 15. in Number.

In the fourth Age S. Hierome on those words, Till thou repay the last
farthing. This is that which he says, thou shall not go out of prison, till
thou shall pay the least sins, in c. 5. S. Matthew. and S. Cyprian gives the same
interpretation of them, L. 4. Epist. 2. And again S. Hierome, (on those words,
Why do thou s^^ a mote in thy brothers eye?) He speaks of those who being
guilty themselves of mortal crimes, permit not lesser sins in their brethren,
straining the Gnat, and swallowing the Camel, in c. 7. S. Matthew. Lastly, he
condemns Jovinian as an Heretic for holding all sins to be equal, (an old
paradox of the Stoics) l. 2. cont. Jovin. c. 15, 16, 17.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine; Sometimes we lie for the good of others, a sin
therefore it is, but venial, l. Enchirid. c. 22. And again, For daily, short,
and light sins (without which this life cannot pass) the daily prayer of the
faithful satisfies. Enchirid. c. 72. And in another place; There be certain
venial sins, without which the just man cannot live, L* de spiritu and litera
c. 28.

The Council of Sens decreed it Heresy, to hold, that venial sins are not
distinct from mortal, In Annot. post decreta fidei.

Objections solved.
Ob. THe soul that sins the same shall die, Ezech. 18. 20. Therefore all
sins be mortal.

Answ. I deny the consequence; the Prophet speaks there of enormous sins, and
had exemplified before, in the^^, murder, idolatry, etc. which are all mortal.

Ob. He that offends in one, is made guilty of all* S. James 2. 10.

Answ. In one mortal sin, I grant, for any one mortal sin is directly against
charity, and makes us guilty of the whole law of charity. In one venial sin, I
deny. S. James exemplifies in murder and adultery, v. 11. which are not venial
sins.

Ob. There is no condemnation for them which are in Christ Jesus.

Answ, True; for whilst we are in him, we are in charity, and state of grace.

Ob. He that does sin, is of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8.

Answ. S. John speaks there of mortal sin, such as deprives us of the justice
and grace of God; as is manifest by that which goes before and after.

Ob. To the elect all things cooperate unto good. Therefore all sins are venial
to them.

Answ. I deny the consequence; for though their very sins and failings are a^
occasion of contrition, and good to them, yet every breach of the
commandments, till they expiate and blot it out by true contrition,
confession, and satisfaction, is as mortal to them, as to the reprobate.

Ob. Whom God has predestined, them also has he called, and whom ^e has
called, them also has he instified. Therefore no sin shall be imputed to them.

Answ. I deny the consequence, for this only proves the predestinate shall have
final perseverance and die in state of grace, which hinders not, but some time
or other in their lives, they may in^^t the guilt of mortal sin, as David,
Peter, Magd^len, and others did; David's adultery, Peter's denial of his master,
and Magd^lens incontinence were no venial sins, yet these were all predestinate
Saints.

Ob* These sins were pardoned them, an^ therefore venial.

Answ. I deny the consequence speaking properly of venial sin; For ^o there is
no sin of the reprobate, if they had confessed it, and been heart^ly sor^y for
it (as these were) which would not have been pardoned them, Ezech. 18. 21.
though many of their sins were mortal of their own nature, and never pardoned,
by reason of their final impenitence.

Ob. God may damn a man for vnial sin, if he so please.

Answ. Speaking of him, as absolute creator and Lord of all things, I grant it,
as a just J^dg, who renders to every man according to his works, I deny; for so
he cannot infl^ct the same punishment for every idle word, or humane
imperfection, as for murder, or Adultery.

Ob. Every venial sin is against an infinite Majesty.

Answ. In some degree I grant, in a degree deserving death, I deny; the measure
of the punishment must not exceed that of the offense.

ARTICLE XX. Of the worship and invocation of Angels and Saints.
NOte for your better apprehending this controversy, that there are as many
different degrees of inward and outward religious wroship, as of civil, which
are diversified, according to the various dignity of the persons to whom they
are given (worship or honor being nothing else but a testimony of excellency)
nor can they always be distinguished by the outward act, which often times is
one and the same to God and men, to Kings and subjects; (as in the act of
kneeling, bowing, putting off the hat, etc.) but commonly by the inward
affection, and intention with which we do them.

When we kneel, and pray to Angels o^ Saints, we do it only as to Gods eminent
creatures and for Gods sake; when we kneel or pray to God, we do it as to our
Lord, God, Creator, Redeemer, and last end, and for his own sake purely we pray
to Angels and Saints to assist us, by and through the merits of Christ; without
which we know they are and can do nothing. We pray to Christ to help us by and
through his own merits only so that there is no more danger of robbing God of
his honor, by worshipping his Angels and Saints, then of robbing a King of his
honor, by reverencing his Peers and Nobles, according to their several
dignities and capacities: this presupposed,

OUr Tenet is, That the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven can and d^ know our
actions and affairs (at least as far as appertains to their state) and that it
is good and profitable to worship them, as Gods eminent creatures, with an
inferior worship proportioned to their excellency, as also to invocate and pray
to them, as to subordinate mediators of intercession to God for us; which we
prove thus.

The first Argument.
1. What was possible to the Prophets in this life by the special light of
grace only, cannot be impossible to the Saints and Angels in heaven. 2. But the
Prophets in this life by the special light of grace only could and did know
things done at a great distance. 3. Therefore the Saints and Angels in heaven
can and do know things done at a great distance.
The major is manifest, because from the greater to the less in the same kind,
the Saints and Angels have a greater and more special light of grace, then the
Prophets could have in this life.

The minor is proved; because Elis^us (by the special light of grace only) saw
what was done in the King of Syria's privy ^hamber, 4 Kings 6. and what passed
b^twixt his servant G^^z^ and Naama^, when he was absent, 4 Kings 5. S. Peter
knew the sacrilegious ac^ of Ananias and Saphira, though acted privately
betwixt themselves. Add unto this their often foretelling destruction and
calamity to whole cities and Kingdoms, which came to pass accordingly.

A second Argument.
1. All that which the very Devils know, by the mere light of nature, the
blessed Angels in heaven (who have the light of grace and glory superadded)
cannot be ^enied to know. 2. But the very Devils (by the mee^ light of nature)
know our actions. 3. Therefore the blessed Angels in heaven cannot be denied to
know them.
The major is also manifest, because from the greater to the less in the same
kind.

The minor is proved, as well by the concession of our Adversaries, as by the
Scripture, in which we read, For the accuser of our Brethren (the Devil) is
cast forth, who accused them before our God day and night, Apoc. 12. 10. He
could not accuse them, unless he knew their actions.

A third Argument.
1. They who see God perfectly with all his attributes and perfections, must
needs see us with all our actions. 2. But the blessed Angels and Saints in
heaven see God perfectly with all his attributes and perfections. 3. Therefore
the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven must needs see us and all our actions.
The necessary sequel of the mayor is manifest, because God is infinitely more
invisible and inscrutable, then we and all his other creatures put together;
and contains both us and all things in himself in a most eminent manner. In him
(says S. Paul) we live, be moved, and are.

The minor is proved, in regard the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven see and
know God face to face, even as they themselves are known, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 11, 12.

A fourth Argument.
1. If the blessed Angels and Saints be our Guardians and Governors by Gods
appointment, know our affairs, and pray for us, then must it needs be very good
and profitable for us to worship, invocate, and pray to them. 2. But they be
our Guardians and Governors by Gods appointment, know our affairs, and pray
for us. 3. Therefore it is very good and profitable for us to worship,
invocate, and pray to them.
The mayor is evident, because honor with an humble address by way of
invocating their assistance, is due from all Pupills to their Guardians by the
light of nature.

The minor (that they are our Guardians and Governors) is proved; See that ye
despise not one of these little ones, for I say to you that their Angels in
heaven (theirs by special patronage) always see the face of my Father which is
in heaven, S. Matthew. 18. 10. The Angels are all ministering spirits sent to
minister for them who shall receive the inheritance of salvation, Heb. 1. 14.

That God has appointed the Saints to govern us, is proved thus. He that shall
^vercome and keep my works to the end, to him will I give power over nations,
and he shall rule them in an iron rod, Apoc. 2. 26 27. Thou have made us (the
Saints) to our God a kingdom, and Priests, and we shall reign upon the earth,
Ap^c 5. 10.

That they know our necessities, and affairs, is proved thus: There shall be
joy before the Angels of God upon one sinner doing penance, S. Luke 15. 10.
Take he^d that ye despise not one of th^se little ones, for I say to you their
Angels that are in heaven always see the face of my Father* etc. S. Matthew. 18.
10. which of necessity implies, that the Angels know when we are injured, and
pray to God in our behalf; and the Saints are as the Angels of God in heaven,
S. Matthew. 22. 31. Equal to the Angels, S. Luke 20. 36. Now therefore when thou
did pray and Sara thy daughter in law (says the Angel to old Toby) I did
present thy prayers to our Lord, ^ob. 12. 12.

That the Angels and Saints actually pray for us, is proved; The Angel of our
Lord answered and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on
Hi^rusal^m, and the cities of Juda, with which thou have been angry these
threescore and ten years? Zach. 1. 12. The four and twenty Elders fell down
before the Lamb, having every one of them harps and vialls full of ^dors, which
are the prayers of the Saints, Apoc. 5. 8. and Judas Machabeus saw in a vision
Oni^ that had been High Priest, holding up his hands and praying for the Jews,
and pointing also to another in these words; This is a lover of the Brethr^n,
who prays much for the people, and for the holy Caty, (to wit) Jeremie the
Prophet of God, 2 Machab. c. last. 12, 13, 14. Those had both been dead many
years before.

That it is also good and profitable for us to worship and invocate the Saints
and Angels, is proved thus; because the chosen friends of God are recorded in
holy Scripture to have often done it.

I am the Prince of the host of our Lord (said the Angel to Josue) and Josue
fell flat on the gr^und and adored, Josue 5. 14. Lot (when he had seen the
Angels) ro^e up and went to meet them, and adored with his face b^wed toward
the earth* Genesis 19. 1. S John fell down to adore before the feet of the Angel
(though he had once been willed not to do it) Ap^c. 22. 8. Therefore he thought
and knew it lawful to be done, or else committed wilful ido latry, which we
presume in common modesty none will affirm.

The Angel that delivered me from all evil (says the Patriarch Jacob) bless
these children, Genesis 48. 16. Jacob prevailed against the Angel, and wept and
prayed to him, Ose 12. 4. Be my name (says Jacob) the names also of my
fathers, Abraham and Isaac invocated ^n them, Genesis 48. 17. Grace to you (says
S. John) and peace from him that is, that was, and that shall come, and from
the seven spirits that are in the sight of the thro^e, Apoc. 1. 4. seven
Angels, according to the 12. of Toby. To conclude, Call therefore (says
Eliphas to Job) and turn thee to some of the Saints, Job 5. 1. a very vain and
senseless exprobration, had it not been a custom with Job to invocate the
Saints.

Besides, the faithful on earth, being Members of the same mystical Body of
Christ with the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven, it cannot stand with
common sense and reason, but they must have some care and knowledge of our
condition; because if one member suffer any thing, all the members suffer with
it, and if one member glory, all the members rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12. 25.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age Dionysius. I constantly affirm, with the divine Scripture,
that the prayers of the Saints are very profitable for us in this life after
this manner; When a man is inflamed with a desire to imitate the Saints, and
distrusting his own weakness, betakes himself to any Saint, beseeching him to
be his helper, and petitioner to God for him; he shall obtain by that means
very great assistance. Eccles. Hierar. c. 7. par. 3. Sect. 3. prope ^inem*

In the same Age S. Clement. We command you that the Martyrs be in all honor
among you, even as James the Bishop, and Stephen our fellow Deacon has been
amongst us; for God has made them blessed, and holy men have honored them. L.
Apost. constitut. 5.

In the same Age Justin Martyr. We worship and ^dore both God the Father and
the Son, who came and taught us these things etc. and also the company of his
followers and the good Angels, and we worship them both by words and deeds, and
in truth, even as we our selves have been taught and instructed. In Apolog. 2.
and Antoninum P^^m.

In the third Age Origin: I will begin to fall down on my knees, and pray to
all the Saints to suc^^ur me, who dare not ask God for the exceeding greatness
of my sin. O Saints of God! with tears and weeping I beseech you to fall down
before his mercy for me a wretch. In Lamentat.

And again: All the Saints departed bearing yet charity toward the living, it
shall not b^ inconvenient to say, that they have a care of their salvation, and
help them with their prayers to God for them: for it is written in the
Machabees, This is ^eremy, who always prays for the people, etc. Homil. 3. in
Cantica.

In the fourth age S. Chrysostom: They adored the same Saints that we do at
this day* Hom. de Sanctis Juven. and Maxim.

In the same age S. Ambrose, He honors Christ that honors his Martyrs Sermon.
6. And again: We must pray to the Angels who are given us to be our defenders,
we must pray to the Martyrs, etc. for they are able to pray for our sins, who
have washed away their own* etc. These are the Martyrs of God, our Governors,
and watchful beholders of our life and actions, l. de viduis.

In the same age S. Chrysostom: If Moses and Samuel shall stand before me,
(Jerem 15.) observe (says he) how it is said of the two Prophets, if they
shall stand before me, etc. because they both had prayed for them, and had not
obtained, etc. yet let not us contemn the prayers of the Saints, etc. but let
us entreat them to pray for us, that we may obtain the promises, Homil. 1. in
Epist. ad Thessalon. And again, The servants of Christ even when they are dead,
are the protectors of the kings of this world, Hom. 26. in 2. ad Cor.

In the fifth age S. Augustine: The multitude of the Gentiles does now adore
with bended knees most blessed Peter the Fisherman: Sermon. de Sanctis Pet and
Paul. And again, We do not worship them as Gods, but as holy men, in Psalm. 96.
And in another place, All the Martyrs that are with Christ intercede for as,
nor cease they to pray for us, unless we cease to sigh after them, in Psalm. 85.
And finally in the 40. chapter of his Meditations he prays thus: O blessed
Trinity! preserve me from all evil etc. by the prayers of the Patriarchs, by
the intercession of the Apostles, by the constancy of the Martyrs, etc. and by
the inter^^ssion of all the Saints, etc. Then having invocated the B. Virgin,
and many Angels and Saints by name, he concludes saying, I beseech you
intercede for me a sinner, unto God, that I may be delivered from the jaws of
the Devil and everlasting death.

The Council of Gangers defined, That if any man out of pride abominate the
assemblies which are celebrated a^ the confessions of the Martyrs, or execrate
the mysteries which are there done together with their memories, be he
Anathem^, Can. 20. an. Dom. 324.

The sixth Constantinopolitan Council defined, That a Christian, adoring only
God his Creat^r, may invocate the Saints, that they would vouchsa^e to pray for
him to the divine Majesty, c. 7. an. Dom. 676.

The second Nicene Council, Let us do all things with the fear of God, asking
the intercessions of the ^^spotted Mother of God, as also of the Angels and all
the Saints, Act. 3. 6. an. Dom. 781.

Objections solved.
Ob. HOnor and glory be to God alone, 1 Timothy* 1.

Answ. Supreme and sovereign honor, true; Inferior honor, I deny it; and so
do* S. Paul, saying, Glory and honor, and peace to every one that does good,
R^m. 2. 10.

Ob. Him only shall thou serve, D^ut. 6. 13.

Answ. As Lord and God ^ grant: Yet by charity serve ye one another, Gal. 5. 15.

Ob. One Mediator of God and men, man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy* 2.

Answ. One principal Mediator of Redemption I grant it: but many subordinate of
intercession. God gave the law in the hand of (Moses) a Mediator, Ga^ 3. 19.
Every Parish Priest is a subordinate Mediator of intercession for his Parish.

Ob. Let all the earth adore thee, Psalm. 65*

Answ. True, and only him as Creator, Redeemer, and Conserver. Yet Jacob
blessing his son Judas, said, Thy fathers children shall adore the^, Genesis 49. 8.

Ob. Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. S. Matthew. 11. 28.

Answ. This excludes not subordinate Mediators of intercession, otherwise it
would be unlawful for us to desire our friends or Parish Priest to pray for us,
contrary to that of

S. Paul, Brethren I beseech you, that you also help me in your prayers to God
for me, Romans 15. 13.

Ob. Let no man seduce you in a voluntary humility and religion of Angels,
Colos. ^. 18.

Answ. It follows* Not holding the head (Christ) of whom the whole body is
composed, v. 1^. He writes there against a Sect of Heretics, who offered
sacrifice to Angels, and neglecting Christ esteemed them immediate and
principal mediators, independent of Christ, all this we abhominate as gross
Idolatry, this h^resy was condemned long since by our Church in the Council of
La^d^^^a, ^an. 35*

Ob. How shall they invocate in wh^m they have not beli^ved? Romans 10. 14.

Answ. We cannot invocate any as a God, in whom we have not believed as a God,
I grant: As fellow servants and mediators of intercession to God for us, I
deny: and though we believe not in the Saints as in God, yet have we also faith
toward them, Have ye says in ou^ Lord Jesus Christ and toward all the
Saints. Epist. ad Philem. v. 5.

Ob. What I shall command thee that shall thou do, Deuteronomy. c 12. Therefore since
there is no command for praying to Saints, we ought not do it.

Answ. God spoke that only in a particular case, forbidding them to imitate the
sacrifices of the heathens, who sacrificed t^eir children to the devil; as is
plain by the words immediately preceding. Not that he forbad us to practice
any devotion in the Church without an expr^ss command for it in Scripture,
otherwise the invocation of the Trinity it self under that notion, with all
public Liturgy and set form of prayer, as also the changing of the Saturday
into Sunday, with many other things, must be laid aside; there being no
express command in Scripture for them.

Ob. Abraham has not known us, and Israel has been ignorant of us, Isa. 63.
16.

Answ. He speaks there only of the knowledge of approbation, and signifies, that
Abraham and Israel did not approve or own them for their Children, by reason of
their sinful and wicked ways, not that they had no knowledge at all of them;
let S. Hierom expound this text; Abraham knows us not etc. because we have
off^nded thee, neither do they acknowledge for their children, whom they
unsterstand not to be beloved of their God, etc. So Christ said of the
reprobate, and of the foolish virgins, I know you not, S. Luk^ 13. 25. S. Mat.
25. 12. yet you will not deny but that the known all things*

Ob. S. Peter forbad Cornelius to adore him, Acts 10.

Answ. S. Hierome says, He apprehended some divinity to be in Peter, and so
did John in the Angel* when the Angel forbad him to adore him the first time,
Apoc. 19. We do not honor any Angel, or Saint, as God.

Ob. The Saints are dead.

Answ. They pass from death to life, S. John 5. 24. We pray not to bodies, but
souls.

Ob. The Devils are with us upon, or near the earth, therefore, if they did
see and know our actions, it would not follow that the Saints and Angels do.

Answ. Yes, it would, for spirits, which are not limited with matter, or
confined to bodies, neither see, nor understand with corporal eyes as we do but
with their glorified understandings, which are illuminated by the light of the
Lamb: And therefore cannot be hindered in their operations, by any distance of
place, or interposition of Bodies.

Ob. If the Saints and Angels knew God perfectly with all his Attributes and
all our actions besides, there would be no difference assig^able betwixt their
knowledge and Gods Omniscience.

Answ. Yes, infinite difference; because God knows not only all our actions,
absolutely speaking, with all created nature (which is much more then has been
hitherto asserted of Saints and Angels) but also his own essence and
perfections, with a most comprehensive, infinite, essential, and uncreated
knowledge, which Saints and Angels are not capable of, their knowledge (how
great soever it may be) being always limited, finite, create, and a
participation only of Gods knowledge.

Quere. If there be such eviction both of Scripture, and authority, for the
worship and Invocation of Angels and Saints, as you affirm, why should all
Sectaries cry out so much against it?

Aansw. Because, having robbed God of that honor, which is proper to him only,
to wit sacrifice, by taking away (as much as in them lies) the unbloody
sacrifice of the Altar, if they should allow the outward actions, of kneeling,
bowing, standing bare, and praying to Angels and Saints, they should seem to
have nothing proper to God, yet they themselves might answer this objection,
because allowing, as they do, all the same actions, even to men (and that, as
they profess, without robbing God of his honor) why not rather to the Angels
and Saints? but one absurdity being admitted, many will follow, and so it does
with them.

ARTICLE XX. I Of Relics.
OUr Tenet is, That it is also good and lawful to give a relative honor and
Veneration to the holy Relics of Saints; which we prove thus.

The first Argument.
1. That which God himself has warranted, and approved by many famous
miracles, is good and lawful. 2. But God himself has warranted and approved
the honor and veneration of the Relics of Saints by many famous miracles. 3.
Therefore the honor and Veneration of the Relics of Samts is good and
lawful.
The mayor is proved, because it is not consistent with the goodness and
veracity of God, to set his seal of miracles to confirm a lie, or to induce us
into error.

The minor is also proved, because the Woman in the Gospel was miraculously
cured of her bloody flux, by venerating and only touching the hem of our
Saviors garment, with a belief that it would heal her, S. Matthew. 9. 21, 22.
The very shadow of S. Peter cured diseases in such as honored it, and were but
only shadowed by it. Acts 5. 15. The Napkins, and Hankerchiefs that ^^d but
touched the body of S. Paul cast out devils and cured diseases, Acts. 19. 12.
The very touch of Eliseus his bones raised a dead man to life, 4. Kings 14. 21.

The second Argument.
1. All instruments of miracles wrought for our good, and moving memories or
pledges of dead friends, are worthy of some honor and veneration. 2. But the
holy Relics of Saints are instruments of miracles wrought for our good, and
moving memories or pledges of dead friends. 3. Therefore the holy Relics of
the Saints are worthy some honor and veneration.
The first Proposition is proved: Because the very light of nature teaches us
to honor the instruments of supernatural effects* as is manifest by the
practice of all Nations, whether Christian or Infidel; Hence the Turks give
such honor and veneration to the tomb and ashes of their false prophet
Mahomet, and all other Heathens to the memories of their false gods, falsely
esteeming them the instruments of their good; and hence the chosen people of
God in the old Law gave such honor and veneration to the Manna, the Tables of
the Law, Aarons rod, etc. Moses departing out of Egypt, carried with him the
bones of Joseph the Patriarch, in an honorable manner, Exodus 13. ^osias
commanded the bones of Gods Prophet to remain untouched, 4 Kings 23. All
Nations honor the corpse and ashes of the dead with monuments, and decent
burial. And lastly, God himself honored the body of his servant Moses, by
giving it an honorable burial, Deuteronomy. chap. last.

The second proposition for the first part, that relics are instruments of
miracles, has been already proved; and for the second part, it is likewise
proved: because they move us to an imitation of their holy lives and actions,
whilst we behold their very bones and ashes so much honored. This was the end
for which all former ages erected statua's to their renowned ancestors, so to
excite and move posterity to an imitation of their virtues.

Fathers for this point.
IN the third Age Tertullia^ numbers it amongst the rites of Christians, To
kneel to the Altars of God, under which the Relics of the Saints were kept,
l. de poenitent.

In the beginning of the fourth Age Constantine the great made rich offerings
to the Relics of S. Peter and Paul, Tom. 1. of the Councils, in vita
Sylvestri.

In the same Age Eusebius speaking of S. James his wooden chair, It is kept
(says he) with great diligence, as a memory of holiness delivered from
Ancestors, and is had in great reverence, 7. Histor. 14. ad finem in Ruffino 15.

In the same Age S. Basil; When death happens for Christ, the Relics of his
Saints are precious, in Psalm. 115.

In the same Age S. Gregory Naz. Whose only bodies can do the some thing that
their holy souls can do, whether they be touched with hands, or honored, whose
only drops of blood, or small signs of their passion, can do the same things
that their bodies can. D^st thou not worship these things? Orat. 1. in Julian.
Apostat.

In the same Age S. Chrysostom; Let us often visit them, let us worship their
sep^lchers, and let us touch their Relics with great ^aith, that we may
thence obtain some blessing. Sermon. de Sanctis Juvent. and Maximo.

In the same age S. Ambrose; But thou sa^'st to me, what do thou honor in
flesh now resolved and consumed? I honor in the Martyrs flesh his scarres,
received for the name of Christ, etc. I honor the body that shows me how to
love our Lord, and taught me not to fear death for our Lord. Why should not the
faithful honor that body which even the Devils fear? Sermon. 93. in fine.

In the fifth age S. Augustine: They bring the Relics of most blessed Stephen
the Martyr, which your Holines^ is not ignorant, as we also have done, how
conveniently you ought to honor, Epist. 103. And in his 22. book of the city
of God he says, At the Relics of S. Stephen only there were in a short space
so many miracles wrought, that if all should be recorded, it would fill many*
volumes* etc.

Objections solved.
Ob. CHrist reproved the Jews for adorning the sepulchers of the Martyrs, S.
Matthew. 23.

Answ. No, he did not reprove them for that, but for not imitating their lives,
whom they counterfeited to honor, and showing themselves the children of thos^
who had murdered them, as is manifest by the text.

Ob. Neither the souls nor bodies of the Saints are in their sepulchers, what
therefore do ye honor?

Answ. The memorial and matter which was once in their bodies, that is there,
and sufficient to excite us to a memory and imitation of them.

Ob. It is impossible that dead things, as Relics are, should have any
inherent sanctity in them.

Answ. We do not say they have, but only that they are memorials of the
inherent sanctity, and holiness of the martyrs, and instruments of miracles and
blessings to us; enough to make them worthy that relative honor, and
veneration, which we give them.

Ob. You rather dishonor, then honor the Saints, by scattering their bones
and ashes about the world.

Answ. You mistake; what ever is done by the Church in that kind, is done with
an intention of honor, and much conduces to the memory and veneration of
them, through all Christendom, as also to our benefit and growth in virtue.

Ob. The worship of relics is a mere will worship.

Answ. No, it is a worship of divine inspiration, witness the texts of Scripture
and the authority of the Church already showed you.

Ob. God himself commanded Moses his body to be hid from the Jews, for fear
they should adore it, Deuteronomy. last verse. 6.

Answ. For fear they should adore it with divine adoration, I grant; for the
Jew^ after the death of Moses were a people most pron^ to idolatry; but not for
fear they should venerate it with a relative honor; for God himself was pleased
to honor it, as you have heard above.

ARTICLE XXII. Of sacred Images.
NOte for your understanding this Article, that as evil thoughts are the cause
of all our evil actions, so good and pious thoughts are the cause of all our
good and pious actions. Out of the heart (says our Savior) come evil thoughts
murders adulterers, fornications, etc. these are the things which defile the
soul, S. Matthew. 5. 19. Since therefore nothing is or can be in our
understanding, according to Philosophy, which is not first in some of our
senses, by some sensible picture, sign or image, from whence it is conveyed
to the fantasy and memory, and thence again to the understanding and will,
great doubtless is the lawful use and benefit of sacred pictures, signs and
images, which are in us a most effectual nurse of holy thoughts, desires, and
actions. Nor is there any sense in man, that represents more effectually, then
that of seeing. This presupposed;

OUr Tenet is, that it is good, lawful, and profitable to keep the holy
Pictures, or Images of Christ and his Saints, and to set them up in Churches
and give them a relative honor or veneration, which we prove thus.

The first Argument.
1. All that which is recorded in holy Scripture to have been done by the known
Saints of God, (without reproof, or any prohibition, even to this time) nay to
their special good and benefit, is also good and profitable for us to do. 2.
But it is recorded in holy Scripture, that the known Saints of God have
worshipped the sacred pictures, or Images of Christ and his Saints (without
reproof or any prohibition, even to this time) nay to their special good and
benefit. 3. Therefore it is also good and profitable for us to venerate and
honor them, with a relative and inferior honor.
The major is manifest, because their recorded and approved actions are left to
us for patterns and examples.

The minor is proved, in regard S. John the Baptist worshipped the very latchet
of our Saviors shoe, the latch^t of whose shoes (says he) I am not worthy
to unloose, 1. 27. For which fact S. Augustine on that place, concludes him to
have been full of the Holy Ghost. The Patriarch Jacob adored the top of Joseph's
Rod, (a sign or image of his regal power) Heb. 11. 21. The Israelites, by
venerating and looking with reverence on the brazen Serpent (a type or image of
Christ crucified) were healed of the biting of Serpents in the desert.

The Jews kneeled before the pictures of the Cherubins, overshadowing the Ark,
Exodus 25. The primitive Christians venerated the very shadow, and garments of
S. Peter, and Paul, and received special benefit by so doing, Acts 5. 15. and
19. 11.

A second Argument.
1. All that which God himself has commanded, and no where prohibited, is
good, lawful and profitable for us to do. 2. But God himself has commanded
sacred pictures, signs, or images, to be made and set up with honor in the
Temple, and no where prohibited it. 3. Therefore it is good, lawful, and
profitable, for us to make and set them up.
The major is manifest, and needs no proof.

The minor is proved. Two Cherubins says God to Moses) shall thou make of
beaten gold, on both sides of the Or^cle, etc. let them cover both si^e of the
propitiatory, etc. and I will speak to thee from the two ^^^^s of the Cherubins
which shall ^^ upon the a^k of the testimony, all things that I shall command
the children of Isra^l by th^e* Exo ^. 25. 18 And when the Temple was built
again by Solomon ^^e two Cherubins were renew^d and set in the midst of the
inward Temple* 3 Kings 6. 24 Nor did he only command two Ch^rubins, but diverse
other carved w^rks and images to be made on the Oracle, and the walls of the
Temple, as you may see in the same chapters; replenishing Beseleel and Oliab
with his own holy Spirit, to devise whatsoever might be artificially made of
gold silver, brass, marble, etc* Exodus 31. He commanded the Jews to adore the
Ark. Psalm. 99. which is only the footstool of God, and a sign of his power, 1 Chronicles. 28. He commanded his own name to be honored, and sanctified, Ezod. 20.
S. Matthew. 6. In the name of Jesus every knee bow, etc. Phil. 2. 8. Now the name
of Jesus is only a sign or image of our redemption, or God made man; and the
name J^^ova, of our creation, which was in so great honor with the Jews, that
the common people durst not utter it, nor the Priest. but only in time of
sacrifice and solemn benediction, according to Phil^ in the life of Moses. Nay
the very Plate on which the name of God was written on the high Priests
forehead, is called the Plate of sacred veneration, Exodus 38. 26, 28. finally
hecommanded the Temple (which was an image of his heavenly house) to be
honored as a holy place, reproving those Priests who polluted his Sanctuary,
and put no difference betwixt a holy thing and a profane, Ezech. 22. 26.

A third Argument.
1. All that which brings into our minds the holy mysteries and actions of
Christ and his Saints, and ingraffs a love thereof in our hearts, is
(doubtless) lawful, good, and profitable. 2. But the frequent use and
veneration of sacred Pictures, Signs, or Images does movingly bring into our
minds* the holy mysteries and actions of Christ and his Saints engrafting also
a love thereof in our hearts. 3. Therefore the frequent use and veneration of
sacred pictures, signs, or images, is doubtless lawful, good and profitable.
The minor (which only needs proof,) is evinced; because Pictures, signs, or
images do of their own nature, (if often used, and honored) excite to
aknowledge and love of those things, which they represent, and it is the very
es^ence of an image, to represent another thing. 'Twas for this end the Church
of God has in all ages mad^ artificial pictures signs or images, of the
nativity, miracles, life and death of Christ and his Saints, and set them up in
Churches and holy places, teaching u^ to honor them with a relative honor or
veneration, not for the matter they are made of, but for the sacred things they
represent, and in as much as they represent such things being now absent, by
sensible and present objects. And this is therefore called a relative honor,
because it relates immediately to the things represented, and either immediately,
or mediately to God himself, as to our chiefest good, and last end.

A fourth Argument.
1. That which is the mark of the predestinate, and standard or ensign of
Christ himself, is worthy of a relative honor or veneration. 2. But the Cross
or s^cred image of Christ crucified, is the mark of the predestinate, and
standard, or ensign of Christ. 3. Therefore the Cross or sacred image of
Christ crucified, is worthy of a relative honor, or veneration. And the like
houlds with proportion, in all other images of Christ, which represent the
mysteries of his life, or passion.
The major Proposition cannot be denied without unreasonable wilfulness.

The minor is proved. Hurt ye not (says the Angel) the earth, nor the sea, nor
the trees, till we have signed the servants of our God in their foreheads (with
the Cross) Apoc. 7. 2. All that were signed with the sign Ta^ (a type of the
Cross) were saved from the exterminating Angel, Ezech. 9. 4. Then (at the day
of judgment) shall appear the sign of the Son of man (the Cross) in heaven, S.
Matthew. 24. 36.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age S. Dionysius, The sign of the Cross is so much honored,
that it is often used both in Baptism and other Sacraments, l. 2. Eccles.
Hierar. c. 2. and 5.

In the same Age S. Ignatius: The Devil rejoices when any on^ shall deny the
Cross, because he well knows the confession of the Cross is his destruction,
for that it is a trophie, or tr^umphall a^k against his power, Epist. ad
Philippenses.

In the same Age S. Martial, Remember the Cross of our Lord, keep it in your
mind, speak often of it, have it in the sign, for it is your invincible armor
against Satan, in his Epistle to those of Bordeaux.

In the third Age Tertullian; In every thing we do, we sign our forehead with
the sign of the Cross, of which practice Tradition is the d^fend^r, custom
the cons^rv^r, and faith the observer, l. de corona milit. 6. 3. And in his
time he says, The image of Christ bearing a lamb on his shoulders was graven
on the chalices used in Churches, l. 2. de pudicitia.

In the same Age Origin; They are only preserved by the Angel whom he had
signed with the sign Tau, that is the sign of the Cross, let us therefore
life up our hands to heaven in the likeness of a C^oss, seeing the Devils are
oppressed, when they find us ^o armed, Hom. 8.

In the same Age S. Cyprian; God shows in another place Ezech 9.) that those
only can escape who are born again, and have been signed with the sign of the
Cross, in Epist. ad Demet.

In the same Age Lactantius affirms, That when Christians were present at the
sacrifices of the Heathens, and made the sign of the Cross, they put their
gods to flight, and struck them dumb, l. Institut c. 27.

In the fourth Age S. Athanasius, A man only using the sign of the Cross,
drives away from him the deceipts of the Devil, etc. By it the predictions of
Magicians cease, and their in^^a^^ments are made void, l. de verbo incarna^o.

In the same Age S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Let not us be ashamed of the Cross,
but if any one shall hide it, do thou publicly sign thy self on the forehead
with it, that the Devils seeing the standard of the King, may trembling make
have to be gone, Cateches 4 de vita Christiana.

In the same Age S. Hierome; We beseech thee, O Lord, that, guarded by the
sign of the Cross, and defended by the assistance thereof, we ^ay deserve to
^e free from all the deceits of the D^vil, in Psalm. 58.

In the same Age S. Ambrose, Christian people in every moment write the
contempt of death upon their foreheads (by signing them with the Cross) for
they know, that without the Cross of our Lord they cannot be saved, l. 9.
Epist. 77.

In the fifth Age S. Augustine; Unless the sign of the Cross be applied as
well to the foreheads of believers, as to the water wherewith they are
regenerated, and to the oil wherewith they are annoyled, none of these things
are rightly administered, Tract. 118. in Joan.

S. Palladius (contemporary to S. Augustine) tells us, That the Bishop of
Jerusalem was wont yearly at the solemnity of Easter to expose the Cross to be
adored by the people, he himself first adoring it, Epist. 11.

The second Nicene Council defined, That the sacred images of Christ and his
Saints are to be had and kept in Churches, and that salutation or honorary
worship may be given them, but not Latria, or sovereign honor which belongs to
God only, Act. 7. An. Dom. 781.

Add to this, that in the Council of Ephesus, An. Dom. 431. S. Cyril of
Alexandria, who there presided, prayed thus; Hail Mother of God etc. through
whom the precious Gross is made famous, and adored throughout the world, Homil.
cont. Nestorium, set down in the end of the second Article of the said Council.

Objections solved.
Ob. THou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc. Ex. 20.

Answ. You corrupt the Text; the Greek word is Idol, the Latin and Hebrew word
is graven thing, etc. and it follows immedily; to adore them (viz. as Gods) we
make no Idols, nor any graven things, or images, to adore them, as Gods, or
with Gods honor, we abhor that, as damnable idolatry; we only give them a
relative honor, or veneration.

Ob. Many say you honor them, as Gods.

Answ. Fame is a liar you know; we do not so, nor yet as creatures, substances,
or persons, but only as they are mere artificial resemblances, and
representations of heavenly things; and for their sakes whom they are made to
represent; whereas Idolatry is not committed, unless the honor due to God
only, (that is supreme, and sovereign honor) be given to a creature.

Ob. Honor and glory to God alone.

Answ. Supreme and sovereign honor* true; relative and inferior honor may be
given to creatures; Honor, and glory, and peace to every one that does good,
Romans 2. 10.

Ob. You saw not any similitude in the day that our Lord spoke to you in Horeb
from the midst of the fire, l^st perhaps deceived you might make to your selves
a graven similitude or image of male or female, Deuteronomy 4. 15.

Answ. That place only forbids the making idols, or vain images to our selves,
and therefore it follows, Of those things which God has forbidden thee, verse.
23. God never forbad the making sacred images of Christ and his Saints; nay he
has commanded it, as has been proved above.

Ob. To whom have you made God like, or what likeness will ye compare to him?
Isa. 40. 18.

Answ. We intend not to picture the nature of divinity, or essence of God, that
we are taught is impossible, and unlawful to attempt; we compare not any image
to him, we know all descriptions of him are infinitely short of his perfection,
we only mean to represent some apparitions of God, and those in such forms or
shapes, as he himself has pleased to appear in, or else represent some
attribute o^ his by some analogical similitude; as his un^peakable ^oodness, by
a Stork, which has no tongue; his Eternity by a circle, which has neither
beginning nor end, or by the image of an old man, as he appeared to Daniel,
Dan. 7.

Ob. Whereunto have you resembled me and made me equal, and compared me? Isa.
46. 5.

Answ. This is also against Idols only (as is plain by the text) which were
made equal to God. And therefore it follows immediately, Bringing a Goldsmith,
to make a God.

Ob. Certainly you adore your images in the same manner the Heathens did their
Idols.

Answ. Be not wilful in your uncharitable mistakes; we do not, they adored
their Idols as gods, and offered sacrifice to them. Make us Gods (say they)
which may go before us, Exodus 31. 1. He cut down cedars, and kindled the fire,
and baked bread, etc. but of the rest he made a God, and adored, Isa. 44. 15.
They praised their Gods of silver, of brass, of wood, and of stone, Dan. 5. 4.
They have made to themselves a molten calf, and adored and immolated to it,
Exodus 32. 8. They sacrificed to the idols of Canaan, Psalm. 105. 38. We do not
sacrifice to images, nor worship them as Gods; no, we abhor and renounce it.

Ob. Some of your Divines hold it lawful to worship the Cross with sovereign
honor.

Answ. By or for it self I deny; by accident, and as it makes one thing, with
Christ crucified, whom they conceive, as hanging on it, I grant some Divines
hold; but this is a mere School opinion, and not of faith with us: Nay, the
seventh general Council, which we all submit to, has decreed, That the image
of Christ is not to be adored with sovereign honor, nor otherwise, then the
Books of the Gospel, Act. 7. and last, Can. 3. Urge not therefore what some
particular Divines may say, but hearken to the doctrine of Gods Church, that we
rely upon.

Ob. You call the Cross, O holy Cross, etc.

Answ. In as much as it represents the holy passion of Christ, I grant; so you
call the Bible the holy Bible, and the Communion Table the holy Communion Table,

Ob. You pray in one of your Hymns, O Cross, our only hope, etc.

Answ. It Is a Poetical Figurative expression, in which by the Cross we speak to
Christ himself, who hung and died on it for our sins. So the Prophet, Hear O
heavens, and hearken O earth! Deuteronomy. 32. 1. In which address, by the words,
heaven and earth, he spoke to the inhabitants of heaven and earth; which kind
of speech is frequent in the Scripture, especially the Psalms, that are
Poetical. Give the Church therefore leave in this to imitate her Teacher the
Holy Ghost. And for the words, Our only hope, the Cross is no otherwise, our
only hope, then it was S. Paul's only glory. God forbid, I should glory, but in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14. That is, instrumentally, as it
was the only instrument of our Redemption, or by accident, as it makes one
thing with Christ, bleeding and dying on it.

Ob. Two Councils at Constantinople under Leo Iconomicus and Constantinus
Copronimus defined against images.

Answ. They were not General Councils nor approved; neither the Pope, nor any
of the Patriarks were present either by themselves or Legates.

Ob. The Council of Frankford condemned images.

Answ. There is no such decree to be found in any antien^ Author, nor was that
council approved in any thing, but only in her decrees concerning Church
benefits, as the Centurists themselves confess with one consent.

Ob. The Council of Eliberis forbids the making images in Churches.

Answ. You mistake, it only forbids making them on Church walls in time of
persecution, lest Infidels should profane, and deface them.

The Gentiles calumniated the Cross, of superstition and witchcraft, as the
modern Sectaries do; Simon Magus, Cerinthus, and Basilides taught, that Christ
was not truly crucified, but withdrew himself from the Cross, suffering only in
a fantastical image, and therefore they denied all honor to the Cross. See S.
Irenaeus l. 1. c. 25. de haeres. S. Epiphanius haeres. 24. 28. The Nicolaites,
Cleobulus, and Theodore denied the Cross, and taught, that Christians ought not
to give any reverence to it, or to the images of the Apostles and other Saints,
affirming that they themselves were immediately sent from God (the common
pretense of all Heretics) to reform the world. See S. Epiphanius, l. 3. de
haeresibus, haeres. 21, 22.

The Manichees taught that no images were to be worshipped, as witnesses
Tarasius in the second Nicen Council, and S. Augustine l. 20. cont. Faustum c.
15. Arrius denied that any worship was to be given to the images of Christ and
his Saints, as you may read in the seventh general Synod. The great Apostata
Julian set up his own image in the place of the holy Cross, and cried out
against Christians, O wretched men, who adore the Cross, and imprint the sign
of it on their foreheads, and before their doors, as S. Cyril of Alexandria
relates, l. 6. cont. Julian, which image of Julian was burnt with lightning
from heaven. These were all archheretikes; let therefore all deluded people take
notice who they were that hated the Cross and holy images.

ARTICLE XXIII. Of free Will.
OUr Tenet is, That man (even in the state of corrupted nature) as assisted by
the efficatious Grace of God, has free will to do, or not to do, not only
natural and moral, but also works belonging to his eternal salvation, and to
commit or avoid evils; and that he is not enforced to do good, or avoid evil by
the said efficatious grace, though sweetly and infallibly determined to it.
Which we prove thus.

The first Argument.
1. In all those things, in which men have election, they have free will. 2.
But men, assisted by the efficatious grace of God, have election not only in
their moral and natural actions, but also in their supernatural, and things
belonging to eternal life and the avoiding sin. 3. Therefore men, assisted by
the efficatious grace of God, have free will not only in their moral and
natural actions, but also in their supernatural, and things belonging to
eternal life, and the avoiding sin.
The major Prop. is proved, because Election is defined, A deliberate app^ten^y
with consultation, which of necessity implies freedom.

The minor Proposition is proved; Choice i^ given you, choose this day that
which pleases you, Josh. 24 Choice is given thee (says our Lord to David)
choose on^ of them which thou will, 2 King. 24. If thou do ^ll, shall not thy
sin be forthwith present at the doo^? but the lust (or desire) thereof shall be
under thee, and thou shall have dominion ever it, Genesis 4. 6, 7. ('it is in our
power to do, or not to do it.) I have proposed to you life and death, bl^ssing
and cursing, choose therefore life that thou may live, Deuteronomy. 30. verse. 17,
18, 19. How often (says our Lord) would I gather thy children, etc. and thou
would not, Matthew. 23. 37. You always resist the Holy Ghost, Acts 7. 51. But
as many as received him (Christ) he gave them power to be made the sons of God,
S. John 1. 12. (they were liabled by his grace to be made such, if they
themselves would) He that has determined in his heart, not having necessity,
but having power of his own will, to keep his virgin, does well, 1 Cor. 7. 37.
(S. Paul thought it in the free power of our will to keep, or not to keep it.)
God from the beginning made man, and left him in the hand of his own counsel.
Eccles. 15.

A second Argument.
1. Almigh^y God who can do nothing in vain, and is no tirant, but the Father
of mercy, exhorts and commands us to do good, and avoid evil, threatening to
damn us, if we neglect. 2. But it were altogether vain to exhort or command
any such things, and tyranny to damn as for not doing them, unless it were in
our free power, to do, or not to do them. 3. Therefore it is in our free power
(as enabled by Gods grace) to do, or not to do them.
The major is manifest to all that know the Scripture, which is indeed nothing
else, but a divine book of holy precepts and exhortations to do good, and
abstain from evil, with great rewards and punishments annexed of everlasting
salvation, or damnation.

The minor is proved. Because nothing can be more vain then to spend much time
in exhorting or commanding that, which is not in our power, or possible for us
to do (it were as rational to preach to the dead, or to command a man, that had
no legs, to run) neither can any thing be more tirannical, then to damn us,
for not doing it, sin^e no man can be bound, without extremity of injustice, to
that which is impossible.

Fathers for this point.
IN the second Age S. Ignatius; If any man do wickedly, he is a man of the
Devil, not made so by nature, but by the arbitrament of his own mind, In Epist*
ad Magn.

In the same age S. Irenaeu^; Not only in works, but even in faith has
Almighty God reserved liberty of will to man, saying, Be it done to thee
according to thy faith, l. 4. c. 72. And again, If therefore it were not in us
to do these things, or not to do them, what cause ^a's the Apostle or our Lord
himself long before to counsel us to do certain things, and to abstain from
others, but because man had free will from the beginning. in the same ^h.

In the third age, S. Ciprian, the freedom of believeing or not believeing is
placed in the will. in. Deuteronomy. etc. l. 3* ad Quirin. c. 5^.

In the same Age, Origin, And ^^w O Israel what does ^^y Lord God require from
thee; Let them be ashamed of those words, who deny free will in man; how should
God require from man, unl^sse man had in his power what to off^r to God
r^quiring. Homil. 12 in number.

In the fourth Age, S. Hierom; because thou have free will, I warn thee, that
sin have no dominion ever thee, but thou ^ver sin, quest. in Genes.

In the same age S. Chrysostom, the Lord of all things has made our nature to
have free will etc. thus therefore n^w is also done in Cain, Homil. 19. in
Genes. c 4.

In the same age S. Basil on those words, If you will, and will hear me, Isa.
^. 19. In this place (says he) especially he sets before our eyes the liberty
of will to be given to man's nature.

In the same age S. Augustine, God has revealed to us in holy Scripture, that
in man there is free will, first because Gods commandments themselves would
not profit man, unless he had free will whereby to do them, etc. lib de great.
and libero arbitrio. cap. 2. To consent (says he) or not to consent, lies in a
man's own will, lib. de spiritu and litera. cap. 34. If we will, it is, if we
will not, it is not, l. 5 de. Civitate Dei. c. 10. It is in a man's power to
change his will, l. 1. retract. c. 22. Who will not cry out it is a foolish
thing to give Commandments to him, who has not freedom to do what is
commanded, and that it is an injury to condemn him, who had not power to
fulfill them, l. de fide contra. Manichaeos. c. 10.

The fourth Toletan Council defined, that man by his free will obeying the
Serpent perished, and so the grace of God calling, by the conversion of his own
mind, every man by believing is saved, therefore not by force, but by the free
will of the mind they are to be persuaded to be converted, c. 57. de Judaeis.
Anno dom. 681.

The Council of Sens declared, this Heresy, wholly taking a way the will, we do
not so much condemn, (it being already long since condemned by the Church and
Councils) as we declare it contrary to plain testimonies of Scripture, c. 15.
de l. Arab Anno Dom. 1431.

Objections solved.
Ob. I Know, Lord, that man's way is not his own, neither is it in man to direct
his own steps. Jerem. 10.

Answ. It is not his own always in order to execution, I grant, for so it may
be hindered diverse ways; it is not his own in order to election, in which
freedom essentially consists, I deny; nor can he direct his own steps, without
the assistance of divine grace; with that assistance, I deny it.

Ob. All our works thou have wrought to us (or in us) Isa. 26. 12. and the
Apostle says who works all things according to the council of his will, 1.
Cor. 12. 11.

Answ. These places only prove Gods cooperation with us in all our actions,
which does not exclude nor destroy, but rather perfect the freedom of our
wills; we acknowledge we are not able to do any good thing, without his aid of
grace, neither can we see without light, yet light neither hurts nor takes
away, but perfects our faculty of seeing.

Ob. No man can come to me, unless the Father that sent me draw him. S. Jo.
6. 44.

Answ. Here the Maniches (says S. Crysostome) rise up contending by the
testimony of this text, that we can do nothing our selves; but this takes not
away our free will but shows it needs Gods help. In Joha^: Homil. 45. and on
the same place, wherefore it is evident, that it is in our choice, whether we
will be saved or damned, Hom. 46.

Ob. It is God that works in you both to will and to accomplish. Phil. 2. 13.

Answ. Not because he said, It is God that works in you both to will and to
accomplish, etc. is he therefore thought to have taken away free will? if it
were so, he would not have said before, with fear and trembling work ye your
salvation; for when there is command that they work, their free will is called
upon. Thus S. Augustine on this place.

Ob. We are dead by sin, Ephesians. 2.

Answ. But quickened by Christ, ibid^m.

Ob. It is necessary that Scandals come, S. Math. 18. 7. It is impossible that
scandals should not come, S. Lu. 17. Therefore it is impossible for us to avoid
them.

Answ. I deny the consequence, those texts only infer a necessity of
supposition, because God has foreseen and foretold they will come, which
hinders them not from being freely done, speaking of absolute freedom, and as
they are compared to the immediate, and second causes.

Ob. God necessarily and infallibly foreknows all things that will ever come to
pass. Therefore whatsoever we do, we do by unavoidable necessity.

Answ. I deny your consequence, for God not only foresees effects, but also
their causes and that they will proceed, and be done, according to their
exigence; from free causes freely and from necessary causes necessarily; so
that all which God foresees to be done, will infalibly be done, yet not
necessarily or by compulsion, because his foresight does not impose on things
foreseen, any absolute necessity, but only a necessity of supposition, which is
consistent with absolute freedom, or liberty.

Ob. God has by his will decreed from all eternity whatever will be done.

Answ. True; according to the natural exigence of second causes, but not
contrary to it; and therefore he has decreed many things to be done freely.

ARTICLE XXIV. Of saving or justifying faith.
OUr Tenet is, That justifying faith is not a confident undoubted belief, that
our sins are forgiven, and that we are of the elect, (as Sectaries hold) but a
true faith, in Jesus Christ, God and man, and steadfast belief of all those
things which he has any way revealed to us; which we prove thus.

The first Argument.
1. That cannot be a saving or justifying faith, which was not taught the
Church for such, by Christ and his Apostles. 2. But Protestants foresaid faith
of special mercy (by which they assuredly believe, their sins are forgiven, and
that they are of the elect) was never taught the Church for such, by Christ and
his Apostles. 3. Therefore Protestants faith of special mercy, is not a saving
or justifying faith.
The major is manifest, because Christ and his Apostles were the masters and
teachers of all saving and justifying faith.

The minor is proved; because they never taught the Church, to have assured
belief, that their sins were forgiven, or that they were of the Elect, as any
certain or necessary means of their salvation, but rather the quite contrary.
Man knows not whether he be, worthy love or hatred, Eccles. 9. 1. Who can say
my heart is clean, I am pure from sin, Pro. 20. Sins who understands, from my
secret sins cleanse me, Psalm. 18. Therefore, my dearest, with fear and
trembling work out your salvation, Philip. 2. 12. I am not guilty in conscience
of any thing, but herein I am not justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4. In fear converse ye
the time of your soiourning, 1: Pet. 1. Nor is there any Article of the Creed,
or any verse of the whole Gospel, which teaches this presumptuous Faith of
special mercy.

The second Argument, affirmative.
1. That is the holy saving or justifying Faith of Christians, which Christ and
his Apostles taught the Church, for a necessary means to justice and
salvation. 2. But Christ and his Apostles taught the Church for a necessary
means of justice and salvation, a Faith in him, true God and man, by which all
those things are firmly believed, which he has any way revealed to us, and
working also by Charity. 3. Therefore a Faith in Christ, true God and man, by
which all those things are firmly believed which he has any way revealed to
us, and working also by charity, is the only saving or justifying Faith of
Christians.
The major is manifest of it self.

The minor is proved. Without Faith, it is impossible to please God; for he
that comes to God, must first believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder to
them that seek him, Heb. 11. 6. In him (Christ) every one that believes is
justified, Acts. 13. 39.

Jesus said I am the resurrection, and the life, he that believes in me
although he be dead he shall live etc. believe thou this? She says to him,
Lord I have believed, that thou are Christ the Son of God who art come into the
world. S. John. 11. 25, 27. Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God, and Jesus said unto him, blessed art thou Simon Bar^ona, etc.
S. Math. 16. 17. (viz. by reason of that Faith) This is the word of Faith which
we preach, for if thou confess wi^h thy mouth our Lord Jesus Christ, and
believe with thy heart, that God has raised him up from the dead; thou shall
be saved, Romans 10. 9. add to this, that Article of the Creed, and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord; without which Faith, no justice nor salvation can
be ^ad.

That it must also work by charity, is proved; because Faith without charity is
dead, and profits not to justice. You see then brethren (says S. James how
that by works a man is justified and not by Faith only, S. James* 2. 17, 21. If
a man have all Faith and have not charity, he is nothing, it profits nothing, 1
Cor. 13. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails ought, no^ prep^^e,
but Faith that works by charity, Galath. 5. 6. Not every one that says Lord,
Lord, but he that does the will of my Father shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, S. Math, 7. 21. To conclude; G^^ ye teaching all Nations, baptizing
^h^m and tea^hing them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
S. Math. 28 19 20. We must believe, and do accordingly; we must believe the
divinity, humanity, life, death, miracles and doctrines o^ Jesus Christ. He
that believes not, shall be condemned, S. Mark. 16. 26.

Fathers for this Point.
In the second Age St. Clement, Wherefore when we hear, thy faith has made
thee safe, we do not understand him to say absolutely, that those are saved
who any ways believe, unless their deeds shall follow. l. 4. Strommatum post
med.

In the third Age, Origin, Those that profess faith in Jesus, but do not
prepare themselves with good works to salvation, are to be compared to the
foolish virgins. Tract. 32. in Matthew.

In the same Age, St. Cyril of Alexandria, That faith does not suffice to
salvation, the Disciple of Christ shows, writing, Thou believe there is one
God, the devils also believe and tremble; if therefore only faith were
sufficient, the multitude of devils could not perish: wherefore the works of
charity must come to faith. In c. 2. Jacobi, v. 29.

In the fourth Age, St. Chrysostom, If Paul who suffered so much, was not yet
secure of that resurrection, (viz. to glory) what shall we say? Homil. 2. in
Epist. ad Philip. And again, If thou shall rightly believe, etc. but do not
rightly live, it does nothing profit thee to salvation. Homil. 30. in Joan. and
Math. 7.

In the same Age, St. Hierome, I have sound the works of the just to be in the
hand of God; but whether they be loved of God or not, now they cannot know, in
cap. 9. Eccles. v. 1. And again, Therefore it is but doubtful and uncertain,
(to wit, whether God will convert and forgive) that whilst men are doubtful of
their salvation, they may seriously do penance. In c. 3. Jonae* v. 9.

In the same Age, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, Do not trust in this only that thou
believe, but keep faith burning, that thy light may shine before men by good
works, Catechis. 15.

In the fifth Age, St. Augustine, What man knows he is to persevere to the
end in the progress of justice, unless by some revelation he be assured from
God? l. 2. de civitat. Dei. c. 2. And again, Who among all the faithful, as
long as he lives in this mortality, can presume himself to be of the number
of the predestinate? because it is necessary to be hid in this place, where
pride is to be taken off. l. de corrept. and great. c. 13. Faith truly may be
without charity, but not profit. l. 15. de Trinitat. c. 18. And finally, I know
that the justice of my God remains; whether mine remain or no, I know not, in
Psalm. 40. And far was it from the Apostles meaning that faith is sufficient for
a man, although he have no good works. l. de great. and lib. arbit. c. 7.

The Council of Moguntia defined, Without faith we cannot please God;
notwithstanding faith needs works, because faith without works is dead. Can.
1. Anno dom. 813.

You see what kind of faith the Fathers required to justice; not faith alone,
or faith of special mercy, but faith in Jesus Christ working by charity.

Objections solved.
Obj. The Spirit himself gives testimony to our spirit that we are the sons
of God, Romans 10.

Answ. It gives not testimony that we are the sons of God, by believing so
only, or by assuring our selves that our sins are forgiven us; but by and
through a faith in Jesus Christ, working by charity; and though his testimony
be always infallible in it self* yet it is always doubtful, and uncertain
on our part, whether we have, or have it not, without special revelation. And
therefore many say Our Father, and think themselves the sons of God, who are
indeed the sons of the devil, as Christ proved to the Jews, St. John 7.

Obj. Paul says, I am sure that neither life nor death, etc. shall separate us
from the charity of God, etc. Romans 8.

Answ. He does not say, That this assurance justified him. No, it presupposed
him in state of justice: and he either speaks there of such only as be
predestinate, or else by the words ( I am sure) he means no more then I am
confidently persuaded; neither can we without presumptuous pride, pretend to
such assurance in that behalf as holy Paul in likelihood might have.

Obj. Know you not your selves that Christ Jesus is in you, unless perhaps you
be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Answ. He speaks only there of Christ's being present with the Corinthians, not
in respect of justifying grace (for both in this and three precedent Chapters,
he threatens them with heavy vengeance for their sins) but in his special
power, providence, and miracles showed to them.

Ob. A man is justified in Baptism, and that without any works.

Answ. Without external works, or works pretending justice, I grant; those are
not always requisite to the first justice, without internal works, or at least
works consequent to justice (speaking of such who have the use of reason) I
deny.

Obj. If a man have not a care of his own, and especially Domesticals, he has
denied the faith, according to St. Paul.

Answ. He has denied it in his deeds, as many do, but may notwithstanding
have true, though not justifying faith; a man may have all faith (in St. Paul's
supposition, 1 Cor. 13.) and no charity.

Obj. He that says he knows God, and does not keep his Commandments, is a liar.

Answ. If he say he knows him with friendly or informed faith, I grant it; and
of such only St. John there speaks. Hence it is, that your faith only, or faith
of special mercy, will not suffice to justify.

Obj. Every one that believes that Jesus is Christ, is born of God, 1 Joan. 5.
Therefore justified.

Ans. He speaks of Faith formed with Charity, and so I grant your consequence.
Here is no exclusive particle; he says not, He that believes only.

Ob. The Saints by Faith overcame kingdoms, Heb. 2.

Answ. Not by faith only, but by faith joynd with Hope and Charity.

Ob. We account a man to be justified by Faith, without the works of the Law,
Romans 3. 28. Therefore by Faith excluding all works.

Answ. St. Paul excludes there only the Ceremonial works of the Old law, of
which some boasted much, or works preceding faith, and done by the mere
strength of nature; he excludes not the works of grace and charity, or works
which follow faith. So that your consequence is erroneous. Some (says St.
Augustine in one place) not understanding what the Apostle says, have supposed
his meaning to be, That Faith is sufficient for a man though ^e live nickedly,
and have no works: but far was that from the intention of the vessel of
election. l. de great. and ^^ber. arbit. c. 7. And in another place, Paul speaks
of works that go before faith (we do not hold that those will justify. James
speaks of works which follow faith, these do justify) l. 83. q. 76. in fine,
and l. de fide and operib. c. 14.

Ob. Believe only, and she shall be saved, St. Lu. 8. 50.

Answ. He only there promises corporal life and safety to the Princes daughter
of the Synagogue for her fathers faith; not spiritual life and safety of the
soul. Which is not against us; we doubt not but corporal blessings may be
given for faith only, and faith is always required to Justice, but not
sufficient without Charity.

Ob. All that believe in him shall not perish, but have eternal life. St. John
3. 14.

Answ. If he want not some other thing as requisite as faith, I grant it. So
all that hope in him, shall not be confounded, Eccles. 2. Yet neither Faith nor
Hope, nor both together, will suffice to justify without Charity. There be many
particular and inadequat causes of Justification; and the Scripture sometimes
attributes the whole effect to one of them, and sometimes to another; but never
so to any one as to exclude the rest, but rather as including and supposing
them.

ARTICLE XXV. Of the merit of Works.
OUr Tenet is, That our best works (in this state of corrupted nature) as they
are ours precisely, are not meritorious of a reward from God; because we can
do no good thing our selves, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is all from
him; yet as proceeding from the grace of Christ, working in us, and with us,
and elevated by his merits, and promises; so he has promised a reward to them,
and made them worthy a reward. Which is all we intend by the merit of Works.
And is proved thus:

The first Argument.
1. To merit a reward from God (according to the Churches notion and exposition
of it in this place) is nothing else but to be worthy and challenge a reward
from God by contract. 2. But our good works, as done by us in state of grace,
relying on the promises of Christ, and elevated by his grace and merits, are
worthy, and do challenge a reward from God by contract. 3. Therefore our Good
works, as done by us in state of grace, relying on the promises of Christ, and
elevated by his grace and merits, do merit a reward from God.
The first Proposition is manifest, unless you will obtrude your meaning and
explication on the Church, and not accept of the Churches explication of her
own words.

The second Proposition is proved: Blessed are ye when they shall revile and
persecute you, etc. for my sake: rejoice and be glad; for very great is your
reward in Heaven, St. Math, 5. 12. Whosoever shall give to one of these little
ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, Amen I say unto you,
he shall not lose his reward, St. Math. 10. 42. The son of man is to come in
the glory of his father, and then shall he render to every man according to his
works, Apoc. c. last, v. 12. I have fought a good fight, there is a crown of
justice laid up for me, which our Lord will render to me at that day, a just
judge: and not only to me, but to them also that love his coming, 2 Timothy 4. 7,
8. They shall walk with me in white, because they are worthy, Apoc. 3. 4. God
has tried them, and found them worthy of himself, Wisd. 3. That ye may be
counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer, 2 These. 1. 5.
Come ye blessed of my father, and possess ye the Kingdom, etc. for I was
hungry, and ye gave me to eat, etc. St. Matthew. 25. 14, 15. You see the
Covenant or contract is plainly made, and the reward as plainly promised, which
of necessity implies merit, seeing a reward and merit are correllatives.

A second Argument.
1. God has freely bound himself by Covenant and promise to reward our good
works proceeding from the grace, and dignified by the merits of Christ, with
grace and glory; then of necessity it follows that our good works, proceeding
from his grace, and dignified by his merits, do merit a reward of grace and
glory. 2. But God has freely bound himself to this by covenant and promise.
3. Therefore our good works proceeding from the grace of Christ, and dignified
by his merits, do merit a reward of grace and glory.
The sequel of the Major is proved, because a faithful promise makes a due
debt, and the Workman is worthy his wages, promised by covenant.

The Minor is proved by all the Texts above cited; as also the Parable in the
twentieth Chapter of Saint Matthew, where Christ in the person of an Householder
agrees with the workmen in his Vineyard for a penny a day; that is, Everlasting
Life, as all the Fathers expound it. And Saint Paul tells us, God is not unjust
that he should forget your work and love which you have showed in his Name,
Heb. 6. 10.

Fathers for this Point.
In the second Age Saint Ignatius, Give me leave to become the food of beasts,
that by that means I may merit and win God. Epist. to the Romans.

In the same Age Justin Martyr, We think that men, who by works have showed
themselves worthy of the will and counsel of God, shall by their merits live
and reign with him. Apolog. 2.

In the same Age Ireneus, We esteem that crown to be precious, which is gotten
by combat and suffering for Gods sake. lib. 4. cont. haeres. cap. 72.

In the third Age Saint Cyprian, If the day of our return shall find us
unloaden, swift, and running in the way of good works, our Lord will not fail
to reward our merits. Sermon. de Eleemosyna.

In the fourth Age Saint Basil, show thy works and exact a reward. Orat. ad
divites.

In the same Age Saint Ambrose; Is it not evident, that there remains after
this life, either rewards for merits, or punishment. l. 1. de Officiis c. 15.

In the fifth Age Saint Augustine, He (Paul) says that our Lord a just Judge
will render to him a Crown: he therefore owes it, and as a just Judge will pay
it; for the work being regarded, the reward cannot be denied. l. 50. Homil. 4.

And again, Our Lord has made himself a debtor, not by receiving, but by
promising; it is not said to him, render what thou have received, but what thou
have promised, in Psalm 83. and in another place, They give the price of their
own souls, who cease not to give Alms. in Psalm 48. v. 8.

The Arausican Council defined a thousand years ago, That reward is debt to
good works if they be done, but grace which was not debt precedes that they may
be done. Can. 18.

The Lateran Council defines, If any man shall say, that the good works of a
justified man which are done by him, through the grace of God, and the merits
of Christ, do not merit an increase of grace and glory, everlasting life and
the obtaining thereof, if he die in state of grace, be he Anathema. Chapter
Firmiter de sum. Trinitate an. dom. 1215. the same is defined in the Council of
Florence, decreto de Purgatorio.

Objections Solved.
Obj. Heaven and Everlasting Life is an inheritance, If Sons, then Heirs, etc.
Romans 8. therefore not a reward.

Answ. I grant the antecedent, but deny the consequence; it is also a reward
and crown to such as labor and fight for it. Whatsoever ye do, work it from
the heart, as to our Lord, etc. knowing ye shall receive a reward from our
Lord, Colos. 3. 23, 24. And no man shall be crowned, but he that has fought
lawfully.

Obj: Everlasting life is the grace of God, Romans 6. 23. And the passions of
this life are not condign to future Glory, Romans 8. 18.

Answ. It is therefore called the Grace of God, because gratis and freely
promised to our works, which could not otherwise deserve it, as also because he
gives us grace, whereby to merit and obtain it, without which we could not do
it. Yet it is also a reward of justice, 2 Timothy 4. And to the second place
objected, I Answer, we hold not our works or sufferings to be absolutely
condign to future glory, or equal in rigorous, but only in a Geometrical
proportion, which requires no more but a reasonable correspondence of one thing
to another, which is here found, so that our present tribulation works above
measure an immense weight of glory in us, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Obj. When ye have done all those things that are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10.

Answ. We are unprofitable of our selves, and as servants under the servitude
of sin, I grant; but as fellow-Citizens of the Saints, Friends and Heirs of
God, assisted by his grace and by the merits of Christ, I deny; and so does
Saint Paul, saying, If any man shall cleanse himself from these (sins) he shall
be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and profitable to our Lord, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Well done good and faithful servant, etc. but the unprofitable servant (take
heed Protestants) cast ye forth into outward Darkness. Matthew. 25. 21. O the
great goodness of God (says St. Augustine) to whom when we did owe servitude
by the condition of our estate, as bondmen to their Lords, yet has he promised
us the reward of friends. Sermon de verbis Apostoli.

Obj. Thy boasting has been excluded; by what law? by the law of deeds? no;
but by the law of faith. Romans 3. 27.

Answ. St. Augustine: Paul speaks only of the works of Abraham, in as much as
they proceeded from the law, secluding the spirit and grace of Christ. l. de
fide and op^rib. c. 14.

Obj. Christ himself reprehends mercenaries, St. John 20. Therefore it is not
lawful to do good works for a reward.

Answ. I deny the consequence: Mercenaries do their good works solely, or at
least chiefly for a reward; we do ours chiefly for the love of God, and
secondarily only for a reward, as David himself did: I have inclined my heart
to do thy justifications for ever for a reward. Psalm 119. v. 112.

Obj. There can be no justice between God and man.

Answ. Rigorous justice, I grant; Analogical justice, which is sufficient to
merit, I deny. There is a Crown of justice, as you have heard; and David tells
you, Our Lord will render to me according to my justice, because I have kept
the ways of our Lord. Psalm 18. 20, 21.

ARTICLE. XXVI. Of Vows.
AVow is defined to be a religious promise made to God of some better thing:
that is, of something which is better to be done, then omitted. This premised,

Our Tenet is, That it is a good and pious practice, and much conducing to
perfection (though not necessary to salvation) to make Vows to God of Poverty,
Chastity, Obedience, and other virtues, and good works. Which we prove thus:

The first Argument.
1. All that is taught us, and commended in the holy Scriptures, is very good
and pious for us to practice. 2. But Vows are taught us, and commended (not
only in themselves but unto us) in the holy Scripture. 3. Therefore it is good
and pious for us to practice them.
The Minor (which only needs proof,) is proved. They shall vow vows unto our
Lord, and pay them. Isa. 19. 21. Jacob vowed a vow to God (Viz. to erect an
Altar and offer Tyths) Genesis 28. David vowed a Vow to the God of Jacob (namely,
to build a Temple to his name.) Psalm. 13. 12. Vow ye, and render ye to the Lord
your God. Psalm. 75. 2.

A Second Argument.
1. To vow those things which are commended and counseled (though not
commanded) by Christ and his Apostles, is a most pious and Religious practice.
2. But Evangelical poverty, perpetual chastity, and voluntary obedience, are
counseled and commended (though not commanded) by Christ and his Apostles. 3.
Therefore to vow them, is a pious and Religious practice.
The Major is proved, because freely to bind our selves by Vow, for the mere
love of God, to an observance and practice of such virtues as God himself has
not commanded but only councelled, is a great argument of our gratitude toward
God, and pious zeal of his honor.

The Minor is proved, as to Poverty thus: If thou will be perfect, go and sell
all thou have, and give to the poor, and come and follow me, and thou shall
have treasure in Heaven. Mat. 19. 21: The multitude of Believers had one heart,
one soul, neither did any of them call ought their own of those things which
they possessed, Acts 4. 32. Which abnegation (as St. Augustine tells us) was
made by vow, Sermon. 1. de communi vita sanctorum. Ananias and his wife Saphira
had vow^d to give all they had to God. Acts 15. according to the Fathers on
that place; otherwise, as they well note, they could not have committed so
great a sacriledg, or have bin said to lie to the Holy Ghost by only reserving
to themselves some part of that which was their own, and then denying it to St.
Peter.

As to Chastity, it is proved thus: There be Eunuchs who have gelded themselves
for the Kingdom of Heaven; he that can take, let him take. Mat. 19. 12. This
was an actual council of perpetual chastity, and imply's also a Vow, because it
signify's that some by one act of the will had cut off from themselves all
power of marrying, which could not be but by Vow, as the Fathers conclude on
this place. St. Paul commands that young widows should not be chosen or
admitted to the vow of widdow-hood: But the younger widows (says he) avoid,
for when they shall be wanton in Christ, they will marry, having damnation,
because they have made void their first faith, 1 Timothy 5. 2. (that is, their vow
of chastity.) He that has resolved in his heart being settled, not having
necessity, but having power of his own will, to keep his Virgin, does well;
therefore be that gives his Virgin in marriage does well; and he that gives
her not, does better, 1 Cor. 7. 37, 38. Add to this, that the Fathers (on those
words, How can this be, because I know not man? St. Lu. 1. 34.) affirm and
prove that the blessed Virgin Mary had vowed chastity; otherwise she might have
known man, and have conceived, and born a son without miracle.

As to Obedience thus: Children, obey your Parents in all things, Colos. 3. 20.
And Christ himself was subject to the blessed Virgin and St. Joseph by a mere
voluntary subjection; He himself being the absolute Lord of them and all
things. St. Luke 2. 51. Obey your Prelates and be subject to them, etc. Heb.
13. 17.

Fathers for this Point.
In the second Age, St. Ignatius. Let Virgins know to whom they have
consecrated themselves. Epist. ad Antiochens. And he commands sacred (vowed)
Virgins to be honored, Epist. ad Tharsens..

In the same Age Dionysius tells us, That Monks promise publicly in the
Church, that they renounce a divisible or secular life, which is divided
betwixt God and the world, Eccles. Hierarch. part 2. c, 6.

In the third Age Tertullian, Have thou married to Christ? thou have delivered
thy flesh to him, thou have espoused thy ripeness to him. l. de velandis
virginibus. And St. Fulgentius; Whosoever has gelded himself for the Kingdom
of Heaven etc. has in his heart vowed chastity to God. l. de fide ad Petrum.
c. 3.

In the same Age St. Cyprian; Those that have consecrated themselves to Christ,
and bequeathed as well their mind as flesh to God, let them consummate their
work destinated to a great reward. l. de Habitu Virginum.

In the fourth Age St. Ambrose; Thou forbiddest Maids initiated with sacred
mysteries, and consecrated to integrity, to marry: would to God I could recall
them being about to marry. l. de virginitate.

In the fifth Age St. Augustine: Another vows to leave all things, and to go
into the common life and society of the Saints, he has vowed a great vow: in
Psalm. 25. And in another place he tells us, That a certain Maid did very ill in
having a will to marry, because she had vowed her self to God, in Psalm 75.

The Council of Chalcedon has defined; It is not lawful that a Virgin which
has vowed her self to God, (and the like of a Monk) should marry; and if they
shall be found doing this, let them be excommunicated, Can. 15. Alias 16. Anno
Dom. 451.

The fourth Council of Carthage decreed, That if any widows have vowed
themselves to our Lord, and shall afterward pass to secular marriages,
according to the Apostle they shall have damnation, because they have dared to
make void their Faith, which they have vowed to our Lord, Can. 104. An. dom.
439. See also the Toletan Council, can. 54. alias 55:

Objections Solved.
Obj. Vows are only Popish ceremonies.

Ans. They are great acts of virtue, and of divine institution, as has been
proved. All ceremonies are external, but Vows may be internal and made by the
will only.

Obj. The word Vow is not in all the new Scripture.

Ans. The thing is, which is equivalent.

Obj. All that we can do to Gods honor, we are already bound to do; Therefore
it is fond to vow it.

Ans. You are fond in both your assertions. No man is bound to sell all he has
to give to the poor; To geld himself for the Kingdom of Heaven; To spend all
his days prayer, fasting, and mortification, etc. yet these things we can do
by Gods assistance, and some are found who perform them for his sake.

Obj. God may exact all we can do.

Ans. He may, but does not; he has left us free in many things to do, or not
to do them.

Obj. All that belongs to our own or our neighbors salvation, we are obliged
to.

Ans. All that is absolutely necessary to salvation, I grant; All that is
profitable to salvation, I deny; there is a certain latitude in goodness; else
he that is not best, would be worst, which is a Paradox.

Obj. Why should we oblige our selves to that which God himself has not
obliged us to?

Ans. To show our gratitude and piety toward him, who has given us such
freedom, and done infinitely more for us then he was bound to do.

Obj. It is better to marry then burn (with unchaste desires or actions) 1 Cor:
7. 9.

Ans. He speaks only to such as are free, and have no vow or lawful impediment
to the contrary; Otherwise it would follow, that if such as are married should
chance to burn with any unchaste desires or actions, they also ought to marry
again, which is gross and impious. Thus St. Ambrose ad Virginem lapsam, c. 5.
and St. Hierom contra Jovinianum, explicate this place.

Obj. That which is done without vow, is more freely done, and therefore more
pleasing to God.

Ans. Nothing is more freely done, then what we vow to do; because the Vow it
self is freely made; and the necessity which arises from the Vow, is only a
necessity of supposition, which detracts nothing from the dignity of the act,
but adds to it.

Obj. No man is certain he shall keep such Vows. Therefore it is rash to make
them.

Ans. If thou can not (says Tertullian) it is because thou will not; for God
has left both in thy arbitrament; we are certain God both can and will enable
us, if we ask it as we ought. Ask and ye shall have. Wherefore I deny your
consequence.

Obj. All do not take that word, Matthew. 19.

Ans. He does not say all cannot, but all do not, and the reason is, they will
not.

Obj. St. Paul forewarns us of some, who in the later times. would forbid to
marry, and teach to abstain from meats.

Ans. He spoke of the Manichees who held marriage to be unlawful, and all flesh
meats to be unclean; we forbid not either in due and lawful circumstances, but
hold marriage to be a holy Sacrament, and no sort of meat to be evil of it
self, but only at forbidden times.

Obj. The Council of Gangers condemns those who execrate marriage.

Ans. So do all Catholics; we dislike and forbid none but sacrilegious and
unlawful marriages.

ARTICLE. XXVII. Of the possibility of keeping the Commandments.
OUr Tenet is, That a just man, assisted by the spirit and grace of God, may
(if he himself be not in fault,) and ought to keep the Precepts of the
Decalogue, or ten Commandments of the Moral law* which we prove thus.

The First Argument.
1. All that which God has commanded us, as a necessary condition, for our
obtaining salvation, is possible to us by Gods assistance. 2. But God has
commanded us as a necessary condition for our obtaining salvation, to keep the
Precepts of the Decalogue or Ten Commandments of the moral Law. 3. Therefore to
keep the precepts of the Decalogue or Ten Commandments is possible to us by
Gods assistance.
The Major is manifest, because otherwise salvation were impossible to be
obtained, and God a Tyrant in commanding that which he himself cannot enable us
to do.

The Minor is proved: If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, St.
Mat. 19. 17. do this (keep the Commandments) and thou shall live, St. Luke 18.
28. If you love me, keep my Commandments. St. John 14. 14. He that shall break
one of these least Commandments and teach men so to do, he shall be called
least in the Kingdom of Heaven. St. Matthew. 5. 20. Not hearers of the Law are
just with God, but doers of the Law shall be justified. Romans 2. 13. S^e Exodus
c. 20. and 34. Deuteronomy. 27. 31. Where God threatens grievous punishments to such
as break them, and justly sure, since absolutely to break any one of them,
willingly, is against Charity, and damnable.

A Second Argument.
1. If God have promised to enable men to keep his Commandments, and some de
facto have kept them, then they are possible to be kept. 2. But God has
promised to enable men to keep his Commandments, and some de facto have kept
them. 3. Therefore they are possible to be kept.
The Major is manifest, because otherwise we make God unable to perform his
promises, which is blasphemy, and grant, that some have done impossibilities,
which is absurd.

The Minor is proved. I will put my spirit in the middle of you, and I will
make that you walk in my precepts, and keep my Judgments and do them. Ezekiel. 36.
27. They shall be my people etc. they shall walk in my Judgments and keep my
Commandments, and do them. Ezekiel. 37. 24. See the promise. Zachary and
Elizabeth were both just before God, walking in all the Commandments and
justifications of our Lord without blame. St. Luke 1. 6. Noah was a just man
and perfect, Genesis 6. 9. Thine they were (says our Savior) and to me thou
gave them, and they have kept my word. St. John 17. 6. Whatsoever we shall
ask we shall receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, 1 John 3. 22. I
ran the way of thy Commandments when thou did dilate my heart, Psalm. 118.
See also the performance.

Fathers for this Point.
In the Second Age Tertullian; No Law could impose on him who had not in his
power due obedience to the Law: These words of his are cited by the Protestant
Centurists, Centur. 3. Column. 240.

In the Third Age Origin: The baptized may fulfill the Law in all things, Homil.
9. in Jos.

In the Fourth Age St. Basil. It is an impious thing to say that the
Commandments of God are impossible, Orat. in illud, Attend tibi.

In the same Age St. Chrysostom; Blame not our Lord, he commands nothing
impossible, Homil. 8.

In the same Age St. Hierom; We execrate their blasphemy who affirm any thing
impossible to be commanded by God to men. In explanat. Symbol. ad Damas. and
again, We are therefore to understand that Christ commands nothing impossible,
Comment. in Matthew. 5.

In the Fifth Age, St. Augustine; God who is just cannot command any thing
impossible, neither will he that is holy, damn man, for that which he cannot
avoid. Sermon. 61. de Tempore.

The Second Milevitan Council defined, That whoever shall say, the grace of God
does in this only help us not to sin, because by it the understanding of the
Commandments is revealed to us, that so we may know what we ought to desire
and eschew, but that by it, it is not given us, that what we know to be done,
we may love and be able to do; c. 4. This Council was subscribed by St.
Augustine An. 400. and odd.

The Second Araufican Council, defined, We believe all such as are Baptized
etc. Christ helping and cooperating, may and ought to fulfill, if they will
labor faithfully, those things that belong to salvation, c. 25. An. Dom. 440.
odd.

Objections Solved.
Obj. St. Paul calls the Law a yoke of servitude, supposing it impossible to be
kept, Gal. 5.

Ans. He speaks of the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, which was abrogated by the
death of Christ. If you will needs extend it to the moral Law, I answer, it is
impossible to be kept by the bare knowledge of the Law, or strength of nature
only, but not by grace and assistance of the Holy Ghost; for that which was
impossible to the Law, is made possible by the grace of Christ. Romans 8. (viz.
our fulfilling the justification of the Law) verse. 3. 4.

Obj. To will is present with me, but to accomplish that which is good, I find
not, Romans 7.

Ans. He speaks there of the first motions of concupiscence, which are not
always in our power to hinder, nor any sin at all, if we neither delight in,
nor consent to them, which by Gods assistance is always in our power.

Obj. We have not always that assistance from God.

Ans. It Is our own fault then; we may have it, if we ask it, as we ought: Ask
and ye shall have.

Obj. We all offend in many things. St. James 2. If we say we have no sin, we
delude our selves. 1 Joan. 1. 8.

Ans. Those places concern only venial sins, which are not absolutely against
charity, but only weaken it; and therefore break not the Commandments
absolutely, but only hinder our perfect observance of them; they are not
against, (as the Fathers say,) but by or besides the Commandments.

Obj. We cannot love God in this life with our whole heart as he commands.

Ans. In that perfection as the Blessed do in heaven, or so as to love nothing
else but him I grant; comparatively and so as to prefer him before all other
goods, I deny; and this is all that is intended by such expressions. So Joshua
followed God in all his heart, 4. Kin. 13. He accomplished all things, and
omitted not one word of all the Commandments which our Lord gave to Moses.
Josh. 2.

Obj. Paul said, The law is not put for the just, but for sinners. Therefore the
just are not bound to keep it.

Ans. It is not put for the just, according to the coercive power of it,
because they keep it willingly, but for sinners, I grant; according to its
directive power, I deny it, and your consequence.

Obj. St. Peter calls the Law a yoke, which neither they nor their Fathers were
able to bear* Acts 1. 15.

Ans. He speaks there only of the penal ceremonies, not the moral precepts of
the Law. He was not ignorant what his great Master had said: My yoke is sweet,
my burden light, St. Matthew. 11. 30.

ARTICLE. XXVIII. Of the Sacraments.
OUr Tenet is, That the Sacraments of the new Law, ordained by Christ our Lord,
for our Justification, are in number Seven; Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Order, and Matrimony, and that they all confer
grace instrumentally, if we our selves put no impediments; Proved thus.

The Argument.
1. A Sacrament is defined by the Church, To be a visible (or sensible) sign of
invisible grace, divinely instituted by Christ our Lord, for our
Sanctification. 2. But in the new Law there be seven Visible signs of
invisible grace divinely instituted by Christ our Lord for our sanctification.
3. Therefore in the new Law there be seven Sacraments.
1. The Minor (which only needs proof) is proved: for Baptism; Go ye teaching
all Nations and Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, St. Matthew. 28. 19. 2. For Confirmation; And he that
confirms us with you in Christ, and has annoiled us, God, who also has
sealed ^s, and given the pledge of the spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1. 22. And
when Philip the Deacon had converted Samaria to the Faith, Peter and John were
sent to confirm them, Who, when they were come (says the Text) prayed for
them, that they might receive the holy Ghost, etc. Then did they impose their
hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 14, 15, 16. 3. For
the Blessed Eucharist, He took bread etc. saying, This is my Body, This is my
Blood, etc. St. Matthew. 26. 26, 27. St. Mark 14. St. Luke 22. 4. For Penance,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye shall forgive they are forgiven, and
whose sins ye shall retain, they are retained, St. John 20. 23. 5. For extreme
Unction, Is any man sick among you? let him bring in the Priests of the Church,
and let them pray over him annoyling him with oil, in the name of our Lord;
and the prayer of Faith shall save the sick man, and our Lord will lift him up:
and if he be in sins, his sins shall be forgiven him: St. James 5. 13, 14, 15.
6. For the Holy Order, Do ye this for a commemoration of me; St. Luke 22. 19,
20. There he made his Apostles Priests, by giving them power to offer
sacrifices, which is the highest act of Priesthood. Neglect not the grace which
is in thee by prophesy, with the imposition of the hands of the Priesthood, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 7. For Matrimony, Therefore they are not two but one flesh: that
therefore which God has joined let not man separate, St. Matthew. 19. 6. There
shall be two in one flesh: this is a great Sacrament, but I say in Christ and
the Church, Ephesians. 5. 31, 32.
See here the number and divine institution testified.

The visible sign in Baptism is natural water, and the words; the invisible
grace, the sanctity and justice given to him that is Baptized. He that shall
believe and shall be Baptized, shall be saved, St. Matthew. 28. 19. But ye are
washed, but ye are justified, but ye are sanctified, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 10.

The visible sign in Confirmation is Oil blessed by a Bishop, mingled with
Balm, and the words of the form. The invisible grace, the holy Ghost, or
special grace to profess the faith of Christ thereupon: And they received the
Holy Ghost. Acts 8. 16.

The visible sign in the Eucharist, is the outward forms or accidents of bread.
The invisible grace, Christ himself, the fountain of all grace: This is my
body, etc. St. Matthew. 26. He that eats of this bread, shall live for ever;
St. John 6.

The visible sign in Penance, is the Penitent confessing his sins, and the
Priest absolving. The invisible grace, the remission of his sins made by grace.
Whose sins ye shall remit, they are remitted, St. John 20.

The visible sign in Extreme Unction, is the prayer of the Priest ( By that
anointing, and his own most pious mercy, Let our Lord pardon thee, etc.) and
holy Oil with which he is anointed. The invisible grace, the remission of the
relics of sin, His sins shall be forgiven him, St. James 5.

The Visible sign in Holy Order, are, the things given to him that is Ordained,
and the words of the Bishop, Receive power, etc. The Invisible grace, the grace
that is there given him: Neglect not the grace which is in thee, etc. 1 Timothy 4.
14.

The Visible sign in Matrimony, are the words or signs of the parties by which
they express mutual and present consent: The Invisible grace, a supernatural
conjunction by Almighty God, and grace given them in order to the holy
procreation and education of children in the knowledge, love, and fear of God:
which cannot be done without special grace; What God has joined, etc. St.
Matthew. 19.

That Baptism is necessary for those that are at years of understanding, by
the necessity of a divine precept, I take for granted by our adversaries, and
therefore shall not need to prove farther then has been done already by the
words of Institution.

For the necessity of Infant Baptism, take this ensuing probation.

A second Argument.
1 All that which Christ has ordained as a necessary means of salvation, as
well for Infants, as those of riper age. 2 But Christ has ordained Baptism as
a necessary means of salvation.
Therefore Baptism is necessary is necessary as well for Infants, as those of
riper age.

The Major is manifest; because without a means of absolute necessity, that
whereto it is a means, cannot be had.

The Minor is proved: Unless a man be born again of Water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, St. John 3. 5. (He exempts not the
Infants of one day.) Do penance, and be every one of you baptized in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins, Acts 2. 38. He has
saved us by the laver of regeneration, Titus 3. 26. (He excepts none.)

Fathers for this point.
In the second Age, St. Dionysius affirms it to be a Tradition from the
Apostles, That Infants should be baptized, Lib. eccles. Hierar. c. ultimo.
part. ult.

In the same age, Ireneus, That all are saved who are regenerated in Christ,
Infants, Children, youths, and old men, l. 2. c. 39.

In the third age Origin: The Church has received a Tradition from the
Apostles, to give Baptism also to little ones: l. 5. in c. 6. ad Romans

In the same age St. Cyprian: It seemed good not only to him, but the whole
Council, that little ones should be baptized, even before the eighth day: l. 3.
epist. ad Fidum.

St. Clement also in the second age: Because the frailty of our former
nativity, which is made yours by man, is cut off to one regenerate of water,
and born to God, and so at last you come to salvation, otherwise it is
impossible, Epist. 4.

In the fourth age St. Epiphanius condemns Cerinthus of Heresy, for teaching a
man may be saved without baptism, Here Is. 28.

In the fifth age St. Augustine: If thou will be a Catholic, believe not,
teach not, say not, that Infants, prevented with death before they are baptized
can come to the pardon of their Original sins: l. 3. de origin animar. c. 9.
And again, Whosoever shall say that little ones shall be quickened in Christ,
who depart out of this life without partaking of this Sacrament; this man truly
both contradicts the preaching of the Apostles, and condemns the whole Church:
where they therefore haste, and run with little ones to be baptized, because
they believe without doubt, that otherwise, they cannot be quickened at all in
Christ. Epist. 28. ad Hieron.

The first Nicen- Council decreed, That whoever is baptized, descends guilty
of sins, etc. and ascends free from his sins, made the son of God, and heir of
his grace, coheire also of Christ, having put upon him Christ himself, as it
is written, etc. l. 3. decret. de Sancto Baptismate.

The second Milevitan Council defined, that, Whoever denies children newly
born to be baptized, or says, etc. they contract nothing of original sin from
Adam which may be cleansed with the laver of regeneration, etc. Anathema, c. 2
Age the 5.

Objections Solved.
Obj. Our Lord said to Abraham, I am thy God, and of thy seed, Genesis 17. 7.
Therefore we are made the children of God by being born of believing parents.

Ans. That promise concerns literally peculiar protection, and worldly
felicity, not the remission of sins and everlasting life; neither can we be the
sons of Abraham by carnal generation, or by our c^rnall parents, (we are not
Jews but Gentiles) but only by spiritual generation (to wit, baptism) by
which we are born to God, and made the brothers of Christ, the son of Abraham.
Those (says St. Paul) are the sons of Abraham, not who are the sons of the
flesh, but of faith, Romans 4. 12, 13 so that your consequence is ill deduced.

Obj. The man an Infidel is sanctified by the faithful woman, and the woman an
Infidel sanctified by the faithful husband: otherwise your children should be
unclean, but now they are holy, I Cor. 7. 14.

Ans. If this text could prove any thing to your purpose, it would also prove
the Infidel wife and Infidel husband in that case might be sanctified and saved
without either baptism or faith, as well as their children, which no man yet
ever held; but let St. Augustine answer you, It is to be held without doubting,
whatsoever that sanctification was, it was not of power to make Christians, and
remit sins, unless they were made faithful by Ecclesiastical sanctification,
and Sacraments. Neither can little ones (how just or holy so ever their parents
were) be absolved from the guilt of Original sin, unless they shall be
baptized in Christ etc. whence it comes that none can be regenerated in their
parents, not being born; but if he shall be born, it is meet ^e be regenerated,
because unless one be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, l. 3. de
peccat, merit. and remissi. c. 12.

Obj. Christ himself was not baptized till thirty years of age.

Ans. He was not conceived or born in Original sin as we are, and therefore
needed it not at all; nor was there any danger of his death, as there is of
ours; so that his privilege cannot be our president.

Obj. The Scripture in many places says, they must be taught before they be
baptized, Go ye teach all Nations, baptizing them. Therefore Infants which
cannot be taught, ought not to be baptized.

Ans. Those who are at years of understanding, must be taught and instructed
first I grant; Infants I deny: Yet they must also be baptized, as has been
proved.

Obj. The place objected concerns all Nations.

Ans. True; but not all particular persons, for the point of teaching, (Infants
are excepted although it do for the command of baptizing.

Obj. If baptism were necessary for all to salvation, many thousand Infants
would be damned without any sin, which is unjust.

Ans. Without any actual sin, I grant; without Original, I deny; for In Adam
all die, 1 Cor. 15. 22. And all are born the children of wrath, enough to
justify their condemnation.

Obj. You hold that some are saved without actual baptism.

Ans. Yes, by the desire of it we do: but Infants are not capable of that; so
that there is no means of saving them in case they die, but actual Baptism,
or martyrdom for Christ.

Obj. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 2. and consequently to
be saved. But Infants cannot have faith, for how shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? To. 10.

Ans. They cannot have actual faith, I grant; neither is that requisite in
them, though it be in the ripe of age; because as they died in Adam, and sinned
only by another will; so it is but just they should be repaired and quickened
by another faith, to wit, the Churches; it suffices to their justification,
that the holy Ghost is given them, and his supernatural gifts be infused into
them, by virtue of the Sacrament.

Fathers for confirmation.
In the Second Age St. Clement: All must make have without delay to be
regenerated to God, and at length to be consigned (confirmed) by a Bishop; that
is to receive the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost, etc. because otherwise he
that is baptized cannot be a perfect Christian; etc. which we have received
from blessed Peter, and all the rest of the Apostles have taught, our Lord
commanding: in epist. ad Julium.

In the same Age, Dionysius: But the consummating, annoynting of Ointment,
gives also the coming of the Holy Ghost to them that are consecrated with the
most sacred mystery of regeneration: Eccles. Hierach. c. 4. part. 3.

In the Third Age Origin, (speaking of such as were already baptized) says, But
the gift of the grace of the Spirit, is designed by the Image (or sign) of
Oil. Homil. 8. in Leviti. prope finem.

In the same* Age Cyprian: It is necessary that ^e be Anointed who has been
baptized, that Chrisom being received, he may be the Anointed of God, and have
Christ in him: Epist. ult.

In the same Age Tertullian, The flesh is Annoinsed, that the soul may be
consecrated, the flesh is overshadowed with the Imposition of ^ands, that the
soul may be illuminated with the spirit: l. de resurrect. carnis.

In the same Age, Clemens Alexandrinus: He that illuminated him with the
Sacrament of Baptism, has afterward signed him with the seal of our Lord,
as with the perfect and safe custody of his soul: apud Eusebius. l. 3. c. 17. in
Ruffino. 23.

In the fourth Age St. Ambrose, The sacred seal follows, because it follows
after the Font, that perfection may be made, when at the invocation of the
Priest (a Bishop) the Holy Ghost is infused: l. 3. de Sacramentis, c. 2.

In the fifth Age St. Augustine: In this Ointment Petillian will have the
Sacrament of Chrisom to be understood, which truly in the kind of visible
seals is holy, as Baptism it self: l. 2. cont. litt. Petill. c. 104.

The Eliberine Council decreed, If he shall survive, (to wit, after Baptism)
let him bring him to the Bishop, that he may be perfected by the Imposition of
hands: can. 38. Age the fourth, about the time of the first Nicen Council.

The Council of Laodicea decreed, That those that have been baptized, must
after Baptism retein the most Holy Chrisom, and be made partakers of the
Heavenly kingdom: c. 48.

Objections Solved.
Obj. Paul recalls us from the Elements of this world, Col. 2. 8.

Answ. From naked elements which cannot justify (such as were the Sacraments
of the old law) I grant; from sanctifying and quickening elements, such as these
are, I deny. He sends us to these, as you have heard.

Obj. Your form of Chrisom, or Confirmation is not in the Scripture.

Ans. Neither is the express form of Baptism there: it is in Apostolical
Tradition, which suffices.

Touching the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist* I take that also for
granted by our Adversaries, and have already said enough above.

Fathers for Penance.
In the second Age Tertullian, God foreseeing the poison, (to wit of sin) the
gate of pardon being fast, and the bolt of washing being shut, has yet
permitted something to lie open, and has placed in the porch the second
Penance, which may open to them that knock: l. de p^^itent. And again, Let him
blot out what has been committed by doing Penance, by weeping, by satisfying,
etc. Homil. 6. in Exodus

In the third Age St. Cyprian affirms, That private Confession, in which men
confessed their sins and wicked thoughts (not only mortal, but venial) and
had satisfaction imposed according to the offense, was usual in his time, and
earnestly exhorts all thereunto: Sermon 5. de lapsis.

In the fourth Age, St. Hierom: Let it be redeemed by the blood of our Savior,
either in the gift of Baptism, or Penance, which imitat^s the grace of Baptism.

In the same Age St. Chrysostom: They not only regenerate us (by Baptism) but
afterward have power to pardon us our sins: l. 3. de Sacerdot.

In the same Age St. Ambrose: Why do ye Baptize, if sins cannot be remitted by
a man? for in Baptism is the remission of all sins; nor is it material,
whether Priests challenge to themselves this power by Penance, or by Baptism;
for it is the same in both: l. de poenitent. c. 7.

In the fifth Age St. Augustine says, Some run unto the Church as king Baptism;
others, Reconciliation; others also, the doing of Penance it self: all, the
conferring and making of Sacraments; Epist. 108. And again, If murder be
committed by a Catechumen, it is washed away by Baptism: if by one that is
baptized, it needs Penance and Reconciliation, de adulter. conjug. l. 2. c. 16.

The third Council of Carthage decreed, That the time of Penance should be
appointed Penitents by the arbiterment of the Bishop according to the
difference of their sins: can. 31. 1200. years ago.

The Cabilon Council affirms, That their Confession being made, Penance be
enjoined to the penitents by Priests, all Priests agree: can. 8. above 1000.
years since.

Objections Solved.
Obj. There is no Element in Penance; therefore no Sacrament.

Ans. I deny the consequence: there is a visible sign, which is sufficient.

Obj. Christ and St. John in all their preaching penance, make no mention of a
Sacrament of Penance.

Ans. True; it was not instituted till after the Resurrection. Jo. 20.

Fathers for Extreme Unction.
In the third Age Origin says, That Priests ought to do at all times what
James prescribes saying, Is any sick amongst you, and^. Homil. 2. in Levit.

In the fourth Age St. Chrysostom asserts, The Obligation of Priests to keep
the precepts of St. James: Is any man sick, etc. l. 3. de Sacerdot.

In the fifth Age St. Augustine exhorts the sick to be mindful, and keep the
said precept of the Apostle: Sermon. 215. de tempore.

The first Nicen Council mentions the Oil of the sick, and distinguishes it
from Chrisom, or Oil of Confirmation, and the Oil of Catechumens, c. 60. ex.
Arab.

The Second Cabilon Council decreed, That according to the documents of the
blessed James the Apostle, to whom the decrees of the Fathers are consonant,
the sick ought to be anointed by the Priest with Oil, blessed by a Bishop:
therefore such a medicine is much to be regarded which heales the languors both
of soul and body: can. 48.

Objections solved.
Obj. St. James speaks only of corporal diseases, and the miraculous gife of
cures.

Ans. He would not then have bid them call in Priests only, but such as had
the gift of cures, which were not always Priests; nor was that only done by
annoynting, much less would he have added, And if he be in sins, his sins
shall be forgiven him.

Fathers for Holy Order.
In the second Age Dionysius affirms, That by order grace is given to him that
is ordained. 5. Eccles. Hierarch. de ritu Ordinan.

In the third Age St. Cyprian, De Operibus Cardinalibus.

In the fourth Age St. Ambrose, Man imposes his hand, but God conferreth the
grace: l. de digni^at. Sacerdot. c. 5.

In the same Age St. Chrysostom, Priesthood is finished on earth, but ought to
be referred into the number and order of celestial things: de Sacerd.

In the fifth Age St. Augustine: Let them explicate how the Sacrament of the
Baptized cannot be lost, and the Sacrament of one ordained can. 2 cont. Parmen.
13. and l. 3. de baptism. c. 1.

In the same Age Theodoret teaches, That the grace of the Holy Ghost is given
by Ordination: in 1 Timothy 5.

The Council of Florence has defined it to be a Sacrament, as you have seen
above.

Fathers for Matrimony.
In the second Age Ireneus: Where, by all mean^ they ought to meditate on the
mystery (it is the Greek word for a Sacrament) of marriage, l. 1.

In the third Age St. Cyril teaches* That Christ sanctified Wedlock, and gave
grace to Marriages, 2 in Joan. 22.

In the fourth Age, St. Ambrose, He signifies that there is a great Sacrament
of mystery in the unity of man and woman. In c. 5. ad Ephesians. v. 32.

In the fifth Age, St. Augustine, They shall be two in one flesh; this is a
great Sacrament: That which in Christ and the Church is a great Sacrament; this
in all men and wives whatsoever is the least Sacrament; but notwithstanding an
inseparable Sacrament of conjunction. Tract. 9. in Joan. And again, In the
Church not only the bond, but also the Sacrament of marriage is commended. l.
de side and operib. c. 7. And in the third place, In the marriage of our women
the sanctity of the Sacrament is more worth then the fruitfulness of the womb.
l. de bono conjugii. c* 18. 24.

The Council of Florence defines: There be seven Sacraments, Baptism, etc. and
they all give grace to the worthy receivers, etc. Litera Vnionis in deoret.
Eugen. It was subscribed both by the Greek and Latin Church.

Objections solved.
Obj. A Sacrament cannot be given to such as are absent; but Matrimony may:
Therefore Matrimony is no Sacrament.

Ans. I distinguish your major; a Sacrament cannot be given to such as are
absent, if they be so absent, as not present by proxy, I grant* it; if they be
present by proxy, though Physically absent, I deny it. I distinguish the minor
after the same manner; and so deny the consequence.

Object. Matrimony has no determinate form.

Ans. Yes, it has; It is determined to words or signs expressing mutual and
present consent, though not confined to any precise number of words or
syllables.

Obj. The material use of the bed, is too mean a thing to deserve a Sacrament.

Answ. It is not, it makes them two in one flesh, and renders marriage
indissoluble; nor is the education of their children in the service of God, the
mutual fidelity, peace and comfort of the parties any mean thing. All which
depend upon this Sacrament.

The Conclusion.
HOw can I better close this little Manuel, then with a short Apostrophe to our
poor Country, by crying out unto her with the Prophet, O Captive daughter of
Sion, loose the Bonds off thy own neck etc. Isa. 52. shake off the Fetters of
the servitude; I mean the servitude of Schism and heresy* That Monster,
Schism, which first, through the insatiable luxury of an effeminate tyrant,
broke the bonds of unity and obedience in Gods Church, and has since (according
to its proper quality) hatched an innumerable brood of Sects and Heresies,
which yet are daily ingendring more, and continually wander up and down in
strange unknown paths, and can never find repose or settlement, whilst they
are out of Gods holy Arc, the Catholic Church; which alone has stood
constant and immovable amidst all those changes and revolutions these late
unhappy years have produced: which alone yields true comfort and assurance to
those that rely on her Authority.

Return then (my dear Country) to thy own true mother, and embrace the liberty
of her saving Faith. This is the freedom I invite thee to: This is the
happiness I wish thee: This is the way I have chalked thee out by the strait
line of Apostolical Doctrines, a milky way, which leads souls to eternal
beatitude. God of his mercy grant thou may walk in it, through Jesus Christ
our Lord and Savior, to whom be all honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
AN APPENDIX TO THE Article concerning the Popes Supremacy. Page 90.
AFter I had finished this Treatise, a learned friend sent me a certain British
testimony, taken out of Sir Hen. Spelman, de Council. p. 1^8. and out of it an
Argument framed against the Popes power over the whole flock of Christ: and
though it came not to my hands soon enough to be admitted to its proper place,
yet I thought good rather to add it here, then not at all, lest as it has
deluded some, it might seduce others, if not called to a just trial.

Sir Henry says, he finds the Original Cambrian interlined with English in an
old Manuscript of Peter Moston, a Cambrian Gentleman; copied so (if we may
trust Sir Henry's conjecture) out of another of more antiquity: and, to fit it
for other Nations, himself translates it into Latin, the English and Welsh
remaining verbatim transcribed out of Mr. Mostons pretended Copy; and so prints
it in his ^ook. When, and by whom that Manuscript was composed, he professes
himself ignorant: but sets down the testimony as the Abbot of Bangor's Answer
to St. Augustine the Monk, when he demanded of the Britans an acknowledgement of
submission to the Roman Church: And affirms that this Abbot and first Author of
the Cambrian lines was the learned and renowned Dinoth or Dionoth; one of those
that, with the seven Britan Bishops, gave meeting to St. Augustine in the
second Synod held at Worcester, as some will have it, in the year of Christ
601. the first meeting (of fewer and meaner persons) having been (as far as I
can guess by History) not about Worcester, as Sir Henry puts it, but in the
confines of the Vectians (the Isle of Wight) and West Saxons.

That all may better discern the vanity of this objection, I will here set down
the Testimony, whence it is taken, word for word, and point for point, just as
it lies printed in Sir Henry's book, in the original Cambrian (which is chiefly
or only to be regarded) and as it is translated into English and Latin, thus*

Bid ispis a diogei i chooiyn, bod ni hall un ac aral, in

Be it known and without doubt unto you, that we all are, and every one of us

Notum sit and absque dubitatione vobis, quod nos omnes sumus and quilibet
nostrum

uvidd ac ynn ostingedig i eglwys duw, ac it Paa^, o Ku^ain,

obedient and subjects to the Church of God, and to the Pope of Rome,

obedientes and subditi Ecclesiae Dei, and Papae Romae,

ac i boo^ Kya^ Grissdion dwyuol, y garu pawb in i radd

and to every godly Christian to love every one in his degree,

and unicuique vero and pio Christiano ad amandum unumquemque in suo gradu

mewn Kariad parfaich, ac i helpio pawb o honaunt, ar air a

in perfect charity, and to help every one of them, by word and

in perfecta charitate, and ad juvandum unumquemque eorum verbo and

guecchred i ho^ ynn blant y ^u^: ac amgenath ubyddod n^* hwn

deed to be the children of God: and other obedience then this

facto fore filios Dei: and aliam obedientiam quam istam

nidadwen i vod, i^ neb yr yddeck ch^i y hemint in Paa^, ne in

I do not know due, to him whom you name to be Pope, nor to be the

non scio debitam, ei quem vos nominatis esse Papam, nec esse

Daad o Daad: yw gleimio ac yw ouunn, ar uvidd^d ^iun idden

father of fathers: to be claimed and to be demanded, and this obedience we are

patrem patrum: vindicari and postulari, and istam obedientiam nos sumus

ni y^ varod yw rod ac yw dalu iddo efac i pob Krisdion

ready to give and to pay to him and to every Christian

parati dare and solvere ei and cuique Christiano

in dragwiddol. He^vid yr ydym ni dan Lywodrath esco^

continually. Besides we are under the government of the Bishop

continuo. Praeterea nos sumus sub gubernatione Episcopi

Kaerllion a^ wysc, yr hien y stdd in oligwr dan ^u^^ arnom.

of Kae^leon upon Uske, who is to oversee under God over

Caerlegionis super Osca, qui est ad supervidendum sub Deo super

ni* y ^^^^nthud i ni gadwe Fordd is brydol.

us, to cause us to keep the way spiritual.

Nobis, ad faciendum nos servare viam spiritualem.

Though this Record be much insisted on by Sir Henry and others, more modern
opposers of the Roman Church, Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Schism, p. 112.
and Dr. Bramhal, Bishop of Derry, as an argument lately found of great force,
if not demonstrative against that power over the whole Church of Christ, which
all Catholics acknowledge the Popes right, by Christ's institution: yet how
unapt it is for that purpose, how unworthily alleged by persons of any
ordinary judgment or erudition; and how easily convicted to be a simple
imposture, is clearly demonstrated by what follows.

First, there is not the least scrap of Antiquity so much as pretended to
prove, that the Cambrian lines cited were the Abbot of Bangors answer to St.
Augustine upon the occasion specified; nor that the renowned Dinoth was that
Abbot; nor that the old Manuscript, whence Sir Henry extracts the Testimony,
was copied out of any other more ancient: All these are but Sir Henry's bare
conjectures, without any proof at all. And certainly, if his Manuscript be no
elder then the enterlined English, he has grossly wronged himself and his
Reader, by honoring it with the style of ancient: For, as every one sees, the
English is purely modern, and cannot be so old by many years as Henry the
eighths cashiering the Popes authority, and arrogating the supremacy in
Ecclesiastical matters to himself; for maintenance whereof it is alleged, and
was certainly forged.

Secondly, the Welsh lines are so un-Cambrian for Orthography, so mixed with
English words, and so just to the mode of the present English or other
strangers, writing imperfectly, as they are apt to speak, when they are but
young smatterers in that language, as every one but of indifferent skill therein
can testify, that it cannot be in the least degree credible, either Dinoth or
any other Abbot of Bangor should be author of them.

The imperfection I point at, ^s (among other instanc^s) apparen^; First, in
the ordinary use of V consonant instead of the Cambrian F, (though rightly used
in one place) which is the ordinary error of the present English or other
strangers, when without skill they begin to w^^te Welsh after the spelling of
their own language: The like error is committed in writing v consonant for w,
in the word guecthred, and for b in the word varod.

Secondly, by the use of the letter k as in Kiar Kariad* Kaerllion, Krisdion,
and by terminating the word Yddeck by ck, all persons indifferently skild in
the language knowing that the letter k is not in the Cambrian Alphabet; the
letter C bearing the sound of K before all vowels in Cambrian words; and that
the termination of words in ck is an Anglicisme, not admitted in the British
Language.

Thirdly, by inconstancy in spelling the same word; as grissdion in one place
and krisdion in another, and neither of them right; in in one place, and ^nn,
in others; hwn, in one place, hivn in another, and hien in a third, all for the
same word hwn: idden, in one place, and ydim in another; boob, in one place,
and pob in another; uvyddod for vfuddod: the word duw every where written for
dhuw, which duw in those places is just as Englishmen or other strangers, not
acquainted with the Euphonia's of the Cambrian, are wont to write according to
their ungenuine pronunciation of the language.

Fourthly, by the use of these two words, helpio and gleimio; which (though now
often used by the Welsh, especially borderers, whose language is more mixed
with the neighbor English, yet) are known to be no Cambrian, but words of the
present use among the English: helpio (or more usually helpu) being but the
English verb help, brought into a Cambrian termination; and gleimio, taken
after the same manner from the English claym, as that formerly from the French
clamer, and therefore most probably never known even among the English, til the
laws and language of the Norman Conqueror came to be mingled with theirs.

The Cambrian testimony being thus looked into, it cannot be more credibly
thought, that Dinoth, or any ancient Abbot of Bangor was the author of it, then
it can be imagined that one, renowned for learning, and celebrated for an
ancient writer (as Dinoth was) or one of special note above others for
erudition (such surely was the Abbot of Bangor) should (1050 years since, when
the language was pure, and the Britans commerce with the Saxons little, unless
it were to war) in writing his native ancient language (which was the sole
idiom of his Country) use modern English words; or characters, which not his
own, but the English Alphabet admitted; or be inconstant or diverse in writing
the same word; or fall just into such errors of Orthography, as the English or
other unskilful commonly do at this day, when they write Cambrian: And whether
this be not extremely incredible and unlikely, I appeal to all rational
judgments.

But though all these exceptions, observable only by the Britans, should be
winked at, and the testimony only confidered in its English and Latin
translation; yet is the Author thereof easily convicted to be an ignorant
Impostor by his putting Bangor six or seven years after St. Augustines coming
into England, under the government of the Bishop of Caerleon upon Vske. For,
besides Bangors being very near to if not in the Diocese of Llan Elwy (in
antiquity Episcopus Eluiensis, as may be seen in Sir Henry Spelman, p. 106.
speaking of his coming to meet St. Augustine at the second Synod, and now
commonly called St. Asaph) all histories testify, that the Archiepiscopal seat
was removed or translated from Caerlion upon Vske, to Meneuy, in King Arthurs
time, by St. David; who (by Dr. Pits, de Illust. Britan. Script. de St. Davide)
died about the year of Christ 544. which was fifty years before St. Augustines
first entrance into Britain: whereto Sir Henry himself assents, putting that
translation betwixt 70 and 80 years before St. Augustines coming.

Was he not then an ignorant Impostor that put Bangor six or seven years after
St. Augustines coming, under the Bishop of Caerleon upon Vsk? Is it likely, or
possible that Dinoth (or any other Abbot of Bangor at that time) should be
ignorant of the aforesaid translation, or not know under what immediate Bishop
or Metropolitan their famous Monastery was seated? Dinoth, I say, of all
others, who is famous in the Catalogue of ancient Writers, (as for other
Treatises, so particularly) for his defense of the jurisdiction of the Sea of
Menevy.

To say with Sir Henry, that the Archbishop of Menevy, even after the
translation, retained the title of Caerleon, is not worth regard. First,
because it is but his word, without proof. Secondly, because it implies a
contradiction, to say, the Sea was translated, and the former title still
retained; Translation importing, not a joint possession of two titles, but the
taking a new, and a desertion of the old.

To all my former exceptions against the Testimony, add, First, that there is
no likelihood Dinoth, a writer of Latin books, or any other, that could either
write Latin himself, or get a Latin Secretary to help him, should return a
Welsh answer to St. Augustine, who (as all know) was an Italian, not many years
before come from Rome, and cannot reasonably be presumed either to have
understood the Britans native language, or to have made his demand to them
otherwise then in Latin.

Secondly, that both the English, nor to be father of fathers: to be claimed,
etc. and the Latin, nec esse patrem patrum: vindicari, etc. are false
translations of the Cambrian: the true being, whom you name Pope, or father of
fathers, etc. quem vos nominatis Papam, vel patrem patrum, etc. Nor is the
Cambrian rightly translated by Sir Henry's passive vindicari; or Dr. Hammonds
vendicari and postulari; but by the active vendicare and postulare, to claim
and to demand. This legerdemain discovers the Reformers humor, to be still
corrupting what falls into their hands to help out their cause against the Roman
Church: and an ill cause it must be, that needs such shifts.

Thirdly, that (however it goes with the Cambrian) there is no good sense
either in the English, Nor to be the father of fathers, to be claimed, etc. or
in Sir Henry's Latin, nec esse patrem patrum: vindicari, etc. as every Reader
may see. And this Dr. Hammond, if affected to sincerity, should rather have
acknowledged, then use so much paraphrastical liberty and addition of his own,
to make a falls translation and senseless words speak his mind against the Pope.

Fourthly, that the Testimony makes as much against the aim of the Protestant
Prelatick Reformers, I mean the late Kings supremacy, which Dr. Hammond and
others (to keep off the guilt of schism from themselves) labor to support, as
against the Popes: for those words, who is to oversee under God over us, make
the Bishop of Caerleon next to God over Bangor, and exclude the King as well as
the Pope.

Fifthly, if Sir Henry and those others that borrow out of him had been willing
to see the truth themselves, and communicate it faithfully to others; they
would not have made reflections upon that upstart Testimony, which appeared not
til within these fifteen years, and then only brought in by head and
shoulders, to witness against the Popes supremacy a hundred years after it was
taken from him, by their forefathers who produce it: but upon that true
antiquity, which, having endured the shock of almost a thousand years, Sir
Henry has delivered a little before, page 105. transcribed out of Venerable
Bedes History of the Church of England, l. 2. c. 2. wherein every one may read,
that when St. Augustine, in his dispute with the Britans, at the first meeting,
demanded their conformity to the Church of Rome in the celebration of. Easter
and Baptism, and that they would join with him in preaching the Gospel to the
Heathen Saxons, and could not otherwise incline them to it, he offered to try
by miracle, whether he or they were in the right; whether he did well in
demanding, or they ill in refusing: which, the Britans failing, he effectually
performed, miraculously giving sight to a blind man: And when, in the second
meeting he found them still refractory to his proposals, he prophetically
foretold Gods revenge, which soon after fell upon them.

That miracle and divine vengeance more then sufficiently prove, that St.
Augustine, sent by the Pope, came in the Name of God, from a lawful authority;
and that his demands of conformity to the Church of Rome in the points
specified, were good, and to be yielded to by the Britans. Miracles, the proper
works of the Almighty, and proper seals of his Missives, being never wrought
to confirm unlawful missions or false Doctrines. And were there no other
exception against the Cambrian pretended Testimony, but that Miracle; it
clearly evidences, that when, and by whomsoever it was first written, the
Author was either very ignorant, or in a worse error, and that there was more
obedience due to the Pope from those of Bangor and all other Christians, then
acknowledged by it.

I wish the present refractory opposers of the Roman Church, and her
Missionaries, sent by the same Authority, to preach the same doctrine with St.
Augustine, would reflect without prejudice on that miracle, and prediction of
divine revenge: they are a seasonable theme for the present Pulpit.

FINIS.

