Jehovah Iireh Merito Audiens, praeco Evangelicus An Angel from Heaven, OR, An
Ambassador for CHRIST, Descending from God, Ascending unto God, lawfully
dignified, compleately qualified, HEARD (With Religious devotion) reporting
his EMBASSAGE. To the honorable Societies of the Inner, and Middle TEMPLES: On
Sunday the Eleventh day of December 1642. The substance whereof is commended to
public view; By Edw. Tuke.

LUKE 2. 13. And suddenly there was with the Angel, a multitude of the
heavenly Hosts praising God and saying, 14. Glory to God in the Highest, and
on Earth peace, good will toward men. London printed for T. W. 1642.

To the Worshipful, well devoted and his much Honored friend M. John Cave
Councellor at Law and of the Inner Temple
Worthy Sir,
THE Rabbis to maintain Tradition, usually distinguish Gods Holy Law, into
the Law written; Torah she baccathubh and Torah she begnah Peh; and their
Talmud or Doctrinall, is no other then an elucidation or exposition on Gods Law
written, says Elias Levila in Tisbi:

And to take (...) or Traditioe, as we use the word in the Church, pro quavis
Iustitutione quae ecclesia traditur, it may as justly refer to Prophetical
and Apostolical Truths, and by consequence, not to be Abrogated: 2 These 2. 15,
1 Cor. 2. 15. 3, 4 As to those things whose circumstances make them mutable and
whose observations is therefore free, and not of absolute necessity as Act. 15.
28 29. 1 Cor. 11. 2.

Of this Sermon, you had first an unwritten Tradition or (as the Jews say) the
Law spoken, The errors which may be found in it, are with tolerable modesty
better to be answered, in that it was given me (as they say their Tradition) in
the Night, for I think, there is no man that shall attempt and act matters of
high and useful consequence from hours stolen from his pillow, but may now
and then be taken napping*

But such as it was, being given me to deliver, it was more then Reasonable I
should deliver to them, for whom it was Given; yea to do that, was Causa sine
qua non; besides Gods providence and spiritual permission; Your Patience an
particular Admission, There was law to command me, the law of necessity, and
necessity of preaching, against which I know no law, and I must aknowledge, I
had a conscionable Motion to it at that time.

It appertains to all, lawfully called and duly authorized, to preach Gods
word, And though I am yet (by Gods will) Fortunes Dwarf, (...) (Religiously be
it spoken) and so, not commended to any proper Pastoral cure; Yet in Saint
Paul's first chapter to the Romans verse 14. I can read my Duty; To which the
Syrian gives a word of such Important obligement; as may supply others (as well
as those of necessary invitation) with a paraphrasticall Commentary upon this
subject: mehhaicbh euoleakr^z, I am indebted to the pulpit, or in Duty to the
office of a Preacher.

From this Ground I spoke, and spoke my Conscience God bearing me witness; and
from Gods Bearing me witness, I writ; and Here you have the Law written.

I must note unto you Sir, that I do not with real Freedom expose my self to
the press, much less, to the Torturing Rack of the worlds harsh Censure;
learning it self stands in White sheets and I think no public penance is
voluntary; Mine is not such, yet if it suffer such, and look not too pale, the
matter is less; White is a Symboll of Innocence and Purity, and these is some
comfortable mitigation, to be persuaded; It does penance.

The Sinful Censurers of the Times, are as Locusts in Egypt; I speak not
double when I say Arbeh is nor strained from Rabah, Multitudes from Numbers;
Some for Paul, some for Apollos, some for Lephas; From the increase of these
Numbers, are drawn many Heads, which some call Divisions: These like worms,
live upon the Government, and eat out the very Heart of the Tree, or as Flies in
summer, putrify the sweetest sustenance.

Sir, These send me to you; for the Declension of an age from primitive virtue,
could not suffer me to come forth without Protection; an hundred to one, These
are many: you may please in this matter to be all one to me: That one is that I
wish for my singular esteem of you, makes me account these Pluralists nullius
numen, nothing.

To be short; Your Love, next unto Gods Hand, lead me to the Temple, at that
Time, and your Approbatory Testimony, compells me to prize my poor Fortunes
dexterity, that has fitted a Dedication correspondent to my desires Direction,
at this Time.

The Almighty God of heaven and earth, whose property in Divine Nature is to be
merciful above offenses, quicken you by his Spirit, to an heavenly Emulacia to
study the Principles and Desires of his Truth, and (as far as concerns you)
the Churches safety; enclose you in the volume of his Book; and Gather you into
the Bosom of his Son, in whom is only True Bliss, and of whom.

By Faith and Holiness (in this life) you shall be assured at the Resurrection
of the Just; when God by his Spirit or soft and still voice, in a less minute
then any man dies here, shall unite the Spirits and Bodies of all: When and
Where God is All in All.

And though his Church on Earth (as at this time never so militant) be sad
round about, and his Children under Clouds and pillars of fire; yet Sursum
Corda lift up your heart, and eyes unto the Hills, those mountains of
Deliverance above; Take every day two or three Turns up and down Jacobs
ladder, by humble Meditations and Faithful Ejaculations, Trusting unto your
Redeemer with Godly perseverance; And let the Troubles, be what can be, for
Condition and Duration* so long as there is Elijah an holy and devout soul;
God will be in the Cave.

It is my security in this Business to have thought upon your Candor; when you
have kindly accepted this, you free me not of all; for in Gratitude I owe you
service, and in Duty prayer,

Whilst I am a lawful Ambassador for Christ, EDVARD TVKE.
From my Study December 19. 1642.
HOnoratissimis, sagaciter per sapientibus, literis mansuetioribus Disertissime
locupletibus, sacrosancta Doctrinarum veritate (Anglicanae Ecclesia fideliter
extru^ta) Accuratissime Fundatis

Roberto Berkley,

Roberto Foster,

Francisco Crawley,

Iurisprudentibus, militibus, and Iudicibus, omni observantia colendis,
venerandis.

Et claritate virtutis excellenti, ingenue Dapsili, Art and legibus comptisme,
integerrimeque valenti, Regales causas, scientissime Oranti

Radolpho Whitfield, militi,

Necnon, Generosi sanguinis, utriusque Templi, Iuris Candidatis, culti oris
facundia, and venustissimo Ciceronis lepore Relucentibus and Fragrantibus;
suaviloquentia Festivissima, uberrimaque sententiarum supellectile (aurei
instar Fluminis) exuberantibus; Humanitatis laud urbanioris, antecellentibus;
officiorum studiosioribus; Iuvenibus.

Hunc suum, Merito Audientem Praeconem Evangelicum,

In Concione (oratione impolita apud vos, praelecta, Decembris undecimo
Dominico, habita,) Munusculum Levidensae, ad perpetuum (in calestibus) vestrum
Monumentum and em^lumentum

Theologica laurea minime Doctoratus, suppliciter, verecunde, nec minus
rubicunde summo candore,

Offert, Addicat, Consecratque, December. 19. 1642.

EDVARDVS TVKE Presbyter Humillimus.

CHRIST'S Lawful AMBASSADOVR.
THese meditations Infant-like unable to walk or talk by themselves as
Pyrrhus in Plutarch silently and humbly entreat your Attentions, I cannot
pass the ^^^ing of Rabbin Josibar, Iehudah in Pirkabboth, he that learnes of
young men like a man that eats un-ripe grapes, or drinks Wine out of the
Wine Press. But he that learnes of the Ancient is like him that eats ripe
grapes and drinks wine that is old: And it is Plinies direction; for more
generous wine of the old Vine Tree (Antiquity was famous and had respect in
those days,) Ex vetustioribus vitibus vinum melius, novellis Copiosius. And
should I by Synechdochen understand Baptism, for the sum of S. John Baptists
Doctrine, I hope I could not offend in humility to profess with Apollos, Act.
18. 25. That I understand only John's Baptism. And therefore I submissively
salute you in his Apology unto Christ whom he endeavored to put of coming to
his Baptism with his (...), I have need to be baptized of thee, and come
thou to me? but patiently suffer it to be so now, Me to preach and you to hear
the word of the Lord, delivered unto you, from the,

2 COR. 5. 20.Now therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. MY Text
in its body represents a Church and State in an ordinate unity under one head,
or Domuni quandam conventionis, a certain House of Parliament, the debatements
though various, yet intend the Churches happiness and determine in peace. The
King and Lord Spiritual of the upper House in Heaven intimates the Treaty for
the settled bliss of the Soul, is content though stabdd and pierced through
with the sharp spear of daily transgressions, and insufferable injuries to
pass his pardon without man's peccavi or demand, and not upbraiding our
oblivion and want of gratitude endeavors by all continued Clemency, to seek
us yea seek to finds us who first lost him by sending this unparralleld
Embassage of peace. Now therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ, etc.

The Poets feign the Chariot of the sun in respect of its four diversities
to be drawn by four horses: at his rising it is redd, at the third hour
bright, at noone hot, at Evening cold; the fiction I stand not to dispute, only
in this Text I can perceive four wheels as of a Chariot; running much like
those four last Articles of faith, upon which wise men by rumination walk,
and safely rest, whilst fools run over and over throw.

First, Read here the Communion of Saints, which may be gathered hence, we are
Ambassadors sent to that purpose.

Secondly, See the forgiveness of Sins, if ye repent, while God beseeches,
and we pray in Christ's stead*

Thirdly, Expect the bodies resurrection properly, and the souls
Metaphorically and accidentally from the grave of death, sin, and hell, which
is perfectly assured to the utmost of this life's capacity, if ye be reconciled;
therefore be reconciled.

Fourthly, Taste that all good, and good of all, life everlasting God, the rest
of the rest, therefore be ye reconciled unto God* But I have here 4 other
wheels very useful and not unfitly made fast to this Chariot.

1. Is Magnificens Christi in presbyterio Majestus, Gods power and Majesty in
his Ministry, We are Ambassadors for Christ.

2. Affectio providens, Gods provident love to his people, as though God did
beseech you by us.

3. Here is Religiose unita societas, an unanimous and religious society,
Christ by his Ambassadors, the Ambassadors in Christ, request your Christian
conjunction, unto Christ, We pray in Christ's stead* be reconciled.

4. Here is indefatigabilis and immutabilit satie as, an unwearied and
unchangeable saciety of Gods mercy and your peace, if ye be reconciled, (...)
unto God; Now therefore we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God. The
first word now, stands as Abraham in his Tent door, attending the coming of
Angels from God, such as these textuary Ambassadors, and serves now to
instruct us of an orderly succession of Legates from God unto a strange people,
and it opens the door unto Christ too, and signifies his special appointment
of Shepherds over his flock, as Bishops, Pastors, and Apostles, to guide,
feed, and instruct them, now therefore we are Ambassadors, says Saint Paul.

And this word now, by an holy and Apostolical derivation is present with us
to confirm our office and authority, and to enjoin you obedience and submission
to the watch man and his word for your souls, now therefore we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled unto God From this Illative (...), therefore, I might argue a
consequent necessity of the Ambassadors coming, and your entertainment of
his person and Message, as also, I might hence yield a reason invincible, of
your spiritual life, by dying to the night of sin, and rising to the day of
righteousness, propounded unto you, as a matter of great justice, from the death
and Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ, ver. 13. as also, the means of
accomplishing that death and this Resurrection, which this therefore seems to
imply, as the complement of your salvation, when in religious obedience, hereto
you approve the dignity of the Minister over you to that effect, or to effect
that, and excellentiam Ministerij, as Beza notes it, the excellency of the
Ministry, and thence termed the word of reconciliation, ver. 19.

But having more than two words to speak, I speak of these two little more,
though laid in my way like stones, not of offense, but defense, and as the
Basis of a chief corner stone, fetched hither from the bottom of the earth, or
Moses rock, which being polished, fitted and squared by sufficient explication,
might prove solid grounds, for erecting us lively stones in Gods building, by
faithful application; Now therefore we are Ambassadors. In the first five
words, are five several parts of speech, which Grammatically stood upon, would
help me to avoid the tongues confusion, by which the whole work suffers, and
goes not forward, but omitting that, as also the subject, copulate, and
redicate, which logically, this first affirmative proposition affords, I will
apply my sal^e somewhat, to the concurrence of those wheels, on which the Text
last ran, and not liking many divisions in the Temple, please to observe in
the moving of the first wheel, Deputationem nostram, our Deputation, we are
Ambassadors, 2. Reputationem nostram, our reputation for Christ; In the
turning of the second wheel, note 2. First, Commissionem, our commission;
Velut Deo vos precante per nos, as though God did beseech you by us. Secondly,
Conditionem, the Condition* Oramus nomine Christi, we pray in Christ's stead,
in the third or three quarter wheel, take notice of the subjects Vos ye, be
ye. 2. The subject, reconciliation, Vos reconciliamini, be ye reconciled: in
the last wheel, as it turns round, see the object, God, whom I have read
signified, by a wheel which turns ever and never cease turning, Vos
reconcilumini Deo, be ye reconciled unto God.

Thus reverently saving to my Text, the Acclamation of Elisha unto Elijah* in
his rapture, to a blessed translation, my Father, my Father, the Chariot of
Israel, and the horsemen of Israel, I shall now upon these particulars, or
some of them, sometime sit, and sometime stand, and in this divided Order.
First, of the first.

We are Ambassadors, various and as valuable are these high Titles of honor
various which the great God of HEAVEN and Earth, has collated upon the Heralds
of his Law and Gospel which are Bridles to command and curb the scorn of the
contemptible world, nor can any eye be so Dim and fleshly covered though
overspread with a Scirrhosis but may discern those titular respects to be
tutelar protects of such his Ambassadors and Messengers as the Apple of his
own eye: They are silver keys which lead the Coveteous Christian to the
golden treasure hidden in the field: be it only Titulus isis. And it Quasi
Titan illuminating the minds of the men or less Ignorant, as the sun does
the world, but they are many, and like Pilates superscription in Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin, to point the Jew, Gentile and Christian to Christ and his Cross,
for which we are Ambassadors.

Ambassadors, honorable men, and of Gods Privy Council, fellow Commoners
with God, yea Angels too: and this testimony, we receave in either Testament.
Expositours mean the judging high Priest, when Ecclesiastes the 5. and 6. it is
said, say not before the Angel; and the Jews propound that Angel, which came
up from Gilgal to be Phineas the high Priest, Judge. 2. and 1. And so Beza
renders those Angels before whom a woman must be covered in the Church, to be
the instructing Ministers. The Angels of the seven Churches, we say Bishops,
(whereas others that cannot speak out, with Shibboleth,) call them
superintendents. And because we preach the Unity of one full Church Celestial
and Terrestrial under Jesus Christ, we participate by the counterchange of
names, of the nature of Angels. An Angel in Heaven is a Celestial Priest and
an Ambassador in Earth is well styled a Terrestrial Angel. We are those
Angels upon the ladder of Jacob, Jesus Christ, ascending by prayer for the
people, by, and to his Divinity, and descending by Doctrine upon the people, by
his Humanity, though Coucht under the flatt style of an Ambassador in the
text. Nor is this relation of so late news as to cause your ears to itch, but
rather tingle, in dicbus illis, even in the old time before us this Doctrine
was preached, the use discovered, the abuse corrected; the old world were
Aurium tenus up to the ears in water, and perished as by an heavenly. Dropsy,
for not obeying and esteeming Noah an Ambassador from God unto them: the
lustful Sodomites were (for wickedness almost matchless) matched, being
consumed by flames, and generally overthrown by one burning fever, for that
they hearkened not unto righteous Lot their Ambassador. Since ever there were
a people God has continued away of practice with that people either immediately
or mediatly, extraordinarily or ordinarily, sometime by inspiration, sometime
by dreams, sometime by prophesy, sometime by visions, and sometime by
revelation, all which in their Order and end considered, were as so many
Ambassadors from God the great King, and as so many testimonies of his mercy
and love to the people, even from Moses the great Prophet, unto Malachi the
lesser, the line has run direct, to point to the greatest of all Jesus
Christ, whom Saint John Baptist exactly aimed at with his (...). Behold the
lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. Not a word without an
Article to lead us to the person and Actions of Christ, for whom being come
and ascended we are Ambassadors.

In this place, I may without digression observe Gods holy and wise
Oeconomicall Method: until the Law was published, God revealed himself and his
will by Apparitions and Inspirations of Prophets; but Miracles and visions
apparently decreased as there was an augmentation of his holy Scripture; so
Vrim and Thummim at the captivity ended, and nothing was assigned to the
Priests duty, but to teach the Law when the Prophet Malachy finished the
Prophets; and Esaiah the 8. 20. the people are informed to what they must look
and stand, even to the Law and to the Testimony, and are evidently admonished
to remember the Law of Moses from which they might conclude; no more
expectation of Angels, Prophets, dreams or visions, until the coming of
that great Prophet indeed Jesus Christ, so lately pointed at by his forrunner
John the Baptist.

From this course we may gather the Complement of the Law, the ceasing of
further visions, of ^^oaching of dreams, of faineing of Prophesyes, of
dreaming of new Revelations, and Enthusiasticall inspirations, and here is the
Proclamation of the Gospel by Gods lawful Ambassadors, at whose mouth we are
directed to know Christ's will; whose lips in the Temple we are bound to
prefer before the private Adoration of a God of our own setting up, though we
should see him moove by his itching in our garrets and chambers. We
Ambassadors have Authority to preach remission of sins to all faithful
penitents, assurance of Resurrection to Eternal life, to faithful souls by
Jesus Christ, who having sealed up all vision and prophesy, revealed the whole
will of his father directed us unto Gods wisdom, commands us to lay aside all
Popish traditions. Anabaptisticall inspirations, humane unnecessary inventions,
and to rest upon him in his written holy word; who is the beginning and the
ending Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, And for this we are
Ambassadors.

Hence the people are taught that it must needs be an high arrogance to add new
Doctrines, because the whole will of God the Father is in these last times
fully declared and manifestly published by Jesus Christ his only son, and our
only Savior in his Word. And since Christ has completely finished the whole
Law of God and man's everlasting Redemption, and that this Doctrine, these
Divine Ambassadors are commanded with substantial knowledge to preach to the
people, the people are hence directed with all humble holiness immediately to
take drift and living directions from us as the textuaries, and Apostolical
Ambassadors, that so Gods written word may have evident and sound Explication,
all Schisms and heresies utter exerpation, pure Devotion high augmentation
significant discipline in all comeliness and decency, practical commendation,
the people to whom the Ambassador comes, may receave sincere edification, the
Ambassador, religious estimation; Gods Embassage deserved exaltation, and God
himself, an uniforme Glorification; and for this we are Ambassadors.

Here is Officium and Beneficium, Ambassador it is nomen oneris as well as
honoris, a name of Office as well as benefice, of sedulity as well as utility, of
service as well as ceremony. We exercise an Eldership and discharge the work, as
truly, as legatione fungimur we are charged with the Embassage: by the
authority of Christ, we are invested and inducted into one; and by the same
virtue, in nomine Christi in the name of Christ, we effect the other: Dignitas
honoris, the worthiness of this honor, falls out according to the power of
this Gift; and the Gift had not been sufficient, except God had endued it with
power.

Whence our Deputation first issued, and what it may understand; Saint Paul (as
co^menting else where upon this text) unfolds by the word of Eternal truth: He
that descended is the same also who ascended up far above all heavens, that
he might fulfill all things: 1. Ephesians. 4. 10. and v. 11. He gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ.

But this deputation is no less then a work of the sacred Trinity, for the
blessed Trinity, which by one consultation in word created man, do now in the
word, by one work, recreate him: in this last quotation you read Donum Filij,
the gift of the Son, and 1. Cor. 3. 6. you may read Donum Patris, the gift of
the Father. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase; and 1.
Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly teachers; after that Miracles then Gifts of Healings, Helps,
Government, diversities of tongues.

And Act. 20. 28. see Donum Spiritus sancti, the Gift of the holy Ghost: Take
heed therefore unto your selves and to all the flock over the which the holy
Ghost has made you overseers to feed the Church of God.

Learned Calvin particularly interpreting Saint Paul's order of Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, shepherds, and teachers; does summarily concorporate
them into the office and honor of an Apostolical Pastor, such as this
Ambassador himself was.

By shepherds and teachers some understand those, whose charge extended to the
care of a particular Nation, and such fell somewhat short of that account,
which they received, who spared no pains to preach every where.

By Evangelists, some intimate those who walked not abroad and yet preached, as
Priscilla Act. 18. 26. or those who wrote the Gospel.

By Prophets, some mean certain which were not Apostles, and yet were
Prophets, as Agabus Act. 11. 28.

By Apostles, there are who understand such as had all things, for an Apostle
is a vessel of the body more principal and lively, receaving all things from
Christ himself; so says Saint Chrysostom in Ephesians. 5.

And the before cited judicious Calvin, puts betwixt the orders some
difference, but that, in very modest discretion.

By teachers, he will signify such, as applied their whole diligence to the
sound interpretations of Divine writ, and whose care it was to preserve the
purity of Doctrine amongst the faithful, and it is his observation, that such
teachers intermedled not with any Discipline or Ministrations of Sacraments to
the people.

By Evangelists, he means an order in Dignity somewhat inferior to the
Apostles, yet not without some relations to them in office, such as Saint Luke
and Timothy, and perhapps those 70. Disciples appointed by Christ.

By Prophets, he intends not all interpreters of the Divine will, but such as
by singular Revelation excelled others; of which kind* we have now none Extant,
for so he argues, quales nunc vel nulli extant, vel minus sunt conspicui.

But the power Apostolical, he confines not to any other bounds then the whole
Universe, alluding to their Commission granted from the Lord Governer and
Commander of the whole world, Saint Mark 15 16. Go ye into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every Creature.

And the Pastoral and Apostolical charge, not admitting the least difference
betwixt them in substance or service; He concludes, comprehends all these, for
thus he resolves. Pastorale autem mumus haec omnia in se continet, and now by
consequence it is manifest: but what relation is or could be, in honor and
office betwixt our teachers and the old Prophets; the same, more fully
authorized and exemplified, have our Pastors with the Apostles, and so, in the
duties of preaching, praying, praising, baptizing, breaking of bread,
administering of the Cup, and in all other holy actions grounded on Gods word;
as apperteining to the Ministry, our succession is Apostolical; for Saint
Paul ingrosseth not the office to himself, but verifieth an equality of
execution to all such succeeding Ministers and Ambassadors. Let a man so
esteem of us, as of the Ministers of Christ and stewards of the Mysteries of
God 1. Cor. 4. 1. that hence, we be esteemed as Ambassadors for Christ, sent
by Christ, and that the people to whom we are sent, may as from our hand,
receave the rich treasure of Salvation* gathered for them, and distributed unto
them from the holy Scriptures and Mysteries of God; And in this sense is my
thesis in the text, we are Ambassadors.

Here is honor indelible, dignity indamnable, reward interminable, dignatio
magna, here, if I could build Tabernacles, the glory of the Lord would
suddenly fill them. We are Ambassadors, here is or should be our Unity, and
we are all Ambassadors, here is or should be our holy Community; Legatione
fungimur, we are all Ambassadors, but all are not we; he mistaks the place,
qui tibi hu^c assumit honorem, who takes this honorable Office upon him, not
being called of God as was Aaron: there are which run, whom God has not
commanded to go, but interpreting Saint Paul's mark, set before them, to be a
pulpit, press forward in their senseless performances, without authentical
Ordinations. O monstrum horrendum, Inform ingens cui lumen ademptum, O head
and body without eyes, unparalleld wonder, here let Admiration seal up every
lipp, that any people should conceave that way, best profitable to mend their
aberrations and steppings awry, by hearing and seeing a Cobbler, who perhaps
would delight more to be Solus cum sola wax a Preacher, nay it is causa capitis
and head Business, which moves my more then ordinary invectives: against such
profanation, and profaners, when a dresser of Hatts will seem a redresser of
hearts; what can such polluted hands work save gum into men's Heads and gall
into there minds, they may presume to make Sermons as good as ever was felt,
though never so true as to be understood, such take not a book in hand without
some color, and though there utterance exceed there entrance, their going
out; there learning nay though there shutle tongues we aver like, Iigg into the
tumult of discourse, and stray into the timelesse wast of words, against their
own science, or capacity; yet though many their are, blessed be God (which cry
such out) too too many there are, which cry up such, for the only zealous
teachers, and commend in them Gods power, with a digitus Dei, because such a
Mechanical Enthusiast has it ad unguem as he has at his fingers end.

What otherwise can be expected for event then making of Schisms and rents in
Gods Church, when a the theevish tailour, who but now has robbed his neighbor
of his goods in his Stall, shall leap up into Moses Chair, and strait way
robb God of his honor in the pulpit, which of you, ever heard of any King that
took a Cobbler, hatter tailour, or such like; and sent him an Ambassador: and
will the King of Kings (judge you) allow of such; these like Apes, show their
ugliness by climbing up, these like horsleeches suck up that blood
unnaturally, which nature and Art as Parents. Have bestowed upon lawful
Children, these like snap-dragons, live upon the Almsbaskett of the Country,
their title to the Office and honor of the true Ambassador, suits well with
the harlotts claim, who when she had overlaid here own Child, with a bold and
uncontracted for-head, pretended an interest in another; persuade your selves,
that even by such instrument, the Devil may delude to destruction; whom ye
report to have a Cloven foot, but think not of his Cloven tongue, yea my
friend, to hear such tautologicall fellows, is unprofitable for you, says
Saint Paul elsewhere, and since you hear his limitation, hear a little more
from this text, even your Imitation, for we are Ambassadors for Christ.

I need not here further dispute our primitive Installment into this Sacred
function, being Confident that no truly affected Son to the Church of
England, can be seduced by such senseless insolency, to deny or doubt, so
possitive a truth as is here uttered, we are Ambassadors for Christ.

But not being such, or in case there be such, this text will better inform
both; in which, there are credenda and agenda matters of faith, that we are
Ambassadors, and such Ambassadors, and this respects our selves, and you to
believe; and matters of fact; and this concerns us, first to approve our selves
Ambassadors, and such Ambassadors, and then, it calls upon you to incline to
our Embassage.

The words respectively considered, may be compared, to an Image of Juno in
Lucian de Dea Syria; which looks this way, and that way, and every way; for
they have an eye to us, and an eye to you, to us, as Activi Doctores, to you,
as passivi discipuli, to us, as Ambassadors faithfully to report our
Embassage, to you, as persons, to whom we are sent, fruitfully to receave our
errand, they view us Ambassadors, as we are dignified with honor, and they
look upon us, as we perform our Office.

But committing the honor, and worth of an Ambassador, to the wise estimation
of those persons, whom justly it may respect; I should pass to his work, save,
that the Course might seem preposterous, except I touch a little, upon some
qualifications, proper to an Ambassador, and such an Ambassador, in this
transition.

The Persians named there King and Priests Magos, neither do the Dignity of
this Ambassador, nor the Excellency of his Office, lie obscure under this
Appellation; since the Hebrew gives it, a Meditando and docendo, from his
Meditation and Instruction, for which two, he should be ably quallified.

The five Intellectual virtues, Intellectus, Sapientia, Scientia, Ars, and
Prudentia, Intelligence, Sapience, Science, Art, and Prudence, which Arist,
Ethic. 6. terms, Arma Spiritualia, Spiritual Armor, or weapons; must never be
wanting to this Ambassador, nor must he need that lac Philosophia, milk of
Philosophy, Grammar, Logic, and Rethorique, by which soft nutriment, the
Ancient as well as youth, sucking, may be nourished, and by these his tender
Documents growing up, may in time, more freely and with less Crudities digest
his stronger Oratory.

But for his more solid and prompt expressions, of those Metaphysicall and
Theological Essays, it will not dishonor him, yea much enable him* to
incline a regular observation, of Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance
4. Cardinal virtues, so called, as in respect of the matters, Dignity, about
which they treat, so, of that certain and definite Principality, which they
not improperly assume to themselves* as Boelius de Consol. 1. has it.

The Greek, (...), originally issues from (...), or (...) hence (...), which is
as much is (...) to serve and labor in tho dust, so radically, (and in genere)
understood, we are servants, toylers, and tillers of the Ground.

And so Patheticall a power has each word in his sense, as if the earthly
hearted hearer, should necessarily and effectually be moistened, by the
plentoous dropps of the head sweating preacher.

Here the sun bakt, vulgar, whose Envy has made them look a squint upon the
work of the Minister, and whose busy Idleness find fault which his labors,
conceaving the Curse, in sudore vnlous etc. in the sweat of thy brows shall
thou eat bread, not to reach his head; or that like an usurer he lies sleeping
in security, and therefore, that his maintenance takes him napping, here such
may receave an infallible Conviction.

Pierius Hieroglyphically designs and sindes out a true Scholar by the Hare,
which sleeps waking, with her eyes open, and wakes sleeping with her oyes
shutt, that is one, who seems to contemplate Acting, and to Act in
contemplation; Pity it were to start this Hare, from the form; But alas, how
subject howerly is this poor Hare to a sudden surprise, yea without fair
law shot at, and with such Greedines as scarce mist an Hare, In what danger
sits this Hare to be torn in Pieces, flesh yea Skin and all, nor will this
always suffice seldom suffocate.

Praeda Canum lepus est vasto, non implet Hiatus, the hare is a dish for
hounds, but grosser Paunches she cannot satisfy.

Neither, have other Emblemists dealt penuriously, in their Annotations upon
the serious Student, which discern him, by one eye shutt, and another open,
Phosphorus in his right hand, and the word of observation, vigilo, I watch;
Hesperus, in his left hand, and the word, Dormio, I sleep; hence I collect
they Argue, his just division of the day and night, for theoricks and
practicks, for Meditation, and Application.

See, how he walks obstipo Capite, with his head awrie, his eyes perceing the
earth; Hear but his silent murmuring, how his Spirits are gnawn asunder and
divided into pieces, by the worm of revolving invention.

Perceive the work of his Judgment, by his two lips out stretched, which are
as Balances, to weigh his sententious and ponderous expressions; yea think, how
near he consumes himself, when spider like, he is ever weaving curious webbs,
for your soft and durable wearing, out of his own Bowels. Consider that the
firmament, the world and all creatures in heaven and earth are arguments
proposed for his understanding and disputation, together with that principium
primum, causa prima, ens entium, that essentia, and trinus personis, God, that
one eternal Essence of three persons, the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost,
and his will to be revealed unto Christians; for the disposing and effecting
whereof, as there is little need of mundane Impediment, or the peoples
discouragement, so great cause for the exercise of his prudence, which
opportunely (I trust) with your patience I may consider, and that, very briefly.

Cicero, says, it is scientia and cl^ctio rerum, quas cupimus auf fugimus, the
Apprehension and Election of those things, which we are bound to seek or avoid;
or it is Approbatio causarum, and effectuum experientia, the Experience and
account of causes with their Effects, doubtless, it is the hand that lays out
for all, the foot that walks for all* the ear that hears for all and the
very eye that constitutes all: It is ( Ars vitae, says Tully) as Physic is
the Methodicall preservative of our health, it is the Alarm of the Army, the
Monitour of the School The watch in the Pockett, it is the predominant moral
in man's Affections and Actions, that whereas other virtues do, Inclinare, move
men to Civility, and their passions to Regularity, this does Imponere, im^ose a
necessity of wise Government in the soul: for no prudent man, as good no man.

Nor is the virtue to be nicely disliked because Cardinal, or Confind to one
office and Action of the Ambassador, but generally to all.

To his first Admission into this holy Dignity, to his setting forth; yea it is
his Companion in his journey betwixt earth and heaven, it comes along with him
to the people, to whom he is sent, and to sum up all* It is his eye, his
Ear, his mouth, his bracelett, It is every where, not circumscribed, but as
infinite, as the individualls, For since moral virtue, is an habit created in
man's will by the holy Ghost, moving him to honest Actions agreeable to the line
of Gods Law, and that prudence is one chief, Pillar of man's reasonable
understanding, this Prudence wanting, or not practiced, it must follow,

A man's passions do subvert his reason, wisdom is infatuated, His Affections
contemning a judicious Government, and prudent moderation, expose him violently
to unbridled courses, irregular, exorbitant, and dissolute demeanours, or as
the Schools have it, per actus remissos habitus virtutis corrumpitur.

I cannot stand upon the varions distinctions of this prudence, as that
personal, oeconomicall political, nor that of Cicero's pura and impura,
propria and impropria, The first showing a respective wisdom, when a man
feels his own pulse, and consults himself; The second, more common, when he
sends to the Physician, and is advised by another, that, which this hand leads
me to, at this time, is to those effects, singular, and observable, in a
religious prudence, and are as attendants upon this AMBASSADOVR, and they are
these.

The first is, Perfect considerare, To consider thoroughly, God, themselves,
their Embassage, and the world; For, as he well replied, to an ignorant
admirer, of the ill success of those things which with such deliberations were
at, tempted and acted, so, here it may make our answers, Consultationum Domini
Erant, they were Masters of their deliberating consultations, but not of the
coming success.

The second, is perfect determinare, to determine thoroughly, Deo fidelitate
seipso, sinceritate, populo, sobrietate, with GOD by his fidellitie, with
himself by his sincerity, with the world by discretion and sobriety.

First, That God be not dishonored, for his want of judgment, nor himself
neglected, for want of due examination, nor the world abused and blinded, in a
matter of such importance, as the Embassage of there own salvation.

The third is perfect applicare, thoroughly to apply himself to God, and His
Word, his Doctrine to Gods people, his life for their example, and his patience
for their pattern, so that the people may joyfully receave the Ambassador,
and hearken his Embassage; That they may prudently embrace it, in its purity,
obey it, as there line of godly life, in its sanctity: And, that they may be
wrought, to an invincible courage, against all false Ambassadors, and
Ambassages; And all gaine-sayers of this Gospel of Jesus CHRIST, under what
species of fained holiness, and seeming reformation whatsoever, yea Contra
Angelum descendentem, against an Angel coming down to such a purpose; and so
much for the first virtue, his prudence.

He that is justly prudent, is prudently just, for that is, not distinctions a
badge by which, the true Ambassador is known.

But upon, that Justice, Quae sibi, and unicuique suum tribuit, morally I
insist not, nor upon that Original Justice, reason over sensuality; which
Socrates pretily taught going thirsty to the well, there drawing, the first
bucket to power down, and the next to drink of, by which he showed, the
appetites submission to reason, neither upon that natural, universal, and
Phylosophicall Justice, which being insensible, and imaginary. We contemplate
by inward, notions, as the Ideas of Plato, nor that other artificial,
particular, and polliticall Justice, which as the leaden Lesbian Rule, is made
flexible, to times, persons, and accidents, vet this way, were I to walk upon
any distinction of Justice in an Ambassador, I should render the devision in
Iustitiam c^mutativam, et distributivam; The first, practiced betwixt
themselves and others privately, and by proportion Arithmeticall the second
measured, and done publicly, by Geometrical proportion, whose direct aim is
praemium et supplicium, reward and punishment.

But not to prejudice my text, You, nor my self, by injustice in digression, I
shall observe for my purpose, three special notes, which as debts do engage
the Ambassador to a Religious justice. Deo, sibi, suis. To God to himself, to
the world; Our blessed Savior, Bipartires them, Thou shall love the Lord with
all thy heart, thy God, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and
thy neighbor as thy self.

The Embassage in my Text, comes not short of the Angels doxology, and tidings
to the Shepherds, Saint Luke 2. Here is glory to God, peace on earth, good
will toward men; And the Justice of this Ambassador, must be Evangelically,
Angelically, as was that Angelically, Evangelicall; He must know God, His
maker, that sent him; his Lord that entrusted him, and his Lawgiver, that
invested him, that as in other matters, from their knowledge issues their
honor done unto him; so in this, in them, who are sent, and them to whom they
are sent, by such knowledge in the one, and revelation to the other, there must
be mutual honor justly given unto God, and instructions of piety, d^e^y one
to another.

But this Justice in the Ambassador, must reach higher, by raising his
devoutest thoughts, to the contemplation of Gods Divinity, then which higher he
cannot go, for God, is terminus ad quem, the most exact endeavor of our
conceits, infinitely transcending, all our ^ast and wisest aims, of mortal
perfection, every Ambassador apart, may augment the Jdea, or notion of his
Glory, according to the predicament of his own abillity; But God is above all,
in Heaven and Earth, and the perfect knowledge of him, is Essentially Himself,
who being Actu infinitus, nonreperitur in ^llo praedicamento, as Arist.

To conclude, this Ambassador must know God, so far as to do him justice by
true and seasonable service, answerable to his nature, which is spiritu et
veritate: in spirit and truth; And the people, to whom this Ambassador comes,
must deal justly with God, likewise, by receaving his Embassage, in purity of
heart and spirit, Deus est spiritus, God is a spirit, and si Deus est animus,
sit tibi puramente Colendus, if God be a spirit, ye must worship him in spirit,
yea the Father seeks for such worshippers, these are only right Worshipful, a
pure spirit is a sacrifice to God, an harmelesle life, a spotless soul:
optimus animus pulcherrimus Dei cultus, a pure mind, is the best service to
God, the most religious worshipping of God is to follow him, Amore, more, ore,
re, and the only true serving and honoring of God in Priest, and people, is not
evil, in sum, let this Ambassadors Justice, and the peoples practice
toward God, meet both in this, that it be, perfecta, pura, and perpetua,
perfect, that both only love him, pure, that both wisely fear him, perpetual,
that both only and firmly believe in him, and rest in him.

And let the Ambassador, herein be just, to himself; that he punctually
understand, the will of his King, and the weal of his people.

In the first, wisely and orderly to inform himself:

In the second, soberly and fully, to instruct the people, his honesty must
play the skillfull Organist, to touch well and truly according to Art, nor may
he, at all times interweave a discourse of Justice Pharasaicall and legal, to
the people to whom he comes, the Christian only must be his rule; and then he
is an Ambassador for Christ; when he is thus honestly just to Christians; I
say honestly, for herein, what health is in the body, the same is honestly in
the soul, Salus animae is honestas corporis; And to sum up all, the Prophets
Basar and the Angels (...), Good and new, joyful and seasonable, Tidings, of
Christ promised, of Christ exhibited, must from his mouth dropp like Sovereign
oil of Gladness to anoint the swelling heart of the miserable wounded man,
whom the Priest and Levite, the Law could not stand to pity, or look upon to
remedy; this oil, thus dropping, upon the soul of a Sinner, melted and
dissolved, (by sense and sorrows for sin) to bitter tears, will in these
liquids, appear uppermost; and as the oint meant upon Aarons head, will not
only supple himself, but run down upon the skirts of his Clothing, the
meanest of his Auditors.

Oh, the Excellency, of such an Ambassador, the measure, proportion and
Comeliness of his body, is wisdom, and spiritual beauty, the riches of his
spirit, are the Gifts of the spirit, and his sciences, and his Justice to God
and man, is as that noble Aptnes, which disposes him to all virtues, and
holiness, and so much for this Justice. from that I have spoken by necessary
consequence you may deduce the prime strength of an Ambassador to depend upon
well grounded intelligence and practical wisdom, which Moses such a man of
God intimates by his Urim and Thummim, so much discipline an ordinary ear
might take in, from that golden Bell and Pomegranate which surrounded the hem
of the Priests robe; this is that only delightful sound and pleasant taste,
which through the application of the holy Ghost, the voice of the Father and
the Son, is effectual to preserve the sin-spotted soul and dumb sinner unto
purity, and Hallelujahs everlasting.

I omit the significant illustrations unto this duty, which the inseparable and
particular ornaments of the Tabernacle might lead me, and content my self with
those rules which Saint Paul applied to Timothy and Titus, Hold fast a form of
sound words, giving attendance to reading and doctrine, exhort and convince, be
apt and able to teach, which doctrine clearly opposes, all unfit quarrelling
with words, frothy, and scummy-jangling language, and all peevish, theevish,
treacherous and traitorous documents.

Thus like the noted Musician, I have sat so long upon this Text, that I fear
I have not kept time. I confess my self unprepared for farther prosecution of
any part coincident to, and with this Text: I beseech you, suffer my jejune and
dry oratory to express an application of what has been hitherto propounded,
which through Gods assistance, and your patience, I shall thus epitomize.

1. It instructs the Ambassador with all meet preparation considerately to
undertake his Embassage, for they are the savor of life, to life, or death, to
death, to the people to whom they come; and to that office must be required
more then ordinary circumspection, the issues whereof are of such extraordinary
concernment. Hence Moses complains of his want of utterance, and eloquence;
and S. Paul, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. The treasures
comprised in the rich Casket of sacred Scripture, with which they are by God
entrusted to communicate unto the people, are for profundity so great, and for
extent so large, that I may resume that of Saint Paul, Who is sufficient, etc.
it justly pursues the runners of these times, which without mission or
commission lay hands on consecrated things, whom I lovingly advise to stay at
Jericho till their beards be grown; for if Deacons must first be tried, and
then Minister if they be found faithful, much more should workmen of more
eminent faculty not assume unto themselves a calling, unless some Timothy or
Titus duly authorized by a sacred symboll of manual imposition, give them
external appointment to that function: Gods holy Spirit must give them primary
and private motion, their own consciences evident and certain justification,
the Church legal ordination; and though at this time there is great question
about the form of ordination, yet in all ages, and in all well ordered places,
there have been certain constitutions, and cannons for admitting of men upon
trial into sacred orders; and I find not that ever the settled order of any
Church for such purposes, has been so calumniated and branded as at this time
this of ours. Hence I shall not fear to conclude, that who ever shall
prophecy or preach in this Church without examination, approbation and
faculty, by present authority, comes of himself and as a false Prophet, I
take it our duty to beware of him.

2. The name of an Ambassador implies faithfulness in the declaration of his
Embassage, he comes not forth without instructions what he shall say and do,
nor may he add or diminish from Gods word, he must not create unto himself a
fools paradise, and walk up and down there, set up a throne and judge there,
he must fish in Gods Sea and World, not lanch into another of his own making,
nor sail with pleasure in old wives fables, or issues of his own brains; if
he have an itch within him to long for that which neither the place nor season
affords, some unheard of unparalleld perfection in Utopia; it must be carefully
adverted unto, and cured before it spread, or the people smell it: Gods true
Ambassador must content himself with the wonders of God discovered in the
depth of his word, and the height of his works: for the blessed Spirit reveals
nothing but that which is the will of the Father and Son, John 16. 14. and
Gods Angels we may imagine in old time spoke neither more nor less, then what
they had declared unto them in heaven, and an Ambassador on earth must not
dare to transgress that celestial proportion.

3. The fanaticall Zelots of our times judge all learning, but Scripture, the
language of the Beast, and that there is no use of Latin, except ordinary, or
as much as will keep the neck from an halter; and there can be no pure
preaching of the word with them, except Universities down, and they come up,
not directed by the letter, but Spirit; they object the Apostles were
illiterate men, and yet by the Spirit they understood all mysteries and
knowledge, and I would have them without education to their tongues, in
Apostolical manner speak to the Jews, and Indians, and other like with us,
and it should be to me a probable inducement sooner to confide in their
abilities, to direct us in that truth in our own tongue, which they fondly
pretend Academicks miss of, and I dare safely question, whether such by their
presumptuous spirit can effect more without artificial instructions, then such
as with the knowledge of Arts have the assistance of the true Spirit of God.
Thence I conclude, though Gods sacred Word should especially have precedence in
all learning, and all Gods Ambassadors, yet how shall this word be safely
interpreted, and the sense truly rendered without knowledge in the Originalls,
Translations, and ancient Commentaries, therefore to use humane learning as
Hagar to attend Sarah, and Arts and expositors assistance, the monuments of
learned men, as Joshua the Gibeonites, (who upon the grounds and landmarkes of
antiquity, old boots old shoes, molded bread, were admitted to carry water
for the Israel of God) is lawful, and for ought I read not in any age before
gainsayed in such vulgar impudencies, and frequent insolences as in this.

4. But how ashamed is a learned and wise King of a foolish and ignorant
Ambassador, and how God suffers in his glory when Ministers want knowledge to
instruct the people? Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee, thou shall be no Priest to me, says the Lord by the Prophet Hosea:
these are the dumb Dogs spoken of by another of his Prophets, unto whom if the
book be tendered, may be answered, non legit ut clericus, he dreams and sees
visions, books sealed, and his profitablest document, is the peoples nocument,
his best doctrine is the peoples scandal, wherein he must acknowledge that he
is no Prophet, nor Prophets son, he never saw the Schools of the Prophets,
he is some husbandman, herdman, or at best, a cobbler, hatter, horserubber,
leatherseller, or tailor, and so skipping up to reform the magnificat in the
City or Country, before he had his nunc dimittis in the University, his
doctrine is ignorance, his use error, the Pulpit (the true seat of spiritual
judgment, and divine oratory,) is stuffed with old saddles, empty pictures,
brainsicke and railing superfluities: and hence it is that the hearers Camelion
like, live upon air and wind.

But considering the weight of this spiritual Embassage in all actions and
circumstances thereto pertinent. The Tables of the Law, in the discussing
whereof large Volumes will not contain the Cases of Conscience thence still
emergent, considering the Ambassadors skill required in Ethickes,
Oeconomiques, Politiques, Histories, Chronology, Geography, Philosophy,
Tongues, Rhetorique, Logique, holy Scripture, mysteries of Prophecy, Fathers,
Schoolmen, Polemicall Divinity, and Controversy.

The Arguments of Papists, Atheists, Turks, and Sectaries, to be resolved and
refell'd.

Misprisions in History, Prophecy, Tongues, Cases of Conscience, which arise
(to the great disturbance and unhinging of Christian truth) to be confuted.

Many divine sentences and other passages without conference inexplicable.

Considering these (and infinite more of this nature) individuals to his
function, what use should the true Church make of arrogant idiots, and
peremptory illiterates? whose zeal without knowledge, like mettle in blind
horses, destroy the riders, stumbling upon they care not, know not whom? Why
do we put children to remove great timber? blind men to conduct us in
unknown paths? Does a man's curiosity restrain his wearing Apparel from a
Botcher, and his distrust preserve his dying body from a Mountebank, and shall
not true zeal to his souls eternal life, warrant his special care; to what
doctrine, and whose spiritual oversight he submits himself? If we make no
conscience of this, we make conscience of nothing, and conscience nothing.

And by this means the Ambassadors ignorance, and the peoples profaneness,
sedition and heresy takes place of religion and piety, and as well sound
doctrine, as ancient discipline, is transformed into a fable, and scoff, and
the people having cast off all true obedience to Gods law, benumbed conscience,
and rejected right judgment and true holiness, make nothing true doctrine but
what pleases them.

But if antiquity for doctrine and discipline shall bear no authority with
them, if they will not follow Moses advice, inquire of the days before them,
even from one end of heaven to the other, if they account not the Doctors and
Histories of the Church unpartiall which lived before, such ignorance in the
one, and licentiousness in the other, were so open and impudent, such
blasphemies and questions were moved, as are now too frequent to the dishonor
of God, Jesus Christ, and his Word, and the offense of good men: and if they
will circumcise the Church to themselves only, and not to the rules of the
ancient Scriptures, Apostles, and Teachers, damning all but themselves, I hope
you cannot be offended if I deliberate whether I would be of such a Church,
whereof for ought I know never any were before themselves: we may gird on our
swords of knowledge to help us in these perilous journies, but the best
accessory for protection and direction is Gods providence and wisdom to his
servants, which is timely and needful.

Having in the last use, left lawless Ignorance in the Pulpit of godly
knowledge, what ungodly and improbable deductions will thence be compelled, is
easy, though dismal io conceive. For does not the Papist preach hence
infallibility, and with Campian cry, Templum, Templum, the Church, the Church?
and the Schismatics in their invective Pamphlets use the words of Isa. 62. 1.
For Sions sake I will not hold my tongue, and for Jerusalems sake I will not
rest, and are not both our enemies, the Papists for tyranny, and the other
laboring for Anarchy?

Are not mercenary Levites abounding with us, the Devils dawbers, preaching
placentia, and sowing pillowes under men's elbowes, speaking good of evil, and
evil of good, men-pleasures, blinding Isreal's sin, and taking a reward for
iniquity? Do not Prophets prophecy falsely, and men love to have it so? and
are not the times such, I fear not to speak, giving God the glory, that he
that departs from such iniquity, makes himself a prey? Do not profaneness,
hardheartednesse, murmuring, contumelies, revilings, envyings, luke warmenesse,
dwell amongst us? Are not these diseases catching, Epidemicall? Is it not to be
feared they possess the whole body of the land? Are not fishers of men, turned
fishers of money, fishers of women? Did not the Devil tempt Eve first, and
then overcome Adam? Is it not hence that silly women are led captive, laden
with sinful lusts? are not they first wrought upon by strange doctrines as
means to trap their husbands? what reason can you give for this, save that
their weakness makes way to receive false opinions, and gives them more
confident to broach them; or because they seek not God in the truth, or
because their wits are short, and their tongues long.

Are there not a generation of men risen up, which our Protestant forefathers
never knew, whose hearts as if they were hewne out of hard rocks, or as if they
had sucked the milk of Wolves, (as it is reported the first founder of Rome
did) relent not to see their native Country made nothing else but a shambles of
butchers and blood? Alexander when he saw the dead corpse of Darius, and Marcus
Marcellus, Syracusa burn, and Titus Jerusalem laid even with the ground,
(though enemies) could not abstain from tears: these quite contrary mourn
not with Jerusalem, nor help it with prayers in this sad time of unnatural
calamity.

Are there not men pretending right to the Ambassadors calling, who have none
in justice to it, men Canon mouthed, and yet living by no Ecclesiastical rule,
no Logicians, yet full of fallacies, right Carters upon Seton, whip and go,
bellowing like Bulls of Basan, balls of wild fire, down with her, down with
her to the ground; Gunpowder arguments against Church and State, who in their
own sense, notwithstanding will be martyrs, Saints, Catharists: but if those
be martyrs who are murderers? if these be Saints who are Scythians? and if
these be Catharists who are Canibals?

Lastly, this doctrine reflects upon the people, and teaches them spiritual
obedience, Obey them that have rule over you: and Saint Paul to the
Thessalonians, I beseech you know them that labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and have them in estimation for their works sake. To this purpose
is it that God so dearly accounts them in Scripture, that the King is directed
to ask counsel of God at the mouth of the Priest: and King Solomon terms
them the masters of Assemblies, to this purpose, there preaching is termed
prophesiing, the hearers are said to sit at their feet, and not upon their
skirts; to teach them lessons of love, and religious reverence.

But alas, this kingdom cannot smother it, The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. In old time it was Ghostly
Father, but now Baals Priest, Jesuits, Canterbury whelps, none of Gods Priests,
man's Priests, not inspired, nor called, nor led by the Spirit: nay the most
Christian and judiciously godly Ambassadors in this City have in their
charges, and in their occasional grave walkings been derided and exploded.
But if national laws, and historical testimonies produce such examples of
cruelties and wrongs, for the abuse and blood of Ambassadors, then I say the
Lord comes even within a little while, behold the God of Angels and men comes
with thousands and ten thousands, to take vengeance upon the men of this Nation
for their barbarous entertainment of many of his Ambassadors, coming meekly
unto them with Christmas in their mouths, Evangelium gaudii, a Gospel of joy,
Christ Jesus an eternal Savior, borne in the time of peace, and for their
redemption.

I will end my Sermon with the prayer of our forefathers, in a part of the
first English Lytany, set out in the days of King Henry the eight, From all
sedition and privy conspiracy, from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all
his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine and heresy, from hardness
of heart, from contempt of thy word and Commandments.

Unto which by the assistance of Gods Spirit I will add:

From all Jesuits, Brownists, Anabaptists, Socinians, Arminians, rebels,
traitors, sectaries, and turbulent spirits, good Lord deliver us.

And that Gods glory may for ever shine upon us, we pray,

That it may please him to be still with this Church and Nation, that he would
say to the destroying Angel, it is enough here, and else where.

That the Gospel of his Son Jesus Christ, the most holy and just Lord, be
soundly preached, and obediently and purely practiced.

That the true Protestant Religion, I mean the whole body of Doctrine revealed
in Gods written word, absolutely necessary to salvation, established in Queen
Elizabeth, and King James his days, may yet and ever continue amongst us.

That such discipline may be used, as Gods Saints may serve him in his places
of worship in all comeliness and decency.

That God would still continue the Kings heart in sincerity, to his glory, and
the true Protestant Religion.

That God would cover his head in the day of battle, and protect him from all
his enemies, and knit fast in one truth and peace, him and his people.

That we may all keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

That we may enjoy peace supernall with God, internal of conscience* and
fraternall one with another.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

Thus living Angellically in peace on earth, we shall by Jesus Christ the
Prince of peace, partake of peace with Angels in heaven, here by participation,
there by consummation; where is no place for sedition, for their bless is
orderly, and their happiness everlasting, where we shall sing this unanimous
trisagion, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, heaven and earth are full of
the Majesty of thy glory: Glory be to thee, O Lord, most high God the Father,
and to Jesus Christ the everlasting soule-saving Son, and the truly God, and
blessed and holy Spirit, eternally proceeding from both.

To whom, trinity in unity, and unity in trinity, be ascribed, as is most due,
from the bottom of our hearts, all honor, glory, power, praise, wisdom,
righteousness, mercy and judgment, the rest of this Lords day, henceforward,
and for ever; and let all that hear me this day, say, Amen, Amen, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

