DUCTOR DUBITANTIUM or The RULE of CONSCIENCE In lumine tuc, Domine, videbimus,
lumen.



DVCTOR DVBITANTIVM, OR THE RULE OF CONSCIENCE In all her general measures;
Serving as a great Instrument for the determination of CASES of CONSCIENCE. In
Four Books.

By JEREMY TAILOR, D. D.

Prove. 14. 8. (...).

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivy-lane, 1660.

TO THE MOST SACRED MAJESTY OF CHARLES II. KING of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE and
IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Great Sir,
THE circles of the Divine Providence turn themselves upon the affairs of the
world so, that every spondel of the wheels may mark out those Virtues which we
are then to exercise; and every new event in the Economy of God is God's
finger to point out to us by what instances he will be served. We have been
sorely smitten and for a long time; for (that I may use the words of the
Prophet) Alas, for that day was great, so that none was like it, it was even
the time of Jacob's trouble; and then, Faith and Patience, and all the passive
Graces of Religion were in their own season. But since God has left off to
smite us with an iron rod, and has once more said unto these Nations, Jer. 30.
7, 8.
They shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King whom I have raised
up unto them; Now our duty stands on the Sunny side; it is our work to rejoice
in God and in God's Anointed, and to be glad, and worthily to accept of our
Prosperity is all our business: for so good a God we serve, that he has made
it our Duty to be happy, and we cannot please him unless we be infinitely
pleased our selves. It was impossible to live without our King; but as Slaves
live, that is, such who are civilly dead, and persons condemned to metalls: we
lived to the lusts and insolency of others, but not at all to our selves, to
our own Civil or Religious comforts. But now our joys are mere and unmixt; for
that we may do our duty and have our reward at once, God has sent your
Majesty amongst us, that we may feel the pleasures of Obedience, and reap the
fruits of that Government which God loves and uses, which He has constituted
and adorned, which He has restored to us by a conjugation of miracles, by the
work of his hand and the light of his countenance, by changing the hearts of
Men, and scattering the people that delight in War, by infatuating their
Counsels and breaking their Cords asunder; that is, which He himself has
wrought amongst us by himself alone, and therefore will bless and will never
interrupt: only we must be careful never to provoke him any more by our
Unthankfulness and infidel Apostasy.

But now, Great Sir, be pleased to give me leave in the throngs of those that
rejoice to see the goodness of God to his servant Job, in imitation of them who
presented him with, everyman, an ear-ring of Gold, and a piece of Silver, (...)
or a Lamb *, to bring also my Offering, the signification of my joy. For
though it be but two Books which like the Widows two mites make up but a
contemptible Sum; yet because it is all I have, your Majesty may be pleased
to accept: and so much the rather, because it is also an expression of that
part of the duty of my Calling which has fallen to my share. For your Majesty,
like the King in the Gospel, has been in a far Country, and some of your
Citizens sent after you, Luke 19. 14.
and said, Nolumus hunc regnare; but God has caused you to return and reign:
and if your Majesty should by that example call us to render an account of our
Talents, I can only say, that amongst those many Excellent persons who have
greatly improved theirs, I was willing to negotiate and to labor. What fruit
will from hence accrue to Souls is wholly in the hands of God: but this
semination and culture was much wanting in the Reformed Churches. For though in
all things else the Goodness of God has made us to abound, and our Cup to run
over; yet our labors have been hitherto unimploied in the description of the
Rules of Conscience and Casuistical Theology. In which because I have now made
some attempt, if the production be not unworthy, I am sure it is not improper
to lay it at the feet of your Majesty. For your Majesty being by God appointed
Custos utriusque Tabulae, since like Moses you are from God descended to us
with the two Tables of the Law in your hand, and that you will best govern by
the arguments and compulsory of Conscience, and this alone is the greatest
firmament of Obedience; whatsoever can be the measure of Conscience est res
Fisci, is part of your own propriety, and enters into your Exchequer.

Be pleased therefore, Gracious Sir, to accept this instance of my duty to God,
to your Majesty, and to your Great Charge, the Church of England. There are in
it many things intended for the service, but nothing to disserve any of these
great interests. Those Cases that concern the Power and Offices of
Ecclesiastical Superiors and Supreme, were (though in another manner) long
since done by the incomparable Mr Hooker, Lib. 7, 8. Of Eccle. Polity. Lib. 8.
de rep. Eccles.
and the learned Archbishop of Spalato: but their labors were unhappily lost,
and never saw the light. And though I cannot attain to the strength of these
Champions of David and Guardians of the Temple; yet since their portion of work
is fallen into my hand, I have heartily endeavored to supply that loss; though
with no other event, but as charitable passengers by their little, but
well-meaning, alms repair the breaches of his fortune who was greatly undone by
War or Fire. But therefore I humbly beg your Majesty's pardon in all things
where my weaknesses make me to despair of your more Gracious acceptance: and
here I am therefore to be confident, because your Mercy is, as your Majesty,
this day in her exaltation, and is felt by all your Subjects; and therefore
humbly to be hoped for by

Great Sir, Your Majesty's most dutiful and most obedient Subject Jeremy
Tailor.

THE PREFACE.
THE Reformation of Religion in the Western Churches has been so violently, so
laboriously, so universally opposed by Evil Spirits and Evil Men, by
willfulness and ignorance, by prejudice and interest, by error and partiality;
and it self also has been done so imperfectly in some places, and so
unskilfully in some others, because the thick and long-incumbent darkness had
made it impossible to behold the whole Light in all its splendor; that it was
found to be work enough for the Ministers of Religion to convince the
Gainsayers, to oppose their witty arts by the advantageous representment of
wise truths, so to keep the people from their temptations. But since there were
not found many able to do this but such which had other cures to attend, the
conduct of souls in their public and private charges, and the consequent
necessity of preaching and catechizing, visiting the sick, and their public
daily offices; it was the less wonder that in the Reformed Churches there has
been so great a scarcity of Books of Cases of Conscience: though it is not to
be denied but the careless and needless neglect of receiving private
Confessions has been too great a cause of our not providing materials apt for
so pious and useful a ministration. But besides this, it is certain that there
was a necessity of laboring to other purposes then formerly: and this
necessity was present and urgent; and the hearts and heads of men ran to quench
that fire, and left the government of the house more loosely, till they could
discern whether the house would be burnt or no by the flames of contention
which then brake out: only this duty was supplied by excellent preachings, by
private conferences, by admonitions and answers given when some more pious and
religious persons came to Confessions, and as they were upon particular
occasions required and invited. But for any public provisions of books of
Casuistical Theology, we were almost wholly unprovided, and, like the children
of Israel in the days of Saul and Jonathan, we were forced to go down to the
forges of the Philistims to sharpen every man his Share and his Coulter, his
Axe and his Mattock. We had Swords and Spears of our own, enough for defense,
and more then enough for disputation: but in this more necessary part of the
Conduct of Consciences we did receive our answers from abroad, till we found
that our old needs were sometimes very ill supplied, and new necessities did
every day arise.

Some of the Lutherans have indeed done something in this kind which is well;
Balduinus, Bidenbachius, Dedekanus, Konig, and the Abbreviator of Gerard: Some
essays also have been made by others; Alstedius, Amesius, Perkins, and the late
Eloquent and Reverend Bishop of Norwich. But yet our needs remain; and we
cannot be well supplied out of the Roman storehouses: for though there the
staple is, and very many excellent things exposed to view; yet we have found
the Merchants to be deceivers, and the wares too often falsified.

For 1. if we consider what heaps of prodigious propositions and rules of
Conscience their Doctors have given us, we shall soon perceive that there are
so many boxes of poison in their Repositories under the same paintings and
specious titles, that as it will be impossible for every man to distinguish
their ministeries of health from the methods of death; so it will be unsafe for
any man to venture indiscriminately. For who can safely trust that guide that
teaches him, [ Eman. Sa. aphor. v. Furtum.
That it is no deadly sin to steal, or privately against his will and without
his knowledge to take a thing from him who is ready to give it if he were
asked, but will not endure to have it taken without asking; That it is no theft
Prove. 28. 24.
privately to take a thing that is not great from our Father; Idem v.
Restitutio.
that he who sees an innocent punished for what himself has done, he in the
mean time who did it, holding his peace, is not bound to restitution; Diana de
Euchar. in compend. n. 30.
That he who falls into fornication, if he goes to confession, may the same day
in which he did fornicate receive the Communion; n. 31.
That Communion is Manducation, and therefore requires not attention; n. 32.
That he who being in deadly sin receives the H. Communion commits but one sin,
viz. that against the dignity of the Sacrament; and that the omission of
confession is no distinct sin, meaning, amongst them who believe confession to
be of Divine institution?] Idem de poenit. n. 3.
As bad or worse are those affirmatives and doctrines of repentance. number. 7.
[ A dying man is not tied to be contrite for his sins; but confession and
attrition are sufficient:] and that we may know what is meant by attrition, we
are told [ it is a sorrow for temporal evil, number. 11, and 17, and 18.
disgrace or loss of health, sent by God as a punishment, or feared to be
sent;] this alone is enough for Salvation, if the dying man do but confess to
the Priest, though he have lived wickedly all his lifetime. And that we need
not think the matter of confession to be too great a burden, we are told, [ He
that examines his Conscience before confession, sins if he be too diligent and
careful.] But as for the precept of having a contrite and a broken heart [It
binds not but in the article or danger of death: number. 18.
nor then, but when we cannot have the Sacrament of penance.] To these may be
added those contradictions of severity for the securing of a holy life: that [
If a man purpose at the present to sin no more, though at the same time he
believes he shall sin again, (that is, that he will break his purpose,) yet
that purpose is good enough: number. 19.
That it is not very certain whether he that has attrition does receive grace,
though he does not formally resolve to sin no more:] meaning, that it is
probable, that it is not necessary to make any such resolution of leaving their
sin; they are not certain it is so, nor certain that it is otherwise; that is,
they find no Commandment for these things: It may be they are counseled and
advised in Scripture, Id. Verb. Detractio. number. 5.
but that is no great matter; for [ It is no sin not to correspond with the
Divine inspirations exhorting us to Counsels.] Add to these, that [ To detract
from our Neighbors fame before a conscientious, silent and a good Man, is no
deadly sin: Dispensatio. number. 11.
To dispense with our vows in a year of Jubilee is valid, though the condition
of obtaining that Jubilee be not performed.] Thus men amongst them have leave
to sin, and the may live in it as long as their life lasts without repentance;
and that repentance in the sum of affairs is nothing but to call to the Priest
to absolve them; provided you be sorrowful for the evil you feel or fear God
will send on you: but contrition, or sorrow proceeding from the love of God is
not at all necessary; Council. Trid. sess. 14. cap. 4.
[ neither is it necessary that our sorrow be thought to be contrition; neither
is it necessary that attrition should go before confession, Dian. Compend. de
poenit. Sacram. n. 8.
but will serve if it be sometime after; and if you confess none but venial
sins, it is sufficient if you be sorrowful for one of them; and the case is
the same for mortal sins formerly confessed.] But I am ashamed of this heap of
sad stories: If I should amass together what themselves have collected in their
books, it would look like a libel: but who is pleased with variety of such
sores may enter into the Hospitals themselves, and walk and look til he be
weary.

2. But not only with the evil matter of their propositions; but we have reason
to be offended with the strange manner of their answerings. I shall not need to
instance in that kind of argument which is but too frequent among those who
prevail more by their authority then their reason, of proving propositions by
similitudes and analogies. Clavis Regia, l. 4. c. 2. n. 5.
I remember that Gregory Sayr says that all the Precepts of the Moral Law are
to be reduced to the Decalogue; because as all natural things are reduced to
ten Praediments, so it is expedient that all kinds of virtues and vice be
reduced to the ten Commandments. And Bessaeus infers seven Sacraments from the
number of the Planets, and the seven ears of full corn in Egypt, and seven
water-pots changed into wine (though there were but six,) because as the wine
filled six water-pots, so the Sacrament of the Eucharist fills the other six,
and it self makes the seventh; and that therefore peradventure the Sacraments
are called Vessels of grace. But this I look upon as a want of better arguments
in a weak cause, managed by careless and confident persons; and note it only as
a fault, that the Guides of Consciences should speak many things when they can
prove but few.

3. That which I suppose to be of greatest Consideration is, that the Casuists
of the Roman Church take these things for resolution and answer to questions of
Conscience which are spoken by an authority that is not sufficient; and they
admit of Canons, and the Epistles of Popes for authentic warranties, which are
suspicious whether ever they were written by them to whose authority only they
do pretend; and they quote sayings of the old Doctors, which are contradicted
by others of equal learning and reputation, and all cited in their own Canon
Law; and have not any sufficient means to ascertain themselves what is binding
in very many cases argued in their Canons, and Decretal epistles, and Bulls of
Popes. Nay they must needs be at a loss in their conduct of Consciences,
especially in all inquiries and articles of faith, when they choose such
foundations, which themselves know to be weak and tottering; and yet lay the
greatest load upon such foundations, and tie the Conscience with the hardest
ligature, where it is certain they can give no security. For it is not agreed
in the Church of Rome, neither can they tell upon whose authority they may
finally rely: they cannot tell who is the visible Head of the Church: for they
are not sure the Pope is; because a Council may be superior to him, and whether
it be or no it is not resolved: And therefore either they must change their
Principle, and rely only upon Scriptures and right Reason and Universal
Testimonies, or give no answer to the Conscience in very many cases of the
greatest concernment; for by all other measures their questions are
indeterminable. But the authority of man they make to be their foundation: and
yet if their allegations were allowed to be good argument, it would serve them
but to very few purposes, since the Doctors, whose affirmative is the decision
of the Case, are so infinitely divided.

4. This to me, and to very many wise men, looks like a very great Objection:
but I find that they who are most concerned in it account it none; For the
Roman Casuists profess it; and yet do not suppose that the Consequent of this
should be, that the case is difficult, and the men not to be relied upon, and
the Conscience to be otherwise informed, and that we ought to walk the more
warily, but therefore the Conscience is at liberty, and the question in order
to practice has no difficulty; hard in the case, but easy in the action; for
by this means they entertain all interests, and comply with all persuasions,
and send none away Unsatisfied. For Uncertain answers make with them no
Uncertain resolution; for they teach us, that in such cases we may follow
either part: and therefore they studiously keep up this Academical or rather
Sceptick Theology, Sa aphor. verb. Jejun. n. 11.
Alii aiunt, alii negant; utrumque probabile. And upon this account, although
with greatest severity they bind on men's persuasions the doctrines of meats and
carnal ordinances, yet they have left them loose enough when it comes to the
Conscience, so loose that the precept is become ridiculous: for what can it be
otherwise, when they teach, ibid. n. 8.
that the Fast is not broken by drinking of water or wine, nay though we eat
something that our drink may not hurt us; nor the usual collation at night if
it be taken in the morning; nor if the Butler or the Cook lick his fingers; nor
if we eat eggs or milk-meats, so it be not in the holy time of Lent; nor if
after dinner awhile you eat something at the entreaty of a friend; nor if you
upon a reasonable cause eat before your time? in all these cases you eat and
fast at the same time. All these things are derivatives from the contrary
opinions of some easy, gentle Doctors; and the effect of this stratagem is seen
in things of greater consequence. idem verb. Dubium.
For [ we are free from our vow, or from a Commandment, if it be a probable
opinion of the Doctors that we are free;] and [it is probable, if it be the
opinion of one grave Doctor:] That is, in effect, plainly, If it be probable
[in the doctrine,] it is certain [in practice;] and it is probable if any one
of their Doctors says it.

5. And the mischief of this is further yet discernible, if we consider that
they determine their greatest and most Mysterious cases oftentimes by no other
argument but the saying of some few of their Writers. I shall give but one
instance of it; but it shall be something remarkable. The question was, Whether
the Pope can dispense in the law of God? The inquiry is not concerning a dish
of whey, Suarez lib. 10. deleg. cap. 6. n. 3.
but of a considerable affair; upon which the right or the wrong of many
thousand Consciences amongst them do depend. It is answered [That one opinion
of the Catholics says, that the Pope can dispense in all things of the Law of
God, excepting the articles of faith.] The proof is this, So Panormitan speaks,
in cap. proposuit, de concess. praebend, n. 20. citing Innocentius in cap. cum
ad Monasterium, de statu Monachorum; where he says, that without cause the
Pope cannot dispense in things of Divine right; intimating that with cause he
may. And the same is the opinion of Felinus in cap. Quae in Eccles. de constable.
n. 19, and 20. where amongst other things he says, that the Pope when he has
cause can change the usual form of baptism, and make it lawful to baptize in
the Name of the Trinity, which he reports out of Innocentius cap. 1. de baptis.
in fine number. 11. Yea the same Felinus is bold to affirm in cap. 1. de constable. n.
23. that the Pope with one word can create a Priest, without any other
solemnity, saying, Be thou a Priest; which he reports out of Innocentius in
cap. 1. Sacra Unct. The same Felinus adds further that the Pope with his word
alone can make a Bishop; and he cites Angelus in l. 2. C. de crim. Sacrilegii;
and in l. 1. C. de Sententiam passis. The same sentence is held by Decius,
consil. 112. n 3. in fine; and in dict. cap. Quae in Eccles. n. 25. and seq.
alias n. 44, and 45. in Novis. Allegantur etiam alii Juristae in cap. 2. de
translat. Episcopi; and in l. Manumissiones. ff. de just. and jure; and in l.
2. C. de servit. etc.

Here is a rare way of probation: for these allegations are not only a
testimonial that these Catholic authors are of that opinion; but it is
intended to represent, that this opinion is not against the Catholic faith;
that Popes and great Lawyers are of it; and therefore that it is safe, and it
may be followed, or be let alone: but yet this is sufficient to determine the
doubting Conscience of a subject, or to be propounded to him as that on which
he may with security and indemnity rely. The thing is affirmed by Felinus, and
for this he quotes Innocentius; and the same is the opinion of Decius, and for
this opinion diverse other Lawyers are alleged. Now when this or the like
happens to be in a question of so great Concernment as this, it is such a dry
story, such an improbable proof, so unsatisfying an answer to the Conscience,
that the great determination of all those questions and practices which can
depend upon so Universal an article as this, and a warranty to do actions
which their adversaries say are abhorrent from the law of Nature and common
honestly, shall in their final resort rest upon the saying of one or two
persons, who having boldly spoken a foolish thing, have passed without
condemnation by those Superiors for whose interest they have been bold to tell
so great a lie.

In Conclusion, the effect of these Uncertain principles and Unsteady Conduct
of questions is this; that though by violence and force they have constrained
and thrust their Churches into an Union of faith, like beasts into a pound, yet
they have made their cases of Conscience and the actions of their lives
Unstable as the face of the Waters, and Unmeasurable as the dimensions of the
Moon: by which means their Confessors shall be enabled to answer according to
every man's humor, and no man shall depart sad from their Penitential chairs,
and themselves shall take or give leave to any thing: concerning which I refer
the Reader to the books and letters written by their parties of Portroyal, and
to their own weak answers and vindications.

If I were willing by accusing others to get reputation to my own, or the
Undertakings of any of our persuasion or communion, I could give very many
instances of their Unjustice and partialities in determining matters and
questions of justice which concern the Church and their Ecclesiastical persons;
as if what was just amongst the reprobates of the laity were hard measure if
done to an Ecclesiastic, and that there were two sorts of justice, the one for
Seculars and the other for Churchmen; of which their own books Vide Summas
Cas. Consc. in verbis, Immunitas. Ecclesia. Hospitale. Privilegium. Clericus.
Monasterium. etc.
give but too many instances. I could also remark that the Monks and Friars are
iniquiores in Matrimonium, and make inquiries into Matrimonial causes with an
impure curiosity, and make answers sometimes with spite and envy, sometimes
with licentiousness; that their distinction of Sins Mortal and Venial has
intricated and confounded almost all the Certainty and answers of Moral
Theology: but nothing of this is fitted to my intention, which is only to make
it evident that it was necessary that Cases of Conscience should be written
over a new, and established upon better principles, and proceed in more sober
and satisfying methods: nothing being more requisite then that we should all be
instructed, and thoroughly prepared to every good work; that we should have a
conscience void of offense both toward God and toward man; that we should be
able to separate the vile from the precious, and know what to choose and what to
avoid; that we may have our senses exercised to discern between good and evil,
that we may not call good evil, or evil good. For since obedience is the love
of God, and to do well is the life of religion, and the end of faith is the
death of sin and the life of righteousness; nothing is more necessary then
that we be rightly informed in all moral notices; because in these things an
Error leads on to evil actions, to the choice of sin, and the express
displeasure of God; otherwise then it happens in speculation and ineffective
notices and schoole-questions.

And indeed upon this consideration I was always confident, that though the
questions of the School were nice and subtle, difficult and very often good
for nothing; yet that in Moral Theology I should have found so perfect an
accord, so easy determination of questions, that it would have been harder to
find out questions then answers; and the great difficulty in books of this
subject would be to put the great number of inquiries into order and method. I
was not deceived in the ground and reason of my conjecture; because I knew that
in promptu and facili est aeternitas, God had made the way to heaven plain and
simple, and what was necessary did ly open, and the lines of duty were to be
read by every eye, or heard and learned by all understandings; and therefore it
is certain that all practical truths are to be found out without much
contention and dispute, because Justice and obedience to God in all moral
conversation is Natural to us, just as Logic and discourse is. But when I came
to look a little nearer, I found that Men were willing enough to be tied up to
believe the Unactive propositions of the Doctors, but would keep a liberty of
pleasing themselves in matters of life and conversation: in the former they
would easily be governed by leading Men; but in the latter they would not obey
God himself, and without great regret would not be confined to strictness and
severity in their Cases of Conscience. Some would; but many would not. They
that would, gave laws unto themselves, and they could easily be Governed; but
they that would not, were ready to trample upon their yoke, if it were made
gentle and easy for their neck. But this was the least part of the evil.

For besides this, Moral Theology was made a trade for the house, and an art of
the Schools: and as nothing is more easy then Natural Logic, and yet nothing
harder then Sophistical, so it is in Moral Theology; what God had made plain,
Men have intricated; and the easy Commandment is wrapped up in uneasy
learning; and by the new methods, a Simple and Uncrafty Man cannot be wise unto
salvation; which is but small comfort to him that stands in the place of the
Idiot and Unlearned. Sometimes a severe Commandment is expounded by the sense
of ease and liberty, and the liberty is established in Rule; but because the
Rule is not true in some hundreds of cases, a conscientious Man does not know
how to make use of it: and if the Commandment be kept close to the sense of
strictness and severity, there are so many outlets and escapes found out, that
few men think themselves obliged. * Thus in the Rule [ Spoliatum ante omnia
restituendum] which is an excellent measure of Conscience in many cases, and
certainly can have no direct abatement in the duty, and the party obliged can
only be relieved by equity in the manner of doing it; yet of this plain and
easy Rule, Gabrielius brings no less then threescore and ten limitations: and
to make all questions of that Nature and the Rule of Conscience infinite and
indeterminable, Menochius has seven hundred ninety and eight questions
concerning Possession; and who is sufficient for these things? * There is a
Rule amongst the Lawyers which very much relates to the Conscience of those men
who are engaged in suits and sentences of Law in all Countries which are ruled
by the Civil law, In quolibet actu requiritur citatio. Of this Rule Porcius
brings an hundred and sixteen ampliations, and an hundred and four and twenty
limitations. Maranta enumerates forty cases in which [A Negative ought to be
proved:] and Socinus sets down eight hundred and two fallencies (that is the
word of the law) concerning the contestation of suits and actions at law. Many
more might be reckoned even in the interpreters of the Civil law, and in the
measures we derive from thence. But if any man thinks it better in the Canon
law, which is supposed to be as great a rule of our Conscience in the matter of
Religion as the other is of Justice; I shall only say, that the very title of
the Canon law was Concordantia Discordantiarum, a tying of contradictions
together in one string: and when you begin to look into the interpreters of the
Decretum, Tract. de Decretis.
which is the best part of the Canon law, Simoncellus tells us that the word
Decretum has five and twenty significations. So that there is a wood before
your doors, and a labyrinth within the wood, and locks and bars to every door
within that labyrinth; and after all we are like to meet with Unskilful
guides; and yet of all things in the world, in these things an error is the
most intolerable.

But thus the Enemy of Mankind has prevailed upon us while we were earnest in
disputations about things less concerning: Then he was watchful and busy to
interweave evil and uncertain principles into our Moral institutions, to
entangle what was plain, to divide what was simple, to make an art of what was
written in the tables of our hearts with the finger of God. When a Gentleman
was commending Dr. Fisher Bishop of Rochester his great pains in the
confutation of Luther's books, the wise Prelate said heartily, that he wished
he had spent all that time in prayer and meditation which he threw away upon
such useless wranglings. For that was the wisdom of the Ancients. Seneca ad
Lucilium.
Antiqua Sapientia nihil aliud quam facienda and vitanda praecepit: Et tunc
meliores erant viri. Postquam docti prodierunt, boni desunt. Simplex enim illa
and aperta virtus in obscuram and solertem scientiam versa est; docemurque
disputare, non vivere. Our Forefathers taught their children what to do and
what to avoid; and then Men were better. But when Men did strive to become
learned, they did not care so much to become good; they then were taught to
dispute rather then to live. To this purpose I understand that excellent saying
of Solomon, Eccles. 12. 12.
Of making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the
flesh. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter. Fear God and keep his
Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. Meaning, that books which
serve to any other purpose are a laborious vanity, consumptive of our time and
health to no purpose: nothing else being to any purpose but such things as
teach us to fear God, and how to keep his Commandments. All books, and all
learning which ministers to this end, partakes of the goodness of the end; but
that which promotes it not, is not to be regarded: and therefore the Chaldee
Paraphrast reads these words into an advise of making many books tending to
holiness. Fili mi, monitus esto ut facias libros sapientiae plurimos, adeo ut
non sit finis; and ut studeas verbis Legis, conspiciasque defatigationem
carnis. Make books of wisdom very many, and study in the words of the Law till
thou may see the weariness of thy flesh. Beata aetas quae in vita hominum
regenda totam disputandi rationem posuit, Blessed are the times in which men
learn to dispute well that they may live the better. And truly it were much to
be wished that men would do so now; endeavoring to teach the ways of
Godliness in sincerity; to show to men the right paths of Salvation; to
describe the right and plain measures of Simplicity, Christian Charity,
Chastity, Temperance and Justice; to unwind the intanglements of Art, and to
strip Moral Theology of all its Visors; to detract all the falsehoods and
hypocrisies of crafty men; to confute all the false principles of evil
Teachers, who by uncertain and deceitful grounds teach men to walk confidently
upon trap-doors and pit-falls, and preach doctrines so dangerous and false,
that if their Disciples should live according to the consequents of such
doctrines, without doubt they must perish everlastingly.

It is a great work and too heavy for one man's shoulders; but some body must
begin; and yet no man ever would, if he can be affrighted with the
consideration of any difficulty in the world. But I have laid aside all
considerations of my self, and with an entire dependence upon God for help, I
have begun an institution of Moral Theology, and established it upon such
principles and instruments of probation which every man allows, and better then
which we have none imparted to us. I affirm nothing but upon grounds of
Scripture, or Universal Tradition, or right Reason discernable by every
disinterest person, where the questions are of great concern, and can admit
these probations: Where they cannot, I take the next best; the laws of wise
Commonwealths and the sayings of wise men, the results of fame and the Proverbs
of the Ancient, the Precedents of holy persons and the great examples of
Saints. (...). Arist. lib. ^ eth. c. 3.
He that is well instructed will require in every kind of argument and
disputation no other proof or subtilty then the subject matter will bear. For
it were ridiculous for a Mathematician to go about to persuade with eloquence,
or an Orator to pretend to demonstrations. But Moral Theology is a collective
Body of all wisdom, whereof some things are demonstrable and many are
probable, and other things are better then their contraries; and they are to be
proved accordingly, every thing in its proportion and capacity. And therefore
here I make use of all the Brocardics, or rules of interpreters; that is, not
only what is established regularly in law, but what is concluded wise and
reasonable by the best interpreters. Socinus, Duennas, Azo, Gabrielius,
Damasus, and diverse other great Lawyers attempted this way in the
interpretation of the Civil and Canon law. I intermeddle not in the question,
whether they did well or ill, but leave the contest as it lies between Duarenus
and Balduinus who blame them, and Wesenbech and Gribaldus who are their
confident Advocates. But in the discourses of Conscience, whatsoever is right
reason, though taken from any faculty or science, is also of use and efficacy.
Because whatever can guide the actions or discourses, or be the business or
the conduct of any man, does belong to Conscience and its measures; and what is
true in any Science; is true in Conscience.

I do not say that what is true or allowed in humane laws is also true or
allowed in the Divine; because though God does justly and wisely, yet men do
not always so; and what is true in Sciences is not always understood to be
true in Civil laws. Qualis causa, talis effectus, says the Philosopher, The
cause and the effect are of the same nature. But the Lawyer says, this is not
always true. For Manumission, which is a cause of liberty, is of the Civil law
and positive institution; but Liberty, which is the effect of it, is of the law
of Nature. Now although the Philosopher understands his Rule of Natural causes
and effects, or those causes which are artificial, but operate by the way of
Nature, and intends it not at all to be persuasive in matters of positive and
legal institution; yet this truth and all other truths must prevail in
Conscience, because they are emanations from the fountain of truth; from whence
nothing can derive that is not always true, and in all senses true where they
are intended to persuade or teach. But then the truths of Philosophy must be
used in the measures of Conscience by the intentions of Philosophy, and not be
carried on to a disparate matter, and without cause be indifferently applied,
the same words to things of another nature. * There is a Rule in Philosophy,
Incorporalia sunt individua: from hence Ho^^oman argues, Therefore Dominion,
Heritage, Ususfructus, or the use of a thing by him that is not the Lord, are
individual, because they are incorporeal. Now this will deceive him that trusts
upon it: not because what is true in one place is not true always and every
where; but because these words applied to other matters, and the words
signifying other intentions, they abuse the unwary hearer, but instruct not.
But because the questions of Conscience do relate to all matters, therefore to
these all Arts and Sciences do minister. Res fisci est ubicunque natat,
Whatsoever swims upon any water belongs to this Exchequer; that is, De doct.
Christi. li. 2. c. 18.
says S. Austin, Christianus Domini sui esse intelligit, ubicunque invenerit
veritatem, If it be truth, wheresoever it be found, the Christian knows it is
his Lords goods: and therefore I have proved and adorned some truths with the
wise sayings of Philosophers and Poets, Co^fess. l2. c. 15.
ut Deo serviat quicquid puer utile didici, that, according to the expression
of the same Saint, whatsoever being a child I learned which can profit, may be
brought in to serve and pay homage to God. But still they are to be understood
according to the sense and meaning of their proper Art where they dwell. And
though there is great need of skill in all those Sciences from whence we derive
notices in order to the conduct of Conscience; and that it will be hard for any
man to pretend to be Master of all those things which must be used in these
discourses; yet I who will not pretend to that, have yet taken as good a course
as I could to inform my self, though not in the whole System of every art in
the whole circle which I have here occasionally used, yet I have been careful
to understand those few things which I have thence drawn in as auxiliaries: and
lest I should yet fail, I have taken another course by way of caution and
defense, that I may be right and sure in the reflexe, if I had cause to doubt
of any thing in the direct notice.

For I have propounded to my self general measures to be as boundaries to the
determination of doubts and the answer of questions; which so long as I do
observe, my error will be very innocent, if any happens. For 1. In hard and
intricate questions I take that which is easy and intelligible, and concerning
which it will be easy to judge whether it be right or wrong. 2. In odious
things, and matters of burden and envy, I take that part which is least,
unless there be evident reason to the contrary. 3. In favors I always choose
the largest sense, when any one is bettered by that sense, and no man is the
worse. 4. In things and questions relating to men I give those answers that
take away scruples, and bring peace and a quiet mind. 5. In things relating to
God I always choose to speak that thing which to him is most honorable. 6. In
matters of duty I always choose that which is most holy. 7. In doubts I choose
what is safest. 8. In probabilities I prefer that which is the more reasonable,
never allowing to any one a leave of choosing that which is confessedly the
less reasonable in the whole conjunction of circumstances and relative
considerations.

Upon the account of these principles I hope to serve God and the good of
Souls. For these being the points of my compass, which way soever I sail, I
shall not suffer shipwreck: and if at anytime I go about, which I have avoided
as much as my infirmities will permit, yet at last, and in the whole, I arrive
where I ought to be. For indeed in this whole affair I have proceeded with
great fear; as knowing that he who writes Cases of Conscience, does in a manner
give laws to all that do believe him: and no man persuades more vehemently
then he that tells you, This, God forbids; This, God commands; and therefore I
knew that to be mistaken here was very evil, and might do much evil; but to be
careless, or prejudicate, or partial, or flattering, or oppressive with
severity, or unsafe with gentleness, was criminal in the cause as well as
mischievous in the event: and the greatest security which I have that I have
not spoken unsafely in any man's case, is because I have prayed much, and
labored much that I might not at all minister to error or schism, to folly or
vanity, but to the glory of God, and to the good of Souls: and I have so
determined every Case that I have here presented, as I my self would practice,
as I would account at the day of judgment, through the mercies of God in Jesus
Christ, and the integrity and simplicity of my Conscience: and therefore I
desire that my Reader will use the same caution and ingenuity before he
condemns any conclusion, and consider, that as in these things it was
impossible to please every man (...) so I designed to please no man but as he
is a lover of truth, and a lover of his own soul.

The style that I here use is according as it happens, sometimes plain,
sometimes closer: the things which I bring are sometimes new, and sometimes
old; they are difficult and they are easy; sometimes adorned with cases, and
the cases specificated in stories, and sometimes in stead of a story I recite
an apologue, and disguise a true narrative with other names, that I may not
discover the person whose case I discourse of: and in all things I mind the
matter; and suppose truth alone and reason and the piety of the decision to be
the best ornament; and indeed sometimes the thing it self will not be handled
otherwise. Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri.

I was here to speak to the Understanding, not to win the affections; to
convince, not to exhort: and where I had no certainty in a case, or that the
parts of a question were too violently contended for, without sufficient
evidence on either side, I have not been very forward to give my final
sentence; but my opinion and my reason; Per verbum FORTE respondent saepe
periti. G. of. in c. quo^um appell. non ^^cipiuntu^.
And yet I hope that in some cases it will be found, that though I am not
fierce, positive and decretory, yet the case it self is sufficiently declared,
so that he who has occasion to use it, may upon those accounts determine
himself. For the Modesty of him that teaches is not always an argument that he
is uncertain in his proposition. b. 3. 15. Ad Olynth. 1.
(...), says Ulpian. When the Ancients said, I suppose, I think, It seems,
they did not always mean that they were uncertain; but they sometimes intended
it for a modest, but a direct affirmative: and so I do in some few Cases where
there is great reason on one side, and a great prejudice on the other: I give
my reasons, and lay down the Case and all its allays, and leave it to prevail
without my sentence by its own strength. And for this I hope no man will be
offended at me: if he be, it is because I was not willing to offend him; but I
was desirous to instruct, to comfort, to determine and to establish him that
needs.

I have studiously avoided all questions that are curious and unprofitable;
such, I mean, which are only trials of wit, but neither ministers of Justice
nor Religion. Such was that which was brought before the Lawyers and all the
learned men of Athens, with great noises to little purpose. A Gentleman of
Aegina dying left three daughters. The one was beauteous and wanton; the second
a lover of wine and gay pleasures; and the third a good spinster, and a great
follower of Country houswifry. He made the Mother of these daughters to be his
Heir upon this condition, that she should divide all his estate between his
daughters equally; but in such a manner, that what they received they should
neither possess nor enjoy, and as soon as ever they had quitted their portions
they should pay each of them to their Mother ten thousand Philippics. The
Mother runs to Athens, consults the Lawyers and Philosophers how this Will
should be fulfilled; but they know not, as supposing one part to cross
another, and altogether to be impossible; for if the whole estate be divided
amongst them, how is it that they shall not enjoy it? and if they do not, how
shall they pay their Mother her assignment? The Mother therefore finding no
help there, contrives it thus her self. To the pretty wanton she gives rich
clothes, smooth Eunuchs, soft beds, sweet perfumes, silver lavatories, and all
things which she supposed might please her lust, and consume her portion. To
the drinking girl she provides vessels of rich wines, a house well furnished,
and all things fitted for expensive entertainments. But to the Country
houswife, a good farm, plowmen and a great stock, many horses and some cows,
some Menservants and a great many Maidens, a kennel of hounds and a few swine;
supposing this was no very probable way for her to thrive, but the likeliest
way to do her Husbands will; because the lust of the first, and the thirst and
debauchery of the second, and the ill-contrived stock of the third would
consume all their portions. But all this while she considered not how when they
grew poor, she should receive her share. But at last, a wiser Man then was in
the Schools of Athens advised her thus; Give to the Drunken maiden the rich
garments, the jewels and the Eunuchs; and because she loves them not, she will
sell them all for old wines of Chios: To the Wanton give fields and cattle,
oxen and ploughs, hinds and swine; and she will quickly sell them that she may
entertain her Lovers: But if you give vessels of wine to the Country girl, she
knows not what to do with them, and therefore will sell them to the Merchant
for ready money. Thus shall neither of them enjoy their portion; but by selling
it, they shall be enabled to pay the money to their Mother. This was a Riddle,
rather then a Case of Law of Conscience; and so are many others, which I
therefore resolved to lay aside, and trouble no man's Conscience or head with
them; as supposing that the answer of the dull Diodorus mentioned in the Greek
Epigram is sufficient for such curiosities, (...), etc. It is so, or it is not
so; it must be done this way, or some other; the thing in question is yours, or
some bodies else: but make the Judge your friend, and I will warrant your
cause, provided it be just; but look you to that. A slight answer to an
intricate and useless question is a fit cover for such a dish; a cabbage leaf
is good enough to cover a pot of mushromes: but I have taken a shorter way, and
laid them all aside; remembering the saying of Friar John Annias to Nicolaus de
Lyra; Testimonium Dei lucidum est, nec egent literae Divinae plicis, The things
of God are plain and easy: and therefore I have rejected every thing that is
not useful and intelligible; choosing only to make such inquiries by which we
may become better, and promoted in something of our duty; Quid sumus, and
quidnam victuri gignimur, ordo
Quis datus, aut metae quam mollis flexus, and unde,
Quis modus argento, quid fas optare, quid asper
Utile nummus habet, patriae, charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te Deus esse
Jussit, and humana qua part locatus es in re:
viz. That we may be taught how to know what God requires of us, instructed to
salvation, and fitted to every good work.

But now I shall desire that he who reads my Book will not expect this Book to
be a collective body of particular Cases of Conscience; for I find that they
are infinite, and my life is not so; and I shall never live to write them all,
or to understand them all: and if I should write some and not all, I should
profit I know not whom, and do good but to a very few, and that by chance too;
and it may be that their cases being changed by circumstances would not be
fitted by my indefinite answers. I therefore resolved upon another way; which
although No Man before me has trod in writing Cases of Conscience, yet I
cannot say it is new; for I took my pattern from Tribonianus the Lawyer, who
out of the laws of the old Romans collected some choice Rules which give
answer to very many Cases that happen. And after I had considered and tried
many others, I found this most reasonable, most useful and most comprehensive
of all matters relating to my present Undertaking. For I intend here to offer
to the world a General instrument of Moral Theology, by the rules and measures
of which, the guides of Souls may determine the particulars that shall be
brought before them; and those who love to inquire, may also find their duty so
described, that unless their duties be complicated with Laws, and civil
Customs, and secular interests, men that are wise may guide themselves in all
their proportions of Conscience: but if their case be indeed involved, they
need the conduct of a Spiritual Guide to untie the intrigue, and state the
question, and apply the respective Rules to the several parts of it; for
though I have set them down all in their proper places relating to their
several matters, yet when a question requires the reason of many Rules, it is
not every hand that can apply them: Men will for ever need a living guide; and
a wise Guide of Souls will by some of these Rules be enabled to answer most
Cases that shall occur.

For although I have not given answers to every doubt; yet have I told what we
are to do when any doubt arises; I have conducted the doubting Conscience by
such Rules which in all doubts will declare her duty: and therefore if the
matter of the doubt be in the reception of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, or
in wearing cloths, or in eating, the Rule is the same and applicable to every
matter. I have not disputed whether Sumptuary laws be actually obligatory to
us in England or Ireland; but I have told by what measures we shall know
concerning all laws, whether they be obligatory or no, in any place, and to
every person. I have not expounded all the laws of God, but I have told by what
rules they are to be expounded and understood. But because these Rules have
influence upon all particulars, I have by way of instance and illustration
determined very many special Cases: and I was a little curious to choose such
which are the matter of our usual inquiries; and have been very studious to
draw in to particular Scrutiny most of the principal and noblest questions of
Christendom which could relate to the matter of my Rule; provided that they
were practical and did minister to good manners; having that of Lactantius in
my mind, Non tam de rebus humanis been meretur qui scientiam been dicendi
affert, quam qui pie and innocenter docet vivere. He best deserves of mankind
who teaches men to live well rather then to talk well: and therefore the wiser
Greeks preferred Philosophers before Orators. Illi enim recte vivendi Doctores
sunt existimandi, quod est long praestabilius. It is better to be a Doctor of
good life, then of eloquent or learned speaking: for there are but few who are
capable of eloquence, but to live well is the duty of all: and I have always
been pleased with the saying of Jupiter to Pallas in the apologue, when he
kissed her cheek for choosing the fruitful Olive. -- Nam quod facimus, id nisi
utile est,
Stulta omnis atque inanis inde est gloria;
unless it does good and makes us better, it is not worth the using: and
therefore it has been no small part of my labor not only to do what was
necessary, but to lay aside what was useless and unfit, at least what I
thought so.

In this manner by the Divine assistance I have described a Rule of Conscience:
in the performance of which I shall make no excuses for my own infirmities, or
to guard my self from the censure of the Curious or the Scorners. I have with
all humility and simplicity desired to serve God, and to minister to his
Church, and I hope he will accept me: and for the rest, I have laid it all at
his most holy feet, and therefore will take no further care concerning my self
in it. Only I am desirous that now I have attempted to describe a General Rule,
they who find it defective would be pleased to make this more perfect by adding
their own Symbol; which is much easier then to erect that building which needs
but some addition to make it useful to all its purposes and intentions. But if
any man, like a bird sitting upon a tree, shall foul the fruit and dishonor
it, that it may be unfit for food, I shall be sorrowful for him that does so,
and troubled, that the good which I intended to every one, should be lost to
any one. But I shall have the Prophet's comfort if I have done my duty in
righteousness and humility: Isa. 49. 4, 5.
though I labor in vain and spend my strength for naught, yet surely my
judgment is with the Lord, and my work is with my God.

I know not whether I shall live to add Matter to this Form, that is, to write
a particular explication of all the precepts of Christian Religion; which will
be a full design of all special cases and questions of Conscience measurable by
this General Rule. If I do not, I hope God will excite some other to do it;
but whoever does it, he will do it with so much the more profit, by how much
he does dispute the less: and I remember that Socrates and Sozomen tell that
Aelius the Heretic was counted an Atheist propter eristicum loquendi and
disputandi modum, because he taught no part of religion but he minced it into
questions and chopped it into Aristotle's Logic. The simple and rational way of
teaching God's Commandments as it is most easy, so it is most useful; and
all the cases that will occur will the most easily be answered by him that
considers and tell in what Cases they bind, and in what they bind not: which is
the duty of him that explicates, and may be delivered by way of plain rule and
easy commentary.

But this I shall advertise; That the Preachers may retrench infinite numbers
of Cases of Conscience if they will more earnestly preach and exhort to
simplicity and love; for the want of these is the great multiplier of Cases.
Men do not serve God with honesty and heartinesse, and they do not love him
greatly; but stand upon terms with him, and study how much is lawful, how far
they may go, and which is their utmost step of lawful, being afraid to do
more for God and for their Souls then is simply and indispensably necessary;
and oftentimes they tie religion and their own lusts together, and the one
intangles the other, and both are made less discernible, and less
practicable. * But the good Man understands the things of God; not only because
God's Spirit by secret immissions of light does properly instruct him; but
because he has a way of determining his Cases of Conscience which will never
fail him. For if the question be put to him whether it be fit for him to give a
shilling to the poor; he answers that it is not only fit, but necessary to do
so much at least, and to make it sure, he will give two: and in matter of duty
he takes to himself the greater share; in privileges and divisions of right, he
is content with the least: and in questions of priority and dignity he always
prevails by cession, and ever is Superior by sitting lowest, and gets his will,
first by choosing what God wills, and then what his neighbor imposes or
desires. But when Men have no love to God, and desire but just to save their
Souls, and weigh grains and scruples, and give to God no more then they must
needs, they shall multiply Cases of Consciences to a number which no books will
contain, and to a difficulty that no learning can answer.

The multiplication also of Laws and Ceremonies of Religion does exceedingly
multiply questions of practice; and there were among the Jews by reason of
their numerous rites many more then were at first among the Christians. For we
find the Apostles only exhorting to humility, to piety toward parents, to
obedience to Magistrates, to charity and justice; and the Christians who meant
well understood well, and needed no books of Conscience but the Rule, and the
Commandment. But when Error crept in, Truth became difficult and hard to be
understood: and when the Rituals of the Church and her laws became numerous,
then Religion was hard to be practiced: and when Men set up new interests, then
the laws of Conscience were so many, that as the laws of the old Romans; --
verba minantia fixo
Aere legebantur --
which at first were nailed in a brasse-plate upon a wall, became at last so
numerous and filled so many volumes, that their very Compendium made a large
Digest; so are these, too many to be considered, or perfectly to be understood;
and therefore either they must be cut off by simplicity and an honest heart,
and contempt of the world, and our duty must look for no measures but love and
the lines of the easy Commandment, or else we can have no peace and no
security. But with these there is not only collateral security, but very often
a direct wisdom. Because he that endeavors to keep a good Conscience and has
an honest mind, besides that he will enquire after his duty sufficiently, he
will be able to tell very much of it himself: for God will assist him, and
cause that his own mind shall tell him more then seven Watchmen that fit in a
tower; and if he miss, he is next to an excuse, and God is ready to pardon
him: and therefore in what sect of Christianity soever any man is engaged, if
he have an honest heart, and a good Conscience, though he be in darkness, he
will find his way out, or grope his way within; he shall be guided, or he shall
be pardoned; God will pity him, and find some way for his remedy; and if it be
necessary, will bring him out.

But however it comes to pass, yet now that the inquiries of Conscience are so
extremely numerous, Men may be pleased to observe that Theology is not every
man's trade; and that it requires more wisdom and ability to take care of Souls,
then those Men who now-adays run under the formidable burden of the Preachers
office can bring from the places of their education and first imploiment. Which
thing I do not observe that by it I might bring reputation to the office of
the Clergy; for God is their portion and lot, and as he has given them work
enough, so he has given them honor enough, though the world despise them: but
I speak it for their sakes who do what they ought not, and undertake what they
cannot perform; and consequently do more hurt to themselves and others then
possibly they imagine; which it were better they should amend, then be put to
answer for it before Him who loves Souls better then he loved his life, and
therefore would not entrust them to the conduct of such persons, who have need
to be taught the plain things of salvation, and learn to do justice and
charity, and the proper things of a holy religion.

Concerning my self I shall make no request to my Reader, but that he will
charitably believe I mean well, and have done my best. If any Man be troubled
that he has expected this Nothing so long; I cannot make him other answer, but
that I am afraid it is now too soon; and I bless God that I had abilities of
health and leisure now at last to finish it: but I should have been much
longer, if God had not by the piety of one of his Servants provided for me a
comfortable retirement and opportunity of leisure: which if I have improved to
God's glory, or to the comfort and institution of any one, He and I both have
our ends, and God will have his Glory; and that is a good Conclusion, and to
that I humbly dedicate my Book.

From my Study in Portmore in Kilultagh, October 5. 1659.
A TABLE Of the TITLES of the Chapters, and the Rules of the FIRST BOOK.
Of COnscience, the kinds of it, and the general Rules of conducting them.
CHAP. I. The Rule of Conscience in general.
RULE. 1. Conscience is the mind of a man, governed by a Rule, and measured by
the proportions of good and evil in order to practice. Page 1. 2. The Duty and
Offices of Conscience are to dictate and to testify or bear witness, to accuse
or excuse, to loose or bind. 11 3. Be careful that Prejudice or Passion, Fancy
and Affection, Error or Illusion, be not mistaken for Conscience. 26 4. The
Conscience of a Vicious man is an Evil Judge and an imperfect rule. 30 5. All
Consciences are to walk by the same rule, and that which is just to one is so
to all in the like Circumstances. 32 6. In Conscience that which is first is
truest, easiest and most useful. 34 7. Conscience by its several habitudes and
relations and tendencies toward its proper object is divided into several
kinds. 35
CHAP. II. Of the Right or Sure Conscience.
1. A Right Conscience is that which guides our actions by right and
proportioned means to a right end. 38 2. In a right Conscience the practical
judgment, that is the last determination to an action, ought to be sure and
evident. 38 3. The practical judgment of a right Conscience is always
agreeable to the speculative determination of the understanding. 40 4. A
Judgment of Nature or Inclination is not sufficient to make a sure Conscience.
62 5. When two motives concur to the determination of an action, whereof one is
virtuous and the other secular, a Right Conscience is not prejudiced by the
mixture. 64 6. An argument not sufficient nor competent, though it do persuade
us to a thing in it self good, is not the ground of a right, nor a sufficient
warrant for a sure Conscience. 73 7. A Conscience determined by the counsil of
wise men, even against its own inclinations, may be sure and right. 80 8. He
that sins against a right and a sure Conscience, what ever the instance be,
commits a great sin, but not a double one. 81 9. The goodness of an object is
not made by Conscience, but is accepted, declared and published by it, and made
personally obligatory. 95
CHAP. III. Of the Confident or erroneous Conscience.
1. AN erroneous Conscience commands us to do what we ought to omit, or to
omit what we ought to do, or to do it otherwise then we should. 99 2. An
erroneous Conscience binds us to Obedience, but not so as a right Conscience
does. 102 3. A Conscience erring vincibly or culpably is an unavoidable cause
of sin, whether it be resisted or complied with. 109 4. It is a greater sin to
do a good action against our Conscience, then to do an evil action in
obedience to it. 111 5. It is not lawful to delight in an evil action (after
the discovery of our error) which we did innocently in our erroneous
Conscience. 112 6. An innocent or invincibly erring Conscience is to be obeyed
even against the known Commandments of a Superior. 113 7. The Error of an
abused Conscience ought to be reformed sometimes by the command of the Will,
but ordinarily by a contrary reason. 116 8. The Error of a Conscience is not
always to be opened to the erring person by the Guides of Souls, or any other
charitable adviser. 117
CHAP. IV. Of the Probable or thinking Conscience.
1. A Probable Conscience is an imperfect assent to an uncertain proposition,
in which one part is indeed clearly and fully chosen, but with an explicit or
implicit notice that the contrary is also fairly eligible. 119 2. A Conscience
that is at first and in its own nature probable may be made certain by
accumulation of many probabilities operating the same persuasion. 124 3. Of two
Opinions equally probable upon the account of their proper reasons, one may be
safer then another. 144 4. An Opinion that is speculatively probable is not
always practically the same. 144 5. The greater probability destroys the less.
146 6. When two Opinions seem equally probable the last determination is to be
made by accidents, circumstances and collateral inducements. 150 7. It is not
lawful to change our practical sentence about the same object, while the same
probability remains. 154 8. An Opinion relying upon very slender probability is
not to be followed, except in the cases of great necessity or great charity.
154 9. Multitude of Authors is not ever the most probable inducement, nor does
it in all cases make a safe and sure Conscience. 156 10. In following the
Authority of men, no rule can be antecedently given for the choice of the
persons, but the choice is wholly to be conducted by prudence and according to
the subject matter. 162 11. He that has given assent to one part of a probable
opinion, may lawfully depose that Conscience and that opinion upon confidence
of the sentence of another. 168 12. He that enquires of several Doctors, until
he find one answering according to his mind, cannot by that enquiry make his
Conscience safe; but according to the subject matter, and other circumstances
he may. 171 13. He that is asked concerning a case that is on either side
probable, may answer against his own opinion if the contrary be probable, or
more safe, or more expedient, or more favorable. 172 14. When the Guide of
Souls is of a different opinion from his charge or penitent, he is not bound to
exact conformity to his own opinion that is but probable, but may proceed
according to the Conscience of the Penitent. 173 15. The sentence and
arbitrament of a prudent and good man, though it be of it self but probable,
yet is more then a probable warranty to actions otherwise undeterminable. ibid.
CHAP. V. Of a Doubtful Conscience.
1. A Doubtful Conscience assents to neither side of the question, and brings
no direct obligation. 174 2. A negative doubt neither binds to action nor
inquiry nor repentance, but it binds only to caution and observance. 175 3. A
privative doubt cannot of it self hinder a man from acting what he is moved to
by an extrinsick argument or inducement that is in it self prudent or innocent.
177 4. In doubts of right or Law we are always bound to enquire: but in doubts
of fact not always. 178 5. In doubts the safer part is to be chosen. 180 6. It
is lawful for the Conscience to proceed to action against a doubt that is
merely speculative. 184 7. Every dictate and judgment of the Conscience, though
it be little and less material, is sufficient, and may be made use of for the
deposition of a doubt. 187 8. When two precepts contrary to each other meet
together about the same question, that is to be preferred which binds most. 188
CHAP. VI. Of the Scrupulous Conscience.
1. A Scruple is a great trouble of mind proceeding from a little motive and a
great indisposition, by which the Conscience, though sufficiently determined by
proper arguments, dares not proceed to action, or if it does, it cannot rest.
208 2. A Conscience sufficiently instructed by its proper ^^guments of
persuasion may without sin proceed to action against the Scruple, and its
weaker arguments or stronger tremblings. 213 3. He that is troubled with
scruples ought to rely upon the judgment of a prudent Guide. ibid. 4. When a
Doubt is resolved in the entrance of an action, we must judge of our action
afterward by the same measures as before; for he that changes his measures,
turns his doubt into a Scruple. ibid. 5. A Scrupulous Conscience is to be cured
by remedies proper to the disease and to the man. 215
SECOND BOOK. Of Divine Laws, and all Collateral Obligations.
CHAP. I.Of the Law of Nature in General.
1. THE Law of Nature is the Universal Law of the world, or the Law of
Mankind, concerning common necessities, to which we are inclined by Nature,
invited by consent, prompted by reason; but is bound upon us only by the
commands of God. 220 2. The Law of Nature is the foundation of all Laws, and
the measure of their obligation. 243 3. The first or greatest band of the Law
of Nature is fear of punishment. 244 4. The second band of Virtue is Love, and
its proper and consequent deliciousness. 247 5. The Imperfection of some
provisions in civil Laws are supplied by the natural obligation remaining upon
persons civily incapable. 251 6. Sins against the Law of Nature are greater or
less, not by that proportion, but by the greatness of the matter, and the evil
consequent or the malice of the Sinner. 258 7. Actions which are forbidden by
the Law of Nature either for defect of power, or for the incapacity of the
matter, are not only unlawful but also void. 260 8. When an act is forbidden
by the Law of Nature for the turpitude and undecency that it has in the matter
of the Action, the Act is also void when the turpitude remains or has a
perpetual cause. 262 9. The Law of Nature can be dispensed with by the Divine
power. 263 10. The Law of Nature cannot be dispensed with by any Humane power.
269 11. That the Obligation to a natural Law does cease in any particular, is
not to the presumed in every one, but is to be declared by the public voice.
274 12. The Exactness of natural Laws is capable of interpretation, and may be
allayed by Equity and Piety and Necessity. 275
CHAP. II. Of the Law of Nature as it is drawn up in the Christian Law.
1. WHen the Law of Jesus Christ was established, the Old Testament or the Law
of Moses did no longer oblige the Conscience. 275 2. The Ceremonial Law of
Moses is wholly void. 280 3. The Judicial Law of Moses is annulled or
abrogated, and retains no obliging power either in whole or in part over any
Christian Prince, Commonwealth or person. 286 4. The ten Commandments of Moses,
commonly called the Moral Law, is not a perfect Digest of the Law of Nature.
318 5. All the Explications of the Moral Law that are found in the Prophets
and other H. writers of the Old Testament are to be accounted as parts of the
Moral Law, and equally oblige the Conscience. 323 6. Every thing in the
Decalogue is not obligatory to Christians, is not a part of the Moral Law or
Natural. 324 The measures of difference to discern between Moral precepts and
precepts not Moral in all the Laws of God. 367 7. There is no state of men or
things but is to be guided by the proportion of some Rule or Precept in the
Christian Law. 372
CHAP. III. Of the Interpretation and Obligation of the Laws of JESUS CHRIST.
1.IN Negative precepts the Affirmatives are commanded, and in the Affirmative
commandments the Negative are included. 389 2. When a Negative and an
Affirmative seem opposite in any sense, the Affirmative is to be expounded by
the Negative, not the Negative by the Affirmative. 395 3. In the Affirmative
and Negative precepts of Christ, not only what is in the words of the
Commandment, but whatsoever is symbolicall or alike, is equally forbidden or
commanded. 396 4. When any thing is forbidden by the Laws of Jesus Christ, all
those things are forbidden also which follow from that forbidden action, or for
whose sake it was forbidden. 402 5. The Laws of Jesus Christ are the measures
of the Spirit, and are always to be extended to a spiritual signification. 404
Whatsoever is an Elicit or Imperate Act of virtue, whether it be acted by the
soul or by the body, is an act of spiritual religion. 408 All acts of virtue
are to be preferred before the Instruments of it; and that which exercises it
before that which signifies it; and the inward Act before the outward. 410 6.
The Imperate Acts or outward expressions of one Commandment must not
contradict the Elicit Acts of another. 411 7. When any thing is forbidden by
the Laws of Christ, all those things also by which we come to that sin are
understood to be by the same Law forbidden. 414 8. The Suppositive Propositions
with the supervening advices of our B. Savior are always equivalent to matter
of Duty, and are by Interpretation a Commandment. 417 9. The Institution of a
Rite or Sacrament by our B. Savior is a direct Law, and passes a proper
obligation in its whole integrity. 420 10. If the sense of a Law be dubious, we
are sometimes to expound it by Liberty, sometimes by Restraint. 432 11. The
positive Laws of Jesus Christ cannot be dispensed with by any Humane power. 440
12. Not every thing that is in the Doctrines and Sermons of Jesus Christ was
intended to bind as a Law or Commandment. 448 13. Some things may be used in
the service of God which are not commanded in any Law, nor explicitly commended
in any doctrine of Jesus Christ. 454 14. The Christian Law both of Faith and
Manners is fully contained in the H. Scriptures, and from thence only can the
Conscience have divine warrant and authority. 472 15. In the Law of Christ
there is no precept that ministers wholly to the Law of Moses, but for a time
only and less principally. 519 16. The Laws of Jesus Christ are to be
interpreted to the Sense of a present Obedience according to the subject
matter. 520 17. Because the Laws of Jesus Christ were delivered in Sermons to a
single person or a definite number of hearers, we are curiously to enquire and
wisely to understand when those persons were only personally concerned, and
when they were representatives of the whole Church. 540 18. Evangelicall Laws
given to one concerning the duty of another do in that very relation concern
them both, but in differing degrees. 546 19. Custom is no sufficient
Interpreter of the Laws of Jesus Christ. 548 20. The measure of perfection and
obedience required of Christians is greater then that of the Jews even in
moral duties common to them and us. 554
THE SECOND VOLVME. THIRD BOOK.Of Humane Laws, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Humane Laws in general.
1. THE Conscience is properly and directly, actively and passively under pains
of sin and punishment obliged to obey the Laws of men. 3 Rules whereby to
conjecture at the gravity or lessening of the Sin of disobedience to humane
Laws. 2. Humane Laws do not oblige the Conscience to an active obedience, when
there is an imminent danger, or an intolerable or very grievous evil in the
obedience. 26 3. The Laws of our Superior that are not just and good do not
bind the Conscience. 32 4. A Law that is founded on a false presumption does
not oblige the Conscience. 37 5. Humane Laws do bind the Conscience to or from
an act in secret as well as in public. 40 6. Humane Laws before sufficient
promulgation do not oblige the Conscience. 44 7. That a Law should oblige the
Conscience does not depend upon the acceptance of the Law by the people. 46 8.
Humane Laws of indifferent matter do not oblige the Conscience of the Subjects
out of the Dominions of the Superior. 49 9. Obedience to Laws is to be paid
according to what is commanded, not according to what is best. 51
CHAP. II. Of Laws Penal and Tributary.
1. IT is lawful for Christian Magistrates to make Penal Laws not only
pecuniary and of restraint, but of loss of member and life it self. 53 2.
Penal do sometimes oblige the guilty person to the suffering the punishment
even before the sentence and declaration of the Judge. 59. In what cases the
Criminal is to be his own Executioner. 63. Signs by which we may judge when
the Criminal is condemned ipso facto. 67 3. Penalties imposed by the Judge
must be suffered and submitted to, but may not after such sentence be inflicted
by the hands of the condemned. 71 4. He that has suffered the punishment is
not discharged in Conscience, unless he also repent of the disobedience. 79 5.
It is not lawful for a guilty person to defend himself by calumny or a lie,
from the penalty of the Law, though it be the sentence of death. 82 6. It is
not lawful for private Christians without public authority to punish
malefactors, but they may require it of the Magistrate in some cases. 107 7. It
is not lawful to punish one for the offense of another merely and wholly. 117
8. The Laws of Tribute are Moral Laws and not Penal, except it be by
accident; and therefore do oblige the Conscience to an active obedience. 124 9.
The Laws of tribute have the same conditions, causes, powers and measures with
other Laws of government. 125 10. Tribute and custom, which are due, are to ^e
paid, whether they be demanded or no. 127
CHAP. III. Of Kings, Princes and all Supreme Civil Powers, and their Laws in
Special.
1. THE Supreme power in every Republic is universal, absolute and unlimited.
130 2. The Supreme power is superior to the Civil Laws, but not wholly free
from them. 138 3. It is not lawful for Subjects to rebel or to take up arms
against the Supreme power of the Nation, upon any pretense whatsoever. 149. 4.
The Supreme civil power is also supreme Governor over all persons and in all
Causes Ecclesiastical. 160 5. Kings have a legislative power in the affairs of
Religion and the Church. 174 6. The Supreme civil power has a power of
coercion over every person in the whole Order Ecclesiastical. 178 7. The
Supreme civil power has Jurisdiction in causes not only Ecclesiastical but
Internal and Spiritual. 199 8. The Supreme civil power is to govern in causes
Ecclesiastical by the means and measures of Christ's institution, that is by
the assistance and ministeries of Ecclesiastical persons. 207
CHAP. IV. Of the power of the Church in Canons and Censures, with their
obligations and powers over the Conscience.
1. THE whole power which Christ has left in ordinary to his Church is merely
spiritual. 211 2. The Church has power to make Laws, and to give Commands
obliging the Conscience, that is, tying the Subject to obedience under the
penalty of committing or incurring the Divine displeasure. 220 3. The Church
has power to make laws in all things of necessary duty by a direct power and a
divine authority. 224 4. The Church has power to make Laws in such things
which are helps and apt ministeries and advantages of necessary duty. 226 The
Rule [The Accessory follows the nature of the Principall] explicated. 227 5.
When the Canons or Rules of Ecclesiastical Rulers are confirmed by the Supreme
civil power, they oblige the Conscience by a double obligation. 234. II. Of
Censures Ecclesiastical. 6. Kings and Princes are tied by the ties of
religion, not of power, to keep the Laws of the Church. 237 7. It is not
lawful for the Ecclesiastical power to excommunicate Christian Princes or the
supreme civil power. 240 8. Ecclesiastical censures are to be inflicted by the
consent and concurrence of the supreme civil power. 247 9. Excommunication
inflicted upon a light cause binds externally but not internally: but if it be
inflicted upon an unjust cause it binds not at all. 255 10. It is not lawful
to communicate with those whom the Church has by a just sentence
excommunicated. 260. III. Of Canons Ecclesiastical. 11. The Canons of the
Apostles which are of order and external government do oblige the Conscience
by being accepted in several Churches, not by their first establishment. 266
12. All those ritualls which were taught to the Apostles concerning
ministeries, which were of divine institution, do oblige all Christendom to
their observation. 269 13. In the Rules which the Apostles gave to the Churches
in things indifferent, the Church has a liberty, but it is not to be used but
for great reason, great necessity, and for the edification of their people
committed to their charge. 272 14. The Canons of the ancient General and
Provincial Councils are then laws to the Conscience when they are bound upon
us by the authority of the respective Governors of Churches. 285 15. The
Laudable customs of the Catholic Church which are in present observation do
oblige the Conscience of all Christians. 287 16. The Decrees and Canons of the
Bishops of Rome oblige the Conscience of none but his own subjects. 298. IV. Of
the matter and conditions of Ecclesiastical Laws required to the obligation of
Conscience. 17. Ecclesiastical Laws that are merely such cannot be universal
and perpetual. 301 18. Ecclesiastical Laws of ceremonies and external
observances do not bind the Conscience beyond the cases of contempt and
scandal. 313 19. Ecclesiastical Laws must be charitable and easy; and when
they are not, they oblige not. 315 20. Ecclesiastical Laws must ever promote
the service of God and the good of Souls, but must never put a snare or
stumbling block to Consciences. 323. V. Of Ecclesiastical Laws of Faith. 21.
The Catholic Church is a witness of Faith and a record of all necessary
truths; but not the Mistress and Ruler of our Creed, that is, cannot make any
laws of Faith. 350 22. The Decrees of General Councils are of great use in the
conduct of Conscience, but not the proper measure or last determination of
matters of belief. 353 23. Subscription to articles and forms of conf^ssion in
any Particular Church is wholly of Political consideration. 356
CHAP. V. Of Laws Domestic, or the power which Fathers of Families have to
bind the Consciences of their Relatives.
1. CHildren are bound to obey the Laws and Commandments of their Parents in
all things Domestical, and in all actions personal relating to the family,
or done within it. 359 2. Fathers have a power to chastise their offending
children, but not a power of life and death. 364 3. A Father has power over
the goods and persons of his children so as to be maintained by them. 366 4.
The Fathers power doe^ not extend to matter of Religion and persuasions of
Faith. 369 5. The Fathers power over the children can remit an injury done to
them without their leave or consent. 371 6. A Fathers authority cannot abide
after his death, but the Sons piety to his Father must and may pass upon him
some indirect obligations. 372 7. Neither the Fathers authority nor his Sons
piety can oblige them to do an action against the Laws of God, or of the
Fathers, or our just superiors. 374 8. It is not lawful for Children to enter
into any lasting course of life against the will or approbation of their
Fathers or parents. 378
CHAP. VI. Of the Interpretation, Diminution and Abrogation of Humane Laws.
. I. Of Equity. 1. WHen the Letter of the Law is burdensome and unjust, the
meaning and charity of the Law does only oblige the Conscience. 398. II. Of
Judicial Interpretation. 2. When the power that made the Law does interpret
the Law, the Interpretation is authentical, and obliges the Conscience as much
as the Law, and can release the bond of Conscience so far as the Interpretation
extends as much as if the Law were abrogated. 407. III. A contrary or ceasing
reason.3. A Law made for a particular reason, when the reason wholly ceases,
does no longer oblige the Conscience. 411. IV. Dispensation.4. The Legislator
has authority to dispense in his own Laws for any cause that himself prudently
shall judge to be reasonable, so that no distinct interest be prejudiced or
injured. 423. V. Commutation.5. The same power that can dispense can also
commute a Duty: and as in the first it eases, so in the latter it binds the
Conscience. 426. VI. Contrary Customs.6. A Custom can interpret a Law, but
can never abrogate it without the consent of the supreme power. 427. VII.
Abrogation. 7. Abrogation of a Law by a competent, that is, the Supreme power,
may be just and reasonable, though the Law it self be neither unreasonable nor
unjust. 431
FOURTH BOOK. Of the Nature and Causes of Good and Evil.
CHAP. I. Of the Efficient Causes of all Humane Actions good or evil.
. I. Of Choice and Election voluntary and involuntary. 1. AN action is neither
good nor evil, unless it be voluntary and chosen. 437 2. The virtuall and
interpretative consent of the will is imputed to Good or Evil. 455 Rules of
conducting our Sports and Recreations. 473 3. The Act of the will alone,
although no external action or event do follow, is imputed to Good or Evil by
God and men. 480 4. An Involuntary effect proceeding form a voluntary cause is
imputed to the Agent as if it were voluntary and directly chosen. 489. II. Of
the Diminutions of voluntary Actions; and first of Ignorance, and its influence
into the morality of Humane Actions. 5. Nothing is good or bad but what we
know, or concerning which we can deliberate. 493 6. Ignorance does always
excuse the fact, or diminish the malignity of it, or change the kind or nature
of the Sin. 500. III. Of Fear and Violence, and how these can make an action
Involuntary. 7. Fear that makes our reason useless, and suffers us not to
consider, leaves the actions it produces free from crime, even though it self
be culpable. 511
CHAP. II. Of the Final cause of Humane actions, and its influence or
causality of Good and Evil.
1. IN every good Action the means and the end must be Symbolicall; so that a
good Action done for an evil end, and an evil Action done for a good end, are
alike Criminal. 517 2. To do an action of it self lawful for temporal
regards, for ends of profit, pleasure, or honor, is not unlawful, except it
be accidentally. 520 3. The end and intention of a Law is under the
Commandment as much as the Action it self commanded in order to the end. 525
A Table of Questions solemnly handled and under distinct Titles.
1. WHether it be in any case, or in what case it is lawful to choose the
Conclusion before the Premises. Page 28 2. Whether one may believe a
Proposition which he cannot prove. ibid. 3. Whether the (...) may be corrupted.
31. n. 2. 4. How far the Conscience may be corrupted. 31. n. 3 5. Of what use
RIGHT REASON ought to be in religion. 42. n. 8 6. Whether they that enter into
H. Orders are bound principally to design the glory of God. 65 7. Whether it be
lawful to persuade a man to believe a truth by arguments which himself judges
insufficient. 73 8. Whether it be lawful for a good end for preachers to
affright men with Panick terrors, and to create fears that have no ground; as
to tell them, If they be liars their faces will be deformed. 78. n. 12 9.
Whether a Judge must give sentence according to the evidence of those witnesses
whom he knows false, or according to his Conscience, though contrary to a legal
process. 82. n. 5. 10. Whether a false and abused Conscience can oblige us to
pursue the error. 102. n. 3 11. Whether obedience to a Conscience erring
vincibly or culpably be a double sin in the action and the principle. 12. A
Discourse to prove that the RELIGION of JESUS CHRIST is from God. 124 13.
Whether it be lawful to several persons to use probable arguments
contradictory to one another for ends in themselves lawful. 154 14. How the
Ignorant and vulgar people shall proceed, when the Teachers are divided in
opinion. 159 15. When the Authority of Divines is to be followed, when that of
Lawyers. 165 16. Whether it be lawful to advise, determine or petition another
to a lesser sin, that thereby he may avoid a greater. 189 17. Whether it be
lawful for a wife that she may live with some degree of comfort to connive at
her Husbands stolen pleasures, and what is the Woman's duty, and most prudent
course in this case. 190
LIB. II.
18. Whether a will not sufficiently ratified according to the Civil Law be
valid to the injury of any of the Legatees. 254 19. Whether we under the Gospel
are still bound to abstain from blood and things strangled. 281 20. Whether the
Judicial Law of mutual abstinence in the days of women's separation obliges
Christians. 287 21. Whether Cosen-Germans may marry one another. 301 22.
Whether it be against the Law of Nations to do so. 309 23. Whether it be
lawful to make a picture or Image of God. 331 24. Whether it be lawful for
Christians to worship God by an Image. 337 25. How we are to celebrate the
Lords day. 363 26. Whether it is lawful for a Prince to permit any thing for
the public necessities of the people, which is forbidden by the Laws of Jesus
Christ. 374 27. Of the measures of War by Christ's Law. 377 28. Whether the
precedents of the Old Testament are a Law to them that go to war. 380 29. Of
the Negative measures of Examples in the Old Testament. ibid. 30. Of the
Example of Christ. 383 31. Of the use of Examples in the Old and New Testament.
386 32. Of the Positive measures of Examples, and which may be safely followed.
387 33. Why the Law of Moses consisted of Negatives all but one. ibid. 34. In
what cases the stricter sense of the Laws of Christ is to be followed. 432 35.
When the Laws of Christ are to be expounded to a sense of ease and liberty. 433
36. Who are truly and innocently weak and to be complied with. 437 37. What are
the notes of difference between counsels and commands Evangelicall. 452 38.
Whether we are to require from Scripture a warrant for every action we do in
common life. 454 39. Whether in matters of religion we may use any thing for
which we have no express word in Scripture. 457 40. Of Will Worship. ibid. 41.
What voluntary or uncommanded actions are lawful or commendable. 459 42.
Whether there be any, or what are those rules by which we may discern
tradition. 493 43. Whether or no and how far a Negative argument from Scripture
is to prevail. 501 44. Whether there may be any new Articles of Faith, or that
the Creed of the Church may so increase that what was sufficient to salvation
in one age cannot serve in another. 508 45. At what time precisely is every
sinner bound to repent of his Sins, so that if he does not repent at that time,
he commits a new sin. 523 46. Whether a man is bound to repent not only the
first time, but every time he thinks of his Sin. 537 47. Whether the Customs of
Jews or Gentiles or indifferently of many nations be a just presumption, that
the thing so practiced is agreeable to the Law of Nature, or is any ways to be
supposed to be consonant to the will of God. 551
LIB. III.
48. Whether the Laws of Men oblige the Conscience. p. 3. 49. Of Christian
Liberty. 17 50. The difference of Divine and Humane Laws in their obligation.
23 51. Whether Humane Laws can command or forbid inward actions. 41 52. Whether
it be lawful to kill ones self to prevent a cruel death inflicted by his
Enemies. 72 53. Whether in suffering the punishment annexed to penal Laws the
Conscience is discharged without repentance. 79 54. Whether it can in any case
be lawful to tell a lie. 83 55. Whether it be lawful to use restrictions and
mental reservations, so that what we utter is false, but joined with something
within does integrate a truth and make up an answer. 97 56. Whether it be
lawful to equivocate or use words of doubtful signification with a purpose to
deceive, or knowing that they will deceive, and in what case it is so. 100 57.
Whether it be lawful by false signs, by actions and pretenses of action to
deceive others for any good end, and in what cases it is so. 104 58. Whether it
be lawful for a Christian to require of the Magistrate that his offending
Brother may be punished. 114 59. Whether it be lawful for the supreme Prince
or Magistrate to aliene his Princely rights, or to give away any parts of his
Kingdom. 137 60. Whether a Prince is subject to the Laws which he makes. 138
61. What Laws they are from which a Prince is freed; what is the right or
prerogative of the Supreme Power. 145 62. Whether it be lawful for Subjects to
take up arms against the Supreme power. 150 63. In what sense the service of
God is to be preferred before every thing else. 180 64. Which are to be
preferred, and which are better, things spiritual or temporal. 183 65.
Whether are to be preferred, Spiritual or temporal persons. 186 66. Whether
the eminency of the spiritual calling, and the consequent prelation of
spiritual persons can exempt them from secular coercion, and make them
superior to Princes. 188 67. Whether is to be obeyed, the Prince or the
Bishop, if they command contrary things. 191 68. Whether in the civil affairs
and causes of the Ecclesiastical power and persons the presumption ought to
lie for the King or for the Church. 198 69. Whether the supreme Civil power
has authority to convene and dissolve Synods Ecclesiastical. 203 70. Whether
the Supreme Civil power has a power of external judgment in matters of
faith. 205 71. Whether the Guides of Souls have a proper and spiritual power
to enjoin Penances or Ecclesiastical Satisfactions to a Prince that has
sinned publicly. 244 72. Of the Lent Fast and the weekly fasting. 273 73. The
Lent Fast is not a Tradition or Canon Apostolical. 275 74. Whether
Ecclesiastical Laws may be perpetual. 303 75. What persons are tied to the
observation of Ecclesiastical fasts, and in what cases. 317 76. Of Music in
Churches. 329 77. Of the Marriage of Bishops and Priests. 332 78. Whether it
can be lawful to subscribe what he does not believe to be true. 358 79.
Whether it be lawful for children to enter into any religious vow or state
without the consent of their Parents. 378 80. Whether they may lawfully marry
without or against their parents consent. 381 81. Of Exemption from the power
of Fathers. 390 82. Whether if the Grandfather be alive and the Son in his
power, it be sufficient to legitimate the marriage of the Son, if the
Grandfather consent, though the Father be not asked. 391 83. Whether if the
Parents have consented and authorized the treaty of marriage, till the
affections of the children are irrevocably engaged, and afterward recall their
consent, the children are bound to obey their Parents. 392 84. Whether Mothers
have the same authority ever their children as their Fathers have. 393 85.
Whether the power of Parents is such that they can compel a Son or Daughter
to marry whom or when they will. 394 86. Whether the Law obliges no more, when
its reason cease. 411 87. Whether in some case the Subject is so quitted from
the obligation of the Law that he may use his liberty without asking the will
of the Superior. 417 88. Whether the obligation of the Law does extend it self
to all cases that have the same or an equal reason, though the case be not
comprehended directly in the Law. 419 89. Whether it be a just and prudent
cause to take a thing quite away because it has been abused. 432 90. Whether
every action of our life ought to be directed by a right Conscience, or a
wellperswaded will: Or, Are not some Actions, not only in their whole kind, but
in their Circumstances and Limitations also, merely indifferent? 444 91.
Whether is it necessary that for the doing of good we have an express act of
volition? that is, May not the will be indifferent, though the actions are not?
450 92. Upon whom does the greater portion of the guilt lie, upon him that
commands a sin, or him that sins in obedience? 458 93. How far it can be
lawful to permit a sin. 464 94. Whether to make and provide the instruments
which usually minister to sin, makes us also guilty. 467 95. Whether it be
lawful to play at Cards or Dice. 469 96. Whether the Sin of the Action be
distinct from that of the Affection. 481 97. Of the identity and diversity
respectively of actions internal and external, and the multiplication of sins
by them. 483 98. What degrees of guiltiness are contracted by the beginnings
and desires of wickedness which are imperfect and unfinished. 486 99. Whether a
mad man may be punished for a fact he did in his health. 491 100. Of what
things a man may be innocently ignorant, and what not. 494 101. What diligence
is necessary that our ignorance may be innocent. 496 102. What is a probable
ignorance. 497 103. Whether drunkenness does excuse, or extenuate, or
aggravate the crimes which it occasions. 505 104. What morality is in those
actions which are done by a man that is abused into ignorance by the fraud of
another. 509 105. Whether it be lawful to serve God for any end less then
himself, for riches, honor, etc. 523 106. In what sense it is true that God
must be served purely for his own sake, and virtue pursued for virtues sake.
524
QUESTIONS more briefly handled.
1. WHether a man can be wholly without Conscience. lib. 1. cap. 1. rul. 1. n.
5. 2. From whence Conscience has the power to torment a man. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2.
n. 18. p. 20. 3. Why is the Conscience more afraid in some sins then others? l.
1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 21. p. 21. 4. Whether Ecclesiastics ever ought to leave one
Church for another. l. 1. c. 1. r. 5. n. 23. p. 69. 5. Whether it be lawful to
use argumenta ad hominem. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 10. p. 75. 6. Whether a
Conscience invincibly erring is to be obeyed against the known commands of our
Superior. l. 1. c. 3. r. 6. p. 114. 7. Whether the Error of a Conscience may
be laid down upon an argument less probable then that which first produced the
error. l. 1. c. 3. r. 7. n. 2. p. 116. 8. Whether a moral demonstration be a
sufficient ground of certainty in duties. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n. 2. p. 121. 9.
Whether when two probable opinions are practically compared, it is lawful to
reject that which is more probable. l. 1. c. 4. r. 5. n. 3. p. 148. 10.
Whether when two opinions seem equally probable, the understanding ought to
choose neither. l. 1. c. 4. r. 6. n. 1. p. 150. 11. Whether the lesser evil in
respect of the greater has the nature of good, and whether it may be lawfully
chosen, if necessity force to choose one. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 25. p. 199. 12.
Whether the Christian Law be a collected body of the Laws of Nature. l. 2. c.
1. r. 1. n. 40. p. 235. 13. Whether it be lawful to serve God with intuition
of reward. l. 2. c. 1. r. 4. n. 9. p. 250. 14. Whether the Divine power can
dispense with the Law of Nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. p. 263. 15. How God
dispenses with his Laws. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 3. p. 264. 16. What Laws of
Nature can be dispensed with. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 10. p. 267. 17. Whether it
be rightly said, Per Jus Gentium and Civil aliquid detrahitur de Jure
Naturali. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10. n. 2. p. 269. 18. Whether the Pope can dispense
with the Law of Nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10. n. 9. p. 271. 19. Whether Abraham
were brother to Sarah. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 31. p. 300, 305. 20. What is meant
Levit. xviii. 6. by, None of you; and, Near of kin to you. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n.
36, 39. p. 302. 21. Whether Christ gave any new precepts which were not in the
Mosaicall Digest. 319. 22. Whether that which we call the second Commandment be
a distinct Commandment, or an explication only of the first. 325. 23. Whether
it is well to divide the tenth Commandment into two. 327. 24. Whether it be
lawful to make an image. 330. 25. Whether Spiritual persons should be exempt
from Secular Jurisdiction. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 67. p. 368. 26. Whether an
example out of the Old Testament be sufficient warrant for us. l. 2. c. 2. r.
7. n. 26. p. 380. 27. Whether in the Law of Moses, the Affirmative Laws are
included in the Negative. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 7. p. 391. 28. Whether the
Arguments of an old Heretic new made use of still increase the account of the
first sin. l. 2. c. 3. r. 4. n. 6. p. 404. 29. Whether marriage be an
universal Commandment. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 2. p. 420. 30. Whether the Lords
Supper be to be administered to all in both kinds. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 5. p.
421. 31. Whether in the Holy Eucharist whole Christ be received under each
kind. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 26. p. 427. 32. Whether the blood is received in the
Bread by concomitance. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 26. p. 429. 33. Whether a power of
dispensing with the positive laws of Christ be entrusted with any man or
society of men, to the Pope or any other. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 6. p. 441. 34.
Whether it be lawful to break the vow and bonds of marriage to enter into a
religious house. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 9. p. 443. 35. Whether a Supply of duty
is to be made in any case, or, whether it be not better in some cases to do
something of the duty then nothing when we cannot do all. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11.
n. 17. p. 446. 36. Whether it be as great a sin to teach for necessary
doctrines the prohibitions of men as the injunctions. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 20.
p. 463. 37. What Superstition is. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 26. p. 466. 38. Whether
the Sacrifice of Abel was will worship. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 27. p. 467. 39.
Whether whatsoever is taught us by natural reason is bound upon us by a
natural law. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 28. p. 467. and c. 1. r. 1. n. 30. p. 230.
40. Whether the Holy Scriptures contain the whole will of God. l. 2. c. 3. r.
14. n. 2. p. 473. 41. What is the use of Traditions. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 13.
p. 483. 42. Whether Tradition after the consignation of the Canon of Scriptures
be of any use in Questions of Faith or manners. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 23. p.
487. 43. Whether Traditions can be proved out of Scripture. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14.
n. 38. p. 494. 44. Whether the belief of the Catholic Church is a sufficient
argument to prove a Tradition to be Apostolical. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 39. p.
495. 45. Whether a Council or the Doctors of the Church can give sufficient
Authority to Tradition. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 42. p. 499. 46. What Authority an
uninterrupted Succession from Apostolical men can give to a Tradition. l. 2.
c. 3. r. 14. n. 43. p. 500. 47. Whether it be lawful to defer Baptism till
near death. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 1. p. 521. 48. Whether a man be bound to weep
as often as he thinks of his sin. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 36. p. 539. 49. Whether
the Bishop that ordeins, or he that is ordained, or they that choose do sin, if
the Bishop be unfit. l. 2. c. 3. r. 18. n. 1. p. 547. 50. Whether Christian
Liberty extend to the freeing from all humane Laws made concerning ceremonies.
l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 28. p. 18. 51. Whether Humane Laws bind to their
observation with the danger of life. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n. 2. p. 27. 52. Whether
a Law that binds under pain of mortal sin does also bind to obedience though
death attend it. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n. 10. p. 28. 53. When the Supreme power can
bind to the observation of his Laws though with danger of death. l. 3. c. 1. r.
2. n. 12. p. 29. 54. Whether Laws have their binding power from the consent of
the people. l. 3. c. 1. r. 7. n. 5. p. 47. 55. Whether when a Law is refused by
the greater part of the people, single persons are excused. l. 3. c. 1. r. 7.
n. 9. p. 49. 56. Whether for a lawful Magistrate to put a malefactor to death
flagrante crimine be against charity. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 4. p. 54. 57.
Whether a liee may be told to another for the benefit of a third person. l. 3.
c. 2. r. 5. n. 12. p. 87. 58. Whether a lie may be told to save ones good name
and prevent disgrace. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 17. p. 92. 59. Whether a General
may tell a lie and use stratagems. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 19. p. 93. 60. Whether
a Prince is to be accounted a private person, when he proceeds not according to
the sentence and methods of Law. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 11. p. 111. 61. Whether
Judicial duells are lawful. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 12. p. 112. 62. Whether it
be lawful for Christians to go to law one with another. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n.
18. p. 115. 63. Whether it be lawful to punish one for another of persons
conjoined by Contract. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 5. p. 118. 64. Whether it be
lawful to imprison or torment insolvent Debtors. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 5. p.
118. 65. Whether persons affianced by Nature may be lawfully punished one for
another. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 11. p. 121. 66. Whether persons affianced by
Crime may be punished one for another. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 12. p. 122. 67.
Whether it be unlawful to deny tribute on pretense it is unjust. l. 3. c. 2.
r. 10. n. 3. p. 128. 68. What the Bishops are to do, if the Civil power
forbid that any invocation of the H. Ghost be made in the public Liturgies. l.
3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 29. p. 196. 69. Whether it be lawful for the Spiritual
power by spiritual censures to punish those actions which the Civil power
permits. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 32. p. 197. 70. How to know which is the
Accessory and which the Principal. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4. n. 6. p. 227. 71. In what
sense the Accessory does follow the nature of the Principal. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4.
n. 12. p. 229. 72. Whether the Bishops can give Laws which properly and
immediately bind the transgressors under sin. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4. n. 23. p. 233.
73. In what cases Excommunication may be lawfully inflicted. l. 3. c. 4. r. 9.
n. 6. p. 257. 74. Whether such sentences in Law as declare a man Excommunicate
ipso facto be unlawful. l. 3. c. 4. r. 9. n. 11, 12. p. 259. 75. What is
meant by that word of our Saviors, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of
men. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 8. p. 303. 76. Whether Bishops and Priests may
marry after Ordination. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 24. p. 343. 77. When the Law
expressly names the punishment, whether there can be any relief by Equity or
Interpretation. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 17. p. 406. 78. Whether a Custom can
abrogate a Law. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 4, 5, 6, 7. p. 429. 79. Whether the Will
be free in it is actions. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 2, 3. p. 440.
First Volume Contains BOOK FIRST, OF CONSCIENCE IN GENERAL, viz. the Right,
Confident or Erroneous, Probable or Thinking, Doubtful and Scrupulous
Conscience. (Page 1.

SECOND BOOK, OF LAWS DIVINE, viz. the Laws of Nature, Moses and Christ, and
all Collateral Obligations. (page 220.

Second Volume Contains BOOK THIRD, OF HUMANE LAWS, Their Obligation and
Relaxation, and of the Collateral, Indirect and Accidental bands of
Conscience. (page 1.

BOOK FOURTH, OF THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF GOOD And EVIL, Their Limits and
Circumstances, Aggravations and Diminutions. (page 437.

NON MAGNA LOQVIMVR. SED VIVIMVS* NIHIL OPINIONIS GRATIA. OMNIA CONSCENTIAE
FACIAM



DVCTOR DVBITANTIVM, OR, The Rule of Conscience.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of Conscience, the kinds of it, and the general Rules of
conducting them.
CHAP. I. The Rule of Conscience in general.
RULE 1. Conscience is the mind of a Man governed by a Rule, and measured by
the proportions of good and evil, in order to practice; viz. to conduct all our
relations, and all our intercourse between God, our Neighbors, and our Selves:
that is, in all moral actions.
GOD governs the world by several attributes and emanations from himself.. 1.
The nature of things is supported by his power, the events of things are
ordered by his providence, and the actions of reasonable creatures are governed
by Laws, and these Laws are put into a man's soul or mind as into a Treasury or
Repository: some in his very nature, some by after actions, by education and
positive sanction, Lib. de interiori domo.
by learning and custom: so that it was well said of S. Bernard, Conscientia
candor est lucis aeternae, and speculum sine macula Dei Majestatis, and imago
bonitatis illius. Conscience is the brightness and splendour of the eternal
light, a spotless mirror of the Divine Majesty, and the image of the goodness
of God. It is higher which Tatianus said of Conscience, (...), Conscience is
God unto us; which saying he had from Menander, (...), and it had in it this
truth, That God who is every where in several manners, has the appellative of
his own attributes and effects in the several manners of his presence. Jupiter
est quodcunque vides, quocunque moveris.

That providence which governs all the world is nothing else but God present by
his providence: 2.
and God is in our hearts by his Laws: he rules in us by his Substitu^e our
conscience. God sits there and gives us laws; and as God said to Moses, Exodus
7. 1.
I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, that is, to give him Laws, and to minister
in the exec^tion of those Laws, and to inflict angry sentences upon him; so
has God done to us. He has given us Conscience to be in Gods stead to us, to
give us Laws, and to exact obedience to those Laws, to punish them that
prevaricate, and to reward the obedient. And therefore Conscience is called
(...), The Household Guardian, The Domestic God, The Spirit or Angel of the
place: and when we call god to witness, we only mean, that our conscience is
right, and that God and Gods Vicar, Lib. 6. de vero cultu. cap. 24.
our conscience knows it. So Lactantius: Meminerit Deum se habere testem, id
est, ut ego arbitror, mentem suam, qua nihil homini dedit Deus ipse divinius.
Let him remember that he has God for his witness, that is, as I suppose, his
mind; then which God has given to man nothing that is more divine. In sum,
It is the image of God; and as in the mysterious Trinity, we adore the will,
memory and understanding, and Theology contemplates three persons in the
analogies, proportions and correspondencies of them: so in this also we see
plainly that Conscience is that likeness of God in which he was pleased to make
man. For although conscience be primarly founded in the understanding, as it is
the Lawgiver, and Dictator; and the rule and dominion of conscience fundatur in
intellectu, is established in the understanding part; yet it is also Memory,
when it accuses or excuses, when it makes joyful and sorrowful; and there is in
it some mixture of will, as I shall discourse in the sequel; so that conscience
is a result of all, of Understanding, Will, and Memory.

But these high and great expressions are better in the Spirit then in the
letter; 3.
they have in them some^hing of institution, and some^hing of design, they tell
us that Conscience is a guard and a guide, a rule and a law set over us by God,
and they are spoken to m^ke us afraid to sin against our conscience, because by
so doing we sin against God; he having put a double bridle upon us, society and
solitude, that is, company, and our selves, or rather, God and Man; it being
now impossible for us to sin in any circumstances, but we shall have a
reprover: (...), as Hierocles said well; that neith^r company may g^ve
countenance or excuse to sin, or solitariness may give confidence or warranty;
for ^s we are ashamed to sin in company, so we ought to fear our conscience,
which is Gods Watchman and Intelligencer.

To which purpose it was soberly spoken of Tertullian, 4.
Conscientia optima testis Divinitatis; Lib. de testimon. animae.
our conscience is the best argument in the world to prove there is a God: For
conscience is Gods deputy; and the inferior must suppose a superior; and God
and our conscience are like relative terms, it not being imaginable why some
persons in some cases should be am^z'd and troubled in their minds for their
having done a secret turp^tude, o^ cruelty; but that conscience is present with
a message from God, and the men feel inward causes of fear, when they are
secure from without; that is, they are forced to fear God, when they are safe
from men. And it is impossible that any man should be an Atheist, if he have
any conscience: and for this reason it is, there have been so few Atheists in
the world, because it is so hard for men to lose their conscience wholly.

Quest.

SOme dispute whether it be possible or no for any man to be totally without
conscience. 5.
Tertullians sentence in this article is this, Potest obumbrari quia non est
Deus: extingui non potest quia a Deo est. It is not God, and therefore may be
clouded: but it is from God, and therefore cannot be destroyed. But I know a
man may wholly lose the use of his reason; some men are mad, and some are
natural fools, and some are sots, and stupid; such men as these lose their
conscience, as they lose their reason: and as some mad men may have a fancy
that there is no Sun; so some fools may say there is no God; and as they can
believe that, so they can lose their conscience, and believe this. But as he
that has reason or his eyes cannot deny but there is such a thing as the Sun,
so neither can he that has conscience deny there is a God. For as the Sun is
present by his light which we see daily, so is God by our conscience which we
feel continually: we feel one as certainly as the other.

But it is to be observed, 6.
that conscience is sometimes taken for the practical intellective faculty; so
we say the law of nature, and the fear of God is written in the conscience of
every man.

2. Sometimes it is taken for the habitual persuasion and belief of the
principles written there; so we say, He is a good man, and makes conscience of
his ways. And thus we also say, and it is true, that a wicked person is of a
profligate and lost conscience. He has no conscience in him. That is, he has
lost the habit, or that usual persuasion and recourse to conscience by which
good men govern their actions.

3. Or the word conscience is used effectively, for any single operation and
action of conscience: so we speak of particulars, I make a conscience of taking
up arms in this cause. Of the first and last acceptance of the word
Conscience, there is no doubt; for the last may, and the first can never be
lost: But for the second, it may be lost more or less, as any other habit can;
though this with more difficulty then any thing else, because it is founded so
immediately in nature, and is so exercised in all the actions and entercourses
of our life, and is so assisted by the grace of God, that it is next to
impossible to lose the habit entirely; and that faculty that shall to eternal
ages do the offices which are the last, and such as suppose some preceding
actions, I mean to torment and afflict them for not having obeyed the former
acts of dictate and command, cannot be supposed to die in the principle, when
it shall be eternal in the emanation; for the worm shall never die.

For, 7.
that men do things against their conscience, is no otherwise then as they do
things against their reason; but a man may as well cease to be a man, as to be
wholly without conscience. For the drunkard will be sober, and his conscience
will be awake next morning: This is a perpetual pulse, and though it may be
interrupted, yet if the man be alive, it will beat before he dies; and so long
as we believe a God, so long our conscience will at least teach us, if it does
not also smite us: But as God sometimes lets a man go on in sin and does not
punish him, so does conscience; but in this case, unless the man be smitten and
awakened before he dies, both God and the conscience reserve their wrath to be
inflicted in hell. It is one and the same thing; Gods wrath, and an evil guilty
conscience: For by the same hand by which God gives his law, by the same he
punishes them that transgress the law. God gave the old law by the ministry of
Angels, Psalm. 78. 49.
and when the people broke it, he sent evil angels among them; now God gives us
a law in our consciences, and there he has established the penalty; This is
the worm that never dies; let it be trod upon never so much here, it will turn
again. It cannot die here, and it shall be alive for ever.

But by explicating the parts of the Rule, we shall the best understand the
Nature, Use, and Offices of Conscience. Conscience is the mind of a Man --

When God sent the B. Jesus into the world to perfect all righteousness, 7.
and to teach the world all his Fathers will, Heb. 10. 16.
it was said, and done, I will give my laws in your hearts, Jer. 31. 33.
and in your minds will I write them; that is, you shall be governed by the
law of natural and essential equity and reason, by that law which is put into
every man's nature: and besides this, whatsoever else shall be superinduced
shall be written in your minds by the Spirit, who shall write all the laws of
Christianity in the Tables of your consciences. He shall make you to understand
them, to perceive their relish, to remember them because you love them, and
because you need them, and cannot be happy without them: he shall call them to
your mind, and inspire new arguments and inducements to their observation, and
make it all as natural to us, as what we were born with.

Our mind being thus furnished with a holy Rule, 8.
and conducted by a divine Guide, is called Conscience; and is the same thing
which in Scripture is sometimes called, The heart Eccles. 7. 22. 1 John 3. 21.
; there being in the Hebrew tongue, no proper word for Conscience, but in stead
of it they use the word (...) the heart; Oftententimes also thine own heart
knows, Apud Syros conscientia dicitur (...) a radice (...) formavit,
depinxit, descripsit; quia scil. conscientia notat and pingit actiones nostras
in tabula cordis.
that is, thy conscience knows, that thou they self have cursed others: so in
the New Testament, Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we peace
toward God; viz. If in our own consciences we are not condemned. Sometimes it
is called Spirit Prove. 18. 14.
, the third ingredient of the constitution of a Christian; the Spirit, distinct
from Soul and Body. For as our Body shall be spiritual in the resurrection,
therefore because all its offices shall entirely minister to the spirit, and
converse with spirits, so may that part of the soul which is wholly furnished,
taught and conducted by the spirit of grace, and whose work it is wholly to
serve the spirit, by a just proportion of reason be called the Spirit. Heb. 4.
12.
This is that which is affirmed by S. Paul, The word of God sharper then a two
edged sword, dividing the soul and the spirit; that is, the soul is the spirit
separated by the word of God, instructed by it, and by relation to it, is
called, the spirit. In epist. ad Romans cap. 2. lib. 2.
And this is the sense of Origin, Testimonio sane conscientiae uti Apostolus
dicit eos qui descriptam continent in cordibus legem, etc. The Apostle says,
that they use the testimony of conscience, who have the law written in their
hearts. Hence it is necessary to enquire what that is which the Apostle calls
conscience, whether it be any other substance then the heart or soul? For of
this it is otherwhere said, that it reprehends, but is not reprehended, and
that it judges a man, but it self is judged of no man: as John says, If our
conscience condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And again,
Paul himself says in another place, Our glorying is this, even the testimony
of our conscience; because therefore I see so great a liberty of it, that in
good things it is always glad and rejoices, but in evil things it is not
reproved, but reproves and corrects the soul it self to which it does adhere: I
do suppose that this is the very spirit which by the Apostle is said to be
with the soul, as a paedagogue and social Governor, that it may admonish the
soul of better things, and chastise her for her faults and reprove her: Because
no man knows the things of a man but the spirit of a man which is in him; and
that is the spirit of our conscience, concerning which, he says, That spirit
gives testimony to our spirit. So far Origin.

Thus, 9.
Conscience is the Mind, and God writing his laws in our minds is, informing
our conscience, and furnishing it with laws and rules, and measures, and it is
called by S. Paul, Romans 7. 23.
(...), the law of the mind; and though it is once made a distinct thing from
the mind (as in those words, Titus 3. 1^.
Their minds and consciences are defiled) yet it happens in this word as in
diverse others, that it is sometimes taken largely, sometimes specifically and
more determinately: The mind is all the whole understanding part, it is the
memory; so Peter called to mind the word that Jesus spoke, Marc. 14. 72.
that is, he remembered it. It is, the signification or meaning, the purpose or
resolution. No man knows the mind of the spirit, Philip. 2. 5.
but the spirit. 1 Co^. 2. 16.
It is the discursive or reasoning part; Luc. 1. 29.
Mary cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be. It is the
assenting and determining part; Romans 14. 5.
let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: and it is also taken for
Conscience, or that Treasure of rules which are in order to practice. And
therefore when S. Paul intended to express the anger of God punishing evil men
with evil consciences and false persuasions in order to criminal actions and
evil worshippings, he said, God gave them over (...), to a reprobate mind,
Romans 1. 28.
that is, to a conscience evil persuaded, furnished with false practical
principles; but the return to holiness, and the improvement of a holy
conscience is called, Ephesians 4. 23.
a being renewed in the spirit of our mind, Romans 12. 2.
(...), the renovation of the mind.

Now there are two ways by which God reigns in the mind of a man, 10.
1. Faith, and 2. Conscience. Faith contains all the treasures of Divine
knowledge and speculation. Conscience is the treasury of divine Commandments
and rules in practical things. Faith tells us why; Conscience tells us what we
are to do. Faith is the measure of our persuasions; Conscience is the measure
of our actions. And as Faith is a gift of God, so is Conscience; that is, as
the understanding of a man is taught by the Spirit of God in Scripture, what to
believe, how to distinguish truth from errors; so is the Conscience instructed
to distinguish good and evil, how to please God, how to do justice and charity
to our neighbor, and how to treat our selves; so that when the revelations of
Christ and the Commandments of God are fully recorded in our minds, then we
are perfectly instructed to every good work.

Governed by a Rule --

S. Bernard comparing the Conscience to a house, 11.
says it stands upon seven pillars. De interiori domo cap. ^.
1. Good will. 2. Memory of Gods benefits. 3. A clean heart. 4. A free spirit.
5. A right soul. 6. A devout mind. 7. An enlightened reason. These indeed are
some of them the fruits and effects, some of them are the annexes and
appendages of a good conscience, but not the foundations or pillars upon which
Conscience is built. For as for the first

Good will.

Conscience relies not at all upon the will directly. 12.
For though a Conscience is good, or bad, pure or impure; and so the Doctors of
Mystic Theology divide and handle it, yet a conscience is not made so by the
will, formally, but by the understanding. For that is a good conscience, which
is rightly taught in the word of life; that is impure and defiled, which has
entertained evil and ungodly principles; such is theirs, who follow false
lights, evil teachers, men of corrupt minds. For the conscience is a Judge and
a Guide, a Monitor and a Witness, which are offices of the knowing, not of the
choosing faculty. Spiritum correctorem, and paedagogum animae, so Origin Ubi
supsa.
calls it. The instructor of the soul, the spirit, In Psalm. 48.
the corrector. Natural judicatorium, or naturalis vis judicandi, so S. Basil.
The natural power of judging, or natures judgment seat. Lucem intellectus
nostri, so Damascen calls it, The light of our understanding. The conscience
does accuse or excuse a man before God, which the will cannot. If it could, we
should all stand upright at doomesday, or at least those would be acquitted,
who fain would do well, but miss, who do the things they love not, and love
those they do not; that is, they who strive to enter in, but shall not be
able. But to accuse or excuse is the office of a faculty which can neither will
nor choose, that is, of the conscience; which is properly a record, a book, and
a judgment seat.

But I said, 13.
Conscience relies not upon the will [directly] yet it cannot be denied, but
the will has force upon the conscience collaterally and indirectly. For the
evil will perverts the understanding, and makes it believe false principles;
deceiving and being deceived is the lot of false Prophets; and they that are
given over to believe a lie, will live in a lie, and do actions relative to
that false doctrine which evil manners first persuaded and introduced. For
although it cannot be that Heretics should sin in the article against the
actual light of their consciences, because he that wittingly and willingly sins
against a known truth is not properly a Heretic but a Blasphemer, and sins
against the Holy Ghost; and he that sees a Heretic run to the stake or to the
gallows, or the Donatist kill himself, or the Circumcellian break his own neck
with as much confidence to bear witness to his heresy, as any of the blessed
Martyrs to give testimony to Christianity it self, cannot but think he heartily
believes, what so willingly he dies for; yet either heretics do sin
voluntarily, and so^ distinguish from simple errors, or else they are the same
thing, and either every simple error is damnable, or no heresy. It must
therefore be observed, that

The will of man is cause of its actions either mediately or immediately. 14.
Some are the next products of our will; such are Pride, Ambition, Prejudice,
and these blind the understanding, and make an evil and a corrupted
conscience, making it an incompetent judge of truth and error, good and evil.
So that the corruption of conscience in a heretic is voluntary in the
principle, but miserable and involuntary in the product; it may proceed from
the will efficiently, but it is formally a depravation of the understanding.

And therefore our wills also must be humble and apt, 15.
and desirous to learn, and willing to obey. Obedite and intelligetis, by
humility and obedience we shall be best instructed. Not that by this means the
conscience shall receive direct aids, but because by this means it will be left
in its own aptnesses and dispositions, and when it is not hindered, the word of
God will enter and dwell upon the conscience. And in this sense it is that some
say that [Conscience is the inclination and propension of the will
corresponding to practical knowledge] Will and Conscience are like the cognati
sensus, the Touch and the Taste; or the Teeth and the Ears, affected and
assisted by some common objects, whose effect is united in matter and some
real events, and distinguished by their formalities, or metaphysical beings.

2. Memory of Gods benefits,

Is indeed a good engagement to make us dutiful, 16.
and so may incline the will; but it has no other force upon the conscience
but that it re-minds us of a special obligation to thankfulness, which is a new
and proper tie of duty; but it works only by a principle that is already in
the conscience, viz. that we are specially obliged to our gracious lords; and
the obedience that is due to God as our lord doubles upon us by love and zeal
when we remember him to be our bountiful Patron, and our gracious Father.

3. A clean heart,

May be an effect and emanation from a holy Conscience; 17.
but conscience in it self may be either good or bad, or it may be good when
the heart is not clean, as it is in all the worst men who actually sin against
conscience, doing that which conscience forbids them. In these men the
principles are holy, the instruction perfect, the law remaining, the
persuasions uncancell'd; but against all this torrent, there is a whirlwinde of
passions and filthy resolutions, and wilfulness, which corrupt the heart, while
as yet the head is uncorrupted in the direct rules of conscience. But yet
sometimes a clean conscience and a clean heart are the same; and a good
conscience is taken for holiness, so S. Paul uses the word, 1 Timothy 1. v. 1^.
holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away have made
shipwreck, (...), so Clemens Alexandrinus explicates the place; they have by
infidelity polluted their divine and holy conscience: but S. Paul seems to
argue otherwise, and that they laying aside a good conscience fell into
infidelity; their hearts and conscience were first corrupted, and then they
turned heretics. But this sense of a good conscience is that which in Mystic
Divinity is more properly handled, in which sense also it is sometimes used in
the law. Idem est conscientia quod vir bonus intrinsece, said Ungarellus Verb.
Cons^ientia.
out of Baldus In c^cum cau sa de Testi.
; and from thence Aretine In. s^d iste. Instu. de Act. Gl. in c. Statut..
assess. detent.
gathered this conclusion, that if any thing be committed to the conscience of
any one, they must stand to his determination and ab ea appellari non potest;
there lies no appeal, quia vir bonus pro quo sumitur conscientia non potest
mentiri and falsum dicere vel judicare. A good man, for whom the word
conscience is used, cannot lie, or give a false judgment or testimony: of this
sort of conscience it is said by Ben Sirach, Ecclus. 13. 30, alia^ 24.
Bonam substantiam habet cui non est peccatum in conscientia. It is a man's
wealth to have no sin in our conscience. But in our present and future
discourses, the word conscience is understood in the Philosophical sense, not
in the Mystical, that is, not for the conscience as it is invested with the
accidents of good or bad, but as it abstracts from both, but is capable of
either.

4. A free spirit,

Is the blessing and effect of an obedient will to a well instructed
conscience, 18.
and more properly and peculiarly to the grace of chastity, to honesty and
simplicity; a slavish, t^morous, a childish and a trifling spirit being the
punishment inflicted upon David before he repented of his fact with Bathsheba.
But there is also a freedom which is properly the privilege, or the affection
of conscience, and is of great usefulness to all its nobler operations; and
that is, a being clear from prejudice and prepossession, a pursuing of truths
with holy purposes, an inquiring after them with a single eye, not infected
with any sickness or unreasonableness. This is the same thing with that which
he distinctly calls [A right soul] To this is appendant also, that the
conscience cannot be constrained, it is of it self a free spirit, and is
subject to no commands, but those of reason and religion. God only is the Lord
of our conscience, and the conscience is not to subject it self any more to the
Empire of sin, to the law of Moses, to a servile spirit, but to the laws of God
alone, and the obedience of Jesus, willingly, cheerfully, and in all instances,
whether the Commandment be conveyed by the holy Jesus, or by his Vicegerents.
But of this I shall afterward give particular accounts.

5. A devout mind,

May procure more light to the conscience, 19.
and assistances from the spirit of wisdom in cases of difficulty, and is a
good remedy against a doubting and a scrupulous conscience; but this is but
indirect, and by the intermission of other more immediate and proper
entercourses.

6. 20.
But the last is perfectly the foundation of conscience.

An enlightened Reason.

To which if we add what S. Bernard before calls a right soul, that is, an
honest heart, full of simplicity and hearty attention, and ready assent, we
have all that by which the conscience is informed and reformed, instructed and
preserved in its just measures, strengths, and relations. For the Rule of
Conscience is all that notice of things and rules by which God would have good
and evil to be measured, that is, the will of God communicated to us by any
means, by reason, and by enlightening, that is, natural and instructed. So that
conscience is (...), and (...), it is principled by creation, and it is
instructed or illuminated in the regeneration. For God being the fountain of
all good, and good being nothing but a conformity to him, or to his will, what
measures he makes, are to limit us. No man can make measures of good and evil,
any more then he can make the good it self. Men sometimes give the instance in
which the good is measured; but the measure it self is the will of God. For
therefore it is good to obey humane laws, because it is Gods will we should;
and although the man makes the law to which we are to give obedience, yet that
is not the rule. The rule is the Commandment of God, for by it obedience is
made a duty.

Measured by the proportions of good and evil --

That is, 21.
of that which God has declared to be good or evil respectively, the
conscience is to be informed. God has taken care that his laws shall be
published to all his subjects, he has written them where they must needs read
them, not in tables of stone or phylacteries on the forehead, but in a secret
Table: The conscience or mind of a man is the (...), the preserver of the
Court Rols of heaven. But I added this clause, to the former of [a Rule]
because the express line of Gods rule is not the adequate measure of
conscience: but there are analogies and proportions, and commensurations of
things with things, which make the measure full and equal. For he does not
always keep a good conscienee who keeps only the words of a Divine law, but
the proportions also and the reasons of it, the similitudes and
correspondencies in like instances, are the measures of conscience.

The whole measure and rule of conscience, 22.
The law of God, or Gods will, signified to us by nature, or revelation, and by
the several manners and times and parts of its communication it has obtained
several names. The law of Nature. *The consent of Nations. *Right Reason. *The
Decalogue. *The Sermon of Christ. *The Canons of the Apostles. *The laws
Ecclesiastical and Civil of Princes and Governors. *Fame, or the public
reputation of things, expressed by Proverbs and other instances and measures of
public honesty. This is (...), so Euripides calls it, all the rule that teaches
us good or evil. These being the full measures of right and wrong, of lawful
and unlawful, will be the Rule of Conscience, and the subject of the present
Books.

In order to practice --

In this, 23.
conscience differs from knowledge, which is in order to speculation, and
ineffective notices. And it differs from faith, because although faith is also
in order to practice, yet not directly and immediately: it is a collection of
propositions, the belief of which makes it necessary to live well, and
reasonable and chosen. But before the propositions of faith pass into action,
they must be transmitted through another principle, and that is conscience.
That Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and our Lord, and our Master, is a
proposition of faith, and from thence if we pass on to practice, we first take
in another proposition; If he be our lord, where is his fear? and this is a
sentence, or virtual proposition of conscience. And from hence we may
understand the full meaning of the word [Conscience.] (...), and Conscientia,
and so our English word Conscience have in them Science or Knowledge: the seat
of it is the Understanding, the act of it is Knowing, but there must be a
knowing of more together.

Hugo de S. Victore says, that Conscientia est cordis scientia, Conscience is
the knowledge of the heart. It is so, but certainly this was not the (...) and
original of the word. But there is truth in the following period. Cor noscit se
and alia. Quando autem se noscit appellatur conscientia, quando praeter se,
alia noscit, appellatur scientia. Knowledge has for its object any thing
without; but when the heart knows it self, then it is conscience. So it is used
in Authors sacred and profane. Nihil mihi conscius sum, says S. Paul; I know
nothing by my self; ut alios lateas, tute tibi conscius eris: and -- hic murus
aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi --
so Cicero to Marcus Rutilius uses it; Cum and mihi conscius essem quanti te
facerem; When I my self was conscious to my self how much I did value thee. But
this acception of the word conscience is true, but not full and adequate; for
it only signifies conscience as it is a Witness, not as a Guide. Therefore it
is more reasonable which Aquinas and the Schoolmen generally use: that
conscience is a conjunction of the universal practical law with the particular
moral action: and so it is scientia cum rebus facti, and then it takes in that
which is called (...), or the general repository of moral principles or
measures of good, and the particular cases as reduced to practice. Such as was
the case of S. Peter when he denied his Lord: He knew that he ought not to have
done it, and his conscience being sufficiently taught his duty to his Lord, he
also knew that he had done it, and then there followed a remorse, a biting, or
gnawing of his spirit, grief, and shame, and a consequent weeping: when all
these acts meet together, it is the full process of conscience.

1. The (...) or the first act of conscience, S. Hierome calls Scintillam
conscientiae, the spark or fire put into the heart of man.

2. The (...), which is specifically called conscience of the deed done, is the
bringing fuel to this fire.

3. And when they are thus laid together, they will either shine or burn,
acquit or condemn. But this complication of acts is conscience. The first is
Science, practical science; but annex the second: or it and the third, and then
it is conscience. When David's heart smote him, that is, upon his adultery and
murder, his conscience thus discoursed. Adultery and Murder are high violations
of the Divine Law, they provoke God to anger, without whom I cannot live, whose
anger is worse then death. This is practical knowledge, or the principles of
conscience; but the following acts made it up into conscience. For he remembered
that he had betrayed Uriah and humbled Bathsheba, and then he begs of God for
pardon; standing condemned in his own breast, he hopes to be forgiven by Gods
sentence. But the whole process of conscience is in two practical Syllogisms,
in which the method is ever this. The (...) or Repository of practical
principles begins, and where that leaves, the conscience or the witness and
Judge of moral actions begins, like Jacob laying hold upon his elder brothers
heel. The first is this: Whatsoever is injurious ought not to be done,
But to commit adultery is injurious,
Therefore it ought not to be done:
This is the Rule of conscience, or the first act of conscience as it is a Rule
and a Guide, and is taken for the (...), or practical repository. But when an
action is done or about to be done, conscience takes the conclusion of the
former Syllogism, and applies it to her particular case. Adultery ought not to
be done,
This action I go about, or which I have done, is adultery,
Therefore it ought not to be done, or to have been done.
This is the full proceeding of this Court; after which many consequent
solemnities and actions do pass, of sentence, and preparatory torments and
execution.

But this I am to admonish, 25.
that although this which I have thus defined, is the proper and full sense of
the word Conscience according to art and proper acceptance, Acts 23. 1. and
24. 16.
yet in Scripture it is used indifferently for an act of conscience, Romans 13. 5.
or any of its parts, 1 Cor. 8. 10. and 19. 12.
and does not always signify in its latitude and integrity, 1 Timothy 1. 5. 19.
and 3. 9.
but yet it all tends to the same signification; 2 Timothy 1. 3.
and though the name be given to the faculty, Titus 1. 15.
to the habit, 1 Pet. 2. 19. 3. 16.
to the act, Heb. 13. 18.
to the object, to the effect, to every emanation from the mind in things
practical, yet still it supposes the same thing: viz. that conscience is the
guide of all our moral actions; and by giving the name to so many acts and
parts and effluxes from it, it warrants the definition of it when it is united
in its own proper and integral constitution.

To conduct all our relations and entercourses between God, our Neighbors and
our Selves; that is, in all moral actions.

This is the final cause of conscience: 26.
and by this it is distinguished from prudence, which is also a practical
knowledge and reduced to particular and circumstantiate actions. But 1.
Prudence consists in the things of the world, or relative to the world;
Conscience in the things of God, or relating to him. 2. Prudence is about
affairs as they are of advantage or disadvantage: conscience is employed about
them as they are honest or dishonest. 3. Prudence regards the circumstances of
actions whether moral or civil: conscience only regards moral actions in their
substance or essential proprieties. 4. Prudence intends to do actions
dexterously and prosperously: conscience is to conduct them justly and
according to the Commandment. 5. There are many actions in which prudence is
all at all concerned as being wholly indifferent to this or that for matter of
advantage; but there is no action but must pass under the file and censure of
Conscience; for if we can suppose any action in all its circumstances to be
wholly indifferent to good or bad; yet none is so to lawful or unlawful, the
very indifferent, being therefore lawful because it is indifferent, and
therefore to be considered by conscience, either actually or habitually: For in
this sense even our natural actions in their time and place, are also moral,
and where they are not primarily moral, yet they come under conscience, as
being permitted, and innocent; but where ever they are relative to another
person, they put on some more degrees of morality, and are of proper cognizance
in this Court. Qui didicit patriae quid debeat, and quid amicis:
Quo sit amore parens, Horat. de art^ Poet.
quo Frater amandus, and Hospes:
Quid sit Conscripti, quid Judicis officium: quae
Parts in bellum missi Ducis: ille profecto
Reddere personae scit convenientiae cuique.
That is the full effect of conscience, to conduct all our relations, all our
moral actions.

RULE 2. The duty and offices of Conscience are to dictate, and to testify or
bear witness; to accuse or excuse; to loose or bind.
THE first and last are the direct acts and offices of Conscience: the other
are reflex or consequent actions, but direct offices. The first act which is,

To dictate

Is of that which Divines call the (...), or the phylactery, the keeper of the
records of the laws, and by it we are taught our duty: God having written it in
our hearts by Nature and by the Spirit, leaves it there, ever placed before the
eye of conscience as S. Bernara calls it) to be read and used for directions in
all cases of dispute, Romans 2. 15.
or question or action: this is that which S. Paul calls the work of the law
written in our hearts, and therefore it is, that to sin against our conscience
is so totally inexcusable, and according to the degree of that violence which
is done against the conscience, puts on degrees. For conscience dictates
whatsoever it is persuaded of, and will not suffer a man to do otherwise then
it suggests and tells us: (...) Iliad. (...)

(...)
said Achilles of Hector when he was violently angry with him; I would my
conscience would give me leave to eat thy very flesh.

Its universal dictates are ever the most certain, and those are the first
principles of justice and religion; and whatsoever else can be infallibly and
immediately inferred from thence, are her dictates also, but not primely and
directly, but transmitted by the hands of reason. The same reason also there is
in clear revelation. For whatsoever is put into the conscience immediately by
God, is placed there to the same purpose, and with the same efficiency and
persuasion as is all that which is natural. And the conscience properly
dictates nothing else, but prime natural reason, and immediate revelation;
whatsoever ^^es after these two, is reached forth to us by two hands, one
whereof alone is ministered by conscience. The reason is this: Because all that
law by which God governs is written in our hearts, put there by God
immediately, that is antecedently to all our actions, because it is that by
which all our actions are to be guided, even our discoursings and arguings are
to be guided by conscience, if the argument be moral: now the ways by which God
speaks to us immediately, are only Nature and the Spirit: Nature is that
principle which taught all men from the beginning until now; all that prime
practical reason which is perfective of humane nature, and in which all
mankind agrees. Either the perfections, or the renovations, or the
superadditions to this are taught us by the Holy Spirit, and all this being
written in the conscience by the finger of God is brought forth upon all
occasions of action; and whatsoever is done against any thing so placed, is
directly and violently against the conscience; but when from thence reason
spins a longer thread, and draws it out from the clue of natural principles or
express revelation, that also returns upon the conscience and is placed there
as light upon a wall, but not as the stones that are there: but yet whatever is
done against that light is also against conscience but not so as the other.
Just as it is in nature and accident. To eat poison, and filthiness is against
every man's health and stomach; but if by an (...) a propriety of temper or an
evil habit, or accidental inordination, wine, or fish makes a man sick, then
these are against his nature too, but not so as poison is, or stones. Whatever
comes into the conscience primarily, or consequently* right or wrong, is
brought forth upon occasion of action, and is part of her dictate: but as a man
speaks some things of his own knowledge, some things by hearsay; so does
conscience, somethings she tells from God and her self, some things from reason
and her self, or other accidental notices: Those and these do integrate and
complete her sermons, but they have several influence and obligation according
to their proper efficiency. But of this I shall give f^ll accounts in the
second Book.

To testify.

Conscience bears witness of our actions; 3.
so S. Paul, their conscience bearing witness: and in this sense, Romans (...)
conscience is a practical memory. For as the practical knowledge, or notices
subjected in the understanding make the understanding to be conscience; so the
actions of our life recorded in the memory and brought forth to practical
judgments, change the memory also into conscience. (...). Man differing from
brute beasts by the use of reason, it is not likely he should be a stranger to
his own actions as the beasts are, but that the evil which is done should be
recalled to their mind with the signification of some displeasure. (...). 6.
So Polybius discourses of the reason and the manner of conscience.

Every knowing faculty is the seat of conscience. 4.
and the same faculty when it is furnished with speculative notions retains its
natural and proper name of Understanding, or Memory; but as the same is
instructed with notices in order to judgments practical, so it takes the
Christian name of Conscience, The Voltitive or choosing faculty cannot, but the
intellectual may. And this is that Book which at Doomsday shall be brought
forth and laid open to all the world. The Memory changed into Conscience
preserves the notices of some things, and shall be reminded of others, and
shall do that work entirely and perfectly, which now it does imperfectly and
by parts, according to the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 13 12.
Then shall we know as we are known, that is, as God knows us now, so then
shall we see and know our selves. Cicero 2. Tuscul.
Nullum theatrum virtuti conscientia majus, shall then be highly verified. Our
conscience will be the great Scene or Theater upon which shall be represented
all our actions good and bad. It is Gods Book, De Inter. dom. lib. 2. cap. ult.
the Book of life or death. According to the words of S. Bernard, Ex his quae
scripta erunt in libris nostris judicabimur: and ideo scribi debent secundum
exemplar libri vitae, and si sic scripti non sunt, saltem corrigendi sunt. We
shall be judged by that which is written in our own books (the books of
conscience) and therefore they ought to be written according to the copy of the
book of life; and if they be not so written, yet they ought to be so corrected.

Consequently to these the conscience does 5.


Accuse or Excuse.

So S. Paul joins them as consequent to the former; Romans 2. 1^.
Their conscience bearing witness, and their thoughts in the mean time accusing
or excusing one another. Si optimorum consiliorum atque factorum testis in omni
vita nobis conscientia fuerit, Cicero pro Cluentio.
sine ullo metu summa cum honestate vivemus. If our conscience be the witness
that in our life we do good deeds, and follow sober counsels, we shall live in
great honesty and without fear. (...), said Hierocles, God has constituted a
most righteous and domestic Judge, the Conscience and right Reason; (...),
Every man ought most of all to fear himself, because it is impossible but we
should know what we have done amiss, and it concerns us also to make righteous
judgment, for we cannot escape our selves. (...), said Isocrates. Etsi a
caeteris silentium est, tamen ipse sibimet censcius est posse se merito
increpari, so Apuleius renders it. Though others hold their peace, yet there is
one within that will not. Nec facile est placidam ac pacatam degere vitam,
Qui violat factis communia foedera pacis: Lucretius*

Etsi fallit enim Divum genus, Humanumque;
Perpetuo tamen id fore clam diffidere debet.
It is hard to be concealed from God and man too, and although we think our
selves safe for a while, yet we have something within that tells us (...), he
that does any thing is espied, and cannot do it privately. Quicum in tenebris?
was the old Proverb; Who was with you in the dark? And therefore it was that
Epicurus affirmed it to be impossible for a man to be concealed always. Upon
the mistake of which he was accused by Plutarch and others, to have supposed it
lawful to do any injustice secretly; whereas his design was to obstruct that
gate of iniquity, and to make men believe that even that sin which was
committed most secretly, would some time or other be discovered and brought to
punishment; all which is to be done by the ex raregular events of providence,
and the certain accusations and discoveries of Conscience.

For Conscience is the Looking-glass of the soul, 6.
so it was called by Pe^ipha^^s in Plautus; In Epic^^^
Non oris causa modo homines aequum fuit
Sibi habere speculum, ubi os contemplarent suum;
Sed qui perspicere possent cor sapientiae:
Igitur perspicere possent ut cordis copiam
Ubi id inspexissent, cogitarent postea
Vitam ut vixissent olim in adolescentia.
And a man looking into his Conscience, instructed with the word of God, its
proper rule, James 1. 21, 23, 24.
is by S. James compared to a man beholding his natural face in a glass; and
that the Apostle describes Conscience in that similitude, is to be gathered
from the word (...), verbum insitum, the ingraffed word, the word of God
written in our hearts, which who so looks on, and compares his actions with his
rule, may see what he is: but he that neglects this word and follows not this
rule, did indeed see his face, but has forgotten what manner of man he was,
that is, what he was framed in the works of the new Creation, when he was newly
formed and created unto righteousness and true holiness.

This accusation and watchfulness, 7.
and vocal, clamorous guards of Conscience are in perpetual attendance, and
though they may sleep, yet they are quickly awakened, and make the evil man
restless. (...), said Epicurus, which is very well rendered by Seneca, Ideo non
prodest latentibus, quod latendi etiamsi felicitatem habeant, fiduciam non
habent. They that live unjustly, always live miserably and fearfully; because
although their crime be secret, yet they cannot be confident that it shall be
so: meaning, that because their conscience does accuse them, they perceive they
are discovered, and previous to an eye, which what effect it will have in the
publication of the crime here and hereafter, is not matter of knowledge, but
cannot choose but be matter of fear for ever. -- Juven. Sat. 10.
fiet adulter
Publicus, and poenas metuet quascunque mariti
Irati debent, nec erit felicior astro
Martis, ut in laqueos nunquam incidat --
If any chance makes the fact private, yet no providence or watchfulness can
give security, because within there dwells a principle of fear that can never
die, till repentance kills it. And therefore Chilon in Laertius said upon this
account, that loss is rather to be chosen then filthy gain; because that loss
brings sorrow but once, but injustice brings a perpetual fear and pain. Anne
magis Siculi gemuerunt era juvenci, (...). Sat. 3.

Et magis auratis pendens laquearibus ensis
Purpureas subter cervices terruit? Imus,
Imus praecipites, quam si sibi dicat, and intus
Palleat infelix quod proxima nesciat Uxor.
The wife that lies by his side knows not at what the guilty man looks pale,
but something that is within the bosom knows; and no pompousness of condition
can secure the man, and no witty cruelty can equal the torment. For that also,
although it be not directly the office of conscience, yet it is the act and
effect of conscience; when it self is injured, it will never let any thing else
be quiet.

To loose or bind,

Is the reflex act of conscience. 8.
Upon viewing the records, or the (...), the Legislative part of conscience, it
binds to duty; upon viewing the act, it binds to punishment, or consigns to
comfort; and in both regards it is called by Origin, affectuum corrector, atque
animae paedagogus, the corrector of the affections, and the teacher of the
soul. Which kind of similitude Epictetus in Stobaeus followed also, Parents
pueros nos paedagogo tradiderunt, qui ubique observaret ne laederemur, Deus
autem clam viros insitae conscientiae custodiendos tradidit; quae quidem
custodia nequaquam contemnenda est. As our parents have delivered us to a
guardian who did watch lest we did or suffered mischief; so has God committed
us to the custody of our conscience that is planted within us; and this custody
is at no hand to be neglected.

The binding to duty is so an effect of conscience, 9.
that is cannot be separated from it; but the binding to punishment is an act
of conscience also as it is a Judge, and is intended to affright a sinner, and
to punishment: but it is such a punishment as is the beginning of hell
torments, and unless the wound be cured will never end till eternity it self
shall go into a grave: Illo nocens se damnat quo peccat die, Apud Publianum.
the same day that a man sins, on the same day he is condemned; and when
Menelaus in the Tragedy did ask, (...); what disease killed poor O^estes? he
was answered, (...), His disease was nothing but an evil conscience; he had
done vile things, and had an amazed spirit that distracted him, and so he died.
Curas ultrices Virgil calls the wounds of an evil conscience, Plautus.
Revenging cares. Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius, said he in
the Comedy; nothing is more miserable then an evil conscience, and the being
pained with it, is called (...), to be choked or strangled with an evil
conscience; by S* Chrysostom (who in his 22. Homily upon the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, speaks much and excellently to the same purpose;) and there
are some that fancy that this was the cause of Judas death; The horrors of his
conscience were such that his spirits were confounded, and restless, and
uneasy; and striving to go from their prison stopped at the gates of emanation,
and stifled him. It did that, or as bad; it either choked him, or brought him
to a haltar, as it has done many besides him. And although I may truly say as
he did, Non mihi si linguae centum --
Omnia poenarum percurrere nomina possem,
no tongue is able to express the evils which are felt by a troubled
conscience, or a wounded spirit, yet the heads of them are visible and
notorious to all men.

1. 10.
The first is that which Nazianzen calls (...), accusations and vexings of a man
when he is in misery; then when he needs most comfort, he shall by his evil
conscience be most disquieted. A sickness awakes a dull sleeping conscience,
and when it is awakened it will make that the man shall not sleep. 1 Macc* 6.
1^.
So Antiochus when his Lieutenant Lysias was beaten by the Jews, he fell sick
with grief, and then his conscience upbraided him; but now (said he) I remember
the evils that I did at Jerusalem; quia invenerunt me mala ista, so the Latin
Bible reads it; because these evils now have found me out. For when a man is
prosperous, it is easy for him to stop the mouth of conscience, to bribe or to
abuse it, to fill it with noise, and to divert it with business, to outvie it
with temporal gayeties, or to be flattered into weak opinions and sentences;
but when a man is smitten of God, and divested of all the outsides and
hypocrisies of sin, and that conscience is disintangled from its fetters and
foolish pretensions, then it speaks its own sense, it ever speaks loudest when
the man is poor, or sick, or miserable. This was well explicated by S. Ambrose,
Dum sumus in quadam delinquendi libidine, nebulis quibusdam conscientiae men's
obducitur, ne videat eorum quae concupiscit deformitatem. Sed cum omnis nebula
transierit, gravia tormenta exercentur in quodam male conscii secretario. A man
is sometimes so surprised with the false fires and glarings of temptation, that
he cannot see the secret turpitude and deformity. But when the cloud and vail
is off, then comes the tormentor from within: -- acuuntque metum mortalibus
agris, Aeneid. 12.

Si quando lethum horrificum, morbosque Deum Rex
Molitur, meritas aut bello territat urbes.
Then the calamity swells, and conscience increases the trouble, when God sends
war, or sickness, or death. It was Saul's case, when he lost that fatal battle
in which the Ark was taken, he called to the Amalekite, Sta super me and
interfice me, fall upon me and slay me; quoniam tenent me angustiae, I am in a
great strait. He was indeed; for his son was slain, and his army routed, and
his enemies were round about: But then conscience stepped in and told him of the
evil that he had done in causing fourscore of the Lords Priests to be slain;
and therefore Abulensis reads the words thus, Fall upon me and slay me, quoniam
tenent me or ae vestimenti Sacerdotalis, I am entangled in the fringes of the
Priests garments. Videbatur sibi Saul quod propinquus morti videret Sacerdotes
Dei accusantes eum in judicio coram Deo. He thought he saw the Priests of the
Lord accusing him before God. And this has been an old opinion of the world,
that in the days of their calamity wicked persons are accused by those whom
they have injured. Not much unlike to which is that of Plato, describing the
torments of wicked souls, (...), They roar and cry out. Some calling on them
whom they killed, some on those they have calumniated; and calling they pray
them whom they have injured to give them pardon. Then every bush is a wild
beast, and every shadow is a ghost, and every gloworm is a dead man's candle,
and every lantern is a spirit. -- pallidumque visa
Matris lampade respicit Neronem.
When Nero was distressed, he saw his mothers tapor and grew pale with it.

2. The second effect is shame, 11.
which conscience never fails to inflict secretly, there being a secret
turpitude and baseness in sin, which cannot be better expressed then by its
opposition and contradiction to conscience. Conscience when it is right makes a
man bold; qui ambulat simpliciter, ambulat confidenter, he that walks honestly,
walks confidently, because he has innocence and he has reason on his side.
But he that sins, sins against reason, in which the honor and the nobleness of
a man does consist; and therefore shame must needs come in the destitution of
them. For as by reason men naturally rule, so when they are fallen from it,
unless by some accidental courages they be supported, they fall into the stare
of slaves and sneaking people. And upon this account it was that Plato said, Si
scirem Deos mihi condonaturos, and homines ignoraturos, adhuc peccare
erubescerem propter solam peccati turpitudinem. If I were sure God would pardon
me, and men would not know my sin, yet I should be ashamed to sin, because of
its essential baseness: The Mistresses of our vile affections are so ugly, we
cannot endure to kiss them but through a vail; either the vail of excuse, or
pretense, or darkness; something to hide their ugliness; and yet even these
also are so thin that the filthiness and shame is not hid. Bona conscientia
turbam advocat, mala autem in solitudine anxia atque sollicita est, said
Seneca. An evil conscience is ashamed of light, and afraid of darkness; and
therefore nothing can secure it. But being ashamed before Judges, and
assemblies, it flies from them into solitudes, and when it is there, the shame
is changed into fear, and therefore from thence it runs abroad into societies
of merry criminals, and drinking sanctuaries, which is nothing but a shutting
the eyes, and hiding the head, while the body is exposed to a more certain
danger. It cannot be avoided, it was and is and will eternal^y be true,
Perjurii poena Divina exitium, Cicero de ^egib. l. 2.
humana dedecus esto. Which S Paul perfectly renders, The things whereof ye are
now ashamed; Rom ^ ^^.
the end of these things is death. Death is the punishment which God inflicts,
and shame is that which comes from man.

3. There is another effect which cannot be well told by him that feels it, 12.
or by him that sees it, what it is; because it is a thing without limit and
without order. It is a distraction of mind, indeterminate, divided thoughts,
flying every thing, and pursuing nothing. It was the case of Nebuchadnezzar,
(...), his thoughts troubled him. A. Gell. l. 5. c. 1.
Varios vultus, disparilesque sensus; like the Sophisters who in their pursuit
of vainglory displeased the people, and were hissed from their Pulpits; nothing
could amaze them more; they were troubled like men of a disturbed conscience.
The reason, is, they are fallen into an evil condition which they did not
expect; they are abused in their hopes, they are fallen into a sad state of
things, but they know not yet what it is, nor where they are, nor whither it
will bear them, nor how to get out of it. This indeed is commonly the first
part of the great evil; shame goes along with the sin, in the very acting it,
but as soon as it is acted, then begins this confusion, -- nefas tandem
incipiunt sentire peractis
Criminibus --
they thought of nothing but pleasure before, but as soon as they have
finished, then they begin to taste the wormwood and the colliquintida; perfecto
demum scelere, magnitudo ejus intellecta est, Lib. 14. Annal.
said Tacitus. While they were doing it, they thought it little, or they
thought it none, because their fancy and their passion ruled; but when that is
satisfied and burst with a filthy plethory, then they understand how great
their sin is, but are distracted in their thoughts, for they understand not how
great their calamity shall be. Occultum quatiente animum tortore flagellum, the
secret tormentor shakes the mind, and dissolves it into indiscrimination and
confusion. The man is like one taken in a lie, or surprised in a shameful act
of lust, or theft; at first he knows not what to say, or think, or do, and his
spirits huddle together, and fain would go some where, but they know not
whither, and do something, but they know not what.

This confusion and first amazement of the conscience in some vile natures, 13.
and baser persons proceeds to impudence, and hardness of face. -- frontemque a
crimine sumunt. when they are discovered they rub their foreheads hard, and
consider it cannot be worse, and therefore in their way they make the best of
it; that is, they will not submit to the judgment of conscience, nor suffer
her infliction, but take the fortune of the Banditi, or of an outlaw, rather
then by the rule of subjects suffer the penalty of the Law, and the severity of
the Judge. But Conscience has no hand in this, and whatsoever of this nature
happens, it is in despite of conscience; and if it proceeds upon that method,
it goes on to obstinacy, hardness of heart, a resolution never to repent, a
hatred of God, and reprobation. For if conscience be permitted to do its work,
this confusion when it comes to be stated, and that the man has time to
consider, it passes on to fear; and that is properly the next effect.

4. An evil or a guilty conscience is disposed for fear, 14.
shame and fear cannot be far asunder: (...). Epicharm.
Sin makes us ashamed before men, and afraid of God: an evil conscience makes
man a coward, timorous as a child in a Churchporch at midnight; it makes the
strongest men to tremble like to keepers of the house of an old man's
Tabernacle. (...),
(...),
said Menander, No strength of body, no confidence of spirit is a defensative
against an evil conscience which will intimidate the courage of the most
perfect Warrior. Qui terret, plus iste timet, sors ista tyrannis
Convenit, invideant claris, fortesque trucident,
Muniti gladiis vivant, septique venenis
Ancipites habeant arces, trepidique minentur.
So Claudian describes the state of Tyrants and injurious persons, De 4 Hono^
Con^u^.
they do evil and fear worse, they oppress brave men, and are afraid of mean
fellows; they are encompassed with swords, and dwell amongst poisons, they have
towers with back doors and many outlets, and they threaten much, but themselves
are most afraid. We read of Belteshazzar, his knees beat against each other
upon the arrest made on him by the hand on the wall, which wrote the sentence
of God in a strange character, because he would not read the writing in his
conscience. This fear is very great and very lasting even in this world: and is
rarely well described by Lucretius: Cerberus and Furiae --
-- neque sunt usquam, neque possunt esse profecto: (...)

Sed metus in vita poenarum pro malefactis
Est insignibus insignis; scelerisque luela
Carcer, and horribilis de saxo jacta deorsum,
Verbera, Carnifices, robur, pix, lumina, taedae,
Quae tamen etsi absunt, and men's sibi conscia facti
Praemetuens adhibet stimulos, torretque flagellis;
Which description of the evil and intolerable pains and fears of conscience
is exceeded by the Author of the wisdom of Solomon, Indisciplinatae animae
erraverunt. (...)
That is the ground of their misery; The souls were refractory to discipline,
and have erred. They oppress the holy Nation. The effect was, they became
Prisoners of darkness, and fettered with the bands of a long night; fugitive
perp^tuae providentiae ^acuerunt, they became outlaws from the divine
providence. And while they supposed to lie had in their secret sins, they were
scattered under ^ dark vail of forgetfulness; paventes horrende, and cum
admiratione nimia perturbati, they did fear horribly, and disturbed with a
wonderful amazement. For neither might the corner that held them keep them from
fear, but a sound descending did trouble them; and personae tristes apparentes
pavorem illis praestabant, sad appar^tions did affright them; a fire appeared
to them very formidable; and timore percussi ejus quae non videbatur faciei;
they were affrighted with the apprehensions of what they saw not: and all the
way in that excellent description, there is nothing but fear, and affrightment,
horrid amazement and confusion; pleni timore, and tremebund: peribant, full of
fear, and they perished trembling; and then follows the philosophy and rational
account of all this. Frequenter enim praeoccupant pessima redarguente
conscientia. When their conscience reproves them, they are prepossessed with
fearful expectations. For wickedness condemned by her own witness is very
timorous. Cum enim sit timida nequitia, dat testimonium condemnata: Conscience
gives witness and gives sentence, and when wickedness is condemned it is full
of affrightment. For fear is praesumptionis adjutorium, the allay of confidence
and praesumption, and the promoter of its own apprehensions, and betrays the
succors that reason yields. For indeed in this case, no reason can dispute a
man out of his misery, for there is nothing left to comfort the conscience, so
long as it is divested of its innocence. The Prophet Jeremy instances this in
the case of Pashur who oppressed the Prophets of the Lord, putting them in
Prison and forbidding them to preach in the name of the Lord: Thy name shall be
no more called Pashur but Magor Missabib, J^r. 2^ ^ 4.
[that is, fear round about] for I will make thee a terror unto thy self.

This fear of its own nature is apt to increase, 15.
for indeed it may be infinite. Nec videt interea quis terminus esse malorum
Possit, Lucret.
nec quae sit poenarum denique finis:
Atque eadem metuunt magis, haec ne in morte gravescant.
Hinc Acherusia fit stultorum denique vita.
He that fears in this case, knows not the greatness and measure of the evil
which he fears; it may arrive to infinite, and it may be any thing, and it may
be every thing, and therefore there is,

5. An appendant perpetuity and restlesness; 16.
a man of an evil conscience is never at quiet. De profugit.
Impietas enim malum infinitum est, quod nunquam extingui potest, said Philo:
He is put to so many shifts to excuse his crime before men, and cannot excuse
it to God or to himself, and then he is forced to use arts of forgetfulness,
that he may not remember his sorrow; he runs to weakness for excuse, and to sin
for a comfort, and to the methods and paths of hell for sanctuary, and rols
himself in his uneasy chains of fire, and changes from side to side upon his
gridiron till the flesh drop from the bones on every side. This is the Poets
vultur, Immortale jecur tundens, faecundaque poenis
Viscera, rimaturque epulis, habitatque sub alto
Pectore, nec fibris requies datur ulla renatis.
It gnaws perpetually, and consumes not, being like the fire of hell, it does
never devour, but torments for ever.

6. This fear and torment, 17.
which is inflicted by conscience does not only increase at our death, but
after death is the beginning of hell. For these are the fire of hell; (...), I
am tormented in this flame, so said Dives when he was in torments; that is, he
had the torments of an evil conscience, for hell it self is not to be opened
till the day of judgment; but the sharpest pain is usually expressed by fire,
and particularly the troubles of mind are so signified. Urit animum meum; This
burns, that is, this exceedingly troubles my mind; and uro hominem in the
Comedy, I vex him sufficiently, I burn him; loris non ureris, thou art not
tormented with scourgings. Poena autem vehemens, Juvenal.
and multo saevior illis
Quos and Caeditius gravis invenit, and Rhadamanthus,
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
This is a part of hell fire, the smoke of it ascends night and day; and it is
a preparatory to the horrible sentence of Doomsday, as the being tormented in
prison is, to the day of condemnation and execution. The conscience in the
state of separation does accuse perpetually, and with an insupportable
amazement fears the revelation of the day of the Lord. Et cum fateri Furia
jusserit verum,
Cogente clamet conscientia scripsi. Martial.

The fury within will compel him to confess, and then he is prepared for the
horrible sentence, as they who upon the rack accuse themselves, and then they
are carried to execution. (...).
Menippus in Lucian says that the souls of them that are dead are accused by
the shadows of their bodies. (...) and these he says are (...) worthy of
belief, because they are always present, and never parted from the bodies;
meaning that a man's conscience which is inseparable as a shadow, is a strong
accuser and a perfect witness: and this will never leave them till it carries
them to hell, and then the fear is changed into despair, and indignation, and
hatred of God, and eternal blasphemy. This is the full progress of an evil
conscience, in its acts of binding.

Quest.

BUT if it be inquired by what instrument conscience does thus torment a man,
18.
and take vengeance of him for his sins, whether it has a proper efficiency in
it self, and that it gives torment, as it understands, by an exercise of some
natural power; * or whether it be by an act of God inflicting it, * or by
opinion and fancy, * by being persuaded of some future events which shall be
certainly consequent to the sin, or by Religion and belief, * or lastly by
deception and mere illusion, and upon being affrighted with bugbears? I answer,

That it does or may afflict a man by all these. 19.
For its nature is to be inquisitive and busy, querulous and complaining; and
to do so is as natural to it, as for a man to be grieved when any thing
troubles him. But because men have a thousand little arts to stifle the voice
of conscience, or at least that themselves may not hear it; God oftentimes
awakens a man by a sudden dash of thunder and lightning, and makes the
conscience sick, and troublesome; just as upon other accidents a man is made
sad, or hardened, or impudent, or foolish, or restless: and sometimes every
dream, or sad story that the man has heard, the flying of birds, and the
hissing of serpents, or the fall of waters, or the beating of a watch, or the
noise of a cricket, or a superstitious tale, is suffered to do the man a
mischief and to increase his fear. -- Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt.
This the Poets and Priests expressed by their Adrastea, Nemesis, Minos, Aeacus
and Rhadamanth, not that these things were real, -- neque sunt usquam, neque
possunt esse profecto, said one of them; but yet to their pains and fears they
gave names, and they put on persons, and a fantastic cause may have a real
event, and therefore must come from some further principle: and if an evil man
be affrighted with a meteor or a bird, by the chattering of swallows (like the
young Greek in Plutarch) or by his own shadow (as Orestes was) it is no sign
that the fear is vain, but that God is the Author of conscience, and will
beyond the powers of nature, and the arts of concealment set up a Tribunal, and
a Gibbet, and a Rack in the Court of Conscience. And therefore we find this
evil threatened by God to fall upon sinners. Levit. 26. 36.
They that are left alive of you in the land of your captivity, I will send
fainting in their hearts, in the land of their enemy, and the sound of a leaf
shall chase them: Deuter. 28. 65^
and again The Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of
eyes, and sorrow of mind, and thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and
thou shall fear day and night, and shall have no assurance of thy life: and
this very fear ends in death it self; it is a mortal fear sometimes; for when
the Prophet Isaiah had told concerning Jerusalem, Isai. 22. 2.
Thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle; to the inquiry
of those who ask how then were they slain? the answer is made by a learned
gloss upon the place, Homines hi non expectato adventu hostis, velut transfossi
exanimantur metu: They were dead with fear, slain with the affrightments of
their own conscience, as if they were transfixed by the spear of their enemies.
Lib. 1. c. ^.
Quid ergo nos a Diis immortalibus divinitus expectemus, nisi errationibus
finem faciamus, said Q. Metellus in A. Gellius: There is no avoiding
punishment, unless we will avoid sin; since even a shadow as well as substances
may become a Nemesis, when it is let loose by God, and conducted by conscience.

But the great instrument of bringing this to pass is that certainty of
persuasion which is natural in all men, 20.
and is taught to all men, and is in the sanction of all laws expressly affirmed
by God, that evil shall be to them that do evil; (...), Aeschyl.
He that dishonours God shall not escape punishment: both in this life, Senec.
(...) Act. 3.
Ultrix Erinnys impio dignum parat
Lethum Tyranno --
and after this life, for so they reckoned, that Adulterers, Rebels, and
Traitors should be kept in prisons in fearful expectation of horrid pains;
Quique ob adulterium caesi, quique arma secuti
Impia, nec veriti Dominorum fallere dextras,
Inclusi poenam expectant --
all this is our conscience, which in this kind of actions and events, is
nothing but the certain expectation and fear of the Divine vengeance.

Quest.

BUT then why is the conscience more afraid in some sins then in others, 21.
since in sins of the greatest malignity we find great difference of fear and
apprehension, when because they are of extreme malignity there can be no
difference in their demerit?

I answer; 22.
Although all sins be damnable, yet not only in the several degrees of sin,
but in the highest of all there is great difference; partly proceeding from the
Divine threatenings, partly from fame and opinion, partly from other causes.

For 1. there are some sins which are called peccata clamantia, crying sins;
that is, such which cry aloud for vengeance; such which God not only has
specially threatened with horrid plagues, but such which do seldom escape
vengeance in this life, but for their particular mischief are hedged about with
thorns lest by their frequency they become intolerable. Such are Sacrilege,
Oppression of widows and Orphans, Murder, Sodomy, and the like^ Now if any man
falls into any of these crimes, he sees an Angel with a sword drawn stand before
him; he remembers the angry words of God, and calls to mind that so few have
escaped a severe judgment here, that Gods anger did converse with men, and was
clothed with our circumstances, and walked round about us; and less then all
this is enough to scare an evil conscience.

But 2. there are some certain defensatives and natural guards which God has
placed in men against some sins; such as are a natural abhorrency against
unnatural lusts. A natural pity against Murder, and Oppression: the double
hedge of sacredness and religion against Sacrilege. He therefore that commits
any of these sins does so much violence to those defensatives, which were
placed either in or upon his heart, that such an act is a natural disease, and
vexes the conscience not only by a moral but by a natural instrument.

3. There are in these crying sins certain accidents and appendages of horror
which are apt to amaze a man's mind: as in Murder there is the circumstance and
state of death, which when a man sees and sees alone, and sees that himself
has acted, it must needs affright him; since naturally most men abhor to be
alone with a dead corpse; so also in Oppression of widows, a man mee^s with so
many sad spectacles, and hears so many groans, and clamorous complaints, such
importunities, and such prayers, and such fearful cursings, and perpetual
weepings, that if a man were to use any artifice to trouble a man's spirit, he
could not dress his Scene with more advantage.

4. Fame has a great influence into this effect, and there cannot easily be a
great shame amongst men, but there must be a great fear of vengeance from God;
and the shame does but antidate the Divine anger, and the man feels himself
entering into it, when he is enwrapped within the other. A man committing a foul
sin, which has a special dishonor and singular disreputation among men, is
like a wolf espied amongst the sheep: The outcry and noises among the shepherds
make him fly for his life, when he hears a vengeance coming. And besides in
this case, it is a great matter that he perceives all the world hates him for
his crime, and that which every one decries must needs be very hateful and
formidable, and prepared for trouble.

5. It cannot be denied, but Opinion also has some hand in this affair; and
some men are affrighted from their cradle in some instances, and permitted or
connived at in others; and the fears of childhood are not shaken from the
conscience in old age: as we see the persuasions of childhood in moral actions
are permanent, so is the fear and hope which were the sanction and
establishment of those persuasions. Education and Society, and Country
Customs, and States of life, and the Religion or Sect of the man's professing,
have influence into their portions of this effect.

The consequent of this discourse is this; That we cannot take any direct
accounts of the greatness or horror of a sin by the affrightment of conscience.
For it is with the affrightments of conscience as it is in temporal judgments;
sometimes they come not at all, and when they do, they come irregularly, and
when they do not, the man does not escape. But in some sins God does strike
more frequently then in others, and in some sins men usually are more
affrighted then in others. The outward judgment and the inward fear are
intended to be deleteries of the sin, and instruments of repentance; but as
some great sins escape the rod of God in this life, so are such sinners
oftentimes free from great affrightments. But as he who is not smitten of God,
yet knows that he is always liable to Gods anger, and if he repents not, it
will certainly fall upon him hereafter: so it is in conscience, he that fears
not, has never the less cause to fear, but oftentimes a greater, and therefore
is to suspect and alter his condition, as being of a deep and secret danger:
and he that does fear, must alter his condition, as being highly troublesome.
But in both cases, conscience does the work of a Monitor and a Judge. In some
cases, conscience is like an eloquent and a fair spoken Judge, which declaims
not against the criminal, but condemns him justly: In others, the Judge is
more angry, and affrights the prisoner more, but the event is the same. For in
those sins where the conscience affrights, and in those in which she affrights
not, supposing the sins equal but of differing natures, there is no other
difference; but that conscience is a Clock, which in one man strikes aloud and
gives warning, and in another the hand points silently to the figure, but
strikes not; but by this he may as surely see what the other hears, viz. that
his hours pass away, and death hastens, and after death comes judgment.

But by the measures of binding, 24.
we may judge of the loosing, or absolution, which is part of the judgment of
conscience, and this is the greatest pleasure in the world. (...), (...)

(...).
a good conscience is the most certain, clearest, and undisturbed felicity.
Lectulus respersus floribus bona est conscientia, 2 C^^ 1. 1^.
bonis refect a operibus. No bed so soft, no flowers so sweet, so florid and
delicious as a good conscience, in which springs all that is delectable, all
that may sustain and recreate our spirits. Nulla re tam laetari soleo quam
officiorum meorum conscienti^. I am pleased in nothing so much as in the
remembrances and conscience of my duty, said Cicero. Upon this pillow and on
this bed, Christ slept soundly in a storm, and S. Peter in Prison so fast that
the brightness of an Angel could not awake him, or make him to rise up without
a blow on his side. This refreshed the sorrows of Hezekiah when he was smitten
with the plague, and not only brought pleasure for what was past, and so
doubled the good of it, Vivere bis vita posse priore frui; but it also added
something to the number of his years, Ampliat aetatis spacium sibi vir bonus --
And this made Paul and Silas sing in Prison and in an Earthquake; and that I
may sum up all the good things in the world, I borrow the expression of S.
Bernard, Bona conscientia non solum sufficit ad solatium sed etiam ad coronam:
It is here a perpetual comfort, it will be hereafter an eternal crown.

25. This very thing Epicurus observed wisely, and in his great design for
pleasure commended Justice as the surest instrument to procure it. So Antiphon,
Conscium esse sibi in vita nullius criminis, multum voluptatis parit: and Cato
in Cicero, Conscientia been actae vitae multorumque benefactorum recordatio
jucundissima est: Nothing is a greater pleasure then a good conscience; for
there is peace and no disturbance; (...): Quietness is the best fruit, and that
grows only upon the tree in the midst of Paradise, upon the stock of a holy
Heart or Conscience. Only care is to be taken, that boldness be not mistaken
for peace, and hardness of heart for a good conscience. It is easy to observe
the difference, and no man can be innocently abused in this affair. Peace is
the fruit of a holy conscience. But no man can say, I am at peace, therefore I
have a holy conscience. But, I have lived innocently, or I walk carefully with
my God, and I have examined my conscience severely, and that accuses me not;
therefore this peace is a holy peace, and no illusion. A man may argue thus: I
am in health, and therefore the sleep I take is natural and healthful. But not
thus: I am heavy to sleep, therefore I am in health, for his dullness may be a
lethargy. A man may be quiet, because he inquires not, or because he
understands not, or because he cares not, or because he is abused in the
notices of his condition. But the true peace of conscience is thus to be
discerned.

Signs of true peace.

1. Peace of conscience is a rest after a severe inquiry. When Hezekiah was
upon his deathbed as he supposed, he examined his state of life, and found it
had been innocent in the great lines and periods of it; and he was justly
confident.

2. Peace of conscience can never be in wicked persons, of notorious evil
lives. It is a fruit of holiness, and therefore what quietness soever is in
persons of evil lives, it is to be attributed to any other cause, rather than
innocence; and therefore is to be called any thing rather than just peace. The
adulterous woman eats and wipeth her mouth, Prove. 30, 20.
and says, I have done no wickedness. And Pilate washed his hands, when he was
dipping them in the most innocent, the best and purest blood of the world. But
S. Paul had peace, because he really had fought a good fight. And it is but a
fond way to ask a sign how to discern, when the Sun shines. If the Sun shines
we may easily perceive it, and then the beams we see are the Sunbeams; but it
is not a sure argument to say, I see a light, therefore the Sun shines; for he
may espy only a tallow candle, or a gloworm.

3. That rest which is only in the days of prosperity, is not a just and a
holy peace, but that which is in the days of sorrow and affliction. The noise
and madness of wine, Eccl^s. 13 ^6.
the transportations of prosperity, the forgetfulness of riches, and the voice
of flatterers outcry conscience, and put it to silence; and there is no reason
to commend a woman's silence and modesty when her mouth is stopped. But in the
days of sorrow, then conscience is vocal, and her muffler is off; -- Invigilant
animo, (...)
scelerisque patrati
Supplicium exercent curae, tunc plurima versat
Pessimus in dubiis augur timor --
and then a man naturally searches every where for comfort; and if his heart
then condemns him not, it is great odds but it is a holy peace.

4. Peace of mind is not to be used as a sign that God has pardoned our sins,
but is only of use in questions of particular fact. What evils have I done?
what good have I done? The peace that comes after this examination is holy and
good. But if I have peace in these particulars, then have I peace toward God
also, as to these particulars: But whether I have pardon for other sins which I
have committed, is another consideration, and is always more uncertain. But
even here also a peace of conscience is a blessing that is given to all holy
penitents more or less, at some time or other, according as their repentance
proceeds, and their hope is exercised: But it is not to be judged of by sense,
and ease, but by its proper causes: It never comes but after fear, and labor,
and prayers, and watchfulness, and assiduity; and then what succeeds is a
blessing, and a fair indication of a bigger.

5. True peace of conscience is always joined with a holy fear; a fear to
offend, and a fear of the Divine displeasure for what we have offended; and the
reason is, because all peace that is so allayed is a peace after enquiry, a
peace obtained by just instruments, relying upon proper grounds; it is
rational, and holy, and humble; neither carelessness, nor presumption is in it.

6. True peace of conscience relies not upon popular noises, and is not a sleep
procured by the tongues of flatterers, or opinions of men, but is a peace from
within, Lib. 4. de be^efic. c. 21.
relying upon God and its own just measures. It is an excellent discourse which
Seneca has, Est aliquando gratus qui ingratus videtur, quae mala interpres
opinio in contrarium deducit. Hic quid aliud sequitur, quam ipsam conscientiam
quae etiam obruta delectat, quae concioni ac samae reclamat, and in se omnia
reponit, and cum ingentem ex altera part turbam contra sentientium aspexit,
non numerat suffragia, sed una sententia vincit? Some men are thankful, who yet
seem unthankful, being wronged by evil interpretation. But such a man what else
does he follow but his conscience, which pleases him, though it be overborn
with slander, and when she sees a multitude of men that think otherwise, she
regards not, nor reckons suffrages by the poll, but is victorious by her single
sentence? But the excellency and great effect of this peace he afterward
describes: Si vero bonam fidem perfidiae suppliciis affici videt, non descendit
e fastigio, sed supra poenam suam consistit. Habeo inquit quod volui, quod
petii. Non poenitet, nec poenitebit: nec ulla iniquitate me eo fortuna
perducet, ut hanc vocem audiam, Quid mihi volui? Quid mihi nunc prodest bona
voluntas? prodest and in equuleo, prodest and in igne, qui si singulis membris
admoveatur, and paul^tim unum corpus circumeat; licet ipsum corpus plenum bona
conscientia stillet, placebit illi ignis per quem bona fides collucebit. A good
conscience loses nothing of its confidence and peace for all the tortures of
the world. The rack, the fire shall not make it to repent and say, what have I
purchased? But its excellency and integrity shall be resplendent in the very
flames. And this is the meaning of the Proverb used by the Levantines, Heaven
and Hell are seated in the heart of man. As his conscience is, so he is happy,
or extremely miserable. What other men say of us, Orat. 25.
is no more then what other men dream of us, said S. Gregory Nazianzene; It is
our conscience that accuses or condemns to all real events and purposes.

And now all this is nothing but a persuasion partly natural, 26.
partly habitual, of this proposition which all the Nations, and all the men in
the world have always entertained as the band of all their Religion, and
private transactions of justice and decency, Deum Remuneratorem esse, that God
is a just Rewarder of all actions. Cicero pro Milone.
I sum up the premises in the words of the Orator; Magna vis est
conscientiae, Judices, and magna in utramque partem: ut neque timeant qui nihil
commiserint, and poenam semper ante oculos versari putent, qui peccarint. On
either side conscience is mighty and powerful, to secure the innocent, and to
afflict the criminal.

But beyond these offices now described, 27.
Conscience does sometimes only [Counsell] a thing to be done; that is,
according to its instruction, so it ministers to holiness. If God has put a
law into our minds, conscience will force (...) ^^^nce, or make us to suffer
for our disobedience; but if a proposition tending to holiness and its
advantages be entrusted to the conduct of conscience, then it presses it by all
its proper inducements, by which it was laid up there, and leaves the spirit of
a man to his liberty; but if it be not followed, it upbraids our weaknesses,
and chides our follies, and reproves our despi^^^ holy degrees, and greater
excellencies of glory laid up for loving and willing spirits. Such as is that
of Clemens Alexandrinus in the matter of an Evangelical Counsel; (...), He that
does so and so, sins not; for he is not forbidden by the law of the Gospel; but
yet he falls short of the perfection that is designed and propounded to
voluntary and obedient persons. To sum up this.

When S. Paul had reproved the endless genealogies of the Gnostics and
Platonists, 28.
making c^rcles of the same things, or of diverse whose difference they
understood not; as Intelligence, Fear, Majesty, Foundation, Wisdom,
Magnificence, Mercy, Victory, Kingdom, Foundation, God, and such
unintelligible stuff which would make fools stare, and wise men at a loss; he
subjoyns a short, 2 Timothy ^. ^.
but a more discernible genealogy, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
and conjugation of things to our purpose. 2 Timothy 1. 3.
The end of the Commandment is love out of a pure heart, H^b 9 14. 10. 22. 13.
18.
and a good conscience, Acts 15 9.
and faith unfeigned: that is, out of an unfeigned faith proceeds a good
conscience; that is, abstinence from sin; and from thence comes purity of
heart, or a separation from the trifling regards of the world, and all
affections to sin; and these all end in charity: that is, in peace, and joy,
and the fruition and love of God, in Unions and Contemplations in the bosom of
Eternity. So that faith is the first mover in the understanding part, and the
next is conscience, and they both purify the heart from false persuasions, and
evil affections; and then they join to the production of love and of felicity.

Thus far is the Nature and Offices of Conscience: It will concern us next,
to consider by what General measures we are to treat our Conscience that it may
be useful to us in all the intentions of it, and in the designs of God.

RULE 3. Be careful that prejudice or passion, fancy and affection, error or
illusion, be not mistaken for Conscience.
NOthing is more usual, 1.
then to pretend Conscience to all the actions of men which are public, and
whose nature cannot be concealed. If arms be taken up in a violent war;
inquire of both sides, why they engage on that part respectively? they answer,
because of their Conscience. Ask a Schismatic why he refuses to join in the
Communion of the Church? he tells you, it is against his Conscience: And the
disobedient refuse to submit to Laws; and they also in many cases pretend
Conscience. Nay, some men suspect their brother of a crime and are persuaded
(as they say) in Conscience that he did it: and their Conscience tells them that
Titius did steal their goods, or that Caia (...) an adulteress. And so
Suspicion, and Jealousy, and Disobedience, and Rebellion are become
Conscience; in which there is neither knowledge, nor revelation, nor truth, nor
charity, nor reason, nor religion. Quod volumus sanctum est, was the Proverb of
Tichonius and the Donatists. Nemo suae mentis motus non aestimat aequos,
Prosper Epigr. de cohibenda ira.

Quodque volunt homines se been velle putant.


Every man's way seems right in his own eyes; and what they think is not against
Conscience, they think or pretend to think, it is an effect of Conscience, and
so their fond persuasions and fancies are made sacred, and Conscience is
pretended, and themselves and every man else is abused. But in these cases and
the like, men have found a sweetness in it to serve their ends upon Religion,
and because Conscience is the Religious Understanding, or the Mind of a man as
it stands dres'd in and for Religion, they think that some sacredness or
authority passes upon their passion or design, if they call it Conscience.

But by this Rule it is intended that we should observe the strict measures of
Conscience. 2.
For an illusion may make a Conscience, that is, may oblige by its directive
and compulsive power. Conscience is like a King whose power and authority is
regular, whatsoever counsel he follows. And although he may command fond
things, being abused by flatterers, or misinformation, yet the commandment
issues from a just authority, and therefore equally passes into a Law; so it is
in Conscience. If error, or passion dictates the King is misinformed, but the
inferiors are bound to obey; and we may no more disobey our Conscience
commanding of evil things, then we may disobey our King injoyning things
imprudent and inconvenient. But therefore this Rule gives caution to observe
the information and inducement, and if we can discern the abuse, then the evil
is avoided. For this Governor [ Conscience] is tied to Laws, as Kings are to
the Laws of God and Nations, to Justice and Charity; and a man's Conscience
cannot be malicious: his Will may, but if the error be discovered, the
Conscience, that is, the practical understanding cannot. For it is impossible
for a man to believe what himself finds to be an error: and when we perceive
our Conscience to be misguided, the deception is at an end. And therefore to
make up this Rule complete, we ought to be strict and united to our rule, for
by that only we can be guided, and by the proportions to it we can discern
right and wrong, when we walk safely, and when we walk by false fires.
Concerning which, besides the direct survey of the rule and action, and the
comparing each other, we may in cases of doubt and suspicion be helped by the
following measures.

Advices for the practice of the former Rule.

1. We are to suspect our Conscience to be misinformed when we are not willing
to inquire into the particulars. 3.
He that searches, desires to find, and so far takes the right course; for
truth can never hurt a man, though it may prejudice his vice, and his affected
folly. In the inquiries after truth, every man should have a travelers
indifferency, wholly careless whether this or that be the right way, so he may
find it. For we are not to choose the way because it looks fair, but because
it leads surely. And to this purpose, the most hearty and particular inquest is
most prudent and effective. But we are afraid of truth when we will not
enquire, that is, when the truth is against our interest or passion, our lust
or folly, that is, seemingly against us, in the present indisposition of our
affairs.

2. He that resolves upon the conclusion before the premises, 4.
inquiring into particulars to confirm his opinion at aventures, not to shake
it if it be false, or to establish it only in case it be true, unless he be
defended by chance, is sure to mistake, or at least can never be sure whether
he does or no.

This is to be understood in all cases to be so unless the particular unknown
be secured by a general that is known. He that believes Christ's advocation and
intercession for us in heaven upon the stock of Scripture, cannot be prejudiced
by this rule, although in the inquiries of probation, and arguments of the
doctrine, he resolve to believe nothing that shall make against his Conclusion;
because he is ascertained by a proposition that cannot fail him. The reason of
this exception is this, because in all discourses which are not perfectly
demonstrative, there is one lame supporter, which must be helped out by the
better leg; and the weaker part does its office well enough, if it can bring us
to a place where we may rest our selves and rely. He that cannot choose for
himself, has chosen well enough if he can choose one that can choose for him;
and when he has, he may prudently rely upon such a person in all particulars,
where he himself cannot judge, and the other can, or he thinks he can, and
cannot well know the contrary. It is easier to judge of the general lines of
duty, then of minutes and particulars: and Travelers that are not well skilled
in all the little turnings of the ways, may confidently rely upon a Guide whom
they choose out of the natives of the place; and if he understands the coast of
the Country, he may well harden his face against any vile person that goes
about wittily to persuade him he must go the contrary way, though he cannot
answer his arguments to the contrary. A man may prudently and piously hold a
conclusion which he cannot defend against a witty adversary, if he have one
strong hold upon which he may rely for the whole question; because he derives
his conclusion from the best ground he has, and takes the wisest course he
can, and uses the best means he can get, and chooses the safest ways that are
in his power. No man is bound to do better then his best.

3. Illusion cannot be distinguished from Conscience, 5.
if in our search we take a wrong course and use incompetent instruments. He
that will choose to follow the multitude which easily erres, rather then the
wise Guides of souls; and a man that is his partner in the Question rather then
him that is dis-interess'd, and them that speak by chance, rather then them who
have studied the Question, and a man of another Profession, rather then him
whose office and employment it is to answer, has no reason to be confident he
shall be well instructed. In Lava^ro Conscien^.
John Nider tells an apologue well enough to this purpose: Two brethren
traveling together, whereof one was esteemed wise, and the other little better
then a fool, came to a place where the way parted. The foolish brother espying
one of them to be fair and pleasant, and the other dirty and uneaven, would
needs go that way, though his wiser brother told him, that in all reason that
must needs be the wrong way; but he followed his own eyes, not his brothers
reason: and his brother being more kind then wise, though against his reason,
followed his foolish brother; they went on till they fell into the hands of
thieves, who robbed them and imprisoned them, till they could redeem themselves
with a sum of money. These brothers accuse each other before the King as
author of each others evil. The wiser complained that his brother would not
obey him, though he was known to be wiser, and spoke reason. The other
complained of him for following him that was a fool, affirming that he would
have returned back if he had seen his wise brother confident, and to have
followed his own reason. The King condemned them both; the fool because he did
not follow the direction of the wise, and the wise because he did follow the
wilfulness of the fool. So will God deal with us at the day of Judgment in the
scrutinies of Conscience. If appetite refuses to follow reason, and reason does
not refuse to follow appetite, they have both of them taken incompetent
courses, and shall perish together. It was wisely said of Brutus to Cicero,
Lib. 11. samil epist.
Malo tuum judicium, quam ex alter a part omnium istorum. Tu enim a certo
sensu and vero judicas de nobis, quod isti ne faciant, summa mal^volentia and
livore impediuntur. I prefer thy judgment singly, before all theirs, because
thou judge by intuition of the thing; they cannot do that, being hindered by
envy and ill will. The particulars of reducing this advice to practice in all
special cases, I shall afterward enumerate; for the present, I say this
only, that a man may consent to an evil authority, and rest in a false
persuasion, and be conducted by an abused conscience, so long as the
Legislative Reason is not conjoined to the Judge Conscience, that is, while by
unapt instruments we suffer our persuasions to be determined.

4. That determination is to be suspected that does apparently serve an
interest, 6.
and but obscurely serve a pious end, Utile quod nobis do tibi consilium, Lib.
5. ep. 20. Mart.
when that appears, and nothing else appears, the resolution or council is to
be considered warily before it be pursued. It is a great allay to the
confidence of the bold talkers in the Church of Rome, and hinders their gain
and market of proselytes from among the wise and pious very much; that most of
their propositions for which they contend so earnestly against the other parts
of Christendom, do evidently serve the ends of covetousness and ambition, of
power and riches, and therefore stand vehemently suspected of design and art,
rather then of piety or truth of the article, or designs upon heaven. I
instance in the Popes power over Princes and all the world; his power of
dispensation; the exemption of the Clergy from jurisdiction of secular Princes;
the doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgencies, by which once the Friars were set
awork to raise a portion for a Lady, the Niece of Pope Leo the tenth; the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, by the effects and consequence of which, the
Priests are made greater then Angels, and next to God; and so is also that heap
of doctrines, by the particulars of which the Ecclesiastical power is far
advanced beyond the authority of any warrant from Scripture, and is made highly
instrumental for procuring absolute obedience to the Papacy. In these things
every man with half an eye can see the temporal advantage; but how piety and
truth shall thrive in the mean while, no eye has yet been so illuminate as to
perceive. It was the advice of Ben Sirach, Ecclus. 37. 11.
Consult not with a woman touching her of whom she is jealous, neither with a
coward in matters of war, nor with a Merchant concerning exchange, nor with a
buyer of selling, nor with an envious man of thankfulness, nor with an
unmerciful man touching kindness, nor with the slothful for any work, nor with
the hireling for a year of finishing work, nor with an idle servant of much
business; hearken not unto these in any matter of counsel. These will counsel
by their interest, not for thy advantage.

But it is possible that both truth and interest may be conjoined; and when a
Priest preaches to the people the necessity of paying Tithes, where they are by
Law appointed, or when a poor man pleads for charity, or a man in debt urges
the excellency of forgetfulness; the truth which they discourse of, cannot be
prejudiced by their proper concernments. For if the proposition serves the ends
in Religion, in providing for their personal necessities, their need makes the
instances still the more religious, and the things may otherwise be proved. But
when the end of piety is obscure, or the truth of the proposition is uncertain,
then observe the biass; and if the man's zeal be bigger then the certainty of
the proposition, it is to be estimated by the interest, and to be used
accordingly.

But this is not to prejudice him that gives the counsel, for although the
Counsel is to be suspected, yet the man is not, unless by some other
indications he betray himself. For he may be heartily and innocently persuaded
of the thing he counsels, and the more easily and aptly believe that against
which himself did less watch, because he quickly perceived it could not be
against himself.

Add to this, the Counsel is the less to be suspected if it be asked, then if
it be offered. But this is a consideration of Prudence, not of Conscience
directly.

5. If the proposition serve or maintain a vice, 7.
or lessen a virtue, it is certainly not Conscience, but error and abuse;
because no truth of God can serve Gods Enemy directly, or by its own force and
persuasion. But this is to be understood only in case, the answer does
directly minister to sin, not if it does so only accidentally. Q. Furius is
married to Valeria, but she being fierce and imperious, quarrelsome and loud,
and he peevish and fretful, turns her away that he might have peace and live in
patience. But being admonished by Hortensius the Orator to take her again, he
asked counsel of the Priests, and they advise him to receive her. He answers,
that then he cannot live innocently, but in a perpetual state of temptation, in
which he daily falls. The Priest replies, that it is his own fault; let him
learn patience, and prudence; for his fault in this instance is no warranty to
make him neglect a duty in another; and he answered rightly. If he had
counseled him to drink intemperately to make him forget his sorrow, or to
break her bones to make her silent, or to keep company with harlots to vex her
into compliance, his counsel had ministered directly to sin, and might not be
received.

6. Besides the evidence of the thing, 8.
and a direct conformity to the Rule, to be judged by every sober person, or by
himself in his wits, there is ordinarily no other collateral assurance, but an
honest hearty endeavor in our proportion, to make as wise inquiries as we can,
and to get the best helps which are to be had by us, and to obey the best we
do make use of. To which (because a deception may tacitly creep upon our very
simplicity) if we add a hearty prayer, we shall certainly be guided thorough
the labyrinth, and secured against our selves, Eccl^^s. 37. 15.
and our own secret follies. This is the counsel of the son of Sirach; Above
all this; pray to the most high, that he will direct thy way in truth.

RULE 4. The Conscience of a vicious man is an evil Judge, and an imperfect
Rule.
THat I mean the Superior and Inferior part of Conscience, 1.
is therefore plain, because the Rule notes how the acts of Conscience may be
made invalid both as it is a Ruler, and as it is a Judge. But according to the
several offices this truth has some variety.

1. The superior part of Conscience, 2.
or the (...) repository of practical principles (which for use and brevity
sake, I shall call the phylactery) or the Keeper of Records; that is, that part
which contains in it all the natural and reasonable principles of good actions,
(such as are, God is to be worshipped, Do to others as they should do to
thee, The pledge is to be restored, By doing harm to others thou must not
procure thy own good, and the like) is always a certain and regular Judge in
the prime principles of reason and religion, so long as a man is in his wits,
and has the natural use of reason. For those things which are first imprinted,
which are universal principles, which are consented to by all men without a
Teacher, those which Aristotle calls (...), those are always the last removed,
and never without the greatest violence and perturbation in the world. But it
is possible for a man to forget his Name and his Nature: a Lycanthropy made
Nebuchadnezar to do so, and a Fever made a learned Greek do so: but so long
as a man's reason is whole, not destroyed by its proper disease; that is, so
long as a man has the use of reason, and can and will discourse, so long his
conscience will teach him the general precepts of duty; for they are imprinted
in his nature, and there is nothing natural to the soul, if reason be not; and
no reason is, unless its first principles be, and those first principles are
most provided for, which are the most perfective of a man, and necessary to his
well being, and those are such which concern the intercourse between God and
Man, and between men in the first and greatest lines of their society. The very
opening of this chain is a sufficient proof, it is not necessary to intricate
it by offering more testimony.

2. But then these general principles are either to be considered as they are
habitually incumbent on the mind, 3.
or as actually applied to practice. In the former sense they can never be
totally extinguished, for they are natural and will return when ever a man
ceases from suffering his greatest violence; and those violences which are so
destructive of nature as this must be, that makes a man forget his being, will
fall off upon every accident and change. Difficile est personam diu sustinere.
But then when these principles come to be applied to practice, a strong vice
and a malicious heart can draw a veil over them, that they shall not then
appear to disorder the sensual resolution. A short madness, and a violent
passion, or a fit of drunkenness, can make a man securely sin by incogitancy,
even when the action is in the matter of an universal principle. No man can be
brought to that pass, as to believe that God ought not to be honored; but
supposing there is a God, it is unavoidable, that this God must be honored:
but a transient and unnatural violence intervening in a particular case,
suspends the application of that principle, and makes the man not to consider
his Rule; and there he omits to worship and honor this God in many particulars
to which the principle is applicable. But this Discourse is coincident with
that Question, In Rule 1. numb. 5. and se^.
Whether Conscience may be totally lost? of which I have already given
accounts. That and this will give light to each other.

3. But further, there are also some principles which are indeed naturally
known, 4.
that is, by principles of natural reason: but because they are not the
immediate principles of our creation and proper being, they have the same
truth, and the same seat, and the same certainty; but not the same prime
evidence, and connaturality to the soul; and therefore these may be lost, or
obscured to all purposes of usefulness, and their contradictories may be
admitted into the rule of Conscience. Of this nature, I reckon, that
Fornication, violent and craf^y contracts with many arts of deception, and
overreaching our Brother, theft, in^^st in some kinds, drunkenness, and the
like, are to be avoided. For concerning these, it is certain that some whole
Nations have so abused their Conscience by evil manners, that the Law in their
mind has been cancelled, and these things have passed for lawful. And to this
day, that Duels may be fought by private persons and authority, is a thing so
practiced by a whole sort of men, that it is believed, and the practice, and
the belief of the lawfulness of it are interchangeably daughter and mother to
each other. These are such of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 28.
they are given over to believe a lie, they are delivered to a reprobate mind.
And this often happens, and particularly in those cases wherein one sin is
inferred by another naturally, or morally, or by withdrawing of the Divine
grace.

4. Wherever the Superior or the Ruling part of Conscience is an imperfect
Rule; 5.
in the same cases the Inferior is an evil Judge, that is, acquits the
criminal, or condemns the innocent, calling good evil, and evil good: which is
to be understood when the persuasion of the erring conscience is permanent and
hearty, not sudden, and by the rapid violence of a passion; for in this case
the conscience condemns as soon as that is acted, to which before the action
it was cousened and betrayed: but it proceeds only in abiding and lasting
errors. And this is the cause why so many orders of persons continue in a
course of sin with delight, and uninterrupted pleasure, thinking Rebellion to
be a just defense, Sacrilege a lawful title, while other men that are otherwise
and justly persuaded wonder at their peace, and hate their practices. Our
blessed Lord foretold concerning the Persecutors of the Church, that they
should think they did God good service. But such men have an evil portion, they
sing in the fire, and go dancing to their graves, and sleep on till they be
awakened in hell. And on the other side, this is because of superstition, and
scruples, and sometimes of despairing and unreasonable fears, when the
Conscience is abused by thinking that to be a sin, which is none.

RULE 5. All Consciences are to walk by the same Rule, and that which is just
to one, is so to all, in the like circumstances.
IF all men were governed by the same Laws, 1.
and had the same interest, and the same degrees of understanding, they would
perceive the truth of this Conclusion. But men are infinitely differenced by
their own acts and relations, by their Understandings and proper Economy, by
their superinduced differences and orders, by interest and mistake, by
ignorance and malice, by sects and deceptions. And this makes that two men may
be damned for doing two contradictories: as a Jew may perish for not keeping of
his Sabbath, and a Christian for keeping it; an Iconoclast for breaking images,
and another for worshipping them: for eating, and for not eating; for receiving
the holy Communion, and for not receiving it; for coming to Church, or staying
at home.

But this variety is not directly of Gods making, 2.
but of Man's. God commands us to walk by the same rule, and to this end, (...),
to be of the same mind; and this is (...), the exactness of our Conscience;
which precept were impossible to be observed, if there were not one rule, and
this rule also very easy. For some men have but a small portion of reason and
discretion, and they cannot help it; and yet the precept is incumbent upon them
all alike; and therefore as the rule is one, so it is plain and easy, and
written in every man's heart; and as every man's reason is the same thing, so is
every man's conscience; and this comes to be altered, just as that.

Neither is the unity of the Rule prejudiced by the infinite difference of
cases. For as a river springing from the mountains of the East is tempted by
the levels of the ground and the uneasiness of its passage, 3.
to make some turns backward toward its head, even while it intends Westward;
so are the cases of Conscience branched out into instances, sometimes of
contrary proceedings, who are to be determined to cross effects, but still upon
the same account. For in all things of the world the obligation is uniform, and
it is of the same persuasion.

The case is this:

Autolycus robbed the gardens of Trebonius, 4.
and asked him forgiveness and had it. But when Trebonius was chosen Consul,
and Autolycus robbed him again, and was taken by others, and as a thief brought
before him, he asked forgiveness again; but Trebonius condemned him to the
Galleys: for he who being a private man was bound to forgive a repenting
trespasser, being a Magistrate was bound not to forgive him; and both these
were upon the same account. A man may forgive an injury done to himself,
because it is his own right, and he may alone meddle in it; but an injury done
to the Commonwealth, She only could forgive, not her Minister. So,

He that fasted upon a Saturday in Ionia or Smyrna was a Schismatic; and so
was he who did not fast at Milan or Rome upon the same day, both upon the same
reason; Cum fueris Romae, Romano vivito more,
Cum fueris alibi, vivito sicut ibi.
because he was to conform to the custom of Smyrna, as well as to that of
Milan, in the respective Diocesses.

To kill a man in some cases defiles a land; 6.
in others it cleanses it, and puts away blood from the people: and it was
plain in the case of circumcision. S. Paul did it, and did it not; both because
he ought, and because he ought not; and all upon the same account and law of
charity. And therefore all inquiries, and all contentions, and questions should
be relations to the Rule, and be tried by nothing but a plain measure of
Justice and Religion, and not stand or fall by relations to separate
propositions and distinct regards. For that is one and easy; these are
infinite, uncertain, and contradictory. (...). It is a very great cause of
mischief not to be able to deduce general propositions, and fit them to
particular cases, In Epicter. lib. 3. c. 26.
said Arrianus. But because all men cannot, therefore there will be an eternal
necessity of spiritual guides, whose employment, and the business of their life
must be to make themselves able respondere de jure, to answer in matters of
law, and they also must be truly informed in the matters of fact.

RULE 6. In Conscience that which is first is truest, easiest, and most useful.
THere are some practices, 1.
which at the first sight, and by the very name and nature of the things
themselves, seem as directly unreasonable and against a Commandment, as any
other thing of the foulest reproach; and yet object the sin to the owners, and
they will tell so many fine stories, and struggle, and distinguish, and state
the question in a new manner, and chop it into fragments, and disguise the
whole affair, that they do not only content and believe themselves, but also
lessen the confidence of the adversary, and make a plain rule an uneasy lesson.
I instance in the question of images, the making of some of which, and the
worshipping of any, does at the first sight as plainly dash against the second
Commandment, as adultery does against the sixth. But if you examine the
practice of the Roman Church, and estimate them by the more wary determination
of the Article in Trent, and weigh it by the distinctions and laborious devices
of its Patrons, and believe their pretenses and shows, it must needs be that
you will abate something of the reproof; and yet all the while the worship of
images goes forward: and if you lay the Commandment over against the devices
and distinctions, it will not be easy to tell what the Commandment does mean;
and yet because it was given to the meanest understandings, and was fitted for
them, either the Conscience is left without a clear rule, or that sense is to
be followed which stands nearest the light, that which is next to the natural
and proper sense of the words. For it is certain God put no disguises upon his
own Commandments, and the words are meant plainly and heartily; and the
further you remove from their first sense, the more you have lost the purpose
of your rule. In matters of conscience, that is the best sense which every wise
man takes in before he has sullied his understanding with the disguises of
sophisters, and interessed persons; for then they speak without prejudice and
art, that is, so as they should speak, who intend to guide wise men, and all
men.

But this is to be understood otherwise, 2.
when the first sense of the words has in its letter a prejudice open and easy
to be seen; such as is that of putting out the right eye, or cutting off the
hand. The face is a vizor and a metaphor, and the heart of it only is the
Commandment, and that is to be understood by the measures of this rule, that
is, the prime and most natural signification is the best, that which is of
nearest correspondency to the metaphor and the design of the Speaker, and the
occasion and matter of the discourse.

But in all things where the precept is given in the proper style of laws, 3.
and the vail is off, and the words are plain, he that takes the first sense is
the likeliest to be well guided. If a war be commenced between a King and his
People, he that is willing to read his duty, may see it in the words of Christ
and of three Apostles, and it is easy to know our duty; but when we are engaged
against our Prince, it is certain we are hugely put to it to make it lawful,
and when our conscience must struggle for its rule, it is not so well as when
it takes that which lies easy before us. Truth is easy, error is intricate and
hard. If none but witty men could understand their duty, the ignorant and idiot
could not be saved; but in the event of things it will be sound, that this man's
Conscience was better guided while simplicity held the taper, then by all the
false fires of art, and witty distinctions. Qui ambulat simpliciter, ambulat
confidenter, says Solomon. It is safer to walk upon plain ground, then with
tricks and devices to dance upon the ropes.

RULE 7. Conscience by its several habitudes and relations, or tendencies
toward its proper object, is divided into several kinds.
COnscience in respect of its information, 1.
or as it relates to its object, taken materially, and in the nature of the
thing, is either True or False, Right or Wrong. True when it is rightly
informed, and proceeds justly. False when it is deceived. Between these as
participating of either extreme, stands the probable Conscience; which if we
consider as it relates to its object, is sometimes right, and sometimes wrong,
and so may be reduced to either, according as it is in the event of things. For
in two contradictories which are both probable, as if one be, both are, if one
part be true, the other is false; and the conscience of the several men holding
the opposite parts, must be so too, that is, right and wrong, deceived and not
deceived respectively. The division then of Conscience in respect of its object
is tripartite.

For in all questions, 2.
if notice can be certainly had, he that gets the notice, has a True
Conscience: He that misses it, has a False or Erring Conscience. But if the
notices that can be had be uncertain, imperfectly revealed, or weakly
transmitted, or understood by halfs, or not well represented; because the
understanding cannot be sure, the conscience can be but probable. But according
as the understanding is fortunate, or the man wise and diligent, and honest
enough to take the right side of the probability, so the conscience takes its
place in the Extreme, and is reduced to Right or Wrong accordingly.

But to be Right or Wrong, 3.
is wholly extrinsecal to the formal obligation of Conscience, as it is a Judge
and a Guide, and to the consequent duty of the Man. For an erring conscience
binds as much as the right conscience, directly and immediately, and
collaterally more; that is, the man who has an erring conscience is tied to
more and other duties, then he that is in the right. The conscience binds
because it is heartily persuaded, not because it is truly informed; not because
it is right, but because it thinks so.

It does indeed concern the duty of Conscience, 4.
and its felicity, to see that it be rightly instructed, but as to the
consequence of the action, it is all one: this must follow whatsoever goes
before. And therefore although it concerns the man as much as his felicity, and
all his hopes comes to, to take care that his conscience be not abused in the
matter of duty; yet a Right and a Wrong conscience are not made distinct Guides
and different Judges. Since therefore we are to consider and treat of
Conscience, as it is the Guide of our actions, and Judge of our persons, we are
to take it in other aspects, then by a direct face toward its object; the
relation to which alone, cannot diversify its kind, so much as to become an
universal Rule to us in all cases and emergencies.

Now because intellectual habits employed about the same general object, have
no way to make them of different natures, but by their formal tendencies, and
different manners of being affected with the same object; we are in order to
the perfect division and assignation of the kinds of conscience, to consider
the Right Conscience, either as it is Sure, or as it is only Confident, but
not Sure. For an Erring conscience and the Unerring are the same Judge, and the
same Guide, as to the Authority, and Persuasion, and as to the effect upon the
person: but yet they differ infinitely in their Rule; and the persons under
their conduct differ as much in their state and condition. But our Conscience
is not a good Guide unless we be truly informed and know it. For if we be truly
informed and know it not, it is an uncertain and an imperfect Guide. But if we
be confident and yet deceived, the uncertainty and haesitation is taken off,
but we are still very miserable. For we are like an erring Traveller, who being
out of the way, and thinking himself right, spurs his horse and runs full
speed: he that comes behind, is nearer to his journeys end.

That therefore is the first kind of Conscience; 6.
The Right Sure Conscience; and this alone is fit to be our Guide; but this
alone is not our Judge.

2. Opposite to this is the Confident or Erring Conscience; 7.
that is, such which indeed is misinformed, but yet assents to its object with
the same confidence as does the Right and Sure; but yet upon differing grounds,
motives, and inducements: which because they are always criminal, although the
assent is peremptory and confident, yet the deception is voluntary and vicious
in its cause; and therefore the present confidence cannot warrant the action,
it only makes the sinner bold. So that these two differ in their manner of
entering into the assent; the one entering by the door, the other by the breaches
of the wall. Good will, and Bad, Virtue and Vice, Duty and Sin, keeping the
several keys of the persuasion and consent.

This Erring Conscience I therefore affirm to be always Voluntary and Vicious
in its principle, 8.
because all Gods laws are plain in all matter of necessary duty: and when all
men are to be guided, learned and unlearned, the Rule is plain and easy,
because it is necessary it should be so. But therefore if there happen any
invincible ignorance, or involuntary deception, it is there where the Rule is
not plain, and then the Matter is but probable, and then the Conscience is
according. And this makes the third kind of Conscience, in respect of the
different manner of being affected with the object.

3. The Probable Conscience is made by that manner of assent to the object, 9.
which is indeed without fear, but not without imperfection. The thing it self
is of that nature, that it cannot properly make faith or certainty of
adherence; and the understanding considers it as it is represented without any
prejudice or prepossession; and then the thing must be believed as it deserves
and no more: but because it does not deserve a full assent, it has but an
imperfect one; but it is perfect enough in its kind, that is, it is as much as
it ought to be, as much as the thing deserves. These are all the kinds of
Conscience that are perfect.

4. But sometimes the state and acts of conscience are imperfect; 10.
as the vision of an evil eye, or the motion of a broken arm, or the act of an
imperfect or abused understanding: so the conscience in some cases is carried
to its object but with an imperfect assent, and operates with a lame and
deficient principle: and the causes of it are the vicious or abused affections,
accidents or incidents to the Conscience. Sometimes it happens that the
arguments of both the sides in a question seem so indifferent, that the
conscience being affrighted and abused by fear and weakness dares not
determine, and consequently dares not do any thing; and if it be constrained
to act, it is determined from without, not by it self, but by accidents and
persuasion, by importunity or force, by interest or fear: and what ever the
ingredient be, yet when it does act, it acts with fear, because it reflects
upon it self, and considers it has no warrant, and therefore whatever it does
becomes a sin. This is the calamity of a doubting Conscience. * This doubting
does not always proceed from the equality of the parts of the question, but
sometimes wholly from want of knowing any thing of it: as if we were put to
declare whether there were more men or women in the world? whether the number
of the stars were even or odd? sometimes from inconsideration, sometimes
from surprise, sometimes from confusion and disease; but from what principle
soever it be, there is always some fear in it. This Conscience can neither be a
good Guide, nor a good Judge: we cannot do any thing by its conduct, nor be
judged by it; for all that can be done before or after it, is not by it, but by
the suppletories of the perfect conscience.

5. A less degree of this evil, 11.
is that which by the Masters of moral Theology is called, The scrupulous
Conscience, which is not a distinct kind of conscience as is usually supposed,
but differs from the doubting Conscience only in the degrees of the evil. The
doubt is less, and the fear is not so violent as to make it unlawful to do any
thing: something of the doubt is taken off, and the man can proceed to action
without sin, but not without trouble; he is uneasy and timorous even when he is
most innocent; and the causes of this, are not only portions of the same
weaknesses which cause the doubting Conscience; but sometimes Superstition, and
Melancholy, and Pusillanimity and mean opinions of God are ingredients into
this imperfect assent: and in such cases, although the scrupulous man may act
without sin, and produce his part of the determination, yet his scruple is not
innocent, but sometimes criminal, but always calamitous. This is like a mote in
the eye, but a doubt is like a beam.

This Conscience may be a right Guide, 12.
but dares not be a Judge: it is like a Guide in the dark that knows the way,
but fears every bush; and because he may err, thinks he does. The effect of
this imperfection is nothing but a heartless and uncomfortable proceeding in
our duty, and what else the Devil can make of it, by heightning the evil and
abusing the man, who sits upon a sure foundation, but dares not trust it: he
cannot rely upon that, which yet he cannot disbeleeve.

6. There are some other affections of Conscience, 13.
and accidental appendages; but because they do not vary the manner of its
being affected with its proper object, they cannot diversity Conscience into
several kinds, as it is a Guide and Judge of Humane actions. But because they
have no direct influence upon our souls, and relate not to duty, but are to be
conducted by rules of the other kinds, I shall here only enumerate their
kinds, and permit to Preachers to discourse of their natures, and collateral
obligations to duty, of their remedies and assistances, their advantages and
disadvantages respectively. These also are five: 1. The tender Conscience. 2.
The hardened or obdurate. 3. The quiet. 4. The restless or disturbed. 5. And
lastly, The perverse Conscience. Concerning which, I shall at present say this
only: That the two first are seated principally in the Will, but have a
mixture of Conscience, as Docibility has of Understanding. The two next are
seated in the fancy, or the affections, and are not properly placed in the
Conscience, any more then love or desire; but yet from Conscience they have
their birth. And for the last, it is a heap of irregular principles, and
irregular defects, and is the same in Conscience, as deformity is in the body,
or peevishness in the affections.

CHAP. II. Of the Right or Sure Conscience.
RULE 1. A right Conscience is that which guides our actions by right and
proportioned means to a right end.
THE end is, Gods glory, or any honest purpose of Justice or Religion, Charity
or Civil conversation. Whatsoever is good for us, or our neighbors, in any
sense perfective of our being as God purposed it, all that is our end. The
means ought to be such as are apt instruments to procure it. If a man intends
to live a severe life, and to attend Religion, his End is just and fair, and so
far his Conscience is right: but if his Conscience suggest to him, that he to
obtain his end should erect Colleges of Women; and in the midst of Feasts, and
Songs, and Society, he should Preach the Melancholy Lectures of the Cross, it
is not right; because the end is reached at by a contrary hand. But when it
tells him, that to obtain continence he must fast and pray, watch diligently,
and observe prudently, labor and read, and deny his appetite in its daily
attempts upon him, then it is a right Conscience. For a right Conscience is
nothing but right Reason reduced to practice, and conducting Moral actions. Now
all that right Reason can be defined by, is the propounding a good end, and
good means to the end.

RULE 2. In a right Conscience, the practical judgment, that is, the last
determination to an action, ought to be sure and evident.
THIS is plain in all the great lines of duty, 1.
in actions determinable by the prime principles of natural Reason, or Divine
revelation; but it is true also in all actions conducted by a right and perfect
Conscience. This relies upon all that account on which it is forbidden to do
actions of danger, or doubt, lest we perish in the danger, which are to be
handled in their proper place. But for the present we are to observe, that in
the question of actions, whose rule is not notorious and primely evident, there
is or may be a double judgment.

The first judges the thing probable by reason of the differing opinions of men
wise and pious; 2.
but in this there is a fear or suspicion of the contrary, and therefore in the
direct act nothing is certain. 2. But there is also a reflex act of judgment;
which upon consideration that it is certain that a probable action may lawfully
be done; or else, that that which is but probable in the nature of the thing
(so far as we perceive it) may yet by the superadding of some circumstances,
and prudential considerations, or by equity, or necessity become more then
probable in the particular; although (I say) the Conscience be uncertain in the
direct act, yet it may be certain, right, and determined in the reflex and
second act of judgment; and if it be, it is innocent and safe, it is that
which we call the Right-sure Conscience.

For in moral things there cannot ordinarily be a demonstrative, 3.
or Mathematical certainty; and in Morality we call that certain, that is, a
thing to be followed and chosen, which oftentimes is but very highly probable;
and many things do not attain that degree; and therefore, because it is very
often impossible, it is certainly not necessary that the direct judgment
should be sure and evident in all cases. Aristo^. Ethic. lib. 6. cap. 6.
(...), Science is of those things which can be demonstrated; but prudence [and
conscience] of things which are thus, or may be otherwise. But if it be not
supplied in the reflex and second act of judgment, so that the conscience be
either certain in the object, or in the act, the whole progress is a danger,
and the product is criminal; the conscience is doubtful, and the action is a
sin.

It is in this as is usually taught concerning the Divine knowledge of things
contingent; 4.
which although they are in their own nature fallible and contingent, yet are
known certainly and infallibly by God, and according to the nature of the
things, even beyond what they are in their natural, proper, and next causes:
and there is a rare, and secret expression of Christ's incarnation used by S.
Paul [in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily] that is, the
manner is contrary to the thing; the Godhead that is wholly incorp^real dwells
in him corporally. After the like manner of signification is the present
certainty I speak of. If it be not certain in the object, it must be certain in
the faculty, that is, at least it must be a certain persuasion, though of an
uncertain article: and we must be certain and fully persuaded that the thing
may be done by us lawfully, though whether the thing it self be lawful, is at
most but highly probable.

So that in effect it comes but to this: 5.
The knowledge that is here required, is but the fullness of persuasion, which
is and ought to be in a Right Conscience: Romans 14. 14.
(...), I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus; so S. Paul. Our knowledge
here, which is but in part, must yet be a full confidence for the matters of
duty. The Conclusions then are these:

1. There must be a certainty of adherence in the actions of a right Conscience.

2. It must also for the matter of it too, at least be on the right side of the
probability.

The conscience must be confident, and it must also have reason enough so to
be; or at least, so much as can secure the confidence from illusion; although
possibly the Confidence may be greater then the Evidence, and the Conclusion
bigger then the Premises. Thus the good simple man that about the time of the
Nicene Council confuted the stubborn and subtle Philosopher by a confident
saying over his Creed: and the holy and innocent idiot, or plain easy people of
the Laity, that cannot prove Christianity by any demonstrations, but by that of
a holy life, and obedience unto death; they believe it so, that they put all
their hopes upon it, and will most willingly prove it again by dying for it, if
God shall call them. This is one of the excellencies of faith; and in all cases
where the mercies of God have conducted the man into the right, it is not
subject to illusion. But for that particular, I mean, that we be in the right,
we are to take all that care which God has put into our power; of which I have
already said something, and shall give fuller accounts in its proper place.

RULE 3. The practical judgment of a right Conscience is always agreeable to
the speculative determination of the Understanding.
THIS Rule is intended against those whose understanding is right in the
proposition, 1.
and yet declines in the application; it is true in thesi, but not in
hypothesi; it is not true when it comes to be their case: and so it is in all
that sin against their conscience, and use little arts to evade the clamor of
the sin. They are right in the rule, and crooked in the measuring; whose folly
is apparent in this, because they deny in particular what they affirm in the
general; and it is true in all, but not in some. David was redargued wittily by
Nathan upon this account; he laid the case in a remote Scene: Titius, or
Sempronius, a certain rich man, I know not who, some body or other robbed the
poor man of his Ewe lamb. Therefore said David he shall die who ever he be.
Yea, but you are the man: what then? shall he die still? This is a new arrest;
it could not be denied, his own mouth had already given the sentence.

And this is an usual, 2.
but a most effective Art to make the conscience right in the particular, by
propounding the case separate from its own circumstances, and then to remove it
to its own place is no hard matter. It was an ingenious device of Erasistratus
the Physician, De bellis Sytiacis.
of which Appian tells: When young Antiochus almost died for love of Stratonica
his Father Seleucus his Wife, the Physician told the passionate and indulgent
Father, that his son was sick of a disease, which he had indeed discovered, but
found it also to be incurable. Seleucus with sorrow asking what it was?
Erasistratus answered, He loves my wife. But then the old Kings hopes began to
revive, and he turned wooer in the behalf of his son, begging of the Physician
who was his Counselor and his friend, for pity sake, for friendship and
humanity to give his wife in exchange or redemption for the young Kings life.
Erasistratus replied, Sir you ask a thing too unreasonable and great; and
though you are his Father, your self would not do it, if it were your own case;
and therefore why should I? when Seleucus swore by all his Country gods that he
would do it as willingly as he would live; Erasistratus drew the curtain of
the device, and applied it to him, by telling, that the cure of his son
depended upon his giving the Queen Stratonica to him, which he did; and
afterwords made it as lawful as he could, by a Law postnate to that insolent
example, and confirmed it by military suffrages.

In all cases we are to consider the rule, 3.
not the relation; the law, not the person: for if it be one thing in the
proposition, and another in the assumption, it must be false in one place or
the other, and then the Conscience is but an ill Guide, and an ill Judge.

This rule is not to extend to the exception of particular cases; 4
nor to take away privileges, pardons, equity. For that which is fast in the
proposition, may become loose in the particular by many intervening causes, of
which I am to give account in its due place. For the present, this is certain,
that, Whatsoever particular is of the same account with the general, not
separate, or let loose by that hand which first bound it, is to be estimated as
the general. But this Rule is to go further also.

For hitherto, I have called the act of particular Conscience directing to a
single and circumstantiate action by the name of Practical judgment: 5.
and the general dictate of the (...), or Phylactery, or upper Conscience,
teaching the kinds of good actions, by the name of Speculative judgment. But
the rule also is true, and so to be understood, when practical and speculative
are taken in their first and proper sense. If in Philosophy we discourse that
the True God, being a Spirit without shape or figure, cannot be represented by
an image; although this be only a speculation, and demonstrable in natural
Philosophy, and no rule of Conscience; yet when Conscience is to make a
judgment concerning the picturing of God the Father, it must not determine
practically against that speculation. * That an idol is nothing, is
demonstrable in Metaphysics; and therefore that we are to make nothing of it,
is a practical truth: and although the first proposition be not directly placed
in the upper region of conscience, but is one of the prime Metaphysical
propositions, not properly Theological, according to those words of S. Paul,
Concerning things sacrificed to idols, 1 Cor. 8. 1. 4.
we know (...) that we all have knowledge; and we know that an idol is nothing
in the world; meaning, that this knowledge needs no revelation to attest it; we
by our own reason and principles of demonstration know that; yet, the lower, or
particular practical Conscience must never determine against that extrinsecal,
and therefore (as to Conscience) accidental measure.

For whatsoever is true in one Science, 6.
is true also in another, and when we have wisely speculated concerning the
dimensions of bodies, their circumscriptions, the acts of sense, the certainty
of their healthful perceptions, the commensuration of a place and a body: we
must not esteem these to be unconcerning propositions, if ever we come to use
them in Divinity: and therefore we must not worship that which our senses tell
us to be a thing below worship; nor believe that infinite which we see
measured; nor esteem that greater then the heavens which I see and feel goes
into my mouth. If Philosophy gives a skin, Divinity does not flea it off: and
truth cannot be contrary to truth; and God would not in Nature teach us any
thing to misguide us in the regions of Grace.

The Caution for conducting this proposition is only this: 7.
That we be as sure of our speculation, as of any other rule which we
ordinarily follow; and that we do not take vain Philosophy, for true
speculations. He that guides his conscience by a principle of Zeno's
Philosophy, because he has been bred in the Sto^cal sect, and resolves to
understand his Religion to the sense of his Masters Theoremes, does ill. The
Christian Religion suffered much prejudice at first by the weak disputings of
the Greeks; and they would not admit a Religion against the Academy, or the
Cynicks, or the Athenian Schools; and the Christian Schools drew some of their
articles thorough the limbecks of Plato's Philosophy, and to this day the
relish remains upon some of them. Ad annum 538. sect. 34.
And Baronius complains of Origin, that, In Paganorum commentis enutritus,
eaque propagare in animo habens, divinas se utique Scripturas interpretari
simulavit: ut hoc modo nefariam doctrinam suam sacrarum liter arum monumentis
malign admiscens, Paganicum and Manich^icum errorem suum atque Arrianam
vesaniam induceret. He mingled the Gentile Philosophy with Christian Religion,
and by analogy to that, expounded this, and how many Disciples he had, all the
world knows. Nay not only from the doctrine, but from the practices and rites
of the Pagan Religion, many Christians did derive their rites, and they in time
gave authority and birth to some docrines, Vigilias anniversarias habes apud
Suetonium. A. D. 44. n. 88.
Lustralem aquam, aspersionem sepulchrorum, lumina in iisdem parare, Sabbatho
lucernam accendere, cereos in populum distribuere. The staff, the ring, the
Mitre, and many other customs, some good, some only tolerable, the Christians
took from the Gentiles; and what effect it might have, and what influence it
has had in some doctrines, is too notorious to dissemble. Thomas Aquinas did a
little change the Scene, and blended Aristotle so with School Divinity, that
something of the purity was lost, while much of our Religion was exacted and
conducted by the rules of a mistaken Philosophy. But if their speculations had
been right, Christianity would at first have entered without reproof, as being
the most reasonable Religion of the world, and most consonant to the wisest and
most sublime speculations; and it would also have continued pure, if it had
been still drawn from the fountains of our Savior thorough the limbecks of the
Evangelists and Apostles, without the mixture of the salt waters of that
Philosophy, which every Physician and witty man now adays thinks he has reason
and observation enough easily to reprove. But men have resolved to verify their
Sect rather then the truth; but if of this particular we be careful, we must
then also verify every speculation in all things where it can relate to
practice, and is not altered by circumstances.

As a appendage, 8.
and for the fuller explication of this Rule, it is a worthy inquiry which is
by some men made, concerning the use of our reason in our Religion. For some
men finding reason to be that guide which God has given us, and concreated
with us, know that Religion which is superinduced, and comes after it, cannot
prejudice that noblest part of this Creation. But then, because some articles
which are said to be of faith, cannot be made to appear consonant to their
reason, they stick to this, and let that go. Here is a just cause of complaint.
But therefore others say, that reason is a good guide in things reasonable and
humane, but our reason is blind in things Divine, and therefore is of little
or no use in Religion. Here we are to believe, not to dispute. There are on
both sides fair pretenses, which when we have examined, we may find what part
of truth each side aims at, and join them both in practice. They that speak
against reason, speak thus.

1. There is to every state and to every part of man given a proportionable
light to guide him in that way where he ought, 9.
and is appointed to walk. In the darknesses of this world, and in the actions
of common life, the Sun and Moon in their proper seasons are to give us light:
In the actions of humane intercourse, and the notions tending to it, reason is
our eye, and to it are notices proportioned, down from nature and experience,
even from all the principles with which our rational faculties usually do
converse. But because a man is designed to the knowledge of God, and of things
spiritual, there must spring a new light from heaven, and he must have new
capacities, and new illuminations; that is, new eyes, and a new light: For here
the eye of Reason is too weak, and the natural man is not capable of the things
of the Spirit, because they are spiritually discerned. Faith is the eye, and
the Holy Spirit gives the light, and the word of God is the lantern, and the
spiritual not the rational man can perceive the things of God. Secreta Dei, Deo
meo, and filiis domus ejus. God and Gods secret ones only know Gods secrets.

2. And therefore we find in Holy Scripture that to obey God, 10.
and to love him, is the way to understand the mysteries of the kingdom.
Obedite and intelligetis, If ye will obey, then shall ye understand: and it was
a rare saying of our blessed Savior, John 7. 17.
and is of great use and confidence to all who inquire after the truth of God,
in the midst of these sad divisions of Christendom; If any man will do his
will he shall know whether the doctrine be of God or no. It is not fineness of
discourse, nor the sharpness of arguments, or the witty rencontres of disputing
men that can penetrate into the mysteries of faith: the poor humble man that
prays, and inquires simply, and listens attentively, and sucks in greedily, and
obeys diligently, he is the man that shall know the mind of the Spirit. And
therefore S. Paul observes that the Sermons of the Cross were foolishness to
the Greeks; and consequently, by way of upbraiding, he inquires, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Where is the wise man, where is the Scribe, where is the disputer of the
world? God has made the wisdom of the world foolishness; that is, God has
confounded reason, that faith may come in her place.

3. For there are some things in our Religion so mysterious, that they are
above all our reason; 11.
and well may we admire but cannot understand them: and therefore the Spirit of
God is sent into the world to bring our understanding into the obedience of
Christ; 2 Cor. 10. 5.
we must obey and not enquire, and every proud thought must be submitted to him
who is the wisdom of the Father, who has in the holy Scriptures taught us all
his Fathers will.

4. And therefore as to this nothing can be added from the stock of nature, 12.
or principles of natural reason, so if it did need a supply, reason could ill
do it. For the object of our faith must be certain and infallible; but no man's
reason is so, and therefore to put new wine into broken bottles is no gain, or
real advantage; and although right reason is not to be gainsaid, yet what is
right reason is so uncertain, that in the midst of all disputes, every man
pretends to it, but who has it no man can tell, and therefore it cannot be a
guide or measure of faith.

5. But above all, 13.
if we will pretend to reason in Religion, we have but one great reason that we
can be obliged to; and that is, to believe that whatsoever God has said is
true: so that our biggest reason in Religion, is to submit our reason, that is,
not to use our reason in particular inquiries, but to captivate it in the
whole. And if there be any particular inquiries, let them seem what they will
to my reason it matters not; I am to follow God, not man; I may be deceived by
my self, but never by God. It is therefore sufficient to me that it is in the
Scriptures. I will inquire no further. This therefore is a concluding argument;
This is in Scripture, therefore this is true: and this is against Scripture,
therefore it is absurd, and unreasonable.

6. After all, experience is our competent guide warning to us: 14.
For we see when witty men use their reason against God that gave it, they in
pursuit of reason go beyond Religion; and when by reason they look for God,
they miss him; for he is not to be found but by faith, which when they dispute
for, they find not; because she is built and persuaded by other mediums, then
all Schools of Philosophy to this day have taught. And it was because of
reason, that the Religion of Jesus was so long opposed and hindered to possess
the world. The Philosophers would use their reason, and their reason would not
admit this new Religion: and therefore S. Paul being to remove every stone that
hindered, bad them to beware of vain Philosophy; which does not distniguish one
kind of Philosophy from another, but marks all Philosophy. It is all vain,
when the enquiries are into religious mysteries.

7. For is it not certain that some principles of reason are against some
principles of faith and Scripture? 15.
and it is but reason, that we should hear reason where ever we find it; and
yet we are to have no intercourse with Devils, though we were sure they would
tell us of hidden treasures, or secrets of Philosophy: and upon this account it
is that all Genethliacal predictions, and Judicial Astrology is decried by all
religious persons; for though there be great pretensions of reason and art, yet
they being against religion and revelation are intolerable. In these and the
like cases, reason must put on her muffler, and we must be wholly conducted by
revelation.

These are the pretenses against the use of reason in questions of Religion; 16.
concerning which the same account may be given, as is by the Pyrrhonians and
Scepticks concerning their arguments against the certainty of sciences. These
reasons are like Physic, which if it uncertainly purges out the Humor, it most
certainly purges out it self: and these arguments either cannot prevail against
the use of reason in Religion, or if they do, they prevail against themselves:
For either it is against Religion to rely upon reason in Religion, or it is
not: If it be not, then reason may without danger to Religion be safely relied
upon in all such enquiries. But if it be against Religion to rely upon reason,
then certainly these reasons intended to prove it so, are not to be relied
upon; or else this is no question of Religion. For if this be a question of
Religion, why are so many reasons used in it? If it be no question of Religion,
then we may for all these reasons to the contrary, still use our reason in
Religion without prejudice to it. And if these reasons conclude right, then we
may for these reasons sake trust the proposition which says, that in Religion
reason is to be used; but if these reasons do not conclude right, then there
is no danger, but that reason may still be used, these arguments to the
contrary notwithstanding.

But there is more in it then so. 17.
This foregoing discourse, or to the like purpose, is used by two sorts of
persons; The one is by those, who in destitution of particular arguments, make
their last recourse unto authority of men. For by how much more they press
their own peremptory affirmative, by so much the less will they endure your
reasons and arguments for the negative. But to these men I shall only say, Let
God be true, and every man a liar: and therefore if we trust men concerning
God, we do not trust God concerning men; that is, if we speak of God as men
please, we do not think of men as God has taught us; viz. That they are weak,
and that they are liars: and they who have by artifices, and little devices,
acquired to themselves a reputation, take the less care for proving what they
say, by how much the greater credulity that is, by which men have given
themselves up to be possessed by others. And if I would have my saying to
prevail whether it be right or wrong, I shall the less endure that any man
should use his own reason against me. And this is one of the great evils for
which the Church of Rome has given Christendom a great cause to complain of
her, who not only presses men to believe or to submit to what she says upon
her own authority, without enduring them to examine whether she says true or
no, but also requires as great an assent to what she cannot prove, as to what
she can; requiring an adherence not less then the greatest, even to those
things which she only pretends to be able to prove by prudential motives.
Indeed in these cases if they can obtain of men to bring their faith, they are
safe; but to come accompanied with their reason too, that is dangerous.

The other sort of men, 18.
is of those who do the same thing under another cover; for they not having
obtained the advantages of Union or Government, cannot pretend to a privileged
authority, but resolving to obtrude their fancies upon the world, and yet not
being able to prove what they say, pretend the Spirit of God to be the author
of all their theoremes. If they could prove him to be their author, the thing
were at an end, and all the world were bound to lay their necks under that
pleasant yoke; but because they cannot prove any thing, therefore it is that
they pretend the Spirit for every thing: and if the noise of so sacred a Name
will persuade you, you are within the snare; if it will not, you are within
their hatred. But it is impossible that these men can prevail, because there
are so many of them; It is as if there were twenty Mountebanks in the Piazza,
and all saying they had the only Antidote in the world for Poison; and that
what was not theirs, was not at all, and yet all pretend severally. For all men
cannot have the Spirit, unless all men speak the same thing: It were possible
that even in Union they might be deceivers; but in Division they cannot be
right; and therefore since all these men pretend the Spirit, and yet all speak
several things and contradictory, they do well to desire of us not to use our
reason, for if we do, they can never hope to prevail; if we do not, they may
persuade, as they meet with fools, that were not possessed before.

Between these two there is a third that pretends to no authority on one hand,
19.
nor Enthusiasm on the other; but offers to prove what he says, but desires not
his arguments to be examined by reason, upon pretense that he urges Scripture;
that is in effect, he must interpret it; but your reason shall not be judge
whether he says right or wrong: for if you judge his interpretation, he says
you judge of his argument, and make reason Umpire in questions of faith: and
thus his sect is continued, and the systemes of Divinity rely upon a certain
number of propositions from generation to generation, and the Scholar shall be
no wiser then his Master for ever; because he is taught to examine the
doctrines of his Master by his Masters arguments, and by no other. In effect,
they all agree in this, they would rule all the world by Religion, and they
would have no body wiser then themselves, but be fools and slaves, till their
turn come to use others as bad as they have been used themselves: and therefore
as the wolves offered peace to the sheep upon condition they would put away
their dogs; so do these men allow us to be Christians and Disciples, if we
will lay aside our reason, which is that guard of our souls, whereby alone we
can be defended against their tyrannies and pretensions.

That I may therefore speak close to the enquiry, 20.
I premise these considerations:

1. It is a weak and a trifling principle, which supposes faith and reason to
be opposite: For faith is but one way, by which our reason is instructed, and
acquires the proper notices of things. For our reason or understanding
apprehends things three several ways: The first is called (...), or the first
notices of things abstract, of principles and the primo intelligibilia; such as
are, The whole is greater then the half of the whole; Good is to be chosen; God
is to be loved: Nothing can be and not be at the same time; for these are
objects of the simple understanding, congenite notices, concreated with the
understanding. The second is called (...), or discourse, that is, such
consequents and emanations which the understanding draws from her first
principles. And the third is (...), that is, such things which the
understanding assents to upon the report, testimony, and affirmation of others,
viz. by arguments extrinsecal to the nature of the thing, and by collateral and
indirect principles. For example, I naturally know that an idol or a false God
is nothing; this is (...), or the act of abstract and immaterial reason. From
hence I infer, that an idol is not to be worshipped: This my reason knows by
(...), or illation and inference, from the first principle. But therefore that
all monuments of idolatry are to be destroyed was known to the Jews by (...),
for it was not primely known, nor by the direct force of any thing that was
primely known; but I know it from God by the testimony of Moses, into the
notice of which I am brought by collateral arguments, by tradition, by miracle,
by voices from heaven, and the like.

2. These three ways of knowing, are in all faculties sacred and profane: 21.
for faith and reason do not divide Theology and Philosophy, but in every
Science reason has notices all these ways. For in natural Philosophy there are
prime principles, and there are conclusions drawn from thence, and propositions
which we believe from the authority of Plato, or Socrates, or Aristotle; and so
it is in Theology; for every thing in Scripture is not in the divided sense, a
matter of faith: That the Sun is to rule the day, the Moon and the Stars to
govern the night, I see and feel; That God is good, that he is one, are prime
principles: that nothing but good is to be spoken of this good God, reason
draws by a (...) or discourse and illation: but that this good God will
chastise his sons and servants, and that afflictions sent upon us are the
issues of his goodness, or that this one God, is also three in person, this is
known by (...), or by belief; for it is not a prime truth, nor yet naturally
inferred from a prime truth, but told by God, and therefore is an object of
faith; reason knows it by testimony, and by indirect and collateral probations.

3. Reason knows all things as they are to be known, 22.
and enters into its notices by instruments fitted to the nature of things. Our
stock of principles is more limited then our stock of words; and as there are
more things then words, so there are more ways of knowing, then by principles
direct and natural. Now as God teaches us many things by natural principles,
many by experience, many at first, many more in time; some by the rules of one
faculty, some by the rules of another; so there are some things which descend
upon us immediately from heaven, and they communicate with no principle, with
no matter, with no conclusion here below. Now as in the other things we must
come to notices of things, by deriving them from their proper fountains; so
must we do in these. He that should go to revelation to prove that nine and
nine makes eighteen, would be a fool; and he would be no less, that goes about
to prove a Trinity of persons by natural reason. Every thing must be derived
from its own fountain. But because these things which are derivatives from
heaven, and communicate not at all with principles of Philosophy, or Geometry,
yet have their proper fountains, and these fountains are too high for us to
search into their bottom, we must plainly take all emanations from them, just
as they descend. For in this case, all that is to be done, is to enquire from
whence they come. If they come from natural principles, I search for them by
direct arguments: If they come from higher, I search for them by indirect
arguments; that is, I enquire only for matter of fact, whether they come
thence or no. But here my reason is set on work; first, I enquire into the
testimony or ways of probation, if they be worth believing in what they say, my
reason sucks it in. As if I be told that God said [there are three and one in
heaven] I ask, who said it? is he credible, why? If I find that all things
satisfy my reason, I believe him saying that God said so; and then (...) or
faith enters. I believe the thing also, not because I can prove it directly,
for I cannot, but I can prove it indirectly; testimony and authority is my
argument, and that is sufficient. The Apostles entered into much of their faith
by their senses, they saw many articles of their Creed; but as they which saw
and believed were blessed, so they which see not, but are argued and disputed
into their faith, and believe what they find reasonable to believe, shall have
the reward of their faith, while they wisely follow their reason.

4. Now in all this, 23.
here is no difference in my reason, save that as it does not prove a
Geometrical proposition by moral Philosophy, so neither does it prove a
revelation by a natural argument, but into one and the other it enters by
principles proper to the inquisition; and faith and reason are not opposed at
all. Faith and natural reason are several things, and Arithmetical and Moral
reasons are as differing, but it is reason that carries me to objects of faith,
and faith is my reason so disposed, so used, so instructed.

The result of these propositions is this one:

That into the greatest mysteriousness of our Religion, 24.
and the deepest articles of faith we enter by our reason: Not that we can
prove every one of them by natural reason, for to say that, were as vain, as to
say we ought to prove them by Arithmetic or Rules of Music; but whosoever
believes wisely and not by chance, enters into his faith by the hand of reason;
that is, he has causes and reasons why he believes. He indeed that has
reasons insufficient and incompetent, believes indeed not wisely, but for some
reason or other he does it; but he that has none, does not believe at all: For
the understanding is a rational faculty, and therefore every act of the
understanding is an act of the rational faculty, and that is an act of reason;
as vision is of the visive faculty: And faith, which is an act or habit of the
understanding consenting to certain propositions for the authority of the
speaker, is also as much an act of reason, as to discourse in a proposition of
Aristotle. For faith assenting to a proposition for a reason drawn a
testimonio, is as very a discourse, as to assent to a proposition for a reason
drawn from the nature of things. It is not less an act of reason, because it
uses another topic. And all this is plain and certain, when we discourse of
faith formally in its proper and natural capacity, that is, as it is a
reception of propositions a testimony.

Indeed if we consider faith as it is a habit infused by God, 25.
and by Gods holy Spirit, so there is something more in it then thus: For so,
faith is a vital principle, a magazine of secret truths, which we could never
have found out by natural reason, that is, by all that reason which is born
with us, and by all that reason that grows with us, and by all secular
experiences and conversations with the world; but of such things which God
only teaches, by ways supernatural and divine.

Now here is the close and secret of the Question, 26.
Whether or no faith in this sense, and materially taken, be contrary to our
worldly or natural reason, or whether is any or all the propositions of faith
to be exacted, interpreted, and understood according to this reason materially
taken? that is, are not our reasons which we rightly follow in natural
Philosophy, in Metaphysics, in other Arts and Sciences, sometimes contrary to
faith? and if they be, whether shall be followed? or can it in any sense be an
article of faith, if it be contrary to right reason? I answer to this, by
several propositions.

1. Right Reason (meaning our right reason, 27.
or humane reason) is not the affirmative or positive measure of things Divine,
or of articles and mysteries of faith; and the reasons are plain: 1. Because
many of them depend upon the free will of God, for which, till he gives us
reasons, we are to be still and silent, admiring the secret, and adoring the
wisdom, and expecting till the curtain be drawn, or till Elias come and tell
us all things. But he that will inquire and pry into the reason of the Mystery,
and because he cannot perceive it, will disbeleeve the thing, or undervalue it,
and say it is not at all, because he does not understand the reason of it, and
why it should be so, may as well say that his Prince does not raise an Army in
time of peace, because he do not know a reason why he should; or that God
never did suffer a brave Prince to die ignobly, because it was a thousand
pities he should. There is a ragione di stato, and a ragione di regno, and a
ragione di cielo, after which none but fools will inquire, and none but the
humble shall ever find.

Who can tell why the Devil, 28.
who is a wise and intelligent creature, should so spitefully, and for no end
but for mischief, tempt so many souls to ruin, when he knows it can do him no
good, no pleasure, but fantastic? or who can tell why he should be delighted
in a pleasure that can be nothing but fantastic, when he knows things by
intuition, not by phantasm, and has no low conceit of things as we have? or
why he should do so many things against God, whom he knows he cannot hurt, and
against souls, whose ruin cannot add one moment of pleasure to him? and if it
makes any change, it is infinitely to the worse: That these things are so, our
Religion tells us; but our reason cannot reach it why it is so, or how: Whose
reason can give an account why, or understand it to be reasonable, that God
should permit evil for good ends, when he hates that evil, and can produce that
good without that evil? and yet that he does so we are taught by our Religion:
Whose reason can make it intelligible, that God who delights not in the death
of a sinner, but he and his Christ, and all their Angels rejoice infinitely in
the salvation of a sinner, yet that he should not cause that every sinner
should be saved, working in him a mighty and a prevailing grace, without which
grace he shall not in the event of things be saved, and yet this grace is
wholly his own production. -- Omnipotens hominem cum gratia salvat
Ipsa suum consummat opus, Prosper c. ^. de ingrat.
cui tempus agendi
Semper adest quae gesta velit, non moribus illi
Fit mora, non causis anceps suspenditur ullis.


Why does not he work in us all to will and to do, not only that we can will,
but that we shall will? for if the actual willing be any thing, it is his
creation; we can create nothing, we cannot will unless he effect it in us, and
why he does not do that which so well pleases him, and for the want of the
doing of which he is so displeased, and yet he alone is to do it some way or
other; humane reason cannot give a wise or a probable account.

Nam prius immites populos urbesque rebels,
Vincente obstantes animos pietate, Prosp. de praedest. 55. cap. 8.
subegit;
Non hoc consilio tantum hortatuque benigno
Suadens atque docens, quasi normam legis haberet
Gratia, sed mutans intus mentem atque reformans,
Vasque novum ex fracto fingens, virtute creandi.
Non istud monitus legis, non verba prophetae,
Non praestata sibi praestat natura, sed unus
Quod fecit reficit. Percurrat Apostolus orbem,
Praedicet, hortetur, plantet, riget, increpet, instet,
Quaque viam verbo reseratam invenerit, intret;
Ut tamen his studiis auditor promoveatur
Non doctor neque discipulus, sed gratia sola
Efficit --
Where is the wise Discourser, that can tell how it can be, that God foreknows
certainly what I shall do ten years hence, and yet it is free to me at that
time, to will or not to will, to do or not to do that thing? Where is the
discerning Searcher of secrets, that can give the reason why God should
determine for so many ages before, that Judas should betray Christ, and yet
that God should kill him eternally for effecting the Divine purpose, and
fore-determined counsel? Well may we wonder that God should wash a soul with
water, and with bread and wine nourish us up to immortality, and make real
impresses upon our spirits by the blood of the vine, and the kidneys of wheat;
but who can tell why he should choose such mean instruments to effect such
glorious promises? since even the greatest things of this world had not been
disproportionable instruments to such effects, nor yet too great for our
understanding; and that we are fain to stoop to make these mean elements be
even with our faith, and with our understanding. Who can divine, and give us
the cause, or understand the reason, why God should give us so great rewards
for such nothings, and yet damn men for such insignificant mischiefs, for
thoughts, for words, for secret wishes, that effect no evil abroad, but only
might have done, or it may be were resolved to be unactive? For if the goodness
of God be so overflowing in some cases, we in our reason should not expect,
that in such a great goodness, there should be so great an aptness to destroy
men greatly for little things: and if all mankind should join in search, it
could never be told, why God should adjudge the Heathen or the Israelites to an
eternal hell, of which he never gave them warning, nor created fears great
enough, to produce caution equal to their danger; and who can give a reason why
for temporal and transient actions of sin, the world is to expect never ceasing
torments in hell to eternal ages? That these things are thus, we are taught in
Scripture, but here our reason is not instructed to tell why or how; and
therefore our reason is not the positive measure of mysteries, and we must
believe what we can not understand.

Thus are they to be blamed, who make intricacies and circles in mysterious
articles, 29.
because they cannot wade thorough them; it is not to be understood why God
should send his holy Son from his bosom to redeem us, to pay our price; nor to
be told why God should exact a price of himself for his own creature; nor to be
made intelligible to us, why he who loved us so well, as to send his Son to
save us, should at the same time so hate us, as to resolve to damn us, unless
his Son should come and save us. But the Socinians who conclude that this was
not thus, because they know not how it can be thus, are highly to be reproved
for their excess in the inquiries of reason, not where she is not a competent
Judge, but where she is not competently instructed; and that is the second
reason.

2. The reason of man is a right Judge always when she is truly informed; 30.
but in many things she knows nothing but the face of the article: the
mysteries of faith are oftentimes like Cherubims heads placed over the
Propitiatory, where you may see a clear and a bright face and golden wings, but
there is no body to be handled; there is light and splendour upon the brow, but
you may not grasp it; and though you see the revelation clear, and the article
plain, yet the reason of it we cannot see at all; that is, the whole knowledge
which we can have here is dark and obscure; We see as in a glass darkly, says
S. Paul, that is, we can see what, but not why, and what we do see is the
least part of that which does not appear; but in these cases our understanding
is to submit, and wholly to be obedient, but not to inquire further. Delicata
est illa obedientia quae causas quaerit. If the understanding will not consent
to a revelation, until it see a reason of the proposition, it does not obey at
all, for it will not submit, till it cannot choose. In these cases, Reason and
Religion are like Leah and Rachel: Reason is fruitful indeed, and brings forth
the firstborn, but she is blear-eyed, and oftentimes knows not the secrets of
her Lord; but Rachel produces two children, Faith and Piety, and Obedience is
Midwife to them both, and Modesty is the Nurse.

From hence it follows, 31.
that we cannot safely conclude thus, This is agreeable to right reason,
therefore this is so in Scripture, or in the counsel of God; not that one
reason can be against another, when all things are equal, but that the state of
things, and of discourses is imperfect; and though it be right reason in such a
constitution of affairs, yet it is not so in others; that a man may repel force
by force, is right reason, and a natural right, but yet it follows not, that it
can be lawful for a private Christian to do it, or that Christ has not
forbidden us to strike him that strikes us: The reason of the difference is
this; In nature it is just that it be so, because we are permitted only to
natures provisions, and she has made us equal, and the condition of all men
indifferent; and therefore we have the same power over another, that he has
over us; besides, we will do it naturally, and till a Law forbad it, it could
not be amiss, and there was no reason in nature to restrain it, but much to
warrant it. But since the Law of God has forbidden it, he has made other
provisions for our indemnity, and where he permits us to be defenseless (as in
cases of Martyrdom and the like) he has promised a reward to make infinite
amends: So that we may repel force by force, says Nature, we may not, says
Christ, and yet they are not two contradictory propositions. For nature says we
may, when otherwise we have no security, and no reward for suffering; but
Christ has given both the defense of Laws and Authority, and the reward of
heaven, and therefore in this case it is reasonable. And thus we cannot
conclude, This man is a wicked man because he is afflicted, or his cause is
evil because it does not thrive; although it be right reason, that good men
ought to be happy and prosperous; because although reason says right in it, yet
no reason can wisely conclude, that therefore so it should be in this world,
when faith and reason too tell us it may be better hereafter. The result is
this, every thing that is above our understanding, is not therefore to be
suspected or disbeleeved, neither is any thing to be admitted that is against
Scripture, though it be agreeable to right reason, until all information is
brought in, by which the sentence is to be made.

For as it happens in dreams and madness, 32.
where the argument is good, and the discourse reasonable oftentimes; but
because it is inferred from weak phantasms, and trifling and imperfect notices
of things, and obscure apprehensions, therefore it is not only desultorious
and light, but insignificant, and far from ministering to knowledge: so it is
in our reason as to matters of Religion, it argues well and wisely, but because
it is from trifling, or false, or uncertain principles, and unsure information,
it oftentimes is but a witty nothing: reason is an excellent limbeck, and will
extract rare quintessences, but if you put in nothing but mushromes, or
eggeshels, or the juice of coloquintida, or the filthy gingran, you must expect
productions accordingly, useless or unpleasant, dangerous or damnable.

2. Although right reason is not the positive and affirmative measure of any
article, 33.
yet it is the negative measure of every one. So that, whatsoever is
contradictory to right reason, is at no hand to be admitted as a mystery of
faith, and this is certain upon an infinite account.

1. Because nothing can be true and false at the same time, 34.
otherwise it would follow that there could be two truths contrary to each
other: for if the affirmative be true, and the negative true too, then the
affirmative is true and is not true, which were a perfect contradiction, and we
were bound to believe a lie, and hate a truth; and yet at the same time, obey
what we hate, and consent to what we disbeleeve: No man can serve two such
Masters.

2. Out of truth nothing can follow but truth; 35.
whatsoever therefore is truth, this is therefore safe to be followed, because
no error can be the product of it. It follows therefore, that by believing one
truth, no man can be tied to disbeleeve another. Whatsoever therefore is
contrary to right reason, or to a certain truth in any faculty, cannot be a
truth, for one truth is not contrary to another: if therefore any proposition
be said to be the doctrine of Scripture, and confessed to be against right
reason, it is certainly not the doctrine of Scripture, because it cannot be
true, and yet be against what is true.

3. All truths are emanations and derivatives from God, 36.
and therefore whatsoever is contrary to any truth, in any faculty whatsoever,
is against the truth of God, and God cannot be contrary to himself; for as God
is one, so truth is one; for truth is Gods eldest daughter, and so like
himself, that God may as well be multiplied, as abstracted truth.

4. And for this reason God does not only prove our Religion, 37.
and Jesus Christ prove his Mission by Miracles, by Holiness, by verification
of Prophecies, and prediction of future Contingencies, and voices from heaven,
and apparition of Angels, and Resurrection from the grave, and fulfilling all
that was said of him by the Prophets, that our faith might enter into us by
discourse, and dwell by love, and be nursed and supported by reason: but also
God is pleased to verify his own proceedings, and his own propositions, by
discourses merely like ours, when we speak according to right reason. Thus God
convinces the peevish people that spoke evil of him, Isa. 1. 18. and 5. 3.
Ezekiel. 18. 25.
by arguing concerning the justice of his ways, and exposes his proceedings to
be argued by the same measures and proportions by which he judges us, and we
judge one another.

5. For indeed how can it be possibly otherwise? 38.
how can we confess God to be just if we understand it not? but how can we
understand him so, but by the measures of justice? and how shall we know that,
if there be two Justices, one that we know, and one that we know not, one
contrary to another? if they be contrary, they are not justice; for justice can
be no more opposed by justice, then truth to truth: if they be not contrary,
then that which we understand to be just in us, is just in God, and that which
is just once, is just for ever in the same case, and circumstances: and indeed
how is it that we are in all things of excellency and virtue to be like God,
and to be meek like Christ, to be humble as he is humble, and to be pure like
God, to be just after his example, to be merciful as our heavenly Father is
merciful? If there is but one Mercy, and one Justice, and one Meekness, then
the measure of these, and the reason is eternally the same. If there be two,
either they are not essential to God, or else not imitable by us: And then how
can we glorify God, and speak honor of his Name, and exalt his justice, and
magnify his truth, and sincerity, and simplicity, if truth, and simplicity, and
justice, and mercy in him is not that thing which we understand, and which we
are to imitate? To give an example. I have promised to give my friend a 100.
pounds on the Calends of March: The day comes, and he expects the donative; but
I send him answer, that I did promise so by an open promise and signification,
and I had an inclination to do so; but I have also a secret will to keep my
money, and instead of that to give him a 100. blows upon his back: if he
reproaches me for an unjust and a false person; I have nothing to answer, for I
believe he would hardly take it for good payment to be answered with a
distinction, and told; I have two wills, an open, and a secret will, and they
are contrary to each other: he would tell me that I were a false person for
having two wills, and those two wills were indeed but one, nothing but a will
to deceive and abuse him. Now this is reason, right reason, the reason of all
the world, the measure of all mankind, the measure that God has given us to
understand, and to walk, to live, and to practice by. And we cannot understand
what is meant by hypocrisy, and dissembling, if to speak one thing and not to
mean it, be not that hypocrisy. Now put case God should call us to give him the
glory of his justice and sincerity, of the truth of his promises, and the
equity of his ways, and should tell us. That we perish by our own fault, and if
we will die, it is because we will, not because we must; because we choose it,
not because he forces us; for he calls us, and offers us life and salvation,
and gives us powers, and time and advantages, and desires it really, and
endeavors it passionately, and effects it materially, so far as it concerns
his portion: This is a certain evidence of his truth and justice; But if we can
reply and say, It is true, O God, that thou do call us, but do never intend
we should come, that thy open will is loving and plausible, but thy secret will
is cruel, decretory and destructive to us whom thou have reprobated; that thy
open will is ineffective, but thy secret will only is operative, and
productive of a material event, and therefore although we are taught to say,
Thou art just, and true in all thy sayings, yet certainly it is not that
justice which thou have commanded us to imitate and practice, it is not that
sincerity which we can safely use to one another, and therefore either we men
are not just when we think we are, or else thou art not just who do and
speak contrary things, or else there are two contrary things which may be
called justice.

For let it be considered as to the present instance; 39.
God cannot have two wills, it is against the unity of God, and the simplicity
of God. If there were two Divine wills, there were two Gods; and if it be one
will, then it cannot at the same time will contrary things; and if it does not,
then when God says one thing, and yet he wills it not, it is because he only
wills to say it, and not to do it; and if to say this thing of the good, the
just, the true, the righteous Judge of all the world be not blasphemy, I know
not what is.

The purpose of this instance is to exemplify, 40.
that in all virtues and excellencies there is a perfect unity: and because all
is originally and essentially in God, and from him derived to us, and all our
good, our mercy, our truth, our justice is but an imitation of his, it follows
demonstratively, that what is unjust in men, and what is falsehood in our
entercourses, is therefore false or unjust, because it is contrary to the
eternal pattern: and therefore whatsoever our reason does rightly call unjust,
or hypocrisy, or falsehood must needs be infinitely far from God; and those
propositions which asperse God with any thing of this nature, are so far from
being the word of God, or an article of faith, or a mystery of religion, that
it is blasphemous and false, hateful to God and good men.

In these things there is the greater certainty, 41.
because there is the less variety and no mystery; these things which in God we
adore as Attributes, being the lines of our Duty, the limits and scores we are
to walk by; therefore as our reason is here best instructed, so it cannot
easily be deceived, and we can better tell what is right reason in these
things, then in questions not so immediately relative to duty and morality.

But yet this Rule also holds in every thing where reason is, 42.
or can be right; but with some little difference of expression, but generally
thus:

1. Whatsoever right reason says cannot be done, 43.
we cannot pretend from Scripture, that it belongs to Gods Almightiness to do
it; it is no part of the Divine Omnipotency, to do things contradictory; for
that is not to be done which is not, and it is no part of power to do that
which is not an act or effect of power. Now in every contradictory, one part is
a nonentity, a nothing, and therefore by power cannot be produced; and to
suppose it producible or possible to be effected by an Almighty power, is to
suppose an Almighty power to be no power, or to do that which is not the
effect of power.

But I need say no more of this, 44.
for all men grant it, and all sects and varieties of Christians endeavor to
clear their articles from inferring contradictions, as implicitly confessing,
that it cannot be true to which any thing that is true is contradictory. Only
some men are forced by their interest and opinions to say, that although to
humane reason some of their articles seem to have in them contradictions, yet
it is the defect of their reason, and their faith is the more excellent, by how
much reason is more at a loss. So do the Lutherans about the Ubiquity of
Christ's body, and the Papists about Transubstantiation, and the Calvinists
about absolute Reprobation, as being resolved upon the propositions, though
heaven and earth confute them. For if men can be safe from argument with such a
little artifice as this, then no error can be confuted, then there is nothing
so absurd but may be maintained, and a man's reason is useless in inquiry and in
probation; and (which is to me very considerable) no man can in any article be
a heretic or sin against his conscience. For to speak against the words of
Scripture, is not directly against our conscience, there are many ways to
escape, by interpretation or authority; but to profess an article against our
reason, is immediately against our conscience; for reason and conscience dwell
under the same roof, and eat the same portions of meat, and drink the same
chalice: The authority of Scripture is superinduced, but right reason is the
eternal word of God; The kingdom of God that is within us; and the best
portions of Scripture, even the Law of Jesus Christ, which in moral things is
the eternal law of Nature, is written in our hearts, is reason, and that
wisdom to which we cannot choose but assent, and therefore in whatsoever he
goes against his reason, he must needs go against his conscience, because he
goes against that, by which he supposes God did intend to govern him, reason
not having been placed in us as a snare and a temptation, but as a light and a
star to lead us by day and night. It is no wonder that men maintain absurd
propositions, who will not hear great reason against them, but are willing to
take excuses and pretenses for the justification of them.

2. This is not to be understood, 45.
as if God could do nothing but what we can with our reason comprehend or know
how. For God can do every thing, but we cannot understand every thing: and
therefore infinite things there are, or may be, which our reason cannot master;
they are above our understanding, but are to be entertained by faith. It is not
to be said or believed that God can do what right reason says cannot be: but
it must be said and believed that God can do those things to which our
understanding cannot by all its powers ministered here below, attain. For since
God is omnipotent, unless we were omniscient, we could not understand all that
he can do; but although we know but little, yet we know some propositions
which are truths taught us by God, and they are the measures whereby we are to
speak and believe concerning the works of God.

For it is to be considered, 46.
whatsoever is above our understanding, is not against it: supra and secundum
may consist together in several degrees: Thus we understand the Divine power of
working miracles, and we believe and know God has done many: and although we
know not how our dead bones shall live again, yet our reason tells us, that it
is within the power of God to effect it; and therefore our faith need not be
troubled to believe it. But if a thing be against our understanding, it is
against the work of God, and against a truth of God, and therefore is no part,
and it can be no effect of the Divine power: Many things in nature are above
our understanding, and no wonder if many things in grace are so too; The peace
of God passes all understanding, yet we feel something of it, and hope for
more, and long for all, and believe what we yet cannot perceive. But I consider
further:

There are some things in reason which are certainly true, 47.
and some things which reason does infallibly condemn: our blessed Saviors
argument was certain, A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye perceive me to
have; therefore I am no spirit: and S. John's argument was certain, That which
we have seen with our eyes, and heard with our ears, and which our hands have
handled of the word of life, that we preach, that is, we are to believe what we
see and hear and feel; and as this is true in the whole Religion, so it is true
in every article of it. If right sense and right reason tell us clearly, that
is, tell us so that there is no absurdness, or contradiction, or
unreasonableness in it, we are to believe it, as we are to believe God; and if
an Angel from heaven should tell us any thing against these propositions, I do
not doubt but we would reject him. Now if we inquire what things are certainly
true or false; I must answer that in the first place I reckon, prime principles
and contradictions. In the next place, those things which are manifestly
absurd: but if it be asked further, which things are manifestly absurd, and
what it is to be manifestly absurd? there can no more answer be given to this,
then to him who asks, how shall I know whether I am in light or in darkness? If
therefore it be possible for men to dote in such things as these, their reason
is useless in its greatest force and highest powers: It must therefore be
certain, that if the parts of a contradiction, or a right reason be put in bar
against a proposition, it must not pretend to be an article of faith; and to
pretend Gods omnipotency against it, is to pretend his power against his truth.
God can deliver us from our enemies, when to humane reason it seems impossible,
that is, when we are destitute of all natural help, and proper causes and
probabilities of escape, by what we see or feel; that is, when it is impossible
to men, it may be possible with God; but then the faith which believes that God
can do it, is also very right reason: and if we hope he will do it, there is
more then faith in it, but there is nothing in it beyond reason, except love
also be there.

The result is this: 48.
1. Our reason is below many of the works, and below all the power of God, and
therefore cannot perceive all that God has, or can, or will do, no more then
an Owl can stare upon the body of the Sun, or tell us what strange things are in
that immense globe of fire. But when any thing that is possible is revealed,
reason can consent; but if reason cannot consent to it when it is told of it,
then it is nothing, it has no being, it has no possibility; whatsoever is in
our understanding is in being: for that which is not, is not intelligible, and
to what reason cannot consent, in that no being can be supposed.

2. Not only what is impossible to reason is possible in faith, 49.
but if any thing be really absurd or unreasonable, that is, against some
truth, in which humane reason is really instructed, that is a sufficient
presumption against a proposition, that it cannot be an article of faith. For
even this very thing (I mean) an avoiding of an absurdity, or an inconvenience,
is the only measure and rule of interpreting very many places of Scripture.
For why does not every Christian pull out his right eye, or cut off his hand,
and leg, that he might enter into heaven halt and blind? why do not we
believe that Christ is a door, and a vine, and a stone, since these things are
dogmatically affirmed in Scripture? but that we expound Scriptures as we
confute them who deny principles, by declaring that such senses, or opinions
introduce evil and foolish consequents, against some other truth in some
faculty or other in which humane reason is rightly taught. Now the measure and
the limit of this, is that very thing which is the reason of this, and all the
preceding discourse, One truth cannot be against another; if therefore your
opinion or interpretation be against a truth, it is false, and no part of
faith. A commandment cannot be against a revelation, a privilege cannot be
against a promise, a threatening cannot mean against an article, a right cannot
be against a duty; for all reason, and all right, and all truth, and all faith,
and all commandments are from God, and therefore partake of his unity and his
simplicity.

3. This is to be enlarged with this advice, 50.
that in all questions of the sense of Scripture, the ordinary way is to be
presumed before the extraordinary, and if the plain way be possible, and
reasonable, and useful, and the extraordinary of no other use, but to make
wonder and strangeness to the belief of the understanding, we are to presume
for that, and to let this alone, because that has the advantage of reason, it
being more reasonable that God will keep the methods of his own creation, and
bring us to him by ways with which we are acquainted, and by which we can
better understand our way to him, then that he will do a miracle to no
purpose, and without necessity; God never doing any thing for the ostentation,
but very many things for the manifestation of his power, for his wisdom and
his power declare each other, and in every thing where he shows his mightiness,
he also shows his wisdom, that is, he never does any thing without great
reason. And therefore the Romans doctrine of the holy Sacrament suffers an
intolerable prejudice, because it supposes daily heaps and conjugations of
miracles, wholly to no purpose; since the real body can be taken by them to
whom it does not good; and all the good can be conveyed to us, though the body
be only taken in a spiritual sense; all the good being conveyed by moral
instruments, and to spiritual effect; and therefore the ordinary way, and the
sense which the Church of England gives, is infinitely to be preferred, because
it supposes no violences and effects of miracles, no cramps and convulsions to
reason: and a man may receive the holy Sacrament, and discourse of all its
effects, and mysteriousnesses, though he do not talk like a mad man, or a man
going out of his wits, and a stranger to all the Reason and Philosophy of the
world; and therefore it is remarkable, that there is in our faith no article,
but what is possible to be effected by the ordinary power of God; That a Virgin
should conceive is so possible to Gods power, that is possible in nature say
the Arabians; but however, he that made the Virgin out of nothing, can make her
produce something out of something: and for the resurrection of the dead, it is
certainly less then the Creation, and it is like that which we see every year,
in the resurrection of plants and dead corn, and is in many degrees imitable by
Art, which can out of ashes raise a flower. And for all the other articles of
our Creed, they are so far from being miraculous and strange to reason, that
the greatest wonder is, that our belief is so simple and facile, and that we
shall receive so great and prodigious events hereafter, by instruments so
fitted to the weakest capacities of men here below. Indeed some men have so
scorned the simplicity of the Gospel, that because they thought it honorable
to have every thing strange and unintelligible, they have put in devices and
dreams of miracles of their own, and have so explicated them, that as without
many miracles they could not be verified, so without one, they can hardly be
understood. That which is easy to reason, and most intelligible, is more like
the plainness, and truth, and innocence, and wisdom of the Gospel, then that
which is bones to Philosophy, and iron to the teeth of babes.

But this is to be practiced with caution; 51.
for every man's reason is not right, and every man's reason is not to be
trusted: and therefore,

4. As absurd foolish things are not to be obtruded, under the pretense of
being mysteries, so neither must mistaken Philosophy, and false notices of
things be pretended for reason. There are mistakes on all hands, some
Christians explicate their mysteries, and mince them into so many minutes, and
niceties, and speak of them more then they are taught, more then is said in the
Scriptures, or the first Creeds, that the article which in its own simplicity
was indeed mysterious, and not to be comprehended by our dark and less
instructed reason, but yet was not impossible to be believed, is made
impossible to be understood by the appendages, and exposed to scorn and
violences by heretics and misbeleevers; so is the Incarnation of the Son of
God, the mysterious Trinity, the presence of Christ in the holy Sacrament. For
so long as the mysteries are signified in simple, wise, and general terms,
reason can espy no particular impossibilities in them: but when men will
explicate what they cannot understand, and intricate what they pretend to
explicate, and superinduce new clauses to the article, and by entering within
the cloud, do less see the light, they find reason amazed, where she could
easily have submitted, and clouds brought upon the main article, and many times
the body it self is supposed to be a phantasm, because of its tinsel and fairy
dressing: and on the other side, he that would examine an article of faith, by
a proposition in Philosophy, must be careful that his Philosophy be as right as
he pretends. For as it will be hard to expect, that right reason should submit
to a false article, upon pretense it is revealed, so it will be as hard to
distrust an article, because it is against a false proposition, which I was
taught in those Schools of learning who speak things by custom, or by chance,
or because they are taught, and because they are not suffered to be examined.
Whoever offers at a reproof of reason, must be sure that he is right in the
article, and that must be upon the strength of stronger reason; and he that
offers by reason to reprove a pretended article, must be sure his reason must
be greater then the reverence of that pretension.

And therefore holy Scriptures command us in those cases to such purposes, 52.
as not only teach us what to do in it, but also confirm the main inquiry;
for therefore we are commanded to try all things: Suppose that be meant that we
try them by Scriptures; how can we so try them, but by comparing line with
line, by considering the consequents of every pretense, the analogy of faith,
the measures of justice, the laws of nature, essential right, and prime
principles? and all this is nothing but by making our faith the limit of our
reason, in matters of duty to God; and reason the minister of faith, and things
that concern our duty. The same is intended by those other words of another
Apostle, Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try if the spirits be of God;
how can this be tried? by Scripture? yea; but how if the Question be of the
sense of Scripture, as it is generally at this day? Then it must be tried by
something extrinsecal to the Question, and whasoever you can call to judgment,
reason must still be your Solicitor and your Advocate and your Judge; only
reason is not always the Law, sometimes it is, for so our blessed Savior was
pleased to say, Why of your selves do you not judge that which is reasonable?
for so (...) there is used, Luke 12. 57.
that which is fitting and consonant to reason; and in proportion to this it
was, that so much of the Religion of Jesus was clothed with Parables, as if the
theoremes and propositions themselves were clothed with flesh and blood, and
conversed after the manner of men, to whom reason is the Law, and the Rule, the
Guide and the Judge, the measure of good and evil for this life, and for that
which is to come. The consequent is this:

He that says thus, This doctrine is against the word of God, and therefore it
is absurd and against reason, may as it falls out say true; but his proposition
will be of no use, because reason is before revelation, and that this is
revealed by God, must be proved by reason. But,

He that says, 54.
This is absurd, or this is against reason, therefore this is against the word
of God, if he says true in the antecedent, says true in the consequent, and the
argument is useful in the whole, it being the best way to interpret difficult
Scriptures, and to establish right senses, and to confute confident heresies.
For when both sides agree that these are the words of God, and the question of
faith is concerning the meaning of the words, nothing is an article of faith,
or a part of the religion, but what can be proved by reasons to be the sense
and intentions of God. Reason is never to be pretended against the clear sense
of Scripture, because by reason it is that we came to perceive that to be the
clear sense of Scripture. And against Reason, reason cannot be pretended; but
against the words of Scripture produced in a question, there may be great cause
to bring reason; for nothing seems plainer then those words of S. James, Above
all things my brethren, swear not at all; and yet reason interposes and tells
us, that plain words must not be understood against plain reason and plain
necessity: For if oaths before Magistrates were not permitted and allowed, it
were necessary to examine all men by torture; and yet neither so could they so
well be secured of truth as they can by swearing. What is more plain then the
words of S. Paul? (...), mortify or kill your members, that are upon the earth;
and yet reason tells us, that we must not hurt or destroy one limb, and where
ever the effect would be intolerable, there the sense is still unreasonable;
and therefore not a part of faith, so long as it is an enemy to reason, which
is the elder sister, and the guide and guardian of the younger.

For as when the Tables of the Law were broken by Moses, 55.
God would make no new ones, but bade Moses provide some stones of his own, and
he would write them over: so it is in our Religion, when God with the finger of
his Spirit, writes the Religion and the Laws of Jesus Christ, he writes them in
the tables of our reason, that is, in the tables of our hearts. Homo cordatus,
a wise, rational man, sober, and humble, and discursive has the best faith,
but the (...) (as S. Paul calls them) the unreasonable, they are such who have
no faith, Romans 12. 1.
2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. For the Christian Religion is called by S. Paul (...), a
reasonable worship; 1 Pet. 2. 2.
and the word of God is called by S. Peter (...), the reasonable and uncrafty
milk; it is full of reason, but it has no tricks, it is rational, but not
crafty, it is wise and holy: And he that pretends there are some things in our
Religion, which right reason cannot digest and admit, makes it impossible to
reduce Atheists, or to convert Jews and Heathens But if reason invites them in,
reason can entertain them all the day.

And now to the arguments brought against the use of reason; the^ answers may
easily be gathered from the premises:

To the first I answer, 56.
That reason is the eye of the soul in all things, natural, moral and
religious; and faith is the light of that eye, in things pertaining to God; for
it is true, that natural reason cannot teach us the things of God, that is,
reason instructed only by this world, which S. Paul calls the natural man,
cannot discern the things of the Spirit, for they are spiritually discerned:
that is, that they are taught and perceived by the aids of Gods Spirit, by
revelation and divine assistances and grace: but though natural reason cannot,
yet it is false to say that reason cannot; for reason illuminated can perceive
the things of God; that is, when reason is taught in that faculty, under that
Master, and by those rules which are proper for spiritual things, then reason
can do all its intentions.

To the second I answer, 57.
that therefore humility and piety are the best dispositions, to the
understanding the secrets of the Gospel:

1. Because these do remove those prejudices and obstructions which are bars
and fetters to reason; and the humble man does best understand, because the
proud man will not inquire, or he will not labor, or he will not understand
any proposition that makes it necessary for him to lay aside his employment or
his vanity, his interest or his vice.

2. These are indeed excellent dispositions to understanding, the best moral
instruments, but not the best natural: If you are to dispute against a Heathen,
a good reason will sooner convince him then an humble thought; If you be to
convert a Jew, an argument from the old Prophets is better to him then three or
four acts of a gracious comportment.

3. Sometimes by way of blessing and reward. God gives understanding to good
persons, which to the evil he denies, but this which effects any thing by way
of Divine blessing, is not to be supposed the best natural instrument. Thus the
Divines say that the fire of hell shall torment souls, tanquam instrumentum
Divinae voluntatis, as the instrument in the hand of a voluntary, and almighty
agent, but not as a thing apportioned properly to such an event, for the worm
of conscience is more apt to that purpose.

4. And when we compare man with man, so it is true that the pious man should
be sooner instructed then the impious, caeteris paribus, but if we compare
discourse and piety, reason and humility, they excel each other in their
several kinds, as wool is better then a diamond, and yet a diamond is to be
preferred before a bag of wool; they operate to the same purpose of
understanding in several manners: And whereas it is said in the argument, that
the doctrine of the Cross was foolishness to the Greeks, it is true, but
nothing to the present question. For therefore it was foolishness to them,
because they had not been taught in the secrets of God, they were not
instructed how God would by a way so contrary to flesh and blood, cause the
spirits of just men to be made perfect. And they who were wise by Plato's
Philosophy, and only well skilled in Aristotle, could do nothing in the
Schools of Jesus, because they were not instructed in those truths by which
such proceedings were to be measured; but still, reason is the great wheel,
though according as the motion was intended, new weights must be proportioned
accordingly.

The third objection presses upon the point of duty, 58.
and because the Scripture requires obedience of understanding, and submitting
our most imperious faculties, therefore reason is to be excluded: To this I
answer, that we must submit our understanding to God, is very true, but that is
only when God speaks. But because we heard him not, and are only told that
God did speak, our reason must examine whether it be fit to believe them that
tell us so; for some men have spoken falsely, and we have great reason to
believe God, when all the reason in the world commands us to suspect the
offerings of some men: and although we ought for the greatest reasons submit to
God, yet we must judge and discern the sayings of God, from the pretenses of
men; and how that can be done without using out reason in the inquiries of
Religion is not yet discovered, but for the obedience of understanding, it
consists in these particulars.

The particulars in which obedience of Understanding consists.

1. That we submit to God only and not to man; 59.
that is, to God where ever it appears reasonable to be believed that he has
spoken, but never to man unless he has authority from reason or religion to
command our conformity.

2. That those things which by the abuse and pretense of reason are passed into
a fictitious and usurped authority, 60.
make no part of our Religion; for because we are commanded to submit our
understanding to God, therefore we must call no man Master upon earth;
therefore it is certain that we must not believe the reports or opinions of men
against a revelation of God. He that communicates with holy bread only, and
gives not the chalice to all Gods people that require the holy Communion, does
openly adhere to a fond custom and authority of abused men, and leaves the
express, clearest, undeniable institution of God.

3. When reason and revelation seem to disagree, 61.
let us so order our selves that so long as we believe this to be a revelation,
no pretense of reason may change our belief from it: if right or sufficient
reason can persuade us that this is not a revelation, well and good; but if
reason leaves us in the actual persuasion that it is so, we must force our
reason to comply with this, since no reason does force us to quit this wholly;
and if we cannot quit our reason or satisfy it, let us carry our selves with
modesty, and confess the revelation, though with profession of our ignorance
and unskilfulness to reconcile the two litigants.

4. That whatsoever is clearly and plainly told us, 62.
we obey it, and rest in it, and not measure it by the rules of folly and weak
Philosophy, or the sayings of men in which error may be ingredient; but when
things are unequal, that is, when we can doubt concerning our reason, and
cannot doubt concerning the revelation, we make no question but prefer this
before that.

5. That in particular inquiries, 63.
we so order our selves as to make this the general measure, that we never do
violence to the word of God, or suspect that, but resolve rather to call our
selves liars, then that Religion should receive detriment; and rather quit our
arguments then hazard an article; that is, that when all things are equal, we
rather prefer the pretense of revelation, then the pretenses of reason, for
the reverence of that and the suspicion of this. Beyond this we can do no more.

To the fourth I answer, 64.
that it is true, reason is fallible, or rather to speak properly,
ratiocination, or the using of reason is subject to abuse and deception; for
reason it self is not fallible: but if reason, that is, reasonings be fallible,
so are the pretenses of revelation subject to abuse; and what are we now the
nearer? Some reasons are but probable, and some are certain and confessed, and
so it is in the sense of Scriptures, some are plain and need no interpreter, no
discourse, no art, no reasonings to draw out their sense; but many are
intricate and obscure, secret and mysterious; and to use a fallible reasoning
to draw out an obscure and uncertain sense of Scripture, is sometimes the best
way we have, and then we must make the best of it we can: but the use of
reasoning is not only to find out truth the best we can, but sometimes we are
as sure of it; as of light; but then and always our reason (such as it is) must
lead us into such proportions of faith as they can: according as our reason or
motives are, so ordinary is the degree our faith.

To the fifth I need give no other answer but this, 65.
that it confesses the main question: For if this be the greatest reason in the
world, God has said it, therefore it is true, it follows, that all our faith
relies upon this one reason; but because this reason is of no use to us till
the minor proposition be proved, and that it appear that God has said it, and
that in the inquiry after that, we are to use all our reason; the consequent
is, that in the first and last, reason lends legs of faith, and nothing can be
wisely believed, but what can by some rational inducement be proved. As for the
last proposition in the objection, This is against Scripture, therefore it is
absurd and unreasonable, I have already made it appear to be an imprudent and
useless affirmative.

The sixth Objection complains of them that by weak reasonings lose their
Religion, 66.
but this is nothing against right reasoning: For because Mountebanks and old
women kill men by vile Physic, therefore is it true, that the wise discourses
of Physicians cannot minister to health? half-witted people talk against God,
and make objections against Religion, and themselves have not wit or will
enough to answer them and they intending to make reason to be the positive and
affirmative measure of Religion, are wholly mistaken, and abuse themselves and
others. 2. We are not to exact every thing in Religion according to our weak
reasonings; but whatsoever is certain in reason, Religion cannot contradict
that; but what is uncertain, or imperfect, Religion oftentimes does instruct
and amend it. But there are many mysteries of Religion contrary to reason,
corrupted with evil manners, and many are contrary to reason, corrupted with
false propositions; now these men make objections, which upon their own
principles they can never answer: but that which seems impossible to vicious
persons is reason to good men, and that which children and fools cannot answer,
amongst wise men has no difficulty; and the ignorant, and the unstable, wrest
some Scriptures to their own damnation: but concerning the new Atheists that
pretend to wit, it is not their reason, but their want of reason that makes
them such, for if either they had more learning, or did believe themselves to
have less, they could never be Atheists.

To the last I answer, 67.
that it is reason we should hear reason wherever we find it, if there be no
greater evil brought by the teacher then he can bring good; But if an heretic
preaches good things, it is not always lawful to hear them, unless when we are
out of danger of his abuses also. And thus truth from the devil may be heard,
if we were out of his danger; but because he tells truth to evil purposes, and
makes wise sayings to become craft, it is not safe to hear him. 2. But besides
this, although it is lawful to believe a truth which the devil tells us, yet it
is not lawful to go to School to the devil, or to make inquiries of him,
because he that does so, makes him his Master, and gives something of Gods
portion to Gods enemy. As for Judicial Astrology and Genethliacal predictions,
for my part I therefore reprove them, not because their reason is against
Religion, for certainly it cannot be; but because I think they have not reason
enough in what they say; they go upon weak principles which they cannot prove;
they reduce them to practice by impossible mediums: they draw conclusions with
artless and unskilful heads, they argue about things with which they have
little conversation, they cannot makes scientifical progress in their
profession, but out of greediness to do something; they usually, at least are
justly suspected to take in auxiliaries from the spirits of Darkness; they have
always spoken uncertainty, and most part falsely; and have always lived
scandalously in their profession: they have by all Religions been cried down,
trusted by none but fools, and superstitious people; and therefore although the
art may be very lawful, if the stars were upon the earth, or the men were in
heaven, if they had skill in what they profess, and reason in all their
pretenses, and after all that their principles were certain, and that the
stars did really signify future events, and that those events were not
overruled by every thing in heaven and in earth, by God, and by our own will
and wisdom, yet because here is so little reason, and less certainty, and
nothing but confidence and illusion, therefore it is that Religion permits them
not; and it is not the reason in this art, that is against Religion, but the
folly or the knavery of it, and the dangerous and horrid consequents, which
they feel that run a whoring after such Idols of imagination.

RULE 4. A judgment of nature, or inclination, is not sufficient to make a
sure Conscience.
BEcause this Rule is of good use, 1.
not only for making judgment concerning the states of some men, but also in
order to many practices, it will not be lost labor to consider, that there are
three degrees of practical judgment.

The first is called an inclination, 2.
or the first natural consonancy between the faculty or disposition of man, and
some certain actions. All men are naturally pitiful in some degree, unless
their nature be lame and imperfect: As we say all men naturally can see, and it
is true, if they have good eyes: so all men naturally are pitiful, unless they
have no bowels: But some more, some less. And therefore there is in their
natures a convenience, or agreeing between their dispositions and acts of
charity. In the first or lowest sort there is an aptness to it. 2. In the
sweeter and better natures there is a virtual charity. 3. But in those that
consider and choose, and observe the Commandment, or the proportions of right
reason, there is in these only a formal, deliberative, compound or practical
judgment.

Now concerning the first sort, 3.
that is, the natural disposition or first propensity, it is but a remote
disposition toward a right conscience and a practical judgment; because it
may be rescinded, or diverted by a thousand accidents, and is nothing else but
a relic of the shipwreck which Adam and all the world have made, and may pass
into nothing as suddenly as it came. He that sees two Cocks fight, though he
have no interest in either, will assist one of them at least by an ineffective
pity and desire: but this passes no further then to natural effects, or the
changes or affections of a lodestone; it may produce something in nature, but
nothing in manners.

Concerning the second, 4.
that is, a virtual judgment, that is, a natural inclination passing forth
into habit or custom, and delight in the actions of some virtues; it is
certain that it is one part of the grace of God, and a more promoted and
immediate disposition to the virtue of its kind then the former. Some men are
naturally very merciful, and some are abstemious, and some are continent: and
these in the course of their life take in every argument and accidental motive,
and the disposition swells, and the nature is confirmed. But still it is but
nature. The man, it may be, is chaste, because he hates the immodesty of those
addresses which prepare to uncleanness; or he loves his quiet, or fears the
accidents of his Enemy-crime; or there was a terror infused into him by the
sight of a sad spectacle, the evil reward of an adulterous person. -- quosdam
moechos dum Mugilis intrat. Concerning this kind of virtual judgment or
confirmed nature, I have two things to say:

1. That this virtual judgment can produce love or hatred to certain objects,
5.
ineffective complacencies or disrelishes respectively, proper antipathies and
aversations from a whole kind of objects; such as was that hatred that
Tamerlan had to Zercon, or some men to Cats. And thus much we cannot deny to be
produced by the operation and simple apprehension of our senses by pictures and
all impressions of fancy: Vide Aristot. de anima lib. 2. text. 154.
Cum opinamur difficile aliquid aut terribile statim compatimur. Secundum
imaginem autem similiter nos habemus. We find effects and impresses according
to the very images of things we see, and by their prime apprehensions; and
therefore much rather may these actus imperati, or more natural and proper
effects and affections of will be entertained or produced respectively. Men at
first sight fall in love with women, and that against their reason and
resolution, and counsel, and interest, and they cannot help it; and so they may
do with some actions of virtue. And as in the first case they are rather
miserable then vicious; so in this they are rather fortunate then virtuous: and
they may be commended as we praise a fair face, or a strong arm, an athletick
health, or a good constitution; and it is indeed a very good disposition and a
facilitation of a virtuous choice. But,

2. This virtual judgment, 6.
which is nothing but nature confirmed by accidents, is not a state of good by
which a man is acceptable to God. Neither is it a sufficient principle of a
good life, nor indeed of the actions of its own kind. 1. Not of good life,
because it may be in a single instance; and it can never be in all. The man
that is good natured, that is, naturally meek, and loving, goes the furthest
upon this account; but without the conjunction of other virtues it is a great
way off from that good state whither naturally it can but tend and incline: and
we see some good things are made to serve some evil; and by temperance, and a
moderate diet, some preserve their health, that they may not preserve their
chastity: and they may be habitually proud, because they are naturally chaste:
and then this chastity is no virtue, but a disposition and an aptness only. In
this sense that of S. James may be affirmed, He that offends in one, is guilty
of all; that is, if his inclinations, and his accidentally acquird habits be
such as to admit a mixture, they are not genuine and gracious: such are these
that are the effects of a nature fitted toward a particular virtue. It must be
a higher principle that makes an entire piety; nature and the habits growing
upon her stock, cannot do it. Alexander was a continent Prince, and the
captive beauties of Persia were secured by it in their Honors; but by rage he
destroyed his friend, and by drunkenness he destroyed himself.

2. But neither is this virtual judgment a sufficient principle of the actions
of its own kind; for this natural strength is nothing but an uneasiness and
unaptness to suffer by common temptations; but place the man where he can be
tempted, and this good disposition secures him not, because there may be
something in nature bigger then it.

It remains then, 7.
that to the constitution of a Right and Sure Conscience, there is required a
formal judgment, that is, a deliberation of the understanding, and a choice of
the will, that being instructed, and this inclined by the grace of God:
tantoque laudabilior munificentia nostra fore videbatur, quod ad illam non
impetu quodam sed consilio trahebamur, Lib. 1. ep. 8.
said Secundus: then it is right and good, then when it is not violent,
necessary, or natural, but when it is chosen. This makes a Right and Sure
Conscience, because the grace of God has an universal influence into all the
course of our actions. For he that said, Do not kill, said also, Do not
steal: and if he obeys in one instance, for that reason must obey in all, or be
condemned by himself, and then the Conscience is right in the principle and
fountain, though defiled in the issue and emanation. For he that is condemned
by his own Conscience, has the law written and the characters still fair,
legible, and read; but then the fault is in something else; the will is
corrupted. The sum is this:

It is not enough that the Conscience be taught by nature, 8.
but it must be taught by God, conducted by reason, made operative by
discourse, assisted by choice, instructed by laws and sober principles: and
then it is Right, and it may be Sure.

RULE 5. When two motives concur to the determination of an action, whereof
one is virtuous, and the other secular, a Right Conscience is not prejudiced by
that mixture.
HE that fasts to punish himself for his sins, 1.
and at the same time intends his health, though it will be very often
impossible for him to tell himself which was the final and prevailing motive
and ingredient into the persuasion, yet it is no detriment to his conscience;
the religious motive alone did suffice to make it to be an act of a good
conscience; and if the mix^ure of the other could change this, it could not be
lawful to use, or in any degree to be persuaded by the promises of those
temporal blessings which are reco^ded in both Testaments, and to which there is
a natural desire, and proper inclination. But this also is with some difference.

2. If the secular ingredient be the stronger, 2.
it is in the same degree as it prevails over the virtuous or religious, a
diminution of the worthiness of the action; but if it be a secular blessing
under a promise, it does not alter the whole kind of the action. The reason is
this: Because whatever God has promised, is therefore desirable and good,
because he has promised it, or he has promised it because it is of it self
good, and useful to us; and therefore whatever we may innocently desire, we may
innocently intend: but if it be mingled with a religious and spiritual
interest, it ought not to sit down in the highest place, because a more worthy
is there present, lest we be found to be passionate for the things of this
life, and indifferent for God and for Religion.

3. If the secular or temporal ingredient be not under a promise, 3.
and yet be the prime and chief motive, the whole case is altered: the
conscience is not right, it is natural inclination, not conscience, it is sense
or interest, not duty. * He that gives alms with a purpose to please his
Prince, who is charitable and religious, although his purpose be innocent, yet
because it is an end which God has not encouraged by propounding it as a
reward of charity the whole deliberation is turned to be a secular action, and
passes without a reward. Our blessed Savior has by an instance of his own,
determined this case. When thou make a feast call not the rich, who can make
thee recompense, but call the poor, and thou shall have reward in heaven. To
call the rich to a feast is no sin, but to call them is to lose the reward of
charity, by changing the whole nature of the action from charity to civility,
from Religion to prudence.

And this has not other exception or variety in it, 4.
but when the mixture is of a thing that is so purely natural, that it is also
necessary: Thus to eat upon a festival day to satisfy a long hunger, to be
honestly employed to get a living, do not cease to be religious, though that
which is temporal be the first and the greatest cause of the action or
undertaking. But the reason of this difference (if any be apprehended) is
because this natural end is also a duty, and tacitly under a promise.

Quest.

IT is usually required, 5.
that all that enter into the holy Offices of the Ministry should so primely
and principally design the glory of God, that all other considerations should
scarce be ingredients into the resolution, and yet if it be inquired how far
this is obligatory, and observe how little it is attended to in the first
preparations to the Order, the very needs of most men will make the Question
material.

But I answer to the Question, 6.
in proportion to the sense of the present Rule.

1. Where ever a religious act by Gods appointment may serve a temporal end and
a spiritual, to attend either is lawful; but it is still more excellent, by how
much preference and greater zeal, we more serve the more excellent. Therefore
although it be better to undertake the sacred function wholly for ends
spiritual, yet it is lawful to enter into it with an actual design to make that
calling the means of our natural and necessary support. The reason is:

Because it is lawful to intend what God has offered and propounded. 7.
The end which God has made, cannot be evil, and therefore it cannot be evil
to choose that instrument to that end, which by Gods appointment is to minister
to that end. Now since God has ordained that they who preach the Gospel should
live of the Gospel, it cannot be unlawful to design that in order to this.

2. If our temporal support and maintenance be the first and immediate design,
8.
it makes not the whole undertaking to be unlawful. For all callings, and all
states, and all actions, are to be directed or done to the glory of God;
according to that saying of S. Paul, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, all to the glory of God: and that one calling should be more for Gods
glory then another, is by reason of the matter and employment; but in every
one, for its portion still, Gods glory must be the principal, and yet no man
questions but it is lawful for any man to bring his son up to the most gainful
trade, if in other things there be no objection: and therefore why this may not
be the first moving consideration in the susception of, or designation to the
calling Ecclesiastical, cannot have any reason in the nature of the thing: For
if in all things Gods glory must be the principal end, and yet in some Callings
the temporal advantage is the first mover, then it may be so in all; the
intention of Gods glory notwithstanding: for if it hinders not in that, it
hinders not in this. But yet,

3. 9.
It is a great imperfection actually to think of nothing but the temporal
advantages, of which God has in that Calling made provisions; but I say, it is
not always a sin to make them the first mover in the designing the person to
that Calling.

But therefore this is only tolerable in those persons, 10.
who at great distance design the Calling; as when they first study to make
themselves capable of it, then it is tolerable, because they are bound to
provide for themselves in all just ways, and standing at so great distances
from it, cannot behold the beauties which are in interiori demo; the duty which
is on them, is to do that which is their proper work, that is, to fit
themselves with abilities and skill to conduct it, and therefore their
intention must be fitted accordingly, and move by the most powerful and
prevailing motive, so it be lawful. He that applies himself to learn letters,
has an intention proportionable to his person and capacity when he first
enters, and as he grows in powers, so must he also in purposes; so that as he
passes on to perfection, he may also have intentions more noble and more
perfect: and a man in any Calling may first design to serve that end that
stands next him, and yet when he is possessed of that, look on further to the
intention of the thing, and its own utmost capacity. But therefore,

4. Whoever does actually enter into Orders, 11.
must take care that his principal end be the glory of God, and the good of
souls. The reasons are these:

1. Because no man is fit for that Office, 12.
but he that is spiritual in his person, as well as his Office: he must be a
despiser of the world, a light to others, an example to the flock, a great
denier of himself, of a celestial mind, he must mind heavenly things; with
which dispositions it cannot consist, that he who is called to the lot of God,
should place his chief affections in secular advantages.

2. This is that of which the Apostle was a glorious precedent, 13.
We seek not yours, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
but you; for the Parents lay up for the children, not children for their
Parents: meaning, that between the spiritual and the natural paternity, there
is so much proportion, that when it is for the good of the children, they must
all quit their temporal advantages; but because this is to be done for the
spiritual, it follows, this must be chief.

And this I suppose is also enjoined by another Apostle, 14.
Feeding the flock of God, 1 P^^. 5. 2.
not for filthy lucre sake, (...), that is, but of a prompt, ready mind; a
mind moved by intrinsic arguments of fair design, not drawn by the outward
cords of vanity and gain.

3. 15.
The work of the Calling being principally and immediately for the good of
souls, and for the glory of God, it cannot be pursued as the nature of the work
requires, if that be not principally intended, which is principally to be
procured; All that which is necessary in order to it must also be taken care
of: Thus the Ministers of Religion may attend their health, and must look to
their necessary support, and may defend themselves against all impediments of
their offices in just and proportionable ways: but because all these have
further purposes, although they standing nearest may be first regarded by an
actual care, at some times, and in some circumstances, and by actual attention;
yet habitually, and principally, and constantly, the glory of God, and the good
of souls must be in the heart, and in the purpose of every action.

But the principality and pre-eminence of this intention is no otherwise to be
judged of, 16.
either by our selves or others, then by these following significations.

1. No man can in any sense principally, 17.
that is, as he ought, intend the good of souls, who enters into the sacred
Ministry without those just measures of preparation and disposition, which are
required by the Church, and the nature of the thing it self; that is, that he
be well instructed in the holy Scriptures, and be fit to teach, to exhort, to
reprove. For he who undertakes a work which can serve Gods ends and his own in
several capacities, and is not sufficiently instructed to serve the ends of
God, it is apparent that what he undertakes is for his own end.

2. His intentions cannot be right, who by any indirect arts does enter, for
that which does not begin at God, cannot be for God: Non enim ambitione, vel
pretio, sed probatae vitae and disciplinarum testimonio, ad honoris and
Sacerdotii insignia oportet promoveri, said the Emperor Theodosius. He
therefore who symoniacally enters, fixes his eye and heart upon that which he
values to be worth money, not upon the spiritual employment, between which and
money there can be no more proportion, then between contemplation and a
cartrope; they are not things of the same nature; and he that comes into the
field with an Elephant, cannot be supposed to intend to hunt a hare: neither
can he be supposed to intend principally the ministry of souls, who comes to
that office instructed only with a bag of money.

3. He may be supposed principally to intend the Ministry of souls, 18.
and in it the glory of God, who so attends to the execution of his office,
that it do really and sufficiently minister to the thing. For since the
Calling is by God really designed to that end, and if the Ministers be not
wanting to themselves, they are sufficiently enabled and assisted to that
purpose; he that zealously and wisely ministers in the office, has given a
most real testimony of his fair intention, because he does that thing so as
those intentions only can be effected. The thing it self is sufficient for the
end if God blesses it; he therefore that does the thing, does actuate the
intention of God, and sanctifies his own: But this is to be understood with the
addition of the following caution.

4. 19.
He may be confident that his intentions for Gods glory and the good of souls
are right and principal, who so conjoyns his other lesser ends with the conduct
of the greater, that they shall always be made to give place to the greater.
That is, who still pursues the interest of souls, and the work of his
Ministry, when the hopes of maintenance, or honor, or secular regards do
fail. For he that for carnal or secular regards will either quit or neglect his
Ministry, it is certain, his carnal or secular ends were his chief motive and
incentive in the work. It was the case of Demas who was S. Paul's Minister and
work-fellow in the service of the Gospel, (...)
but he left him, because he loved the present world; concerning which, it is
to be considered, that this lapse and recession of Demas from the assistances
of S. Paul, did not proceed from that love of the wo^ld which S. John speaks
of, (...)
and is criminal, and forbidden to all Christians, which whosoever has, the
love of the Father dwells not in him, but is to be understood of such a love,
which to other Christians is not unlawful, but was in those times especially)
inconsistent with the duty of Evangelists, in those great necessities of the
Church: Demas was a good man, but weak in his spirit, and too secular in his
relations, but he returned to his station, and did the work of an Evangelist, a
while after, as appears in the Epistle to the Colossians and Philemon; but for
the present he was too blame. For he would secure his relations and his
interests with too great a caution and diligence, and leave the other, to
attend this. Such as now adays is too great case of our estates, secular
negotiations, merchandises, civil employments, not ministering directly unto
Religion, and the advantages of its ministration. For our great King the Lord
Jesus, has given to all Christians some employment, but to some more, to some
less, and in their own proportion they must give a return: and in a Minister of
the Gospel, every inordination of carefulness, and every excess of attendance
to secular affairs, and every unnecessary avocation from, o^ neglect of his
great work is criminal, and many things are excesses in them, which are not in
others, because the Ministerial office requires more attendance and
conversation with spiritual things, then that of others.

5. If ever the Minister of holy things, 20.
for hope or fear, for gain or interest descit his station, when he is
persecuted, or when he is not persecuted, it is too much to be presumed, that
he did not begin for God, who for man will quit Gods service. They that wander
till they find a rich seat, do all that they do for the riches of the place,
not for the employment: Si non ubi sed^as locus est, est ubi ambules, said he
in the Comedy; the calling of these men is not fixed but ambulatory: and if
that which fixes them be temporal advantages, then that which moved them
principally is not spiritual employment.

For it is considerable, 21.
that if it be unlawful to undertake the holy Calling, without a Divine
vocation to it, then to forsake it without a Divine permission must be
criminal. He that calls to come, calls to continue, where the need is lasting,
and the office perpetual. But to leave the Calling when the revenue is gone, to
quit the Altar when it has no offering, to let the souls wander, when they
bring no gifts, is to despise the Religion, and to love only the fat of the
sacrifices: For the Altar indeed does sanctify the gift, but not the gift the
Altar; and he has but a light opinion of an eternal Crown of glory, or thinks
God but an ill paymaster, that will not do him service upon the stock of his
promises, and will not feed the flock, though he have no other reward but to be
feasted in the eternal Supper of the Lamb: Who are hirelings, but they who fly
when the Wolf comes? and woe be to that Evangelist who upon any secular regard
neglects to preach the Gospel; woe be to him, to whom it shall be said at the
day of Judgment, I was hungry, and my flock was hungry, and ye fed neither it
nor me.

But this is to be understood with these liberties:

1. That it be no prejudice to those Ecclesiastics, 22.
who in time of Persecution, do so attend to their Ministeries, that no
material part of it be omitted, or slightly performed, and yet take from it
such portions of time as are necessary for their labor, or support by any just
and honest employment. Thus S. Paul wrought in the Trade of a Tent-maker,
because he would not be a burden to the Church of Corinth; and when the Church
is stripped naked of her robes, and the bread of proposition are stolen from
her table by Soldiers, there is no peradventure but the Ecclesiastical offices
are so to be attended to, that the natural duty and necessity be not neglected.

2. That it be no prejudice to Ecclesiastics in the days of peace or war, 23.
to change their station from Bishopric to Bishopric, from Church to Church,
where God, or the Church, where Charity or Necessity, where Prudence or
Obedience calls. Indeed it has been fiercely taught, that Ecclesiastics ought
never, and upon no pretense to desert their Church, and go to another any more
then a man may forsake his wife; and for this a Decretal of P. Euaristus is
pretended, and is recorded in the Canon Law. c. Sicut vir. Can. 7. q. 1. Sicut
vir non debet adulterare uxorem suam, it a nec Episcopus Ecclesiam suam, ut
illam dimittat ad quam fuit sacratus: and therefore when Eusebius the Bishop of
Caesarea was called to be Bishop of Antioch, he refused it pertinaciously, and
for it was highly commended by the Emperor; and S. Hierome in his Epistle to
Oceanus tells, In Nicaena Synodo a Patribus decretum est, ne de alia in aliam
Ecclesiam Episcopus transferatur, n^ virginalis pauperculae societate contempta
ditioris adulterae quaerat amplexus. Something indeed like it was decreed by
the fifteenth and sixteenth Canons of the Nicene Council; and it was an usual
punishment amongst the holy Primitives, Careat Cathedra propria qui ambit
alienam. But these things though they be true and right, yet are not a
contradictory to the present case. For,

1. 24.
Euaristus (it is clear) forbad translations and removes from Church to Church,
ambitus causa, for ambition or covetousness, and therefore it is by him
expressly permitted in their proper cases and limits; that is, [ in inevitabili
necessitate, aut Apostolica, vel regulari mutatione] when there is inevitable
necessity, or the command and authority of a superior power: and yet upon
perusal of the Decree I find, that Euaristus his intent was, that a Bishop
should not thrust his Church from him by way of divorce, and excommunication,
and take another, as appears not only by the corresponding part of the Decree,
viz. That neither must the Church take in another Bishop or Husband upon him to
whom already she is espoused; but by the expression used in the beginning of
it, dimittere Ecclesiam Episcopus non debet; and it is compared to the adultery
of a man that puts away his wife, and marries another; and also it appears more
yet by the gloss, which seems to render the same sense of it, and wholly
discourses of the unlawfulness to excommunicate a Church or a City, lest the
innocent should suffer with the criminal: for when a Church is excommunicated,
though all those persons die upon whom the sentence fell, yet the Church is the
same under other persons their successors, and therefore all the way it does
injustice, by involving the new arising innocents, and at last is wholly unjust
by including all and only innocent persons. But which way soever this Decree
be understood, it comes not home to a prohibition of our case.

2. As for Eusebius, 25.
it is a clear case he imposed upon the good Emperor, who knew not the secret
cause of Eusebius his denial to remove from Caesarea to Antioch. For he having
engaged the Emperor before time to write in his behalf, that he might be
permitted to enjoy that Bishopric, was not willing to seem guilty of levity
and easiness of change. But that was not all, he was a secret favourer of the
Arrians, and therefore was unwilling to go to that Church where his
predecessor Eustathius had been famous for opposing that pest.

3. To that of S. Jerome out of the Nicene Council, I answer, That the
prohibition is only of such, as without authority, upon their own head, for
their own evil purposes, and with injury to their own Churches did it: and of
covetousness it is, that S. Jerome notes and reproves the practice: To despise
our charge because it is poor, is to love the money more then the souls, and
therefore this is not to be done by any one of his own choice; but if it be
done by the command or election of our Superior, it is to be presumed it is
for the advantage of the Church in matter of direct reason, or collateral
assistance, and therefore has in it no cause of reproof.

And to this purpose the whole affair is very excellently stated by the 14. 26.
Canon of the Apostles; A Bishop must not leave his own Parish or Diocese, and
invade that of another man, nisi forte quis cum rationabili causa compellatur,
tanquam qui possit, ibidem constitutus plus lucri confer, and in causa
religionis aliquid profectus prospicere. If there be a reasonable cause he may;
and the cause is reasonable, if by going he may do more good, or advantage to
Religion: but of this he is not to be Judge himself, but must be judged by his
Superiors; and hoc non a semetipso pertentet, sed multorum Episcoporum
judicio, and maxima supplicatione perficiat; he must not do it on his own
head, but by the sentence and desire of the Bishops.

There needs no more to be added to this, 27.
but that if a greater revenue be annexed to another charge, and that it be in
rem Ecclesiae, that the more worthy person should be advanced thither, to
enable his better ministeries by those secular assistances which our infirmity
needs, there is nothing to be said against it, but that if he be the man he is
taken for, he knows how to use those advantages to Gods glory, and the good of
souls, and the services of the Church; and if he does so, his intentions are to
be presumed pure and holy, because the good of souls is the principal.

Upon the supposition of these causes, 28.
we find that the practice of the ancient Bishops and Clerks in their
translations was approved. Origin did first serve God in the Church of
Alexandria, afterward he went to Caesarea, to Antioch, to Tire, and S. Gregory
Nazianzen changed his Episcopal See eight times. Nay the Apostles themselves
did so: S. Peter was first Bishop of Antioch, afterward of Rome: and the
necessity and utility of the Churches called S. Paul to an ambulatory
Government and Episcopacy, though at last he also was fixed at Rome, and he
removed Timothy and Titus from Church to Church as the need and uses of the
Church required. But in this, our call must be from God, or from our
Superiors, not from levity or pride, covetousness, or negligence. Concerning
which, who please further to be satisfied, may read S. Athanasius his Epistle
to Dracontius, of old; and of late, Chytraeus in Epistolis p 150. and 678. and
Conradus Porta in his Formalia. This only; If every man were indispensably
tied to abide where he is first called to minister, then it were not lawful for
an inferior Minister to desire the good work of a Bishop; which because it is
not to be administered in the same place or charge, according to the universal
discipline of the Church for very many ages, must suppose that there can be a
reasonable cause to change our charges, because the Apostle commends that
desire which supposes that change.

These being the limits and measures of the Rule, 29.
it would be very good if we were able to discern concerning the secrets of our
intentions, and the causes of actions. It is true, that because men confound
their actions and deliberations, it will be impossible to tell in many cases
what motive is the principal ingredient. Plin. li. ^. ep. 2.
Sed ut tunc communibus magis commodis quam privatae jactantiae studebamus,
quum intentionem, effectumque muneris nostri vellemus intelligi; ita nunc in
ratione edendi, veremur ne forte non aliorum utilitatibus, sed propriae laudi
servisse videamur. It is hard for a wise and a gallant man, who does public
actions of greatest worthiness deserving honor, to tell certainly whether he
is more pleased in the honors that men do him, or in the knowledge that he
has done them benefits. But yet in very many cases, we may at least guess
probably which is the prevailing ingredient, Vide Rule of Holy Living Chap. 1..
2.
by these following measures; besides those which I have noted and applied to
the special case of undertaking the calling Ecclesiastical.

Signs of difference, whereby we may in a mixed and complicated intention,
discern which is the principal ingredient.

1. Whatsoever came in after the determination was made, 30.
though it add much the greater confidence, and makes the resolution sharper
and more active, yet it is not to be reckoned as the prevailing ingredient; for
though it add degrees, yet the whose determination was perfected before. The
widow Fulvia was oppressed by Attillius; she complains to Secundus the Lawyer.
He considers whether he should be Advocate for his friend Attilius, or for the
oppressed Fulvia; and at last determines on the side of piety and charity, and
resolves to releeve the Widow, but with some abatement of his spirit and
confidence, because it is against his friend: but Charity prevails. As he goes
to Court he meets with Caninius, who gloriously commends the advocation, and by
superadding that spur made his diffidence and imperfect resolution, confident
and clear. In this case the whole action is to be attributed to Piety, not to
the love of Fame; for this only added some moments, but that made the
determination.

2. When the determination is almost made, 31.
and wants some weight to finish it, whatsoever then supervenes and casts the
scales, is not to be accounted the prevailing ingredient, but that which made
most in the suspension and time of deliberation, and brought it forward. It is
like buying and selling: not the last Maravidis that was stood upon was the
greatest argument of parting with the goods; but that farthing added to the
bigger sum, made it big enough: and a child's finger may thrust a load
forward, which being haled by mighty men stands still for want of a little
assistance.

3. 32.
That is the prevailing ingredient in the determination which is most valued,
not which most pleases; that which is rationally preferred, not that which
delights the senses. If the man had rather lose the sensual then, the
intellectual good, though in that his fancy is more delighted, yet this is the
stronger, and greater in the Divine acceptance, though possibly in nature it be
less active, because less pleasing to those faculties, which whether we will or
no, will be very much concerned in all the entercourses of this life. * He that
keeps a festival in gratitude and spiritual joy to do God glory, and to give
him thanks, and in the preparation to the action is hugely pleased by
considering the music, the company, the festivity and innocent refreshments,
and in his fancy, leaps at this but his resolution walks on by that, has not
spoiled the regularity of his Conscience by the intertexture of the sensual
with the spiritual, so long as it remains innocent. For though this flames
brightest, yet the other burns hottest, and will last longer then the other.
But of this there is no other sign, but that first we be infinitely careful to
prescribe measures and limits to the secular joy, that it may be perfectly
subordinate to, and complying with the spiritual and religious: and secondly,
if we are willing to suppress the light flame, rather then extinguish the solid
fire.

4. 33.
Then the holy and pious ingredient is overpowred by the mixture of the
secular, when an instrument toward the end is chosen more proportionable to
this, then to that. Caecilius to do a real not a fantastic benefit to his
Tenants, erected a Library in his Villa, and promised a yearly revenue for
their childrens education, and nobler institution: And thus far judgment
ought to be made, that he intended piety rather then fame; for to his fame,
Plays and Spectacles would (as the Roman humor then was) have served better:
but when in the acting his resolution he praised that his pious purpose, and
told them he did it for a pious, not a vainglorious end, however the intention
might be right, this publication was not right: But, when he appointed that
anniversary orations should be made in the praise of his pious foundation, he a
little too openly discovered what was the bigger wheel in that motion. For he
that serves a secret piety by a public Panegyric, disorders the piety by
dismantling the secret: it may still be piety, but it will be lessened by the
publication; though this publication be no otherwise criminal, then because it
is vain. Plin. li. 1. ep. 8.
Meminimus quanto majore animo honestatis fructus in conscientia quam in fama
reponatur. Sequi enim gloria non appeti debet: nec si casu aliquo non sequatur,
idcirco quod gloriam meruit minus pulchrum est: Hi vero qui benefacta suae
verbis adornant, non ideo praedicare quia fecerint, sed ut praedicarent,
fecisse creduntur; which is the very thing which I affirm in this particular.
If the intermediate or consequent actions serve the collateral or secular end,
most visibly it is to be supposed, that this was the greater motive, and had
too great an influence into the deliberation.

But because the heart of man is so intricate, 34.
trifling, and various, in most cases it must be sufficient for us to know,
that if the mixture be innocent, the whole deliberation is secured in the kind
of it, and for degrees we must do as well as we can.

But on the other side, 35.
if the secular end mixed with the spiritual, and religious, the just and the
honest, be unlawful, and yet intended, though in a less degree, though but
accidentally and by an after consent; the conscience is neither sure nor right,
but is dishonored and defiled: for the whole deliberation is made criminal by
mingling with forbidden purposes. He that takes up arms under his Prince in a
just war, and at the same time intends revenge against his private enemy,
casually engaged on the adverse party, loses the reward of his obedience, and
changes it for the devilish pleasures of revenge.

Concerning the measure and conduct of our intentions, there are some other
things to be said, but because they are extrinsecal to the chief purpose of
this Rule, they are properly to be considered under their own head.

RULE 6. An argument not sufficient nor competent, though it do persuade us to
a thing in it self good, is not the ground of a right, nor a sufficient warrant
for a sure Conscience.
HE that goes to public Prayers because it is the custom, 1.
or communicates at Easter to avoid a censure, has done an act in it self
good, but his motive was neither competent, nor sufficient to make the action
religious, or to manifest and declare the Conscience to be sure and right. For
Conscience is the repository of practical reasons: and as in civil actions, we
count him a fool who wears clothes only because they cost him nothing, or
walks because he would see his shadow move upon the wall: so it is in moral.
When the reason in incompetent, the action is by chance, neither prudent, nor
chosen, alterable by a trifle, tending to a cheap end, proceeding by a
regardless motion: and Conscience might as well be seated in the fancy, or in
the foot, as in the understanding, if its nature and proper design were not to
be conducted with reasons proportionable to such actions which tend to an end
perfective of man, and productive of felicity.

This Rule is so to be understood, 2.
that it be not required of all men to have reasons equally good for the same
determinations, but sufficient and reasonable in themselves, and apt to lead
them in their proper capacities and dispositions, that is, reasons
proportionable to that kind of things in which the determination is instanced,
viz. a religious reason for an action of Religion; a prudent reason for a civil
action: but if it be in its proper kind, it is sufficient if it be probable,
provided always, that it makes a sure mind, and a full persuasion.

He that believes Christian Religion, 3.
because the men are charitable and chaste, and so taught to be, and commanded
by the Religion, is brought into a good place by a single taper; but he came in
by no false light, and he is there where he ought to be. He did not see the way
in so brightly as S. Paul did, who was conducted in by an Angel from heaven,
with a bright flame in his hand; but he made shift to see his way in: and
because the light that guided him came from heaven, his conscience was rightly
instructed, and if it persuaded him heartily, his conscience is as sure as it
is right.

Quest.

Upon the account and consequence of this Rule it is proper to inquire, 4.
Whether it be lawful, and ingenuous to go about to persuade a man to the
belief of a true proposition, by arguments with which himself is not persuaded,
and which he believes are not sufficient? The case is this:

Girolami a learned Priest of Ferrara, 5.
finds that many of his Parishioners are infected with Judaism, by reason of
their conversation with the Jewish Merchants. He studies the Jewish Books to
discover the weakness of their arguments, and to convince them upon their own
grounds. But finding his Parishioners moved only by popular arguments, and not
capable of understanding the secrets of the old Prophets, the Synchronisms, nor
the computation of Daniels weeks, the infinite heaps of reasons by which
Christianity stands firm in defiance of all pretensions to the contrary; sees
it necessary to persuade them by things as easy as those are by which they were
abused. But then he considers; If they were by error led into error, it is not
fit that by error also they should be led out of it into truth: for God needs
not to be served with a lie, and evil must not be done that good may be thence
procured. But if I go by a false argument to cozen them into truth, I tell a
lie to recover them from a lie, and it is a disparagement to the cause of God,
that it must be supported by the Devil. But having discoursed thus far, he
considers further; Every argument which I am able to answer, I know cannot
conclude in the question; for if it be to be answered, it is at most but a
specious outside of reason; and he that knows this, or believes it so, either
must not use that instrument of persuasion, or if he does, he must resolve to
abuse the man's understanding before he can set it right: and this he believes
to be against the honor of truth, and the rules of charity, and the simplicity
and ingenuity of the spirit of a Christian.

To this Question I answer by several Propositions.

1. It is not lawful to tell a lie for God and for truth; 6.
because God will not be served by that which he hates, and there are no
defects in truth which need such violent remedies. Therefore Girolami might not
to persuade his Judaizing Parishoners tell them a tale of a Vision, or pretend
a Tradition which is not, or falsify a Record, because these are direct arts of
the Devil, this is a doing evil for a good end: and every single lie is equally
hated by God, and where there is a difference, it is made by complication, or
the mixing of something else with the lie: and because God has created and
communicated to mankind, not only sufficient but a bundant justifications of
whatsoever he has commanded us to believe, therefore he hates infinitely to
have his glorious Economy of faith and truth to be disordered and discomposed
by the productions of hell. For every lie is of the Devil.

2. It is lawful to use an argument cui potest subesse falsum, 7.
such which I know is not certain, but yet I actually believe it to be true.
That is though the argument be not demonstrative but probable only, yet I may
safely use it, if I believe my self to be on the right side of the probability.
For a real truth, and a supposed truth are all one as to the innocence of my
purposes. And he that knows how little certainty there is in humane discourses,
and how we know in part, and prophecy in part, and that of every thing whereof
we know a little, we are ignorant in much more, must either be content with
such proportions as the things will bear, or as himself can get, or else he
must never seek to alter or to persuade any man to be of his opinion. For the
greatest part of discourses that are in the whole world, is nothing but a heap
of probable inducements, plausibilities, and witty entertainments: and the
throng of notices is not unlike the accidents of a battle, in which every man
tells a new tale, something that he saw, mingled with a great many things which
he saw not, his eyes and his fear joining together equally in the instruction
and the illusion, these make up the stories. And in the observation of things,
there is infinitely more variety then in faces, and in the contingencies of the
world. Let ten thousand men read the same Books, and they shall all make
several uses, draw several notes, and understand them to several effects and
purposes. Knowledge is infinite, and out of this infinity every one snatches
some things real, and some images of things; and there are so many cognoscitive
faculties above and below, and powers ministering to knowledge, and all these
have so many ways of being abused, or hindered, and of being imperfect; and the
degrees of imperfection, positive, and privative, and negative, are also
themselves absolutely so infinite, that to arrive at probabilities in most
things is no small progression. But we must be content to make use of that,
both for our selves and others.

Upon this account we may quote Scriptures to those senses which they can well
serve in a question, 8.
and in which they are used by learned men, though we suppose the principal
intention be of a different thing, so it be nor contrary. For all learned men
know that in Scripture many sayings are full of potential significations,
besides what are on the face of the words, or in the heart of the design: and
therefore although we may not allege Scriptures in a sense contrary to what we
believe it meant; yet to any thing besides its first meaning, we may, if the
analogy will bear it; and if by learned men it be so used, that is in effect,
because for ought we know it may be so indeed.

3. If a man suppose his arguments sufficient and competent to persuade, 9.
though they be neither fitting to persuade, nor at all sufficient, he may yet
lawfully use them. For in this case though himself be deceived, yet because it
is upon the strength of those arguments he relies, he can be tied to use no
better then he has: And since his conscience is heartily persuaded, though it
be in error, yet that which follows that persuasion is innocent (if it be not
mingled with design) though it may be that which went before was not so.

4. In the persuasion of a truth, 10.
it is lawful to use such arguments whose strength is wholly made prevailing by
the weakness of him that is to be persuaded. Such as are arguments ad hominem,
that is, proportionable to the doctrines, customs, usages, belief, and
credulity of the man. The reasons are these:

1. Because ignorant persons are not capable of such arguments as may
demonstrate the question; and he that goes about to draw a child to him, may
pull him by the long sleeve of his coat, and need not to hire a yoke of Oxen.

2. That which will demonstrate a truth to one person, possibly will never move
another. Because our reason does not consist in a Mathematical point: and the
heart of reason, that vital and most sensible part, in which only it can be
conquered fairly, is an ambulatory essence, and not fixed; it wanders up and
down like a floating Island, or like that which we call the life blood; and it
is not often very easy to hit that white by which only our reason is brought
to perfect assent: and this needs no other proof but our daily experience, and
common notices of things. That which at one time is not regarded, at another
time is a prevailing motive; and I have observed that a discourse at one time
has been lightly regarded, or been only pleasing to the ear, which a year or
two after has made great impressions of piety upon the spirit of the hearers.
And therefore, that I can answer the argument, it is not enough to make me
think it necessary to lay it aside or to despise it; there may be something in
him that hears me, that can make the argument to become perfect and effectual;
and the want of that it may be in me, makes me apt to slight it. And besides
that some pretended answers are illusions rather then solutions it may be, that
beyond my answer, a wiser man may make a reply, and confirm the argument so as
I know not: and therefore if it be truth you persuade, it were altogether as
good, and I am sure much more easy to let the man you persuade, enter at the
first and broadest gate of the true proposition, then after having passed
thorough a great many turnings and labyrinths, at last come but to the same
place where he might first have entered. There are some witty men that can
answer any thing; but suppose they could not, yet it would be impossible that
men should be tied in all cases to speak nothing but demonstrations.

3. Some men are to be wrought upon not by direct argument, but by artifices
and back blows; they are easy enough to believe the truth, if they could; and
therefore you must, to persuade them, remove their prejudices and
prepossessions; and to this purpose, it will not be necessary to bring those
things which are proper to the question, but things accidental and extrinsecal.
They who were prejudiced at our blessed Savior because he was of Galilee,
needed no other argument to make them to believe in him, but to confute that
foolish Proverb, Out of Galilee comes no good: and yet he that from thence
thinks the question of his being the Messiah sufficiently concluded, is very
far from understanding the effect and powers of argument.

4. The hindrances of belief are seated in several faculties, in our fancy, in
our will, in our appetite: now in these cases there is no way to persuade, but
by arguing so as to prevail with that faculty. If any man should say that our
blessed Savior is not yet come in the flesh, upon a foolish fancy that he
believes not, that God would honor such a wicked nation with so great a glory,
as that the Savior of the world should be born of them; he needs no argument
to persuade him to be a Christian, but by having it proved to him, that it was
not only likely, but really so, and necessary it should be so, not only for
the verification of the Prophecies of him, but for diverse congruities in the
nature and circumstances of things. Here the argument is to confute the fancy
only, not the reason.

5. Sometimes the judgment is right, but the affections are perverse; and
then, not demonstrations, but popular arguments are not only lawful, but
useful, and sufficient. For reasons of abstracted speculation move not the
lower man. Make the people in love with your proposition, and cause them to
hate the contrary, and you have done all that they are capable of. When some
Divines in Germany were forced for their own defense to gain the people to
their party, they disputed against the absolute decree of reprobation, by
telling them that their Adversaries doctrine did teach that God did drag the
pretty children from their Mothers breasts, and throw many of them into the
eternal portion of Devils: This moved the women, who follow reason as far as
they can be made in love with it, and their understanding is oftentimes more
then in their heart then in their head. And there are thousands of people, men
and women, who believe upon no other account then this, neither can they be
taught otherwise. When S. Paul would persuade the Jews to reason, and from
laying violent hands upon him; he was not to attempt it by offering undeniably
to prove that he did well by going to the Gentiles, since God had rejected the
Jews, excepting a remnant only: but he persuaded them by telling them he did
nothing against the Law of Moses and the Temple.

6. There are some fondnesses, and strange adherencies to trifles in most
people, humors of the Nation, love of the advantage of their families,
relations to sects, or dignities, natural sympathies and antipathies, in a
correspondency to which, all those arguments which are dressed, are like to
prevail, and cannot otherwise do it. For when a man's understanding is mingled
with interest, his arguments must have something of this, or else they will
never stir that: and therefore all our arguments cannot be freed from such
allays.

7. In all the discourses of men, not only Orators, but Philosophers, and even
in their severest discourses, all the good and all the wise men of the world
heap together many arguments, who yet cannot suppose them all certain; but yet
they therefore innocently use them, because as there are several capacities of
men to be dealt withal; so there are several notices of things; and that may be
highly concluding, which it may be is not well represented, and therefore not
fancied or observed by him that uses it; and to another it becomes effective
because he does.

8. The holy Spirit of God himself in his entercourses with men is pleased to
descend to our capacities, and to use arguments taken from our own principles,
and which prevail more by silencing us, rather then demonstrating the thing.
Thus S. Paul in his arguments for the Resurrection uses this; If Christ be not
risen, 1 Cor. 15. 14.
then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. There are some, even
too many now adays, and many more then, who would have granted both the
antecedent and the consequent; but because the Corinthians disavowed the
consequent, they were forced to admit the antecedent. And at last, thousands of
persons could never be drawn from their error, if we might not make use of
arguments, weak like their capacities, and more proportionable to their
Understanding then to the Question.

There are two Cautions to be added to make the Rule perfect:

1. That if the Disciple relying upon his Masters authority, more then his own
ability to judge, ask the Doctor, whether upon his knowledge and faith that
argument does evict the question; if the Doctor himself does not believe it, he
must then put no more force upon it by his affirmation and authority then he
thinks it does in nature bear; but must give prudent accounts of the whole
question in compliance to the present necessity of the demander.

Of the same consideration it is, when a question being disputed between two
parties, the standers by expect the truest and most proper account of things.
In this case, all openness and ingenuity is to be used according to our own
sense of things, not according to what may comply with any man's weakness; and
the not doing so is want of ingenuity, and the worthiness of Christian charity,
and a perfect deceiving them who expect and desire such things as ought to be
finally relied upon.

2. In all arguments which are to prevail by the weakness, or advantages taken
from the man, he that goes about to persuade, must not say any thing that he
knows to be false; but he must comply and twist about the man's weakness, so as
to be innocent all the way. Let him take him that is weak and wrap him in
swaddling clothes, but not encompass him with snakes: But yet this has one
loose and permission that may be used.

3. It is lawful for a man in persuading another to a truth, 11.
to make use of a false proposition, which he that is to be persuaded already
does believe: that is, a man may justly dispute upon the supposition, not upon
the concession and granting of an error. Thus S. Paul disputed with the
Corinthians, and to induce them into a belief of the resurrection, made use of
a foolish custom among them in use, of being baptized for the dead. For the
Christian Church has but two Sacrments, Baptism and the Lords Supper; at the
beginning some of the Christians used Baptism, and in succeeding ages, they
used to celebrate the Lords Supper for the dead, and do to this day in the
Church of Rome. Upon this fond custom of theirs, S. Paul thus argues: If there
be no resurrection, then it is to no purpose that you are baptized for the
dead; but that is to purpose (as you suppose) therefore there is a
resurrection. Thus prayer for the dead, and invocation of Saints, according to
the principles taught in the Primitive Church, might have been made use of
against each other. If all men are imperfect till the day of Judgment, and
till then enter not into heaven, then you cannot with confidence make prayers
to them, who for ought you know, need your help more: But if all that die well,
that is, if all that die in the Lord do instantly enjoy the Beatifical vision,
and so are in a condition to be prayed to, then they need not to be prayed for.
As for the middle place, they in those ages knew no such thing, as men have
since dreamed of. As God in some cases makes use of a prepared wickedness,
though he infers none, much less does he make any to be necessary and
unavoidable; so may good men and wise make use of a prepared error, a falsehood
already believed; but they must neither teach, nor betray any one into it.

The objections mentioned in the state of this question, are already answered
in the stating the propositions.

But now arises another question, and the solution will follow upon the same
grounds.

Quest.

WHether it be lawful for a good end for Preachers to affright men with Panick
terrors, 12.
and to create fears that have no ground; as to tell them if they be liars,
their faces will be deformed; if they be perjured, the devil will haunt them in
visible shapes; if they be sacrilegious, they shall have the leprosy; or any
thing whereby weak and ignorant people can be most wrought upon?

I answer briefly:

1. 13.
There are terrors enough in the new Testament to affright any man from his
sins, who can be wrought upon by fear: and if all that Moses and the Prophets
say, and all that Christ and his Apostles published be not sufficient, then
nothing can be. For I am sure, nothing can be a greater, or more formidable
evil then hell; and no terrors can bring greater affrightment, then those which
are the proper portion of the damned. But the measures of the permission and
liberty that can be used, are these:

1. 14.
A Preacher or Governor may affright those that are under them, and deter
them from sin, by threatening them with any thing which probably may happen. So
he may denounce a curse upon the estate of sacrilegious persons, robbers of
Churches, oppressors of Priests, and Widows, and Orphans; and particularly,
whatsoever the Widow or Orphan in the bitterness of their souls do pray, may
happen upon such evil persons; or what the Church in the instruments of
donation have expressed: as, to die childless; to be afflicted with the gout;
to have an ambulatory life, the fortune of a penny, since for that he forsakes
God and his religion; a distracted mind or fancy, or any thing of this nature.
For since the curses of this life and of the other are indefinitely threatened
to all sinners, Malachi 3. 8, etc. Psalm. 83. 13.
and some particularly to certain sins, as want is to the deteiners of Tithes,
a wandering fortune to Church-robbers; it is not unreasonable, and therefore it
is lawful to make use of such particulars as are most likely to be effective
upon the conscience of sinners.

2. 15.
It is lawful to affright men with the threatening of any thing that is possible
to happen in the ordinary effects of providence. For every sin is against an
infinite God, and his anger is sometimes the greatest, and can produce what
evil he please; and he uses to arm all his creatures against sinners, and
sometimes strikes a stroke with his own hand, and creates a prodigy of example
to perpetuate a fear upon men to all ages.

But this is to be admitted with these Cautions:

1. It must be done so as to be limited within those ways which need not
suppose a miracle to have them effected. Thus to threaten a sinner in England,
that if he prophanes the holy Sacrament, a Tigre shall meet him in the
Churchyard and tear him, is so improbable and unreasonable, that it is
therefore not to be done, lest the authority, and the counsel, and the
threatening become ridiculous: but we have warrant to threaten him with
diseases, and sharp sicknesses, and temporal death; and the warrant is derived
from a precedent in Scripture, 1 Cor. 11. 3^.
Gods dealing with the Corinthian Communicants.

2. He who thus intends to dissuade, must in prudence be careful that he be not
too decretory and determinate in the particular; but either wholly instance in
general threatenings, or with exceptive and cautious terms in the particular;
as, Take heed lest such an evil happen: or, It is likely it may, and we have no
security for a minute against it; and so God has done to others.

3. Let these be only threatenings, not prophesies, lest the whole dispensation
become contemptible; and therefore let all such threatenings be understood with
a provision, that if such things do not happen, the man has not escaped Gods
anger, but is reserved for worse. God walks upon the face of the waters, and
his footsteps are not seen; but however, evil is the portion of the sinner.

3. 16.
In all those threatenings which are according to the analogy of the Gospel, or
the state of things and persons with which we have intercourse, we may take all
that liberty that can by apt instruments concur to the work of God; dressing
them with circumstances of terror and affrightment, and representing spiritual
events by metaphors, apologues and instances of nature. Thus our blessed Lord
expressing the torments of hell, signifies the greatness of them by such things
which in nature are most terrible; as brimstone and fire, the worm of
conscience, weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. But this I say must
ever be kept within the limits of analogy to what is revealed, and must not
make excursions to extraregular and ridiculous significations. Such as is the
fancy of some Divines in the Roman Church, and particularly of Cornelius a
lapide, In Apocal.
that the souls of the damned shall be rolled up in bundles like a heap and
involved circles of snakes, and in hell shall sink down like a stone into the
bottomeless pit, falling still downward for ever and ever. This is not well;
but let the expressions be according to the proportions of what is revealed.
The Divines in several ages have taken great liberty in this affair, which I
know no reason to reprove, if some of their tragical expressions did not, or
were not apt to pass into dogmatical affirmatives, and opinions of reality in
such inventions.

4. If any extraregular example has ever happened, 17.
that may be made use of to affright men from the same or the like sins, and so
pass into a regular warning. Thus, though it but once happened, that God
punished rebellion by causing the earth to open and swallow up the Rebels
against their Prince and Priest, Moses and Aaron, that is, it is but once
recorded in holy Scripture; yet God has the same power now, and the same anger
against Rebellion; and as he can, so we are not sure that he will not
oftentimes do the same. Whatsoever has happened and can happen, we ought to
fear lest in the like cases it should happen. And therefore this is a proper
instrument of a just fear, and apt rightly to minister to a sure and a right
Conscience.

5. If any prodigy of accident and judgment has happened, 18.
though it be possible it may be done for the manifestation of the Divine
glory, yet because it is ten thousand to one, but it is because of sin too;
this may be made use of to affright sinners, although there be no indication
for what sin that judgment happened. Thus the ruin of the Greek Monarchy
finished upon the day of Pentecost: the fearful and prodigious swallowing up
the Cities of the Colossians and Laodiceans; the burning Towns and Villages by
eruption of fire from mountains; the sudden cataracts of water breaking from
the Indian hills; the sudden deaths and madness of many people; the horrible
ruin and desolation of families and kingdoms, may be indifferently used and
propounded to all sorts of persons, where there is need of such violent
courses: and provided that they be charitably and prudently applied, may effect
fear and caution in some sinners, who otherwise would be too ready for gaieties
and unsafe liberties.

6. To children and fools, 19.
and all those whose understanding is but a little better, it has been in all
ages practiced, that they be affrighted with Mormoes and Bugbears, that they
may be cozened into good. But this is therefore permitted, because other things
which are real, certain, or probable, cannot be understood or perceived by
them: and therefore these things are not to be permitted, where it can well be
otherwise. If it cannot, it is fit that their understandings should be
conducted thither where they ought to go, and by such iustruments as can be
useful.

RULE 7. A Conscience determined by the counsel of wise men, even against its
own inclinations, may be sure and right.
FOR in many cases the counsel of wise men is the best argument; and if the
conscience was first inclined by a weaker, every change to a better is a degree
of certainty: In this case, to persist in the first inclination of conscience,
is obstinacy, not constancy: But on the other side, to change our first
persuasion when it is well built, for the counsel of men of another persuasion,
though wiser then our selves, is levity, not humility. This Rule is practicable
only in such cases where the Conscience observes the weakness of its first
inducement, or justly suspects it, and has not reason so much to suspect the
sentence of wiser men. How it is further to be reduced to practice, is more
properly to be considered in the third Chapter, and thither I refer it.

RULE 8. He that sins against a right and a sure Conscience, whatever the
instance be, commits a great sin, but not a double one.
HIS sin is indeed the greater, 1.
because it is less excusable and more bold. For the more light there is in a
regular understanding, the more malice there is in an irregular will. If I had
not come to them (said Christ) they had not had sin; but now have they no cover
for their sin: that is, because they are sufficiently taught their duty. It is
not an aggravation of sin, barely to say, it was done against our conscience:
for all sins are so, either directly or indirectly, mediately or immediately,
in the principle or in the emanat on. But thus; the more sure and confident the
conscience is, the sin receives the greater degree. It is an aggravation of it,
that it was done against a clear light, and a full understanding, and a
perfect, contrary determination.

But even then it does not make it to be a distinct sin. 2.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin (said the Apostle) but he did not say it was
two. It is a transcendent passing upon every sinful action, that it is against
a known law, and a contrary reason and persuasion; but if this could make the
act to be doubly irregular, by the same reason, every substance must be two,
viz. by having a being, and a substantial being. And the proper reason of this
is, because the conscience obliges and ties us by the band of the Commandment,
the same individual band, and no other. The conscience is therefore against the
act, because the Commandment is against it; the Conscience being Gods
remembrancer, the record, and the register of the Law. A thief does not sin
against the Law and the Judge severally; neither does the Magistrate punish him
one way, and the Law another. The conscience has no law of its own, but the
law of God is the Rule of it. Therefore where there is but one obligation to
the duty, there can be but one deformity in the prevarication. But,

In sins where there is a double formality, there indeed in one action there
may be two sins, because there is a double law: 3.
as he that kills his Father sins twice, he is impious and unjust; he breaks
the laws of piety and justice; he sins against the fifth and the sixth
Commandments at once; he is a murderer, and he is ungrateful, and he is
impious. But in sins of a single nature there is but a single relation. For the
Conscience and the Law is the Rule and the Parchment; and he that sins against
the one, therefore also sins against the other, because they both terminate but
one relation.

But although he does not commit two sins, 4.
yet he commits one great one, there being nothing that can render an action
culpable or imputable in the measures of justice, but its being a deviation
from, or a contradiction to the Rule. It is against my conscience, that is,
against my illuminated and instructed reason, therefore it is a sin: this is a
demonstration, because it is against God, and against my self; against my
reason, and his illumination; and that is, against all bands Divine and Humane.

Quest.

BUT then what shall a Judge do, 5.
who knows the witnesses in a criminal cause to have sworn falsely? The case is
this: Conopus a Spartan Judge, walking abroad near the gardens of Onesicritus,
espies him killing of his slave Asotus; who to palliate the fact, himself
accuses another of his servants [ Orgilus] and compelled some to swear it as he
affirmed. The process was made, advocates entertained by Onesicritus, and the
poor Orgilus convict by testimony and legal proof. Conopus the Judge knows the
whole process to be injurious, but knows not what to do, because he remembers
that he is bound to judge according to allegation and proof, and yet to do
justice and judgment, which in this case is impossible. He therefore inquires
for an expedient, or a peremptory resolution on either hand: Since he offends
against the Laws of Sparta, the order of law and his own life, if he acquits
one who is legally convicted; and yet if he condemns him whom he knows to be
innocent, he sins against God, and Nature, and against his own Conscience.

That a Judge not only may, 6.
but is obliged to proceed according to the process of Law, and not to his own
private Conscience, is confidently affirmed by Aquinas, by his Master, and by
his Scholars, and of late defended earnestly by Didacus Covaruvias a learned
man indeed and a great Lawyer; and they do it upon this account:

1. For there is a double person or capacity in a Judge; 7.
He is a private person, and has special obligations and duties incumbent upon
him in that capacity; and his conscience has a proper information, and gives
him laws, and has no superior but God: and as he is such an one, he must
proceed upon the notices and persuasions of his Conscience, guided by its own
measures. But as he is a Judge, he is to do the office of a Judge, and to
receive information by witnesses and solemnities of Law, and is not to bring
his own private conscience to become the public measure. Not Attilius Regulus,
but the Consul must give sentence: and since he is bound to receive his
information from witnesses, as they prove, so the Law presumes; whose Minister
because he is, if there be any fault, it is in the Law, not in the Judge, and
in this case, the Judge does not go against his conscience, because by oath he
is bound to go according to Law. He indeed goes against his private knowledge;
but that does not give Law to a Judge, whose knowledge is to be guided by other
instruments. 2.
* And it is here as in case of execution of sentences, which is another
ministry of Law. Ordinarius tenetur obsequi Delegato, etsi sciat sententiam
illam injustam, exequi nihilominus tenetur eandem, said Innocentius III. Cap.
pastoralis. (...) De ^fficio and pote^^ Judicis Delegati.
The Executioner is not to refuse his office, though he know the Judge to have
condemned an innocent; for else he might be his Judges Judge, and that not for
himself alone, but also for the public interest. For if an Executioner upon
his persuasion that the Judge did proceed unjustly against the life of an
innocent, shall refuse to put him to death, he judges the sentence of the Judge
over again, and declares publicly against it, and denies to the Commonwealth
the effect of his duty: so does a Judge, if he acquits him whom the Law
condemns, upon the account of his private knowledge. 3.
* It is like speaking oracles against public authority from a private spirit.
* Which thing if it were permitted, 4.
the whole order and frame of Judicatures would be altered, and a door opened
for a private and an arbitrary proceeding: and the Judge if he were not just,
might defame all witnesses, and acquit any criminal, and transfer the fault
to an innocent and unsuspected, and so really do that which he but pretends to
avoid. * And the case would be the same, if he were a man confident and
opionative. For he might seem to himself to be as sure of his own reason, as of
his own sense; and his conscience might be as effectively determined by his
argument as by his eyes; and then by the same reason he might think himself
bound to judge against the sentence of the Law according to his own persuasion,
as to judge against the forms of Law, and proceedings of the Court according to
his own sense. * And therefore not only in Civil but in the Ecclesiastical
Courts we find it practiced otherwise: 6,
and a Priest may not refuse to communicate him whom he knows to have been
absolved upon a false allegation, and unworthily; but must administer
Sacraments to him according to the public voice, not to his own private
notice: for it would be intolerable, if that which is just in public should be
rescinded by a private pretense, whether materially just or no; not only
because there are other measures of the public and private, and that to have
that overborn by this would destroy all Government; but because if this private
pretense be admitted, it may as well be falsely as truly pretended: And
therefore since real justice by this means cannot be secured, and that unless
it were, nothing could make amends for the public disorder, it follows that
the public order must be kept, and the private notice laid aside. 7.
* For the Judge lays aside the affections of a man, when he goes to the seat
of judgment; and he lays aside his own reason, and submits to the reason of
the Law; and his own will, relinquishing that to satisfy the Law; and therefore
he must bring nothing of a private man with him, but his own abilities fitted
for the public. 8.
* And let no man in this case pretend to a zeal for truth and righteousness;
for since in Judicatures, legal or seeming truth is all that can be secured,
and with this the Laws are satisfied, we are sure we may proceed upon the
testimony of concurring witnesses, because they do speak legal truth, and that
being a proportionable conduct to legal persons, is a perfect rule for the
conscience of a Judge; according to the words of our blessed Savior quoted out
of Moses Law, John 8.
It is written in your Law, The testimony of two men is true, that is, it is to
be accepted as if it were true, and proceedings are to be accordingly. In
pursuance and verification of this, are those words of S. Ambrose, Bonus Judex
nihil ex arbitrio suo facit, and domesticae proposito voluntatis, sed juxta
leges and jura pronunciat, scitis juris obtemperat, non indulget propriae
voluntati, nihil paratum and meditatum domo defert, sed sicut audit, ita
judicat. In Psalm. 118.
A good Judge does nothing of his will, or the purpose of his private choice,
but pronounces according to Laws and public right, he obeys the sanctions of
the Law, giving no way to his own will, he brings nothing from home prepared
and deliberated, but as he hears, so he judges. This testimony is of the more
value, because S. Ambrose had been a Judge and a Ruler himself in Civil
affairs, and therefore spoke according to the sense of those excellent Laws,
which almost all the civil world have since admitted. * And the thing is
confessed in the parallel cases: 9.
For a Judge may not proceed upon the evidence of an instrument which he has
privately perused, if it be not produced in Court, though he by that could be
enabled to do justice to the oppressed party; for he does not know it as a
Judge, but as a private man; and though that be a distinction without a real
difference of subject, yet in effect it means, that the Laws do not permit a
Judge to take notice of any private information, which might prove an inlet to
all manner of violence and robbery. * And therefore if a Priest hearing the
Confession of Caius, understands that Titius was the complice of Caius his
crime, 10.
he may not refuse to absolve Titius, though he do not confess the fact in
which he took part with Caius; because he is to proceed by the method of that
Court where he sits Judge. 11.
For private and personal notice is not sufficient. * And if I do privately
know that my neighbor is excommunicate, I am not bound to refuse him my
society, till I know it legally; and therefore much less may a Judge do a
public act upon private notice, when we may not do even a private act
referring to Law without a public notice. 12.
* And all this is confirmed by the authority of Ulpian, (...)
Veritas rerum erroribus gestarum non vitiatur, and ideo Praeses provinciae id
sequatur quod convenit eum ex fide eorum quae probabuntur. The truth of things
is not prejudiced by errors in matters of fact: and therefore let the President
of the Province follow that which is fitting for him, 13.
proceeding by the faith of those things which shall be proved. * For since no
man must judge by his own private authority, he must not judge by his own
private knowledge. 14.
* And to what purpose shall be call in witnesses to give him public
information, if when they have done so, he by his private may reject the
public?

But if after all this you inquire what shall become of the Judge as a man, 8.
and what of his private conscience? these men answer; That the Judge must use
what ingenious and fair artifices he can to save the innocent, or to do
justice according to truth, but yet so as he may not prevaricate the duty of a
Judge: he may use the prudence of a friend and a private man: let him by
various and witty interrogatories, in which he may be helped by the advantage
of his private knowing the secret, make ways to entrap the false witnesses, as
Daniel did to the two Elders in the case of Susanna: or let him refer the
cause to the supreme power, or resign his office, or make a deputation to
another, or reprieve the injured man, or leave a private way for him to escape,
or use his power of interpretation, or find some way to elude the unjust hand
of justice, which in this case does him wrong by doing right. But if none of
these ways, nor any other like them can preserve the innocent man, or the
Judges private conscience, he must do justice according to Law, standing
upright as a public person, but not stooping to particulars, or twisting
himself by his private notices.

This is the sum of what is or can be said in this opinion; and though they
speak probably and well, 9.
yet I answer otherwise, and I suppose, for reasons very considerable.
Therefore,

To the Question I answer, That a Judge in this case may not do any public
act against his private conscience; he may not condemn an innocent whom he
knows to be so, though he be proved criminal by false witnesses. And my reasons
are these:

1. Innocentem and justum non occides (said God) to slay an innocent person is
absolutely and indispensably evil. 10.
Upon which ground I argue; Exodus 23. 7.
That which is in its own nature essentially and absolutely evil, may not be
done for any good, for any pretense, for any necessity, nor by any command of
man. Since therefore in the present case, the man is supposed innocent, he
ought not to be delivered to death for any end in the world; nor by any
authority, much less for the preservation of the forms of Courts, or to prevent
a possible evil that may accidentally and by abuse arise; especially since the
Question here is not matter of prudence or policy, but of justice and
conscience; nor yet of the public interest, but of the Judges duty; nor at
all, what the Laws actually do constitute and appoint, but what the Judge may
really practice. Now, in all cases, if a man dies, it must be by the merit of
the cause, or for some public end. The first is not supposed in this question,
because the man is supposed innocent; and if the latter be pretended, it is an
open profession of doing evil that good may come of it. And if it be answered,
that this is true, if the man did appear to be innocent, but in Law he appears
otherwise. I reply, that it is true, to the Law he does so, but not to the
Judge; and therefore though the Law can condemn him, yet she cannot do it by
that Judge. He must not do it, because it being by an unavoidable defect, or
error, that the Law may do it, and if the Law could be rightly informed, she
would not, she could not do it, it follows that the Judge who is rightly
informed can no more do it then the Law it self, if she had the same
information.

2. To judge according to forms and processes of Law, 11.
is but of humane positive right and constitution; for the Law may command a
Judge to proceed according to his own knowledge, if she will trust him and his
knowledge: and in all arbitrary Courts it is so; and in the supreme power it is
always so, if it be absolute. But not to condemn the innocent, is of Divine
and eternal right, and therefore cannot be prejudiced by that which only is
humane. And indeed if we look into the nature and causes of things, we shall
find, that the reason why Judges are tied to forms and processes of Laws, to
testimonies and judicial proofs, is, because the Judge is supposed not to know
the matters brought before him, till they appear in the forms of Law. For if a
Judge did know men's hearts, and the secrets of things and causes, supposing him
to be honest, he were the fittest person in the world to be a Judge, and can
proceed summarily, and needs no witnesses. But this is the way of the Divine
judgment, who proceeds upon his own knowledge, though for the declaration of
his justice to men, he sometimes seems to use processes, and measures of humane
inquiry; as in the case of Sodom, and the like. And in proportion, if God
should reveal to a Judge the truth of every cause that lies before him, I think
no man doubts, but he might safely proceed to judgment upon that account. This
was the case of Daniel and Susanna. For she was convicted and proved guilty by
concurrent witnesses; God revealed the truth to Daniel, and he arrested
judgment upon that account. Upon exam^nation of the witnesses he finds them
disagree in the circumstances; but this was no legal conviction of their
falsehood in the main; but it was therefore sufficient, because Daniel came in
the manner of a Prophet, and knew the truth from God, not by forms of Law. Now
it matters not (as to the justice of the proceeding) which way the truth be
known; for the way of receiving it is but extrinsecal to the main question: and
as Daniel being made Judge by God, might not have consented to the death of
Susanna, though not only the two Elders, but ten more had sworn that they had
seen Susanna sin: so neither can a Judge, to whom God by some special act of
providence in behalf of truth and innocence has made known the matter, proceed
to sentence against that knowledge, which he by Divine dispensation has
received.

3. If a King or Senate, 12.
or any supreme power receive testimony of a matter of fact concerning any of
their Council, whom they know to be innocent; as if it be legally proved that
Sempronius robbed a man upon the Kalends of March, a hundred miles from the
place where the King or Senate saw him sitting all that day; that they may not
deliver him to death appears therefore because they being accountable to none
but God, must judge by his measures, that is, so as to preserve the innocent,
and not by those measures which men's necessity, and imperfection, and
weaknesses have made regularly necessary. But that which is regularly
necessary, may irregularly, and by accident in some cases be unjust, and in
those, the supreme power must make provisions where it can, and it can when it
knows the truth of the particular. For since the Legislative power can dispense
in the administration of its own Laws upon particular necessities, or charity
upon the affirmation and petition of him that needs it: much more must it
dispense with the forms of proceedings in a case of such necessity, and
justice, and charity, and that upon their own knowledges. The affirmation of
the argument is, that Princes and Senates may, and must do this; that it is
necessary, and therefore also just in them to do so. The consequent of the
argument is this: That therefore if private Judges may not do so, it is
because they have no authority to do so, but are compelled by their Princes to
proceed by forms: and if this be all, it declares the necessity of such
proceedings to be only upon man's authority; and so, though by Law he may be
bound to do so, yet our inquiry being what he is tied to do in conscience,
the Law cannot prevail above conscience, the subordinate above the superior,
there being in this case, a knowledge of the fact, and the law of God for the
right.

4. For the case is this; God says, 13.
Thou shall not slay the innocent, and the Judge does certainly know, that the
accused man is truly innocent: The conclusion is, therefore this man must not
die. Against this, the argument opposed is this: Humane authority says, Thou
shall slay him that is convicted of a fault, whether by true or false
witnesses: Here are witnesses which do convict him, and I know them to be
false: The conclusion is, Therefore this man must die. Which of these two
arguments ought to prevail, I think needs not much inquiry.

5. And what if Titius be accused for killing Regulus, 14.
whom the Consul at that time has living in his house, or has lately sent
abroad; would not all the world hoot at him, if he should deliver Titius to the
Tormentors for killing the man whom the Judge knows to be at home, it may be
dressing of his dinner, or abroad gathering his rents? But if this be so absurd
(as it is indeed extremely) it follows that he may use his private knowledge
against a false testimony that is public. Or how if he sees the fact done
before him in the Court? a purse cut, or a stone thrown at his brother Judge,
as it happened at Ludlow not many years since? The Judge proceeded to sentence
upon intuition of the fact, and stayed not for the solemnities of Law. Or put
case that there be depositions offered on both sides, for and against the
innocent, either directly, or indirectly. If in this case the Judges private
knowledge may determine for either, it follows that his private knowledge can
be admitted as the instrument of justice; and if it may, it must: for nothing
can hinder him to do it, but because he may not. But that he may, appears in
the now alleged instances.

6. Adrianus puts another case, 15.
in which it is also without contradiction evident that private notice is to be
preferred before public solemnity where there is an error in this and none in
that. The case I choose to express in this narrative. Viretta a naughty woman
pretends to be wife to Coloro an Italian Gentleman, and brings a Priest and
witnesses whom she had suborned, to prove the marriage. The Judge gives
sentence for Viretta, and commands Coloro to pay the duties of a husband to
her, and to use her as a wife. He knows the contrary, and that he is husband to
Vittoria Morisini, and therefore pays her all his duty, and neglects the other;
and he is bound to it, because no man's error or malice can alter the Laws of
God, and from paying that duty which he knows is due by the Laws of God, he
cannot be excused by any formal error arising in the administration of the Laws
of man. The same is the Judges case. For if the Law commands him to do an act
against a known private duty, he is so to follow the duty he knows he ows to
God in preserving the innocent, as Coloro is bound to preserve his duty to his
wife, and the Judge may no more commit murder then Coloro may commit adultery;
but neither of them can be rescued but by their private conscience, therefore
they may use that. And there is no escape in this instance, because the Subject
is as much bound to submit to the sentence of the Law, as the Judge is to the
forms of it; and that which secures one, secures both.

7. The evils that may be consequent to the strict adherence to the forms and
proofs of Law against the Judges conscience may be so great as to be
intolerable, 16.
and much greater then can be supposed to be consequent to the following a
certain unsolemne truth. And there is no man, but put the case so as himself
and his party may be involved in ruin by false witness, and he will grant that
himself is by all means to be preserved. Put case a whole order of the Clergy,
of Monks, of Lawyers, should be accused falsely and oppressed by evil men, as
the Knights Templars were accused fiercely, and so were the Religious in Henry
the eighths time: If the King had known that the Monks, and the Pope had known
that the Templars had been innocent, no man ought to have persuaded them to
condemn the guiltless. For if the King had proceeded against them to
confiscation, making use of his advantage gotten by the sin of vile men, the
effect had been, that he would rather have gotten money by a lie, then have
done justice to the oppressed according to his conscience. And indeed because
it is not to be supposed but all the world would have given sentence for
themselves in their own case, it is to be supposed that the contrary opinion is
but the sentence of men in prosperity, or of unexperienced Scholars who care
not what load they put upon others to verify their own opinion. And what
Christian will not condemn Pilate for condemning the most holy Jesus,
according to the testimonies of his false accusers, and against his own
conscience? And let the case be put, that the witnesses had agreed, and proved
foul things against the unspotted Lamb of God, and made all clear in forms of
Law, and that Pilate had known the Lord to be innocent and injured, could the
water in the basin have washed him clean, if he had against his conscience in
compliance with the solemn perjurers have condemned him who was purer then the
Angels? In this case the effect had been intolerable, for which no pretense of
necessity, or legal formalities could have made recompense.

8. A Law founded upon presumption binds not in the Court of Conscience, 17.
when the presumption is found to be an error. The Law presumes that the heir
entering upon an estate, if he makes not an Inventory, does it to conceal the
goods and defraud the Creditors. But if an heir does so by negligence or
ignorance, or an impertinent fear, or upon ill counsel, or be betrayed to do
so; If the Creditor knows that the goods are not sufficient, he may not in
conscience take the advantage the Law gives him, but is bound to do charity
and justice by the measures of his private knowledge, and not by the measures
of the Law to do violence and oppression, which was the thing in question.

9. To the verification of the sentence of death upon an accused person there
are required, 18.
1. A reality of the Crime. 2. A power in the Judge. 3. And equity in the Law.
Now if diverse men should swear that the Judge has a competent power, nay
though they threaten him with death if he does not, yet he may not exercise any
such power, which himself privately knows that he has not. So also if he knows
the fact does not deserve death, though men swear it, or a higher power declare
it, or another competent Judge affirm it, yet a Judge must not consent to it,
if himself knows it to be unjust. And I have read of an excellent Prince, who
because he did consent to the forms and processes of Law made by his Senate
against the bravest of his Subjects, against his own conscience and knowledge,
repented of it all the days of his life, and was not pardoned for it till the
day of his death; and the first confidence he had of pardon was upon the
account of S. Paul's words, He that is dead is justified from sins. But then,
since the defect of either of these two makes it unlawful for a Judge to
proceed according to the forms of Law, and ties him to follow his conscience
even against allegation and proof, much more must it be so if there be no
reality of fact in the accused party; because in the destitution of this, the
Laws themselves have no power, and therefore they can give none to a Judge
their Minister. Justis lex non est posita; The Law was not made for the
innocent, but to defend them, and therefore has no power to destroy them; and
then the Judge can have none, and so cannot in that case be tied to proceed
according to formalities, and therefore must proceed according to his
conscience, or not at all. For,

10. If a Law were made that a Judge should be bound to condemn an innocent
person, 19.
though he knows him to be so, and to be accused by calumny, and supplanted by
perjury, it were an unjust Law, as all men (that I know of) grant, and indeed
must grant. For it were a Law made to encourage perjurers and oppressors, to
discourage innocence: a Law made against the intention of Laws, which is, to
defend the right, and punish the wrong doer: it were a Law disabling the Judge
to rescue the oppressed, and a Law expressly disowning the cause of the
afflicted: and if any Judge should undertake his office upon such terms, he
should openly profess that if the case happened, he would do against his
conscience. And all Laws going the best way they can to find out truth, would
never disable a Judge to make use of it when he had found it out, and assisted
the inquiry of the Laws by a fortunate discovery. For the examining of
witnesses being but a means to find out truth, cannot possibly be so adhered
to, as to be preferred before the end to which it is designed, that were as if
a man should rather love to seek then find. Since therefore no Law ever was,
or can be so unreasonable as to decree that a Judge shall not in such a case
directly relieve the innocent, but proceed to his condemnation, it follows that
he can have no obligation to do so, and then the obligation of his conscience
can upon no pretense be declined. The Law does not intend to oblige the Judge
in that case, because no Law can be made expressly to do so; He therefore being
free from the Law in that case, stands bound to his private conscience, without
excuse. Nay, the Canon Law expressly enjoins that a Judge should give sentence
according to his own conscience, as appears in c. 1. de re Judic. in 6. and in
clem, 1.. verum de haeret.

11. Suppose a Judge should suborn false witnesses against an innocent; 20.
either he is bound not to proceed according to allegation and proof, but
according to his secret conscience, or else he is bound to go on in his crime,
and effect that which he had maliciously designed. For it is not enough that he
is bound to disingage the witnesses and take off the subornation: for suppose
the persons already appearing will not cease, lest they should be shamed and
ruined, but will take confidence from their crime, and perseverance from their
publication, then there is no remedy for the innocent, neither can the Judge
rescue him from himself, nor give over sinning, unless he proceed by his
private certain measures, and not by those which are false and public. For to
say he may be sorry for his fault and yet proceed in it, is to make him an
hypocrite: if he confesses that he subor^d the witnesses, and yet proceed to
condemn the innocent, he is ridiculous, and makes the Law put on the face of
tyranny and unreasonable violence and oppression. So that either he must go on
and sin to the end without remedy, or he must be admitted to proceed by his
private conscience, and that in his case would be justice and penitence besides.

12. Lastly, all Laws being intended for the good of the Subjects, 21.
are bound not only to comply with their ordinary cases by ordinary
provisions, but for their accidental needs by the extraordinary. And so we
find it, that all Laws yield in particulars, when the Law is injurious in the
special cases, and this is the ground of all Chancery, because summum jus,
summa injuria; and Solomon advised well, Noli esse justus nimium, be not over
righteous; and the j^stice of God being (...), gentleness and favor, equity
and mercy, ours is best when we follow the best precedent; now since no case is
more favorable then the present, the Laws are unjust that will not bend and
stoop to the miseries of the oppressed; and therefore the Judge having no
hindrance, he is tied by a double band to releeve the oppressed innocent, by
his direct sentence (where it can be admitted) or by his open declaration, and
quantum in se est, but at no hand to consent to his condemnation.

I conclude therefore with that rule of the Canon Law, 22.
C. penult. de reg. jur.
Melius est scandalum nasci quam ut veritas deseratur; It is better that a
scandal should be suffered, and an offense done to the forms and methods of
judicial proceedings, then that truth should be betrayed and forsaken; and what
was said in the prophecy concerning our blessed Savior, Non secundum auditum
aurium arguet, he shall not reprove according as he hears, but according as he
knows, is also true of Judges in this case; they do judge most perfectly when
in truth and in defense of the innocent, they follow the pattern of the Divine
judgment and not the imperfection of the humane, that is, they are to judge by
the eyes, not by the ears; Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures
Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus --


That is a sure sentence that can rely upon ocular demonstration; for our eyes
are a better guard of innocence then the tongues of Sycophants, and our
consciences are surer informers then the forms of Law; and since no Law has
declared against it, the conscience is at perfect liberty; and yet if it were
not, we are certain it is better to obey God then men; the conscience is no
man's servant, it is Gods only. Conscience is Gods Angel: Grieve not the Angel
lest he smite thee, do nothing against him, lest he forsake thee. Viro bono
fixum in omni vita est, transversum unguem a recta conscientia non discedere,
said Cicero; Every good man is perfectly resolved not to depart from his right
conscience a hairs breadth during his whole life.

And now to the pretenses which are made on the other side, 23.
there will be the less need of a reply, if we consider that they only prove
that a Judge is tied to observe the forms of judicial process, and to proceed
according to allegation and proof, ordinarily and regularly, as supposing that
this is the best ordinary way of information, as it is most certainly. But as
the Law, using the best she has, would not yet refuse a Prophet from heaven,
or a miracle to bring truth from her retirements, or her vail, so neither will
she refuse any better way that can be offered; but whatever the Law would do,
yet the question now being concerning the Judge, it is certain that the Judge
in the case now put, has a surer way of evidence; and therefore as the Law, if
she had a surer way of evidence, ought not to go against so clear a light, so
neither can the Judge. And the arguments only proceeding upon the usual
suppositions conclude that regularly Judges must do as usually they can do,
that is, proceed according to proof, because they can have no better way, but
they cannot be drawn to this extraregular and rare contingency. For though most
men are brought in upon suspicion or private accusation, yet the Apostle says
that some men's sins are manifest, going before unto judgment: and when this
happens, the Judge must not go in inquest after what he sees. And the same
arguments may as well be urged against all dispensations and remissions,
against favor and Chancery, and destroy all equity, and all Religion, as to
destroy all conscience when it is certain and infallible. But I shall say
something to the particulars.

1. It is true that a Judge has a double capacity, 24.
and he has offices proportionable; some as a man, some as Judge; that is, he
has some natural and essential obligations, some which are superinduced upon
his office. And therefore I refuse to use this distinction as it is commonly
used, and so made more subject to mistake and abuse. In this case the Judge is
not to be considered as a public man, and a private man; for private is as
much superinduced as public; and all his other relations are as much to yield
to his essential duty, as that of a Judge: such as are the relation of a
Husband, of a Father, of a Tutor, of a Master; and amongst these, the more
private is often tied to yield to the more public. But therefore in this case
the Judge is to be considered as a Judge and as a Man; and in this case the
duties are sometimes disparate, but never contrary; and when there is a
dispute, the superinduced must yield to that which is original; for whatsoever
is his duty as a man, the Judge may not prevaricate; for it is the man that is
the Judge, in the man that office is subjected, and the office of a Judge is
bound upon him by the conscience of the man. If the Judge had two consciences,
and two real persons, then it were to be granted that they were to be served
and attended to in their several callings; but it is not so, they are but two
persons in fiction of Law, but materially, and to all real events, the same: it
is the same conscience ministering to diverse duties: And therefore as the Judge
is always that man, so his conscience is the conscience of that man; and
because as a man he must not go against his conscience, so when that man is a
Judge he must not go against the man's conscience, for the Judge is still that
man ruled by that conscience. The essential duty of a man cannot by any
superinduced formality be dispensed with. Now to go according to our
conscience and knowledge is the essential rule and duty of a man, which he
cannot put off by being a Judge. The new office superinduces new obligations,
but none contrary, no more then he can cease being a man by being a Judge.
Tertul. ^ib. de (...).
Certe prior anima quam litera, and prior sermo quam liber, and prior sensus
quam stylus, and prior homo quam philosophus and poeta: He is first a Man, and
then a Philosopher, a Poet, or a Judge; and that which is first cannot be
prejudiced by what is superinduced. And if the Judge go against the conscience
of the man, pretending to do according to the conscience of the Judge, the man
shall be damned, and where the Judge shall then appear any child can tell. If
the Bishop of Bayeux as Earl of Kent will rebel against his Prince, the Earl of
Kent shall lose his head, though the Bishop of Bayeux may plead his Clergy. For
in this there is a great mistake. To be a man and to be a Judge are not to be
compared as two distinct capacities of equal consideration. To be a Bishop and
to be a Judge are properly such, and have distinct measures; but to be a man is
the subject of the two capacities, and cannot be laid aside as either of the
other may; and therefore the distinction is vain and sophistical, and if it
could be admitted in Metaphysics (in which yet, it appears to have an error)
yet it can never be suffered to pass to real events. This being the ground of
all the contrary opinion, and being found false, the superstructure must also
fall to the ground. To the special cases this I answer:

2. An Executioner may not refuse to do his office though the Judge has given
an unjust sentence: it is true only when the matter is dubious, 25.
or not known, or intolerable. But if the Judge commands the Hangman to flay a
Prophet alive, or to crucify Christ, or to strike his King thorough with a
sword, I doubt not but the adversaries themselves will think he is not obliged
to obey. Indeed this ought not easily to be drawn into a rule, lest such people
turn it into a pretense. But if the Executioner be sure, and the matter be
notorious and such as cannot deceive him, his hand ought not to be upon an
innocent. For as Receivers are to Thieves, so are Executioners to unjust
Judges. When the fact is notorious, and the injustice evident, then it is such
as all men can see it; and then, as if there were no Receivers there would be
no Thieves; so if there were no Executioners of unjust sentences, the Judge
would be apt to reverse his sentence.

3. Now whereas it is pretended that if a private notice were admitted against
public evidence, 26.
it were like a private spirit against a public article, and would open a way
to every pretension, it would dissolve the forms of judicatures, and introduce
many evils: I answer, that if all this were true, and that for this there could
be no remedy, nor yet any recompense in the special cases, it would follow that
the Law were prudent if it did refuse to admit such a proceeding, unless she
had some reason to trust the Judge: But this were nothing to the Judge. For the
Law therefore refuses his testimony, because she has that which she presumes
is better, and because she not knowing the secret follows the best way she
has. But the Judge knows the secret, and he is not deceived, and he does not
make pretenses, for the case supposes him to speak according to his conscience;
and therefore although tht Law in prudence does not believe him, yet he cannot
but believe himself, and therefore in duty to God must proceed accordingly, or
must not proceed at all.

4. Neither is this like a private spirit against a public article; 27.
because this conscience of the Judge does not impose upon the public, who
has power to admit or to refuse his sentence; but it is only for himself, and
although his conscience ought not to be the public measure, yet it ought to be
his own. I do not doubt but the Law may go against the Judges conscience, but
the Judge himself may not go against his own.

5. And this we see verified in the matter of a private evidence; 28.
for though the Judge has seen it in a chamber, yet he must not judge by it in
the Court, the Law will not suffer him to do so; but yet for himself he may so
far make use of it, as to be persuaded in his conscience, and to understand
on which side the right stands, and to favor it in all the ways that are
permitted him. But the case here being not matter of life and death, the Law
has power to dispose of estates, and the conscience of the Judge is not
obliged to take more care of a man's money or land then himself does, but it can
be ^bl^ged to take care of men's lives when the injured person is not able. A
man may give away his estate, but he may not give his life away; and therefore
he may lose his estate by such ways, by which he ought not to be permitted to
lose his life. Add to this, that a Judge having seen an Instrument in private
which could much clear the cause depending, may not upon that account proceed
to sentence, because it may be the adverse party can give an answer to it, and
make it invalid; whereas in matters of fact of which the Judge ^s conscious
there is no uncertainty, nor fallibility. And lastly, the suffering party in
the question of money or lands suffers no inconvenience, but what is outweighed
to the public by the order of justice and solemnities of Law* and the man that
loses to day for want of producing his evidence, may produce it to morrow and
recover it. But in matter of life and death, nothing can m^ke recompense to the
oppressed innocent, and if he suffers to day, he cannot plead an error in the
indictment to morrow. For these and many other considerations the case is
wholly different.

6. By some of these things we may also answer to the instance of a confident
and opinionative Judge. 29.
He may not prefer his private opinion before the sentence of the Law, and
bring it into open judgment. 1. Because he himself may be deceived in his
opinion, and his confidence is no argument that he is not deceived. 2. Because
if the sentence and decree of the Law be less reasonable, yet the Judge without
sin may proceed to it, because the more reasonable is not in his choice, and
the less reasonable is not absolutely and simply unjust. 3. In matters of
prudence and civil government there is no demonstration of reason, but the
Legislative power may determine for the public interest as is presently
apprehended, and may refuse the better counsel, and yet do well enough; for
that which is simply the better is not in these cases necessary; and in such
things a man's reason ought not to be so confident, as he is of what he sees, or
what is matter of faith; and therefore in these only he is to be guided by his
own, in the other he must proceed by the public measures. And as in all things
not demonstratively certain or evident the Executioner is bound to obey the
Judge; so is the Judge bound to obey the Law; and the presumption will lie for
the Law against the Judge, as it will lie for the Judge against the Officer. 4.
And yet after all, I do not doubt but if a Judges conscience were effectively
determined against a Law, and that he did believe it to be unjust and unlawful,
he ought to follow his conscience. As if a Judge did believe it to be a sin to
put a man to death for stealing 13. d. ob. he might not condemn such a thief
to the Gallows. And he is not excused by saying, It is not the Judge but the
Law that does amiss. For if the Judge believe the Law to be unjust, he makes
himself a partner in the injustice by ministering to an unjust Law against his
conscience. For not only he that commands evil to be done is guilty, but he
that obeys such a command. In this case, either the Judge must lay aside his
opinion or his office, for his conscience must not be laid aside.

7. The instance of a Priest and an excommunicate person unworthily absolved
will no way conclude this Question. 30.
1. Because the case is infinitely differing between condemning an innocent,
and acquitting the guilty. If any man pretends he is satisfied in conscience
that the accused person is criminal, though it cannot be legally proved, yet
there is no wrong done, if the accused man be let free; an inconvenience there
may be, but the Judge must not be permitted to destroy by his private
conscience, against or without legal conviction, because the evil may be
intolerable if it be permitted, and the injustice may be frequent and
unsufferable; but if it be denied, there may sometimes happen an inconvenience
by permitting a Criminal to live, but there can be no injustice done. It may
have excuse, and it may have reason, and it may have necessity that a Judge
refuse to consent to the death of an innocent, but that he should against his
conscience kill him can have no warrant; and if he be not innocent, there may
be reason to let him alone, but none to condemn him if he be. Conscience can
oblige a Judge to an unsolemne absolution, but not to an illegal and unsolemne
condemnation. This should have been considered in the Earl of Straffords Case.
The Law has power to forgive the criminal, but not to punish the guiltless.
And therefore if a man be absolved when he deserved it not, we may suppose him
pardoned, and the private Priest is not his Judge in that case. For to refuse
to communicate him is an act of public Judicature, and to absolve him is an
act of the same power, and therefore must be dispensed by authority, not by
usurpation, that is, by the public sentence, not by the private Minister,
since to give the holy Communion to such a person is not against any essential
duty of a Christian. And therefore if the Priest knows him unworthy to
communicate, he may separate him so far as he has power to separate him,
that is, by the word of his proper Ministry: let him admonish him to abstain,
represent his insufficiency, threaten him with the danger; but if he will
despise all this, the private Priest has no more to do, but to pray and weep
for him, and leave him to God and the Church. But of this I am to speak more
largely in its proper place.

8. As for the case of the Priest hearing Confessions, 31.
though he find Titius accused by Caius, yet if Titius does not accuse
himself, Titius is rather to be believed in his own case then Caius in another
man's. Because in this intercourse every man is so concerned to do his duty,
that every man is to be believed for himself and against himself, because if he
speaks false himself only is the loser. 2. Caius accusing Titius may for ought
the Confessor knows tell a lie and abuse him, and therefore he cannot pretend
knowledge and conscience against Titius; and so this comes not home to the
present case which supposes the Judge to know the accused person to be
innocent. 3. This argument supposes that a man cannot be absolved unless he
enumerate all his sins to the Priest, Unum necessar.
which being in many cases false (as I have shown otherwhere) that which relies
upon it can signify nothing.

9. Last of all, 32.
although the Judge must lay aside his affections and his will, and his opinion
when he sits upon the seat of judgment, because these are no good measures of
Judicature, nor ought to have immediate influence upon the sentence; yet he
cannot lay aside his knowledge, and if he lay aside his conscience he will make
but an ill Judge. 2. And yet the Judge must lay his affections and his will
aside never but when they tempt him to injustice. For a Judge must not cease to
be merciful when it does not make him unjust; nor need he cease to please
himself, so long as he is pleased to do right: these if they do hurt indeed
must be left off, else not; and therefore it cannot with any color from hence
be pretended that he must lay aside his knowledge when it is the only way by
which he can do good.

10. To the authority of S. Ambrose, 33.
what I have already said is a sufficient answer. For he speaks of a Judges
office regularly and usually, not what he is to do in cases extraordinary, and
such as is the present question. But he that said. Sicut audit, ita judicat,
would no less have said, Sicut videt, ita judicat. The seeing of his eyes is as
sure a measure as the hearing of his ears.

11. As for the words of Ulpian I will give no other answer, 34.
then that Panormitan and Covaruvias who urge them, and who are concerned to
make the most of them, do yet confess that they make as much against them as
for them; and that they say true, will appear to any ordinary understanding
that considers them.

12. For although no Judge must do acts of a private authority, yet he may as
well use his own private knowledge, as he may use the private knowledge of the
witnesses; for their knowledge is as private as the Judges, till it be brought
into open Court, and when his is brought thither, it is as public as theirs;
but however from the authority to the knowledge to argue is a plain paralogism;
for the Prince who armed him with public authority, did not furnish him with a
commission of knowledge, but supposed that to be induced by other ways.

13. And therefore the Judge may when he has called witnesses reject them upon
his own certain knowledge, as well as use arts of discovery, or any other
collateral ways to secure the innocent. For it may as well be inquired
concerning the Judges using his knowledge to the infatuating or discovering the
falsehood of the evil witnesses as to the rejecting them. For if he must
absolutely take all for granted which they say, then he must use no arts to
invalidate their testimony; but if he may do that, he may do the other, and
yet the calling in of witnesses may be to many good purposes, and by the
collision of contraries light may arise, and from falsehood also truth may be
produced like a fair child from a foul mother. And after all, though this
question is not to be determined on either side by authorities, yet because
amongst the writers of Cases of Conscience very many rely much upon the
testimony of Authors, I think it not amiss to say that this sense of the
question which I defend was the sentence of many eminent Divines and Lawyers,
particularly, Nicolaus Lyra, Adrianus, Angelus, Navarre, Hostiensis,
Calderinus, Panormitan, Martinus, Johannes Arboraeus, Oldendorp, Corrasius,
Lessius, Bresser and diverse other; and therefore besides the strength of the
reasons, I walk the more confidently by having such good company.

To conclude: 35.
All those advises of prudence which are given by the adverse party in this
affair as expedients for the Judges to proceed by in such cases, I am ready to
admit if they will secure their conscience and the life of the innocent
oppressed. But if they will not, but that the Judge must give sentence for Law
or for Conscience, the case to me seems very clear. God is greater then our
Conscience, but our Conscience is greater then any thing besides. Fiat jus and
pereat mundus, said S. Austin, adhaec imagine ne nature veritas obumbretur
curandum. For images and forms of things, the natural and substantial truth of
things may not be lost or prejudiced. Let justice be done whatsoever be the
event. Accipere personam improbi non est bonum, Prove. 18 5.
ut pervertas justum in judicio. It is not good to receive the person of a
wicked man, thereby to overthrow the righteous in his cause.

RULE 9. The goodness of an object is not made by Conscience, but is accepted,
declared, and published by it, and made personally obligatory.
NO object can have its denomination from the judgment of reason, 1.
save only that from thence it may be said to be understood to be good, to be
declared, to be consented to; all which supposes the object to be good, or to
be so apprehended. Just as an emerald is green before the eye perceives it so:
and if the object were not in it self good, then the reason were deceived in
consenting to it, and a deceiver in publishing it.

This is true in respect of the material, 2.
fundamental, and proper goodness of the object; for this it has independently
of the conscience: and the rectitude of the conscience is dependent on this,
and consequent to the perception of it. But yet there is a formal, extrinsecal,
and relative goodness passed upon an object by the conscience, by whose
persuasion although an evil object do not become naturally good, yet it
becomes personally necessary; and in the same proportion a good object may
become evil.

The purpose of this is to remonstrate that we must rather look to the rule
then to the present persuasion; 3.
first taking care that our conscience be truly informed, before it be suffered
to pass a sentence; and it is not enough that our conscience tells us thus,
unless God has told the conscience. But yet if the conscience does declare, it
ingages us, whether it be right or wrong. But this has in it some variety.

1. The goodness of an act depends upon the goodness of an object, 4.
that is, upon its conformity to a rational nature and the commands of God. For
all acts of will and understanding are of themselves indefinite and
undetermined till the relation to an object be considered, but they become good
or bad when they choose or refuse that which is good or bad respectively. To
will to do an act of theft is bad, because theft it self is so: to be willing
to commit an act of adultery is evil, because all adultery is evil: and on the
other side, to be willing to do an act of justice, is therefore good because
justice it self is good. And therefore Aristotle defines justice by a habitude
or relation to its object. It is voluntas dandi suum cuique, a will of giving
to every one that which is their due. And therefore our conscience, because it
is to receive its information from the rule by which every action is made good
or bad, and its motion from the object, is bound to take in that only which is
really and truly good, and without sin or error cannot do otherwise.

2. Although conscience is bound to proceed this way, 5.
yet sometimes the younger the elder brother by the heel, or gets out before
him, and the act gets before the object by indirect means. For though all
things should be thought good because they are good, yet some things are made
good because they are thought so; and the conscience looking out upon its
object finds error dressed up in the shape of truth, and takes it in, and
adopts it into the portion of truth. And though it can never be made really and
naturally good, yet by being supposed so by the conscience, it is sometimes
accepted so by God.

3. Although the rule by which good and bad is measured, 6.
be in it self perfect, yet it is not always perfectly received by us. Good is
proportionable to Reason; and as there is probabiliter verum, so there is
probabiliter bonum, a probable good, as well as a probable truth: and in the
inquest after this, we often show a trick of humanity, even to be pitifully
deceived; and although when it is so, it is an allay of the good it intends,
yet it does not wholly destroy it: God in his goodness accepting at our hands
for good, what we really and innocently suppose to be so. Just like the Country
fellow that gave a handful of water to his Prince; he thought it a fine thing,
and so it was accepted. For when the action and the rule are to be made even,
if either of them comply and stoop, the equality is made. God indeed requires
the service of all our faculties, but calls for no exact measures of any but
the will. For the acts of the will are perfect in their kind, but our
understanding is imperfect, therefore this may find an excuse, but that never.

4. Upon this account it is that though the goodness or badness of an act
depends upon the quality of the object regularly and naturally, 7.
yet the acts become irregularly or accidentally good or bad by the conscience,
because the conscience changes the object; that is, the act is good by the
object really good, or so apprehended. The object always changes or constitutes
the act, but the conscience changing the object immediately, has a mediate
influence upon the act also, and denominates it to be such as in the event it
proves. But then in what degrees, and to what events this change is made is of
more intricate consideration.

What changes can be made in moral actions by the persuasion and force of
Conscience.

1. Whatsoever is absolutely and indispensably necessary to be done, 8.
and commanded by God expressly, cannot be changed by Conscience into an evil,
or into that which is unnecessary. Because in such cases where the rule is
plain, easy, and fitted to the conscience, all ignorance is voluntary, and
spoils the consequent act, but never can legitimate it. And the same reason is
for things plainly and expressly forbidden, as adultery, murder, sacrilege, and
the like; they can never become good by any act of Conscience. And therefore in
such cases it often happened that God did declare his judgment to be contrary
to the opinion which men had of themselves and of their actions. Sometimes men
live contrary to their profession; Tit. 1. 16.
they profess the worship of God, but deny him in their hearts, even when they
least think they do. Thus the Israelites having constrained Aaron to make a
golden Calf proclaimed a feast, To morrow is a feast unto Jehovah; Deuter. 32.
17.
but God says of them, They offered sacrifice to Devils and not to God. And so
it was with their children after them, who killed and persecuted the Apostles
and servants of Jesus, and thought they did God good service. He that falls down
before an idol, and thinks to do honor to the Lord; or robs a Temple, and
thinks it is for Religion, must stand or fall, not by his own fancy, but by
sentence of God, and the rule of his Law; Protestatio contra factum is invalid
in Law. To strike a man's eye out, and say he did it in sport; to kill his
brother, and think it is well done, because done to prevent his sin, though it
may be thought charity by the man, yet it is murder before God.

2. Where the rule is obscure, 9.
or the application full of variety or the duty so intricate that the
conscience may inculpably err, there the object can be changed by conscience,
and the acts adopted into a good or an evil portion by that influence. He that
thinks it unlawful to give money to a poor Turk, has made it to become
unlawful to him, though of it self it seems to be a pious act. So also it is in
the uncertain application of a certain proposition. It is certainly unlawful to
commit adultery; but if Jacob supposes he lies with Rachel, and she prove to be
Leah, his conscience has not changed the rule, but it has changed the object
and the act: The object becomes his own by adoption, and the act is regular by
the integrity of the will. This is that which is affirmed by the Apostle, Romans
1^ 14. Vide Chrysostom. in hunc locum, S. Ambros. ib. and Theophyl^. ibid.
I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it
self, but he that thinks it is unclean, to him it is unclean. This instance
is in a case in which they might easily be mistaken, and innocently abused by
reason of the prepossession of their minds by Moses Law; and therefore in such
cases the conscience rules. They who believe themselves married, may mutually
demand and pay their duty: But if they be not married, it is fornication or
adultery (as it happens.) But if Conscience says they are married, it is not
adultery, but an act of duty, because the same conscience that declares for the
marriage, obliges also to pay their duty, as a matter of necessity. Where ever
the understanding is wrong, and the will is wholly right, the action is
accepted, and the error pardoned.

3. When the act is materially evil, 10.
the conscience adopting it into a good portion, that is, believing it to be
good, does not make a perfect change, but leaves an allay in the several
degrees of its persuasion. For it is impossible that a right conscience and a
wrong should have no difference in the effect, especially if there be any thing
criminal or faulty in the cause of the error. When two men take up arms in a
differing cause, as suppose one for his Prince, and the other against him;
though they be both heartily persuaded, and act according to Conscience, yet
they do not equally do well or ill. The one shall be accepted, and it may be,
the other pardoned, or excused in various degrees. But this which needs a
pardon for one thing, is not in the whole constitution of it, good for any
thing, nor can it be accepted to reward.

4. If the conscience dictate a thing to be necessary, 11.
the thing is become necessay, and at no hand to be declined. Gal. 5. 3.
This was it which S. Paul said, He that is circumcised is a debtor of the
whole Law; meaning, that though Christ had broken the yoke of Moses, yet if
conscience did take up one end of it, and bound it upon it self; the other end
would be dragged after it, and by the act of conscience become necessary. If a
man inquires, whether he is bound to say his prayers kneeling, or whether he
may do it standing, or lying, or leaning; if his conscience be persuaded that
he must do it kneeling, it is necessary he should do so, and he may not do
it in his bed: Because the Conscience is a Lawgiver, and has authority over
the man, and ought to prevail, when the contrary part is only, That they may
do otherwise. For whether this part be true or false, the matter is not so
great, because there is no danger if a man do not make use of a liberty that
is just: He can let it alone and do well enough; and therefore to follow the
other part which is supposed necessary, must needs be his safest way.

But if the Question be, whether it be necessary to keep a Holy day, or
necessary to let it alone; there if the Conscience determine that for necessary
to be done, which is necessary to be let alone, the man is indeed bound to
follow his conscience, but he cannot escape a sin. For conscience makes no
essential alterations in the thing, though it makes personal obligations to the
man; and if it be an evil superstition to keep a holy day, it cannot be made
lawful, because the conscience mistaking calls it necessary. And if this were
otherwise, it were not a pin matter what a man thought, for his thinking so
becomes his law, and every man may do what is right in his own eyes. And
therefore God was pleased expressly to declare it, that if a Prophet did mislead
the people, both he and they should perish; and our blessed Savior signified
the same thing in a Parabolical expression, If the blind lead the blind, they
both fall into the ditch. But in this case there is a fault somewhere, and the
man smarts under the Tyranny, not the Empire of his Conscience; for Conscience
can have no proper authority against the Law of God. In this case that which
the conscience falsely calls necessary, becomes so relatively and personally
(that is, he thinks so, and cannot innocently go in the right way, so long as
his guide conducts him in the wrong, and yet cannot innocently follow his guide
because she does abuse him) but in it self, or in the Divine acceptance, it
only passes for a bonum, something there is in it that is good, and that God
may regard; there is a praeparatio animi, a willingness to obey.

5. If the Conscience being mistaken in a question, whether an action be good
or no, calls that good which is nothing but indifferent; the Conscience alters
it not, it is still but lawful; but neither necessary nor good, but relatively
and collaterally: The person may be pitied, and have a gift given him in
acknowledgement, but the thing it self cannot expect it. When the Lords of the
Philistines, that they might deprecate the Divine judgments offered to God
golden Mice and Emerods, the thing it self was not at all agreeable to the way
by which God chose to be worshipped; but their conscience told them it was
good, it therefore became lawful to them, but not good in it self; and God who
is the Father of mankind saw their heart, and that they meant it for good, and
he was pleased to take it so. But the Conscience (I say) cannot make it good.
For to be good or bad is wholly another consideration then to be necessary or
not necessary. This distinction is relative to persons, and therefore can be
made by Conscience in the sense above allowed. But good and bad is an abstract
consideration, and relates to the materiality of the object, and is before the
act of Conscience, not after.

6. If the Conscience being mistaken calls a thing lawful, 13.
which is not so in the Rule, or Law of God, there the Conscience neither makes
an alteration in the thing, nor passes an obligation upon the person. Eleonora
de Ferrante was married to a Spanish Gentleman, who first used her ill, then
left her worse. After some years she is courted by Andrea Philippi her
Countriman, to marry him. She inquires whether she may or no, and is told by
some whom she ought not easily to have believed, that she may; and so she does.
But being told by her Confessor of her sin and shame, she pretends that she did
it bono animo, her conscience was persuaded she might do it, and therefore
hopes to be excused or pardoned. He answers her; That her conscience could not
make that lawful which God had forbidden, and therefore she ought not to
pretend conscience; for though her conscience did say it was lawful, she was
not bound to follow it; because thought she must do nothing that is unlawful,
yet she is not tied to do every thing that is lawful: and though her
conscience can give her a Law, yet it cannot give her a Privilege. She is bound
to do what her conscience says is necessary, though it be deceived, and if she
does not, she sins against her conscience, which can never be permitted or
excused. But if her conscience tells her only it is lawful so to do; if she
does not do the thing which her conscience permits, she offends it not,
because though it allows, yet it does not command it. If therefore she does it,
and there be an error in the conscience, the sin is as great as the error,
great as the matter it self; as if the fact materially be adultery, it is also
morally so, and the persuasion of the conscience does not excuse it from being
such. The reason is plain; For since the conscience when she allows does not
command, if the person chooses that thing which materially is a sin, it is in
pursuance of her own desires, not in obedience to her conscience. It is Lust
more then Conscience. * But yet whereas she says she hopes for pardon in this
case, there is no question but she may. For she sinned as S. Paul did in
persecuting the Church; he did it ignorantly and so did she. Here only was the
difference; he was nearer to pardon then she; because he thought he was bound
to do so, and therefore could not resist his conscience so persuaded: she
only thought she might do it, and therefore might have chosen. The conscience
has power in obligations and necessities, but not so much, nor so often in
permissions.

CHAP. III. Of the Confident, or Erroneous Conscience.
RULE 1. An Erroneous Conscience commands us to do what we ought to omit; or
to omit what we ought to do, or to do it otherwise then we should.
IN this there is no other difficulty but in the last clause. 1.
For when our blessed Lord had propounded an instance of perfection, he that
not only obeyes the counsel, but thinks it to be a Commandment, and necessary
to be done in all times and persons, enters into an error at the gate of Zeal,
and at the same place lets out the excellency of his love. Christ has
recommended renunciation of the world, spiritual castration for the kingdom of
God, dying for our Enemies, etc. he that in zeal, with charity and prudence
follows these advices will find his reward swell high; but he whose zealous
desire to grow toward perfection, shall so determine his practice, as that by
degrees he shall think these counsels individually necessary, has abused his
conscience, laid a snare for others, put fetters upon Christian liberty, and is
passed into that state of doing it, that though he entered first by love, he is
gone beyond it, and changed it into fear, and scruple, and superstition: he is
at last got so far that he would not do it at all if he durst do otherwise;
and he dares not, because his love was zealous, and his zeal was imprudent, and
his imprudence was a furious snare, and the passion of a mighty folly.

But an erroneous conscience is generally abused by two manners of proceeding.
2.
1. By a true application of a false proposition: Thus, Whatsoever is done
against my Conscience is a sin.
But to allow of Magistrates is against my Conscience.
Therefore it is certainly a sin that they be allowed.
The first proposition is not true, unless it be understood of him only,
against whose conscience it is done, and then it is always true, either
absolutely, or relatively, originally, or accidentally. But if it be intended
to conclude, that because it is against my conscience to allow them, therefore
it is simply unlawful, or unlawful to every one else, this is a Paralogism, and
makes an erring conscience. Or secondly, the conscience is abused, and made
erroneous by a false application of a true proposition. Whatsoever is forbidden
by God is a sin.
But every oath is forbidden by God.
Therefore every oath is a sin.
Every thing here is true but the conclusion. The second proposition is true,
but not universally. For S. James saying, Swear not at all, forbids all kinds
of oaths materially: James 5.
that is, in that sense in which any is forbidden, in the same all are
forbidden. Without just authority and occasion it is not lawful to swear By
God, therefore without such authority, neither is it lawful to swear by a
creature. So that his words mean thus; Except in such a case swear not at all,
that is, not with any kind of oath; for unless that case occurres to warrant
it, this or that oath is criminal as well as any: that is, it is no excuse in
common talk to say, it was but a slight oath, for you must not swear at all,
viz. in such circumstances.

The causes of error, are

1. Ignorance, 3.
either of right or fact. For no other division of ignorance can concern the
relation of an erring conscience. For although a man is otherwise concerned in
ignorance if it be vincible, otherwise if it be invincible, yet his will is
concerned in that directly, and his conscience but collaterally and indirectly.

2. Fear whether it be pusillanimous, 4.
or superstitious, that is, whether it begin upon religion, or upon natural
imbecility, they alike abuse the conscience. Ignorance makes it erroneous, but
takes not away its confidence, but oftentimes increases it: fear makes it
erroneous too, and though it begins in doubting, it ends in a silly choice,
which grows to as much confidence as it can, so much as to establish the error.

3. To this usually is reduced a morose humility and abjection of mind, 5.
which because it looks pitifully and simply, some men in charity think it
laudable: so Antoninus particularly; and it is the same that S. Gregory
recommends, Bonarum quippe mentium est, Part. 1. decret. did. 6. c. 4.
ibi etiam aliquo modo culpas suas agnoscere, ubi culpa non est. It is the sign
of a good mind to accuse themselves of a fault when there is none. Which if it
relates to the present affairs is dangerous and illusive. For if the question
be in a Case of conscience, and the conscience be determined upon its proper
grounds innocently and right, there to acknowledge a fault in the conscience or
determination, is to make the Rule it self crooked, to introduce eternal
scruples and irresolution, to disturb our own peace, and a device to snatch at
a reward by thrusting it from us, and to think to please God by telling of a
lie. But if the saying relates to all the whole action in all its conjugation
of circumstances and appendages, then it may consist with humility and prudence
both, to suspect a fault where there is none; to fear lest we have erred by
excess of degrees in passion, or by remisness and slackness of action, or by
obliquity of intention, or intertexture of some undecency, or weariness, or
sensuality, or complacency, and fantastic deliciousness, or something secret,
and we know not what: But even in this case, we may best follow S. Paul's
expedient and manner of expression, Nihil mihi conscius sum, I am guilty of
nothing, my heart smites me not, yet I am not hereby justified, for God is
greater then my conscience: I may for ought I know have done something amiss,
or my duty not well, but as I cannot accuse my self, so neither can I acquit my
self, but refer my self to Gods equal and merciful sentence. What goes beyond
this may abuse the conscience, not only by a secret scruple, but by an evil
principle and false conclusions: and this, although it looks like modesty, and
seems contrary to confidence, and therefore cannot be so well reduced to this
kind of conscience, but to the doubting, or the scrupulous; yet I have chosen
to place it here, for the reason above mentioned. * It looks in at the door
with a trembling eye, but being thrust in, it becomes bold. It is like a
fire-stick which in the hand of a child being gently moved, gives a volatile
and unfixed light, but being more strongly turned about by a swift circular
motion, it becomes a constant wheel of fire: or like a bashful sinner sneaking
to his lust, till he be discovered, and then he is impudent and hardened. And
there are very many wise men who tremble in their determinations, and not being
able clearly to resolve, fall upon one part by chance, or interest, or passion,
and then they are forced for their peace sake to put on an accidental hardness,
and a voluntary, not a natural confidence. But this confidence is commonly
peevish, impatient, and proud, hating all contradiction and contradictors;
because it was only an art to sleep, and to avoid the first trouble, and
therefore hates every thing that brings them forth from their fantastic
securities.

Other causes of an erroneous conscience here usually are assigned but
inartificially I suppose, 6.
and not of present concernment or relation. Such as are the subtraction of the
Divine aids, Gods leaving a man, and giving him over (...), and to believe a
lie; perplexity, or irresolution, self-love, pride, prejudice, and passion;
perit enim omne judicium cum res transierit in affectum, quia affectus obscurat
intellectum ne recte judicet, said Seneca. When affection sits Judge, there
reason and truth are seldom admitted to plead, or if they are, yet they cannot
prevail. Impedit ira animum ne possit cernere verum. But these are no otherwise
causes of an erroneous conscience, but as they are causes of ignorance, or
deception; for in this case I reckon them to be but one; an error being nothing
else but an ignorance of truth, which whether it be culpable or inculpable, and
at what gate it enters, is of another disquisition, and shall be reserved to
its proper place.

RULE 2. An erroneous Conscience binds us to obedience, but not so as a right
Conscience does.
THE object can move the will no otherwise then as it is propounded by the
understanding. 1.
If it be propounded as evil, the will that chooses it under that formality is
criminal and malicious. If it be propounded as good, the will that rejects it
so propounded despises good; for it is so to the will, if it be so to the
understanding, which is the Judge and the immediate rule of all humane actions.
And he that does a good thing while he believes it to be evil, does choose the
evil, and refuse the good; for he does therefore because he believes it evil,
or though he thinks it so, and therefore is equally disposed to choose a real
evil; for that this is not so, is but extrinsecal and accidental to his choice.

If this were not thus, 2.
but that it were possible to be otherwise, then we might suppose that a man
might do a thing reasonably, for which he ha^h no reason; and an humane action
without the natural process of humanity, that is, to choose by chance, and
unnaturally, to choose for a reason that he has not, and a good that appears
not, which is like beholding of a thing that he sees not. The Jew thinks it is
his duty to be circumcised, and to keep the Sabbath. While in this error he is
confident, by what argument can he be moved to omit it? If you give him
reasons, you seek to cure his error, and to alter his persuasion; but while
this persuasion is not altered, how can he be moved to omit it? If you give him
no reasons, you desire him to omit it because he thinks he ought not, and to
do an action because it seems unreasonable, and follow your opinion because he
believes it false; that is, to obey you because he ought not, which is a way
not possible to prevail with a wise man, or with a fool; how it may work with
any sort of madness, I know not.

But against this Rule, 3.
some contend earnestly, in particular Guilielmus Parisiensis, and some that
follow him, saying it is impossible that an erring or a lying conscience should
oblige a man to follow i^. The thing has great influence upon our whole life,
and therefore is worth a strict survey.

Quest.

WHether a false and an abused Conscience can oblige us to pursue the error?

That it cannot these reasons are or may be pretended.

1. * Because it seems to be absurd to say, that when the error it self is not
a sin at all, or but a little one, that it can be a great sin to follow a man's
own humor against that error; If a man should do according to his error, it
could at most be but a small sin, and therefore to go against it cannot be
greater. For the error can oblige no higher, then its own nature, as rivers
cannot arise above their fountains.

2. But it is a more material consideration; 4.
If an erring conscience obliges us to follow it, then some men are bound to
persecute the Church, and the high Priests sinned not in crucifying Christ; and
the zealots of the Jews did well in afflicting the Apostles and Disciples of
Jesus, because they did it ignorantly, and by the dictate of an erring
Conscience; and S. Paul says of himself before his conversion, I my self
thought I ought to do many things against the Name of the Lord Jesus; and yet
he sinned in following his erring conscience; and therefore certainly could not
be bound to it. In pursuance of which,

3. S. Bernard argues thus; 5.
(...) and (...).
To follow truth is always good; but if by the conscience we can be bound to
follow error, and that in that case it is not good to follow truth; that is, If
a good may become evil by the sentence of an erring conscience, and so great an
evil as it supposes it to be, then by the same reason that which is evil, may
by the like sentence become good, and so great a good as it is supposed; and
then may a man be chaste for committing adultery, and charitable for committing
murder, and religious for worshipping idols, and pious to his Parents in
denying to relieve them from the Corban; all which consequents being
intolerable, the antecedent which infers them, must needs be false.

4. It is true indeed, 6.
the conscience is our Guide and our Lawgiver, our Judge and our Rule; but it
is not our Lord, nor in the present case is it an authentic record, but a
(...), a heap of lies and errors, and therefore cannot be a true guide, and we
are not tied to follow any leader to hell. Better it is in this case to follow
the conscience of a wiser and a better man then my self, it being more
reasonable that we be tied to follow his right, then our own wrong conscience.

5. For if still we were bound to follow our abused conscience, 7.
then we were bound to impossibilities, for then either we were not at all
bound to follow God, or if we were, and yet bound to follow our conscience
against God, we were bound at the same time to do, and not to do the same
thing; to serve two Masters, which our blessed Savior said, No man can do.

6. But therefore in this case God must be obeyed and not Man; 8.
it being impious to say that the law of our conscience should derogate from,
or wholly evacuate the Law of God, by which alone we ought to be governed. For
if this law of conscience takes away the obligation of the Divine Law, or if
the Divine Law take away the obligation of conscience when it erres, then they
must cease respectively; and the event will be this, that as long as Gods Law
binds us (which is for ever) the law of an erring conscience cannot bind us.

7. And there are in this, 9.
great proportions of reason. For if the will be bound to lay down all its rods
and axes, all the ensigns of Empire at the foot of the throne of God, doing or
refusing by the command of God against its own inclination, it will not be
imagined that the conscience, that is, the practical understanding has any
such privilege indulged to it, that it can be exempt from the jurisdiction of
God, or that it can oblige in defiance of his Laws.

8. For it is certain, 10.
conscience is Gods creature, bound to its Lord and Maker by all the rights of
duty and perfect subordination, and therefore cannot prejudice the right and
power of its Lord; and no wise man obeys the orders of a Magistrate against the
express Law of his King; or the orders of a Captain against the command of his
General; and therefore neither of conscience which is Gods messenger, against
the purpose of the message with which God entrusted it. However, it is better
to obey God then man; to follow the Law of God then to go against it; to do
that which we should, rather then that which we should not.

9. And there can be no more necessity upon us to follow our conscience
teaching us, 11.
then our conscience binding us; and yet if a contract that is vicious be made,
or an oath that is unlawful be uttered, the obligations of conscience cease,
because they are against the Law of God; and how then can conscience against
this Law of God in any sense pass an obligation? But this rather, that as we
are bound not to commit a crime, so not to follow an error and a lie.

10. For it is impossible that our opinion, 12.
or falsely persuaded conscience should make any alteration in the thing; If it
was evil in it self, it is so still; and my thinking that Mercury is not
poison, nor Hellebore purgative, cannot make an Antidote and deletery against
them, if I have upon that confidence taken them into my stomach; and the Sun is
bigger then the Earth, though I foolishly think it no wider then a Bushel. And
therefore in such cases the conscience can have no power, and can bind us to
nothing but to lay our error down. Because as to him that is in error, it were
madness to bid him err more; so to him that has an erring conscience, it were
equally evil to bid him pursue, and actuate and consummate his error; which yet
he were bound to do, if an erring conscience could bind him.

11. Lastly if an erring conscience binds us to obedience, 13.
it either binds us by its own independent, ingenite power, or by a power
derived from God. If by a power derived from God, then God commands us to
believe a lie, to commit a sin, to run after false fires and illusions, which
to affirm, seems to be blasphemy; but if it binds us by its own power, then our
conscience can make Gods Law to become unlawful to us, and we shall be stronger
then God, and a man's self becomes his own rule; and he that is deceived by a
false opinion is a Lawgiver to himself, and error shall be the measure of good
and evil.

These are the arguments which are used by several persons respectively in
verification of the opinion of Parisiensis, 14.
which I have not only heaped here together, but added some and improved the
rest, that by the collision of these with their answers, the truth might be
made more useful and evident; and diverse collateral things incident to the main
question might be spoken of; and those arguments remain valid which I brought
for the affirmative in the first and second paragraphs of this Rule. To the
first therefore I answer:

1. That it is not the error that binds us to follow it, 15.
but the conscience in error; and therefore although the error can have no
force greater then its own nature and proper energy, yet our conscience can
bind beyond the force of error. As if a General commands a Soldier to turn to
the right hand under pain of death; if he mistaking turn to the left, the event
is greater then can be effected by the intentional relations of right or left
hand, but depends upon the reason, and the command, the power and empire of the
General.

2. To the second, 16.
I answer, That it follows not, because the erring conscience binds, therefore
the obedience is not a sin. For such is or may be the infelicity of an abused
conscience, that if it goes forward, it enters into folly, if it resists, it
enters into madness, if it flies, it dashes its head against a wall, or falls
from a rock, if it flies not, it is torn in pieces by a Bear; and the very
instances make it clear; the Rulers of the Jews and S. Paul were both called to
repent of that which they did in obedience to their erring conscience, which
cannot legitimate impiety, but only make the one or the other instance to be
unavoidable.

3. To that which S. Bernard objects, the answer is easy upon another account;
for conscience may make a good thing evil to it, because besides the goodness
of the object to make an action lawful there is required the faith and
persuasion of the Agent; and if this be wanting, as it is in an erring
conscience that believes not the goodness of it, the action is evil, by reason
of the destitution of an integral part. For, Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex
qualibet particulari, and by the same reason, conscience cannot make an evil
thing good, because besides the persuasion of conscience, there is required the
goodness of the object, which if it be wanting, one ingredient cannot make it
good, all must enter into the constitution of good, though the want of one is
enough to spoil it.

4. To the fourth I answer, 18.
That because the conscience is in error, and the principle within it is a
(...), a false record, therefore it is true, that we are not absolutely tied to
follow its conduct, but we are tied to lay the error aside, that we may follow
it in straight ways; but in the present constitution of affairs it is
miserable, and because we must follow our leader, that is, all that can go
before us; we do go to hell, or to mischief, not that we are by God bound to
do this, but only to do that; and it is by our own fault that we are bound to
fall into an evil portion, God binds us to follow our conscience, we spoil it
by some folly or other, and then we follow it; the evil appendage is our own,
the Law by which God bound us was holy. Nature requires of us to drink at our
meals: But if we have corrupted all our beaurage, we must drink unwholesome
draughts, but yet nature did not bind us to this misfortune.

5. And therefore the answer to the next objection provides us of a remedy
against the former. 19.
We are bound absolutely to follow the Law of God; but we are bound to follow
the contrary law of conscience erring, conditionally and by accident, that is,
because we have made our rule crooked which God had made straight. For to be
absolutely and irrespectively bound to follow God, and yet respectively and by
accident to be bound to follow the contrary conscience, are not
incompossibilities, or the parts of a contradiction, because they are not ad
idem, not in the same regards. But then, since it is impossible that both these
should be actually followed, therefore God does not command us to follow our
conscience and not to follow it at the same time, but to follow our conscience,
and to lay aside the error, and then both parts are reconciled; for God and the
conscience are but accidentally opposed, and God commanding us to follow our
conscience; took care that at the same time we should follow God too, and
therefore God taught our conscience, but when we get other teachers, we make it
impossible to obey God. Let us submit our conscience to God, that is, lay aside
our error, and then God and Conscience are not two Masters, but one, that is,
God; and Conscience is his Deputy and subordinate. And in order to this, it is
not ill advised in the fourth objection, to follow the right conscience of a
wiser man; to do so is a good expedient for the laying down our error; but it
is not directly obligatory, so long as the error is confident; for I must not
follow a wiser man in his right, if I believe him to be in the wrong, and if I
believe him to be in the right, and he really be so, then I have laid aside my
error, and indeed to do this is our duty; but this cannot be done till the
error be discovered, till then I must follow my own conscience, not the
conscience of another man.

6. To the sixth I answer, 20.
That the law of Conscience cannot derogate from the Law of God, when they are
placed in the eye of reason over against each other; that is, when the
Conscience sees the Law of God, no law, no persuasion, no humor, no opinion can
derogate from it. But an erring confident conscience believes that it follows
God when it does not. So that the law of God has here a double effect. The Law
of God apprehended by the Conscience binds him to action: But the Law of God
real and proper binds the man to lay aside his error. For he that goes against
the matter and the instance of the Law of God, does yet at the same time obey
the sanction and authority, because he proceeds to action in obedience to, and
in reverence of the Law of God. The wife of Amphitruo was kind to her lord,
when she entertained Jupiter in his semblance; and for Sosia's sake Mercury was
made much of: and because the error is dressed like truth, for truths sake we
hug and entertain the error. So here. The Law of God is not despised, much
less evacuated by following the dictate of Conscience, because it is for the
sake of Gods Law that this conscience is followed. And therefore since by
accident they are made opposite; the event of it cannot be that one must cease,
for both may and must stand, but nothing must cease but the error.

7. And therefore although the will must cease from its own pleasure, 21.
when Gods will is known to be clear against it, yet the understanding must not
cease from that which it supposes to be the will of God, till the error be
discovered, but when it is, then it must as much cease from its own ways as the
will must, for every understanding as well as every proud will, must be
submitted to the obedience of Jesus.

8. For Conscience being Gods creature, 22.
and his subordinate, cannot possibly prejudice the rights of God, for as soon
as Gods right appears, and his Laws are read, conscience does and must obey;
but this hinders not but that conscience must be heard when she pretends the
Law of God for her warrant, so long as it is not known but that she says true.

9. For it is in this as it is in contracts and oaths, 23.
so long as they seem lawful they must be observed, and must not be rescinded
until it be discovered that they are against the Law of God, and so it is with
the dictates of an erring conscience.

10. And the reason is plain, 24.
because conscience does not make a real change in extreme objects (as I have
formerly discoursed) the things are good or bad by their proportions to Gods
Law, Cha. 2. Rule 9.
and remain so, whatever the conscience thinks: But yet they put on vizors and
shapes, and introduce accidental obligations by error. Indeed the error brings
in no direct obligation but that it be discovered and laid down: but so neither
can it hinder but that Conscience shall still retain the power that God has
given it directly and principally; that is, that it be the Man's rule and guide.
For the fallacy that runs thorough all the objections is this, that the Erring
Conscience is in its obligation considered as erring. Now it does not bind, as
Erring, but as Conscience; that is, not by its Error, but by its Nature, and
the power of God, as being the reporter and record of his commands. Against
which, he that bids our conscience to proceed indeed gives ill counsel. He that
counsels a man to follow his erring conscience, invites him to folly; he tells
him he is in error, and bids him not lay it down. But he that advises him to
follow his conscience, though it happens in the truth of things that his
conscience be in error, meddles not at all in the countenancing the error, but
in the power of conscience.

11. For all the obligation which our conscience passes on us is derivative
from God, 25.
and God commands us to follow our conscience, but yet he commands us not to
sin; because his commanding us to follow our conscience supposes our conscience
instructed by the word of God and right reason, and God had appointed
sufficient means it should be; but that conscience offers a sin to the
obedience is wholly the man's fault, and besides the intention of God. God has
not made us to sin, but has committed us to the conduct of Conscience, which
by prevaricating its instructions has betrayed us.

By this it appears what manner of obligation is passed upon us by an erring
Conscience; 26.
the Conscience always has the same commission as being the same faculty, the
same guide: but because it self is bound to the Laws of God and right reason,
so far as it follows them, so far it binds. But because when it is in
error, it also pretends them, by them it still binds, till the illusion be
discovered. Durandus expressed this by a distinction of words, in which himself
only made the difference. Ligat, sed non obligat. So he. That is, it has not
the same power that is in a right conscience. But it binds us so that we cannot
proceed to good. A right Conscience directly and finally binds us to the action
it self: An erring Conscience cannot do that, because the action it offers is
criminal, but it makes us take that in stead of what it ought to bind us to:
That is, it has the same authority, but an evil exercise of it; The formal
obligation is the same, but when it comes to be instanced, it binds us to that
in which it has no power. For though it has power over us, yet it has no
direct power in that particular matter.

Cordubensis and Vasquez contradict this expression of Durandus, 27.
affirming that an erring conscience does ligare and obligare; I cannot well
translate the words into a distinction, but their meaning is this, that we are
not bound positively to follow the error, but yet so that we must not do the
contrary. Which indeed is the same thing; and they going to reprove Durandus
his distinction that has no difference, they do it by a contradiction that
has in it no opposition. For to say that an erring conscience does so bind us
that we must not contradict it, is to say that it positively binds us to follow
it. For if it commands us to follow it, and we must not go against that
command, is it not notorious and evident that we must positively follow it? But
for the establishing the measures of obedience in the present case, these
following rules are the best proportions.

The measures of obedience due to an erring Conscience.

1. If an erring conscience commands a thing that is of it self indifferent, 28.
we are bound to follow it, and we may do it without sin. Because if it be
indifferent, it is therefore lawful, and it cannot cease in it self to be
lawful, by being supposed to be necessary. Indeed if a Governor commands us to
do a thing indifferent, and says it is necessary, we may not do it under that
compliance; that is, we may not betray our Christian liberty, and accept that
as simply necessary which Christ has left under liberty. We must do the
thing, but not own the necessity. But if an erring conscience bid us do an
indifferent, and represent it as a necessary action, though it may be a sin to
believe it necessary, yet it is no sin to do the action. For nothing that
supervenes can alter the nature of the thing, and a new personal necessity
introduced by an erring conscience, by making it seem necessary to him, changes
it not from being lawful in it self. But then it inferres this also, that as it
may be done without sin, so without a sin it cannot be left undone: Because the
error has made it personally necessary, and the truth of God has made it
lawful really.

2. If an erring conscience dictate a thing to be good which is not good, 29.
not to follow that dictate, and not to do that thing is no sin. Because every
good is not necessary, and it may be good or seem so, and yet to omit it in
certain circumstances, may be equally good or better.

3. If an erring conscience affirm that which is good, or which is indifferent,
30.
to be evil and vicious; as if it says, it is a sin to spit upon the pavement
of a Church, or that it is superstition to serve the poor in an Hospital, it is
no sin to omit that indifferent or that commendable action; because here is no
command of God to countermand the resolution of conscience, and therefore the
error may become a snare and a hindrance, but no direct cause of sin; because
such actions in themselves not being necessary, it cannot be criminal upon a
less reason to omit them. * But upon the same account it is a sin to do them,
because they are not of faith, and the conscience being persuaded against them,
they are sins. For any deficiency of a necessary ingredient makes a sin.

4. If an erring conscience say that such an action is lawful only, 31.
when of it self it is good and laudable, we sin not if we do it, or if we do
it not. For in this case neither is there any direct obligation from God, nor
any indirect obligation from Conscience, and therefore the man is wholly
permitted to his liberty: although it may be a pious action to pray kneeling on
the ground with bare knees, or prostrate on our faces, yet if conscience says
it is in no sense laudable, but that it is lawful only, we may safely do it;
but then there is no other effect of such an action, then there is of
scratching a man's head with one finger, and it cannot be commendable in him to
do an action in which he believes there is no worthiness.

5. If an erring conscience commands what is simply evil, 32.
or forbids to do that which is absolutely commanded, the man sins whether he
obeys, or obeys not. In one case he sins against his Rule, and in the other
against his Guide: and any one miscarriage is enough to introduce a sin. But
this will be the matter of the next Rule. The use of these Rules is not at all
effective upon erring consciences, while the error remains: for the advices
supposing the error are not applicable to them who will not suppose themselves
in error. But they are applicable to consciences recovered from their error,
and are useful in the conduct of their repentance, because they describe the
respective measures of sin and innocence, and what obligations of sorrow and
amends are left behind when the error is gone.

To these may be added those Rules which I have already given, concerning the
changes which can be made in moral actions, by the persuasion and force of
Conscience, Chap. 2. Rule 9.

RULE 3. A Conscience erring vincibly or culpably is an unavoidable cause of
sin, whether it be resisted, or complied with.
WHEN the error proceeds of malice or negligence, 1.
the man is guilty according to the venom of the ingredient; there is a sin in
the principle, and this leads to an action materially evil. He that makes
assemblies against his Prelate, and thinks he may lawfully do it, does an
action for which by the Laws he is punishable; but to God he is to answer
besides the action, for the sin that led him to that error.

Quest.

BUT if it be inquired, 2.
whether that also be a sin which is an obedience to his Conscience, that is,
whether the instance of the action be a sin, beside the malice of the
principle, and so every such action become a double sin? I answer, that it is
according as the instance is.

1. If it be against a prime principle, 3.
in which we are naturally, or any way greatly instructed, then the error is
culpable in that manner that it remains voluntary all the way; and then not
only the introduction or first principle, but the effect also is a sin. The man
has only put a blind before his eyes, and in every reflex action it is
discovered, and he knows it habitually all the way. * And therefore in this
case the conscience ought not to be obeyed. Castropal. tom. 1. dis. 1. punct.
6. n. 3.
For the Conscience is but imperfect and equivocal, violent and artificial. It
is persuaded in the act, and convinced of the evil in the habit or reflex act,
and is no otherwise deceived, then a man is blind that wears a hood upon his
eye.

2. If the Conscience be possessed with a damnable error, 4.
and in a great matter, and this possession is a dereliction and a punishment
from God for other crimes, it is no matter whether we call the consequent
action a sin or no. For the man is in a state of reprobation, and the whole
order of things and actions in that state are criminal formally or
equivalently. His prayers are an abomination; and if so, then the actions that
are materially evil, are much worse, and in estimation, are prosecutions of the
state of sin. Of this sort are they that are given over to believe a lie; all
the consequent actions are sins, just as the envies and blasphemies of damned
people are sins, or as the acts of Devils are imputed: they are consigned to
death, and all the consequent actions are symbolical; and it will be always so,
unless they can return to a state of repentance.

3. If the Conscience be abused in a deduction, consequence, or less certain
proposition, 5.
by evil arts and prejudice, by interest and partiality, there is so much evil
in the whole determination, as there was in the introducing cause of the error,
and no more. For if the action consequent to the persuasion were also a sin,
then it ought not to be done; but because in this case the conscience ought to
be obeyed, though in the whole affair there is a sin, and it is unavoidable,
yet the sin is antecedent to the action and determination, but no proper
appendage or qualification of it. And since the object in the present case
transmits honesty and equity into the action, not according to what it is in
the thing, but according to what it is in reason, it must needs be that we are
obliged according to what we find it to be in Conscience. For in this case we
know not what it is in it self, and therefore by it we cannot be guided to
choose or to refuse; but because we must be guided by something, it must be
wholly by opinion and conscience.

4. If the Conscience be weakly and innocently misguided, 6.
there is no sin either in the error, or in the consequent action. Because no
man is bound to do better then his best; and if he has no sin in the
principle of his error, it is certain he did his best, that is, he did all his
duty, and then to proceed by the best light he has, is agreeable to right
reason and to Religion.

Upon the ground of these Conclusions we may easily infer, 7.
that though an erring conscience is to be followed (as it is above explained)
and yet that God also is entirely to be followed, and that therefore a man by
accident, and by his own fault may be entangled in nervis testiculorum
Leviathan (as S. Gregory's expression is out of Job) in the infoldings of sin
and Satan, and cannot escape innocently so long as he remains in that
condition; yet because he need not remain in that condition but either by
suspecting himself, or being admonished by another, by inquiry and by prayer he
may lay his error down, it follows that to obey God never has an unavoidable
dilemma, and never is impossible so long as the man is in a state and
possibility of repentance. Because every error that infers an action that is
formally as well as materially sinful, not only ought but may also be deposed
or laid down, because in such cases no man is invincibly abused. No man can
ever be in that condition, that to love God shall become a sin to him; because
no man can really be ignorant, or properly entertain this opinion, that it is a
sin to love God; that rebellion is lawful; that adultery is no sin; that it can
be lawful to strike a Prince for justice; or to break a Commandment to
preserve the interest of a Sect; that a man may rob God in zeal against
idolatry and images. These things are so plainly taught, that an error in these
cannot choose but be malicious.

But when the error is in such cases where either it is invincible and
irremediable, 8.
or where weakness pleads excuse, the action is in that degree innocent in
which the error is unavoidable. And if it could be otherwise, then a case might
happen in which by the Laws of God a man could be bound to that which is
intrinsecally evil, and then God and not man were the Author of the sin.

The sum is this. 9.
God is Supreme, and Conscience is his Vicegerent and Subordinate. Now it is a
certain, that the Law of an inferior cannot bind against the command of a
Superior when it is known. But when the Superior communicates the notices of
his will by that inferior, and no otherwise; the subject is to obey that
inferior, and in so doing he obeys both. But the Vicegerent is to answer for
the misinformation, and the Conscience for its error, according to the degree
of its being culpable.

RULE 4. It is greater sin to do a good action against our Conscience, then to
do an evil action in obedience to it.
THIS Rule concerns degrees only, 1.
but is useful in the conducting some actions of repentance; and it is to be
understood to be true only in equal cases, and when there is no circumstance
aggravating one part. Friar Clement the Jacobine thinks erroneously, that it is
lawful to kill his King. The poor Damoiselle Faucette thinks it unlawful to
spit in the Church: but it happened that one day she did it against her
conscience; and the Friar with his conscience and a long knife killed the King.
If the question be here, who sinned most, the disparity is next to infinite,
and the poor woman was to be chidden for doing against her conscience, and the
other to be hanged for doing according to his. Because the Friars error could
not be invincible and inculpable, hers might; and in such questions, the effect
of which is of so high concernment, because the errors in them are supreme and
dangers, the inquisition ought to be very great where there can be difficulty,
and therefore the negligence is always intolerable, and it is malicious where
the discovery is easy, as it is in these cases. And therefore in so different
materials the case can no way be equal, because in one there is a greater
light, a more ready grace, a perfect instruction, an evident provision, and
open restraint, and a ready Commandment.

But when the effect of the Questions are equal and not differenced by
accidents, 2.
the rule is certain upon this reason: Because a sin done against knowledge, is
greater then a sin done ignorantly. He that sins against his conscience, sins
against all his knowledge in that particular. But if he sins against a
Commandment, which he knows not to be such, he sins ignorantly, and therefore
the more excusably. But I found mercy (says S. Paul) for I did it ignorantly
in unbeleef.

Upon this account it comes to be the same kind, 3.
and the same degree of crime to sin against an erring, and to sin against a
right Conscience in the same instances. He that omits to hear Divine service on
a Festival when he has no reasonable impediment, and he who omits it upon a
Common day, which he erroneously supposes to be a Festival, has equally
prevaricated the Law of the Church, and the analogy of the Commandment of God
on which this of the Church is founded, they being equally against his rule by
which he is to walk, and this error has no influence upon the will, or choice,
but is wholly extrinsecal to it. But this is to be understood in errors of
fact, and such as are inculpable, and have no effect, and make no change in the
will.

And therefore in our penitential sorrows and expiations we need not be
curious to make a difference of them which have the same formal malice; 4.
and if we be taught to make any, it may have this evil consequence in it, that
we may love our ignorance, and flatter our selves in our irregularities, which
we think will not be so severly imputed, by reason of the error. If this be a
great crime to disobey our Conscience teaching us righteous and true
propositions, it is on the other side also very great to suffer our Conscience
to be so misled, that a good action shall become criminal by such mistaking; so
that besides the departing from our Rule which is equal in both, they have
their own superadded evil to weigh against each other.

RULE 5. It is not lawful to delight in an evil action (after the discovery of
our error) which we did innocently in an erroneous Conscience.
THE case is this; 1.
Quintus Hortensius received a forged Will of Minutius from some Haeredipetae
or Testamentary cheaters, and because they offered to verify it, and to give
him a share, he defended the forgery and possessed his part; but when he
afterward perceived the cheat, and yet detained the purchase, he grew
infamous: It was innocent till he knew it, but then it was criminal. He should
not have pleased himself in it, because he should have restored it. But in this
there is no question.

But when the possession or purchase may lawfully remain, 2.
there is some difference in the decision of the question. Spurinna striking a
Stag, involuntarily and unwittingly kills his brother, and becomes rich by the
inheritance. Here the man must separate the effect from its relation, and so
proceed: The inheritance was a blessing, the accident was a misfortune; and if
he may not rejoice in that, he may not give thanks for it, but as for a cross.
But if he pleases himself in the way of his entrance to it, he had a mind
ready to have killed his brother if he durst, or at least did secretly wish him
dead, that he might openly have his living. In this there is no great
difficulty to make the separation. God strikes a man with blindness, and gives
him a good memory; he sighs for that, and rejoices for this. A little
Metaphysics makes this abstraction.

2. But concerning the act when it is discovered to have been evil, 3.
he is to have no other complacency, but because he did it ignorantly. He that
suffers nocturnal pollution, if he finds a remedy by it, is to rejoice that
himself suffered it involuntarily, that is, he may rejoice that he did not sin;
and of the innocence of the joy, he can have no other testimony but by his
hating the act in all cases in which it is a sin, and refusing to do it. But
the French woman whom Myl. Montaigne speaks of, who having suffered a rape by
diverse Soldiers, gave God thanks that without sin she had enjoyed pleasure,
had a criminal joy, and delighted in the action, for the voluntary
entertainment of which she only wanted an excuse.

3. If we consider the whole conjunction of things together, 4.
the evil act with the advantageous effect, we are to be indifferent to joy and
sorrow, that is, to do neither directly, but to look on it as an effect of the
Divine providence bringing good out of evil, and to fear lest a joy in the
whole should entitle us too nearly to the sin by the relation of an after act
and approbation; or lest we be so greedy of the effect that we be too ready to
entertain the like upon terms equally evil, but less fortunate.

4. This is also to be understood only in such cases, in which we are not
obliged to restitution. For if we rejoice in that effect which we ought to
destroy, we recall the sin from the transient action, and make it dwell with the
possession, and then the first involuntary error becomes a chosen rapine.

5. If the action was only materially, 6.
and therefore innocently, an error against a humane Law, and turns to our
secular advantage, we are more at liberty to rejoice and please our selves in
the advantage. Because humane Laws make no action intrinsecally and essentially
evil, but only relatively and extrinsecally. And therefore the danger is not
so great of polluting the conscience by the contact and mingling of the
affections with the forbidden action. He that eats flesh in Lent in those
places and circumstances where it is forbidden, and did not remember it was
Lent, or did not know it, and by so doing, refreshes himself well, and does
advantage to his health, may not be accused easily if he delights in the whole
action, as it joins the error and the advantage. For besides the former reason,
this also is considerable; that humane Laws not being so wise and excellent as
Divine Laws do bend more easily and readily, that they may comply with the
ends of charity and gentleness, and have in them a more apt dispensation, and
almost offer themselves to go away, when a greater good comes in their room.
But of this in its due place.

6. In actions materially evil against the Divine Laws, 7.
if the event cannot be clearly separated from the irregularity, the first
innocent error is by the after pleasure turned into a direct sin. Cneius Carbo
lay with Laelia unwittingly, supposing her to be his wife Posthumia, but
afterward having discovered the error was pleased in the mistake, because he
by the arts of fancy did by an after thought represent to himself the change
and the variety, and then he was adulterous. For to be pleased in the mistake
which brings no advantage separable from the sin, is directly to choose the sin
for the advantage sake; and this was Carbo's case.

RULE 6. An innocent, or invincibly erring Conscience is to be obeyed even
against the known Commandment of our Superiors.
AGainst this S. 1.
Bernard seems to argue earnestly; Lib. de praecept. and dispens.
Si tantopere vitanda sunt scandala parvulorum, quanto amplius praelatorum,
quos sibi Deus coaequare quodammodo in utroque dignatur, dum sibimet imputat
and illorum reverentiam and contemptum? etc. If with so great caution we must
be careful that we do not offend any of Gods little ones, how much more must
we be curious to avoid giving offense to great ones, to our Superiors, whom
God seems in some manner to make equal to himself, while the reverence or the
contempt that is done to them, he takes unto himself; saying, He that hears
you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me. But if you say, that
men may be deceived in their inquest after the will of God, and may deceive
others in reporting it; what is that to thee who know not that they are
deceived? especially since from Scriptures thou art taught, That the lips of
the Priest shall preserve knowledge, and they shall require the Law at his
mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. To which discourse of S.
Bernard, the following consideration may add some moment; and the discussing
them, may give light to the inquiry.

2. For in things indifferent the command of the Superior must needs be
accounted the will of God; for although our Superiors are executioners of the
Divine Laws, yet because they have also a Legislative power, they who can alter
nothing in things commanded or forbiddden by God, must have a power to command
or to forbid respectively in things indifferent or not at all. And therefore in
such things our conscience is bound to obey.

3. And if conscience be pretended against it, it is an error and ought to be
laid down, for to follow this erring conscience ingages us in sin all the way.

4. But as he that submits his understanding to the obedience of Jesus, pleases
God most, even when he does it in defiance of all arguments and temptations to
the contrary, which though he cannot answer, yet he resolves to follow Christ;
so he does best who though his conscience pretend reasons against it, will yet
lay aside those reasons that he may submit to his superiors.

5. For it is a great crime by rebelling against or slighting the command of
our Rulers, to give offense to whole societies of men; * and there can be no
greater contempt done to them, then by undervaluing their judgment to prefer
our own; and therefore the Prophet pronounces woe to them who are wise in their
own eyes.

6. But let a Subject be never so wise, he ought not to judge his Superior, or
to condemn his sentence; and therefore he must be judged by it, and not by his
own erring conscience.

7. For as he who has made a vow of obedience, has divested himself of all
pretenses of contradicting what shall be imposed; and if his conscience shall
check him in the instance, he ought to look upon it as a temptation and use it
accordingly; so must it be also in every Subject, who by the Laws of God is as
much tied to obey his Superior, as he can be by any Law which he puts upon
himself. The effect of these suggestions is this, that in things where the Law
of God has not declared positively, an erring conscience is not to be attended
to, but the Law of the Superior, and his sentence must be the guide of his
Conscience.

To this discourse I answer in short, 2.
That it is all very true; that the lawful Superiors are Gods Vicegerents
appointed over us in things pertaining to God, so as to be Executioners of the
Divine Laws; and besides this, to make Laws in things indifferent and
pertaining to men; That all contempt done to them is done to God; That it is
scandalous to refuse obedience to them; That he is a proud man who says he is
wiser then his Superiors; and he is intolerable that preferres his private
folly before the public wisdom: And therefore it is well inferred, that the
error of an abused conscience ought to be laid down, and though he cannot in
particular answer the arguments which trouble him, yet if he have reason to
believe that though the arguments be too hard for him, yet that the Superiors
command is innocent; it were well if he would lay aside those arguments and
adhere to authority; yet all this touches not the secret of the Question. For,

He that compares the law of Conscience, with the law of the Superior,
compares the law of God and the law of man; 3.
and the question is not whether a man should follow his Superior, or follow
himself, but whether God or Man be to be obeyed, whether the Superior or the
Supreme be to be attended to? The reason of this is, because the Conscience
stands bound by the supposed Law of God, which being superior to all the law
of Man, must rather be obeyed; and therefore although the arguments conclude
rightly that an erring conscience disobeying his Superiors lawful command does
sin greatly, yet they cannot conclude that he avoids sin by obeying against his
conscience. For his condition is indeed perplexed, and he can no way avoid sin,
but by laying his error aside first, and then obeying. And since he sins
whether he obeys his Superiors just command, or the unjust command of his
conscience, the inquiry is, in this sad conjunction of things, by what hand he
must be smitten, on which side he must fall, that he may fall the easier? To
this the Rule answers, That his erring conscience must be obeyed rather,
because he is persuaded that God speaks there, and is not persuaded that God
speaks by his Superior. Now though in this he be deceived, yet he that will
not go there where he thinks God is, and leave that where he thinks God is
not, does uncertainly go toward God, but does certainly forsake him, as much
as lies in him. For,

It is to the Conscience all one as if the Law of God were really upon it, 4.
if it be thought it is. Idem est esse and apparere in this case, and therefore
the erring conscience is to be attended to, because the will and the affections
are for God, though the judgment has mistaken a gloworm for the Sun. But this
is to be understood only, when the conscience erres innocently and
unavoidably, which it can never do in the precepts of nature, and brightest
revelation.

But if the Conscience does err vincibly, 5.
that is, with an actual fault, and an imperfect, artificial resolution, such a
one, as a good man will not, and a wise man need not have, his present
persuasion excuses him not from a double sin, for breaking a double duty. For
he is bound to correct his error, and to perform the precepts of his Superior,
and if he does not, his sin is more then that which was in the vicious cause of
his misperswasion, as I showed in the explication of the former Rules.

But according as the ignorance and error approaches toward pity, lessening 6.
or excusing, so the sin also declines. He that thinks it is not lawful at all
to take up arms at the command of his Prince in an unjust, or a dubious cause,
sins if he does what he thinks so unlawful, and he commits no sin in
disobeying, that only excepted which entered into his misperswasion, which is
greater or less, or next to none at all, according as was the cause of his
error, which in the whole constitution of affairs, he could not well avoid. But
he that is foolishly persuaded that all Government is unlawful and
Antichristian, is bound to lay his error down, and besides the vicious cause of
his error, he sins in the evil effect of it, though his imperfect, equivocal
conscience calls on him to the contrary, yet he sins if he does not obey,
because in such notorious and evident propositions an error is not only
malicious in the principle, but voluntary all the way; and therefore may
easily, and must certainly be laid aside in every period of determination.

Whatsoever Cases are between these, partake of the extremes according to their
proper reason and relation.

RULE 7. The error of an abused Conscience ought to be reformed, sometimes by
the command of the will, but ordinarily by a contrary reason.
1. 1.
IF the error did begin upon a probable reason, it cannot be reformed but by a
reason seeming equal to it, because a less reason has not naturally the same
efficacy with a greater, Vide Chap. 4.
and to assent to a less probability against a greater is to do against
reason, against all that by which this lesser reason is outweighed. For in this
case the will can have no influence, which not being a cognoscitive and
discoursing faculty, must be determined by its own motives when it is not
determined by reason, that is, by the motives of understanding. Now the motives
of will when it is not moved by right reason, are pleasure and profit, ambition
and revenge, partiality and pride, chance or humor; and how these principles
can disabuse a conscience is very hard to understand, how readily and certainly
they do abuse it, is not hard. Whether the stars be even or odd? whether
the soul be generated, or created and infused? whether it be lawful to fight or
rail against a Prince, what has the Will to do with it? If the will meddles,
and makes the resolution, it shall be determined, not as it is best, but as it
falls out by chance, or by evil, or by vain inducements. For in the will there
is no argument good but reason; I mean both in the matter of nature and of
grace, that is, reason changed into a motive, and an instrument of persuasion
from whatsoever inducing principle.

2. 2.
Sanchez. select. 99. disp. 41. number. 27. Meroiia in florileg. verb. conscientia
nu. 14. B^^dus de conscientia discept. 3. cap. 11.
Some have affirmed that the error of a conscience may fairly be deposed upon
any probable argument though of less persuasion; which if it could be admitted,
would give leave for a man to choose his side as he pleases, because in all
moral things as dressed with circumstances it is very easy to find some
degrees of probability, but very difficult to find a case against which
nothing can be disputed. And therefore if it happens that a man be better
persuaded of his error then of the contrary truth, that truth cannot be chosen
wisely, nor the error honestly deposed, because it is done against the way of a
man, not absolutely, but comparatively against reason.

3. 3.
If the reason on both sides seems equally probable, the will may determine by
any of its proper motives that are honest; any prudent interest, any fair
compliance, any custom, in case these happen to be on the right side. When the
arguments seem equal, the understanding or conscience cannot determine. It must
either be a chance, and a special providence of God, or a particular grace that
casts us on the right side. But whatsoever it be that then determines us to the
right, if of it self it be innocent, it is in that case an effect of Gods
grace, and an apt instrument of a right Conscience.

4. 4.
When the conscience is erroneous, and the error unreasonable, commenced wholly
upon interest, trifling regards, or vicious principles, the error may be
deposed honestly, though there be no reason thought of to the contrary, besides
the discovery of the first abuse. The will in this case is enough. Volo servare
animam meam, said one; I will, I am resolved to save my own soul. A man may and
ought to hate the evil principle of his error, and decline it upon the stock of
indignation, which in this case is a part of repentance. And this insinuates
the reason of this discourse. For,

Repentance is founded principally in the will, 5.
and whatsoever a man is to leave upon the stock of repentance, he may do it
wholly upon the stock of his will, informed, or inclined by general
propositions, without any cognizance of the particulars of the present
Question. Eratosthenes coming amongst the Persian Magi, and observing their
looser customs of marrying their sisters and their mothers, falls in love with
his half sister Lampra and marries her. A while after perceiving that he entered
upon this action upon no other account but lust, and fancy, and compliance with
the impurer Magi, began to hate his act for the evil inducement, and threw away
her and his folly together. This he might do without any further reasonings
about the indecency of the mixture, by perceiving that a crime or a folly stood
at the entrance and invited him to an evil lodging. He that begins without
reason, has reason enough to leave off, by perceiving he had no reason to
begin; and in this case the will is the great agent, Vide Chap. 4. Rule 5.
which therefore here is no ill principle, because it leaves the error upon the
stock of grace and repentance.

5. 6.
If the will entertained the error without any reason at all, as oftentimes it
does, it knows not why; she may also depose it honestly without any reason
relating to the particular, upon this general, that it could not make the
action to be conscientious to have it done without any inducement. But then the
taking up the contrary truth upon as little reason is innocent, because it
happens to be on the right side; but it is not Virtue nor Conscience till it be
persuaded by something that is a fit inducement either in the general, or in
the particular.

RULE 8. The error of a Conscience is not always to be opened to the erring
person by the Guides of souls, or any other charitable adviser.
IF the error began with a sin, 1.
and still dwells there upon the same stock, or if it be productive of a sin,
it is always to be discovered, though the greatest temporal inconvenience were
certainly consequent to the discovery. Because a man must not be suffered to
lie in sin, no not a minute, if he can be recovered or rescued from it; and no
temporal advantage or disadvantage can be considerable in this case, which is
the case of soul. An error that is vincible is all the way criminal and must
not be permitted.

2. 2.
If the error be invincible and innocent or pitiable in the cause, and yet ends
in an intolerable event, and the effect be a crime or a great danger to souls,
the error must be discovered by them that can. The Novatians erred in the
matter of Repentance: The inducing cause of their error was an over active
zeal, and too wary a tenderness in avoiding scandal and judging concerning it.
God served the ends of his glory by the occasion of that error, for he uses to
bring good out of every evil; and the Church under a better article grew as
wary as the Novatians, as watchful against scandal, as severe against lapsed
persons. Now although in this case, the error was from an innocent cause, yet
because it landed them upon a course of discipline, and persuasion that was not
innocent, they were not to be permitted in their error, though the dissolut on
of the error might or would have occasioned the remission of discipline. For
their doctrine of repentance was dishonorable to the mercies of God, and
instrument of despair, a rendering the power of the Keys and the Ministry of
the order Ecclesiastical in a manner wholly useless, and would if it were
pursued to its just consequents have hindered repenting sinners to revert to the
folds of the Church; and therefore for the accidental good which God brought,
or which was likely to have come from that error or the innocence of its
principle, it was not to be concealed, but reproved and destroyed because it
dwelt in sin. He that believes that repentance to be sufficient, which has in
it nothing but sorrow for what is past, and a present purpose without amendment
really in the future, upon no pretense is to be complied withal in the
palliation of his error, because the consequent of his error is such a danger,
or such a state of sin, for which nothing can make amends.

3. If the error be invincible, 3.
and the consequent of the persuasion be consistent with the state of grace,
the error must be opened or not opened, according to prudent considerations
relating to the person and his state of affairs. So that the error must rather
be suffered then a grievous scandal, or an intolerable, or a very great
inconvenience. To this purpose Comitolus says it was determined by a
Congregation of learned and prudent persons in answer to a strange and a rare
case happening in Venice; A Gentleman ignorantly did lie with his Mother; she
knew it, but intended it not, till for her curiosity and in her search whether
her son intended it to her maid, she was surprised and gotten with child: She
perceiving her shame and sorrow hasten, sent her son to travel for many years;
and he returned not till his Mothers female birth was grown to be a handsome
pretty Maiden. At his return he espies a sweet faced girl in the house, likes
her, loves her, and intends to marry her. His mother conjured him by all that
was sacred and profane that he should not, saying, she was a beggars child,
whom for pities sake she rescued from the streets and beggary, and that he
should not by dishonouring his family make her to die with sorrow. The
Gentleman's affections were strong, and not to be mastered, and he married his
own sister and his own daughter. But now the bitings of the Mothers conscience
were intolerable and to her Cofessor she discovered the whole business within a
year or two after this prodigious marriage, and asked whether she were bound to
reveal the case to her son and daughter, who now lived in love and sweetness of
society, innocently, though with secret misfortune which they felt not. It was
concluded negatively, she was not to reveal it, lest she bring an intolerable
misery in the place of that which to them was no sin; or lest upon notice of
the error they might be tempted by their mutual endearment and their common
children, to cohabite in despite of the case, and so change that into a known
sin, which before was an unknown calamity; and by this state of the answer,
they were permitted to their innocence, and the children to their inheritance,
and all under the protection of a harmless, though erring and mistaken
conscience.

4. 4.
If it be doubtful whether more good or hurt may be consequent to the
discovery, it is better to conceal it. Because it is more tolerable to have a
good omitted, then to have an evil done. That may sometimes be lawful, this can
never; and a known evil that is not a sin, is rather to be admitted then an
unknown, which no man can tell whether it will arrive. But in this, the
prudence of a good and a wise man is to be his only guide, and Gods glory his
only measure and the public good, and the greater concernments of the
interessed be chiefly regarded.

CHAP. IV. Of the Probable or Thinking Conscience.
RULE 1. A probable Conscience is an imperfect assent to an uncertain
proposition, in which one part is indeed clearly and fully chosen, but with an
explicit, or implicit notice that the contrary is also fairly eligible.
A Probable Conscience dwells so between the Sure and the Doubtful that it
partakes something of both. 1.
For a sure Conscience may begin upon a probable inducement, but is made sure
either by an assent to the Conclusion, stronger then the premises will infer,
or by a reflex act, or some other collateral hardness and adventitious
confidence, and therefore the probable is distinguished from that by the
imperfection of the assent. But because in that respect it approaches to the
doubtful, and in that is alike, it is differenced from this by the
determination. For a doubtful conscience considers the probabilities on each
side, and dares not choose, and cannot. But the probable does choose, though it
considers that in the thing it self there can be no certainty. And from them
both it is distinguished by the intervening of the Will. For in the sure
Conscience the Will works not at all, because it is wholly conducted by the
understanding, and its proper motives. In the doubtful the Will cannot
interpose by reason of fear and an uncertain spirit; but in the probable it can
intervene, not directly, but collaterally and indirectly, because the motives
of the probable conscience are not always sufficient to make the conclusion
without something of the Will applied to extrinsecal motives which reflect also
upon the understanding; and yet in this conscience there is no fear, and
therefore the Will can here be obeyed, which in the first needs not, in the
last it cannot. For it is remarkable, that a probable conscience though it be
in speculation uncertain, yet it may be practically certain, that is, he that
believes his opinion to be probable, cannot but think that it is possible he
may be in an actual error, but yet he may know that it is innocent to do that
for which he has a probable reason: for though in all these cases he may
choose that which is the wrong part, yet he proceeds as safely as if he had
chosen right, for if it were not safe to do that which is only probable, then
nothing could be done till something were demonstrated; and then in moral
Theology we should often stand still and suspend our act, but seldom do any
thing; nay sometimes (...) act nor suspend, it being but probable that either
is to be (...) sometimes it happens what Aristotle said, that false things are
(...) then true, as it is to all them who are innocently and in^ (...); and in
this case, if probability were not a sufficient convicti^^ (...) such persons
could not honestly consent to truth. * For even (...) disagree in their
sentences of truth and error, and after a great search, (...) do they discover
one single truth unto just measures of confidence; (...) therefore no other law
could be exacted for humane actions, then an opinion honestly entered into and a
probable conscience. And it is remarkable that Cicero says that the word
Arbitror is verbum consideratissimum, and the old Romans were reserved and
cautious in the decrees of Judges, and the forms of their oath began with
arbitor although they gave testimony of things whereof they were eye witnesses;
and the words which their Praetors did use in their sentences, was fecisse
videtur, (...) 11 4.
or non videtur. He that observes the winds shall not sow, and he that
watches the clouds shall never reap; which means, that if we start at every
objection, and think nothing safe but what is certain, and nothing certain but
what can be demonstrated, that man is over wise and over just, and by his too
curious search misses what he inquires for. (...), That is well enough proved,
that is proved according to the subject matter. For there is not the same
exactness to be looked for in all disciplines, any more then in all
manufactures. But in those things which are honest and just, and which concern
the public, (...), there is so much dissension and deception that things are
good or bad not by themselves, but as they are in law; (...). He is well
instructed who expects that manner of proof for things, which the nature of the
things will bear, Ethic. l. 1. c. 1.
said Aristotle. And in moral things, it is sufficient that a thing is judged
true and certain, though by an uncertain argument; and the opinion may be
practically certain, when the knowledge of it is in speculation only probable.

It has two sorts of motives, 2.
intrinsecal and extrinsecal. That is reason, this is authority, and both of
them have great considerations in order to practice, of which I am to give
account in the following Rules.

RULE 2. A Conscience that is at first, and in its own nature probable, may be
made certain by accumulation of many probabilities operating the same
persuasion.
EVery probable argument has in it something of persuasion and proof, 1.
and although it cannot produce evidence and entire conviction to a wise and a
discerning spirit, yet it can effect all that it ought; and although, if the
Will list, or if passions rule, the understanding shall be made stubborn
against it, and reject it easily; yet if nothing be put in bar against it, it
may bring a man to adhere to it beyond the evidence. But in some cases there
are a whole army of little people, heaps of probable inducements which the
understanding amasses together, and from every side gathers all that can give
light and motion to the article in question, it draws auxiliaries from every
thing, fights with every weapon, and by all means pursues the victory; it joins
line to line, and precept to precept, reason to reason, and reason to
authority; the sayings of wise men with the proverbs of the people; consent of
talkers, and the arguings of disputers; the nature of the thing, and the
reasonableness of its expectations; the capacities and possibilities of men,
and of accidents; the purposes and designs, the usefulness, and rewards; and by
what all agents are and ought to be moved; customs are mingled with laws, and
decencies with consideration of profit; the understanding considers the present
state and heap of circumstances, and by prudence weighs every thing in its own
balance; it considers the consequent of the opinion it intends to establish,
and well weighs the inconvenience of the contrary. But from the obscurity and
insufficiency of these particulars, there cannot come a perfect light; if a
little black be mingled with white, the product must have something of every
influence that can be communicated from its principle, or material
constitution; and ten thousand millions of uncertains cannot make one certain.

In this case the understanding comes not to any certainty by the energy of the
motives and direct arguments of probability, 2.
or by the first effort and impresses of their strength, but by a particular
reflection which it makes upon the heap, and by a secondary discoursing
extracted from the whole, as being therefore convinced, because it believes it
to be impossible that so many considerations, that no way conspire either in
matter or design, should agree in the production of a lie. It is not likely
that so many beams of light should issue from the chambers of heaven for no
other reason but to lead us into a precipice. Probable arguments and prudential
motives are the great hinges of humane actions, for as a Pope once said, It is
but a little wit that governs the world; and the uncertainty of arguments is
the great cause of contingency in events; but as uncertain as most counsels
are, yet all the great transactions of the affairs of the world are resolved on
and acted by them; by suspicions and fears and probable apprehensions infinite
evils are prevented; and it is not therefore likely to be an error by which so
perpetually so many good things are procured and effected. For it were a
disparagement to the wise providence of God, and a lessening the rare Economy
of the Divine Government that he should permit almost all the world, and all
reiglements, the varieties of event, and all the changes of Kingdoms, and all
counsels and deliberations, to be conducted by moral demonstrations, and to be
under the power of probabilities, and yet that these should be deceitful and
false. Neither is it to be imagined that God should permit wise men, and good,
men that on purpose place their reason in indifference, that abate of their
heats and quench their own extravagant fires, men that wipe away all clouds and
mists from their eyes, that they may see clearly, men that search as they ought
to do, for things that they are bound to find, things that they are commanded
to search, and upon which even all their interests depends, and yet inquiring
after the end whither they are directed, and by what means it is to be acquired
that these men should be inevitably abused by their own reason, by the best
reason they have; and that when concerning the thing which cannot be
demonstrated by proper and physical arguments, yet we are to enter into a
persuasion so great, that for the verification of it men must venture their
lives and their souls; I say, if this kind of proof be not sufficient to
effect all this, and sufficiently to assure such men, and competently to affirm
and strengthen such resolutions, salvation and damnation must be by chance, or,
which is worse, it must be impossible to be well, but when it cannot choose to
be otherwise; and this I say is not to be imagined that God will or does permit,
since all these entercourses so much concern Gods glory and our eternal
interest. The main events of heaven and hell do in some regards depend, as to
us, upon our faith, whose objects are represented with such lights from God and
right reason as are sufficient to persuade, not to demonstrate; they are such
which leave something to us of choice and love, and every proposition of
Scripture though it be as sure, yet it is not so evident as the principles of
Geometry; and the Spirit of God effects his purposes with an influence as soft
and placid as the warmth of the Sun, while a physical demonstration blows hard
and high as the Northwind; indeed a man must use rudeness if he does not quit
his garment at so loud a call, but we are more willing to part with it when the
Sun gently requires us: so is a moral demonstration, it is so humane, so
persuasive, so complying with the nature and infirmities of man, with the
actions of his life and his manner of operation, that it seems to have been
created on purpose for the needs and uses of man in this life, for virtue and
for hopes, for faith and for charity, to make us to believe by love, and to
love by believing, for in heaven they that see and love, cannot choose but
love, and see, and comprehend; for it is a reward and fills all their faculties,
and is not possessed by us, but it self possesses us; In this world where we
are to do something our selves, though all by the grace of God, that which we
do of our selves is nothing else but to work as we our selves can, which
indeed happens to be in propositions, as it is in the love of God, this cannot
fail us, but we may fail of it, and so are the sentences of Religion,
infallible in themselves, but we may be deceived, while by a fallible way we
proceed to infallible notices, for nothing else could indear our labor and our
love, our search and our obedience; and therefore this must be sufficient and
acceptable, if we do what we can: But then this also will secure our
confidence, and in the noises of Christendom when disputing fellows say their
brother is damned for not believing them, we need not to regard any such
noises, if we proceed prudently as we can, and honestly as we ought, probable
motives of our understanding are our sufficient conduct, and then we have this
warrant, Brethren, if our hearts condemn us not, (...) 3. 21. then have we
peace toward God. And God would never have inspired his Church with prudence,
or made any such virtue, if the things which were put under the conduct of it,
that is, probabilities, were not instrumental to the service of God, and to the
verification of all its just and proper productions.

Probable arguments are like little stars, 3.
every one of which will be useless as to our conduct and enlightening, but
when they are tied together by order and vicinity, by the finger of God and the
hand of an Angel, they make a Constellation, and are not only powerful in
their influence, but like a bright Angel to guide and to enlighten our way. And
although the light is not great as the light of the Sun or Moon, yet Mariners
sail by their conduct; and though with trepidation and some danger, yet very
regularly they enter into the haven. This heap of probable inducements, is not
of power as a Mathematical and Physical demonstration, which is in discourse as
the Sun is in heaven, but it makes a Milky and a white path, visible enough to
walk securely.

And next to these tapers of effective reason, 4.
drawn from the nature and from the events, and the accidents and the
expectations and experiences of things, stands the grandeur of a long and
united authority: The understanding thus reasoning, That it is not credible
that this thing should have escaped the wiser heads of all the great personages
in the world, who stood at the chairs of Princes, or sat in the Rulers chair,
and should only appear to two or three bold, illiterate, or vicious persons,
ruled by lusts, and overruled by evil habits; but in this we have the same
security and the same confidence that timorous persons have in the dark; they
are pleased and can see what is and what is not, if there be a candle, but in
the dark they are less fearful if they be in company.

This way of arguing some are pleased to call a moral demonstration, 5.
not that it can make a proposition clear and bright, and quit from clouds and
obscurity, as a natural demonstration can, for I may in this case use
Aristotle's saying, (...), Things of this nature may be very true, but are not
very evident; but it can produce the same effect, that is, it can lead into
truth, not with as much brightness, but with as much certainty and
infallibility in the event of things. For a man may as prosperously and
certainly arrive at his journeys end though but conducted by him that went the
way but once before him, as if he had a straight path walled in on both sides;
so may we find truth as certainly by probabilities, as by demonstrations: we
are not so sure that we find it, but it is oftentimes as surely found. And if
the heap arrive at that which we call a moral demonstration, it is as certain
that no moral demonstration can be opposed against it, as that no natural
demonstration can be brought in contradiction to a natural. For the
understanding cannot call any thing a moral demonstration, till by considering
the particulars on both sides, the reasonableness of one, and the
unreasonableness of the other, with a cold sent, and liberty of spirit, and an
unbyassed Will, it has passed the sentence for the truth; and since in this
case all the opposition is between strength and power on one side, and weakness
and pretense on the other, it is impossible that the opposite parts should be
demonstrations or seem so to the same man. And this appears by this also, that
some propositions which are only proved by a conjugation of probable
inducements, have yet obtained as certain and as regular events as a natural
demonstration, and are believed equally, constantly, and perpetually by all
wise men, and the understanding does regularly receive the same impression, and
give the same assent, and for ever draws forth the same conclusions when it is
not abused with differing prejudices and preoccupations, when its liberty and
powers are not infeebled with customs, examples and contrary breeding, while
it is not bribed by interest, or hurried away by passion.

Of this I shall choose to give one instance, 6.
which as it is of the greatest concernment in the world in it self, so the gay
impieties and bold wits of the world who are witty against none more then God
and Gods wisdom, have made it now to be but too seasonable, and that is, that
the Religion of Jesus Christ, or The Christian Religion is from God; concerning
which I will not now pretend to bring in all the particulars whereby each part
of it can be verified, but by heaping together such heads of probabilities
which are or may be the cause of an infinite persuasion, and this I had rather
choose to do for these reasons:

1. 7.
Because many men excellently learned have already discoursed largely of the
truth of Christianity, and approved by a direct and close congression with
other Religions, by examination of the contrary pretenses, refutation of their
arguments, answering their objections, and have by direct force so far
prevailed, that all the reason of the world appears to stand on the Christian
side: and for me to do it now, as there is no just occasion ministered by this
argument, so neither can it be useful and necessary.

2. In that way of arguing, 8.
every man that is an adversary can answer one argument, and some can reprove
many, and none can prevail singly to posses all the understanding, and to fill
all the corners of consideration, but in a moral demonstration that can be
supplied.

3. 9.
In the other way an adversary supposes himself to prevail when he can answer
the arguments singly, and the discourses in that method are like the servants
sent singly to gather fruits of the Husbandmen, they killed them as fast as
they came, and a man may kill a whole Kingdom over, if the opponents come by
single persons; but a moral demonstration is like an Army which can lose single
persons and yet prevail, but yet cannot be beaten unless it be beaten all.

4. 10.
The few little things that Atheistical persons prate against the holy Jesus
and his most excellent Religion, are infinitely outweighed by the multitude and
variety of things to be said for it; and let the others stand (as if they meet
with persons that cannot answer them) yet they are sure this greater ought to
prevail, because it possesses all the corners of reason, and meets with every
instance, and complies with the manner of a man, and is fitted to the nature of
things, and complies with the Will, and persuades the understanding, and is a
guard against the tricks of Sophisters, and does not only effect its purpose
by direct influence, but is secured by reflection upon it self, and does more by
its indirect strength, and by a back blow, then by its first operations; and
therefore,

This instance and this way of argument may be of more use to those persons who
cannot so dispute, 11.
but that they are apt to be abused by little things, by talkings and imperfect
arguings; it may be a defensative against trifling objections, and the impious
pratings of the nequam ingeniosi the witty fools, while the men are armed by
love and prudence and wise securities to stand with confidence and piety
against talkings and intrigues of danger; for by this way best, Wisdom is
justified of all her children.

An instance of Moral demonstration, or a conjugation of probabilities, proving
that the Religion of Jesus Christ is from God.

THis discourse of all the disputables in the world, 12.
shall require the fewest things to be granted; even nothing but what was
evident, even nothing but the very subject of the Question, viz. That there was
such a man as Jesus Christ, that he pretended such things and taught such
doctrines: for he that will prove these things to be from God, must be allowed
that they were from something or other. But this postulate I do not ask for
need, but for orders sake and Art; for what the histories of that Age reported
as a public affair, as one of the most eminent transactions of the world, that
which made so much noise, which caused so many changes, which occasioned so
many wars, which divided so many hearts, which altered so many families,
which procured so many deaths, which obtained so many Laws in favor, and
suffered so many Rescripts in the disfavour of its self; that which was not
done in a corner, but was 33. years and more in acting; which caused so many
Sects, and was opposed by so much Art, and so much power that it might not
grow, which filled the world with noise, which effected such great changes in
the bodies of men by curing the diseased, and smiting the contumacious or the
hypocrites, which drew so many eyes, and filled so many tongues, and employed
so many pens, and was the care and the question of the whole world at that
time, and immediately after; that which was consigned by public acts and
records of Courts, which was in the Books of friends and enemies, which came
accompanied and remarked with eclipses and stars and prodigies of heaven and
earth, that which the Jews even in spite and against their wills confessed, and
which the witty adversaries intending to overthrow, could never so much as
challenge of want of truth in the matter of fact and story; that which they who
are infinitely concerned that it should not be believed, or more, that it had
never been, do yet only labor to make to appear not to have been Divine:
Certainly, this thing is so certain that it was, that the defenders of it need
not account it a kindness to have it presupposed; for never was any story in
the world that had so many degrees of credibility, as the story of the person,
life and death of Jesus Christ: And if he had not been a true Prophet, yet that
he was in the world, and said and did such things cannot be denied; for even
concerning Mahomet we make no question but he was in the world, and led a great
part of mankind after him, and what was less proved we infinitely believe; and
what all men say, and no man denies, and was notorious in it self, of this we
may make further inquiries whether it was all that which it pretended, for that
it did make pretenses and was in the world, needs no more probation.

But now whether Jesus Christ was sent from God and delivered the Will of God,
13.
we are to take accounts from all the things of the world which were on him, or
about him, or from him. Consider first his person: he was foretold by all the
Prophets: He, I say, for that appears by the event, and the correspondencies of
their sayings to his person: he was described by infallible characterisms which
did fit him, and did never fit any but him; for when he was born, then was the
fullness of time, and the Messiah was expected at the time when Jesus did
appear, which gave occasion to many of the godly then to wait for him, and to
hope to live till the time of his revelation: and they did so, and with a
spirit of Prophecy which their own nation did confess and honor, glorified
God at the revelation: and the most excellent and devout persons that were
conspicuous for their piety did then rejoice in him, and confess him; and the
expectation of him at that time was so public and famous, that it gave
occasion to diverse Impostors to abuse the credulity of the people in pretending
to be the Messiah; but not only the predictions of the time, and the perfect
Synchronisms did point him out, but at his birth a strange star appeared,
which guided certain Levantine Princes and Sages to the inquiry after him; a
strange star which had an irregular place and an irregular motion, that came
by design, and acted by counsel, the counsel of the Almighty Guide, it moved
from place to place, till it stood just over the house where the Babe did
sleep; a star of which the Heathen knew much, who knew nothing of him; a
star which Chalcidius affirmed to have signified the descent of God for the
salvation of man; a star that guided the wise Chaldees to worship him with
gifts (as the same disciple of Plato does affirm, and) as the holy Scriptures
deliver; and this star could be no secret; It troubled all the Country; It
put Herod upon strange arts of security for his Kingdom, it effected a sad
tragedy accidentally, for it occasioned the death of all the little Babes in
the City, and voisinage of Bethlehem: But the birth of this young child which
was thus glorified by a star, was also signified by an Angel, and was
effected by the holy Spirit of God, in a manner which was in it self
supernatural; a Virgin was his Mother, and God was his Father, and his
beginning was miraculous; and this matter of his birth of a Virgin was proved
to an interested and jealous person, even to Joseph the supposed father of
Jesus, it was affirmed publicly by all his family, and by all his disciples,
and published in the midst of all his enemies, who by no artifice could
reprove it, a matter so famous, that when it was urged as an argument to prove
Jesus to be the Messiah, by the force of a Prophecy in Isaiah [A Virgin shall
conceive a Son] they who obstinately refused to admit him, did not deny the
matter of fact, but denied that it was so meant by the Prophet, which if it
were true, can only prove that Jesus was more excellent then was foretold by
the Prophets, but that there was nothing less in him then was to be in the
Messiah; it was a matter so famous that the Arabian Physicians who can affirm
no such things of their Mahomet, and yet not being able to deny it to be true
of the holy Jesus, endeavor to elevate and lessen the thing, by saying, It is
not wholly beyond the force of nature, that a Virgin should conceive, so that
it was on all hands undeniable, that the Mother of Jesus was a Virgin, a Mother
without a Man. This is that Jesus at whose presence before he was born, a babe
in his mothers belly also did leap for joy, who was also a person extraordinary
himself, conceived in his mothers old age, after a long barrenness, signified
by an Angel in the Temple, to his father officiating his Priestly Office, who
was also struck dumb for his not present believing: all the people saw it, and
all his kindred were witnesses of his restitution, and he was named by the
Angel, and his Office declared to be the forerunner of the holy Jesus; and
this also was foretold by one of the old Prophets; for the whole story of this
Divine person is a chain of providence and wonder, every link of which is a
verification of a Prophecy, and all of it is that thing which from Adam to the
birth of Jesus was pointed at and hinted by all the Prophets, whose words in
him passed perfectly into the event. This is that Jesus who as he was born
without a Father, so he was learned without a Master, he was a Man without age,
a Doctor in a Child's garment, disputing in the Sanctuary at 12. years old. He
was a sojourner in Egypt, because the poor Babe born of an indigent Mother was
a formidable rival to a potent King, and this fear could not come from the
design of the infant, but must needs arise from the illustriousness of the
birth, and the Prophecies of the child, and the sayings of the learned, and the
journey of the Wise men, and the decrees of God; this journey and the return
were both managed by the conduct of an Angel and a Divine dream, for to the Son
of God all the Angels did rejoice to minister. This blessed Person made thus
excellent by his Father, and glorious by miraculous consignations, and
illustrious by the ministry of heavenly spirits, and proclaimed to Mary and to
Joseph by two Angels, to the Shepherds by a multitude of the heavenly Host, to
the Wise men by a Prophecy and by a Star, to the Jews by the Shepherds, to the
Gentiles by the three Wise men, to Herod by the Doctors of the Law, and to
himself perfectly known by the inchasing his humane nature in the bosom and
heart of God, and by the fullness of the Spirit of God, was yet pleased for 30.
years together to live an humble, a laborious, a chaste and a devout, a regular
and an even, a wise and an exemplar, a pious and an obscure life, without
complaint, without sin, without design of fame, or grandeur of spirit, till the
time came that the clefts of the rock were to open, and the Diamond give its
luster, and be worn in the Diademes of Kings, and then this person was wholly
admirable; for he was ushered into the world by the voice of a loud Crier in
the wilderness, a person austere and wise, of a strange life, full of holiness
and full of hardness, and a great Preacher of righteousness, a man believed by
all the people that he came from God, one who in his own nation gathered
disciples publicly, and (which amongst them was a great matter) he was the
Doctor of a new institution, and baptized all the Country, yet this man so
great, so revered, so followed, so listened to by King and people, by Doctors
and by idiots, by Pharisees and Sadduces, this man Preached Jesus to the
people, pointed out the Lamb of God, told that he must increase, and himself
from all that fame must retire to give him place; he received him to baptism
after having with duty and modesty declared his own unworthiness to give, but
rather a worthiness to receive baptism from the holy hands of Jesus; but at the
solemnity God sent down the holy Spirit upon his holy Son, and by a voice from
heaven, a voice of thunder (and God was in that voice) declared that this was
his Son, and that he was delighted in him. This voice from heaven was such, so
evident, so certain a conviction of what it did intend to prove, so known and
accepted as the way of Divine revelation under the second Temple, that at that
time every man that desired a sign honestly, would have been satisfied with
such a voice; it being the testimony by which God made all extraordinaries to
be credible to his people from the days of Ezra, to the death of the Nation;
and that there was such a voice, not only then, but diverse times after, was as
certain, and made as evident as things of that nature can ordinarily be made.
For it being a matter of fact, cannot be supposed infinite, but limited to time
and place, heard by a certain number of persons, and was as a clap of thunder
upon ordinary accounts, which could be heard but by those who were within the
sphere of its own activity; and reported by those to others, who are to give
testimony as testimonies are required, which are credible under the test of two
or three disinterested, honest, and true men, and though this was done in the
presence of more, and oftener then once, yet it was a divine testimony but at
first, but is to be conveyed by the means of men; and as God thundered from
heaven at the giving of the Law, though that he did so, we have notice only
from the Books of Moses received from the Jewish Nation; so he did in the days
of the Baptist, and so he did to Peter, James, and John, and so he did in the
presence of the Pharisees and many of the common people; and as it is not to be
supposed that all these would join their divided interests, for and against
themselves for the verification of a lie, so if they would have done it, they
could not have done it without reproof of their own parties, who would have
been glad by the discovery only to disgrace the whole story; but if the report
of honest and just men so reputed, may be questioned for matter of fact, or may
not be accounted sufficient to make faith when there is no pretense of men to
the contrary, besides that we can have no story transmitted to us, no records
kept, no acts of Courts, no narratives of the days of old, no traditions of our
Fathers; so there could not be left in nature any usual instrument whereby God
could after the manner of men declare his own will to us, but either we should
never know the will of heaven upon earth, or it must be that God must not only
tell it once but always, and not only always to some men, but always to all
men; and then as there would be no use of history, or the honesty of men, and
their faithfulness in telling any act of God in declaration of his will, so
there would be perpetual necessity of miracles, and we could not serve God
directly with our understanding, for there would be no such thing as faith,
that is, of assent without conviction of understanding, and we could not please
God with believing, because there would be in it nothing of the will, nothing
of love and choice; and that faith which is, would be like that of Thomas, to
believe what we see or hear, and God should not at all govern upon earth unless
he did continually come himself: for thus, all Government, all Teachers, all
Apostles, all Messengers would be needless, because they could not show to the
eye what they told to the ears of men; And it might as well be disbeleeved in
all Courts and by all Princes, that this was not the letter of a Prince, or the
act of a man, or the writing of his hand, and so all humane intercourse must
cease, and all senses but the eye be useless as to this affair, or else to the
ear all voices must be strangers but the principal, if I say, no reports shall
make faith: But it is certain, that when these voices were sent from heaven and
heard upon earth they prevailed amongst many that heard them not, and disciples
were multiplied upon such accounts, or else it must be that none that did hear
them could be believed by any of their friends and neighbors; for if they
were, the voice was as effective at the reflex and rebound as in the direct
emission, and could prevail with them that believed their brother or their
friend, as certainly as with them that believed their own ears and eyes.

I need not speak of the vast numbers of miracles which he wrought; 14.
miracles which were not more demonstrations of his power then of his mercy;
for they had nothing of pompousness and ostentation, but infinitely of charity
and mercy, and that permanent and lasting and often: he opened the eyes of the
blind, he made the crooked straight, he made the weak strong, he cured fevers
with the touch of his hand, and an issue of blood with the hem of his garment,
and sore eyes with the spittle of his mouth and the clay of the earth; he
multiplied the loaves and fishes, he raised the dead to life, a young maiden,
the widows son of Naim, and Lazarus, and cast out Devils by the word of his
mouth, which he could never do but by the power of God. For Satan does not
cast out Satan, nor a house fight against it self, if it means to stand long,
and the Devil could not help Jesus, because the holy Jesus taught men virtue,
called them from the worshipping Devils, taught them to resist the Devil, to
lay aside all those abominable idolatries by which the Devil does rule in the
hearts of men: he taught men to love God, to fly from temptations to sin, to
hate and avoid all those things of which the Devil is guilty, for Christianity
forbids pride, envy, malice, lying, and yet affirms that the Devil is proud,
envious, malicious, and the Father of lies; and therefore where ever
Christianity prevails, the Devil is not worshipped, and therefore he that can
think that a man without the power of God could overturn the Devils principles,
cross his designs, weaken his strengths, baffle him in his policies, befool him
and turn him out of possession, and make him open his own mouth against himself
as he did often, and confess himself conquered by Jesus and tormented, as the
Oracle did to Augustus Caesar, and the Devil to Jesus himself, he I say, that
thinks a mere man can do this, knows not the weaknesses of a man, nor the
power of an Angel; but he that thinks this could be done by compact, and by
consent of the Devil, must think him to be an Intelligence without
understanding, a power without force, a fool and a sot to assist a power
against himself, and to persecute the power he did assist, to stir up the
world to destroy the Christians, whose Master and Lord he did assist to destroy
himself; and when we read that Porphyrius an Heathen, Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 1.
praep. Euang.
a professed enemy to Christianity, did say, (...), that since Jesus was
worshipped, the gods could help no man, that is, the gods which they
worshipped; the poor baffled enervated Demons: He must either think that the
Devils are as foolish as they are weak, or else that they did nothing toward
this declination of their power; and therefore that they suffer it by a power
higher then themselves, that is, by the power of God in the hand of Jesus.

But besides that God gave testimony from heaven concerning him; 15.
he also gave this testimony of himself to have come from God, because that he
did Gods will; for he that is a good man and lives by the Laws of God and of
his Nation, a life innocent and simple, prudent and wise, holy and spotless,
unreproved and unsuspected, he is certainly by all wise men said in a good
sense to be the son of God, but he who does well and speaks well, and calls all
men to glorify and serve God, and serves no ends but of holiness and charity,
of wisdom of hearts and reformat on of manners, this man carries great
authority in his sayings, and ought to prevail with good men in good things,
for good ends, which is all that is here required. But his nature was so sweet,
his manners so humble, his words so wise and composed, his comportment so grave
and winning, his answers so seasonable, his questions so deep, his reproof so
severe and charitable, his pity so great and merciful, his preachings so full
of reason and holiness, of weight and authority, his conversation so useful and
beneficent, his poverty great but his alms frequen^, his family so holy and
religious, his and their employment so profitable, his meekness so
incomparable, his passions without difference, save only where zeal or pity
carried him on to worthy and apt expressions a person that never laughed, but
often wept in a sense of the calamities of others; he loved every man and hated
no man, he gave counsel to the doubtful, and instructed the ignorant, he bound
up the broken hearts, and strengthened the feeble knees, he releeved the poor,
and converted the sinners, he despised none that came to him for releef, and as
for those that did not he went to them; he took all occasions of mercy that
were offered him, and went abroad for more; he spent his days in Preaching and
healing, and his nights in Prayers and conversation with God, he was obedient
to Laws and subject to Princes, though he was the Prince of Judaea in right of
his Mother, and of all the world in right of his Father; the people followed
him, but he made no conventions, and when they were made. he suffered no
tumults, when they would have made him a King he withdrew himself, when he knew
they would put him to death he offered himself; he knew men's hearts, and
conversed secretly, and gave answer to their thoughts and prevented their
questions: he would work a miracle rather then give offense, and yet suffer
every offense rather then see God his Father dishonored, he exactly kept the
Law of Moses, to which he came to put a period, and yet chose to signify his
purpose only by doing acts of mercy upon their Sabbath, doing nothing which
they could call a breach of a Commandment, but healing sick people, a charity
which themselves would do to beasts, and yet they were angry at him for doing
it to their brethren: In all his life, and in all his conversation with his
Nation, he was innocent as an Angel of light, and when by the greatness of his
worth, and the severity of his doctrine, and the charity of his miracles, and
the noises of the people, and his immense fame in all that part of the world,
and the multitude of his disciples and the authority of his Sermons, and his
free reproof of their hypocrisy, and his discovery of their false doctrines and
weak traditions, he had branded the reputation of the vicious rulers of the
people, and they resolved to put him to death, they who had the biggest malice
in the world, and the weakest accusations were forced to supply their want of
articles against him by making truth to be his fault; and his office to be his
cr^me, and his open con^ession of what was asked him to be his article of
condemnation, and yet after all this they could not persuade the competent
Judge to condemn him, or to find him guilty of any fault, and therefore they
were forced to threaten him with Caesar's name, against whom then they would
pretend him to be an enemy, though in their charge they neither proved, nor
indeed laid it against him, and yet to whatsoever they objected he made no
return, but his silence and his innocence were remarkable and evident, without
labor and reply, and needed no more argument then the Sun needs an advocate to
prove that he is the brightest star in the firmament.

Well, 16.
so it was, they crucified him, and when they did they did as much put out the
eye of heaven as destroy the Son of God; for when with an incomparable
sweetness, and a patience exemplar to all ages of sufferers, he endured
affronts, examinations, scorns, insolences of rude ungentle Tradesmen, cruel
whippings, injurious, unjust and unreasonable usages from those whom he obliged
by all the arts of endearment and offers of the biggest kindness, at last he
went to death as to the work which God appointed him that he might become the
worlds sacrifice, and the great example of holiness, and the instance of
representing by what way the world was to be made happy [even by sufferings and
so entering into heaven] that he might (I say) become the Savior of his
Enemies, and the elder Brother to his friends, and the Lord of Glory, and the
fountain of its emanation. Then it was that God gave new testimonies from
heaven; The Sun was eclipsed all the while he was upon the Cross, and yet the
Moon was in the full; that is, he lost his light, not because any thing in
nature did invest him, but because the God of nature (as a Heathen at that very
time confessed, who yet saw nothing of this sad iniquity) did suffer. The rocks
did rend, the ve^l of the Temple divided of it self and opened the enclosures,
and disparked the Sanctuary, and made it pervious to the Gentiles eye; the dead
arose, and appeared in Jerusalem to their friends, the Centurion and diverse of
the people smote their hearts, and were by these strange indications convinced
that he was the Son of God. His garments were parted, and lots cast upon his
inward coat, they gave him vinegar and gall to drink, they brake not a bone of
him, but they pierced his side with a spear, looking upon him whom they had
pierced; according to the Prophecies of him, which were so clear and descended
to minutes and circumstances of his passion, that there was nothing left by
which they could doubt whether this were he or no who was to come into the
world: But after all this, that all might be finally verified and no scruple
left, after three days burial, a great stone being rolled to the face of the
grave, and the stone sealed, and a guard of Soldiers placed about it, he arose
from the grave, and for forty days together conversed with his followers and
Disciples, and beyond all suspicion was seen of 500. Brethren at once, which is
a number too great to give their consent and testimony to a lie, and it being
so publicly and confidently affirmed at the very time it was done, and for
ever after urged by all Christians, used as the most mighty demonstration,
proclaimed, preached, talked of, even upbraided to the gainsayers, affirmed by
eyewitnesses, persuaded to the kindred and friends and the relatives and
companions of all those 500. persons who were eyewitnesses, it is infinitely
removed from a reasonable suspicion; and at the end of those days was taken up
into heaven in the sight of many of them, as Elias was in the presence of
Elisha.

Now he of whom all these things are true, 17.
must needs be more then a mere man, and that they were true was affirmed by
very many eyewitnesses, men who were innocent, plain men, men that had no bad
ends to serve, men that looked for no preferment by the thing in this life; men
to whom their Master told they were to expect not Crowns and Scepters, not
praise of men or wealthy possessions, not power and ease, but a voluntary
casting away care and attendance upon secular affairs that they might attend
their Ministry; poverty and prisons, trouble and vexation persecution and
labor, whippings and banishment, bonds and death, and for a reward they must
stay till a good day came, but that was not to be at all in this world; and
when the day of restitution and recompense should come, they should never know
till it came, but upon the hope of this and the faith of Jesus, and the word of
God so taught, so consigned, they must rely wholly and for ever. Now let it be
considered. how could matters of fact be proved better? and how could this be
anything, but such as to rely upon matters of fact? what greater certainty can
we have of any thing that was ever done which we saw not, or heard not, but by
the report of wise and honest persons? especially since they were such whose
life and breeding was so far from ambition and pompousness that as they could
not naturally and reasonably hope for any great number of Proselytes, so the
same that could be hoped for amongst them, as it must be a matter of their own
procuring, and consequently uncertain, so it must needs be very inconsiderable,
not fit to outweigh the danger and the loss, nor yet at all valuable by them
whose education and pretenses were against it? These we have plentifully. But
if these men are numerous and united, it is more. Then we have more; For so
many did affirm these things which they saw and heard, that thousands of people
were convinced of the truth of them: But then if these men offer their oath, it
is yet more, but yet not so much as we have, for they sealed those things with
their blood; they gave their life for a testimony; and what reward can any man
expect, if he gives his life for a lie? who shall make him recompense, or what
can tempt him to do it knowingly? but after all, it is to be remembered, that
as God hates lying, so he hates incredulity; as we must not believe a lie, so
neither stop up our eyes and ears against truth; and what we do every minute
of our lives in matters of little and of great concernment, if we refuse to do
in our Religion which yet is to be conducted as other humane affairs are, by
humane instruments and arguments of persuasion proper to the nature of the
thing, it is an obstinacy that is as contrary to humane reason as it is to
Divine faith.

These things relate to the person of the holy Jesus, 18.
and prove sufficiently that it was extraordinary, that it was divine, that God
was with him, that his power wrought in him; and therefore that it was his will
which Jesus taught, and God signed. But then if nothing of all this had been,
yet even the doctrine it self proves it self Divine and to come from God.

For it is a Doctrine perfective of humane nature, 19.
that teaches us to love God and to love one another, to hurt no man, and to
do good to every man, it propines to us the noblest, the highest, and the
bravest pleasures of the world; the joys of charity, the rest of innocence, the
peace of quiet spirits, the wealth of beneficence, and forbids us only to be
beasts and to be Devils, it allows all that God and nature intended, and only
restrains the excrescencies of nature, and forbids us to take pleasure in that
which is the only entertainment of Devils, in murders and revenges, malice and
spiteful words and actions; it permits corporal pleasures where they can best
minister to health and societies, to conservation of families and honor of
Communities, it teaches men to keep their words that themselves may be secured
in all their just interests, and to do good to others that good may be done to
them; it forbids biting one another that we may not be devoured by one another;
and commands obedience to superiors, that we may not be ruined in confusions;
it combines Governments, and confirms all good Laws, and makes peace, and
opposes and prevents wars where they are not just, and where they are not
necessary. It is a Religion that is life and spirit, not consisting in
ceremonies and external amusements, but in the services of the heart, and the
real fruit of lips and hands, that is, of good words and good deeds, it bids us
to do that to God which is agreeable to his excellencies, that is, worship him
with the best thing we have, and make all things else minister to it; it bids
us do that to our neighbor, by which he may be better: it is the perfection
of the natural Law, and agreeable to our natural necessities, and promotes our
natural ends and designs: it does not destroy reason, but instructs it in very
many things, and complies with it in all, it has in it both heat and light,
and is not more effectual then it is beauteous; it promises every thing that we
can desire, and yet promises nothing but what it does effect; it proclaims
wary against all vices, and generally does command every virtue; it teaches us
with ease to mortify those affections which reason durst scarce reprove,
because she has not strength enough to conquer, and it does create in us those
virtues which reason of her self never knew, and after they are known, could
never approve sufficiently: it is a doctrine in which nothing is superfluous or
burdensome, nor yet is there any thing wanting which can procure happiness to
mankind, or by which God can be glorified: and if wisdom, and mercy, and
justice, and simplicity, and holiness, and purity, and meekness, and
contentedness, and charity, be images of God and rays of Divinity, then that
Doctrine in which all these shine so gloriously, and in which nothing else is
ingredient must needs be from God; and that all this is true in the Doctrine of
Jesus needs no other probation but the reading the words.

For that the words of Jesus are contained in the Gospels, 20.
that is, in the writings of them, who were eyewitnesses and ear-witnesses of
the actions and Sermons of Jesus, is not at all to be doubted; for in every
sect we believe their own records of Doctrine and institution; for it is
madness to suppose the Christians to pretend to be servants of the Laws of
Jesus, and yet to make a Law of their own which he made not: no man doubts but
that the Alcoran is the Law of Mahomet, that the old Testament contains the
Religion of the Jews; and the authority of these Books is proved by all the
arguments of the Religion, for all the arguments persuading to the Religion are
intended to prove no other then is contained in those Books; and these having
been for 1500. years and more, received absolutely by all Christian assemblies,
if any man shall offer to make a question of their authority, he must declare
his reasons, for the disciples of the Religion have sufficient presumption,
security and possession, till they can be reasonably disturbed; but that now
they can never be is infinitely certain, because we have a long, immemorial,
universal tradition that these Books were written in those times, by those men
whose Names they bear, they were accepted by all Churches at the very first
notice, except some few of the later, which were first received by some
Churches, and then consented to by all, they were acknowledged by the same, and
by the next age for genuine, their authority published, their words cited,
appeals made to them in all questions of Religion, because it was known and
confessed that they wrote nothing but that they knew, so that they were not
deceived; and to say they would lie must be made to appear by something
extrinsecal to this inquiry, and was never so much as plausibly pretended by
any Adversaries, and it being a matter of another man's will, must be declared
by actions, or not at all. But besides the men that wrote them were to be
believed because they did Miracles, they wrote Prophecies, which are verified
by the event, persons were cured at their Sepulchers, a thing so famous that it
was confessed even by the enemies of the Religion: and after all, that which
the world ought to rely upon, is the wisdom and the providence and the
goodness of God; all which it concerned to take care that the Religion, which
himself so adorned and proved by miracles and mighty signs, should not be lost,
nor any false writings be obtruded in stead of true, lest without our fault the
will of God become impossible to be obeyed. But to return to the thing: All
those excellent things which singly did make famous so many sects of
Philosophers, and remarked so many Princes of their sects, all them united, and
many more which their eyes (...) dark and dim could not see, are heaped
together in this systeme of wisdom and holiness. Here are plain precepts full
of deepest mystery; here are the measures of holiness and approaches to God
described; obedience and conformity, mortification of the body, and elevations
of the spirit, abstractions from earth, and Arts of society and union with
heaven, degrees of excellencies, and tendences to perfection, imitations of
God, and conversations with him; these are the heights and descents, upon the
plain grounds of natural reason, and natural religion, for there is nothing
commanded but what our reason by nature ought to choose, and yet nothing of
natural reason taught but what is heightened and made more perfect by the Spirit
of God; and when there is any thing in the Religion, that is against flesh and
blood, it is only when flesh and blood is against us, and against reason, when
flesh and blood either would hinder us from great felicity, or bring us into
great misery: To conclude, it is such a Law, that nothing can hinder men to
receive and entertain, but a pertinacious baseness and love to vice, and none
can receive it but those who resolve to be good and excellent; and if the holy
Jesus had come into the world with less splendour of power and mighty
demonstrations, yet even the excellency of what he taught, makes him alone fit
to be the Master of the world.

But then let us consider what this excellent person did effect, 21.
and with what instruments he brought so great things to pass. He was to put a
period to the Rites of Moses, and the Religion of the Temple; of which the Jews
were zealous even unto pertinacy; to reform the manner of all mankind, to
confound the wisdom of the Greeks, to break in pieces the power of the Devil,
to destroy the worship of all false Gods, to pull down their Oracles, and
change their Laws, and by principles wise and holy to reform the false
discourses of the world. But see what was to be taught, A Trinity in the Unity
of the Godhead, (...), that is the Christian Arithmetic, Three are one and one
are three, so Lucian in his Philopatris, or some other derides the Christian
Doctrine; See their Philosophy, Ex nihilo nihil fit. No: Ex nihilo omnia, all
things are made of nothing; and a Man-God and a God-Man, the same person finite
and infinite, born in time, and yet from all eternity the Son of God, but yet
born of a Woman, and she a Maid, but yet a Mother; resurrection of the dead,
reunion of soul and body; this was part of the Christian Physics or their
natural Philosophy. But then certainly their moral was easy and delicious. It
is so indeed, but not to flesh and blood, whose appetites it pretends to
regulate or to destroy, to restrain or else to mortify: fasting and penance,
and humility, loving our enemies, restitution of injuries, and self-denial, and
taking up the Cross, and losing all our goods, and giving our life for Jesus:
As the other was hard to believe, so this is as hard to do. But for whom and
under whose conduct was all this to be believed, and all this to be done, and
all this to be suffered? surely for some glorious and mighty Prince, whose
splendour as far outshines the Roman Empire as the jewels of Cleopatra
outshined the swaddling clothes of the Babe at Bethlehem. No it was not so
neither. For all this was for Jesus whom his followers preached; a poor Babe
born in a stable, the son of a Carpenter, cradled in a cratch, swadled in poor
clouts; it was for him whom they indeed called a God, but yet whom all the
world knew, and they themselves said, was whipped at a post, nailed to a Cross;
he fell under the malice of the Jews his Countrymen, and the power of his
Roman Lords, a cheap and a pitiful sacrifice without beauty and without
splendour. The design is great, but does not yet seem possible; But therefore
let us see what instruments the Holy Jesus chose to effect these so mighty
changes, to persuade so many propositions, to endear so great sufferings, to
overcome so great enemies, to master so many impossibilities which this
Doctrine and this Law from this Master were sure to meet withal.

Here, 22.
here it is that the Divinity of the power is proclaimed. When a man goes to
war he raises as great an Army as he can to out-number his Enemy, but when
God fights, three hundred men that lap like a dog are sufficient; nay one
word can dissolve the greatest army. He that means to effect any thing must
have means of his own proportionable, and if they be not, he must fail, or
derive them from the mighty. See then with what instruments the holy Jesus sets
upon this great reformation of the world. Twelve men of obscure and poor birth,
of contemptible Trades and quality, without learning, without breeding; these
men were sent into the midst of a knowing and wise world to dispute with the
most famous Philosophers of Greece, to out-wit all the learning of Athens, to
out-preach all the Roman Orators; to introduce into a newly settled Empire,
which would be impatient of novelties and change, such a change as must destroy
all their Temples, or remove thence all their gods: against which change all
the zeal of the world, and all the passions, and all the seeming pretenses
which they could make, must needs be violently opposed a change that introduced
new Laws, and caused them to reverse the old, to change that Religion under
which their Fathers long did prosper, and under which the Roman Empire
obtained so great a grandeur, for a Religion which in appearance was silly and
humble, meek and peaceable, not apt indeed to do harm, but exposing men to all
the harm in the world, abating their courage, bl^nting their swords, teaching
peace and unactiveness, and making the Soldiers arms in a manner useless, and
untying their military girdle; a Religion which contradicted their reasons of
State, and erected new Judicatories, and made the Roman Courts to be silent
and without causes; a Religion that gave countenance to the poor and pitiful
(but in a time when riches were adored, and ambition esteemed the greatest
nobleness, and pleasure thought to be the chiefest good) it brought no peculiar
blessing to the rich or mighty, unless they would become poor and humble in
some real sense or other; a Religion that would change the face of things, and
would also pierce into the secrets of the soul, and unravel all the intrigues
of hearts, and reform all evil manners, and break vile habits into gentleness
and counsel: that such a Religion in such a time, preached by such mean
persons, should triumph over the Philosophy of the world, and the arguments of
the subtle, and the Sermons of the eloquent, and the power of Princes, and the
interest of States, and the inclinations of nature, and the blindness of zeal,
and the force of custom, and the pleasures of sin, and the busy Arts of the
Devil, that is, against wit, and power, and money, and Religion, and
wilfulness, and fame, and Empire, which are all the things in the world that
can make a thing impossible; this I say could not be by the proper force of
such instruments; for no man can (...) palm, nor govern wise Empires with
Diagrams. It were impudence to send a footman to command Caesar to lay down his
arms, to d^sband h^s legions and throw himself into Tyber, or keep a Tavern
nex^ to Pompeys Theater; but if a sober man shall stand alone unarmed,
undefended, or unprovided, and shall tell that he will make the Sun stand
still, or remove a mountain, or reduce Xerxes his Army to the scantling of a
single Troop, he that believes he will and can do this, must believe he does
it by a higher power thee he can yet perceive, and so it was in the present
transaction. For that the holy Jesus made invisible powers to do him visible
honors, that his Apostles hunted the Demons from their Tripods, their Navels,
their Dens, their hollow Pipes, their Temples, and their Altars, that he made
the Oracles silent, as Lucian, Porphyrie, Celsus, and other Heathens confess;
that against the order of new things, which let them be never so profitable or
good do yet suffer reproach and cannot prevail unless they commence in a time
of advantage and favor, yet that this should flourish like the Palm by
pressure, grow glorious by opposition, thrive by persecution, and was
demonstrated by objections, argues a higher cause then the immediate
instrument; now how this higher cause did intervene is visible and notorious:
The Apostles were not learned, but the holy Jesus promised that he would send
down wisdom from above, from the Father of spirits; they had no power, but
they should be invested with power from on high they were ignorant and
timorous, but he would make them learned and confident, and so he did: he
promised that in a few days he would send the holy Ghost upon them, and he did
so, after ten days they felt and saw glorious immission from heaven, lights of
movable fire sitting upon their heads, and that light did illuminate their
hearts, and the mighty rushing wind inspired them with a power of speaking
diverse languages, and brought to their remembrances all that Jesus did and
taught, and made them wise to conduct souls, and bold to venture, and prudent
to advise, and powerful to do miracles, and w^^y to convince gainsayers, and
hugely instructed in the Scriptures, and gave them the spirit of Government,
and the spirit of Prophecy. This thing was so public that at the first notice
of it three thousand souls were converted on that very day, at the very time
when it was done; for it was certainly a visible demonstration of an invisible
power, that ignorant persons who were never taught, should in an instant speak
all the Languages of the Roman Empire; and indeed this thing was so necessary
to be so, and so certain that it was so, so public and so evident, and so
reasonable, and so useful, that it is not easy to say whether it was the
indication of a greater power, or a greater wisdom; and now the means was
proportionable enough to the biggest end; without learning they could not
confute the learned world; but therefore God became their Teacher: without
power they could not break the Devils violence, but therefore God gave them
power; without courage they could not contest against all the violence of the
Jews and Gentiles; but therefore God was their strength and gave them
fortitude; without great caution and providence they could not avoid the traps
of crafty Persecutors, but therefore God gave them caution, and made them
provident, and as Besaleel and Aholiab received the spirit of God, the spirit
of understanding to enable them to work excellently in the Tabernacle, so had
the Apostles to make them wise for the work of God and the Ministeries of this
Diviner Tabernacle, which God pitched, not man. Immediately upon this, the
Apostles to make a fullness of demonstration and an undeniable conviction gave
the spirit to others also, to Jews and Gentiles and to the men of Samaria, and
they spoke with Tongues and prophesied, then they preached to all Nations, and
endured all persecutions, and cured all diseases, and raised the dead to life,
and were brought before Tribunals, and confessed the Name of Jesus, and
convinced the blasphemous Jews out of their own Prophets, and not only
prevailed upon women and weak men, but even upon the bravest and wisest. All
the disciples of John the Baptist, the Nazarens and Ebionites, Nicodemus and
Joseph of Arimathea, Sergius the President, Dionysius an Athenian Judge, and
Polycarpus, Justinus and Irenaus, Athenagoras and Origin, Tertullian and
Clemens of Alexandria, who could not be such fools as upon a matter not
certainly true but probably false, to unravel their former principles, and to
change their liberty for a Prison, wealth for poverty, honor for
disreputation, life for death, if by such exchange they had not been secured of
truth and holiness and the will of God.

But above all these was Saul, 23.
a bold and a witty, a zealous and learned young man, who going with Letters to
persecute the Christians of Damascus, was by a light from heaven called from
his furious march, reproved by Gods Angel for persecuting the cause of Jesus,
was sent to the City, baptized by a Christian Minister, instructed and sent
abroad, and he became the prodigy of the world for learning and zeal, for
preaching and writing, for labor and sufference, for government and wisdom;
he was admitted to see the holy Jesus after the Lord was taken into heaven, he
was taken up into Paradise, he conversed with Angels, he saw unspeakable rays
of glory, and besides that himself said it, who had no reason to lie, who would
get nothing by it here but a conjugation of troubles, and who should get
nothing by it hereafter if it were false; besides this I say, that he did all
those acts of zeal and obedience for the promotion of the Religion does
demonstrate he had reason extraordinary for so sudden a change, so strange a
labor, so frequent and incomparable sufferings: and therefore as he did and
suffered so much upon such glorious motives, so he spared not to publish it to
all the world, he spoke it to Kings and Princes, he told it to the envious
Jews; he had partners of his journey who were witnesses of the miraculous
accident, and in his publication he urged the notoriousness of the fact, as a
thing not feigned, not private, but done at noon day under the Test of
competent persons, and it was a thing that proved it self, for it was effective
of a present, a great, and a permanent change.

But now it is no new wonder but a pursuance of the same conjugation of great
and Divine things, 24.
that the Fame and Religion of Jesus was with so incredible a swiftness
scattered over the face of the habitable world, from one end of the earth unto
the other; it filled all Asia immediately, it passed presently to Europe, and
to the furthest Africans, and all the way it went it told nothing but an holy
and an humble story, that he who came to bring it into the world, died an
ignominious death, and yet this death did not take away their courage, but
added much: for they could not fear death for that Master, whom they knew to
have for their sakes suffered death, and came to life again. But now infinite
numbers of persons of all sexes, and all ages, and all Countries came in to the
Holy Crucifix, and he that was crucified in the reign of Tiberius, was in the
time of Nero, even in Rome it self, and in Nero's family by many persons
esteemed for a God; and it was upon public record that he was so acknowledged;
and this was by a Christian, Justin Martyr, urged to the Senate, and to the
Emperors themselves, who if it had been otherwise could easily have confuted
the bold allegation of the Christian, who yet did die for that Jesus who was so
speedily reputed for a God; the Cross was worn upon breasts, printed in the air,
drawn upon foreheads, carried on banners, put upon crowns Imperial; and yet
the Christians were sought for to punishments, and exquisite punishments sought
forth for them; their goods were confiscate, their names o^ious, prisons were
their houses, and so many kinds of tortures invented for them that Domitius
Ulpianus has spent seven Books in describing the variety of tortures the poor
Christian was put to at his first appearing* and yet in despite of all this,
and ten thousand other objections and impossibilities, whatsoever was for them
made the Religion grow, and whatsoever was against them made it grow; if they
had peace, the Religion was prosperous, if they had persecution, it was still
prosperous: if Princes favored them the world came in because the Christians
lived holily; if Princes were incensed, the world came in because the
Christians died bravely. They sought for death with greediness, they desired to
be grinded in the teeth of Lions, and with joy they beheld the wheels and the
bended trees, the racks and the gibbets, the fires and the burning irons, which
were like the chair of Elias to them, instruments to carry them to heaven, into
the bosom of their beloved Jesus.

Who would not acknowledge the Divinity of this person, 25.
and the excellency of this institution, that should see infants to weary the
hands of Hangmen for the testimony of Jesus? and wise men preach this doctrine
for no other visible reward, but shame and death, poverty and banishment? and
Hangmen converted by the blood of Martyrs springing upon their faces which
their impious hands and cords have strained through their flesh? who would not
have confessed the honor of Jesus, when he should see miracles done at the
Tombs of Martyrs, and Devils tremble at the mention of the name of Jesus, and
the world running to the honor of the poor Nazaren, and Kings and Queens
kissing the feet of the poor servants of Jesus? Could a Jew Fisherman and a
Publican effect all this for the son of a poor Maiden of Judaea? can we suppose
all the world, or so great a part of mankind can consent by chance, or suffer
such changes for nothing? or for any thing less then this? The son of the poor
Maiden was the son of God, and the Fishermen spoke by a Divine spirit, and they
catched the world with holiness and miracles, with wisdom and power bigger
then the strength of all the Roman Legions. And what can be added to all this,
but this thing alone to prove the Divinity of Jesus? He is a God, or at least
is taught by God who can foretell future contingencies; and so did the holy
Jesus, and so did his Disciples.

Our blessed Lord while he was alive foretold that after his death his Religion
should flourish more then when he was alive: 26.
He foretold Persecutions to his Disciples; he foretold the mission of the holy
Ghost to be in a very few days after his Ascension, which within ten days came
to pass; he prophesied that the fact of Mary Magdalen in anointing the head and
feet of her Lord, should be public and known as the Gospel it self, and spoken
of in the same place; he foretold the destruction of Jerusalem and the signs of
its approach, and that it should be by War, and particularly after the manner
of Prophets symbolically, named the Nation should do it; pointing out the
Roman Eagles, he foretold his death, and the manner of it, and plainly
beforehand published his Resurrection, and told them it should be the sign to
that generation, viz. the great argument to prove him to be the Christ, he
prophesied that there should arise false Christ's after him, and it came to pass
to the extreme great calamity of the Nation; and lastly, he foretold that his
beloved Disciple S. John should tarry upon the earth till his coming again,
that is, to his coming to Judgment upon Jerusalem; and that his Religion
should be preached to the Gentiles, that it should be scattered over all the
world, and be received by all Nations, that it should stay upon the face of the
earth till his last coming to judge all the world, and that the gates of hell
should not be able to prevail against his Church; which Prophecy is made good
thus long, till this day, and is as a continual argument to justify the
Divinity of the Author: The continuance of the Religion helps to continue it,
for it proves that it came from God, who fore old that it should continue; and
therefore it must continue because it came from God, and therefore it came from
God because it does and shall for ever continue according to the word of the
holy Jesus.

But after our blessed Lord was entered into glory, 27.
the disciples also were Prophets; Agabus foretold the dearth that was to be in
the Roman Empire in the days of Claudius Caesar, and that S. Paul should be
bound at Jerusalem; S. Paul foretold the entering in of Heretics into Asia
after his departure; and he and S. Peter and S. Jude and generally the rest of
the Apostles had two great predictions, which they used not only as a
verification of the doctrine of Jesus, but as a means to strengthen the hearts
of the Disciples who were so broken with persecution: The one was, that there
should arise a Sect of vile men who should be enemies to Religion and
Government, and cause a great Apostasy, which happened notoriously in the Sect
of the Gnostics, which those three Apostles and S. John notoriously and
plainly do describe: And the other was, that although the Jewish Nation did
m^ghtily oppose the Religion, it should be but for a while, for they should be
destroyed in a short time, and their Nation made extremely miserable; but for
the Christians, if they would fly from Jerusalem and go to Pella, there should
not a hair of their head perish: the verification of this Prophecy the
Christians extremely longed for and wondered it staid so long, and began to be
troubled at the delay, and suspected all was not well, when the great proof of
their Religion was not verified; and while they were in thoughts of heart
concerning it, the sad Catalysis did come, and swept away 1100000. of the
Nation and from that day forward the Nation was broken in pieces with
intolerable calamities, they are scattered over the face of the earth, and are
a vagabond Nation, but yet like oil in a vessel of wine, broken into bubbles
but kept in their own circles, and they shall never be an united people till
they are servants of the holy Jesus; but shall remain without Priest or Temple,
without Altar or Sacrifice, without City or Country, without the land of
Promise, or the promise of a blessing, till our Jesus is their high Priest and
the Shepherd to gather them into his fold: And this very thing is a mighty
demonstration against the Jews by their own Prophets, for when Isaiah and
Jeremiah, and Malachi had Prophesied the rejection of the Jews and the calling
of the Gentiles, and the change of the old Law, and the introduction of a new
by the Messiah, that this was he, was therefore certain, because he taught the
world a new Law and presently after the publication of this, the old was
abrogate, and not only went into desuetude, but into a total abolition among
all the world; and for those of the remnant of the scattered Jews who
obstinately blaspheme, the Law is become impossible to them, and they placed in
such circumstances that they need not dispute concerning its obligation; for it
being external and corporal, ritual and at last made also local, when the
circumstances are impossible, the Law that was wholly ceremonial and
circumstantial must needs pass away, and when they have lost their Priesthood,
they cannot retain the Law, as no man takes care to have his beard shaved when
his head is off.

And it is a wonder to consider how the anger of God is gone out upon that
miserable people, 28.
and that so great a blindness is fallen upon them, it being evident and
notorious, that the old Testament was nothing but a shadow and umbrage of the
new, that the Prophecies of that are plainly ver^fied in this; that all the
predictions of the Messiah are most undeniably accomplished in the person of
Jesus Christ, so that they cannot with any plausibleness or color be turned
any other way, and be applied to any other person, although the Jews make
illiterate allegations, and prodigious dreams, by which they have fooled
themselves for 1600. years together, and still hope without reason, and are
confident without revelation, and pursue a shadow while they quit the glorious
^ody; while in the mean time the Christian prays for his conversion, and is at
rest in the truth of Jesus, and has certain unexpressible confidencies and
internal lights, clarities of the holy Spirit of God, and loves to the holy
Jesus produced in his soul, that he will die when he cannot dispute, and is
satisfied and he knows not how, and is sure by comforts, and comforted by the
excellency of his belief, which speaks nothing but holiness, and light and
reason, and peace and satisfactions infinite, because he is sure that all the
world can be happy if they would live by the Religion of Jesus, and that
neither societies of men nor single persons can have felicity but by this, and
that therefore God who so decrees to make men happy, has also decreed that it
shall for ever be upon the face of the earth, till the earth it self shall be
no more. Amen.

Now if against this vast heap of things any man shall but confront the
pretenses of any other Religion, 29.
and see how they fail both of reason and holiness, of wonder and Divinity, how
they enter by force, and are kept up by humane interests, how ignorant and
unholy, how unlearned and pitiful are their pretenses, the darknesses of these
must add great eminency to the brightness of that. For the Jews Religion which
came from heaven is therefore not now to be practiced, because it did come from
heaven, and was to expire into the Christian, it being nothing but the image of
this perfection; and the Jews needed no other argument but this, that God has
made theirs impossible now to be done, for he that ties to Ceremonies and
outward usages, Temples and Altars, Sacrifices and Priests, troublesome and
expensive rites and figures of future signification, means that there should be
an abode and fixed dwelling, for these are not to be done by an ambulatory
people; and therefore since God has scattered the people into atoms and
crumbs of society, without Temple or Priest, without Sacrifice or Altar,
without Urim or Thummim, without Prophet or Vision, even communicating with
them no way but by ordinary providence, it is but too evident, that God has
nothing to do with them in the matter of that Religion, but that it is
expired, and no way obligatory to them or pleasing to him which is become
impossible to be acted; whereas the Christian Religion is as eternal as the
soul of a man, and can no more cease then our spirits can die, and can worship
upon mountains and caves, in fields and Churches, in peace and war, in
solitude and society, in persecution and in Sunshine, by night and by day, and
be solemnized by Clergy and Laity in the essential parts of it, and is the
perfection of the soul, and the highest reason of man, and the glorification of
God.

But for the Heathen religions it is evidently to be seen, 30.
that they are nothing but an abuse of the natural inclination which all men
have to worship a God, whom because they know not, they guess at in the dark;
for that they know there is and ought to be something that has the care and
providence of their affairs. But the body of their Religion is nothing but
little arts of Governments, and stratagems of Princes and devices to secure the
Government of new Usurpers, or to make obedience to the Laws sure, by being
sacred, and to make the yoke that was not natural, pleasant by something that
is. But yet for the whole body of it who sees not that their worshippings could
not be sacred, because they were done by something that is impure, they
appeased their gods with adul^eries and impure mixtures, by such things which
Cato was ashamed to see, by gluttonous eatings of flesh, and impious drinkings,
and they did litare in humano sanguine, they sacrificed men and women and
children to their D^mons, as is notorious in the rites of Bacchus Omesta
amongst the Greeks, and of Jupiter, to whom a Greek and a Greekess, a Galatian
and a Galatess were yearly offered; in the answers of the Oracles to Calchas as
appears in Homer and Virgil; who sees not that crimes were warranted by the
example of their immortal gods, and that what did dishonor themselves, they
sang to the honor of their gods, whom they affirmed to be passionate and
proud, jealous and revengefull, amorous and lustful, fearful and impatient,
drunken and sleepy, weary and wounded, that the Religions were made lasting by
policy and force, by ignorance, and the force of custom, by the preferring an
inveterate error, and loving of a quiet and prosperous evil, by the arguments
of pleasure, and the correspondencies of sensuality, by the fraud of Oracles,
and the patronage of vices, and because they feared every change as an
Earthquake, as supposing overturnings of their old error to be the eversion of
their well established Governments: and it had been ordinarily impossible that
ever Christianity should have entered, if the nature and excellency of it had
not been such as to enter like rain into a fleece of wool, or the Sun into a
window without noise or violence, without emotion and disordering the political
constitution, without causing trouble to any man but what his own ignorance or
peevishness was pleased to spin out of his own bowels, but did establish
Governments, secure obedience, made the Laws firm, and the persons of Princes
to be sacred; it did not oppose force by force, nor strike Princes for Justice;
it defended it self against enemies by patience, and overcame them by kindness,
it was the great instrument of God to demonstrate his power in our weaknesses,
and to do good to Mankind by the imitation of his excellent goodness.

Lastly, 31.
he that considers concerning the Religion and person of Mahomet, that he was a
vicious person, lustful and tyrannical, that he propounded incredible and
ridiculous propositions to his Disciples, that it entered by the sword, by blood
and violence, by murder and robbery, that it propounds sensual rewards and
allures to compliance by bribing our basest lusts, that it conserves it self by
the same means it entered; that it is unlearned and foolish, against reason, and
the discourses of all wise men, that it did no miracles and made false
Prophecies: in short, that in the person that founded it, in the article it
persuades in the manner of prevailing, in the reward it offers it is unholy and
foolish and rude; it must needs appear to be void of all pretense, and that no
man of reason can ever be fairly persuaded by arguments, that it is the
daughter of God and came down from heaven. Since therefore there is so nothing
to be said for any other Religion, and so very much for Christianity, every one
of whose pretenses can be proved as well as the things themselves do require,
and as all the world expects such things should be proved; it follows that the
holy Jesus is the Son of God, that his Religion is commanded by God, and is
that way by which he will be worshipped and honored, and that there is no
other name under heaven by which we can be saved, but only by the name of the
Lord Jesus. He that puts his soul upon this cannot perish neither can he be
reproved who has so much reason and argument (...) his Religion. Sit anima mea
cum Christianis; I pray God my soul may be n^^bred amongst the Christians.

THIS (...) I have here brought as an instance of moral demonstration, not
only to do honor to my dearest Lord, by speaking true and great things of
his Name, and indevouring to advance and esta^^lish his Kingdom^, but to
represent in order to the first in^ention, that a heap of probabilities may in
some cases make a sure Conscience; for as Ciecro says, Probable id est, (...)
habet in se quandam similitudinem, sive id falsum est, sive verum. For (...) is
not in the thing properly, for every thing is true or false in it self, and
even false things may have the face and the likeness of truth, and cozen even
w^se persons. It was said of Bias in Diogenes Laertius, Orator summus and
(...), sed in bonam causam dicendi vim omnem exercuit, he could speak
excell^ntly, but then he spoke best when he had an ill cause. This Lactantius
(...) malitiam, a cunning and an eloquent malice. But then as falsehood many put
on the face of truth, so may truth also look like it self; and indeed every
truth that men preach in Religions is at least probable, that is, there is so
much to be said for it, that wise and good men may be persuaded into every
truth; an^ the cause that it is only probable is by reason of our want of
knowledge of things; but if it so happen that there is much to be said for the
truth, and little or nothing against it, then it is a moral demonstration, that
is, it ought to persuade firmly, and upon it we may rest confidently.

This only I am to admonish, that our assent in these cases is not to be
greater then the force of the premises, 33.
and therefore the Church of Rome offering to prove all her Religion as it
distinguishes from the other divisions of Christians, only by some prudential
motives, or probable inducements, and yet requiring that all her disciples
should believe it with Divine and infallible faith, as certainly as we believe
a Mathematical demonstration, does unjustly require brick where she gives no
straw, and builds a tower upon a bu^rush, and confesses that her interest is
stronger then her argument, and that where by direct proof she cannot prevail,
she by little arts would affright the understanding. For to give a perfect
assent to probable inducements can neither be reasonable nor possible for
considering persons, unless these conditions be in it.

The Requisites or Conditions of a Moral demonstration for the assuring our
Conscience.

1. 34.
That the thing be the most probable to us in our present condition: For there
are summities and principalities of probation proportionable to the ages and
capacities of men and women. A little thing determines a weak person; and
children believe infinitely whatsoever is told to them by their Parents or
Tutors, because they have nothing to contest against it. For in all probable
discourses, there is an allay and abatement of persuasion by the opposition of
argument to argument, but they who have nothing to oppose, and have no reason
to suspect, must give themselves up wholly to it; and then every thing that
comes is equally the highest, because it fully and finally must prevail. But
then that which prevails in infancy seems childish and ridiculous in our youth
and then we are concluded by some pretenses and pretty ^span, ^which for want
of experience we think very well of; and we can then do no more; that is a
demonstration to us, which must determine us, and these little things must then
do it, because something must be done, and we must do it as wisely as we may,
but no man is bound to be wiser then he can. As the thing seems, either in its
ownlight or in our position, so we are to g^ve our assent unto it.

2. 35.
A heap of probable in lucements ought to prevail, as being then a moral
demonstration when the thing is not capable of a natural; for then
probabilities ought to prevail, when they are the best argument we have. For if
any man shall argue thus; It is not probable that God would leave his Church
without sufficient means to end controversies, and since a living in^^llible
Judge is the most effective to this purpose, it is therefore to be presumed and
relied upon that God has done so. This argument ought not to prevail as a
moral demonstration; for though there are some semblances and appearances of
reason in it, Nihil enim est tam incredibile quod non dicendo fiat probabile,
said Cicero in his Paradoxes, there is nothing so incredible, but something may
be said for it, and a witty man may make it plausible, yet there are
certainties against it. For God has said expressly, that every man is a liar,
and therefore we are commanded to call no man Master upon earth, and the nature
of (...) is weak, and his understanding trifling, and every thing abuses him,
and every man that is wise sees his own ignorance, and he that is not wise is
easily deceived, and they who have pretended to be infallible have spoken
pi^iful things, and fallen into strange errors, and cannot be guarded from
shame without a whole legion of artifices and distinctions, and therefore it is
certain that no man is infallible; and where the contrary is certain, the
probable pretense is but a fallacy and an art of illusion.

3. 36.
There can be no moral demonstration against the word of God, or divi^e
revelation. He that should flatter himself with thinking the pains of hell
sh^l^not be eternal, because it is not agreeable to the goodness of God to
inflict a never ceasing pain for a sudden and transient pleasure, and that
there can be no proportion between finite and infinite, and yet God who is the
foun^^n of justice will observe proportions; (or if there could be ten thousand
more little things said to persuade a sinning man into confidences of an end of
torment) ye^ he would find himself dece^ved, for all would be light when put
into the balance against these words of our blessed Savior [ Where the worm
never dies, and the fire never goes out.]

4. 37.
Where there is great probability on both sides, there neither of them can
pretend to be a moral demonstration, or directly to secure the conscience: For
contradictions can never be demonstrated; and if one says true, the other is a
fair pretender, but a foul deceiver; and therefore in this case the conscience
is to be secured indirectly and collaterally by the diligence of search, the
honesty of its intention, the heartiness of its assent, the infirmity of the
searcher, and the unavoidableness of his mistake.

5. 38.
The certainty of a moral demonstration must rely upon some certain rule, to
which as to a center, all the little and great probabilities like the lines of
a circumference must turn; and when there is nothing in the matter of the
question, then the conscience has (...) one great axiom to rely upon, and that
is, that God is just, and God is good, and requires no greater probation then
he has en^bled us to find.

6. 39.
In probable inducements, God requires only such an assent as can be effective
of our duty and obedience, such a one as we will rely upon to real events, such
as Merchants have when they venture their goods to Sea upon reasonable hopes of
becoming rich, or Armies fight battles in hope of victory, relying upon the
strength they have as probable to prevail; and if any article of our Religion
be so proved to us as that we will reduce it to practice, own all its
consequences, live according to it, and in the pursuance of it hope for Gods
mercy and acceptance, it is an assent as great as the thing will bear, and yet
as much as our duty will require; for in these cases no man is wise but he
whose ears and heart is open to hear the instructions of any man who is wiser
and better then himself.

7. 40.
Rules of prudence are never to be accepted against a rule of Logic, or
Reason, and strict discourses. I remember that Bellarmine going to prove
Purgatory from the words of our blessed Savior, It shall not be forgiven him
in this world, nor in the world to come; argues thus, If this shall not be
forgiven in the world to come, then it implies that some sins are there
forgiven, and therefore there is a Purgatory; because in heaven there are no
sins, and in hell there are none forgiven. This (says he) concludes not by the
rule of Logicians, but it does by the rule of prudence. Now this to all wise
men must needs appear to be an egregious prevarication even of common sense;
for if the rules of Logic be true, then it is not prudence, but imprudence
that contradicts them, unless it be prudence to tell or to believe a lie. For
the use of prudence is to draw from conjectures a safe and a wise conclusion
when there are no certain rules to guide us. But against the certain rule it is
folly that declares, not prudence; and besides that this conjecture of
Bellarmine is wholly against the design of Christ, who intended there only to
say, that the sin against the holy Ghost should never be pardoned; it fails
also in the main inquiry, for although there are no sins in heaven, and in hell
none are forgiven, yet at the day of Judgment all the sins of the penitent
shall be forgiven and acquitted with a blessed sentence: but besides this, the
manner of expression is such as may with prudence be expounded, and yet to no
such purpose as he dreams. For if I should say, Aristobulus was taken away,
that neither in this life, nor after his death, his eyes might see the
destruction of the Temple, does it follow by the rule of prudence, therefore
some people can see in their grave, or in the state of separation with their
bodily eyes? But as to the main inquiry, what is to be the measure of prudence?
For some confident people think themselves very prudent, and that they say well
and wisely, when others wiser then they know they talk like fools, and because
no established reason can be contradicted by a prudent conjecture, it is
certain that this prudence of Bellarmine was a hard shift to get an argument
for nothing, and that no prudential motives are to be valued because any man
calls them so, but because they do rely upon some sure foundation, and draw
obscure lines from a resolved truth. For it is not a prudential motive, unless
it can finally rest upon reason, or revelation, or experience, or something
that is not contradicted by any thing surer then it self.

RULE 3. Of two opinions equally probable, upon the account of their proper
reasons, one may be safer then another.
THat is more probable which has fairer reasons, 1.
that is more safe that is furthest distant from a sin: and although this be
always considerable in the matter of prudence, and in the whole conjunction of
affairs, yet it is not always a proper ingredient in the question. The Abbat of
Lerins has the Patronage of some Ecclesiastical preferments in the
neighborhood; He for affection preferres to one of them an ignorant and a
vicious Clerk. But afterward being troubled in conscience inquires if he be
not bound to restitution. He is answered, No; because it is in the matter of
distributive justice, which binds not to repair that which is past, any other
ways but by repentance to God and provisions for the future: yet he being
perplexed, and unsatisfied, does restore so much fruits to the next worthy
Incumbent, as the former unworthy Clerk did eat. This was the surer course, and
it procured peace to him; but the contrary was the more probable answer. It is
safer to restore all gains of Usury; but it is more probable that a man is not
obliged to it. In which cases the advantage lies not on that side that is more
probable, but on that which is more safe, as in these sentences that oblige to
restitution. For although either part avoids a formal sin, yet the safer side
also persuades to an action that is materially good, such as restitution is;
but not to restore, although in these cases it may be innocent, yet in no sense
can it of it self be laudable.

To which also in these cases it may be added, 2.
that on the safer side there is a physical, or natural and proper certainty
that we sin not: on the other, though there is a greater probability that there
is no obligation, yet at most it can make but some degrees of moral certainty.
But how far this course is to be chosen and pursued, or how far the other
is to be preferred, will afterward be disputed.

RULE. 4. An opinion that is speculatively probable, is not always practically
the same.
IN a right and sure conscience the speculative and the practical judgment are
always united, Ch^. 2. Rule 2.
as I have before * explicated; 1.
but in opinions that are but probable the case is contrary. It is speculation
probable, that it is lawful to baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus; but yet
he that shall do this practically, does improbably and unreasonably. If the
opinion of the Primitive Christians had been probable that it is lawful to
communicate infants, yet it were at no hand fitting to be done in the present
constitution of affairs; and it were highly useful if men would consider this
effectually; and not from every tolerable opinion instantly run to an
unreasonable and intolerable practice.

For a ^peculation considers the nature of things abstractedly from
circumstances physically or me^aphysically, 2.
and yet when it comes to be reduced to practice, what in the head was innocent
will upon the hand become troublesome and criminal. If there were nothing in it
but the disorder of the novelty or the disturbance of men's minds in a matter
that is but probable, it were highly enough to reprove this folly. Every man's
imperfect discourse or half reasons are neither fit to govern the actions of
others or himself. * Suppose it probable (which the Greek Church believes) that
the Consecration of the blessed Eucharist is not made by the words of
institution, but by the prayers of the holy man that ministers, the Bishop or
the Priest; yet when this is reduced to practice, and that a man shall omit the
words of institution or consecration, his practice is more to be reproved then
his opinion could be possibly allowed. * Some think Churches not to be more
sacred then other places; what degree of probability soever this can have, yet
it is a huge degree of folly to act this opinion, and to choose a Barn to pray
in, when a Church may be had.

For there are in actions besides the proper ingredients of their intrinsecal
lawfulness or consonancy to reason, 3.
a great many outsides and adherencies that are considerable beyond the
speculation. The want of this consideration has done much evil in many ages;
and amongst us nothing has been more usual then to dispute concerning a rite
or Sacramental, or a constitution whether it be necessary, and whether the
contrary be not lawful; and if it be found probably so as the inquirers would
have it, immediately they reduced it to practice, and caused disorder and
scandal, schism and uncharitableness amongst men while they thought that
Christian liberty could not be preserved in the understanding, unless they
disorder all things by a practical conclusion. Videas quosdam quibus sua
libertas non videtur consistere, nisi per esum carnium die Ver^is in ejus
possessionem venerint; Lib. 3. c 9. instit.
Calvin complains with reason. It is a strange folly that men will not think
they have possession of Christian liberty, unless they break all Laws and all
customs, as if men could not prove things to be indifferent, and not
obligatory, unless they certainly omit them. Christian liberty consists in the
head, not in the hand; and when we know we are free from the bondage, we may
yet do the work; and when our gracious Lord has knocked our fetters off, we
may yet think it too fit to do what his Stewards command us in order to his
services. It is free to us to eat or to abstain, to contain or to marry; but he
that only marries because he would triumph and brag of his freedom, may get
an imperious Mistress instead o^ a gentle Master. By the Laws of Christian
liberty indifferent things are permitted to my choice, and I am not under their
power; but no Christian liberty says that I am free from the power of a man,
though I be from the power of the thing; and although in speculation, this last
was sufficient to be considered, yet when the opinion comes to be reduced to
practice, the other also ought to have been thought upon. And besides this, it
is a strange pertness and boldness of spirit, so to trust every fancy of my
own, as to put the greatest interest upon it; so to be in love with every
opinion, and trifling conceit, as to value it beyond the peace of the Church,
and the wiser Customs of the world, or the Laws and practices of a wise and
well instructed community of men. Nothing can make recompense for a certain
change but a certain truth, with apparent usefulness in order to charity,
piety, or institution.

These instances are in the matter of Religion; it may also happen thus (...)
the matter of justice. 4.
When Lamech perceived something stir in a bush it was very probable it was a
wild beast; but when he came to reduce his opinion to practice, he shot at it
and killed a man. And in the matter of justice there is a proper reason for
this rule: Because in matters of right or wrong, possession is not to be
altered without certainty, and therefore neither can I seize upon my goods in
another man's hand, unless I be sure they are mine, though I were not otherwise
restrained by humane Laws; neither may I expose any thing to danger, of which I
am not certainly Master.

This also is with great caution to be observed in the matter of chastity.
Although it may be true that in many cases such or such aspects or
approximations may be lawful; 5.
that is, those things so far as they are considered have no dissonancy from
reason: yet he that shall reduce this opinion to practice must also remember
that he is to deal with flesh and blood, which will take fire, not only from
permissions, but from prohibitions and restraints, and will pass instantly from
lawful to unlawful: and although this may not be a sin in consideration and
discourse but is to be acquitted by the sentence of the Schools and Pulpit, yet
when it comes to be viewed and laid before the judgment in the Court of
conscience, and as it was clothed with circumstances it will be found, that
when it came to be practiced, other parts or senses were employed which cannot
make such separations, but do something else.

But if it be asked, 6
To what purpose it can be that any man should inquire of the lawfulness of
such actions which whether they be lawful or unlawful, yet may not be done? I
answer, That the inquiry is necessary for the direct avoiding a sin in the
proper matter of the instance; For he that never inquires, sins for want of
inquiry, and despises his soul because he takes no care that it be rightly
informed; but if he inquires, and be answered that the opinion is false, or the
action criminal, he finds by the answer that it was worth his pains to ask,
because by it he is taught to avoid a sin: But then, besides the question of
lawful or unlawful, there are further inquiries to be made concerning fitting
and unfitting, offensive, or complying, safe or dangerous, abstractedly or in
relation; for many things which are lawful in themselves become very bad to him
that does them, and to him that suffers them.

RULE 5. The greater probability destroys the less.
THat is, 1
it is not lawful directly to choose an opinion that seems less probable,
before that which is more probable; I say, directly; for if the less probable
be more safe, it becomes accidentally more eligible; of which I have already
(...) 2 of this (...)
given account, and shall add something afterward (...) 5. Rule 4.
. But without this accident, the degrees of safety are left to follow the
degrees of probability. For when the safety does not depend upon the matter, it
must depend upon the reasons of the inducement; and because the safety must
increase consequently to the probability, it is against charity to omit that
which is safer, and to choose that which is less safe.

For it is not in moral things as it is in natural; 2.
where a less sweet is still sweet, though not so sweet as that which is more:
and the flowers of Trefoile are pleasant, though honey be far more pleasant;
and Phaedon may be wise, though he be not so wise as Plato: because there are
degrees of intension and remission in these qualities: and if we look upon two
probable propositions, and consider them naturally, they are both consonant to
reason in their apparencies, though in several degrees. So that if Sempronius
choose a less probable, before he has learned what is more probable, he has
done well and sefely. But when the two probables are compared, to reject that
which is more probable is to do 1. Unnaturally: 2. and Unreasonably: 3. and
Imprudently.

1. 3
Unnaturally.

In matters proposed to the will, the will may choose a less good, and reject
the greater; and though it is most commonly a great imperfection to do so, yet
it is many times innocent, because it is in the choice of the will to which it
is propounded, and no Commandment laid upon it. But in matters of opinion and
intellectual notices, where there is no liberty, there is a necessity of
following the natural proportions, that is, that the stronger efficient upon
the same suscipient should produce the more certain and regular effect. To
think or to opine is not free (said Aristotle) Lib. 2. de an^ma. text. 153.
and yet he that chooses the less probable, omitting that which is more, makes
the determination by his Will, not by his Understanding; and therefore it is
not an honest act or judgment of Conscience, but a production of the Will.

2. 4.
It is Unreasonable. Because in all those degrees of reasonableness in which
the less probable is excelled by that which is more probable, a man does wholly
proceed without and against that reason; and why does he choose the less
probable? I do not ask why he chooses the less probable opinion, that I mean
which is so in it self; for he may do that because it seems more reasonable,
or he knows nothing else: but I ask why he proceeds according to a less
probable conscience? that is, why does he choose that which he believes to be
less probable? for what reason does he choose that for which he has the least
reason? If there be no reason to choose that rather then the other, then it is
an unreasonable thing to do so. If there be a reason which is not in the
other, or which is not excelled or equalled by it, then the case is altered,
and this is not the less probable, but equally or more. But supposing it less
probable, it is a contradiction to say a man can reasonably choose it. For if
he could, there must be some greater reason in that which has less reason;
something there must be in it whereby it can be preferred, or be more eligible,
which is directly against the supposition and state of the question. The
unreasonableness of this we may also perceive by the necessities of mankind,
which are served by the more probable, and disserv'd by that which is less. For
thus Judges are bound for the interest of all parties, and the reasonableness
of the thing to judge on that side where the sentence is most probable: And the
Physician in prescribing medicines must not choose that which he least confides
in, and reject that which he rather trusts. And why do all the world in their
Assemblies take that sentence which is chosen by the greater part? but because
that is presumed more probable, and that which is so, ought to be followed; and
why it ought not to be so in matters of our soul is not easily to be told,
unless our conscience may be governed by will rather then by reason, or that
the interest of souls is wholly inconsiderable.

3. 5.
It is also imprudent: A man that believes a less probable, is light of heart,
he is incurious of his danger, and does not use those means in order to his
great end which himself judges the most reasonable, effective, and expedient.
He does as Rehoboam did, who rejected the wiser counsel of the Seniors, and
chose the less likely sentence of the young Gallants, and does against the
advice of all those rules which are prescribed us in prudent choice; and if no
man ever advised another to choose that which is less reasonable, he that does
so, does against the wisdom and the interest of all the wise men in the world.

4. 6.
After all this it is not honest to do it. For in two probables only one of
them is true, and which that is, he can only take the best way of the best
reason to find out; and it is impossible he should believe that which to him
seems less likely, to be the more likely; and therefore so far as is in him
he chooses that which is false, and voluntarily abuses his conscience, which,
besides the folly of it, is also criminal and malicious.

This doctrine thus delivered was the opinion of the ancient Casuists, 7.
Angelus, Sylvester, Cordubensis, Cajetan, and some others; but fiercely
opposed by the later, who are bold and confident to say that their opinion is
the common and more received, and it relies upon these reasons;

1. 8.
Because if it were unlawful to follow the less probable and to leave the
greater, it is because there is danger in so doing, and no man ought to expose
himself to a danger of sinning: but this pretense is nothing; for by the
consent of all sides it is lawful to follow the more probable though it be less
safe; and therefore all danger of sinning is not under pain of sin to be
avoided.

2. The people are not tied to greater severity in their practices, 9.
then the Doctors are in their Sermons and discourses, nor yet so much; because
in these an error is an evil principle, and apt to be of mischievous effect and
dissemination, whereas an error in practice, because it is singular and
circumstantiate, is also personal and limited. But the Doctors may lawfully
teach an opinion less probable if they be moved to it by the authority of some
more eminent person.

3. 10.
It is confessed to be lawful to follow the opinion that is more probable, but
that it is lawful to leave the more probable and to follow the less (say they)
is the more common and received opinion, and therefore also more probable; and
therefore this opinion may be chosen and pursued, and then because we may
follow that opinion which is more probable, we may follow that which is less,
because it is more probable that we may.

These Objections I answer:

1. 11.
That the danger of sinning is not the only reason why we may not follow the
less probable opinion; for it is not always unlawful to expose our selves to a
danger of sinning, for sometimes it is necessary that we endure a noble trial,
and resist openly, and oppose an enemy, which cannot be done without danger,
but is often without sin; but to leave the more probable for the less is not
only a danger of sinning, but a sin directly, and beyond a danger; and if it
were not more then a mere danger, it could not be a sin. For besides that this
has danger, it is a most unreasonable, and a most unnatural thing, against the
designs of God, and the proper effects of reason. But besides, this way of
arguing is neither good in Logic nor in Conscience. He that can answer one of
my arguments, does not presently overthrow my proposition, and it is not safe
to venture upon an action, because the contrary relies upon one weak leg. But
then as to the instance in this argument, I answer, He that follows the more
probable, though it be less safe, does not expose himself to any danger at all
of sinning, because though he does not follow his greatest fears, yet he
follows his greatest reason, and in that he is sometimes safest though he
perceives it not: However, there is in this case no danger that is imputable to
the man that follows the best reason he has. But this excuses not him who
follows that which seems to him to have in it less reason; for unless it be by
some other intervening accident which may alter the case (of which I shall
afterward give account) the less probable opinion has in it a direct danger,
and therefore to choose it, is ordinarily against charity, and in some degree
against conscience it self.

2. 12.
To the second I answer, That both Doctors and the People, though they may
safely follow the less probable opinion, yet they may never directly follow a
less probable Conscience: that is, though a probable opinion is a sufficient
guide of conscience, and it is sufficient both for publication and for practice
that it is so; and therefore that we are not strictly tied to make a curious
search into the two probables which excels others in the degrees of reason,
lest there should arise eternal scruples, perpetual restlesness and
dissatisfaction in the minds of men; yet when of two probables there is an
actual persuasion that this is more, and that is less, neither may the Doctors
teach, nor any man follow the less, because here it is not the better opinion,
but the better conscience that is despised. It may happen that what I believe
more probable, is indeed less; and therefore it must be admitted to be safe
(...) follow the less probable opinion, if it happen to stand on the fairest
side of conscience, that is, that it be better thought of then it deserves; but
for the same reason it is also certain that we must follow that which we think
the more probable opinion, whether it be so or no, because this is to be done,
not for the opinion, but for conscience sake. And whereas it is said in the
Objection, that a Doctor may lawfully teach an opinion less probable, if he be
moved to it by the authority of some more eminent person, that is as much as to
say, when the opinion which intrinsecally, or at least in his private judgment
seems less probable, becomes extrinsecally the more probable, he may follow
either, of which in this Chapter I am yet to give a more particular account;
but it no way rifles the present doctrine. Only this I add, If it were lawful
and safe to follow the less probable opinion, and reject the greater, then in
such questions which are only determined by authority, and sentences of wise
men, it were lawful to choose any thing that any one of them permits, and every
probable Doctor may rescind all the Laws in Christendom, and expound all the
precepts of the Gospel in easy senses, and change discipline into liberty, and
confound interests, and arm Rebels against their Princes, and flocks against
their Shepherds and Prelates, and set up Altar against Altar, and mingle all
things sacred and profane. Because if any one says it is lawful, all that have
a mind to do evil things may choose him for their guide, and his opinion for
their warranty.

3. 13.
To the third, I answer, that the opinion which is more common is not always
the more probable, for it may be false and heretical; and if at any times it
seems more probable, it is because men understand little or nothing of it. But
then if it were so, yet this opinion which is lately taught by the modern
Casuists, is not the more common, simply and absolutely; it was once the less
common, and whether it be so now or no, it is hard to tell; but admit it be so,
yet the community and popularity of opinion is but a degree of extrinsecal
probability, and is apt to persuade only in the destitution of other
arguments, which because they are not wanting in this question, the trick in
the objection appears trifling.

RULE 6. When two opinions seem equally probable, the last determination is to
be made by accidents, circumstances, and collateral inducements.
IN the matter of this Rule it is variously disputed; 1.
some affirming that the Understanding must for ever remain suspended, and the
action wholly omitted, as in the case of a doubting Conscience. * Others give
leave to choose either part, as a man please, making the Will to determine the
Understanding.

The first cannot be true, 2.
because while they both seem equally consonant to reason, it cannot be
dishonest to choose that which to me seems reasonable; and therefore the
understanding may choose practically. They are like two things equally good,
which alike move the Will, and the choosing of the one is not a refusing the
other, when they cannot be both enjoyed: but like the taking one piece of gold,
and letting the other that is as good alone: and the action is determined by
its own exercise, not by an antecedent reason.

* But neither can it be in all cases and question that the determination can
be totally omitted; as if the question be whether this ought to be done, or
ought to be let alone, and both of them seem equally probable; so also if the
question be whether it may be done or may be let alone: In these cases it is
certain one part must be chosen, for the very suspending the act is not a
suspending of the choice, the not doing it is a compliance with one of the
probabilities. The lazy fellow in the apologue that told his Father he lay in
bed in the morning, to hear labor and idleness dispute whether it were best to
rise or to lie still, though he thought their arguments equally probable, yet
he did not suspend his act, but without determining he put the sentence of
idleness in execution; and so it must be in all questions of general inquiry
concerning lawful, or unlawful, necessary, or not necessary, the equal
probability cannot infer a suspension or an equal noncompliance.

But neither can the second be true; 3.
for the Will must not alone be admitted an arbitrator in this affair; for
besides that it is of dangerous consequence to choose an opinion because we
will, it is also unnatural, the Will being no ingredient into the actions of
understanding. The Will may cause the understanding to apply a general
proposition to a particular case, and produce a practical judgment by that
general measure without particular arguments in the question apportioned to the
proper matter, Cha 3 Rule 7.
as I before discoursed. But when the understanding is wholly at dispute about
the proper arguments of two propositions, if the will interposes, the error
that happens, if the conclusion falls on the wrong side, is without excuse,
because it is chosen; and the truth is not so safe and useful, because it came
by an incompetent instrument, by that which was indifferent to this truth or
the other. Indeed if there be no other way to determine the question, the Will
must do it, because there is no avoiding it; but if there be any other way,
this must not be taken; but ordinarily there is.

The third way therefore is this; 4.
The determination may be made by any thing that can be added to either side in
genere rationis. As the action that is prepared stands more ready for my
circumstances; that which does me less violence, that which is more
proportionable to any of those events which in prudence are to me considerable.
It is indifferent whether Paula Romana give her alms to the poor of Nicopolis,
or to the poor dwelling near the Monastery of Bethlehem; but because these
dwelt nearer, and were more fitted for her circumstances, this was enough to
turn the scales and make the determination. It is like putting on that garment
that is nearest me, not this rather then the other; nor yet this because I
will, but this because it is here. The use of this Rule is, to prevent a
probable conscience to become doubtful, and yet (as much as may be) to avoid
the interposition of the Will in the practical judgments of Conscience.

This Rule is to be enlarged with this addition; 5.
That if the conscience by reason of the equal probability of two opinions so
standing without any determining and deciding circumstances and accidents
cannot decree on any side neither by intrinsecal nor extrinsecal means, that
is, neither by proper arguments, nor collateral inducements, no action ought to
follow, but the case of which the question is, if it can be, ought to be
omitted, as in the case of a doubting conscience, which though as I showed
before, cannot happen when the question is general of lawful or unlawful,
necessary, or unnecessary, yet it may happen in particular cases, as whether
this thing be lawful, or that, whether this is to be done, or the other. It may
happen that neither of them ought, and in the present supposition neither of
them can; that is, if the man suffers his dispute to pass into a doubt.

In other cases a man may safely take any course which he finds probable,
equally disputed, 6.
uncertain in it self, contrarily determined by Doctors disputing with fair
arguments. For in this case malice is no ingredient; and if interest be, it is
therefore lawful, because it is an extrinsecal motive, apt and reasonable to be
considered, and chosen, and pursued by fair means, if the interest it self have
no foulness in it.

But of all the external motives that can have influence in the determination
of a sentence between two probabilities, 7.
a relation to piety is the greatest. He that chooses this because it is most
pious, chooses his opinion out of consideration, and by the inducement of the
love of God. That which causes more honor to God, that which happily ingages
men in holy living, that which is the most charitable, and the most useful,
that is to be preferred. But this is to be conducted with these cautions:

1. 8.
That the disposition to piety or charity be not made to contest an apparent
truth. It is hugely charitable to some men, if it could be made true, to say
that God is merciful to all sinners and at all times; and it is ten thousand
pities to see a man made to despair upon his deathbed upon the consideration of
his past evil life; but this consideration must not therefore be pretended
against the indispensable plain necessity of a holy life, since it is plainly
revealed, that without the pursuing of peace with all men, and holiness, no man
shall see God.

2. 9.
If both the probabilities be backed and seconded by their proper relations to
piety, to take one of them is not a competent way to determine the probability;
but it must be wholly conducted by the efficacy of its proper reasons, or by
some appendage in which one prevails above the other, when one opinion is
valued because it is apt to make men fear, and not to be presumptuous; and
another, because it is apt to make men hope, and never to despair, the balance
is equal, and must be turned by neither of these. Scotus and Durandus, Gabriel
and Almain, Medina and some few others taught, That the death of Christ did not
make satisfaction to God for the sins of the whole world, by the way of perfect
and exact justice, but by Gods gracious acceptance of it, and stipulation for
it. This opinion does indeed advance the honor of Gods mercy, but the contrary
advances the dignity of Christ's suffering; and therefore it must be disputed
and determined by some other instruments of persuasion. God the Father is on
one side, and God the Son on the other, and though he who honors one, honors
both, yet he that preferres one may seem also to disparage both.

3. 10.
The relation to piety, and the advantages which come to it by the opinion must
not be fantastic, and relying upon a weak opinion and fond persuasion, but
upon true reason, or real effects. It is a common opinion among the Ancients,
that Anna the Mother of the blessed Virgin Mother of God had been married to
three husbands successively, and that the blessed Virgin was the second wife of
Joseph; they who think that the second and third marriages are less perfect
then the first, think it more pious to embrace the other opinions, viz. that
Anna was married to none but Joachim, and that Joseph was only married to the
holy Virgin Mary: But because this is to take measures of things which God has
not given us, and to reckon purities and impurities by their own fancies, not
by reason and revelation from God, therefore this fantastic relation to piety
is not weight enough to carry the question along with it.

In other cases the Rule holds: And by these measures our conscience can be
supported in a storm, and be nourished and feasted every day, viz. if we take
care;

1. That we avoid every thing that we know to be a sin, whether it be
reproached by its natural impurity and unreasonableness, or without any note of
turpitude it be directly restrained by a Law.

2. That we fly every appearance of evil, or likeness of sin. 1 Thessal. 4. 22.

3. That we fly every occasion, or danger of sin. Matthew. 26. 58, 69, 70. and 1
Cor. 7. 5.

4. That we avoid all society, or communication with sin, or giving
countenance, and maintenance to it. By these measures and analogies if we limit
our Cases of Conscience, we cannot be abused into danger and dishonor.

RULE 7. It is not lawful to change our practical sentence about the same
object, while the same probability remains.
A Man may change his opinion as he sees cause, 1.
or alter the practice upon a new emergent reason; but when all things are
equal without and within, a change is not to be made by the man, except it be
in such cases in which no law, or vow, or duty, or the interest of a third is
concerned; that is, unless the actions be indifferent in themselves, or
innocent in their circumstances, and so not properly considerable in the fears
of conscience, in which cases a man's liberty is not to be prejudiced.

This stating of the Rule does intimate the proper reasons of it, 2.
as appears in the following instances; Juan a Priest of Messina having fasted
upon the Vespers of a Holy day, toward the middle of the night has a great
desire to eat flesh; he dwelling by the great Church, observed that the Clocks
in the Neighborhood differed half an hour: He watches the first Clock that
struck midnight, and as soon as it had sounded, he eat his meat, because then
he concluded that the Ecclesiastical fasting day was expired, and that
therefore it was then lawful by the Laws of his Church to eat flesh. But being
to consecrate the blessed Eucharist the next morning, and obliged to a natural
fast before the celebration of the holy Sacrament, he changed his computation,
and reckoned the day to begin by the later Clock; so that the first day ended
half an hour before the next day began, and he broke his fast because the Eve
was past, and yet he accounted that he was fasting, because the Holy day was
not begun. This was to cozen the Law, and if it be translated to more material
instances, the evil of it will be more apparent, but in this, the
unreasonableness is as visible. * The like is the case of a Gentleman living in
the Neighborhood of Rome. Baptista Colonna happened to be in Rome on the three
and twentieth of August, which is usually the Eve of S. Bartholomew, but there
it is kept on the twenty fourth day; he refused to fast on the ordinary day of
the Vigils as he used to do, because in Rome where he then was, the custom
was otherwise; he eat his meals, and resolved to keep it the next day, but on
the morrow being very hungry and desirous of flesh, he changed his sentence,
and went out of Rome to the Neighborhood, and kept the feast of S. Bartholomew
without the Eves. This is to elude the duty, and to run away from the severity
of the Law, by trifling with the letter.

If the Case be not complicated with a Law, 3.
yet it is often infolded with the interest of a third Person, and then is not
to be changed, but remains invariable. Maevius promised to Sertorius to give
him a servant, either Ephodius or Taranta, but resolves to give him Taranta;
immediately after the resolution Ephodius dies, and Maevius tells his friend he
is disobliged, because he has but one, and resolves not to part with Taranta,
and it was in his liberty to give him either, and because he will not aSSign
his part in this, it is wholly lost in the other; but this is unfriendly and
unjust. To this sort of instance is to be reduced a caution against fraudulency
in the matter of Vows.

Vitellescus vows to fast upon the last of February, 4.
but changing his mind, believes he may commute his Fasting for Alms; he
resolves to break his fast and to give a ducket to the poor. But when he had
new dined, he discourses the question again, and thinks it unlawful to commute,
and that he is bound to pay his vow in kind; but the fast is broken, and yet
if he refuses upon this new inquest to pay his commutation, he is a deceiver of
his own soul. For in the present case, if to commute were not lawful, yet it is
certain he is not disobliged; and therefore he is to pay his commutation,
because it was decree^ in the time of a probable conscience; and not being in
it self unlawful, though it be now supposed to be insufficient, yet it is to be
accounted for, upon the stock of the first resolution of the conscience,
because the state of things is not entire; and advantages are not to be taken
against Religion from the account and stock of our errors or delusions; and if
after this, the conscience be not at rest, it is to be quieted by other actions
of repentance and amends.

Quest.

BUT here also is to be inquired, 5.
Whether a man may to several persons, to serve distinct ends, in themselves
lawful and honest, discourse of and persuade both the parts of a probability
respectively? Titius wooes Orestilla for his wife; she being sickly, and
fearful lest she shall have no children, declines it; he to persuade her, tells
her it is very likely she will, and that it will cure her indisposition. But
the interest of Titius is to have no children, as being already well stored,
and therefore is dissuaded by them that have power over him, not to marry
Orestilla. He to answer their importunity tells them, it is very likely
Orestilla will be barren, and upon that account he marries her because she is
sickly, and unlikely to become a Mother. The Question is, Whether this be
lawful?

I answer, 6.
1. If he be actually persuaded of that part of the probability when he urges
it, and be changed into the other when he persuades the other, there is no
question but it is as lawful to say both as one; for they are single
affirmatives or negatives, and the time is but accidental to his persuasion;
yesterday this, and to morrow its contrary are alike, while in both or each of
them his persuasion is hearty and sincere.

2. If Titius urges both parts severally, 7.
and yet remains actually persuaded but of one of them, he may urge them as
probable in themselves, disputable, and of indifferent argument and inducement,
for so they are. But,

3. He must not imprint them by the efficacy of his own authority and opinion,
8.
nor speak that as certain which is at most but probable, and to him seems
false; for so to do is against ingenuity and Christian sincerity; it is to
make a lie put on the face of truth and become a craft; it is not honest nor
noble, nor agreeing to the spirit of a Christian, and is a direct deception on
one side, and an indirect prosecution of a lawful end.

RULE 8. An opinion relying upon very slender probability is not to be
followed, except in the cases of great necessity, or great charity.
THAT it is not ordinarily to be followed is therefore certain, 1.
because it cannot be supposed, but that its contradictory has greater
probability, and either he that follows this trifle is light of belief, or
unreasonable in his choice, or his reason is to him, but as eyes to an Owl or
Bat, half-sighted and imperfect; and at the best, no fit motive to the Will.
And if it could be lawful to follow every degree of probability, it were
perfectly in any man's choice to do, almost what he pleased, especially if he
meets with an ill counselor and a witty advocate. For at this rate all
marriages may be dissolved, all vices excused upon pretense of some little
probable necessity; and drunkenness will be entertained as Physic, and
fornication as a thing allowed by some vicious persons whose wit is better then
their manners; and all books of Conscience shall become patrons or indices of
sins, and teach men what they pretend against, and there shall be no such thing
as checks of Conscience, because few men sin without some excuse, and it were
no excuse unless it were mingled with some little probabilities; and there were
in very many cases, no rule for conscience but a witty inventer of pretty
little inducements, which rather then a man shall want, his enemy will supply
to him out of his magazine of fallacies.

2. But that there are some cases in which it is to be permitted is therefore
certain, 2.
because it may be necessary in some circumstances to do so, and in these
cases the former impediments cannot intervene, because the causes of necessity
or great charity occurring but seldom destroy all power or pretense of an easy
deception. Anna Murrana was married to her near kinsman Thomaso Grillo, but
supposed him not to be so near. It was afterward discovered to her that the
propinquity was so great that the marriage was null and invalid: while this
trouble was upon her, there happily comes a discreet old woman who tells her,
that though it be true that Grillo's Father was supposed to have lien with her
Mother, and that her self was born of that conjunction, yet she her self being
private to the transaction did put another woman into the place of Murrana's
Mother, and that her Mother was also deceived in the same manner; and though
they thought they enjoyed each other, yet they were both cozened into more
chaste embraces. Now upon this the question arises, whether or no Murrana may
safely rely upon so slight a testimony as the saying of this woman, in a matter
of so great difficulty and concernment. Here the case is favorable. Murrana is
passionately endeared to Grillo, and besides her love has a tender conscience,
and if her marriage be separated, dies at both ends of the evil, both for the
evil conjunct^on, and for the sad separation. This therefore is to be presumed
security enough for her to continue in her state.

Like to this is that of a woman in Brescia. Her husband had been contracted to
a woman of Panormo, 3.
Per verba de praesenti; she taking her pleasure upon the Sea, is with her
company surprised by a Turks man of War, and is reported, first to have been
defloured, and then killed. When the sorrow for this accident had boyld down,
the Gentleman marries a Maid of Brescia, and lives with her some years; after
which she hears that his first Spouse was not killed, but alive and in sorrow
in the Isle of Malta, and therefore that her self lived in a state of adultery,
because not she, but the woman in Malta was the true wife to her husband. In
this agony of spirit a Mariner comes to her house and secretly tells her, that
this woman was indeed at Malta, but lately dead, and so the impediment was
removed. The question now arises, whether upon the taking away this impediment,
it be required that the persons already engaged should contract anew? That a
new contract is necessary, is universally believed, and is almost certain (as
in its proper place will be made to appear) for the contrary opinion is
affirmed but by a very few, and relies but upon trifling motives, requiring
only the consent of either of the parties as sufficient for renewing of the
contract. But this being but a slender probability ought not to govern her; she
must contract anew by the consent of her husband as well as by her own act. But
now the difficulty arises; for her husband is a vicious man, and hates her, and
is weary of her, and wishes her dead; and if she discover the impediment of
their marriage, and that it is now taken away, and therefore requires him to
recontract himself, that the marriage which was innocently begun, may be firm
in the progression, and legally valid, and in conscience; she has great reason
to believe that he will take advantage of it, and refuse to join in a new
contract. In this case therefore, because it is necessary she should some way
or other be releeved, it is lawful for her to follow that little probability of
opinion which says, that the consent of one is sufficient for the renovation of
the contract. And in this case all the former inconveniences mentioned before
do cease: and this is a case of favor, in behalf of an innocent marriage, and
in favor of the legitimation of children, and will prevent much evil to them
b^th. So that although this case has but few degrees of probability from its
proper and intrinsecal causes, yet by extrinsecal and collateral appendages it
is grown favorable, and charitable, and reasonable: it is almost necessary,
and therefore has more then the little probabilities of its own account.

One case more happens in which a small probability may be pursued, 4.
viz. when the understanding has not time to consider deeply, and handle the
question on all sides; then that which first offers it self, though but mean
and weak, yet if it be not against a strange argument at the same time
presented, it may suffice to determine the action; for in case the
determination prove to be on the wrong side, yet the ignorance is involuntary
and unchosen.

These Rules are concerning a Conscience that is probable by intrinsecal
motives, that is, by reason, whether the reason be direct or collateral. But
because the conscience is also probably moved in very many cases, by Authority,
which is an extrinsecal motive, this is also to be guided and conducted.

RULE 9. Multitude of Authors is not ever the most probable inducement, nor
does it in all cases make a safe and probable Conscience.
FOllowing a multitude is sometimes like the grazing or running of an heard, 1.
Non quo cundum est, sed quo itur, not where men ought but where they use to
go: and therefore Justinian in compiling of the body of the Roman Laws, took
that which was most reasonable, L p. ver. Sed (...) C de veter^ jure enucle^^^o.
not that which was most followed; Sed neque ex multitudine Authorum quod
melius and aequius est judicabile: cum possit unius forsan, and deterioris
sententia multos and majores aliqua in part superare. The sentence of one, and
of a meaner man may sometimes outweigh the sayings of a multitude of greater
persons. Nam testibus se, non testimoniis crediturum rescripsit Imperator.
Sometimes one witness is better then twenty testimonies; that is, one man, good
and pious, prudent and disinteress'd, can give a surer sentence then many men
more crafty, Cap. Nicaena Syn. dus. did. 32.
and less honest. And in the Nicene Council when the Bishops were purposing to
dissolve the Priests marriages, Paphnutius did not follow the common vote, but
gave them good reason for his single opinion, and they all followed him. This
Rule is true, and to be practiced in the following cases:

1. When against the common opinion there is a strong, 2.
or a very probable reason, then the common opinion is not the more probable.
Because a reason is an intrinsecal, proper and apportioned motive to the
conscience, but humane authority, or citation of consenting Authors is but an
extrinsecal, accidental and presumptive inducement, and a mere suppletory in
the destitution of reason: and therefore Socrates said, In Protag. Plat.
Veritatem in disputando, non ex test aliquo, sed ex argumento esse
ponderandam; Truth is to be weighed by argument not by testimony, and it is
never otherwise but when men are ruled by prejudice, or want reason to rule
them in that particular. Tantum opinio praejudicata poterat, ut etiam sine
ratione valeret authoritas, 1. De not. Deor.
said Cicero. And this is to be extended to all sorts of Authors that are not
Canonical, or Divine. Meum propositum est antiquos legere, probare singula,
retinere quae bona sunt, and a fide Ecclesiae Catholicae non recedere, said S.
Hierom. My purpose is to read the Fathers, to try all things, to retain that
only which is good, and never to depart from the faith of the Catholic
Church, that is, from the Creeds, which all Christendom professes. And at
another time when himself asked leave, in discourse with S. Austin, Patiaris me
cum talibus errare, Vide Libe. ep of Prophes. Sect. 8. D^ille du Vrai usage des
Peers
Suffer me to go along with such great men, though to an error, it would not
be permitted, but reason was chosen and the authority neglected. And this
course all men have followed when they pleased, and knew they might and ought.

2. When the multitude of Doctors are reducible to a single, 3.
or an inconsiderable principle and beginning. Thus an opinion entertained by a
whole family and order of Clerks, while they either generally do follow, or
think themselves bound to follow the leading man in their own order, is to be
reckoned but as a single opinion. The Millenary opinion was driven to a head in
Papias; the condemning unbaptized infants, in S. Austin, or S. Ambrose; and
therefore their numerous followers are not to be reckoned into the account. For
if they that follow consider it not, the case is evident; if they do, then
their reaso^^ are to be weighed, not their authority.

3. When it is notorious that there is, 4.
or may be a deception in that number, by reason of some evil ingredient in the
production of the opinion; as if it be certain that the opinion was taken up
because it serves an interest, the same men having been on the other side when
their interest was there. That it is lawful to put heretics, or disagreeing
persons to death, is generally taught by the followers of Calvin and Beza where
they do prevail: and yet no man that lives under them has warrant to rely
upon their authority in this question, because it is only where and when they
have power, themselves having spoken against it in the days of their minority
and under persecution. Under the same consideration it is, if there be any
other reason against the men, not relating to their manners, but to their
manner of entering or continuing in the persuasion.

4. But when these cautions are provided for, 5.
the multitude of Authors has a presumptive authority, that is, when there is
no reason against the thing, nor against the men, we may presume upon the
multitude of learned men in their proper faculty, that what they teach is good
and innocent, and we may proceed to action accordingly. It can never make a
Conscience sure, but it may be innocent, because it is probable; but he that
relies upon authority alone is governed by chance. Because, if the more be
against him, he is prejudiced by multitude; if the fewer be against him, yet
they may be the wisest: and whether they be or not, yet a tooth-drawer may
sometimes speak a better reason; and one may carry it against multitudes, and
neither one nor the other can justly induce a belief unless they have
considered all things; and if I can tell who has done so, I am my self as well
able to answer as they: for he that can judge who speaks best reason, or who is
most fit to be trusted in the particular, must be able in himself to consider
the particulars by which that judgment is to be made; if he can and does, he
has reason within him, and needs not follow low authority alone; if he cannot,
then he is governed by chance, and must be in the right, or in the wrong
according as it happens. For in many cases both sides have many advocates and
abettors, and no man can tell who has most, and each side says that their
opinion is the most commonly received. In Venice there is a Law that any man
may kill his Father if he be banished; some affirm this also to be lawful where
such a Law is in force, and they affirm this to be the common opinion. Julius
Clarius says that it is the common opinion, that though there be such a Law,
yet that it is unlawful to do it. It is commonly affirmed that it is lawful
for such a banished person to defend himself, and if he can in his own defense
to kill the invader. It is also a common opinion that this is as unlawful as
for a condemned man to kill his Executioner, because no War can be just on
both sides. It is very commonly taught, that it is lawful by fraud, by
surprise, by treason, to slay the Banditi. It is also very commonly taught that
this is absolutely unlawful. * Sometimes that which was the common opinion an
age ago, is now rarely maintained but by a few persons. It was a common
opinion in Tertullians time, that the souls departed are in outer Courts
expecting the revelation of the day of the Lord; in the time of P. Leo, and
Venerable Bede, and after, it was a common opinion that they were taken into
the inner Courts of heaven. * Sometimes the place diversifies the opinion. In
Germany and France, the Romanists worship the Cross with a religious worship of
the lowest kind of their own distinction; but in Spain they worship it with
that which they call (...), or the highest kind; and this is commonly done in
the several Countries respectively. When this, or any thing like this shall
happen, unless by reason men be determined, they may draw lots for their
opinion. But since the better part is not always the greater, it is left to me
to choose which I will; and it is ten to one but I call the men of my own
communion or my own acquaintance, The best; and it is certain I cannot judge of
those with whom I do not converse.

For these and many other concurrent causes, 6.
the proceeding is inartificial and casual, and fit to lead the ignorant, but
not the learned: and concerning the ignorant he can so little skill to choose
his authority, that he must lie under that where he dwells, and where his
fortune has placed him. If he goes any whither else he has no excuse, because
he has no sufficient inducement; and where a man cannot go alone, it is best
for him to sit still where Gods providence has placed him, and follow the
Guides provided by the Laws of his Country where he was born, or where he
lives: C. earch.
(...) --
(...).
Conform your self to the Laws of the People with whom you must abide.

This is the most proper way to conduct the ignorant in their cases of
conscience in which themselves have no skill. 7.
They must believe one, and if they have a better way to proceed, let them
pursue it: if they have not, this is certainly safe, because it is their best;
and no man is tied to make use of better then he has. And if they could fall
into error, yet it could not be imputed to them with justice, while bona fide
they fall into heresy, and are honestly betrayed. This only is to be added:

They must make it as good as they can by inquiry (according to their
circumstances, opportunities, and possibilities) and by prayers, 8.
and by innocent and honest purposes, for these only will secure our way, by
means of Gods providing. In this case there is no irregularity, because it is
the best obedience which can be expressed by subordinate and weak
understandings, and there is in it no danger, because the piety, and the
prayers of the man will obtain Gods blessing upon his innocent well meaning
soul. It was well said of Hesiod, (...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
He is the best and wisest man who in himself knows what he ought to do,
discerning what is best, and seeing unto the end of things. He also is good,
who obeys the sayings of wise men, that counsel well; but he is a fool who not
being able to advise or determine himself, refuses to be conducted by others.
Here only are the evils to be complained of.

In some places there are a great many articles put into their public
confessions, and a great many teachers of unnecessary propositions, and a great
many idle and impertinent guides, who multiply questions lest themselves should
seem useless; and amongst men, there are many orders, and families, and
societies, all which are desirous to advance themselves, and to get disciples
and reputation; and on the other side, there are very many that are idle, and
rather willing to trust others, then to be troubled themselves; and many choose
Teachers for interest, and some have men's persons in admiration because of
advantage; and Princes have designs of State, and they would have Religion
minister to them, and there are a great many Ecclesiastical Laws made, and some
of these pass into dogmaticall propositions, and they teach for doctrines the
Commandments of men; and there are very many sects of men, and confident
fools, who use to overvalue their trifles, and teach them for necessary truths,
and in all this incertainty of things, men are in the dark, and Religion is
become an art of wrangling; and the writers of Controversies are oftentimes
abused themselves, and oftener do abuse others; and therefore men are taught
certain little rules to grope by, and walk in Seas and upon Rocks. But the
things themselves are oftentimes so indifferent, and the reasons of either side
so none at all, or so inconsiderable, that it comes to pass that the testimony
of Doctors is the guide that men choose ( as they list) to follow^ who because
they teach contrary things, cannot be followed by their authority, and for
reason, sometimes themselves have none, sometimes their disciples have not
leisure to examine them, or judgment to discern them.

Quest.

HEre therefore is to be inquired, 10.
How shall the ignorant and vulgar people proceed in such cases where their
Teachers are divided?

1. I answer, that in most cases it is best for them to let them alone, and let
them be divided still, and to follow them in those things where they do agree;
but if it be in such cases where they must declare or act on one side, let them
take that which they think to be the safest, or the most pious, the most
charitable, and the most useful; that so by collateral considerations they may
determine that which by the authority seems equal and indeterminable.

The collateral considerations are commonly these:

1. That which is more agreeable to the letter of Scripture.

2. That which does most agree with the purpose and design of it.

3. That which Saints have practiced.

4. That which whole Nations have approved.

5. That which is agreeable to common life.

6. That which is best for the public.

7. That which is most for the glory of God, for the reputation of his Name,
and agreeing with his attributes.

8. That which is more holy.

9. That which gives least confidence to sin and sinners.

10. That which is most charitable to others.

11. That which will give least offense.

12. And (in destitution of all things else) that which is most useful to our
selves. All these are good considerations, and some of them intervene in most
cases, and can be considered by most men. But where nothing of these can be
interwoven in the sentence, but that the authority of the Teacher is the only
thing that can be considered, the following measures are to be added.

2. The authority of one man wise and good, 11.
that is, who is generally so reputed, is a probable argument, and a sufficient
guide to ignorant persons in doubtful matters, where there is no clear or known
revelation to the contrary. When it is his best, there is no disputing whether
it be good or no; only in this case, he is so far to suspend his consent,
till his guide has considered, or answered deliberately; for if his guide
vomit out answers, it is better to refuse it, till it be digested better. This
has been highly abused in some places, and permissions have been given or
taken to do acts of vile impiety, or horrible danger, where by interest they
were persuaded, and being desirous for some pretense to legitimate the act, or
to invite their conscience to it, they have been content with the opinion of
one probable Doctor. Such was he whose testimony being required in a matter of
right concerning his College, swore to a thing as of his certain knowledge, of
which he had no certain knowledge, but a probable conjecture; only because he
had read or been told that one Doctor said it was lawful so to do. This is to
suborn a sentence and to betray a conscience, for the sentence of one Doctor is
only a good or a tolerable guide, when there is no better guide for us, and no
reason against us; that is, it is to be used only when it is the best, but not
when it is the worst.

3. But if diverse men equally wise and good speak variously in the question, 12.
and that the inquirer cannot be indifferent to both, but must resolve upon
one, he is first to follow his Parish Priest, rather then a stranger in the
article, who is equal in all things else; his own Confessor, his own Bishop, or
the Laws and Customs of his own Country: because next to reason, comes in place
that which in order of things is next to it; that is, the proper advantages of
the man, that is, learning and piety; and next to them succeed the accidental
advantages of the man, that is, his authority and legal pre-eminence. There is
no other reason for these things, but that which is in the proper and natural
order of things: This is the natural method of persuasion direct and indirect.

4. Where it can certainly be told that it is the more common, 13.
there the community of the opinion has the advantage, and is in the same
circumstances still to be preferred, because where reason is not clear and
manifest, there we are to go after it, where it is more justly to be presumed.
(...), said Euripides, it is good when good things are attested by many
witnesses. O (...), said Aristotle, Eth. lib. 10. ^. ^.
that which seems so to all men, this we say, is as it seems; and so it is in
proportion from some to many, from many to all. The sum of all these things
is this: 1. God is to be preferred before man. 2. Our own reason before the
sayings of others. 3. Many before few. 4. A few before one. 5. Our superiors,
or persons in just authority over us, before private persons, caeteris paribus.
6. Our own before strangers. 7. Wise men before the ignorant. 8. The godly and
well meaning, and well reputed, before men of indifferent or worse lives. That
is, they must do as well and wisely as they can, and no man is obliged to do
better. Only this is to be observed;

That in this case it is not necessary that truth should be found, 14.
but it is highly necessary it should be searched for. It may be it cannot be
hit, but it must be aimed at. And therefore they (who are concerned) are not to
be troubled and amazed at the variety of opinions that are in the world; There
must be heresies, that is, sects are differing opinions, that they who are
faithful may be approved. Now they can be approved in nothing but what is in
their power, that is, diligence to inquire, and honesty in consenting; both
which may very well be, and yet the man be mistaken in his particular sentence,
in a matter not simply necessary, not plainly revealed.

There is but one thing more that concerns his duty, and that is, 15.
that in all his choices he prefer the interest of peace and of obedience;
for it ought to be a very great cause that shall warrant his dissent from the
authority which is appointed over him. Such causes may be, but the unskilled
multitude (of whom we now treat) seldom find those causes, and seldom are
able to judge of them, and therefore this Rule is certain.

Whoever blows a trumpet, 16.
and makes a separation from the public, they who follow his authority, and
know not, or understand not a sufficient reason for the doing it, they are
highly inexcusable upon this account, because they following the less probable
authority, have no excuse for the matter of their sin; and therefore if it
happen to be schism or rebellion, or disobedience, or heresy in the subject
matter, it is in the very form of it, so imputed to the consenting person. For
though great reason may be stronger then authority, yet no private authority is
greater then the public. But of this I shall have further occasion to
discourse in its proper place.

Although this is the best, and therefore a sufficient advice for the ignorant,
17.
yet for the learned and the wise, there are other considerations to be added.

1. They who are to teach others may not rely upon single testimonies, or the
slight probability of one Doctors opinion. This is true ordinarily and
regularly, because such persons are supposed more at leisure, more instructed,
better able to inquire, and to rely finally upon such single and weak supports,
is to do the work of the Lord negligently.

2. If the opinion be probable upon the account of a more general reception, 18.
and be the more common, and allowed by wise and good men, they who are
learned, and are to teach others, may lawfully follow the opinion without
examining the reasons for which it is by those wise men entertained. For the
work of learning and inquiry is so large and of immense extension, that it is
impossible all men should perfectly inquire of all things. But some especially
attend to one thing, some to another; and where men have best considered, they
consider for themselves and for others too, and themselves are helped by those
others, in the proper matter of their consideration. A man's life is too short,
and his abilities less, and it may be his leisure is least of all, and unable
so to consider all that is fit to be believed and taught, that it will be
necessary we should help one another; and the great Teachers and Doctors in
several instances may ordinarily be relied upon without danger and
inconvenience.

3. But if it happens that by circumstances and accidents the particular
question be drawn out into a new inquiry; 19.
if a new doubt arise, or a scandal be feared, or the division of men's minds in
the new inquest, then the reasons must be inquired into and the authority is
not sufficient.

1. Because the authority is by the new doubt made less probable, and is part
of the question, and therefore ought not to be presumed right in its own case.

2. Because the duty of Teachers is by this accident determined to this
special inquiry, and called from their unactive rest, and implicit belief;
because the inquirers upon this new account will be determined by nothing but
by that reason that shall pretend strongest; and therefore they who are thus
called upon, can no other ways give answer to them that ask. It was the
universal doctrine of the Church of God for many ages, even for fourteen
Centuries of years, that Episcopacy is of Divine, or Apostolical institution:
It was a sufficient warranty for a Parish Priest to teach that doctrine to his
Parishioners, because he found it taught every where, and questioned no where.
But when afterward this long prescribing truth came to be questioned, and
reasons and Scriptures pretended and offered against it, and a schism likely to
be commenced upon it, it is not sufficient then to rely upon the bare word of
those excellent men who are able to prove it (as it is supposed,) but they who
are to teach others must first be instructed themselves in the particular
arguments of probation; that according to the precepts Apostolical, 1 Pet 3.
15, Tit. 1. 9.
they may render a reason of the hope that is in them, and may be able both to
exhort and to convince the gainsayers; who because they expressly decline the
authority, and the weight of testimony, cannot be convinced but by reason, and
the way of their own proceeding.

RULE 10. In following the authority of men, no Rule can be antecedently given
for the choice of the persons, but the choice is wholly to be conducted by
prudence, and according to the subject matter.
ANcient Writers are more venerable: 1.
Modern Writers are more knowing: They might be better Witnesses, but these are
better Judges. Antiquity did teach the Millenary opinion, and that Infants were
to be communicated; that without baptism they were damned to the flames of
hell; that Angels are corporeal; that the souls of Saints did not see God
before Doomesday; that sins once pardoned did return again upon case of
relapse; that persons baptized by heretics were to be rebaptized, and they
expounded Scripture in places innumerable, otherwise then they are at this day
by men of all persuasions; and therefore no company of men will consent that in
all cases the Fathers are rather to be followed then their Successors. They
lived in the infancy of Christianity, and we in the elder ages; they practiced
more and knew less, we know more and practice less; passion is for younger
years, and for beginning of things, wisdom is by experience, and age, and
progression. They were highly to be valued, because in more imperfect notices
they had the more perfect piety: we are highly to be reproved, that in better
discourses we have a most imperfect life, and an unactive Religion: They in
their Cases of Conscience took the safest part, but the Moderns have chosen the
most probable. * It was the opinion of the Ancient Divines and Lawyers, that
every man is bound to make restitution of all that which he gains by play, by
Cards and Dice, and all such sports as are forbidden by humane Laws. The modern
Casuists indeed do often reprove the whole process, and condemn the Gamesters
in most circumstances, but do not believe them tied to restitution, but to
penance only. The first is the safer and the severer way, but the later has
greater reasons, as will appear in its own place. All contracts of Usury were
generally condemned in the foregoing ages of the Church: of late, not only the
Merchant, but the Priest, and the Friar puts out money to increase, and think
themselves innocent: and although commonly it happens that our ignorance and
fears represent one opinion to be safe, when the other is more reasonable; yet
because men will be fearful, and very often are ignorant and idle in their
inquiries, there will still remain this advantage to either side, that one is
wiser, and the other in his ignorance is the more secure because he does more
then he needs. And therefore it often happens that though we call the ancient
Writers, Fathers, yet we use them like children, and think our selves Men
rather then them, which is affirmed by some, but in effect practiced by every
man when he pleases.

But if any one shall choose the later Writers, he must first choose his
interest and his side; 2.
I mean if he chooses to follow any upon their authority or reputation without
consideration of their reasons, then he must first choose his side, for he can
never choose his side by the men, because most Authors are of it themselves by
interest. But because all probability is wholly derived from reason, every
authority has its degree of probability according as it can be presumed or
known to rely upon reason. Now in this both the Ancients and the Moderns excel
each other respectively. The Ancients were nearer to the fountains Apostolical,
their stream was less pudled, their thread was not fine but plain and strong,
they were troubled with fewer heresies; they were not so wittily mistaken as we
have been since; they had better and more firm tradition, they had passed
through fewer changes, and had been blended with fewer interests; they were
united under one Prince, and consequently were not forced to bend their
doctrines to the hostile and opposite designs of fighting, and crafty Kings;
their questions were concerning the biggest articles of Religion, and therefore
such in which they could have more certainty and less deception; their piety
was great, their devotion high and pregnant, their discipline regular and
sincere, their lives honest, their hearts simple, their zeal was for souls, and
the blood of the Martyrs made the Church irriguous, and the Church was then a
garden of the fairest flowers, it did daily germinate with blessings from
heaven, and Saints sprung up, and one Saint could know more of the secrets of
Christ's Kingdom, the mysteriousnesses of godly wisdom then a hundred disputing
Sophisters; and above all, the Church of Rome was then holy and Orthodox,
humble and charitable, her authority dwelt in the house of its birth, that is,
in the advantages of an excellent faith and an holy life; to which the
advantages of an accidental authority being added by the Imperial seat, she was
made able to do all the good she desired, and she desired all that she ought;
and the greatness of this advantage we can best judge by feeling those sad
effects which have made Christendom to groan, since the Pope became a temporal
Prince, and has possessed the rights of some Kings, and has invaded more, and
pretends to all, and is become the great Fable, and the great Comet of
Christendom, useless and supreme, high and good for nothing in respect of what
he was at first, and still might have been, if he had severely judged the
interest of Jesus Christ to have been his own.

But then on the other side, 3.
the modern Writers have considered all the arguments and reasons of the
Ancients; they can more easily add then their Fathers could find out; They
can retain their perfect issues, and leave the other upon their hands; and what
was begun in conjecture, can either be brought to knowledge, or remanded into
the lot and portion of deceptions. Omnibus enim hic locus feliciter se dedit,
and qui praecesserunt non praeripuisse mihi videntur quae dici poterant, sed
aperuisse. Conditio optima ultimi est, said Seneca. They who went before us,
have not prevented us, but opened a door that we may enter into the recesses of
truth: He that comes last has the best advantage in the inquiry. Multum
egerunt qui ante nos fuerunt, sed non peregerunt, multum adhuc restat operis,
multumque restabit, nec ulli nato post mill secula praecludetur occasio
aliquid adhuc adjiciendi. They who went before us have done wisely and well in
their generations, but they have not done all; much work remains behind, and
he that lives a thousand ages hence, shall not complain that there are no
hidden truths fit for him to inquire after. There are more worlds to conquer:

Multa dies, Epist. 64.
variusque labor mutabilis aevi
Retulit in melius --
Every day brings a new light, and by hearty and wise labor we improve what
our Fathers espied when they peeped through the crevises. Every art, every
manufacture was improved,

Venimus ad summum fortunae, pingimus atque
Psallimus, Aeneid. l. 11.
and luctamur Achivis doctius unct is.
The Romans out did the Greeks, even in things which they were taught in
Athens, or on their hills of sport. But to proceed in the comparing the ages:
These later ages have more heresies, but the former had more dangerous; and
although the Primitive pie^y was high and exemplary, yet the effect of that
was, that in matters of practice they were more to be followed, but not in
questions of speculation; these later ages are indeed diseased like children
that have the Rickets, but their upper parts do swell, and their heads are
bigger, sagaciores in dogmate, nequiores in fide, and if they could be
abstracted from the mixtures of interest, and the engagement of their party,
they are in many things better able to teach the people then the Ancients: That
is, they are best able to guide, but not always safest to be followed. If all
circumstances were equal, that is, if the later ages were united, and governed,
and dis^interest, there is no question but they are the best instructors; there
is certainly more certain notice of things, and better expositions of
Scriptures now then formerly, but because he that is to rely upon the authority
of his guide, cannot choose by reasons, he can hardly tell now where to find
them upon that account. There is more gold now then before, but it is more
allayed in the running, or so hidden in heaps of tinsel, that when men are best
pleased, now adays they are most commonly cozened.

If a man will take the middle ages, 4.
he may if he will, and that is all that can be said in it; for there can be no
reason for it, but much against it. Ego sane veteres veneror, and tantis
Nominibus semper assurgo. Verum inter externa aetatem esse scio, omniaque non
esse apud Majores meliora. I for my part do more reverence the Ancients, and
use to rise up and bow my head to such reverend names, as S. Irenaeus, S.
Cyprian, Origin, S. Hierome, S. Austin; but I reckon age amongst things that
are without, it enters not into the constitution of truth; and this I know,
that amongst these Ancients, not all their sayings are the best. And on the
other side, although Antiquity is a gentle prejudice, and has some authority,
though no certainty or infallibility; so I know that novelty is a harder
prejudice, and brings along with it no authority, but yet it is not a certain
condemnation. Quod si tam Graecis novitas invisa fuisset
Quam est nobis, Horat. l. 2. ep. ^.
quid nunc esset vetus, aut quid haberet
Quod legeret, tereretque vicissim publicus usus.


If our Fathers in Religion had refused every exposition of Scripture that was
new, we should by this time have had nothing old; But in this case what Martial
said of friendships, we may say of truths: Nec me, quod novus sum tibi, recuses:
Omnes hoc veteres tui sodales fuerunt. Videat lector epist. 19. Sancti
Augustini; quae est ad Hieronymum. and epist. ad Fortunatum.

Tu tantum inspice qui novus paratur
An possit fieri vetus sodalis.


Refuse nothing only because it is new. For that which pretends to age now,
was once in infancy; only see if this new thing be fit to be entertained, and
kept till it be old; That is, as the thing is in it self, not as it is in age,
so it is to be valued, and so also are the men; for in this, as in all the
other, the subject matter will help forward to the choice of a guide.

1. The analogy of faith.

2. The piety of a proposition.

3. The safety of it, and its immunity from sin; these are right measures to
guess at an article, but these are more intrinsecal, and sometimes so
difficult, that they cannot be made use of but by those who can judge of
reason, and less need to be conducted by authority. But for these other who are
wholly to be led by the power and sentence of their guide, besides what has
been already advised.

4. The faculty and profession of men is much to be regarded, as that we trust
Divines in matters proper to their cognizance, and Lawyers in their faculty;
which advice is to be conducted by these measures.

When the Authority of Divines is to be preferred, when that of Lawyers.

1. The whole duty of a Christian consists in the laws of Faith or Religion, 5.
of Sobriety, and of Justice; and it is so great a work, that it is no more
then needs that all the orders of wise and learned men should conduct and
minister to it. But some portions of our duty are personal, and some are
relative, some are private, and some are public; some are limited by the Laws
of God only, and some also by the Laws of men; some are directed by nature,
some by use and experience; and to some of these portions contemplative men can
give best assistances, and the men of the world, and business can give best
help in the other necessities. Now because Divines are therefore in many
degrees separate from an active life, that they may with leisure attend to the
conduct of things spiritual, and are chosen as the Ministers of mercy, and the
great reconcilers of the world, and therefore are forbidden to intermeddle in
questions of blood: and because the affairs of the world in many instances are
so entangled, so unconducing to the affairs of the spirit, so stubborn that
they are hardly to be managed by a meek person, carried on by so much violence,
that they are not to be rescued from being injurious but by a violence that is
greater but more just; and because the interests of men are complicated and
difficult, defended by customs, preserved in records, secured by sentences of
Judges, and yet admit variety by so many accidents, circumstances, and
considerations, as will require the attendance of one whole sort of men, and of
all men in the world Divines are the least fit to be employed in such troubles
and contracts, such violences. and oppositions, and yet they are so necessary,
that without them the government of the world would be infinitely disordered,
it is requisite that these should be permitted to a distinct profession. In
particular matters of justice ordinarily and regularly Lawyers are the most
competent Judges: In matters of Religion and Sobriety, the office of Divines is
so wholly or principally employed, that it ought to be chosen for our guide.

2. In matters of Justice which are to be conducted by general Rules, 6.
Theology is the best Conductress; and the Lawyers skill is but subservient and
ministering. The reason for both is the same, because all the general measures
of justice are the Laws of God, and therefore cognoscible by the Ministers of
Religion; but because these general measures, like a great river into little
streams, are deduced into little rivulets and particularities by the laws and
customs, by the sentences and agreements of men, therefore they must slip from
the hands of the spiritual man to the prudent and secular. The Divine can
condemn all injustice, murder, incest, injurious dealing; but whether all
homicide be murder, all marriage of kindred be incest, or taking that which
another man possesses be injustice, must be determined by Laws, and the learned
in them; and though Divines may rule all these cases as well as any of the long
Robe, yet it is by their prudence and skill in Law, not by the proper notices
of Theology.

3. But justice is like a knife, 7.
and has a back and an edge, and there is a letter and a spirit in all Laws,
and justice is self is to be conducted with piety, and there are modalities,
and measures, and manners of doing or suffering in humane entercourses; and
many things are just which are not necessary, and there are excesses and
rigours in justice which are to be moderated, and there are evil and intangling
circumstances which make several instances to justle one another; and one must
be served first, and another must stay its season; and in paying money there is
an ordo ad animam, and justice is to be done for Gods sake, and at some times,
and in some circumstances for charities sake; and the Law compels to pay him
first that requires first; but in conscience, justice is oftentimes to be
administered with other measures: so that as prudence sometimes must be called
to counsel in the conduct of piety, so must piety oftentimes lead in justice,
and justice it self must be sanctified by the word of God and prayer, and will
then go on toward heaven, when both Robes like Paranymphs attending a Virgin
in the solemnities of her marriage, help to lead and to adorn her.

4. Sometimes Humane Laws and Divine stand face to face and oppose each other,
8.
not only in the direct sanction (which does not often happen) but very often
in the execution. Sometimes obedience to a humane Law will destroy charity,
sometimes justice is against piety, sometimes piety seems less consistent with
Religion. The Church is poor, our Parents are necessitous, the fabrics of the
Houses of Prayer are ruinous, and we are not able to make supplies to all
these; Here what is just, and what is duty, not the Law, but Theology will
determine. I owe Sempronius a small sum of money; it happens that he comes to
demand it when the gatherers of Gabels are present to demand an equal sum for
Taxes; here I am to ask my Confessor, not my Lawyer whether of the two must be
served, since I cannot pay both: and in this case the Ministers of Religion are
the guards and defensatives of her interest: Concerning which for the present,
I only insert this Caution; That when Religion and Justice are in contest, the
Ministers of Religion are not always bound to give sentence on the side of
Religion, but to consider which is the more necessary, and where the present
duty stands; for sometimes it is absolutely necessary to do justice, and
actions of particular Religion must attend their season. But then even justice
turns into Religion, and when it does so, Theology must conduct her into action.

5. When the question concerns an interest, 9.
relative to either faculty, it is hard choosing the authority on either part,
for one judges for it self, and the other against his adversary; that is, in
effect they are both Judges in their own cause. It is notorious in the Church
of Rome, where the Canonists say, That a Canon Lawyer is to be preferred before
a Divine in elections to Bishoprics; but you must think, the Divines say that
themselves are far the fitter. The Canonists say that Praedial tithes are due
by Divine right. The Divines say they are only due by positive constitution.
The secret of that is, because most of the Divines that write books are Monks
and Friars, and such which are no friends to Parishes, that the Pope may be
allowed to have power to take tithes from the Parish Priests, and give them to
the Monasteries; which he could not do, if by Divine right they were annexed
to their proper Cures. Amongst us the tables are turned, and the Lawyers take
the Friars part, and the Divines generally affirm the Divine right of tithes.
Concerning which it is to be considered, that though the authority of either
part is not of it self sufficient to determine a doubting person, and where
interest is apparent, the person persuading loses much of his authority, yet
the proposition it self ought not to lose any thing. The interest appearing is
no more warrant to disbeleeve the proposition, then it is to believe it. In
this case there is interest on both sides, and therefore as to that the case is
indifferent. The way to proceed is to consider the proper instruments of
persuasion, and because a truth is not the worse for serving his ends that
teaches it, I am to attend to his arguments without any prejudice. But if I am
not able to judge of the reasons, but must be led by authority, the presumption
lies for the Divines, I am to believe them rather then the Lawyers in such
questions, because there is some Religion in doing so, and a relation to God,
for whose sake it is, that I choose to obey their proposition.

6. Where by the favor of Princes or Commonwealths any matters of Justice are
reserved to Ecclesiastical cognizance, 10.
in those affairs the authority of Divines is to be preferred before that of
Lawyers, because the personal capacities of the men being equal in all things,
the Divines are exercised in the same matters, and therefore are both concerned
and able, instructed and engaged, and though the Lawyers are to be supposed
honest, and just, and wise, yet all that also is to be supposed in Divines,
with some advantages of Religion, and tenderness which is bred in them by their
perpetual conversation with the things of God. But in all things he comes the
nearest to a sure way of being guided, who does his best and with greatest
honesty of heart, and simplicity of pious desires to be truly informed. It was
well said of Socrates, An placeant Deo quae feci, nescio; hoc certo scio, me
sedulo hoc egisse ut placerent. The things which I have done, whether they
please God or no, I know not; but this I know assuredly, that I did earnestly
desire, and diligently take care that they might please him.

If the question be concerning other divisions of men, 11.
as of Schoolmen and Casuists, Critics or Preachers, the answer can be no
other, but that in all faculties relating to any parts of Religion, as there
are very wise men, and very weak men, so there are some to be preferred in each
faculty, if we could find out who they are: but this praelation is relative to
the men, not to the faculty, if they were rightly handled. For the several
faculties are nothing but the proper portion of matter assigned to the
consideration of an order of men, in a proper method; but the great end is the
same, only the means of persuading the same truth is different. But in the
Church of Rome they are made several Trades, and have distinct principles, and
serve special and disunited ends and interests; and therefore which of them is
to be preferred, as to the making a probable opinion is just to be answered, as
if we should ask which is best of feathers or wool; they both of them have
their excellencies in order to warmth, and yet if you offer to swallow them
down, they will infallibly choke you.

RULE 11. He that has given assent to one part of a probable opinion, may
lawfully depose that Conscience, and that opinion upon confidence of the
sentence of another.
THE Curate of S. Martin being sent for to do his last offices to a dying man,
finds him speechless, 1.
but yet giving signs of his penitence, as beating his breasts, weeping and
groaning, holding up his hands, and looking pitifully, and in a penitent
posture: The Curate having read it, disputed whether such a person may be
absolved, concerning whose repentance he can have no other testimony but mute
signs, which may be produced by other causes, and finding arguments on both
sides, consents to the negative as probable; and yet finding learned persons
there who are of another opinion, lays aside the practices of his own opinion,
and in compliance with the other, absolves the sick man. One that was present,
and understood the whole process, inquires whether he did well or no, as
supposing that to do against his own opinion is to do against his conscience;
and a man's own conscience is more to him then ten watchmen that keep a city.

In answer to this, 2.
it is to be considered there is a double consent to a proposition, the one is
direct, the other a reflex; the first is directly terminated upon the honesty
or dishonesty of the object, the other upon the manner of it, and modality. For
instance, the Curate does not directly consent to that part of the question
which he has chosen, as that which he will finally rely upon, but he consents
to it only as a thing that is probable; If he were fully persuaded of the
article as a thing certain, or as necessary (though of it self it be not so) or
if he thinks it is not to be altered, then to do against his opinion were to
do against his conscience, because the opinion were passed the region of
speculation, and ineffective notion, and is become a rule and immediate measure
of action. But because he believes it only probable, that is such, in which he
is not certain; but may be deceived, and may use liberty, he may as well choose
that part of the probability which derives from the reputation and abilities of
other men, as well as that which proceeds from considerations of those little
intrinsic arguments which moved his assent lightly like a breath upon the
waters, or the smile of an undiscerning infant. His own opinion is well enough
concerning the honesty of the object, but yet he that chooses the other part
may make an honest election; for his own opinion reflecting upon it self, not
going beyond the stage of uncertainty and probability does openly challenge its
own right of choosing another part; the conscience is no ways entangled and
determined, but so chooses that it may choose again, if she sees cause for it,
a cause in the particular case, which she espied not in the abstracted question.

For he may prudently suppose that in what he is not certainly persuaded, 3.
another may be wiser and know more, and can judge surer: and if he have reason
to think so, it may be a greater reason then that is by which himself did
choose his own opinion and part of the probability; and he may have reason to
think meanly of himself, and he may remember sad stories of his frequent
deception, and be conscious of his own unaptness to pass an honest unbiassed
sentence, and has no reason to trust himself in matters of proper interest or
relation.

This Rule has no other variety in it but that it be managed by these
Cautions. 4.


1. That the man upon whom we rely, be neither ignorant nor vicious, so far
as we can judge, and so far as relates to the present question, that is, that
he be a person fit to be a guide of others.

2. That relying on others proceed not out of idleness, and impatience to
inquire our selves.

3. That the opinion of the other be not chosen because it better serves my
ends or humor, but upon the preceding grounds of humility and mean opinion of
my self, and great opinion of the other.

4. That it be only against his own probable persuasion so known, so
considered, not against a sure conscience; that is, that it be in such a
matter, in which the assent is but imperfect, and relying upon unsure
inducements. For then he may as honestly trust the others prudence as his own
weakness, the others leisure and consideration, as his own want of time and
aptnesses to consider: and since the actions of most men in the world are
conducted by the wit of others in very many things, and of all men in some
things, it cannot be imprudence to take a guide to direct the conscience in
what it is not sufficiently instructed by its own provisions.

If the intercourse happen between the superior and the inferior, 5.
the liberty of changing our part of the probability is confirmed by a want of
liberty to dissent. The subject may change his opinion, because he must obey
where ever it is possible that he should; and that is in this cases in which it
is not only true that the opinion is probable in it self, but that it and its
contrary be both apprehended as probably true, and safely practicable. For then
there is no excuse to the man, and the conscience of the article cannot be
pretended against the conscience of obedience; and if it be lawful to obey, it
is necessary to obey. Hoc amo quod possum qualibet vire via, every man loves
his liberty, but this liberty does engage our obedience; we might not obey our
superior if God had engaged us in the contrary; but we may, when we are
persuaded that the contrary opinion is probable, that is, conformable to
reason, and fit enough to guide him that is not finally determined in his
conscience to the contrary. For if it could be otherwise, then there were
nothing to be given to authority; for in equal probabilities, it is likely if I
choose one part, I am determined by a little thing, by a trifle, by a chance,
by a humor; and if I be weighed down by never such a trifle, yet I am
determined to the choice of one side, and it will be but an evil portion to
authority, if it cannot be permitted to outweigh a humor, and a chance; an
ignorant confidence, or a vain presumption: and although it will be hard
sometimes for a man to be convinced of the vanity of his argument, yet when his
opinion is not only speculatively but practically probable, that is, when it
is considered only as probable, and the contrary altogether, or almost as well
thought of, the arguments of the present persuasion are confessed to be but
little, because they neither persuade, nor abuse beyond a probability; and
therefore in this case to outface authority, is without pretense, as much as
it is without warrant. And this is affirmed by S. Austin in the case of
Soldiers under a King, Lib. 22. contr. Faustum cap. 74. and habetur cap. Quid
culpatur. 23. qu. 1.
taking pay in a cause which either is just, or that they are not sure it is
unjust. Ergo vir justus si forte etiam sub Rege homine sacrilego militet, recte
potest illo jubente bellare, si vice pacis ordinem servans, quod sibi jubetur,
vel non esse contra Dei praeceptum certum est, vel utrum sit, certum non est.

But if the intercourse happen between a Physician and a Patient, 6.
it is made to differ. For 1. A Physician may not leave a certain way, and take
an uncertain in the question of life or health; In matters of mere opinion, the
very persuasion and probability of assent is warrant enough for the man, and
the effect is innocent; but when so great an interest is engaged, the man
becomes faster bound by the stricter ties of charity. It was a complaint that
Pliny made of Physicians in his time, Discunt periculis nostris, and
experientiam per mortes agunt, medicoque tantum occidisse impunitas summa est.
It is hard that a Physician should grow wiser at no cheaper rate then the
deaths of many Patients. Now to do the thing directly is intolerable, but to
do that which is not our best, and which is not safe, when we have by us that
which is safe, and which we know is useful, is directly against charity, and
justice, and prudence, and the faithfulness of a good man.

But 2. When a Physician has no better, he may take that course which is
probable, for that is his best; he cannot be required to more, and he is
excused, because he is required to minister. And this is yet more certain, if
the sick person shall die without Physic; but it is a venture whether the
medicament may prevail for his cure or no. For then all the hazard is on the
favorable side, and if it fails, the event is no worse; and it is charity to
offer at a Cure that is uncertainly good, but is certainly not evil.

3. When the opinions are on both sides probable, he may take that which is in
any sense safer, or in any degree, or by any means more probable, that is, for
the community of the opinion, or the advantage it has by the learning and
reputation of them that hold it: so that he may leave his own opinion which is
overcome by the greater argument, or the greater authority of another, though
both the authority be less then that which binds, and the argument less then
that which is certain.

RULE 12. He that inquires of several Doctors until he find one answering
according to his mind, cannot by that inquiry make his Conscience safe; but
according to the subject matter, and other circumstances he may.
SAint Paul remarks the folly of such men who heap up Teachers of their own, 1.
that is, such who preach what they desire, and declare things lawful which God
never made so; and he that has entertained an opinion, and is in love with it,
and will seek out for a kind and an indulgent nurse for it, cannot ordinarily
be the more secure for the opinion of his guide, because the intrinsic motive
of his assent is not his guide, but his own purposes and predisposing thoughts
and resolutions; and the getting of a learned man to say so, is but an artifice
to quiet the spirit, and make it rest in the deception if it so happens to be.
This determination from without may possibly add a fantastic peace, but no
moment to the honesty of the persuasion or conscience, because the conscience
was not ready to rely upon the authority, but resolved to go somewhere else
for an authority, if here it could not be had: and therefore the conscience
could not be made probable by the authority, because the resolution of the
conscience was antecedent to it.

This is true ordinarily and regularly, 2.
and there are usually many appendant deceptions; as an impatient desire to
have that true which I desire, a willingness to be deceived, a resolution to
bring our ends about, a consequent using means of being pleased and cozened, a
concealing some circumstances, and a false stating of the question, which is an
infallible sign of an evil conscience, and a mind resolved upon the
conclusion, desirous of a security, or sleepy quietness, and incurious of
truth. But yet there are some cases in which this changing of guides and
inquiries is not only innocent, but an instrument of a just confidence.

1. When the inquirer has very probable inducements for his opinion, 3.
and remains really unsatisfied in the answers and accounts of the first
Doctors.

2. When he has an indifferency to any part that may appear true, but it falls
out that nothing does seem true to him but what he has already entertained.

3. When the assent to our own proposition is determined, so as to avoid a real
doubt or perplexity, but yet a scruple remains, that is, some little degrees of
confidence are wanting, which cannot be better supplied then by an extrinsecal
argument, the authority of a wise man.

4. When the inquiring person is under a weakness and temptation, and wants
some to apply his own notices to him, and to make them operative and persuasive
upon his spirit; as it happens to very many men always, and to all men
sometimes.

5. When the case is favorable and apt for pity and releef, as in the dangers
of despair, then the inquirer not only may, but ought to go till he find a
person that can speak comfort to him upon true grounds of Scripture and
revelation.

6. When the purpose of the inquirer is to be landed upon any virtue, and pious
state of life or design, he may receive his encouragement and final
determination from him whom he chooses for his opinion sake, and conformity to
his own pious intentions.

The reason of these exceptions is this: 4.
Because the matter being just, favorable, and innocent, the man goes right,
and by being confirmed in his way, receives no detriment to his soul or his
duty; and because they are tendencies to duty, it is to be presumed that the
inquirer intends honestly and piously: and now since the way is secure, and the
person well intending, if the instrument of establishing this good course were
very incompetent, it might be an imperfection in nature, but not in morality.

RULE 13. He that is asked concerning a case that is on either side probable,
may answer against his own opinion, if the contrary be probable and more safe,
or more expedient and favorable.
THE reason is, 1.
because he that holds an opinion which himself believes only to be probable,
knows also there is no necessity in counselling it to another, because it is
not certainly true; and ^he may rather counsel the contrary to another then
follow it himself, because himself is already determined, which the other is
not, but is indifferent.

But why he should rather do so then counsel his own opinion, 2.
there is no reason in the thing, but something relating to the person
inquiring; as if the opinion which he maintains not, be more agreeable with the
others circumstances and necessities. Codrus inquires if he be tied to
restitution of all the fruits of a field which he held in a dubious title. The
Curate thinks it to be a probable opinion, that he is bound; but because Codrus
is poor, or apt to break the bridle of Religion if it holds him too hard, he
may counsel him according to the opinion of them that affirm that he is not
bound to restitution. If he be asked what his own opinion is, he must not speak
contrary to it: But when the question only is asked in order to a resolution,
he may point to go that way where by his own sentence he may be safe, and by
reason of the others necessities he may be more advantaged. The reason of this
is, because when two opinions are equally probable, the scales are turned by
piety, or charity, or any good thing that is of collateral regard, and
therefore makes a greater degree of artificial probability, and is in such
cases sufficient for determination. For in direct reason the case is equal, and
in the indirect there is great advantage on the side of charity, or accidental
necessity, or compliance with any fair and just interest. Christian Religion is
the best natured institution in the world.

The like case it is, 3.
when the opinion of the Curate is such, that the inquirer will probably abuse
it to licenciousness and evil mistake; for then the Curate may prudently
conceal his own sentence, and borrow his brothers candle to light a person that
is in danger.

RULE 14. When the guide of souls is of a different opinion from his charge or
penitent, he is not bound to exact conformity to his own opinion that is but
probable, but may proceed according to the conscience of the penitent.
THat is, 1.
supposing the opinion of the penitent to be probable, and that he did the
action bona fide, and as an act commendable, or permitted; he is not to be
troubled with what is past, lest that be turned into a scruple which was no
sin, and lest the Curate judge unrighteous judgment, and prescribe afflictions
for that for which God shall never call him to judgment; for in this case it
is, that no man can be the judge of another man's conscience.

But if the opinion of the penitent be certainly false, 2.
or the parent, or protector, or the occasion of a sin, the guide of his soul
must not comply at all with it, but discover the error and the danger. He that
kills his brother because he is zealous in another opinion, and thinks he does
God good service, must not be permitted in his erring conscience, and criminal
persuasion; for the matter has altered the case, and in the relations of duty,
the error is always vincible, and therefore intolerable: and therefore Peter
Lombard's Mother upon her deathbed was admonished to confess her sin in having
three children by illegal mixtures, though she was foolishly persuaded it was
no sin, because her sons did prove to be such excellent persons, and
instruments of Divine glory.

RULE 15. The sentence and arbitrament of a prudent and good man, though it be
of it self but probable, yet is more then a probable warranty to actions
otherwise undeterminable.
SIcut vir prudens eam definierit, is the great measure which Aristotle and all
the moral Philosophers assign to very many cases and questions. If two cases
that seem equally probable, have in them different degrees of safety, that the
safest is to be chosen is certain; but oftentimes the sentence and opinion of a
good man is the only rule by which we judge concerning safety. *When piety and
religion are in competition for our present attendance, sometimes piety to our
Parents is to be preferred, sometimes an action of religion in its own season;
but what portion of our services is to be allowed to the one and the other is
sicut vir prudens definierit, according as a good and a prudent man shall
determine. *To bury the dead is good, to releeve the living poor is ordinarily
better; but yet there was a time in which there was a proper season for that,
and not for this; and our blessed Savior commended Mary's devotion and choice
in so doing, but when we also may do one or the other, depends upon
circumstances and accidents which are not immediately the subject of Laws, but
of prudent consideration. * Humane Laws bind the conscience of their Subjects,
but yet give place to just and charitable causes; but which are competent and
sufficient is not expressly and minutely declared, but is to be defined by the
moderation and prudence of a good man. * That we are to be careful in the
conduct of our temporal affairs, in paying of our debts, in making provisions
for our children is certain and confessed: but besides the general measures and
limits of carefulness described by our blessed Savior, our earnestness of
prosecution, our acts of provision and labor are to be esteemed regular or
irregular by the sentence of a wise and a good man. The significations of love
to our children and nearest relatives, the measures of compliance with the
fashions of the world, the degrees of ornament or neglect in clothing,
intention of our actions and passions, and the^r degrees, the use and
necessities and pretenses for omissions in good things, and generally all the
accidental appendages of action are determinable only this way; and a
probability is enough to determine us; but that this is the way of introducing
the probability is upon this reason; because next to the provision of Laws,
stands the man who is obedient to Laws and understands them, and next to the
reason of the Law, stands the analogy and proportion of those Laws; and
therefore this is the next best to the Laws, it stands nearest to reason, is
the best guide that is left us, and therefore a proper measure of conscience in
the destitution of that which is most proper.

There are many other Rules concerning the exercise of a probable Conscience,
in the cases and questions of Kings and Priests, of Advocates and Judges, in
matters of Sacraments and Government, which are to be referred to the place of
their proper matter; but this is also to be determined by the Rules here
assigned, and have no particular consideration, except what merely relates to
the matter.

CHAP. V. Of a doubtful Conscience.
RULE 1. A doubtful Conscience assents to neither side of the question, and
brings no direct obligation.
THE Conscience being in its proper operations positive and practical; when it
is neither, 1.
it is not properly and directly conscience; and because it binds to obedience
by its determination and assent, and its consequent inclining the will, when
the understanding is not determined, nor the will inclined, there can no action
follow, but a total suspension of action is its proper consequent.

But upon this there is only a reflex act of Conscience and Understanding; 2.
for by considering that our conscience is doubtful, and indeterminable, we are
obliged to suspend our action; but then this is the act, not of a doubtful, but
of a right conscience, because in this we are certain, and right, and
determined: so that a doubtful conscience is but an aequivocal and improper
conscicence; like an unresolved will, or an artist with his hands bound behind
him: that is, the man has a conscience, but it is then in chains and fetters,
and he wears a hood upon his eye, and his arm in a string, and is only to be
taught how to cut the knot, and to do some little things of advantage, or
security to his intermedial state of impediment; but a doubtful conscience can
be no rule of humane actions.

But yet some collateral and indirect obligations are passed upon the man by
that state of infelicity, 3.
according to the nature of the doubt.

In order to which, 4.
doubts are considered, either as relating to the Law, or as relating to
matters of fact, viz. whether such a thing be lawful or not? or whether I did
such an action or no, by which I am bound to restitution or repentance?

Doubts also are Negative, 5.
or Positive, that is, they are still upon us because there is no means to
determine the understanding; as no man can ever be resolved whether the number
of the stars be even or odd; when is the precise minute in which a man first
comes to the use of reason; and this is called a Negative doubt. The Positive
enters by the indifferency of the arguments, and their equal weight on both
sides: as if it be doubted whether the souls departed enjoy the beatifick
vision before the day of Judgment? whether Residence on a Benefice be an
indispensable precept, or in what cases it obliges not? whether Ecclesiastical
persons be bound by justice or by charity to give all that they can prudently
spare to the poor? These are positive doubts, because there are many arguments
on eithe side.

The Negative doubt is either Metaphysical or Moral, or it is only a
Suspicion; 6.
that is, these are several degrees of such a doubt, for the determination of
which there is no sufficient instrument.

Lastly, 7.
sometimes a doubt is placed only in the understanding, without any other
effect but the trouble of thoughts; and then for methods sake, and right
understanding of the rules of practice, it is called a speculative doubt.
Sometimes this doubt passes on to the conscience, and has influence upon the
action or event; so as to be an impediment to it, or the spoil of it, that is,
so as to cause that it shall not be done, or if it be done that it becomes a
sin: and this is called a practical doubt.

According to these distinctions the following Rules are useful in order to
practice.

RULE 2. A negative doubt neither binds to action, nor inquiry, nor repentance;
but it binds only to caution and observance.
1. THat it binds not to action] I affirm upon the same ground, 1.
by which the same is affirmed concerning all doubting consciences. It binds
from action; for whatsoever is done with a doubting conscience (that is,
without faith, or fullness of persuasion that it is lawful to do it) is a sin.
S. Paul gave us the Rule, Romans 14. 23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Quod dubitas ne feceris, said Cicero. For
if we do it with a doubting conscience, we do it without our Rule, which is
the dictate of our conscience, and since no action is indifferent between
lawful and unlawful (though between good and bad there may) to do without our
Rule of lawful and permitted it to do against it, even that which is not
permitted, and therefore is unlawful. Add to this,

2. He that does not know whether it be lawful or no, does that which he is not
sure but it may be forbidden by God, and displeasing to him; and to do that
which I know not but may grieve my friend, or trouble him, cannot consent with
my love to him; and therefore every act of a doubting conscience is against
charity. In the question of lawful or unlawful, not to know it to be lawful, is
to enter upon it with a mind willing to admit the unlawful; it is all one to
be in the dark, as to be without a candle or a star, and either of them is as
bad, as full of ignorance and obscurity, as if we shut our eyes, or put the
candle out. When therefore it happens that our conscience doubts whether such
an act be a sin or no, a good man will be sure not to sin; but in that case,
and while the doubt remains, he can have no security, but by not doing it.

2. It binds not to inquiry] because there is no competent means to find out a
resolution; 2.
for that is the state of the Question, that is the definition of a Negative
doubt. Fabiola doubts whether in her childhood she did never take Gods name in
vain; and although she be bound to inquire in all the reasonable and remembered
parts of her life, because of them she may find some records, and in that case
the doubt is not negative; yet of the state of childhood she cannot be obliged
to make inquiry, because there was then no Law, no Register, no Court kept, no
judgment, no choice; that is, she cannot be obliged to an effect that is
impossible, and to an act that is to no purpose.

3. It binds not to repentance.] In case she fears exceedingly, 3.
supposing this still to be a Negative doubt, that is, such a one, for the
proper resolution of which there are no competent arguments or instruments.
Fabiola not knowing whether she did or no, and it being impossible afterward
to find it out, Fabiola i^ not tied to ask forgiveness for the blasphemies of
her childhood: For no obligation can come from what is not, or cannot be known.

This is to be understood to be true of that sort of Negative doubt which it
called Metaphysical, 4.
when there is no possibility of knowing; as it is impossible to know what
little pretty phantasm made us to smile when we hanged upon our Mothers breasts;
and the doubt is only founded upon the possibility that the thing might have
been, though now it be impossible to find out whether it was or no. It is
possible that being a child I might laugh at Scripture, or mock an Apostle; but
if this could bring an obligation to an act of repentance, then the same
obligation passes upon all men in all actions and periods of their lives, for
all things, and in all cases in which they do not remember all, or did not
observe every circumstance, or did not consider every minute, or weigh every
degree. For in every thing there is a possibility that I might have done
something very ill.

But there is a Negative doubt which is called Morally negative; 5.
that is, when there is no way of being readily and clearly determined, but yet
the doubt is founded upon some light conjecture, and no more. I was tempted, or
I had an opportunity, or an evil thought came cross me, and I know my own
infirmity; and this according to the degrees of the conjecture can oblige us to
a general and conditional repentance; thus, if I did amiss, God of his mercy
impute it not unto me. I know not, my conscience does not accuse me, (so S.
Paul) but I am not hereby justified; God is greater then my conscience. But
this, set the words of S. John, and they will determine the case: If our hearts
condemn us not, then have we peace toward God; that is, the doubt in this
matter ought to be laid down, if our hearts do not pass sentence against us;
but not so wholly but that we may provide against a danger not actually felt:
We ought to be peaceful, but not too confident, when there is any probability
of error and deception. The peace is warranted by S. John, the wariness is
exemplified in S. Paul.

4. It does bind to caution and observance.] Every thing does so, 6.
where either there is a danger, or any is suspected, or any is possible, or
any ever was: and therefore, for this there needs no peculiar reason, only
according to the approach of the negative doubt to any degrees of its being
positive; that is, to a probability that it is as we doubt, the observance
ought to be stricter, and the caution more severe, which happens in that
imperfect kind of imperfection, in suspicion, which is but the image of
doubting.

For there is yet another sort of doubting, 7.
which may be called a privative doubt. Titius is invited to eat with one of
another communion. First he checks at it, but because he knows no reason
against it, nor indeed did ever dispute, or hear the question disputed, whether
it be lawful or no, he goes. The question is, whether he did well or no?

Concerning which the case is evident, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin,
8.
that is, if it be not done with a persuasion that it is lawful. But if a man
be persuaded that he may lawfully do any thing against which he knows no Law,
no Commandment, no Reason; this is not a doubting conscience, but a probable,
and therefore need not to abate the action. * But if this also turn into a
doubt, the case is altered. For he that thinks he may not do it, or doubts
whether he may or no do a thing for which he has no command, or no positive
and affirmative warrant, and that it is no sufficient reason or warrant for the
doing it that he knows nothing against it, unless he also have something for
it; this man thus persuaded or abused, may not proceed to action. For in this
case he has nothing for it, and one great thing against it, even this
proposition, That a thing is not to be done in such a case, which is the case
of a privative doubt. But for the thing it self, the next Rule gives an account
of it.

RULE 3. A privative doubt cannot of it self hinder a man from acting what he
is moved to by an extrinsick argument, or inducement that is in it self prudent
or innocent.
IT cannot of it self hinder] that is, 1.
abstracting from the circumstance of accidental doubting or not doubting. The
reason is, because there being no Law against it by which he is actually ruled,
and no reason appearing in defiance of it, that is, there being no intrinsecal
disswasive, the conscience is only left to be conducted or persuaded by the
extrinsecal.

For all actions are left indifferent till by a superinduced Law they are
restrained; 2.
which superinduced Law wants its publication, if inculpably I have no notice
of it in my conscience. But this is to be allowed with this caution: That this
entering upon actions against which we know no reason or law, be not sudden, and
violent, and careless, like the rushing of an horse into a battle without
consideration; but that we consider according to our strength, and to our time,
whether there be any reasons for or against the act in question, and if we
find none, let us make none; that is, let us not by our unreasonable and
impertinent doubting place a snare for our own feet, there where none is placed
by the prohibition.

2. If it be a matter that concerns the interest of another, 3.
let us always be the more wary, and remember, if there be nothing against it,
there must be something for it, either in the matter, or in the manner, either
in justice, or in charity, or at least by the securities of the safer part, by
which, if we find no reward, yet we are sure to find indemnity.

This whole advice is of great use in the circumstances of the duty that
concerns the married pairs; 4.
in which the Doctors of Cases of Conscience have spoken what they please, and
in many things wholly by chance or fancy; and the holy state of marriage ought
to be rescued from many of their snares and intricacies by which they have
troubled it, as well appear when I shall speak to the Rules of that affair.

RULE 4. In doubts of Right, or Law, we are always bound to inquire; but in
doubts of fact not always.
THE reason is, 1.
because ignorance of our duty is always a sin, and therefore when we are in a
perceived, discernable state of danger, he that refuses to inquire after his
duty, does not desire to do it.

In matters of fact we are bound ordinarily to inquire, 2.
because we must not be ignorant of the state of our consciences, and what
obligation ^here is to restitution, or repentance. which the more particular it
is, the more perfect it is. But this I say, that though ordinarily it be true
that we are obliged, yet in some cases it may happen that it is safer to trust
the event of things with a general repentance, then that the conscience of some
men be tempted with a particular notice of the fact.

1. This happens in those that are weak-hearted, 3.
soft, and apt to every impression in too deep a regard. A Castilian Gentleman
being newly recovered from the sad effects of a melancholy spirit, and an
affrighting conscience, and being entertained by some that waited on him with
sports and innocent pastimes to divert his scaring thoughts; he with his
company shot many arrows in a public field at rovers: at that time there was a
man killed, whether by his arrows or no, he knew not, and is forbidden to
inquire; and his case had in it reason enough to warrant the advice: The
knowledge of it could not have done him so much good, as it would have done him
hurt; and it was better he should be permitted to a doubting then to a
despairing conscience, as in his case it was too likely to have happened. It is
better to be suspected then to be seen.

2. This also is so to be advised, 4.
when the inquiry into the doubt of fact may be prejudicial to a third person.
A Priest going to the West Indies by misfortune wounds one of his company, whom
with much trouble and sorrow, he leaves to be cured of his hurt, but passes on
to his voyage, which he finished at a huge distance from the place of his
misfortune. The Merchants come the next year that way, and he is unwilling to
inquire concerning his sick friend; desirous he was to know good of him, but
infinitely fearful lest he be dead: Consulting therefore with his superior in
the case, was directed not to inquire, upon this account; because if the man
were dead the Priest would be irregular, and a whole Parish unprovided for, and
left without rites and Sacraments, and public offices, which then and there
could not easily be supplied.

But in matters of right or duty inquiry must be made, 5.
ever, when the question is of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of what is to be
done; because we enter upon danger, and despise our own safety, and are
careless of our duty, and not zealous for God, nor yet subjects of Conscience,
or of the Spirit of God, if we do not well inquire of an action we are to do,
whether it be good or bad. But when the act is done, and done with an actual
persuasion that it was lawful, the conscience of that person is not easily to
be disturbed, which is to be understood with these cautions:

1. When the question was probable on either side, 6.
and at the time of acting, was chosen with its just measures and provisions;
then although the complice or partner of the act do change his opinion, and
think himself bound to repent, yet he is not bound to trouble the other.
Anthony a Gentleman of Parma being in love with Maria de Rupe, being moved with
great interests of his person, and a great necessity, consummates his marriage
before publication, they both of them being persuaded that it is lawful. He
afterward changes his opinion, thinks it a sin, and repents and begs pardon,
but being also in doubt whether he ought to tell his wife of it, was advised to
the contrary, upon this amongst many other concurrent reasons, because what was
innocently done, cannot be condemned in that in which it was innocent: for the
man himself ought to be sorrowful for his being deceived (if he thinks he was)
but he cannot be tied to repent of the act, which supposing his then present
persuasion was lawful, because done according to probable conscience: and
therefore much less ought he to disturb the peace of his wife, whose persuasion
remains the same as at first. What was not a sin at first, cannot in that
individual act become a sin afterward.

2. This is also to be understood, 7.
when the act leaves no evil effect, or has done no hurt to a third person;
but if it do, then my peace is not to be bought at the expense of another
evil. No man is to be made better or left so, by another detriment; and
therefore if a child were begotten in that unripe and hasty consummation, and
that child should be declared bastard, then the peace is to be disturbed, and
the inquiry on all hands to be curious and busy, because in all such cases
there is something of duty for the future concerned in it; sometimes
restitution, but always repentance in particular.

3. This is also true when the fact that is past is not introductive of more
and new instances; 8.
for if it was the wrong side of the probability which was chosen, and the same
kind of action is to return often, there the conscience though heartily
persuaded, must be awakened from its security by him that believes it to be a
sin that was done, and then the interested party must inquire; the reason of
this is, because this concerns the future, and all the world when they enter
upon action must inquire anew when they have reason to doubt anew, and they may
be called upon, and must be better informed by them that can and are concerned.
For the honor of God and the interest of his service is in this case
concerned, which in the other is not, when it only relates to a single and a
past action, which was then lawful, and therefore will not afterward be
imputed.

4. When the person interested does of himself doubt whether the past act was
lawful or not, 9.
and desires to be satisfied, and that there will be no evil effect in the
alteration of his persuasion, then it is fit he be complied with in that which
he judges to be for the interest of his soul, for this is certainly the better;
the other way of concealing and not inquiring being only permitted in some
cases, and with so many cautions and reservations as are before expressed.

RULE 5. In doubts the safer part is to be chosen.
WHen the Conscience is doubtful, 1.
neither part can be chosen till the doubt be laid down; but to choose the
safer part is an extrinsecal means instrumental to the deposition of the doubt,
and changing the conscience from doubtful to probable. This Rule therefore does
properly belong to the probable conscience: for that the conscience is
positively doubtful is but accidental to the question and appendant to the
person. For the reasons on either side make the conscience probable, unless
fear, or some other accident make the man not able to rest on either side. For
in matters of conscience it is as hard to find a case so equally probable that
a man shall find nothing without, or within to determine him, as it is to
find that which the Philosophers call, Temperamentum ad pondus, a constitution
so equal that no part shall excel the other. For if there were nothing in the
things to distinguish them, yet in the man there is a natural propensity which
will make him love one sort of arguments more then another. What can be more
indifferent then to see two dogs fight? and yet no man sees their cruelty,
but he wishes better to one then to another: and although no opinions are so
very even, yet if they were, the man has an acquisite, or else a natural
biass, or something of contingency that will determine him: and if the
conscience remains undetermined, so that he may not, or dare not venture upon
either part, it is certainly a disease, or a direct infirmity. And because such
persons can do nothing at all till their doubtful is changed into a probable
conscience, this discourse must relate to that conscience that is probable,
though in compliance with the usual ways of speaking, I have placed it here.

1. The Rule therefore is to be understood to be good advice, 2.
but not necessary in all cases. For when the contrary opinion is the more
probable, and this the more safe, to do this is a prudent compliance, either
with a timorous or with an ignorant conscience; it is always an effect of
piety, and a strong will to good, but very often an effect of a weak
understanding,; that is, such an one which is inclined to scruple, and dares
not trust the truth of his proposition, or God with his soul in the pursuance
of it. And indeed sometimes there is in this some little suspicion of the event
of things which must needs reflect upon the goodness of God, under whom we
fancy we cannot be so safe by pursuing that rule and guide that he has given
us, that is, the best reason, and the fairest inducement, as we may be by
relying upon the sureness of the matter. Indeed we our selves are so wholly
immerged in matter that we are conducted by it, and its relations in very many
things: But we may as well rely upon formalities and spiritual securities (if
we understood them) as upon the material; and it is as safe to rely upon the
surer side of reason as upon the surer side of the thing. Now that which is the
more probable has the same advantage in constituting a conscience formally
safe, as the other less probable but surer side has for the making the
conscience safe materially.

2. If the conscience be probable, 3.
and so evenly weighed that the determinanation on either side is difficult,
then the safer side is ordinarily to be chosen, because that helps to outweigh
and determine the scale; that is, when reason and the proper motives of the
question are not sufficient to determine it, let auxiliaries be taken from
without, and if the conscience be not made securer by its rule, let it be made
safe by the material. It is just as the building of an house If the Architect
be not wise and knowing how to secure the fabric by rule of art, and
advantages of complication, and the contexture of parts, let him support it
with pillars great and massy; for if the other be wanting, these will sustain
the roof sure enough, but with some rudeness in the thing, and imperfection in
the whole.

3. If to that which is the surer side there be a great inconvenience
consequent, 4.
the avoiding of that inconvenience being laid on the opposite even part, will
outweigh the consideration of the safety. Quintus Milo commands his servant
Anfidius whom he had taken for the teaching Grammar and Rhetoric to his
children, that he would learn the Trade of a Shoo-maker. Anfidius doubts
whether his Master Q. Milo has power to command him to do that which was no
part of the employment for which he was entertained, and yet because the thing
is of it self lawful and honest, he considers it is the safest course for him
to obey, for certainly in so doing he sins not; and thus far he is bound, and
was in the right. But if to learn that mean Trade will dishonor and disable
him, make him a fool and contemptible, and ruin his hopes and his interests
when he leaves the service of Milo, the servant is not tied to follow that
which is more safe, but that which is more charitable and prudent; In dubiis
juris tutior pars sequenda est, and obedire teneor, si commode possim, was the
rule: because the reason abstractedly considered makes the question safe on
either side, as the determination happens; and the avoiding an intolerable
inconvenience is as considerable as the accidental security, and in many cases
more complying with charity, because in a question in which the conscience is
probable there is a great safety without taking in the advantage of a safe
matter, by the proper efficacy and influence of the reason making a probable
and an honest conscience; but then when the safety is provided for fairly
otherways, and for the most part sufficiently, and the inconvenience on the
other side is not provided for; in all such cases we must leave that which is
materially sure, for the choice of that which in its formality is equally sure,
and in its matter more charitable. A little child came to my door for alms, of
whom I was told he was run from his Mothers house and his own honest
employment; but in his wandering he was almost starved: I found that if I
releeved him, he would not return to his Mother, if I did not releeve him, he
would not be able. I considered that indeed his souls interests were more to be
regarded and secured then his body, and his sin rather to be prevented then his
sickness, and therefore not to releeve him seemed at first the greater charity.
But when I weighed against these considerations, that his sin is uncertain, and
future, and arbitrary, but his need is certain, and present, and natural; that
he may choose whether he will sin or no, but cannot in the present case choose
whether he will perish or no; that if he be not releeved he dies in his sin,
but many things may intervene to reform his vicious inclination; that the
natural necessity is extreme, but that he will sin is no way necessary, and
has in it no degrees of unavoidable necessity; and above all, that if he
abuses my releef to evil purposes which I intended not, it is his fault, not
mine, but the question being concerding my duty not his, and that to releeve
him is my duty and not his, and that therefore if I do not releeve him, the
sin is also mine and not his; and that by bidding of him to do his duty I
acquit my self on one side, but by bidding him to be warm and fed, I cannot be
acquitted on the other, I took that side which was at least equally sure and
certainly more charitable.

This also happens in the matter of justice very often. It is the surer side in
many cases to restore, 5.
and is a testimony of an honest mind, that to secure its eternal interest,
will quit the temporal. But if to restore will undo a man, and the case is
indifferent, or at least probable that he is not bound, then it is not
necessary to restore, though to restore be the surer side; and if the interest
of a third person, as of wife, or children, be also involved in the question,
then the inquiring person is bound not to restore. Because in the present case
there is a certain uncharitableness, and but an uncertain justice, that is, a
duty certainly omitted, for the securing of another that is not certain.

4. When the more probable is also the more safe, 6.
there is no question but the safer is to be chosen. For so, the conscience is
made the more sure both materially and formally; that is, by the better reason,
and the more advantageous matter, and he that does otherwise, exposes himself
to an evident danger of sinning, having nothing to out balance either the
direct reason, or the accidental safety.

5. Sometimes it happens that what is safe in one regard, 7.
is dangerous in another, and on each side of the probability there is a danger
and a safety. Vittoria Columbina a Venetian Lady was married to five
Magnifico's successively; and they all being dead, and she left very rich,
young, and tempted to a sixth marriage, advises with her Confessor whether or
no she may lawfully do it? he tells her that it is not only probable, but
certain that she may; but it were better if she kept her Widdowhood, and after
so much sense of mortality retire to Religion. But that he may determine her
case with more certainty she tells him, she had once resolved with her self to
live a Widow, but finds she shall not be free from temptation in that state,
and desires him to tell her if she may lawfully marry, notwithstanding that
resolution, which now to be something altered, he perceives by her question. *
He answers, that it is the surest course to determine for chastity and
abstinence, her state of Widowhood being more certainly pleasing then the
other. But then she hints her temptation, and asks if some sure course is not
to be taken for her being secured in that point too? * This arrests his
thoughts upon a new consideration, but the result is this:

1. When there are two securities to be provided for, 8.
one of the thing, and the other of the person; that of the person is first to
be provided for. It is the safer part of the question to determine on the side
of chastity, or virginity, or widdowhood, but this may be the unsafer side to
the person, who if he suffers temptation is to be provided for by that answer
which gives him remedy and ease.

2. But if it happens that there is danger on either side to the person, 9.
that is the surer side which provides against that temptation which is
strongest and most imminent, and which if it prevails is of the worst
consequence.

3. This is also to be understood in those cases when temporal life is offered
in question against the danger of a sin. 10.
Michael Verinus a young Gentleman of Spain, by reason of his living a single
life was pressed with so great inconvenience that he fell into a lingering and
dangerous sickness. The Physicians advise him to use his remedy, though he be
not married, and being it was in order to his health, which was not else to be
recovered, they presumed it lawful, or did not care whether it were or no, but
however they advise him to it. He doubts of it, and dares not be uncharitable
and die for want of remedy, if he might have it, and yet dares not commit an
act of uncleanness; but finding on either hand a sin threatening him, and if he
flies from a Lion he meets a Bear, or is told that a Bear is in the way: he at
last flies from the evil beast that stood before him, and chooses that way
which was evidently the safest, not to his health, but to his salvation; not to
his body, but his soul, and chose rather to die, then to do that which he was
certainly persuaded to be a sin, and of the other he was not so sure. Sola
Venus potuit lento succurrere morbo,
Ne se pollueret, maluit ille mori,
In other things, the prudence of a guide must be his only Rule.

The sum is this:

1. If the doubt be equal and the danger equal, 11.
the doubt must be laid aside, or there can be no action consequent: and for
the danger, if you choose one, you may choose either, for there is no
difference; a dagger or a sword is all one to him that must die by one.

2. If the doubt be unequal and the danger equal, 12.
the resolution must be on that side where there is the most confidence, that
is, where the less cause of doubting is apprehended; as if I have but enough to
give one alms, and I see two ready to perish, and I can releeve but one; the
danger is equal, for pasce fame morientem, si non pavisti, occidisti, said S.
Ambrose, but one is my friend, and the other is a stranger; in this case the
doubt is unequal, and I ought to prefer my friend.

3. If the danger be unequal, 13.
and the doubt equal, the resolution must be made in compliance with our
safety. For there is nothing to weigh down in the doubt, yet there is something
to weigh down in the ^^nger, and that is sufficient.

4. If the doubt be unequal, 14.
and the danger unequal, there we must take the least danger* though on the
least side of the probability, because there can no degree of sin be consented
to; and therefore when by our own fault or infelicity we must be forced to fall
upon one, we must take the less, by the same reason for which we are to refuse
all that we can. Maevius Caligarius a Roman Gentleman and newly converted to
Christianity, observes that his friend Agricola was pursued by his enemies unto
death, and was by them asked concerning him whether he were in his house or no.
He knew he was, but knows also that if he confesses it he shall die. He doubts
whether it be lawful to lie to save his friends life or no, and cannot resolve
whether it be or no, but inclines rather to think it is not lawful. But he
considers if it be lawful, then he is guilty of his friends death, who refused
to save him at an innocent charge. But if it be not lawful, he does but tell an
officious lie, so long as the doubt remains, he must rather venture upon an
uncertain sin in the officious lie, then the uncertain but greater sin of
homicide. These are the cases in which the danger is on both sides.

5. But if there be danger on one side only, 15.
and a doubt on both sides, there is no question but that side is to be chosen
where there is no danger; unless the doubt on one side be contemptible and
inconsiderable, and the other not so.

RULE 6. It is lawful for the Conscience to proceed to action against a doubt
that is merely speculative.
IN a sure Conscience the speculative and the practical are the same in certain
consequence, 1. Ci^p. 2. Rule 3.
as I have already proved in its own place; but in a doubting Conscience the
case is differing. For though it be ordinarily true here also that he that
doubts speculatively does also doubt practically; as if he doubts concerning
all usurarious contracts, whether it be lawful or no to use any, he doubts also
concerning this which himself uses, if it be usurarious. But because there may
intervene a special case, and that which is true in general may be altered in
the particular, it may happen that he may be certain and determined in the
particular when he is not so in the general; that is, when the case is special,
by privilege, or exemption, or the ceasing of the reason, or by any other
special case he may think himself acquitted, when yet the action is culpable in
its whole kind.

But by a speculative doubt sometimes is meant not the general, 2.
but the question abstracted from circumstances; and in this it sometimes
happens that though the conscience doubt concerning the question, yet it does
not doubt concerning the practice. Titius is possessed of a field on which he
entered by inheritance, and wholly without fraud and violence; but yet upon some
supervening notices he afterward doubts whether the field be his own by a just
title; but because he is informed by his Confessor and others on whom he does
and may rely, that possession is a collateral title, and that what he so
possesses h^^ may still dwell upon till it be certain that it is not his own;
he rests at quiet in his mind, because possession is stronger then his doubt,
though it cannot prevail against demonstration.

Mary of Rhemes the wife of a Soldier is told by his Captain that her husband
was killed at the battle of Pavy; 3.
after her year of mourning was expired she marries again to a Citizen of
Rhemes, and cohabites with him two year; after which she is told that her first
husband escaped to Tarentum, and there lives in obscurity. Upon this she doubts
whether the Citizen be really her husband or no; yet living with him he demands
her to pay her conjugal duty, she inquires whether during this doubt she may or
no; and is answered affirmatively upon the same grounds: The Citizen is in
possession of the marriage, and this is not to be disturbed by a doubt, but by
a certainty, especially since the doubt is but a speculative doubt, not a
practical. For it is no good argument to say, I doubt whether this man be my
husband or no, therefore if I consent to him I commit adultery; for the
presumption lying upon the possessor, though his title be dubious, yet his
possession is not, and either of them both are to have a portion in the effect,
and therefore the certain possession in a dubious title is to be preferred
before a dubious title without possession, and therefore this kind of doubt
ought not to hinder the effect of the present duty. For in this case it is not
true; The antecedent is doubtful, therefore so is the consequent. For as out of
falsehood truth may come, so out of doubts may come certainty. I see a great way
off Father Grimaldi moving his lips; I suppose he is disputing, whom yet I was
told not to be alive. I argue thus: He disputes, therefore he is not dead. The
consequent is certain, but the antecedent doubtful; so it is in the present
case. I doubt whether this woman be and ought to be my wife, but because she is
legally so and so reputed and in possession, I do infer that therefore I
must pay my duty to her, till it be certain that she is not my wife. For though
I doubt of the person whether or no she be my wife, yet I am certain, or I may
be certain of this, that he that approaches to her who is in possession of
marriage may do it lawfully; he only does fornicate who approaches to her of
whom I am certain that she is not my wife. But if of this proposition also I
doubt, the doubt is practical, and I may not do it, till by some means the
doubt be resolved or laid aside. But so long as it is a question speculative,
the action may be determinate and lawful, and introduced upon many accounts.

For the fuller manifestation of which secret, 4.
because it is of great concernment, and has influence upon the conscience in
many great actions and intercourse of humane society, it is remarkable that we
cannot argue thus; This man is not bonae fidei possessor, a possessor by a just
faith, therefore he possesses it mala fide, by an unjust: So neither does this
follow, This man possesses it not with an evil faith, therefore he possesses it
with a good faith. It does neither way follow negatively. But this consequence
is good; He is a possessor by a good faith, therefore he does not possess it by
an evil. Or, he is a possessor by an evil faith, therefore he does not possess
it by a good; it follows either way affirmatively. The reason of the difference
is this; If it be good it cannot be bad, and if it be bad it cannot be good; if
it be one, it cannot be the other, but it may happen that it may be neither
good nor bad, for there is a medium or a third between good and bad faith or
honesty of possession; and this consists in a speculative doubt, by which the
possessor doubts whether that which is in his hands be in his right, or belongs
to him or to another; and that he who so doubts has neither good nor bad faith
is expressed by the gloss in l. 1. C. de acq. poss. gl. in l. 2. ff. pro solut.
and gl. in l. 3.. generaliter ff. de acq. poss.

The consequent of which is this, 5.
That because that he who so doubts is not bonae fidei possessor, therefore he
cannot from thence begin to prescribe or to acquire a just title, because of
the rule of the Law, Quod ab initio non valuit, progressu temporis valere non
debet, and it cannot by time get strength to walk which enters into the world
without feet; now the doubting conscience is but a lame supporter. But yet
because such a conscience which only has this speculative doubt is not malae
fidei possessor, therefore he may lawfully still retain the possession till the
contrary be evicted.

There is this only to be added, that although prescription or other ways of
just title cannot begin with a doubting conscience, yet if it entered with a
thoroughly persuaded conscience, it may go on though it be disquieted by a
supervening doubt. The reason is, because it having lawful Parents of its birth
and first production, cannot be killed and destroyed by a suit at Law, it began
well, and therefore had just principles of its progression; and whatsoever has
the first advantage of just and reasonable, is always to be so presumed till
the contrary be proved; a doubt therefore may make the man unquiet, and tie him
to inquire, but cannot interrupt the possession or the beginning and growing
title. Besides the reason, this sentence is confirmed by the concurring
testimonies of Bartolus, Imola, Sylvester, Felinus, Balbus, and Johannes
Hannibal, under their titles de praescriptionibus and usucapionibus.

There are some accidental hardnesses to the conscience which are innocent, 6.
and because besides the even measures of good and evil by lawful* and
unlawful, there are some paths chalked out to us by necessities, by
conveniences, by presumptions, by securities, and other indefinite aims at
things which can sometimes weigh down the best of our imperfect conjectures in
some obsure cases, we may as well walk by the light of the stars, and better
too, then to walk qui^e in the dark; and not only the Sun is appointed to rule
the day, but there are the Moon and the Stars to govern the night: plain and
easy Rules make a sure conscience, but the doubtful and the dark must be
content with a less light.

For, 7.
unlearned men are oftentimes beset with the arguments of a talking man, which
they cannot answer, but create a speculative doubt, and such as destroys all
the certainty of evidence which they had; but if they should not stick to their
own conclusion in despite of all the objections, by a certainty of adhesion,
they might be disturbed in every thing, and confident in nothing, and might if
they met with a Heretic be fooled out of their Religion, and quit the most
material parts of their belief. And even the learned have in many articles a
presumptive assent to their propositions; and if they be made to doubt in their
understanding by the opposition of an adversary, they are not instantly to
change their practice, but to inquire further. For if after every such doubting
their practice must be insecure or criminal, they might be forced to a
lightness greater then that of the Egyptian Priests: and some men can believe
well, and dispute ill, but yet their faith must not change at the argument of
every Sophister. In these cases the practice is made secure by a collateral
light, and he is defended from change by reputation, and custom, by fear of
scandal, and the tie of Laws, and by many other indirect instruments of
determination, which although they cannot out-wit the crntrary arguments, yet
they ought to outweigh the doubt, and guide the will, and rule the conscience
in such cases.

There is nothing but a weak man may doubt of, 8.
but if he be well, he must not change his foot, till it be made certain to him
that he is deceived; let him consider what he please, and determine at leisure;
let him be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slower yet in declaring by his
action and changed course, that his doubt has prevailed upon him. I knew a
Scholar once who was a man of a quick apprehension, and easy to receive an
objection, who when he read the Roman Doctors was very much of their opinion,
and as much against them when he read their adversaries, but kept himself to
the Religion of his Country, concerning which at all times he remembered that
there were rare arguments and answers respectively, though he could not then
think upon them. * There are temptations of faith and opinion, and they are to
be resisted sometimes by indirect ways of proceeding, and artifices of the
spirit; and sometimes men in sickness are afflicted with doubting and trembling
consciences, but yet are supported only with general remembrances, they
consider that there are comforts, and excellent promises, and instruments of
hope, and wise and holy sayings by which they were nursed up to that height of
strength, that they are now able to fight in the dark: If the speculative
doubting conscience should always prevail in practice, the ignorant might be
abused and miserable in all things, and the learned in most.

RULE 7. Every dictate and judgment of the Conscience, though it be little and
less material, is sufficient and may be made use of for the deposition of a
doubt.
EVery little reason is not sufficient to guide the will, 1.
or to make an honest or a probable Conscience, as I have proved in the
foregoing Chapter Rule 7.
; but in a doubting conscience, that is, where there are seemingly great
reasons of either side, and the conscience not able to determine between them,
but hangs like a needle between two load-stones, and can go to neither,
because it equally inclines to both; there it is, that any little dictate that
can come on one side and turn the scale is to be admitted to counsel and to
action; for a doubt is a disease in conscience, like an irresolution in action,
and is therefore to be removed at any just rate, and any excuse taken rather
then have it permitted. For even to wash in Jordan may cure a leprosy, and a
glass of wine may ease the infirmities of the stomach and he is too ceremonious
in the matter of life and death, that stands upon puntilio's with nature, and
will not be cured but by rich medicines. For in a doubting conscience the
immediate cure is not to choose right, that is the remedy in an erring
conscience; but when the disease or evil, is doubting, or suspension, the
remedy is determination; and to effect this, whatsoever is sufficient may be
chosen and used.

Every conscience that proceeds probably, 2.
proceeds honestly, unless by a greater probability it be engaged against the
less; now to make a conscience that is probable, yet even more probable, a
little advantage is sufficient; which is to be understood with these cautions:

1. When the doubt is equal and the danger alike on either side, 3.
then a smaller supersaetation of argument will do the work, that is, cure the
doubting; for though a little argument is not alone a ground for the action of
a wise man, yet a little overplus of reason will take off this calamity of
irresolution and trepidation; it is not enough to out weigh any danger, but it
can with the portion of the equal measures which stand on its own side, by its
little weight cast the balance.

2. This is not so easily to be admitted when the judgment of the man is
discernably and perceivably little and not to be trusted, 4.
for then the superaddition that is made by him to any part of the doubt may be
as wholly inconsiderable as the doubt it self is troublesome; and though this
may make the doubt to be laid aside, as it will also determine such a man in
the whole traverse of the question, yet it is the worst remedy of the doubt,
and an insufficient introduction of the probability. In this case the doubt is
to be laid aside by the advice and authority of some person fit to lead him,
rather then by the confidence of his own little superadded impertinency. For
indeed it is not good to have the sacredness of a conscience governed by
weakness and contingency.

3. When the doubting person is inconstant, 5.
let him not speedily act what he lightly determines by the sudden intervening
humor; for he that changes quickly, judges lightly, but fancies strongly, and
acts passionately, and repents speedily and often; therefore let such a man
when he perceives his own infirmity stop at the gates of action, lest the
laying down one doubt, multiply many, and he become more miserable in his
remedy then in his sickness.

In pursuance of this Rule it is to be taken care of that fear be not mistaken
for doubt; for there is oftentimes a doubt no where but in the Will, and the
more slender and weak the judgment is, oftentimes the fear is greater; and
sometimes they fear because they fear, and not because they have reason; when
therefore the doubt does not rely upon such a reason as can be formed into an
argument and discourse, but is an unreasonable trouble, and an infinite
nothing; the doubt ought directly to be laid aside, for it is no way
considerable, but only that it is a considerable trouble.

RULE 8. When two precepts contrary to each other meet together about the same
question, that is to be preferred which binds most.
THIS Rule we learn from the eighth Council of Toledo, 1.
Ubi periculi necessitas compulerit, Council. T^le^. 8 Can 2. temp. Martini P.
id debemus resolvere quod minori nexu noscitur obligari. Quid autem ex his
levius, quidve sit gravius, pietatis acumine investigemus. The Council
instances in the keeping wicked oaths and promises, where though the instance
be mistaken, and that in the matter of wicked promises the case is not
perplexed, and it is no sin to break them, but a sin to keep them; yet upon
supposition that the conscience is doubtful whether it be lawful to break them,
and whether it be lawful to keep them, and fears a sin on either side, the
Council has given a right answer, the evil that is least is to be chosen.
Etenim dum perjurare compellimur, creatorem quidem offendimus, sed nos
tantummodo maculamus. Cum vero noxia promissa complemus, and Dei jussa superbe
contemnimus, and proximis impia crudelitate nocemus, and nos ipsos crudeliori
gladio trucidamus. He that having sworn to do an evil turn breaks his oath,
offends God by putting his name to a lie and a villainy, and he pollutes his own
soul: But he that keeps his oath when he has so sworn, despises the
Commandments of God, and hurts his neighbor with an impious cruelty, and
destroys himself with a worse.] On this side therefore there being the more and
worse evils then on the other, we must decline furthest from this. For if all
evil is to be avoided, then all degrees of evil are; and when we cannot avoid
as much as we should, we must avoid as much as we can. We must choose none
directly, but when we are forced upon some by our own infelicity or fault, it
is the best remedy for the Gangrene that we lose our arm or leg, and he that
is in the fatal necessity, no otherwise can be permitted to choose a sin, then
he is supposed to be desirous to be cut of the stone, when upon any terms he
resolves he never will or can endure the torments of the disease. The great
reason of this rule is that which was given by Aristotle, Lib. 5. cap. ^. Ethic.
(...), the less evil in respect of the greater evil is to be accounted good;
because the less evil is rather to he chosen then the greater; and what is in
any sense eligible is in some sense good, and that which is more eligible is a
greater good.

But it seems something harder to inquire concerning this case when it relates
to others: 2.
for so it uses to be asked;

Quest.

WHether it be lawful to advise, to counsel, to petition, to determine, to make
use of the doubt of another, or his necessity, or perplexity, and to call upon
him to do that which is a sin? The case is this; Pollio an intemperate and
wanton young man falls into adulteries and unnatural lusts; his friend Publius
Asinius advises him, not so, but if he will not leave his vileness, better it
is to satisfy his lust by single fornication, and the less harmful
complications: Et quas Euphrates, and quas mihi mittit Orontes
Me capiant, nolo furta pudica thori.
whether or no Publius does well or no in giving this advice, is the question?
The reasons of doubting are these: * Because he that advises evil is guilty of
the sin which he procures; and he that any way consents or induces another to
sin, shall be partner in the punishment.

To this answer, 3.
That in the whole intercourse there are to be considered the formal sin, the
material part of the action, and the degrees of the obliquity. The formal part,
or the sinfulness cannot, must not be countenanced, or assisted at all,
directly or indirectly; and in the present case it is so far from being
countenanced, that it is reduced to as little a proportion as it can, as near
to a destruction as the present necessity or perplexity will permit, and it is
out of hatred to the obliquity or sinfulness that this lesser way is
propounded. Pilate seeing the Jews resolved to do a spite to the holy and
most innocent Jesus, propounded to them a lesser way then murdering him; I will
scourge him, and let him go. Pilates conscience was not perplexed, though his
interest was, and therefore there was no necessity for him to do either, and
neither ought he to have propounded the lesser evil, which it may be themselves
did not design: indeed if they were resolved to do one, he might have
persuaded the less, not absolutely (for nothing could have made that lawful)
but comparatively, that is, rather that then the other, if ye will do one.

2. But for the material part of the action, 4.
if it be already prepared, and the malice known and declared, it is lawful to
propound a less instance of the sin without persuading to it; which is to be
understood with these cautions:

1. That it be only with a purpose of hindering a greater.

2. When the lesser cannot be hindered, but at least so much must be done by way
of redemption. As if Caius resolves to ravish a Matron to satisfy his lust, it
is lawful to divert his lust upon a common prostitute, who sells her soul for
bread; because her malice is always ready and watches for an opportunity, and
sins no less if she wants opportunity which she thirsts after*

3. That it be ever without the prejudice of a third person: As if one of the
Banditi intends to kill one man, and this happens to be offered to a public
and a brave man, it is not lawful to point out his sword to the striking of a
meaner person to save the other, because though in respect of the effect it be
a less evil, yet it is a direct uncharitableness to a third, which can receive
no warrant or legitimation by the intention of the propounder; for although he
intends that a less evil be done for the public, yet he intends a greater evil
to the particular.

4. That it be in a case certainly known where the malice is apparent and
declared, and the matter prepared: for thus we see that God who sees the hearts
of men, diverts their prepared malice upon some special matter which serves the
ends of his providence, and verifies the prophecies of God, and so brings his
designs to effect, and a certain event by contingent or voluntary instruments.
But we may no further imitate this, then we can attain to little portions of
the knowledge of men's private and particular purposes.

3. But as for the degrees of the obliquity or irregularity, 5.
it is certain, none is to be persuaded or assisted directly, but suffered in
the whole, and persuaded in the instance by way of remedy against the greater
and more intolerable. Thus Moses permitted divorces, that the Jews might not
commit open and frequent adulteries, or kill their wives when they grew weary
of them. Thus an inconvenience is suffered rather then a mischief shall be
introduced: and some fooleries and weak usages are suffered in some Churches,
rather then by reforming them, make the ignorant people think all Religion is
indifferent: and if all the people of the Greek Church did perceive that any of
their old customs were fit to be rescinded, they would upon the same easiness
quit their whole Religion and turn Turks. And though an error is not to be
permitted in any Church when it can be peaceably amended, and when it cannot it
is, as often as it can be, peaceably to be discouraged; yet when the necessity
is great, and the evil feared is certain, and felt and is intolerable; it is a
sad necessity, but no man can help it, and therefore it must be as it may, the
lesser error is to be endured till it can be remedied, with a remedy that is
not worse then the disease.

Quest.

UPon this occasion, 6.
and for the reducing the Rule to practice, and to regulate a case which now
adays happens too frequently; it is not amiss to inquire concerning the
necessities of women married to adulterous and morose vile-natur'd husbands;
Whether it be lawful for a wife out of a desire to live with some degree of a
tolerable comfort, to connive at her husbands stolen pleasures, and to permit
him quietly to enjoy his folly? and what is a woman's duty, and what were her
most prudent course, and manner of deportment?

Some of great reputation in the Church of God both of old and later times put
a speedy period to this inquiry, 7.
and absolutely condemn it as unlawful for a man or woman to live with their
husband or wife respectively, if either of them be notoriously guilty of
adultery. Of this opinion was S. Hierom, In 19. Matthew.
saying that a man is sub maledictione si adulteram retineat, he is under a
curse if he retains an adulteress in his embraces. Cause. 32. ^. c. Sicut.
And S. Chrysostom; Sicut crudelis and iniquus est qui castam dimittit, sic
fatuus and iniquus qui retinet meretricem. Patronus enim turpitudinis est qui
celat crimen Uxoris. As he is cruel and unjust who puts a chaste wise from him,
so he is unjust and a fool that keeps a harlot. For he is a Patron of his wives
turpitude. who conceals his wives adultery. And this they prove out of Solomon;
Qui tenet adulteram stultus est; Prove. 28. 21.
almost the words which S. Chrysostom uses. He is a fool that keeps an
adulteress: (...) it is in the Greek LXX. He is an ungodly man. And of the same
opinion was Bucer in the last age, who for his opinion brings two arguments
which are not contemptible. The first is taken from Deuter. 24. 4. where God
enjoins that if a man puts away his wife, he must at no hand receive her again,
quia ipsa polluta est, she is defiled, meaning if any man else has lien with
her: and if this be a good reason, it will conclude stronger, that if she have
committed adultery, she may not be entertained because in that case she is much
more polluted, and where the reason of the Commandment does intervene, there
also the obligation does go along. But the other is yet more considerable; For
if God commanded that the adulteress should be stoned to death, certainly he
much rather intended she should be turned out of doors. * To which I add this
consideration; That since an adulterer is made one flesh with the Harlot with
whom he mingles impure embraces, it follows that he has dissolved the union
which he had with his wife, or she with her husband; for he cannot be one with
his wife, and one with the Harlot, and yet he be one in himself and they two,
for that is a perfect contradiction; for that which is one with two, is not one
but two. Now for a woman to lie with a man, or a man with a woman, between whom
there is not a just and legitimate union, seems to be an unjust and
illegitimate uniting, and therefore it cannot be lawful to lie with an
adulterer who is one with an Harlot.

Before I come to the resolution of the Question, 8.
I must describe how much these arguments do prove and infer; because though
they do not prove so much as their Contrivers do intend, yet they do
something toward the whole Question. 1. The words of S. Hierome infer
nothing but this, That to live with a Harlot is a great calamity and a horrible
curse, and it cannot indeed tend toward a blessing, or end well, or be at all
endured, if it be not intended to purposes beyond the proper effect of that
calamity. He that is smitten with a leprosy, or he that is hanged upon a tree
is accursed; but if the leprosy makes a man run to God or to Christ, or the man
that dies upon a tree does confess and glorify God, and by his death intends to
do so, the Leper shall be presented pure before the throne of Grace, and he
that hangs upon the tree does die with Christ, and shall reign with him for
ever. 2. And the design expressed in the words of S. Chrysostom do verify
this commentary upon the words of S. Hierome. For S. Chrysostom charging not
only infelicity (as the other does) but folly and cruelty upon him who retains
a Harlot; gives this reason, because he is a Patron of his wives turpitude if
he conceals it; meaning it, if he conceals it out of carelessness and positive
neglect, or which is worse, out of interest, or base designs: All wise and good
men in the world condemn the fact of Cato, who did lend his wife Martia, a
virtuous and a chaste Matron to his friend Hortensius: He that conceals his
wives crime with an unwillingness to reform it, or a pleasure in the sin, or
the fruits of it, is his wives betrayer and murderer; nay, he is an adulterer
to his own wife. But these words cannot be true in all cases, for he that
conceals her shame, lest the discovery should make her impudent and harden her
face, he is no patron of the sin, but a careful guardian watching lest she
should commit a worse. And this also is the meaning of the words of Solomon;
for although they are not at all in our Bibles, because they are not found in
the Hebrew text, yet the words which are found in the Greek LXX. and in the
Vulgar Latin, and which were certainly in the Bibles which S. Hierome and S.
Chrysostom did use, and which were the cause and original of their opinion,
have in them this sense; That as he who expels a good woman thrusts good from
his house, so he that does not thrust an evil woman thence, an adulteress, he
is a fool; meaning if he connives at her wickedness, or unless he have something
to sweeten the sufferance, or some pious purposes to sanctify his action. But
if it were absolutely unlawful, then the adulteress were a person of a
desperate fortune, irremediable and irrecoverable, incapable of mercy, or
repentance; or if she were, yet her husbands charity and forgiveness might by
no means be instrumental to it; and yet S. Paul in a case that was extremely
bad, even in the case of infidelity, Qui scis mulier an virum sis lucratura?
What know thou O woman whether thou may gain thy husband? * But the
arguments of Bucer being intended directly against the lawfulness of retaining
an adulteress, or living with an adulterous husband, are to have distinct
answers. For although where a commandment is given with a reason, where ever
the same reason is, it does not always follow that there is the same
obligation, because although God is sometimes pleased to give a reason for the
precept, yet the reason did not bind without the precept, but the precept does
bind without a reason, which demonstrates that the obligation proceeds wholly
from the authority of God, and not from the reason (as I intend to show more
largely in its proper place) yet besides this I say, the reason is not rightly
rendered in the usual Translations: Non poterit prior maritus recipere, quia
polluta est; The first husband may not receive her, because she is defiled: for
the words in the Hebrew are (...) which do not signify [because she is
polluted, but quia facta est polluere se, because she is made to defile her
self;] meaning that because her first husband had thrust her out and offered
her to be humbled by him that would, he being the cause of that pollution has
lost all right to her, and the privilege of restitution: and then this case
refers not to a simple adultery, but to him who betrays or exposes his wife to
adultery; and indeed such a person might not in Moses Law receive her again:
and this was the case of Cato and Socrates who were very free in lending their
wives, as a man lends an utensil. As for the case of lapidation, it is true,
the woman if she were legally convicted was to die; but the husband was not
bound to accuse her, he might pardon her if he pleased, and conceal the fact;
he might pardon her for his share as Christ did the woman taken in adultery; or
put her away privately as Joseph upon a mistake intended to do to the blessed
Virgin Mother: but that it is therefore unlawful to retain her whom his soul
loves, whom he would fain convert, whom he desires and hopes to reform, or that
God did intend the good man should not use any of his charity and kindness to
any such purpose is not at all to be concluded by these arguments. Now as to
the last, the adulterous man is one with the Harlot, but this union is not a
natural union, but a spiritual and legal, as appears by the effect of second
and third marriages; for one person can no more be one naturally with two or
three successively, then he can be one with many at one time; and when the
Patriarchs were married to diverse women at once, they were not naturally one
with them all, but legally they were; that is, they were conjoined in holy
bands, and were to very many purposes to be reckoned but as one. (...), said
Clemens. They were one person by union of affection, they had one bed, one
purse, one interest, community of children, communication of bodies, equal
rights, as to the power of marriage, the same band of duty, tied by the same
mystery. Now he or she that commits adultery breaks this union, and divides or
imparts some of the rights due to each other to an impure person, and they
become one flesh in an impure mixture. Now because he or she that first breaks
this union loses their own right by invading or giving away another, therefore
the offending person may be put away and refused in their petition of right,
which they have lost by doing wrong. But the adultery has not so united the
offending persons, but that the union can, and may better be broke, and the
erring party reduced to his rule and to his right. For it is but a legal, and
it is a spiritual or intellectual union, which is to be done not by material
but by moral instruments which can eternally return, and be effective when they
do. The way then being thus far made straight, I answer;

That it is not only lawful, 9.
but may have in it great piety and great charity for a woman still to cohabite
with an adulterous husband. The lawfulness appears, in that there is no
prohibition by a Divine Commandment, no natural uncleanness in it; and this
appears as all other negative pretenses can, even by evacuating the pretenses
made to the contrary. Of this opinion was S. Basil, who also made a Canon for
it, and commanded it to be done in his Church, as appears in his Epistle to
Amphilochius 1. Can. 9. and 21. The same also was the sentence of S. Lib. 3.
Austin to Pollentius, and in his Book de adulterinis conjugiis: and of P.
Pelagius in his Epistle to Melleus his Subdeacon. But they it seems went
against the general stream, for they were not only forced to dispute it, but
also to limit the question and the permission. For David received his wife
Michol who had lived with another man; and S. Paul advises the wife to be
reconciled to her husband; and Christ forgave the woman taken in adultery, and
God not only is ready to forgive, but calls and invites his Church to return
to his love though she has been an adulteress, and committed fornication
against him: but therefore so may a man, but it ought only to be done in case
the sinning person does repent: only S. Basil is for the living still with the
adulterer though he wallow in his sin; but does not think it fit the man should
be tied to do so to his adulterous wife. That he or she respectively may if
they will still live with the sinning person, needs no other proof but this,
that the innocent being also the injured person may forgive the injury done to
them; and that it may have in it great piety and great charity is certain upon
the same account on which it can be piety and charity to suffer injuries, to be
patient, to have a long-suffering spirit, to exhort, to entreat, to bring the
sinner to repentance, to convert a soul, to save a sinner from the evil of his
way. But this is to be practiced with the following measures and cautions:

1. The innocent person must not be bound to do this, 10.
because the union being dissolved, the criminal has lost his right, and
therefore if the other use their liberty, they do no wrong; and although it
may be good charity in many instances to do it, yet because there is no direct
obligation in any, and there may be great uncharitableness to ones self as the
case may happen, no ones liberty is to be prejudiced in this particular, but
they are to be exhorted to all instances of charity; ever remembering that
saying of God by the Prophet, The Lord God of Israel says, M^^^h 2. 16.
he hates putting away.

2. 11.
The innocent person may lawfully retain the criminal, though he or she have no
other end or purpose in it, but the love of the person, or the retaining of
their own rights temporal, or any other thing that is in it self honest and
lawful: and the reason is, because the fault of the one is not to prejudice the
other; and it is misery enough to be injured in their direct relation, and not
that this injury compel them to receive another. If Titius be an adulterer, his
wife Caia has not lost her power over his body, or her interest in his family
or fortune.

3. 12.
This is to last as long as there is any hopes of repentance, and the
repentance is to be procured and endeavored by all direct means, and by all the
indirect means which are ministered to the innocent person by the power and
advantages which his or her innocence gives over the guiltiness of the other:
Such as are, reproving his fault, denying conjugal rights, delating the person,
bringing him or her to private shame, procuring reproof from spiritual
superiors, or natural relatives, and indeed any thing that can be prudent, and
by which the offender can be made better, and will not be made worse.

4. 13.
If there be no hopes of repentance, yet still the innocent person may use
their own right, not only because there may be possibilities and real
consequent events when we have no hopes; and S. Paul's question, Qui scis o
mulier? how know thou O woman whether thou shall gain thy husband? may still
have place, not only I say for this reason, but for the foregoing; the
innocent person does not lose his or her right, and therefore may still possess
what otherwise she might quit; and his incontinence does not oblige her to be
exposed to the danger of a (...) or ustulation, nor to be reproached with the
noises of divorce, nor offered to an actual poverty, or dereliction, or to
become an actual widow before death.

5. 14.
If the retaining the adulteress be actually scandalous, the Church in that
case has been more restrained in her permission, and has commanded the
innocent person to put the offending woman away: and therefore the Fathers in
the Council of Eliberis refused to give the Communion to a Clergy man even at
the last, C. 6^.
if he did not statim projicere instantly expel from his house his wife whom he
knew to commit adultery: And in the Council of Neo-Caesarea he was to be
deposed from his dignity in the same case; C. 8.
the reason is given by the Council of Eliberis, Ne ab his, qui exemplum bonae
conversationis esse debent, videantur magisteria scelerum procedere; lest their
houses which ought to be the examples of piety and chastity, become the
precedents and warranty of uncleanness. This is nothing else but a pursuance of
the Canon Apostolical, requiring that Bishops and Deacons should be such who
rule their own houses well; 1 Timothy 3. 4* 5.
for if they cannot do that, it is not easy to be supposed they can well rule
the Church of God: and though a good man may have an evil wife, and such a one
whom no prudence can govern; yet if she be an adulteress, he can put her away,
though he cannot govern her: and indeed all such reproaches ought to be
infinitely removed from the houses of those, whose lives and whose Governments
ought to be exemplar. Oportet suspicionem abesse a Caesaris domo. Princes and
Prelates ought not to have any thing under their roof so nearly relating to
them, that can justly be suspected. But this is matter of decency and
fittingness, not of indispensable necessity.

6. 15.
The innocent person must not directly by any compliance, cohabitation, or
indulgence give countenance or encouragement to the impurity or crimes of the
offending relative, for nothing can make it tolerable or lawful to promote a
sin, or any ways directly to cooperate toward it. This is a species lenocinii,
a being a bawd to the uncleanness of that person whom with our lives we ought
to rescue from that damnation if we could. And therefore if the woman finds her
husband grow worse by her toleration and sufferance, she is to go off from it
by such degrees as are on this side the extreme remedy, which I reckoned before
in the third caution; and if nothing else hinder, it is not only excusable,
but hugely charitable, and in a very great degree commendable to be divorced.
For she uses her own power, and therefore sins not, and does it when nothing
else can prevail, and therefore she is not rash, or light and inquisitive after
new relations, and she does it that she may not patronize or increase his sin,
and therefore is charitable to his better interest.

7. 16.
But if his or her compliance and cohabitation does accidentally make the
offending party worse, yet if it be besides the intention, and against the
purpose, and contrary to the endeavors of the innocent; he or she in that case
is not tied to relinquish their right and their advantages in the present
possession or cohabitation. 1. Because concerning accidental events, against
which we labor, no man is to give account. 2. Because of this accidental
event, the offending person is the only author, and the innocent is not to
suffer for his sin. 3. If the innocent person were tied to depart, then it were
at any time in the power of the adulterer or adulteress to be divorced from the
innocent, because he growing worse by the others being good can oblige the
other to quit him of the burden which he hates. 4. Because to depart in that
case is no remedy. Because he that is vile, may grow worse by contrary causes;
and as wicked men are made presumptuous by mercies, and hardened by judgments,
and whether they be punished or not punished, from both they take occasion to
persevere, so may an adulterer, or an adulteress, by being sweetly used, or by
being harshly. All that can be of duty and necessity in this case, is that the
innocent person with all prudent advice and caution do not by any direct act
encourage the crime, or connive at it when it can be helped, or commend it when
it cannot, or refuse to use any fair or any just instrument of curing the
leper; and for the rest, let them pray earnestly, frequently, humbly, and leave
the event to God. It is lawful to permit or suffer an evil whith I cannot help,
and by that permission retain my own rights, or prevent my own wrongs; but it
is at no hand lawful for any interest spiritual or temporal to do an evil, or
to set it directly forward.

Thus some Commonwealths permit fornication and public stews, 17.
to pre^^^t the horrid consequents of the lusts of their young men, which when
they cannot cure, they seek to lessen and divert; and though there be in the
whole, many evil appendages, and a great fault in Government, and many evil and
avoidable necessities introduced or supposed; yet so far as this intention is
considered, if it were not avoidable or remediable by the severity of Laws, and
the wisdom of discourses, and the excellencies of Religion, it were the only
charity that were left, and an after game of Conscience and Religion; sad and
fatal to those whose folly inferres it, but all that is left that can be done
for God and for souls.

But yet this thing in all the circumstances is not to be done at all, because
it is asnare to many who have no such necessities, who are otherwise curable,
who enter into the temptation, because it is made ready to their hand; and it
is a high scandal to the Laws and to the Religion of a Country, where such vile
nests of impurity are suffered; and the necessity is but fantastic,
accidental, and inferred by evil customs, or some secular interest, or weaker
regard; for there is no necessity that men must either debauch Matrons or be
fornicators; let them marry, for that is the remedy which God has appointed,
and he knows best how to satisfy and provide for all the needs of mankind. But
it is objected. The Laws of Italy forbid the younger brothers of great families
to marry. * That is it, which I said, men make necessities of their own, and
then find ways to satisfy them which therefore cannot be warranted by that
necessity, because that necessity is of their own procuring, not from God, nor
for him. For this is the case; An evil is to be cured, and a greater prevented;
God has appointed marriage for a remedy, the civil power forbids it to some
persons, who for want of that must fornicate, or do worse. To prevent the
worse they provide them of opportunities of doing the less? But what remedy is
there for the less? That is not thought of; for marriage is inconvenient to
younger families; but it is very convenient for their souls, and they also
would be provided for, as being no contemptible interest. Here therefore, if
they would alter the necessities which worldly interest introduced, if they
would prefer souls before the greatness of families, heaven before a
Marquisate in Sardinia, and would esteem it more honor to a house to have
chastity preserved rather then wealth and an entire inheritance, the weak
pretenses of excuse for Stews would be hissed off from the face of all
Christian Countries; for if fornication be a remedy against unnatural lusts, it
is just as being poisoned is an antidote against hanging, but certainly there
is a better: Innocence or pardon will prevent it with more advantage, and so
will marriage do to the worse evils of lust; unless no health is considerable
which is not effected by a Witch, and ease is to be despised if it be brought
with a blessing. * But if any one can pretend that marriage will not secure the
Italians or hot Spaniards from attempting intolerable vilenesses (besides that
fornication will do less, as having in it no more of natural remedy, and not
so much by way of blessing) in this case, the wheel or the galleys, hard labor
and the mines, the rods and axes must pare off the luxury.

* This therefore is the result, as to this particular instance. In the
questions of greater or less uncleanness, permissions are not to be made by
public authority, for the reasons before named: but there may be particular
necessities in single instances which will run into present evil, for which no
remedy can be provided; and then it is lawful to divert the malice upon a less
matter, when it cannot be taken off entirely: For thus righteous S. Ambros.
lib. 1. c. 6* de Patriarch. Abraham.
Lot offered his daughters to the impure Sodomites, to redeem the strangers
from the violation intended them, and to hinder his Citizens from breaking the
laws of ^^ture and Hospitality, which (if they were not always) yet they were
of greater obligation then the restraints of simple fornication. And to this
purpose is that of S. Chrysostom who to a man that is accustomed to swear, and
cannot avoid it, Hom. 27. ad pop* Antiochen.
advises that he should rather swear by his head then by God. I do not, I
confess, like the instance, both because it is in some cases worse to swear by
a Creature then by the Creator; it is an honor done to him to swear by him,
though to do it triflingly is such an honor done to him, as superstition is,
an honor that angers him; and 2. also because, he that can pretend his
swearing to be unavoidable, does say so, because he does swear when he cannot
deliberate; and if he does not consider, he can never make use of his advice to
do one rather then another; for no man can choose that cannot consider, but as
for the prime intention of the advice, that the least evil is to be chosen, or
advised, it is without question safe and prudent.

* Of the same purpose are these words of S. L. 1 c. 15. de adulterin. conjug.
Austin, Si decrevisti homicidium aut adulterium facere, adulterium commit
non homicidium. If thou will murder or commit adultery, do this, not that;
that is, rather this then that. But neither here am I pleased with the
instance, because, when any man can lawfully be diverted to a less sin, it must
be in the same kind; because the same lust cannot be filled with a differing
object; and if the temptation be such that it can be taken off wholly from that
Scene, and changed to a differing and disparate matter, he can as well be
turned to something that is innocent as to some other distinct vice; that is,
he may for all his temptation. From unnatural lusts to natural, from the
greater kind to the less, from adultery to fornication, from fornication to
trifling amors, and Platonic fooleries; from murder to a blow, from a blow to
an angry word; these are proper diminutions which are in a direct order to the
retrenching of the sin: but from murder to adultery a man is not to be
diverted, because this is not a direct lessening of the degrees of sin, but a
changing it into equal; or if it be not, yet the malice is more extended, if
not intended, and the man is directly tempted to be a Devil upon a new score,
for it must be a new malice that must change him; but still, the advice is in
its main design safe and innocent.

* But of the same mind is S. L^b. 32. moral. ^* 18.
Gregory affirming it to be good advice that when of two sins one must be
chosen, that the least be it, but his proof of it is not to be suffered; for so
(says he) for the avoiding fornication S. Pa^^* permits marriage; which saying
of his without great violence to the words and charity to the man can never be
reconciled with the truth of Scriptures* the honor of marriage, but as for the
main advice it is well and agreeable to right reason.

But besides the cautions already given number. 4. 19.
relating to the material part of sin, the whole affair is to be conducted with
these provisions:

1. No man may use this course, 20.
by engaging in a present lesser evil, to seek to prevent a greater that is to
come: the reason is, because this is a securing of evil, it is an assurance and
a certain gain to the interest of sin, and this certainly may outweigh the
greater degree of an uncertain evil; and there are many acts of providence
which may intervene and prevent the future evil, which therefore is not to be
prevented by a present evil though less mischievous, because possibly it may be
hindered at a cheaper rate; and no little evil is to be done, but when either it
self or a greater is unavoidable, which happens not (for ought we know) in the
present case; for before to morrow the man may die, or his affections to sin
may die, or he may be sick, or scared, and to put it off as long as we can, is
one kind of diminution and lessening of the sin, which is the thing here
consulted of.

2. Care must be taken, 21.
that by this means no man's sin be promoted, no man's eternal interest be
lessened, no evil be done that we could not ought to forbid and hinder; and
that of this we have a moral certainty, or at least no probable cause to doubt:
The reason is, because if we put any man's soul to hazard, by procuring a less
damnation to an evil person, the evil we do is greater then our good; and we
venture one mischief, for the venture or hopes of lessening another. Quintus
Milvius being in love with the wife of Muraena, and she with him, Milvius
resolves to kill his wife Virginia, and run away with the wife of Muraena, or
force her from him, he acquaints his freed man Priscus Calvus with his purpose,
but he to divert his purpose of murder and adultery persuades his Patron
Milvius rather to lie with Muraena's rather to lie with Muraena's wife now,
then to do such things of hazard and evil voice, and dishonor: and his advice
was charitable and prevailed; for though the adultery was future, yet the
intended murder was present, and the evil was lessened as much as it could, and
no man prejudiced, but the life of one saved. But if he believes that by this
act Virginia will be so exasperated that she will turn adulteress in revenge,
or kill her husband; this is not to be advised upon the foregoing reason. If a
rich Usurer refuses to give an alms to a strav'd person, he may be advised
rather to lend him some money upon interest, then suffer him to die for want of
bread: but if I believe, or probably suppose or suspect that another man will
be confirmed in the uncharitableness, and think because I advise him to this,
he does well in it, and will live and die in this opinion, then I may not at
the charge of another man's soul, do the other wicked person that small
advantage, which is less then can countervail the other evil.

3. He that advises the lesser evil for the avoiding of a greater, 22.
must not advise any thing so to serve his own interest or humor, as that he
shall in any sense be delighted with the evil, because so he becomes guilty of
the others sin, and then he cannot do a thing lawfully, if it asperses him
with guilt; and he may not serve another need with his own evil joys; and the
interest of souls is not set forward when one dies to make another less sick.
But besides this, the question here being whether it be lawful to advise a less
evil for avoiding of a greater, though it be affirmed to be so, when it is
wholly for the avoiding the greater; yet it cannot be lawful to give such
advice to serve my own lower ends: Nothing but the former can legitimate such
an advice, and therefore this latter cannot.

4. No man must make use of this course himself; 23.
for though it be lawful to divert a greater evil by advising the less to
others, yet I may not my self choose a less, that I may not choose a greater;
for if this could be lawful, it would be in the power of any man to sin what
sin he pleased, and to threaten his conscience into a leave; for if he should
resolve he would either kill the father, or lie with the daughter; be unnatural
in his lusts, or loose in his entertainments, he might legitimate every lesser
sin for fear of the greater. But therefore it is certain, that when he can
choose either, he must choose none, for nothing can make it lawful, directly to
choose any, even the least evil. But when it so happens that the conscience is
doubtful and perplexed, and that in this sad conjunction of evil and weak
thoughts, it seems unavoidable but that one must be chosen, we may then incline
to that which has least danger, and least mischief. And this advice was given
by the Chancellor of Paris: Si sub electione proponuntur duo mala, G^rson
tract. 8. in Magnif. number* 88. lit* F.
cave neutrum eligas: Nam in malis quid est eligendum? At vero si culpa nostra
eo recidimus ut necesse sit alterum ex peccatis fieri, minus est acceptandum;
quia jam in comparatione deterioris, sortitur boni, secundum quid, rationem. No
sin is to be chosen when both can be avoided, but when they cannot, the least
is to be suffered. But when this comes to be another man's case that he will not
avoid both, though he sins in choosing any, yet he that advises him rather to
take the less does not sin. He that chooses the less, sins less, but yet sins,
because he should choose none at all; but he that advises him to choose the
less, sins not at all, because he hinders all sin as much as he can.

5. He that advises a less sin for the prevention of a greater, 24.
must see that it be directly less, and certainly so; it must be in the same
matter and kind, and in a less degree, because he can no other ways be certain
that he has done any good at all, and may do a greater evil. For in degrees
of sin the case is clear when the matter or instance is the same; but if it be
specifically different, or in the whole kind, all question of degrees is
infinitely uncertain, and therefore the rule is not without danger practicable
in such cases. But of this I have already given some accounts in the fifth
number of this Rule.

But because all this discourse relies upon this main ground, 25.
that the lesser evil in respect of the greater has the nature of good, and
therefore is to be preferred; or (which is all one) the avoiding of the greater
evil is directly a good, and the suffering the less evil is better then
suffering the other, yet because it is but comparatively good, it is positively
evil; here it is to be inquired, Whether this can be lawful, or is it not a
prevaricating of the Apostles rule, That evil is not to be done that good may
come of it? and whether this may be done in any case, and by what cautions it
can be permitted or made legitimate? This inquiry has great uses in the whole
life of men, and therefore is not unworthy a stricter search.

And first as to the present Rule, 26.
it is certain, that this permission is not a doing evil that good may come of
it: 1. Because no evil is at all permitted when all can be avoided. 2. Because
no man is to act this Rule in his own person, upon whom he may and ought to
have a power of persuasion and effort sufficient to cause himself to decline
all evil. 3. It is only permitted to be advised to others by such persons who
hate all sin, and have neither pleasure nor interest in any. 4. It is not a
giving leave to any sin, but an hindering as much as can be hindered. It is not a
doing any thing at all of kindness to any thing but to the man. It is like that
permission which the sons of Israel gave to the remnant of the Canaanites, to
live in the land because they could not destroy them all. They killed as many
as they could, and it was not kindness but necessity that left those few alive.
And the thing was not ill expressed by Petrarch, Duobus aut pluribus ex malis
minus malum eligendum esse non video, L. 5. epist. rerum senilium.
cum minus malum haud dubie malum sit, qualiter mali electio sit laudanda.
Itaque rectius dici reor, majora mala majori studio vitanda, ut si vitari
cuncta non possunt, minora facilius tolerentur, non electione, sed patientia,
aequanimitate, modestia. Of two evils the least is not to be chosen, since that
the less evil is without all doubt an evil. Thus therefore I suppose we ought
to say; The greater evils are with greater care to be avoided, that if all
cannot be declined, the less may be better tolerated, not by choice, but by
patience. Now though it be not lawful to do evil for a good end, yet it is
lawful to suffer evil to avoid a greater, and to make the best of it that we
can; Lib 3. Offic.
which was the counsel which Cicero says he received from learned men, Non
solum ex malis minima oportere eligere, sed etiam excerpere ex iis ipsis si
quid inesset boni.

But to the thing it self, 27.
there can be no dispute but that it is highly unlawful to do evil for a good
end; S. Paul's words are decretory and passionate in the thing: He calls it
slander, or blasphemy that they reported it of him that he should say, Romans 3.
8.
It was lawful to do evil that good might come of it; he also affirms that
though the greatness of the sins of the Jews or Gentiles did magnify the
greatness of the Divine mercy, yet they whose sins accidentally thus served the
glorification of God, their damnation was just. Though this be clear and
certain, yet I doubt not but all the world does evil that good may come of it;
and though all men are of S. Paul's opinion, yet all men do not blame
themselves when they do against it. I will therefore first represent the
matters of fact, and then consider of the allays or excuses to which men
pretend in their private accounts or public answers, and so separate the
certain from the uncertain, and establish the proper measures of the
proposition.

For first if we look in Scripture, 28.
we shall find that diverse eminently holy have served God by strange violences
of fact, and for his glory have laid hold upon instruments not fit to be
handled, but such which would have cut the hands of a Christian, if they had
been drawn through them. David gave order to Hushai to enrol himself in the
rebel party, and to deal falsely with Absol^m, that he might do good to David;
and indeed so do all spies, which if they were not necessary, would not be
used in all Armies; and if they be, yet they do that which honest men would
scruple at. * 1 Kings 18. 25*
Elias the Prophet that he might bring the people from idolatry, caused a
sacrifice to Baal to be made, and the idol to be invocated, which of it self
was simply and absolutely evil; and Jehu (though a much worse man) yet
proclaimed an assembly for Baal, and both of them did it that they might
destroy the Priests of Baal, and dishonor the idol, and do honor to God, and
both did well: * and for ought appears so did the ten men of Shechem who to
redeem their lives from the fury of Ishmael discovered the secret treasures of
the Nation: Jerem. 41.
* and amongst the Christians some women, particularly Pelagia and her
daughters have drowned themselves to prevent the worse evil of being defloured.
* And is it not necessary in all Governments that by violence peace should be
established, and by great examples of an intolerable justice others should be
made afraid. * For so do all Princes knowingly procure their rights by doing
wrong; for in all wars the innocent must suffer that the guilty may be
punished: And besides that all great examples have in them something of
iniquity; it were not easy to have discipline in private Governments, or
coercitive power in Laws, if in some cases some evil were not to be permitted
to be done for the procuring some good. For suppose Corippus has an obstinate
servant, so perverse that like the sides of Elephants his very soul grows hard
by stripes, and that Corippus knows this, yet if he have other servants who
will be corrupted by the impunity of this, he may, he must do evil to the
obstinate, and ruin his soul for the preserving the others. * And indeed if we
consider how sad, how intolerable an evil it is that a malefactor is snatched
from his scene of evil and vile actions, and hurried to hell with his sins
about him; and that for the only reason of doing good to others, and
preserving the public interest, it will seem necessary that this interest be
preserved, and therefore that the other instrument be employed; * for it is
natural enough that as truth comes from falsehood, so should good from evil, it
is not an accidental or contingent product, but sometimes natural and proper;
and as God brings good out of evil by his almighty power, so do good men by
the nature of the thing; and then the intermedial evil to a wise and religious
person is like unhandsome and ill tasted physic, it is against nature in the
taking and in its operating, but for the preservation of nature in the effect
and consequent; so are some evils against Religion but useful for its
advancement. * And this very similitude supplies many particulars of the same
nature. For thus we make children vainglorious that they may love noble
things; and who can govern prudently and wisely that resolves never to be
angry? and to be angry so as to do the work of government; though it be not
bigger then the measures of the Governor, yet they exceed the measures of the
Man. * Thus for Physic it is affirmed to be lawful for a man to be drunk: Lib.
5. c. 1.
* And Cardinal Tolet allows of voluntary desires of pollution when without it
we cannot have our health; and yet to desire such pollution without such a good
purpose is certainly criminal, and if for the interest of health evil may be
done, much more for Religion and effects of holiness. * But thus I said, it
must happen in public Governments: The Christians that dwell in China, Japan,
and in the Indies cannot transact their affairs with the Heathens without
oaths, and therefore they make them swear by their own false gods, by the names
of their idols and devils, which only they think binding, and neither could
there be any security of faith to Princes or to Subjects, that is, in the
public or private intercourse without it, and yet without question as to swear
by Devils and false Deities is a high crime, to so require or to procure it is
a great sin, and yet it is done for necessity. The Romans would not trust the
Jews that would swear by the Temple of Jupiter: Ecce negas, jurasque mihi per
Templa Tonantis,
Non credo, jura verpe per Anchialum.
no trust was given unless they swore by the God whom they feared, and so it is
in the case of others; and what is necessary, it were very strange if it might
not be permitted. * And what else can be the meaning of dispensations, but that
a thing which is otherwise unlawful is made good by its ministering to a good
end; that is, it is lawful to do evil, to break a Law, and leave is given to
do so, when it is necessary, or when it is charitable. Upon this account it is
that prescription does transfer a right, and confirms the putative and
presumed, in defiance of the legal and proper, and this is for no other reason
but to prevent uncertainties in title, and eternal contentions, which is a
certain doing injury to the right owner, that good may be procured, or evil
prevented. * When a man is in extreme necessity, the distinctions of dominion
do cease; and when David and his Soldiers were hungry, they eat the Show
bread which God forbad to all but the Priests; and so did the Apostles to
satisfy their hunger break the Sabbath by pulling and rubbing the ears of ^orn;
* and in the defense of a man's own life it is lawful to kill another: which is
certainly a doing evil for a good end: and if it be said, that this is not a
doing evil, because the end makes it not to be evil, this is a plain confessing
the question against the words of S. Paul; for if the good end makes that to be
lawful, which of it self without that end is unlawful, then we may conclude
against S. Paul, that it is good to do evil that good may come; that is, it is
ch^nged by the end and by the design. * And upon an equal stock of necessity it
is, that all Princes think themselves excused, if by inferring a war they go
to lessen their growing neighbors; but this is a doing wrong to prevent a
mischief, as the birds in Plutarch, that beat the Cuckoo for fear that in time
she should become a Hawk. Lib. 6. appo^t^.
* And this is certain in the matters of omission, though to omit a duty be
simply evil, yet when it is necessary, it is also lawful, and when it is
charitable it is lawful: Thus religion yields to charity, and charity to
justice, and justice it self to necessity, and a man is not bound to pay his
debts, when to do so will take from him his natural support. * And it is thus
also in commissions; who will not tell a harmless lie to save the life of his
friend, of his child, of himself, of a good and a brave man? and to govern
children and fools by saying false things, no man makes a scruple: and
Physicians are commended if with a witty lie they can cozen melancholic and
hypochondriacal men into a cure. Thus the man of Athens, who phansied if he
should make water he should drown the city, was cured by his Physicians
ingenious fiction that the city was on fire, and defiring him to quench it with
his urine, lest water should be wanting in that great necessity, struck his
fancy luckily, and prevailed upon him to do that which no direct persuasion
could effect. Thus Hercules de Saxonia having committed to his charge a
melancholic man, who supposing himself to be the Prophet Elias would needs
fast forty days, dressed a fellow like an Angel, who pretending that he brought
him meat from heaven, prevailed upon him to receive both food and Physic. This
lie was charitable, and if it was not therefore innocent, then some charity can
be criminal; but if it was innocent, it was made so wholly by the good end,
which sanctified the evil instrument. * Thus also Judges exact oaths from
contradicting parts, though they know that one is perjured, but yet he proceeds
by such means to guess at truth, and satisfy the solemnities of Law. * And when
the Judges themselves are corrupt, we think it fit to give them bribes to make
them do justice, who otherwise would for bribes do injustice; and yet we
suppose we are no more to be reproved then they are who pay interest money to
the Usurers and Bankers whom yet themselves believe to sin. But bribery is a
sin, and bribery in a wrong cause is two or three; and therefore let the cause
be what it will, it is no way tolerable but that it is for a good end. * Thus
we venture into danger to serve worthy designs; some read heretical Books to be
able to confute them; and some venture into persecutions which they could
avoid, because they would not weaken the hands of such who cannot avoid it; and
yet to go to danger is not safe, and therefore against charity, and therefore
sin, and yet it is for charity and faith even when it is against one of them. *
And last of all, all men do, and they believe they may make addresses to a
Tyrant for justice, and though he sits on the Bench by wrong, yet we stoop to
his purple, and kiss his rods and axes when we desire to be defended from the
oppression of a lesser Tyrant; and if this be not a doing evil that good may
come of it, then it is no evil to make another do an act of usurped power, or
to bend to a power which destroys that to which we are bound by the oath of God.

These instances I have not brought in opposition of the Apostles rule, 29.
or that I think any man else pretends any of these in defiance of it, but to
represent that either a great part of mankind does it when they least think of
it, or that some things which seem evil are not so; and that I may describe the
measures of these things, and establish the case of Conscience upon its just
limits and rule.

1. Therefore it is to be observed, 30.
that the facts of men living under a Law, are not to be measured by Laws of a
differing Government, and therefore if the facts of worthy men were exemplary
(of which in its proper place I am to give accounts) yet the facts of Saints in
the old Testament would not be safe examples to us in the New; and therefore we
may not do that which Hushai did, for he did well, that is, against nothing of
the Law under which he stood; but if the simplicity and ingenuity of our Law
gives us other measures; the effect will be, that Hushai did not do evil for a
good end, but did well to a good purpose. And as to the thing it self, it is
very likely that it is lawful to abuse his credulity, whose life I may lawfully
take; the cautions and limits of which permission belong not to this present
inquiry.

2. The rules of war, 31.
and the measures of public interest are not to be estimated by private
measures, and therefore because this is unlawful in private entercourses, it
must not be concluded to be evil in the public. For humane affairs are so
intricate and entangled, our Rules so imperfect, so many necessities supervene,
and our power is so limited, and our knowledge so little, and our provisions so
short sighted, that those things which are in private evils may be public
goods: and therefore in this question, the evil and the good are to be in the
same kind; a private evil is not to be done for the procuring of a private
good, but for a public it may: not that evil may be done for any thing; but
that here it is not evil, when it is measured by the public standard. For
since God is the fountain of Government, he also gives authority to all such
propositions which are necessary means of its support, not to all which pretend
to it, or which are inferred by folly or ambition, but which are really such.
War cannot be made as a man corrects his child, with even degrees of anger,
and a just number of stripes, and equalities of punishment both to the person
and to the offense; and Kings are in the place of God who strikes whole Nations
and Towns and Villages; and war is the rod of God in the hands of Princes,
but the evils which are intermedial to the greater purposes of a just war are
such which are unavoidable in themselves, and besides the intentions of good
Kings; and therefore in such cases, though much evil is suffered because it is
unavoidable, yet none is done of choice, and that makes not against the Rule.
For,

3. In many of the instances objected, 32.
the evils which are the ways of procuring good, are not evils in morality but
in nature; and then it is lawful, when there is no malice in the design, to
prevent the sin, or to do a good office by a shrewd turn. Thus I may pull my
friend out of a pool by a strained arm, and save his life by putting his arm
out of joint; and this is a doing evil materially, with a pious purpose, that
is without malice, and for a good end, and that is innocent and charitable,
when it is unavoidable, but it is not to be chosen, and done with delight, or
evil intent, or perfect election: to do evil to a man in this case is besides
the man's intention, it is accidental also to the whole event, it is not so much
as giving unpleasing Physic, not so much as imposing cupping glasses and using
sacrifications; for this is voluntary and chosen for a good end, because the
good cannot else well be procured, and yet it is chosen upon those terms by the
Patient. Upon this account a man may give his life for his friend, or wish
himself dead; and S. Paul wished himself accursed for his brethren, and Moses
desired to be blotted out of the book of life in zeal for the people of God;
and yet all this is a very great charity, because though a man may not do
evil, yet he may suffer evil for a good end; he may not procure it, but he may
undergo it: and after all, the doing of a natural or physical evil may be
permitted when there is no motive but charity, for then it is in no sense
forbidden; sometimes necessary and unavoidable, but no ways evil or criminal;
and if it be, it becomes so by accident, or by the intertexture of some other
ingredient.

4. When the evils are subordinate or relative, 33.
the less may be done to prevent the greater, though they be not in the same
matter; as a child may be beaten to prevent a sin, an offender smitten to make
him diligent: for these actions, though they are in the accounts of evil
things, yet have no intrinsecal irregularity, but wholly depend upon the end;
But because commonly evil things are done to evil purposes, and with irregular
measures, they have an ill name, but they can be changed when the end is made
straight, and the measures temperate. Every thing that is not intrinsecally
evil, if it be directed to a good end, is good, unless it be spoiled by some
intervening accident.

5. Some things are evils properly and naturally, 34.
some by accident, some by our own faults, some by the faults of others. An
action may be innocent as from me, and yet a very great evil by the fault of
others: A malefactor put to death, it may be perishes eternally; if he does, it
is his own fault, the Laws are innocent when they smite him for the good of
others; and th^s is not a doing evil that good may come of it; for in things
not essentially and unalterably evil, good and evil are in relations, and
though the smiting some sinners produce a very evil effect, yet it is only to
be imputed to its own cause: There is a good and an evil in many things, and
God and the Devil have their share of the thing, and so have several persons,
according as they intend, and as they operate: and in this case, the Laws
intend good, and do that which is good, that is, they punish a Malefactor, but
of the accidental damnation, the sinner that suffers only, is the only cause;
and therefore in this, and many like cases of public transaction there is no
evil done for a good end. Thus if any man who is to take an oath be wicked and
false, the Law may exact the oath because that is good, but the Law it self may
use a false oath if the man will swear it, but then the falseness is the man's
that swears, not the Laws that exacts it. For to many products there are many
concurrent causes, which are not integral, but have each their share; and when
causes are not integral, the portion of effect is to be applied only by the
intention of the agent, and the proportion and order to the end: Indeed if the
whole effect were to be imputed entirely to every concurring agent (as in
murder every man is principal and integral) then in many of the fore alleged
cases, evil were done for a good end, but then it could not be lawful so to
do, but the actions are therefore innocent to some agents, because they do
nothing of it but the good share, that which they ought to do; and that which
spoils it, comes in at another door.

6. Some Laws of God are such that their rectitude is so perfect, 35.
the holiness so entire, the usefulness so universal, the instance so fitted
for all cases, and the Economy of it so handsome and wise that it never
interferes with any other duty, is never complicated with contradicting matter,
or cross interests; now these are such which no case can alter, which no man
may prevaricate, or if they do they are such which no measure can extenuate,
which no end can sanctify: and these are either Laws of general reason, and
common sanction; or spiritual instances, and abstracted from matter. Thus no
man may blaspheme God at any time or for any end, or in any degree; and in
these cases it was rightly said in the objections, that if the end can change
the instrument, then it is not evil to do any thing for a good end, because
the end makes the evil to be good. But then in other cases, where the instances
are material, tied up with the accidents of chance, made changeable by
relations, tied in several parts by several duties, filled with various
capacities, there the good and the evil are like colors of a doves neck,
differing by several aspects and postures, there abstractions are to be made,
and separations of part from part, of capacity from capacity; and when every
man provides concerning his share of influence into the effect all is well, and
if one fails, it may be evil is done to the whole production, but it is not
imputed to them who took care of their own proportions. * But in such kinds of
actions, the limits and measures are extrinsecal and accidental, and the
goodness is not essential, natural, and original; and therefore the whole
receives variety by necessities, and by charity. For whatsoever can be
necessary by a necessity of Gods making, that is lawful: and I may serve any
greater necessity by any thing that is less necessary, when both necessities
cannot be served. Thus David's eating the Shewbread, and the Apostles eating
corn on the Sabbath, served a greater need then could have been secured by
superstitious or importune abstinence. In positive and temporary commands there
is no obligation but when they consist with higher duties; Actus imperati unius
virtutis non debent praejudicare actibus elicitis alterius. The proper and
natural actions of one virtue are ever to be preferred before the instrumental
acts of another. As an act of temperance must be preferred before a posture in
worshipping; charity before fasting, or before ceremonies: that is, the more
necessary before the less. It is more necessary to save the life of a man, then
to say my prayers at any one time, and therefore I may leave my prayers in the
midst, and run to save a man from drowning. This is a thing which cannot stay,
the other can. For in all such precepts of affirmative duty, there is a secret
condition annexed, and they oblige not when they cross a negative. And it is
certain there could be no usefulness of knowing the degrees of good or evil, if
it were not for prelation and election of one before another: To what purpose
were it that we are told, Obedience is better then sacrifice, but that we
should neglect one and do the other when both cannot stand together? and this
order of degrees is the full ground of dispensations when they can be allowed
in divine Commandments: but in humane dispensations there is another, even the
want of foresight, the imperfection of the Laws themselves which cannot provide
for all cases beforehand, as Gods Laws can; and therefore to dispense with a
Subject in a humane Law is not a doing evil for a good end; for to break an
humane Law is not intrinsecally an evil, though no express leave be given, as
the case may happen: but when leave is given, as it is in dispensations, then
there is no evil at all. And something like this, is that other case of
prescriptions, which does indeed transfer a right from a right owner, as it
may happen, but this is a doing good and not evil, for it is a preferring a
certain possession before an uncertain right; or it is a doing a greater good,
that is a prelation of a title which has more evidence, and public advantage
then the other. Besides, it is done by public consent, in which, because every
particular is included, there is no evil done, but much is prevented.

7. In actions the material part is to be distinguished from the formality, 23.
the work from the affection: That may be wholly indifferent, when this may be
wholly criminal. He that drinks till he vomits, by the Physicians advice, gives
none of his affection to the pleasure of any thing forbidden, he takes it as he
takes a potion or pills, which may have the same effect with drink. But when
the material part cannot be done without the sense of pleasure which is
forbidden, then the end cannot sanctify it: and therefore although to drink
much for Physic may be lawful, yet pollution may not be desired for health,
because that cannot be done or suffered without an unlawful pleasure; and so
also will drinking for health become vicious, if in the acting of the material
part, any part of our affections be stolen away, and the pleasure of the excess
be delighted in.

8. He that makes use of the matter of a sin already prepared to which he gives
no consent, 24.
and which he cannot help, does not do evil for a good end. Thus the Prophet
called on the Priests of Baal to do what they used to do, that they might
never do so again: He was no way the cause of a sin, but of its circumstances
and adjuncts, that it be done here and now, and this is not against the
Apostles rule; time and place are no sins, and make none unless frequency be
added to the time, and holiness to a place, and then they may add degrees or
new instances to the sin; but when neither of these is procured or injured
respectively, it is lawful to glorify God by using the prepared sin to good
purposes. When a Judge is ready to receive money upon any terms, out of this
evil we may bring good, and cause him to do a good thing rather then a bad; he
does neither well, but that is his own fault; but to give money is a thing
indifferent, and to give it for that end which is good, makes it better: and
bribery is a word of an ill sound when it means an evil thing, but when it
means well we may find a better word for it, or mean well by this: though
concerning the particular it is not amongst men esteemed certain that it is
lawful to give money to a Judge: Sed si dedi (says Ulpian) ut secundum me in
bona causa Judex pronunciaret, est quidem relatum condictioni locum esse: sed
hic quoque crimen contrahit. Judicem enim corrumpere videtur: and non ita
pridem Imperator noster constituit litem eum perdere. Whether it be lawful or
no is to be inquired in another place; but as to the present inquiry, if it be
lawful, I have accounted for it already; if it be not, it is not to be done, no
not for justice sake. For in this case we no way consent to the evil, but
endeavor to bring good out of that evil which is already in being. Thus we run
to a Tyrant power for justice, he will govern whether we will or no, the sin
will be acted and continued upon his own account; but when the evil matter is
thus made ready, we may reap as much good by it as we can bring out of it; and
in this sense is that true and applicable to the present which is urged in the
objection, That as truth may come from falsehood, so may evil from good; when an
ill gotten power is apt either to justice or injustice, we may draw justice
from it, and then we do good without cooperating to the evil: that is, we
only do determine an indifferent agent to the better part: The manner of
getting the power is wholly extrinsecal to the ministration of it: That is
wholly the fault of the Usurper, but this which is our own act is wholly
innocent. If Nero sets Rome on fire, I do no hurt if I warm by the heat, and
walk by the light of it; but if I laugh at the flames, or give a faggot to it, I
am guilty. And thus the Christians use the Heathens oaths for their own
security; the oath is good, and so far it is desired; that the oath is by a
false god is the Heathens fault; this is effected by these, but the other is
only desired by them: This therefore is not a doing evil for a good end; it is
a desiring of good, and a using the evil matter which is of another procuring.

9. There are some actions criminal and forbidden in certain States only, 38.
as to kill a man is a sin, a private man may not do it; but the same man when
he comes to be a public Magistrate may do it: A private man also may not do
it when he is in the relation and protection of civil society, because in that,
the Laws are his guards, and the public Judges are his defensatives; but if a
man sets on me by violence, and so puts himself into a state of war, he by
going from the limits of civil society, takes off the restraint which that
society put upon me, and I am returned to the liberties of nature; and there is
by all Laws a power given a man to defend himself, by Laws, if he can, and if
he cannot, then by himself and the means of nature; and therefore to kill him
that would kill me, is not to do evil for a good end, for the thing is
permitted, and therefore not intrinsecally evil, and whatsoever is not so, may
be accidentally good.

10. Some of the instances are such which are disallowed by most men; 39.
so to tell a lie for a good end is unlawful, upon supposition that a lie is
intrinsecally evil; concerning which the account must be reserved for its own
place: for the present, it is certainly unlawful to lie for any end, if that
supposition be true; but if lying be only forbidden for its uncharitableness
or injustice, that is, for its effects, then when the end is good, the
instrument is tolerable. By these measures all the instances objected can be
measured and secured, and by these the Rule it self must be conducted. What
cannot be excused upon one of these, is wholly to be reproved as being a direct
prevaricating the Apostles Rule.

The sum is this; 40.
Whatsoever is forbidden by the Law under which we stand, and being weighed by
its own measures is found evil; that is, in a matter certainly forbidden, not
for any outward and accidental reason, but for its natural or essential
contrariety to reason and the Law of God, that may not be done, or procured for
any end whatsoever. For every such thing is intrinsecally and essentially evil,
it is evil without change or variety, without condition or circumstance, and
therefore cannot be made good by any such thing. What is evil in some
circumstances may be good in others, and what is condemned for a bad effect, by
a good one may be hallowed, but if it be bad of it self, it can never be good,
till there come a cause as great to change its nature, as to make it: the
cruelty of a man's habit or his choice can be turned, but a viper will for ever
have a venom in his tooth.

But this Rule is also to be extended to cases that are duplicate, 41.
and relate to two persons. As if two persons affirm or promise contraries; the
first upon a presumptive power and authority over the other, and this other
upon firm resolution, and by an entire power over him or her self; though I am
bound to hinder his promise from passing into fallacy and deception as much as
I can, yet I must rather secure my own. The reason is, because he who had no
power over me, could not promise but with a tacit condition; and though he
were guilty of temerity and an interpretative breach of promise, yet if the
other fails, he is directly and properly guilty. This is still more evident if
a Father promises his daughter to Titius before witnesses, presuming that his
daughter who is a widow will yet be ruled by him, though she be at her own
dispose; but his daughter has solemnly sworn and contracted her self to
Sempronius: The daughter must be more careful not to break her oath and
contract, then by verifying her Fathers promise keep him from a lie; and this
was the case of Acontius and Cydippe in Ovid, Promisit pater hanc, haec
adjuravit amanti:
Ille homines, haec est testificata Deam.
Hic metuit mendax, sed and haec perjura vocari,
Number dubitas hic sit major, an ille metus?
This case may be varied by accidents intervening, as if the daughter be under
her Fathers power, she has none of her own to contract or swear; but in an
equal power and circumstances, the greater care must be to avoid the greater
crime.

These Cautions are all which I think necessary for the conducting of a
doubting Conscience (that is, 42.
a conscience undetermined) in its danger and infirmity: but concerning the
matter of doubts, that is indeed, all cases of Conscience, they are to be
handled under their proper matter. Concerning interpretation of doubts to the
better part, obedience to superiors in a doubtful matter, favorable and easy
interpretation of Laws for the deposition of a doubt, though I was tempted to
have given accounts in this place, yet I have chosen to refer them to their
own places, where by the method and rules of art they ought to stand, and where
the Reader will expect them. But concerning the cure of a doubting Conscience,
this is all that I am to add to the foregoing Rules:

A doubtful Conscience is no guide of humane actions, 43.
but a disease, and is to be cured by prayer and prudent advices, and the
proper instruments of resolution and reasonable determinations; but for those
things which are called doubts, and the resolution of which is the best way to
cure the infirmity of conscience, they must be derived from their several heads
and categories. For these discourses or advices of Conscience in general, are
intended but as directions how to take our Physic, and what order to observe
in diebus custodiae; but the determining of the several doubts, is like
preparing and administering the Medicines which consist of very many ingredients.

CHAP. VI. Of the Scrupulous Conscience.
RULE 1. A Scruple is a great trouble of mind proceeding from a little motive,
and a great indisposition, by which the conscience though sufficiently
determined by proper arguments, dares not proceed to action, or if it do, it
cannot rest.
QUI nimis emungit, 1.
elicit sanguinem, said Solomon; too violent blowing draws blood from the nose;
Prove. 28.
that is, an inquiry after determination, and searching into little corners,
and measuring actions by atoms and unnatural measures, and being over
righteous, is the way not to govern, but to disorder our Conscience.

That it is a great trouble, 2.
is a daily experiment and a sad sight: Some persons dare not eat for fear of
gluttony, they fear that they shall sleep too much, and that keeps them waking,
and troubles their heads more, and then their scruples increase. If they be
single persons, they fear that every temptation is a (...), that burning which
the Apostle so carefully would have us to avoid, and then that it is better to
marry then to suffer it; and if they think to marry, they dare not for fear
they be accounted neglecters of the glory of God which they think is better
promoted by not touching a woman. When they are married they are afraid to do
their duty, for fear it be secretly an indulgence to the flesh, and be to be
suspected of carnality, and yet they dare not omit it, for fear they should be
unjust, and yet they fear that the very fearing it to be unclean should be a
sin, and suspect that if they do not fear so, it is too great a sign they
adhere to Nature more then to the Spirit. * They repent when they have not
sinned, and accuse themselves without form or matter; their virtues make them
tremble, and in their innocence they are afraid; they at no hand would sin, and
know not on which hand to avoid it: and if they venture in, as the flying
^ersians over the river Strymon, the ice will not bear them, or they cannot
stand for slipping, and think every step a danger, and every progression a
crime, and believe themselves drowned when they are yet ashore.

Scruple sometimes signifies all manner of vexation of the mind; 3.
so Cicero pro Sext. Roscio uses it, Hunc mihi scrupulum ex animo evelle, qui
me dies noctesque stimulat ac pungit. Take this scruple out of my mind which
pricks and goads me night and day. So also in S. Hieromes Bible 1 Regum 25. Non
erit tibi in singultum and scrupulum cordis quod effuderis sanguinem innoxium.
It shall not be to thee a cause of grief and scruple of heart that thou have
shed innocent blood: But in the present discourse it has a more limited
signification, and according to the use of Divines and Canonists, means an
unquietness and restlesness of mind in things done or to be done, after the
doubts of conscience are determined and ended. Intolerabilem perturbationem
Seneca calls it, a fear of doing every thing that is innocent, and an aptness
to do every thing that can be suggested, -- nuda ac tremebunda cruentis
Irrepet genibus si candida jusserit Ino.
* Scruple is a little stone in the foot, if you set it upon the ground it
hurts you, if you hold it up you cannot go forward; it is a trouble where the
trouble is over, a doubt when doubts are resolved; it is a little party behind
a hedge when the main army is broken and the field cleared, and when the
conscience is instructed in its way, and girt for action, a light trifling
reason, or an absurd fear hinders it from beginning the journey, or proceeding
in the way, or resting at the journeys end.

Very often it has no reason at all for its inducement, 4.
but proceeds from indisposition of body, pusillanimity, melancholy, a
troubled head, sleepless nights, the society of the timorous from solitariness,
ignorance, or unseasoned imprudent notices of things, indigested learning,
strong fancy and weak judgment; from any thing that may abuse the reason into
irresolution and restlesness. It is indeed a direct walking in the dark, where
we see nothing to affright us, but we fancy many things, and the phantasms
produced in the lower regions of fancy, and nursed by folly, and born upon the
arms of fear do trouble us.

But if reason be its parent, then it is born in the twilight, 5.
and the mother is so little that the daughter is a fly with a short head and a
long sting, enough to trouble a wise man, but not enough to satisfy the
appetite of a little bird. The reason of a scruple is ever as obscure as the
light of a Gloworm, not fit to govern any action, and yet is suffered to stand
in the midst of all its enemies, and like the flies of Egypt vex and trouble
the whole Army.

This disease is most frequent in women, 6.
and monastic persons, in the sickly and timorous, and is often procured by
excess in religious exercises, in austerities and disciplines, indiscreet
fastings and pernoctations in prayer, multitude of humane Laws, variety of
opinions, the impertinent talk and writings of men that are busily idle: the
enemy of mankind by the weaknesses of the body and understanding enervating
the strengths of the spirit, and making Religion strike it self upon the face
by the palsies, and weak tremblings of its own fingers.

William of Osency was a devout man, 7.
and read two or three Books of Religion and devotion very often, and being
pleased with the entertainment of his time, resolved to spend so many hours
every day in reading them, as he had read over those books several times; that
is, three hours every day. In a short time he had read over the books three
times more, and began to think that his resolution might be expounded to
signify in a current sense, and that it was to be extended to the future times
of his reading, and that now he was to spend six hours every day in reading
those books, because he had now read them over six times. * He presently
considered that in half so long time more by the proportion of this scruple he
must be tied to twelve hours every day, and therefore that this scruple was
unreasonable; that he intended no such thing when he made his resolution, and
therefore that he could not be tied: he knew that a resolution does not bind a
man's self in things whose reason does vary, and where our liberty is entire,
and where no interest of a third person is concerned. He was sure that this
scruple would make that sense of the resolution be impossible at last, and all
the way vexatious and intolerable; he had no leisure to actuate this sense of
the words, and by higher obligations he was faster tied to other duties: he
remembered also that now the profit of those good books was received already and
grew less, and now became changed into a trouble and an inconvenience, and he
was sure he could employ his time better: and yet after all this heap of
prudent and religious considerations, his thoughts revolved in a restless
circle, and made him fear he knew not what. He was sure he was not obliged, and
yet durst not trust it; he knew his rule, and had light enough to walk by it,
but was as fearful to walk in the day as children are in the night. * Well!
being weary of his trouble, he tells his story, receives advice to proceed
according to the sense of his reason, not to the murmurs of his scruple; he
applies himself accordingly. But then he enters into new fears; for he rests in
this, that he is not obliged to multiply his readings, but begins to think that
he must do some equal good thing in commutation of the duty, for though that
particular instance become intolerable and impossible, yet he tied himself to
perform that which he believed to be a good thing, and though he was deceived
in the particular, yet he was right in the general, and therefore that for the
particular he must make an exchange. He does so; but as he is doing it, he
starts, and begins to think that every commutation being intended for ease, is
in some sense or other a lessening of his duty, a diminution of his spiritual
interest, and a note of infirmity; and then also fears, that in judging
concerning the matter of his commutation he shall be remiss and partial. * Now
he considers that he ought to consult with his Superiors; and as he is going to
do so, he begins to think that his superior did once chide him for his
scruple, and that now much more he will do it, and therefore will rather seek
to abolish the opinion of obligation then change it into another burden; and
since he knows this before hand, he fears lest it shall be expounded to be in
him an artifice to get himself eased or chidden out of his duty, and cozened
from his obligation. * What shall the man do? He dares not trust himself; and
if he goes to another, he thinks that this will the more condemn him; he
suspects himself, but this other renders him justly to be suspected by himself
and others too. * Well! he goes to God and prays him to direct him; but then he
considers that Gods graces are given to us working together with Gods Spirit,
and he fears the work will not be done for him because he fails in his own part
of cooperating; and concerning this he thinks he has no scruple, but ce^tain
causes of fear. * After a great tumbling of thoughts and sorrows he begins to
believe that this scrupulousness of conscience is a temptation, and a
punishment of his sins, and then he heaps up all that ever he did, and all that
he did not, and all that he might have done, and seek^ng for remedy grows
infinitely worse, till God at last pitying the innocence and trouble of the man
made the evil to sink down with its own weight, and like a sorrow that breaks
the sleep, at last growing big, loads the spirits, and bringing back the sleep
that it had driven away, cures it self by the greatness of its own affliction.
In this case, the Religion is not so great as the affliction.

But because a scruple is a fear, 8.
or a light reason against a stronger and a sufficiently determined
understanding, it can bring no other work to the conscience, but that it get it
self eased of the trouble, which is to be done by the following Rules.

RULE 2. A Conscience sufficiently instructed by its proper arguments of
persuasion, may without sin proceed to action against the scruple and its
weaker arguings or stronger tremblings.
THIS is the best remedy that is in nature and reason. 1.
S. Bernard preached rerely well, and was applauded, but the Devil offering to
him the temptation of vainglory, he in his resisting it, began to think that
he had better leave off to preach then begin to be proud; but instantly the
Holy Spirit of God discovered to him the deception, and the Devils artifice who
would at any rate have him leave off to preach; and he answered, I neither
began for thee, nor for thee will I leave off. This is a right course in the
matter of scruple: proceed to action; and as the reason or the fear in the
scruple was not inducement enough to begin, so neither to leave off.

Against a doubting conscience a man may not work, 2.
but against a scrupulous he may. For a scrupulous conscience does not take
away the proper determination of the understanding; but it is like a woman
handling of a frog or a chicken, which all their friends tell them can do them
no hurt, and they are convinced in reason that they cannot, they believe it and
know it, and yet when they take the little creature into their hands they
shreek, and sometimes hold fast and find their fears confuted, and sometimes
they let go, and find their reason useless.

Valerius of Hippo being used always to fast till high noon of festivals, 3.
falls into an ilness of stomach, and is advised to eat something in the
morning; all the reason of the world that is considerable and pressing, tells
him he may do it lawfully, but because he has not been used to it, and good
people in health do not do it, he is fearful to do that which others do
not, that need it not; this is a slight ground, and with it perfectly may stand
his practical determination of conscience that it is lawful for him; which
final determination, because it is the next and immediate rule of actions
cannot be impeded by that which suffers this persuasion still to remain,
because the doing only against such a persuasion can only be a sin, for that
only is the transgression of the immediate Law; to do conformably to such
determination is to do it with faith; and if the scruple can lessen it, yet it
only makes the man the weaker, but cannot destroy the assent.

Add to this, 4.
that since scruples do sometimes make men mad, do detriment to our health,
make Religion a burden, introduce a weariness of spirit and tediousness, it
cannot be a sin to stop all this evil, and directly to throw away the scruple
and proceed to contrary actions.

But this is to be understood only, 5.
when the scruple is such that it leaves the conscience practically determined.
For if the scruple prevails upon his weakness so far as to rifle the better
reasons, the conscience loses its rule and its security, and the scruple passes
into a doubt, and the Law into a consultation, and the judgment into opinion,
and the conscience into an undiscerning, undetermined faculty.

Hither is to be reduced the case of a perplexed conscience; 6.
that is, when men think that which part soever of the contradiction they
choose, they sin; for though that be impossible to wise men, yet all men are
not wise; and if it were impossible in the thing, yet it is certainly possible
upon the distempers of some men: and because a man has contrary reasonings and
divided principles within, as our blessed Lord had a natural desire not to die,
and yet a reasonable and a holy spiritual desire to submit to his Fathers will,
and if he please, to die; so has every man desires to please an appetite, or
secure an interest of secular designs, and a reason to serve the interest of
his spirit in spiritual designs: But although in our blessed Lord the appetites
of nature were innocent and obedient, and the spirit always got a clear
victory, and the flesh resisted not, yet in us it is not so; and sometimes
spiritual complications do disturb the question, and make the temporal end
seem religious or pious; and the contrary pretense is pious too, and yet a duty
will be omitted which way soever be chosen, or a sin committed as is supposed;
here the case seems hard. * It is certain that there is no such case in the
world, that it is necessary for a man to sin which part soever he takes, and
unless it be his own fault he cannot think so; but some men are wild in their
reasonings, and err in circles, and cannot untie the knots themselves have
knit. Some are weary, and many are involved, and more are foolish; and it is as
possible for a man to be a fool in one proposition as in another, and therefore
his error may be this, that which part soever he chooses he shall sin; what is
to be done here is the Question?

The case is this; 7.
Pratinus a Roman Soldier turns Christian, and having taken his military
Sacrament before, and still continuing the employment, he is commanded to put
to death certain criminals, which he undertakes, because he is bound to it by
his oath. Going to the execution he finds they were condemned for being
Christians; then he starts, remembering his Sacrament or oath on one side, and
his faith on the other; that is, his Religion on both; by which he is bound
neither to be perjured, nor to kill his Brethren: The Question is not how he
might expedite his doubt, and secure his conscience by choosing the surer part,
but what he is to do, this perplexity remaining, that is, he not being able to
lay aside either part of the doubt; for his question is not whether of the two
he shall do, but is persuaded that to do either is a high crime.

1. Concerning this, 8.
it is evident, that if the cases be equal, and the event not to be
distinguished by him in the greatness of its consequent or malice of it, it is
indifferent to him which he chooses; and therefore there can be no Rule given
which he must take, unless he could be convinced of one that it is lawful, and
the other unlawful; but in his case that not being to be done, he ought to know
that in this case he sins not if he takes either, because all sin is with
liberty and choice, at least with complacency; but his error is an infelicity
and no sin, if he neither chooses it, nor delights in it, which in the present
case he is supposed not to do.

2. But if in the event of the actions and parts of choice there be a real or
apprehended difference, 9.
he is bound to choose that part which he believes to be the less sin; this
being a justification of his will, the best that can be in t^^ present case;
but if he chooses that which is of worse event, he has nothing to excuse it.

RULE 3. He that is troubled with scruples, ought to rely upon the judgment of
a prudent Guide.
THE reason is, 1.
because his own understanding is troubled and restless, and yet his reason
determined; and therefore he can but use the best way of cure, which in his
particular is to follow an understanding that is equally determined as is his
own, and yet not so diseased.

Add to this, 2.
that God has appointed spiritual persons, Guides of souls, whose office is to
direct and comfort, to give peace and conduct, to refresh the weary, and to
strengthen the weak, to confirm the strong, and instruct the doubtful; and
therefore to use their advice is that proper remedy which God has appointed. *
And it has also in it this advantage, that there is in it humility of
understanding, a not relying on our own wisdom, which by way of blessing and
disposition will obtain of God that we be directed. Antonin. in sum. 1. p. tit.
^ c. 10.
Consule bonos, prudentesque viros, and acquiesce eis, was an old advice, and
derived from Solomon and Tobit; lean not on thy own understanding; but ask
counsel of all that are wise, and despise not any counsel that is profitable.

RULE 4. When a doubt is resolved in the entrance of an action, we must judge
of our action afterward by the same measures as before; for he that changes
his measures, turns his doubt into a scruple.
THE reason of the Rule is this, 1.
That which is sufficient for satisfaction before, is sufficient for peace
afterward. A Christian in the Diocese of Salamis being faint in his stomach
before the reception of the holy Sacrament, disputes whether he may take a
cordial or a glass of wine. Upon inquiry he is told, That to receive the holy
Sacrament virgin saliva, fasting is a custom of the Church later then the
times of the Apostles, as appears by the Corinthian usages mentioned by S.
Paul; that it having no authority but custom, no sanction but a pious fancy,
and a little proportion and analogy of reverence, it ought to yield to the
elicite acts of charity: Upon this account he being satisfied, drinks a little,
is well, and communicates with health, and joy, and holiness. But afterward
reflecting upon what he had done, he begins to fear he had not done well; that
he had done against the customs of the Church, that it was at least infirmity
in him, and upon what account with God that should be, which in his own most
gentle sentence was at least, infirmity, he knew not; and twenty other little
things he thought of, which signified nothing, but did somethi^^, they meant no
good, but did great evil: and finding himself got into a ne^^^le calls for
help, but is told that he must get out of it by the same way that he came in,
and that which was the sufficient cause of his doing the action, was sufficient
also for the justification of it, and let him confront the reasons which
introduced the action against these flies and little pretensions which disturb
his mind, and he shall find that he has reason to be ashamed of debauching
and prostituting his understanding to such trifles and images of argument: For
let a man look to his grounds when he begins to act, and when he has acted,
let him remember that he did his duty, and give God thanks. For if any just
cause appear for which he ought to reprove his former determination; that just
cause can have no influence upon what is past, if the first proceeding was
probable, and reasonable, and dis-interest. He knows something which he did not
know before; and for the time to come is to walk by this newly kindled taper,
but if he in the first instance walked by all the light he had, he is not tied
to walk it over again: for as God will not of a child exact the prudence and
cautions of a man, but in every age expects a duty answerable to the abilities
of it; so it is in all the stages of our reason, and growing understanding.
According to what we have, and not according to what we have not we shall give
accounts. This is intended to prove that if we proceed probably, we are not
tied to sorrow and repentance, though afterward we find a greater reason to
the contrary; but this concludes more in the present question of scruple, in
which the greater probability goes before, and the less comes after.

But the Rule is to be managed with these Cautions:

1. Take heed that in the beginning we do not mistake our desires to have it
done, 2.
for a sufficient warrant that it may. For if we enter in at a wrong door, or
at the windows, we must go back, and cannot own that entrance which was like a
Thief, or that action which was done with more craft then prudence.

2. Be not too easy in the arguments of probation. 3.
For although in actions concerning our eternal interest, God expects no more
of us but that we should walk by the measures of a man; yet we do not perform
our duty if we act by the measures of a child or a fool. If we could do no
better, the action might be more reprovable then the man; but if we could
consider better and wiser then when we reflect afterward upon what we did
before, and find a fault or a sin, a negligence or an avoidable error in the
principle, we cannot from thence bring rest and confidence to our consciences.

3. Separate your question as much as you can from interest, 4.
that your determination and inquiry be pure; and if more arguments occur
afterward then did in the first inquiry, remember that it was well enough at
first, if it was probable enough; and for the rest, pray to God to accept you,
if you did well and wisely, and to pardon you in what was done amiss, or
negligently, or imperfectly.

RULE 5. A scrupulous Conscience is to be cured by remedies proper to the
disease, and remedies proper to the man.
THat is, 1.
there are some advices which are directly intended for the lessening the
scruple, and some others which take away the scruple by curing the man, and
taking off his distemperature. Those which are directly intended against the
scruple, besides the Rules before described, are these:

Remedies against the Scruple.

1. Let the afflicted and disquiet man often meditate of the infinite goodness
of God, 2.
and how his justice is equity, and his jndgements are in mercy; that he judges
us by what we heartily endeavor, but does not put our infelicities into our
accounts of sins.

2. Let him be instructed that all Laws Divine and Humane are desirous of sweet
and merciful interpretations, 3.
and that of themselves they love to yield to necessity and to charity; and
that severity and exactness of measures is not only contrary to the goodness,
but to the justice of God, who therefore will pity us because we are made of
dust, and are a lump of folly and unavoidable infirmities; and by the same
justice by which God is eternally angry withthe fallen Angels, by the same
justice he is not finally angry with man for his first follies, and pities all
his unavoidable evils.

3. Let it be remembered that charity is the fulfilling the Law, 4.
and by the degrees of it a man tends to perfection, and not by forms and
tittles of the letter, and apices of the handwriting of ordinances. And that if
he loves God and does his best, and concerning the doing his best make the same
judgments real and material, that he does of the other actions of his life, he
certainly does all that can belong to him, and all that which can be wise and
safe. He that acts according to the reason of a man, ought to have the
confidences of a man, for no other confidence can be reasonable. That is
charity that we do carefully and wisely, and follow the best we can.

4. Let it be considered that to incline to the scruple, 5.
and neglect the stronger reason that stands against it, is to take the worse
end, it is to do that which must seem worse; and then it may be remembered,
that if the man is afraid and troubled with the trifle, with the scruple, when
he has stronger reason to secure him, if he yields to the scruple and neglects
the stronger reason, the neglect of that will run upon him like a torrent and a
whirlewind, and the scruple, or the bulrush will not support his building.

5. Since the very design of the Euangelical Covenant is, 6.
that our duty be demanded, and our sins accounted for, according to the
measures of a man, and not by the proportions of an Angel; and that all our
infirmities and ignorances, and unavoidable prejudices are taken into account,
beside the infinite remissions on Gods part, it will follow that by this
goodness of God and a moral diligence, and a good heart we are secured, but we
can never be secured by our own measures. For let us weigh never so exactly, we
may miss some granes or scruples, but to snatch greedily at the little
overrunning dust of the balance, and to throw away the massive ingots that
sunk the scales down, is the greatest folly in the world.

6. The lines of duty are set down so clear and legible, 7.
are so agreeable to reason, so demonstrable upon their proper principles, are
so easy and plain, that we need not run into corners, and sneaking by-lanes to
find it out: If by little undiscerned minutes we were to stand or fall, though
now there are but few that shall be saved, yet but a few of those few should
escape eternal death. The counsels of God are not like the Oracles of Apollo,
double in their sense, intricate in their expression, secret in their meaning,
deceitful in their measures, and otherwise in the event then they could be in
their expectation. But the word of God in the lines of duty is open as the face
of heaven, bright as the Moon, healthful as the Suns influence; and this is
certainly true, that when a thing becomes obscure, though it may oblige us to a
prudent search, yet it binds us not under a guilt, but only so far as it is
or may be plainly understood.

But in the case of a scrupulous conscience, 8.
it is not the thing so much that troubles the mind, as the indisposition of
the part, the man has a vicious tenderness; it is melancholy and fear, and as
very accident can trouble the miserable, so every fancy can affright the
timorous; the chiefest remedies therefore must be by applications to the man,
to cure his distemper, and then the scruple will work no more then its own
activity will enable it, and that is but little and inconsiderable.

Advices to the scrupulous man.

1. The case of the scrupulous man is so full of variety, or uncertainty rather
that it is as easy to govern chance, 9.
and to give rules to contingency as to him. In all other cases there is a
measure and a limit, and therefore a remedy can be proportioned to it; but in
this, fear is the disease, and that alone is infinite; and as it commences
oftentimes without cause, so it proceeds without limit. For by what reason it
entered in, by the same it may grow; that is, without any cause at all it may
increase for ever. * But for the remedy, this is considerable; That the worse
it is, the better it may be remedied, if we could consider. For when fear is
grown so big that it is unreasonable, the cure is ready and plain, that it
must be laid aside because it is intolerable, and it may because it is
unreasonable. When it comes from a just cause, that just cause is usually the
limit of it: but when it is vast and infinite it has no cause, but weakness,
and it appears enough in the instances; for the scrupulous man fears concerning
those things where he ought to be most confident; he fears that God is angry
with him for not doing his duty, and yet he does whatsoever he can learn to be
his duty. * This is a complication of evils, as melancholy is of diseases. The
scrupulous man is timorous, and sad, and uneasy, and he knows not why. As the
melancholy man muses long, and to no purpose, he thinks much, but thinks of
nothing; so the scrupulous man fears exceedingly, but he knows not what nor
why. It is a Religious melancholy, and when it appears to be a disease and a
temptation, there needs no more argument against its entertainment. We must
rudely throw it away.

2. He that is vexed with scruples, 10.
must fly to God by prayer and fasting, that this lunacy and spirit of illusion
which sometimes throws him into the fire, and sometimes into the water may be
ejected, and the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of wisdom may come in
substitution according to the promise so often recorded in the holy Scriptures.
Luke 11. 13. James 1. 5.


3. Let the scrupulous man change the tremblings of his spirit to a more
considerable object, 11.
and be sure if he fears little things, let him fear great things greatly,
every known sin let him be sure to avoid, little or great, for by this purity
he shall see God, and the things of God, peace and truth, and the honesty of
his heart will bear him out from the mischief, if not quit from the trouble of
the scruple: * at no hand let it be endured that he should think this disease
or vicious tenderness in spirit is able to excuse him from his duty in greater
things. Some scruple at an innocent ceremony, and against all conviction and
arms of reason will be troubled and will not understand; this is very bad, but
it is worse that he should think himself the more godly man for being thus
troubled and diseased, and that upon this account he shall fall out with
Government and despise it, this man nurses his scruple till it proves his
death, and instead of curing a bile, dies with a cancer, and is like a man that
has strained his foot and keeps his bed for ease, but by lying there long
falls into a lipothymie, and that bears him to his grave.

4. Let the scrupulous man avoid all excess in mortifications and corporal
austerities, 12.
because there are apt to trouble the body, and consequently to disorder the
mind, and by the prevailing fond persuasions of the world they usually produce
great opinions of sanctity and ignorant confidences of G^ds favor, and by
spending the religion of the man in exterior significations make him apt to
take his measures from imperfect notices, and then his religion shall be
scruple and impertinency, full of trouble, but good and profitable for little
or nothing. Lib. 8. c. ^^riri De rerum (...) erate.
Admiratione digna sunt (says Cardan) quae per jejunium hoc modo contingunt:
somnia, superstitio, contemptus tormentorum, mortis desiderium, obstinata
opinio, insania: jejunium naturaliter praeparat ad haec omnia. It is wonderful
to consider what strange products there are of fasting: Dreams superstition,
contempt of torments, desire of death, obstinacy in opinion, and madness. To
all these, fasting does naturally prepare us: and concerning S. Hilarion it is
reported by S. Hierome, Ita attenuatus fuit jejunio and vigiliis in tantum
exeso corpore ut ossibus vix haerebat: Epist. l. 3
unde nocte infantum vagitus, balatus pecorum, mugitus boum, voces and ludibria
daemonum, etc. that he was so lean and dried with fasting and watching, that
his flesh did scarce cleave to his bone: Then his desires and capacity of sleep
went away, and for want of sleep he must needs grow light headed, and then the
illusions of the Devil were prepared and certain to prevail; then his brains
crowed, and he heard in the desert children crying, sheep bleating, bulls
lowing, and rattling of chains, and all the fantastic noises raised by the
Devil. Much to the same purpose is by S. Athanasius reported of S. Anthony. It
was this excess that made S. Hierome so scrupulous in reading of Tullies
Orations; it was not an Angel, but his own dreams that whipped him for making
and reading good Latin and good sense. After long fasting it was that S.
Gulslach of Crowald fought with the Devil, and such irregular austerities have
been in all ages of superstition, the great instrument of Satan by which his
illusions became Oracles, and religion was changed into superstition, and the
fear of God into timorousness, and inquiry into scruple.

5. Let the scrupulous man interest himself in as few questions of intricate
dispute, 13.
and minute disquisition as he can; they that answer fewest, do commonly
trouble themselves with most. Curious questions may puzzle every man, but they
can profit no man, they are a certain disturbance, they are rebels in the
kingdom of the inner man, they are just the same things in speculation which
scruples are in practice, and therefore because notice properly tends and
directs to action, the increase of them will multiply these. Avoid them
therefore, for not these, but things practical are the hinges of immortality;
but the other break the peace of the superior faculties, they trouble the
understanding and afflict the conscience and profit, or instruct no man.

6. He that would cure his scrupulousness must take care that his Religion be
as near as he can to the measures and usages of common life. 14.
When S. Anthony was troubled with a scrupulous conscience, which so amazed
him, that he thought it was impossible for him ever to arrive at heaven, an
Angel came to him in the likeness of a Hermit, or rather an Hermit spoke to him
like an Angel and said, Nunc paululum laborando manibus, nunc genibus flexis
orando, deinde corpus reficiendo, post quiescendo, and rursus iterum operando,
Antoni, sic fac tu and salvus eris. Sometimes labor with thy hands, then fall
on thy knees and pray, then refresh thy body, then sometimes rest, and then
labor again; and so thou shall be saved. Let us take care that our Religion be
like our life, not done like pictures, taken when we are dressed curiously, but
looking as the actions of our life are dressed, that is, so as things can be
constantly done, that is, that it be dressed with the usual circumstances,
imitating the examples, and following the usages of the best and the most
prudent persons of his communion; striving (...) nothing to be singular, not
doing violence to any thing of nature, unless it be an instrument or a
temptation to a vice. For some men mortify their natures rather then their
vicious inclinations or their evil habits, and so make Religion to be a burden,
a snare, and an enemy. For in scrupulous, that is, in melancholy persons nature
is to be cherished in every thing where there is no danger, that is, where she
is not petulant and troublesome. Such men have more need of something to repair
their house, then to lessen it.

7. Let the scrupulous man take care that he make no vows of any lasting
employment. 15.
For the disease that is already within, and this new matter from without will
certainly make new cases of Conscience, and new fears and scruples upon the
manner, and degrees, and circumstances of performance. Therefore what ever good
thing they intend, let them do it when they can, when it is pleasant, when it
is convenient, and always reserve their liberty. For besides that to do
otherwise must needs multiply scruples, it is also more pleasing to God that we
make our services to be every day chosen, then after one general choice of
them, to have the particulars done and hated.

8. But that I may sum up many particulars in one. 16.
The scrupulous man must avoid those companies, and those employments, and
those books from whence the clouds arise, especially the books of ineffective
and fantastic notion, such as are Legends of Saints, ridiculously and weakly
invented, furnished out for Idea's, not for actions of common life, with dreams
and false propositions; for the scrupulous and fearful will easily be troubled,
if they find themselves fall short of those fine images of virtue which some
men describe, that they might make a fine picture, but like nobody. Such also
are the Books of mystical Theology, which have in them the most high, the most
troublesome, and the most mysterious nothings in the world, and little better
then the effluxes of a religious madness. *

9. Let the scrupulous man endeavor to reduce his body into a fair temper, 17.
* and ^nkindle in his mind a great love and high opinions of God and Gods
mercy, and by proper arts produce joy in God, and rejoycings in the Spirit; *
let him pursue the purgative way of religion, fight against and extirpate all
vicious habits and evil customs, do the actions of virtue frequently and
constantly, but without noise and outcries, without affectation and
singularity; that religion is best which is incorporated with the actions and
common traverses of our life; and as there will be some foolish actions, so
there will be matter for repentance; let this humble us, but not amaze us and
distract us.

10. Let all persons who are or use to be thus troubled with flies, 18.
and impertinencies of reason and conscience be carefully and wisely instructed
in those practical propositions which are the general lines of life, which are
the axioms of Christian Philosophy, which like the rules of Law have great
influence in many virtues, and have great effect toward perfection. For the
more severe the rules are, the more apt they are to be the matter of scruple
when they are not understood in their just measures. Such as are, It is the
part of a good mind to acknowledge a fault where there is none. * Not to go
forward is to go backward. * He that loves danger shall perish in danger. *
Hold that which is certain, and let go that which is uncertain. There are many
more, of which I am to give accounts in the next Book, and from thence the
scrupulous may derive assistances.

Concerning the matter of scruples, I on purpose decline the considering of it
here, because either every thing or nothing of it is to be handled: A scruple
may arise in the doing of every duty, in the remembrance of every action; and
to stop one gap, when the evil may enter in at 500. I did suppose not to be
worth my labor. I therefore reserve every thing to its own place, being
content here to give the measures and rules of conscience in its several kinds,
and differing affections, that is, in all its proper capacities which can
relate to action.

OF THE RVLE OF CONSCIENCE. viz. The Laws Divine and Humane, And All collateral
Obligations.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the Law of Nature in general.
RULE 1. The Law of Nature is the Universal Law of the world, or the Law of
mankind, concerning common necessities to which we are inclined by Nature,
invited by consent, prompted by reason, but is bound upon us only by the
commands of God.
ESto (...), 1.
said the Apostolical constitution; Constit. Apost. l. 1. c 6.
Be careful to understand what is the Law natural, and what is superinduced
upon it. The counsel, abating the authority and reverence of them that said it,
is of great reasonableness. For all men talk of the law of Nature, and all
agree that there is such a material law which some way or other is of the
highest obligation; but because there are no Digests or Tables of this law, men
have not only differed about the number of them, and the instances themselves,
but about the manner of drawing them forth, and making the observation: whereas
if the law of Nature were such a thing as it is supposed generally, these
differences would be as strange and impossible, as that men should disagree
about what is black, or what is yellow, or that they should dispute concerning
rules to signify when they desire, or when they hope, or when they love. The
purpose of the present intendment will not suffer me to make large disputes
about it, but to observe all that is to be drawn from it in order to Conscience
and its obligation.

The Law of Nature]

Jus naturae, 2.
and Lex naturae are usually confounded by Divines and Lawyers, but to very ill
purposes, and to the confusion and indistinction of all the notices of them.
Valla Elegant. l. 4. c. 48.
The right of nature, or Jus naturae is no Law, and the law of nature is no
natural right. The right of nature is a perfect and universal liberty to do
whatsoever can secure me or please me. For the appetites that are prime,
original, and natural, do design us toward their satisfaction, and were a
continual torment, and in vain, if they were not in order to their rest,
contentedness and perfection. Whatsoever we naturally desire, naturally we are
permitted to. For natures are equal, and the capacities are the same, and the
desires alike; and it were a contradiction to say that naturally we are
restrained from any thing to which we naturally tend. Therefore to save my own
life, I can kill another, or twenty, or a hundred, or take from his hands to
please my self, if it happens in my circumstances and power; and so for eating,
and drinking, and pleasures. If I can desire, I may possess or enjoy it: this
is, The right of nature. Jus naturae, by jus or right, understanding not a
collated or legal right, positive or determined, but a negative right, that is,
such a right as every man has without a Law, and such as that by which the
stones in the streets are mine or yours; by a right that is negative, because
they are nullius in bonis, they are appropriate to no man, and may be mine;
that is, I may take them up and carry them to my bed of turf, where the
natural, wild, or untutored man does sit. But this is not the Law of nature,
nor passes any obligation at all.

And indeed nature her self makes not a Law: 3.
Nec natura potest justo secernere iniquum, and this opinion Carneades did
express, but rudely, and was for it noted by Lactantius. He said there was no
law of nature. But the Christians who for many ages have followed the School of
Aristotle, have been tender in suffering such expressions, and have been great
promoters of Aristotle's doctrine concerning the (...), the natural Law. But
indeed Aristotle himself in this was various and indetermined. L. 5. c. 10.
For in his Ethics he affirms that some think the natural law to be [(...),
(...)] unalterable, and of the same force every where, as fire burns here and
in Persia: and yet he himself makes it notable, and that it is not the same
among all Nations; Lib. 1. c. 13. and 15.
for so he in his Rhetoricks says, (...), that some do Divine [not
demonstrate] that some things are just or unjust by nature, without any
Covenant or Society; intimating, that without a covenant or contract tacit or
explicit, there can be no Law: and if it depends upon contract, it must be
variable as necessity, and contingency together; and so he affirms, Lib. 5. c.
7^ Ethic.
That there is nothing so naturally just but it is variable; and although the
right hand is in most men the strongest, yet in some the left hand is. (...).
Distributive justice is by proportion, and therefore it is variable; and in
general he affirms of all justice, (...), justice is in proportion and relation.

For justice is (...), 4.
that is, (...) a relative excellency, and therefore must suppose society, and
a paction or covenant. For a man cannot be unjust to himself or to his own
goods which are absolutely in his power. E^hic. l. 5. c. 10.
(...) and therefore Justice, I mean that universal virtue that contains all
else within it, (...), is a virtue that has its being from something
superinduced upon nature. Justice is natural, as all virtues are, that is,
reasonable and perfective of our nature, and introductive of well-being: But
nature alone has not enjoined it originally, any more then matrimonial
chastity was a natural law, which could not be at all before Eve was created,
and yet our nature was perfect before. Justum nihil est non constituta lege,
nothing is just or unjust of it self, until some Law of God or man does
supervene; and the Scepticks generally, and amongst the Dogmaticks Aristippus
said, that nothing is just by nature, but only (...), by law and custom;
which in what sense it is to be admitted, I shall explicate in the following
periods. -- is the universal law of the World.] (...), Rhetor. l. 1. c. 11.
so Aristotle calls it [ The law of mankinde] Commune omnium hominum us; so
Justinian; which is not to be understood of all men in all things absolutely,
L. 9. ff. de jure and justitia.
but especially of all wise or civil Nations that communicate with each other.
Lucretius restrains it to neighbors, Tunc and amicitiam coeperunt jungere
habentes
Finitima inter se nec laedere, nec violare.
But many Nations have thought, and some think so still, that they may hurt
stranger people, the possessors of far distant Countries, barbarous and
savage people: The Romans who were the wisest of all Nations did so. -- si quis
sinus abditus ultra, Arbiter.

Siqua foret tellus quae fulvum mitteret aurum
Hostis erat --
All people whom they called barbarous, or whom they found rich were their
enemies.

But there are some laws of Nature which belong to all absolutely, 5.
to whom any notice of the true God and of good manners is arrived;
particularly those which belong to common religion: But in the laws of justice,
the law of nature is more restrained, because it does not only, like the laws
of religion, suppose some communications of command from God, but some
intercourse with man; and therefore are obligatory, or extended in proportion
to the proximity and communication. But the law taken in its integrity, or
according to its formal reason, is the law of all mankind; for all men in all
things are bound to it.

Concerning some common necessities]

This describes the matter and body of natural Laws. For there is nothing by
which the laws are denominated natural more then by this, that they are
provisions made for the natural necessities of mankind; such are, To do as we
would be done to: To perform covenants: To secure messengers of peace and
Arbitrators: To be thankful to our Benefactors, and the like: without these a
man cannot receive any good, nor be safe from evil.

By this relation, 6.
and interchanging reason, it is therefore necessary that these laws should be
distinguished from all others, because these and their like proceed from the
same principle, are restrained by the same penalties, written in the same
tables, have the same necessity, and do suppose something super added to our
nature; and therefore that these and their like are natural, and the others are
not, must be by relation to the subject matter.

For in these cases and the like, 7.
when that which is profitable is made just, then that which is natural is made
a law; that is, when the law tends to the same end whither nature tends, when
the faculty or appetite is provided for by obedience to a law, then the law is
called natural. For since all good and just laws are profitable, they are laws
Civil or Religions, or Natural according as they serve the end of the
Commonwealth, or of the Religion, or of Nature. This is evident in the Code of
the Mosaic law, where all laws being established by God under the same Prince,
could have no difference but by their subject matter; and when they did lie in
one body, to separate one from the other by proper appellatives was not easy,
but by their manner of doing benefit, and their material relations.

To which we are inclined by nature] 8.
That which is usually called the law of Nature is of it self nothing else but
convenientia cum natura rationali, a consonancy to natural reason and being.
Some in drawing the Tables of the natural law, estimate those only to be
natural laws which are concerning appetites and actions common to man and
beast. Jus natural est quod natura omnia animalia docuit, said Ulpian. That is
the law of nature which is by nature taught not only to men, L. 1. ff. de
justitia and jure.
but even to beasts, for they also are under her power, -- Magnis agitant sub
legibus aevum. The same definition is also given by Aquinas, and many Lawyers
after Justinian, 1. 2 q. 1^4. art. 2. Elegant. l. 4. c. 43.
and almost all Divines after Aquinas; but Laurentius Valla will at no hand
endure it, Nam jus natural dicere quod natura omnia animalia docuit,
ridiculum; it is ridiculous to affirm that to be the law of nature, which
nature teaches to all living creatures; such as are, conjunction of sexes for
conservation of the kind, nursing and educating children, abstinence from some
certain mixtures and copulations, abhorring the conjunction of some very near
persons. Concerning which it is therefore certain, that though the matter of
these laws is hugely agreeable to nature, and some of them are afterward made
into laws, and for their matter sake and early sanction are justly called
natural (as I have otherwhere discoursed) yet they are made laws in nature
only dispositive, See Great E^^ emplat.
that is, by nature they are made Candidates of laws, they are prepared by
nature, but completed by God in other ways then by our nature and creation.

The reason is, 9.
because that which is natural is one, but these laws admit variety; and
amongst wise Nations in several cases have and have not obligation. The
Religious, and the Priests, and wise men among the Persians did not account
themselves bound by all these, as I shall discourse in the following numbers;
and yet they were then to be reckoned amongst the wisest men in the world,
because of their great Empire and Government, which, by reason of their great
necessities and communications with mankind, cannot be done without its
proportion of wisdom. But if nature did make these into a law, that is, if it
comes by creation, and from thence also the penalty and coercion is derived
(for without these there is no law) then it were impossible the wise Persians
should think it commendable to do that which others called abominable, since
in all those things in which they do a thing which they call unlawful, they as
other men felt an equal sharpness and pungency of conscience.

But that I may speak closer to the particular, 10.
That a thing is common to men and beasts is no indication of a law of nature,
but only of a common necessity, instinct, or inclination respectively. For
they do it without a law, and therefore so may we, unless something else
besides nature makes it a law to us; for nature or natural desire in them and
in us is the same, but this desire is in them where a law cannot be, and
therefore in us also it may be without a law. Beasts do all that they can do,
and can love, and are no more capable of law then of reason; and if they have
instincts and inclinations, it is no otherwise then their appetites to meat,
concerning which nature has determined all, but without proper obligation: and
all those discourses concerning the abstinence of beasts, their gratitude,
their hospitality, their fidelity, their chastity and marriages, are just like
the discourses of those that would make them reasonable. More certain and true
is that which was said of old, (...)
(...),
Fishes and birds and beasts eat one another, because they have no justice or
laws amongst them, said Hesiod; and the like is in Homer, (...). (...)
and therefore although it is a good popular argument which is used against
unnatural conjunctions which is in the Greek Epigram, (...)
(...), L. 1. c. 78.
etc.
Abstain from such impurities, for the very beasts preserve their natural
customs and conjunctions inviolate; yet this is an infinitely uncertain and
fallacious way of estimating any particular laws of nature, because it may as
well be said to be against the law of nature to be drunk, as to be incestuous,
upon this account, because Cows will drink no more then to quench their thirst:
and although in the law of Moses, beasts were put to death if they were
instrumental in bestiality or murder, yet this was in poenam Domini, or a
matter of dominion over beasts; and the word poena or punishment was improper
and no otherwise to be understood then that of Suidas in his story of Nicon;
whose statue when an envious person had whipped, to disgrace his memory,
because in the Greek games he had won 1400. crowns, the statue fell upon his
head and crushed him to death. (...). His sons accused the statue as guilty of
murder, and the Thasians threw it into the Sea; for so was the law of Draco the
Athenian, (...), to banish every thing that killed a man, though it were wood,
stones, or hatchets as you may see in Demosthenes. Orat. contr. Aristocratem.
These things were tragical detestations and emblematical prosecutions of the
crime; but the men were wiser then to believe it really a punishment to
inanimate things. The same is true of beasts in their proportion, whose
cruelty, savageness, or violent revenges is not (...), but (...) Contr. Celsum.
as Origin calls it, it is like pravity or wickedness.

This thing is so much the more considerable, 11.
because it is of use against the pretenses and scruples of some persons in
things where they ought to be confident. S. Hierom says that beasts when they
are impregnated abstain from coition till the production of their young, and
that this they do by the law of nature; now upon this account to impose a law
upon mankind to do so too, is weak and dangerous. But yet not only he L. 1.
contr. Jovin.
, but Origin Hom. 5. sup. 19 Genes.
, S. Ambrose L. 1. Comm. sup. Luc. 1.
, and Sedulius In cap. 5. Ephesians.
, do argue to the same purpose upon that very ground; most weakly and
dangerously exposing married persons to the greater dangers of fornication, and
depriving them of all the endearments of society, not considering that those
creatures, and those men whose custom was otherwise, or laws different, had
vagam libidinem, or the evil remedy of Polygamy. Beasts indeed are so ordered
by nature, but without a law; as there is no law for Lions to eat flesh, or
Oxengrass, but yet naturally they do it. A beast may be cruel or lustful, or
monstrous and prodigious in the satisfaction of his appetites; but not
injurious, or the breaker of any sanction, or laws of justice. There may be
damnum sine injuria facientis datum, says the law, and it is instanced in
beasts. Neque enim potest animal injuriam fecisse dici, quod sensu caret. L. 1.
ss. si Qu^drupes.. 3.
A beast that has no sense (that is, no reason) no sense or perception of
lawful or unlawful cannot be said to do an injury, and therefore is not
capable of punishment, because he is incapable of a law. So Justin Martyr, or
who ever is the author of the Questions and answers placed in his works; (...).
It is unreasonable to exact of beasts the obliquity of their actions, because
they have no reason; it is therefore as unreasonable to make the law of nature
to be something common to them and us.

If it be replied, 12.
that the Lawyers and Philosophers mean only that these material instances
which are common to them and us are the particulars of the law of Nature, and
though they be not a law to them, yet the same things which they do naturally,
are natural to us, and a law besides, that is, the natural law: Besides that
this is not usually said by them, we are then never the nearer to know what is
the law of Nature by this description of it, for all things which they and we
do are not pretended to be laws; as eating and sleeping; and therefore by what
measure any other thing should be a law to us because they and we do it, is
not signified by this definition, or any explication of it. Let us then try the
other measures which are usual.

Invited by consent]

The consent of Nations, 13.
that is, public fame amongst all or the wisest Nations is a great
signification of decency or undecency, and a probable indication of the law of
nature. (...)
(...) --
It is not a vain noise when many Nations join their voices in the attestation
or detestation of an action; and it looks as if it were derived from some
common principle, which seems either to be Nature, or Contract; and then as in
the first case they are reasonable, so in the second they are directly
obligatory. Quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est erratum sed traditum, said
Tertullian: De praescrip^.
like that of Heraclitus, (...), if it seems so to the communities of mankind,
it is genuine, and natural, and without illusion.

Now this is true up to many degrees of probability; 14.
and yet it is rather an index of a permission of nature, then of a natural
obligation; it tells us rather what we may do, then what we must, it being more
probable that all nations will not consent to an unnatural thing, that is, will
not do violence to nature, then that whatsoever they commonly act should be a
necessary law, and the measures of nature, or the indication of her sanctions;
and yet it is still more probable that the consent of Nations is more fit to be
used as a corroberative to a persuasion or a kind of actions, then as the
prime motive or introduction. (...), said Aristotle; and argumentum est
veritatis aliquid omnibus videri, said Seneca; it is a great strengthening and
a powerful prevailing argument to have all men consent to our opinions and
propositions. But it is in many moral instances as it is in the universal
opinion which all mankind has concerning jewels, where they consent no man
knows how, or why: And no man can give a rational account why so great value
should be set upon a Diamond, but because it looks prettily and is lasting: and
so there are in nature decencies and lasting proportions in moral instances
between the conscience and the action; but yet as there is no proper and
effective usefulness in Diamonds toward the life of man, so neither is there
in many instances in which the consent of mankind is very general. And
therefore this is very far short of a law, and is no certain token of a
permissive right of nature, much less of a law or obligation. For,

1. Whole Empires have been established and United by violence, 15.
and have laws given to them, and they received them in pursuance of the
Conquerors interest, and their educations have been formed accordingly. Ninus
formed the Assyrian Monarchy, and his son was flattered into the reputation of
a God, and all the Nations under that Scepter consented to the worship of
Belus; and all the Nations with whom these men conversed, imitated the manners
of the Princeps populus, and in their banquets, the most modest of their women
used to strip themselves stark naked, and it was counted no undecency, but she
was rude and uncivil that did not.

2. There are some Nations so wholly barbarous and brutish in their manners,
16.
that from their consent we can gather nothing but thorns and wild briers: They
are the words of Porphyry, (...), from whom we must not learn to belly and abuse
the fair inclinations and sentences of humane nature. And therefore if we go
to account by the consent of Nations, we must thrust out all wild, savage,
barbarous, and untaught people, (...), said Michael Psellus. In Synopsi LI.
We must into the account of the law of Nations take them only who are subject
to Laws, the well manner'd people only, but then this also will be an infinite
uncertainty. For,

3. All Nations to the Greeks were barbarous; 17.
to the Romans also all Nations but the Greeks and themselves: and to the Jews
all were Heathens, which to them signified the same thing or worse.

4. And then which are those Nations whom we shall call Moratiores, 18.
wise and well manner'd people, for this will depend upon our own customs; if
they be like our customs, our laws, and manners of living then we approve
them, else we condemn them.

5. But then let us remember also that civility and fair customs were but in a
narrow circle, 19.
till the Greeks and Romans beat the world into better manners. Lib 8. Polit.
c. 4.
Aristotle says, that in his time in the Kingdoms of Pontus, which were very
near to Greece, diverse Nations were eaters of man's flesh, such as were the
Achaeans and Heniochans, and diverse amongst the Mediterraneans were worse then
they.

6. The greatest part of the world were undiscovered till this last age, 20.
and amongst them the Jus Gen tium was to sacrifice one another to Demons; for
all the old Navigations were by Maritime Towns, and the inlands either were
left alone in their own wilder manners, or it is not known what civilities they
had. So that the Jus Gentium must needs have been an uncertain thing, variable
and by chance, growing by accidents, and introduced by violence, and therefore
could not be the measure of the law of Nature.

7. Add to these that the several Nations of the world had customs of their
own, 21.
which commencing upon uncertain principles, have been derived to their
posterity, and retained with a religious fancy; becoming natural and
proportionable to their fancies and their fears, and they would rather die then
do an act of violence to them, and believed it to be the greatest impiety in
the world to break them. In Thalia.
Herodotus tells a full instance of this in a trial made by Darius to the
Indians and Greeks. He asked the Greeks what they would take to do as the
Indians did who eat their dead Parents and friends and accounted it the most
honorable burial; they answered, They would not do at it any price. And when
he as'kd the Indians upon what conditions they would be induced to burn the
bodies of their Fathers, and not to eat them, they desired him not to speak to
them of any such horrid impiety as to burn their Fathers careasses, and to deny
to them the honor of a natural burial in the bowels of their dear children.
(...). Custom is the Genius or spirit of a man's actions, and introduces a
nature, a facility, a delight, and religion it self. (...). Arist. Rheot^^. l.
1. c. 11.
Custom is as nature, and that to which we are accustomed is like that which
we were born. For that which is often is next to that which is always. It is
nature which is always, that is custom which is frequent: It is possible that
nature in many things should be altered, and it is very difficult that custom
should in any thing; we have seen and heard it in a great instance in a few
ages last past. For when some of the reformed Doctors by their private
authority did twice attempt it, and the Church of Rome did twelve times
publicly endeavor it, to get the Greeks to forsake the customs of their
Churches, and to reform themselves by their copy, they were all repulsed; and
if the Greek Prelates should take the people off from their old customs,
besides that the great Turk would do them a mischief for complying with the
Western Christians his Enemies, the people themselves would endanger all their
Religion and turn Turks, if they once did learn that their old customs were
not necessary Religion: and therefore they chose to stick secure in their
Religion though allayed with some errors, then for the purchase of a less
necessary truth endanger the whole Religion by taking the people off from their
Jura Gentis, the customs of their Nation.

8. Some Nations do refuse to admit of some of those Laws which others call
the laws of Nature, 22.
and such which ineed were given to all the Nations of the world. -- Non
foedera legum
Ulla colunt, placidas aut jura tenentia mentes. V^. F^c^.

and excepting the care of children, to which by natural likeness and
endearments we love to be obliged, and so less stand in need to be tied to it
by a law, excepting this I say, to which beasts also do as well as we, some
wise persons have observed that in all things else we are at liberty, that is,
naturally tied to no law. (...), (...).

(...)
(...)
(...).
But the instances will make greater indication of this any man's affirmative.
The Idumaeans are Thieves and Murderers, and will not believe that they do
amiss: The manner of their Nation is to live very much upon robbery, and
plundring Merchants: and in Homers time there was a Nation of Pirates: (...),
said the Scholiast upon Homers Odysses (...). They thought it no disparagement
to steal, but an honorable and a glorious thing; and it is worse now, and has
been growing so ever since Nimrods time. Men account it lawful to kill and
steal, if they do it by Nations, by Companies, and Armies, and Navies: and
Cato had reason to complain, Fures privatorum furtorum in nervo atque in
compedibus aetatem agunt, L. 11. cap. 18.
fures publici in auro atque in purpura; and particularly A. Gellius tells of
the Egyptians that they allow of thefts; and the wiser Lacedaemonians, a sober
and a severe people, taught their young men to steal without covetousness; so
they pretended, not to enrich themselves, but to encourage them to fight the
better by plundring well. Lib. 1. c. 8.
Pomponius Mela tells of the Augitae, a Nation in Africa whose custom it was
that every bride should be prostitute to all comers the first night, and she
who had entertained most, was most honored: and Solinus tells of the
Garamantici that they know no marriages, C^p. 43.
and therefore children only own their Mothers, for they can hardly guess at
their Fathers; and indeed the old world did do fuch vile things, contracted
such base customs, so delighted in wickedness, that as they highly provoked
God to anger, so they left it impossible to judge of the laws of nature by the
consent of Nations. Propertius complains severely of this popular impiety. Sed
postquam tellus scelere est imbuta nefando, (...)

Justitiamque omnes cupida de mente fugarunt,
Perfudere manus fraterno sanguine fratres,
Destitit extinctos natus lugere Parents,
Optavit genitor primaevi funera nati,
Liber ut innuptae potiretur flore Novercae:
Ignaro matter substernens se impia nato,
Impia non verita est Divos scelerare penates,
Omnia fanda, nefanda malo permista furore
Justificam nobis mentem avertere Deorum.
The whole earth grew so impure and degenerous, that they drove justice from
them as their Enemy; brothers washed their hands in their brothers blood; the
sons mourned not at their Fathers funeral; and the Father wished the death of
his eldest son, that he might lie with his sons wife; the Mothers would steal
secretly into the embraces of their sons; and they feared not to break the laws
of Hospitality, or Custom, or Nature, or of Societies. Now from hence it will
be impossible to derive our customs, and so to suppose them to be laws of
Nature, which are openly destructive of justice.

And upon this last instance it appears that the saying of Polybius will be of
no use to us in this question; (...). That for the laws of Nature we must seek
amongst them that live according to nature, not amongst them whose natures are
depraved by custom; since as Andronicus of Rhodes was wont to say, He lies not
that says honey is sweet, though a sick man refuses it as bitter and
unpleasant; so is the law of Nature per^ect and immutable in those Nations who
are endued with a sound mind and a sober judgment. This indeed is true, but
how this can be reduced to practice, will be found inexplicable, and the thing
it self impossible: since the Lacedaemonians the wisest and severest amongst
all Commonwealths permitted such natural injustices, and would breed children
upon their own wives by strangers that they might have a good and a handsome
breed.

9. Some Tyrants have made Laws to serve their lusts, 23.
or their necessities, and these things have come into Customs, and Laws of
Nations, and sometimes have been suppressed, or spent in desuetude. It was the
case of Soleucus, who in the necessity of his son Antiochus gave him his own
wise, App^an. d^ B^l. Sy^^
and made it a Law for the future, which thing either was instantly disgraced
and rejected, or else S. Paul had not heard, or had not taken notice of; for he
thought it such a fornication as was not so much as named amongst the Gentiles
that one should have his Fathers wife: indeed it was not named inter
cordatiores, or those with whom he had conversed; but in Syria and in the
Pontick Kingdom before his time, it had been named and practiced and passed
into a Law; and yet that Kingdom consisted of two and twenty Nations of
distinct languages. There was another instance like it spoken of by Cicero,
Orat. pro C^a.
that a woman married her daughters husband, which exactly was the same
undecency and incestuous approach. Nubit genero Socrus, auspicibus nullis,
nullis authoribus, funestis omininibus. O mulieris scelus incredible and
praeter hanc unam in omni vita inauditum. Something like S. Paul's (...), but
yet sometimes it was done, and not only before his time, but long after this
monition also, as it was in the case of Antonius Caracalla: Matrem duxit
Uxorem; od parricidium junxit incestum: So Spartianus. Now concerning these
things, how can any man from hence take an estimate of the law of Nature; for
this cannot be of the law of Nature which has in it so unreasonable and
unnatural complications; and yet by what rule shall we judge of natures Law,
since the wisest persons, even Socrates and Cato did such things which they
thought fit, and we call unreasonable, for they gave their wives to their
friends, as a man lends his beast for his neighbors use.

10. There are some Nations so used to a rude unmannerly pride and fierceness,
24.
that all civility seems softness and effeminacy. To this purpose is that which
Tacitus reports of the son of Phraates the Parthian, who being bred up with
Tiberius and efform'd into the Roman civilities was by the Prince (...) friend
sent to the Kingdom of Parthia; but in the young Gentleman (...) there were
presently observed easiness of access, a fair civil deportment and affability;
obvia comitas: But these virtues being unknown to the Parthians were nova
vitia; and because they were unknown to their Ancestors, perinde odium pravis
and honestis, the good and the bad amongst them did equally detest them.

11. Some Nations have left their good Customs and taken up bad, 25.
and have changed their natural reason into unnatural follies, and the basest
sins have been very general; and when God warned the Jews to take heed of the
manners of their neighbor Nations, he enumerates vile lusts which were the
national customs for which God affirms that he ejected them from their
habitations.

12. Lastly, 26.
there is no consent among nations in their Customs, nor ever was until a
higher principle made a law and tied it on with penalties; such as were
conquest, necessity, contract, reputation, decrees of Princes, or the laws of
God, or of a Religion. Maxim. Ty^ Dissert. ^.
(...), and neither Nation with Nation, nor Man with Man, nor a Man with
himself does long agree.

Indeed there are some propositions which all the world agrees upon, 27.
such as are, the immortality of the soul, and that there is a God. (...). The
Greek and the Barbarian, the Epirot and the Maritime, the wise and the unwise
agree in the belief and profession of a God: but when these things come to
manners and customs, they differ infinitely; and as they anciently chose
several gods, so they did not agree in the manner of worshipping their gods;
some they worshipped by praises, and some by railing, some by giving sacrifice,
some by throwing stones; and so it was in other things. Some were observant of
their Parents, and some knocked them on the head with clubs when they came to a
certain age, as is to be seen in Aelian; and even in the taking care and
educating their children, in which nature seems most to have made a law, and
signified it with the consent of Nations, yet even in this also there was
variety, and no universal law naturally established. For some nursed their
children, and some did not; sometimes they were left to their Mothers without
any provision made by their Fathers; sometimes the Fathers took them from their
Mothers, but however, yet this cannot be properly derived from a Jus Gentium,
for if it be a right or a law at all, it is a lex singulorum, it belongs to
single persons and to families, and is common to man and beast, and has a
necessity in nature, as it is necessary to eat or sleep, and is as necessary to
families as the other are to single persons, but where there is a necessity,
there needs no law, and cannot properly be any.

From all which I conclude that the Jus Gentium, 28.
the law of Nations is no indication of the law of Nature; See the preface to
the Great Exempl^r. n. 23.
neither indeed is there any Jus Gentium collectively at all, but only the
distinct laws of several Nations; and therefore it is to be taken
distributively; for they are united only by contract, or imitation, by fear,
or neighborhood, or necessity, or any other accident which I have mentioned.
And in those things in which they have agreed tacitly, or expressly, they have
no obligation but what they bring upon themselves, as penalties, forfeitures,
obloquies, and the like; which they as easily shake off when they have power,
and when it is for their profit; and we see it in those who have killed Heralds
or Ministers of peace and of Religion; which we say commonly is against the law
of Nations; that is, it is against the custom of them, because to do so is to
no purpose, a spleenish ineffective malice; and therefore although of no
usefulness, and consequently seldom done; yet it has been sometimes, and no
punishment follows, and therefore it is no law.

Now that this opinion may not wholly seem new, 29.
I find something of it affirmed by Constantinus Harmenopulus, Lib. 1. tit. 1.
Prochir.
(...). The law of Nations is that which one or more Nations use; and he
instances in not marrying their nearest kindred, amongst the Greeks and Saurae
[Sarmatae (I suppose)] or else to marry them as the Persians use. But this
only, where it happens that Nations do consent in great proportions, it
confirms our assent to the law, and publishes its being natural, in case that
of it self it be so.

Prompted by reason.]

Cicero defines the law of Nature to be, 30.
Vera ratio naturae congruens, diffusa in omnes, Lib. de Repub.
constans, sempiterna: That right reason which is consonant to nature, which is
in every one always and the same, that is the law of Nature: So he, and from
him Lactantius; but that is not exactly true. Right reason is the instrument of
using the law of Nature, and is that by which together with the Conscience
(which is also reason) we are determined to a choice and prosecution of it our
selves, or to a willingness of obeying the obliging power. (...). Reason
entertains the Divine laws (of nature) and so is made a most vigilant Judge,
said Hierocles. This is that which distinguishes us from beasts, and makes us
capable of Laws. -- Separat haec nos
A grege mutorum, Juven. Sat. 1^.
atque ideo venerabile soli
Sortiti ingenium, divinorumque capaces,
Atque exercendis, capiendisque artibus apti,
Sensum a coelesti demissum traximus arce.


* But reason is not the law, or its measure; neither can any man be sure, that
any thing is a law of Nature, because it seems to him hugely reasonable,
neither if it be so indeed, is it therefore a law. For it is very reasonable
that every man should choose his own wife, because his interest is the
greatest: * That every man should suffer as much evil as he does; * That a man
be not punished for evils that he cannot help; * That every man should suffer
for his own fault, and no man for the fault of another; and yet these are not
laws in all places where they are reasonable. Pythagoras in Laertius said that
which was very reasonable. Plantae mansuetae non nocendum, veluti neque animali
quod non noceat hominibus. A man may not hurt a gentle and a sweet plant, much
less, a harmless and a profitable beast. Truly, it is unreasonable a man
should, but if he does, he breaks no law by the mere doing such an action. For
reason can demonstrate, and it can persuade and invite, but not compel any
thing but assent, not obedience, and therefore it is no law.

But besides this, 31.
Reason is such a box of Quicksilver that it abides no where; it dwells in no
settled mansion; it is like a doves neck, or a changeable Taffata; it looks to
me otherwise then to you who do not stand in the same light that I do: and if
we inquire after the law of Nature by the rules of our reason, we shall be
uncertain as the discourses of the people, or the dreams of disturbed fancies.
For some having (as Lucian calls it) weighed reasons in a pair of scales
thought them so even, that they concluded no truth to be in the reasonings of
men; or if there be, they knew not on which side it stood, and then it is, as
if it were not at all; these were the Scepticks: and when Varro reckoned two
hundred eighty eight opinions concerning the cheifest good or end of mankind,
that were entertained by the wisest and most learned part of mankind, it is
not likely that these wise men should any more agree about the intricate ways
and turnings that lead thither, when they so little could agree about the
journeys end, which all agreed could have in it no variety, but must be one,
and ought to stand fair in the eyes of all men, and to invite the industry of
all mankind to the pursuit of it.

And it is certain, 32.
that the basest of things have been by some men thought so reasonable, that
they really chose it, and propounded it to others. And this is the less wonder,
when we consider that in defiance of all the consenting reasons, and faith of
all the Nations of the world, some few single persons, wittier then folly, but
not so wise as Reason or religion should say that there is no God: such were
Diagoras Milesius, Theodorus Cyrenaicus, Protagoras; and it is thought, Lucian
also: But they that think so, must also consequently believe that nothing is
dishonest that they can do in private, or with impunity. * Some have believed
that there is nothing in it self just, but what is profitable: So did
Carneades (whom I before noted out of Lactantius) and so did Aristippus.

Now here it is not sufficient to say, 33.
that in this inquest after the law of nature by the proportions of reason, we
must exclude all unreasonable, brutish, and monstrous persons. For first the
question will return, who those are which are unreasonable, and we are not to
reject the opinion upon pretense it is unreasonable, unless we first know some
certain measures of reason: Now we cannot take our measures of reason from
Nature; or if we do we cannot take the measures of Nature from reason, that
is, if we call men unreasonable because they speak Unnatural things, then it
must be certain that what is natural or unnatural is known some other way then
by the proportions of reason; for the reason being misliked for its
disproportion to Nature, the laws of nature must be foreknown, and therefore
are not to be proved by that which comes after: besides this (I say) the wisest
of Men in their profession, and such as were no fools in their persons, so far
as can appear by all their other discourses, have believed the worst of crimes
to be innocent, and to have in them no natural dishonesty. Theodorus allowed of
Sacrilege, and so do thousands who at this day call themselves Christians:
Plato allowed adultery, and community of wives; so did Socrates and Cato. Zeno
and Chrysippus approved of incest, and so did the Persians: So that we may well
say as Socrates to Phaedon; when we hear the name of Silver or Iron all men
that speak the same language understand the same thing: but when we speak of
good and evil, we are distracted into various apprehensions and differ from
each other and from our selves: we say as Pilate said of truth, What is truth?
we cannot tell what is true and what is good and what is evil; and every man
makes his own opinions to be laws of nature, Lib. de anima cap. 2.
if his persuasion be strong and violent. Tertullian complained that the old
Philosophers did so: leges naturae opiniones suas facit [Philosophia.] And yet
it is without all peradventure that all laws which are commonly called Natural
are most reasonable, they are perfective of Nature, unitive of Societies,
necessary to common life, and therefore most agreeable to reason. But if you
make an (...) of these, and reckon backward, you cannot wisely and
demonstratively reckon from reason, or consent or natural inclinations up to
natural laws.

But the last clause of the Rule finishes this whole question,

[Bound upon us by the Command of God]

For when God made man a free agent, he by nature gave him power to do all that
he could desire: 34.
and all that is Jus natural, a natural right or power: and it needs no
instances; for it is every thing he could desire in eating and drinking and
pleasures and rule and possession: but the law was superinduced upon this.
Right is liberty, but law is a fetter; Nature is free to every thing which it
naturally desires (...) said Dio Chrysostomus: That Is the right of nature, to
be free, to be subject to no law, to do absolutely whatsoever Pleases us. This
is (...) (as the law calls it) (...). A natural liberty permitting us to do
what we list, Libertati proprium est sic vivere ut velis, said Cicero de Offic.
lib. 1. It is not liberty unless you live as you please: but servitude is not
by nature, therefore liberty is. l. 5. D. de statu hominum. Instit. de jure
personarum. and libertas. For where nanature has an appetite, and proper
tendency, it cannot deny to it self satisfaction; whatsoever therefore is a law
and a restraint to it, must needs be superinduced upon it: which nature her
self cannot be supposed to be willing to do; and nothing had power to do but
God only who is the Lord of Nature. -- (...)
(...).
It was God that gave justice to Mankind: he made justice by his sanction:
This was expressly the sentence of Cicero speaking of the law of nature: Est
recta ratio a Numine Deorum tracta, imperans honesta and prohibens contraria:
and again, Lex vera atque princeps apta ad jubendum and ad vitandum ratio est
recta summi Jovis. The law of nature is a transcript of the wisdom and will of
God written in the tables of our minds, not an (...), a product of experience,
but written with the finger of God, first in the tables of our hearts. But
those tables we like Moses brake with letting them fall out of our hands, upon
occasion of the evil manners of the world: but God wrought them again for us,
as he did for Moses by his spirit, in all the ages of the world, more or less,
by arts of instruction and secret insinuation, by all the ways proportioned to
a reasonable nature; till from an inclination it came to a firm persuasion and
so to a law: God, in this, ruling in our hearts something after the manner by
which he reigns in heaven, even by significations of what is fit, by
inspirations and congenite notices, by natural necessities: but this thing was
yet no law till God also had signified it to Men, after the manner of men, that
is, by discourse and humane Communications, by something that taught them, and
obliged them.

The sense of this is, 35.
that religion is the first and greatest bond of laws, and necessity is the
next: For though many times it prevails more then religion, yet it is not
always incumbent, and that which is necessary to society, is inconvenient in
some cases, and when power comes in, and need goes out, there is nothing which
can make or continue the law: and it were impossible that all the world should
acknowledge any lawgiver but God; for nothing else could be greater then all
mankind, nor be trusted in all cases, nor feared but he alone. And therefore
the heathen Princes when they gave their laws, gave them in the Name of a
Deity. So Numa, Lycurgus, and others; which was not a design to scare fools
and credulous people, but in some instances (excepting only that they named a
false God) was a real truth; that is, in all those things which commanded
natural justice, honesty and decencies: for these were really the laws of the
true God.

For the law of Nature is nothing but the law of God given to Mankind for the
conservation of his Nature and the promotion of his perfective end. 36.
A law of which a man sees a reason and feels a necessity: God is the lawgiver.
Practical reason or conscience is the record, but revelation and express
declaring it, was the first publication and emission of it, and till then it
had not all the solemnities of law, though it was passed in the Court, and
decreed and recorded.

And this is the perfect meaning of those words of S. Paul [but for the law I
had not known sin] that is, 37.
although by natural reason and the customs of the world I had or might have
reasons to dislike many actions; yet till the law declared it I could not call
any thing a sin, and if S. Paul could not, neither could the Gentiles: their
Nature was alike, and S. Paul had advantage in education, and yet his nature
could not instruct him in the Names and differences of good and evil; therefore
neither could the Gentiles know it merely by Nature. But yet a man may become a
law unto himself: So S. Paul observes of the Gentiles who not having a law do
by Nature the things contained in the law, and so become a law unto themselves.
So does every man who believes any thing to be necessary, though it be not so;
yet he becomes a law to himself, because by his conscience and persuasion he
makes to himself a law or obligation: much more might the Gentiles do so; in
whose Nature the aptnesses to justice and disposition to laws were concreated
with their understandings. Well might they become a law unto themselves in
these natural instances; for if opinion can make a law to our selves in an
unlawful matter, much more may it do so in a matter that is so agreeable to
our Nature, so sitting, so useful, so prepared to become a law, that it wants
only the life of authority, sanction and publication: but though the Gentiles
became a law unto themselves, by this means: yet their Natural reason was not
yet framed into a law, till Gods authority, either by his express declaration,
or by the conscience of the man, that is, directly or indirectly did intervene:
testimonium reddente conscientia, so S. Paul, their conscience bearing witness:
for either God published these laws by express declaration and voices, or else
by imprinting upon the Conscience such fears and opinions that passed upon the
man the reverence and obligation of Laws. In both these there was variety:
though in the latter there was amongst the better sort of men a more regular
and universal influence and effect: and although it is very probable that all
the measures of justice and natural laws of honesty were expressly published
to the Patriarchs of the great families of the world, yet when some of the
posterity lost their tradition, these laws were maintained by more imperfect
relations, and kept up by fears and secret opinions which the spirit of God who
is never wanting to men in things necessary, was pleased in his love to
Mankind to put into the hearts of men, that men might be governed by
instruments which would not fail.

Thus S. 38.
Hierome Epist. 151. ad Algas. q. 8.
affirms that Pharaoh knew his sins by the law of Nature: and of this it was
that Tertullian Adrv Judxos c. 2.
affirmed; ante legem Moysi scriptam in tabulis lapideis, legem fuisse contendo
non scriptam, quae naturaliter intelligebatur and a patribus custodiebatur: Nam
unde Noe justus inventus est si non illum naturalis legis justitia praecedebat?
Unde Abraam amicus Dei deputatus, si non de aequitate and justitia legis hujus
Naturalis? by this the Fathers lived, by this Noah was found just, and Abraham
the friend of God: for this though not written in Tables of stone, yet it was
written in the tables of their hearts; that is, it was by God so imprinted in
their Consciences that they were by it sufficiently instructed how to walk and
please God; and this is that which was said by Antigonus in Sophocles, and
which Apollonius did use against the edict of Nero. (...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
This is a thing which neither heaven nor hell has taught by any new or
express sanction: For God has given us other laws. But never did I think that
thy commands could ever prevail so, that it could be possible that thou being a
mortal man should prevaricate the unwritten and potent laws of God. For these
laws are not of to day or yesterday, but they are eternal, and their principle
is secret, and from within.



And therefore Philo says, 39.
the law of nature is a law (...) engraven in an immortal Understanding by an
immortal nature. In this whole affair, God is as the Sun, and the Conscience as
the Eye: or else God or some Angel from him being the intellectus agens did
inform our reason, supplying the place of Natural faculties and being a
continual Monitor (as the Jews generally believe, and some Christians,
especially about three or four ages since:) which Adam de Marisco was wont to
call Helias his Crow: something slying from heaven with provisions for our
needs. And the Gloss. and Gulielmus Parisiensis, and before them Maimonides,
from whom I suppose they had it, affirm this to be the meaning of David in the
fourth Psalm, Offer the sacrifice of righteousness; it follows, Quis
monstrabit? Who will show us any good? who will tell us what is justice, and
declare the measures of good and evil? He answers, Signatum est super nos lumen
vultus tui Domine, thou have consigned the light of thy Countenance upon us, ut
scilicet (as it is in another Psalm) in lumine tuo videamus lumen, that in thy
light we may see light.

The effect of all which is this only, 40.
That God is our lawgiver, and has made our hearts to be the Tables of the
laws of nature, that they might always be there under our eye, legible and
clear. It is not a law for being placed there; but God first made or decreed it
to be a law, and then placed it there for use, and promulgation: and although
very many men, and nations had no intercourse with God as a lawgiver but what
they have by the means of their conscience, that is, they never heard God
speak, had no prophets, no revelation, and have forgot the tradition of their
fathers; yet when God by ways undiscernible has written a proposition there,
and that the Man does believe any thing to be good or evil: it is true that God
is his lawgiver, because he only is Lord of his Conscience: but it is also
true: that he becomes a law unto himself: that is, he becomes obliged to God
by the act of his own conscience; and however it be that his conscience be
wrought upon, though by a fancy or a fear, a sad sight, or a casual discourse,
if it works the conscience into the notice and obedience of a natural law, the
meaner the instrument is, the greater is the efficacy of the principal agent.
The putting it into the conscience is a sufficient promulgation of the law,
however that be done; but nature alone never does it: The express voice of God,
tradition, prophets, contract, providence, education and all sorts of influence
from God, and intercourse with man have their portion in this effect. And when
wise men say, this is naturally understood; it must mean thus, naturally men
find it reasonable, but not naturally to be a law: naturally they consent to
it, but not naturally find it out, or naturally we may be instructed but not
naturally bound: but when God changes science into conscience, then he makes
that which is reasonable to become a law.

But first or last, 41.
this way or another, it became a law only by the authority and proper
sanction of God; God is the author of our Nature and made a law fit for it, and
sent the principles of that law together with it, not that whatsoever is in
nature or reason is therefore a law because it is reasonable or because it is
natural: but that God took so much of prime reason as would make us good and
happy, and established it into a law; which became and was called the law of
Nature both because 1. These laws are in Materta Naturali: that is, concerning
the good which refers to the prime necessities of Nature; and also because 2.
being Divine in respect of the author, the principles of this law are natural
in respect of the time of their institution being together with our nature:
though they were drawn out by God severally in several periods of the world,
who made them laws actually by his command, which in nature are so only by
disposition.

This latter reason is given by Alphonsus a Castro and by Wesenbech: 42.
the former is insinuated by Mynsinger defining the law of Nature to be quod
natura, adeoque Deus ipse omnes homines in Creatione, prima quaedam praecepta
and formulas honestatis docuit. But the latter of them I say is true only of
such as are the prime laws or rather rules of nature, and the general measures
of virtue and vice. But as for the particular laws of Nature (which only are
properly to be called laws) we are to look for no other systeme or collective
body of them, but the express declared laws of God which concern morality,
that is, all that are given to all Mankind without relation to any one period,
such is the moral law of the Jews: and such is the religion of the Christians;
that less perfect, this more perfect and entire: for these in their several
proportions are such which are generally for all mankind; and upon this account
it is affirmed by Gratian, Did. 1. in princ.
Jus natural esse, quod in lege and Evangelio continetur, The law of Nature is
that which is contained in the Law, and the Gospel: which saying he had from
Isidore.

It is necessary that this be rightly understood, 43.
because it establishes many certainties in the matter of Conscience, and eases
us of the trouble of finding out a particular systeme of Natural laws, the
inquiry after which has caused many disputes in the world, and produced no
certainty, It is all (...), as the Platonists call it, (...), the word of God
is the law, a right rule or sentence, and divine law, a law that is the
distribution of the mind of God; and under this come all the precepts of
Christianity: which was well summed up by him who gave this account of the
religion, and the religious that are of it, saying they are homines
conspirantes in communem utilitatem; and that they mutually make and give
(...), Symbols and Sacraments to each other, that none shall do or receive
injury: men conspiring for the good of others: or as the Roman soldier was
told, They are men whose profession is to do hurt to no man, and to do good to
every man: and this is the integral design of the law of Nature so far as it
can relate to humane intercourse.

(...). 44.
So Christ is called by S. Peter and the Greek Fathers, he is the word of the
Father and the law; and it is remarkable, this word or law of the Father was
the instrument of teaching mankind in all periods of the world. He taught the
law of Nature to all men, and renewed it, and made several manifestations and
manners, and at last appeared in the form of a man, and made a perfect body of
it to last as long as our nature last, and as long as this world, and his
kingdom abides. When God spoke to Adam, to the Patriarchs, to the Prophets,
still he spoke by Christ, who was the Angel of the old Testament, and the
Mediator of the New. He is therefore Verbum Patris; by him he signified his
laws and righteous commandments, and the law was given (...), in the hands,
that is, by the ministry, of the Mediator, Adv. Marcion. lib. 2. Adv. Praxeam.
who is one: that is Jesus Christ; and this Tertullian affirms. Christus
semper egit in Dei Patris Nomine. Ipse ab initio conversatus est, and
congressus cum Patriarchis and Prophetis: and again, Christus ad colloquia
semper descendit, ab Adam usque ad Patriarchas and Prophetas, in visione, in
somno, in speculo, in aenigmate, ordinem suum praestruens ab initio semper: and
Deus internis cum hominibus conversatus est; non alius quam semo qui caro erat
futurus. Christ in all ages spoke to Men in the person of his Father, being
from the beginning the word of the Father, which was to be incarnate. The same
also is to be read in Justin Martyr against Tryphon the Jew. Christ therefore
was the preacher of this righteousness, and at last revealed all his Fathers
will, which should never receive any further addition, diminution or
alteration. The Novellae constitutiones, the inlargements and explications made
by our Blessed Lord, together with the repetition of the old, that is, the
Christian law, is the perfect Code and Digest of the Natural law. For they all
rely upon the fundamental relations between God and us, and the natural
intercourse between Man and Man, and the Original necessities and perfective
appetites of our own Nature.

But here it will be necessary to clear that great objection which will be
pretended against this doctrine. 45.
For since Christian religion is new in respect of Nature, and superinduced
some things upon Nature, and rescinded some of her rights, and restrained her
liberty; it will seem impossible that Christian religion should be a collected
body of the laws of Nature; because the law of Nature is prime and eternal;
which Christian religion seems not to be: Now to this I answer

1. That it is evident that all that which any men call the laws of Nature is
actually contained in the books of the new Testament. 46.
S. Austin, H^^o de S. Victore, and Alexander say the law of Nature has but
these two precepts, 1 Do as you will be done to; and 2 Do not that which you
would not have done to your self: Isidore reckons into the laws of Nature, 1
Conjunction of male and female, 2 Education and 3 Succession of children; 4
Common possessions and 5 Common liberty, and 6 Acquisition of things in air,
earth, and sea: 7 Restoring the thing that is entrusted, 8 Repelling force by
force. These are rights of Nature, and natural states or actions, but not laws.
There are some laws concerning these things, but they also are in the New
Testament. Cicero reckoned, 1 Religion, 2 Piety, 3 Thankfulness, 4 Vindication
of injuries, 5 Observance of Superiors, 6 To speak truth. The lawyers reckon
otherwise. The laws of Nature are these, 1 To worship God, 2 To live honestly,
3 To obey superiors; Kings, Parents, etc. 4 To hurt no man, 5 To give every one
their own, 6 Common use of things as far as it may be; and where it may not,
then 7 Dominion and 8 Propriety enter, 9 To take away evil doers from among
men. And if we observe but the precepts of Nature (for they had no other light
which we know of) which are reckoned by Hesiod, Pythagoras, Theognis,
Phocylides, Epictetus, Cato, Publianus, and Seneca, we shall find that they
reckon many minute counsels which are derived from natural Principles, but yet
stand far off of from the fountain: and some which they derive from the rights
of Nature, not from her laws, but indeed are directly contrary. -- Semper tibi
proximus esto.
So Cato, and Qui simulat verbis, nec cord est fidus amicus;
Tu quoque fac simules, sic ars deluditur art.
And that of Cicero, vindicationem esse honestam, revenge is justice. By their
own reason men took their aim at the precepts and laws of Nature, but their
reason being imperfect and abused it was not likely they could be exact: none
but the wisdom of the Father could do it perfectly. Thus they can never
agree in their enumeration of the Natural laws: But it is certain that so many
of these as are laws, and bound upon us by God, are set down in the Scriptures
of the New Testament. For it is not a law of Nature unless God have commanded
it to us in or by or with Nature and natural reason. Now it is certain that
Christ told us all his fathers will: and the Apostles taught all that to the
Church which Christ taught to them: and therefore what is not in their doctrine
is not in natures law, that is, it is no part of the law of God: and if it be
certain that he that lives according to the law of Christ does please God and
do all his duty; then it follows that either there is no such thing as that
which we call the law of Nature, and no obligation from thence, and no measures
of good and evil there; or if there be, it is also part of the Christian man's
duty, and expressed and taught by the Master and Lord of the Christians. All
that is essentially good, is there; all that by which the World can be made
happy, is there: all that which concerns every man's duty, is there; all the
instruments of felicity, and the conveyance of our great hopes is there, and
what other potentiality there can be in the law of Nature, then what I have
reckoned now, I neither have been taught by any man else, neither can I my self
imagine, or understand. Here are the general propositions which are the form,
and make the honesty and the justice of all the particular laws of Nature; and
what is not there provided for by special provision, or by general reason and
analogy, is wholly permitted to humanelaws and contracts, or to liberty and
indifferency, that is, where the laws of nature cease, there the rights of
nature return.

2. But secondly, 47.
to the objection I answer, that it will be but weakness, to think that all
the instances of the law of Nature, must be as prime as Nature herself: for
they neither are so prime, nor so lasting, but are alterable by God and by Men,
and may be made more, or fewer, or other.

This may seem new, 48.
and indeed is unusual in the manner of speaking: but the case is evident and
Empirically certain. For when God commanded Abraham to kill his son; the
Israelites to rob the Egyptians and to run away with their goods; he gave them
a commandment to break an instance of the natural Law; and he made it
necessary that Cain should marry with his Sister: and all those laws of Nature
which did suppose liberty and indistinction of possessions are wholly altered
when Dominion, and Servitude, and propriety, came into the world: and the laws
of nature which are in peace are not obligatory to other persons in the time of
war.

For the laws of nature are in many instances relative to certain states: 49.
and therefore in their instances and particulars are as alterable as the
states themselves, but the reasons indeed on which they do rely (supposing
the same or equal circumstances and the matter unchanged) are eternal and
unalterable as the Constitution of Nature. But therefore it was unwarily said
of the learned Hugo Grotius, and of diverse others before him, that God cannot
change the law of Nature. For as S. Paul said of the priesthood; that it being
changed, there must of necessity be a change also of the law, so it is in the
law of Nature; the matter of it being changed, there must of necessity also be
a change in the law: for although the essential reason may be the same in
changed instances yet that hinders not but the law may justly by affirmed to be
alterable; just as the law was under the several priesthoods, in both which the
obligation is the same, and so is the relation to God, and the Natural
religion. * Thus when rivers are common it is lawful for any man to fish, and
unlawful for my neighbor to forbid me, but when rivers are enclosed and made
proper, it is unlawful for me to fish, and lawful for the proprietary to forbid
me; before the enclosure it was just to do that thing, which afterward is
unjust; and this is as much a change of a particular law as can be imagined. *
If it be meant, that while the propriety remains, or the state, the law
introduced upon that state is unalterable: then there is no more said of the
law of Nature then of any positive law of God, or the wise law of any Prince;
which are not to be altered as long as the same case and the same necessity
remains; and it would be to no purpose to affirm so of the law of Nature; for
the sense of it would be, that while things remain as God established them,
they are unalterable. But if God can disannull the obligation by taking away
the matter of the law, or the necessity or the reasonableness, or the
obligation (and all this he can do one way or other) it is not safe nor true
to say, God cannot alter the law of Nature. * He changed the matter in
suffering liberty to pass into servitude, * he made necessity in one instance,
I mean, in the matter of incest in the case of Cain, and afterward took it
away: * he took away the reasonableness of the sanction by changing the case in
the subduction or mutation of the matter, * and he took off the obligation in
the case of Abraham and of the Israelites robbing their Neighbors.

And therefore the Christian laws superinducing some excellencies and
perfections upon humane Nature, 50.
and laying restraint upon the first Natural laws, that is, upon such which
before this last period of the world were laws of Nature, is no hard thing to
be understood. God in it used but his own right. And I suppose it will be found
to be unreasonable to expound the precepts of the Religion by the former
measures of Nature while she was less perfect, less instructed: but this
rather; the former instances of the Natural law are passed into the Christian
precepts, and the Natural instance is changed, and the law alterd in it is
material part; the formality of it remaining upon the supposition of a greater
reason. Thus to repel force by force is a right of Nature; and afterward it
was passed into a law that Men might do it; that is, God expressly gave them
leave; and although it be not properly a law which neither forbids nor commands
but only gives a leave, yet when God had forbidden men to do violence, and to
establish this law the rather, gave leave, to any man that could, to punish his
unjust Enemy that attempted to do him mischief, it may be called a law, in
the lesser sense, that is, a decree of the Court of Heaven by which this became
lawful. * Though this was passed into a law in the manner now explicated, yet
it was with some restraints; which yet were not so great but they left a great
liberty which was sufficient security against violence. The restraint which God
superinduced upon this Right or Nature was but moderamen inculpatae tutelae, it
left men defended sufficiently against injuries though it permitted us to be
tried in some lesser instances and unavoidable accidents. But now although
Christianity has proceeded in the first method of God, and restrained it yet
more, and forbids us to strike him that strikes us, we are not to force this
precept into a sense consisting with the former liberty which we call the law
of Nature; but was at first only a right of Nature or a permissive law, but
not obligatory; and afterward suffered some restraints: for that which
suffered some, may suffer more: and as the right of nature was for its being
restraind recompensed in the provisions of laws, and by the hands of justice,
taking it from the private into the public hand: so may this right of nature
when it is wholly taken from us be recompensed by Gods taking the (...) or the
power of avenging our quarrels into his hands.

This right of nature being now almost wholly taken from us, 51.
part of it is taken up to God, and part of it is deposited in the hands of the
civil power, but we have none of it; only by Christ's laws and graces our
nature is more perfect, and morality is set forward, and justice and all our
rights are secured; but yet the law is changed. * The like may be said in
diverse other instances, as I shall discourse in their several places: here it
is sufficient to have given the first hint of it, and demonstrated the
certainty and reasonableness of it, which (as appears by the instances)
although it be especially and frequently true in the Jus naturae or the
permissive law of nature, and in those not only God but men also may make an
alteration; yet even in those laws which are directly obligatory, the power of
God who made them cannot be denied to be equal in the alteration: And indeed he
that can annull nature, can also at least alter her laws, which are consequent
to Nature and intended only for her preservation.

The case seems to be the same with eating and drinking which God has made
necessary for our life, 52.
as justice is to societies: but as he can take away the necessity from this
person at this time to eat and can supply it otherwise: so he can also conserve
humane society in the mutation of cases and extraordinary contingencies as well
as in the ordinary effects of justice. Indeed God cannot do an unjust thing;
because whatsoever he wills or does is therefore just because he will and does
it; but his will being the measure of justice, and his providence the disposer
of all those events and states of things to which the instances of Justice can
relate: when he wills an extraordinary case and has changed the term of the
relation, then he has made that instance which before was unjust, now to
become just; and so has not changed justice into unjustice, but the
denomination of the whole action concerning which the law was made, is alterd
from unjust to just, or on the contrary.

It is not to be supposed that the whole law of Nature can be altered as long
as our Nature is the same; 53.
any more then the fashion of our garments can be generally altered as long as
our body is of this shape: and therefore it is not to be thought that he that
makes a doublet shall ever make three sleeves unless a man have three arms, or
a glove with six fingers for him that has but five, but many particular laws
of Nature suffer variety and alteration, according to the changes that are in
our Nature and in our Necessities, or by any Measure of Man or Men which God
shall superinduce. Duo cum idem faciunt saepe, ut possis dicere
Hoc licet impune facere huic, illi non licet;
Non quod dissimilis res est, sed is qui facit.
The rule of Nature is always the same; yet one may do what another may not,
and sometimes that is lawful which at another is criminal; not because the
measure is changeable, but the thing measured suffers variety. So that in
effect the sense and extent of truth in this question is this; That although as
long as this world lasts and men in it, the law of Nature cannot be abrogated,
because it is that law which is framed proportionable to Man's Nature; yet it
may be derogated, that is, lessened, or enlarged in instances, changed in the
integrity of many of it is particulars made, relative to several states and new
necessities; and this is that which in true speaking does affirm that the laws
of Nature may be changed. For although there are some propositions and decrees
so General that they are in their Nature applicable to all variety of things,
and therefore cannot be changed: yet they are rather the foundation of laws
then laws themselves: because a law must be mixed with a Material part, it must
be a direction of actions, and a bond upon persons which does suppose many
things that can be changed: And therefore although the propositions upon which
the reasonableness and justice of the law does depend, serves to the contrary
instances by analogy, and common influence, yet the law being material does
not, and therefore is alterable. But of this I shall give a fuller account in
the ninth and tenth rules of this Chapter. For the present, I observe,

The want of considering this, 54.
has made difficulty in this question and errors in many. Every natural
proposition is not a law: but those antecedent propositions, by the proportions
of which laws stand or fall, are the measures of laws. They are rules, not
laws: and indeed the rules of Nature are Eternal and Unalterable: that is, all
those Natural and reasonable propositions which are dictates of prime reason,
and abstract from all persons and all states and all relations: such as are God
is to be honored: Justice is to be done: Contracts are to be affirmed: Reason
is to be obeyed: Good is to be followed: Evil to be eschewed. These are the
common measures of all laws, and all actions: but these are made laws when they
are prescribed to persons, and applied to matter: and when they are, because
that matter can have variety, the law also can, though the rule cannot.

That we are to restore all that was entrusted to us, 55.
is a Natural law derived from the rule of doing justice: but this may be
derogated and prejudiced without sin. For prescription transfers the possession
and disobliges the fiduciary from restitution.

By the law of Nature relying upon the rule of performing contracts, 56.
clandestine marriages are valid and firm: but yet some Churches, particularly
the Church of Rome in the Council of Trent has pronounced some marriages void
which by the Rule of Nature, and afterward by a law were rate and legal;
particularly, clandestine marriages, and marriages not clandestine by the
ingress of one of the parties into Religion, as is to be seen in the eighth
Session.

By the law of Nature a testimony under two or three witnesses may stand, 57.
but in the case of the accusation of a Cardinal Deacon in Rome they require
the concurrence of seven and twenty, of a Cardinal Priest sixty four, of a
Cardinal Bishop seventy and two, and in England one shall serve the turn, if
it be for the King. In Codicils the civil law requires five witnesses. In
testaments there must be seven: when a controversy is concerning the eminency
and prelation of excellent persons, fifteen are demanded. But if these things
may be prejudiced by men, much more may they be altered by God. But this
extends it self a little further. For in some of these instances, that which is
a law of Nature becomes so inconvenient as to do much evil, and then it is to
be estimated by a new Rule; and therefore the whole law is changed when it
comes to have a new measure, and the analogy of a New reason.

Upon the account of these premises it follows, 58.
that it is but a weak distinction to affirm some things to be forbidden by
God because they are Unlawful: and some to be unlawful because they are
forbidden. For this last part of the distinction takes in all that is unlawful
in the world, and therefore the other is a dead member and may be lopped off.
2. q. 19. ad 3, and 4.
So Ocham affirms against the more common sentence of the Schools (as his
manner is) nullus est actus malus nisi quatenus a Deo prohibitus est, and qui
non possit fieri bonus si a Deo praecipiatur and e converso: Every thing is
good or bad according as it is commanded or forbidden by God, and no otherwise.
For nothing is Unlawful antecedently to Gods commandment. Sin is a
transgression of some law, and this law must be made by a Superior, and there
is no Superior but who depends on God, and therefore his law is its measure.
There are some things good which God has not commanded; but then they are such
which he has commended by counsels, or analogies and proportions. But
whatsoever is a sin, is so therefore because it is forbidden, and without such
a prohibition, although it might be Unreasonable, yet it cannot be criminal or
unjust. Since therefore all measures of good and evil in the entercourses of
Men wholly rely upon the law of God, and are consequent to his will, although
it can never be that we can have leave to be Unjust, or Unchaste, that is, to
do against a law in being with all its circumstances, yet the law may be so
changed that the whole action which was forbidden may become permitted, and
innocent, and that which was permitted may become Criminal. I instance in the
(...), or the conjunction of the nearest kindred, which once was lawful and
ever since is become Criminal.

The purpose of this discourse is this, 59.
that we look no further for tables of the law of Nature, but take in only
those precepts which bind us Christians under Christ our lawgiver who has
revealed to us all his Fathers will. All the laws of Christ concerning moral
actions are the laws of Nature: and all the laws of Nature which any wise
Nation ever reckoned either are taken away by God, or else are commanded by
Christ. So that Christianity is a perfect Systeme of all the laws of Nature,
and of all the will of God, that is, of all the obligatory will; of all the
Commandments. In those things where Christianity has not interposed, we are
left to our Natural liberty, or a Jus permissivum, a permission, except where
we have restrained our selves by contract or dedition.

RULE 2. The law of Nature is the foundation of all laws and the measure of
their obligation.
FOR all good laws, 1.
and all justice has the same reasonableness, the same rules and measures, and
are therefore good because they are profitable, and are therefore just because
they are measured by the common analogies and proportions: and are therefore
necessary because they are bound upon us by God mediately or immediately. Lib.
1. de inv. and ^^. 4, and 5. de (...)
And therefore Cicero defined virtue to be perfecta and ad summum perducta
natura, or Habitus animi naturae modo rationi consentaneus, The perfection of
Nature, or a habit of mind agreeing to Natural reason. But more expressly and
full in his third book de legibus: lex est justorum injustorumque distinctio ad
illam antiquissimam and rerum omnium principem expressa Naturam, ad quam leges
hominum diriguntur, quae supplicio improbos afficiunt, and defendunt and
tuentur bonos. A law is the distinction of good and bad, of just and unjust,
expressed or fitted to Nature, which is the first and the prince of all, and to
which humane laws are directed for the punishment of evil doers, and the
defense of the good. And it is evident in all the moral precepts of
Christianity: all which are so agreeable to a man's felicity and state of things
to which a man is designed both here and hereafter, that a man cannot be happy
without them: and therefore they all rely upon some prime natural reason, which
reason although possibly some or all of it was discovered to us by revelation
and the wise proper discourses of the religion, and was not generally known to
men before Christ, yet the reasons are nothing but consonancies to our state
and being, introductive of felicity, perfective of our Nature, wise and prudent
and noble, and such which abstracting from the rewards hereafter, are
infinitely eligible and to be preferred for temporal regards before their
contraries.

Add to th^s, 2.
they are such which some few the wisest of the Heathens did teach by natural
reason, for ought we know. And there is a proportion of this truth also in all
the wise laws of Commonwealths. The reasons of which are nothing but the
proportions of Nature, and the prime propositions of Justice, common Utility
and Natural necessity. And therefore supposing that every civil constitution
supplies the Material part or the instance, every civil law is nothing but a
particular of the natural law in respect of its formality, reasonableness and
obligation. And all laws of manners are laws of Nature: for there can be but
one justice, and the same honesty and common utility in the world, and as a
particular reason is contained in the Universal, so is the particular profit in
the public, saluti civium prospexit qua intelligebat contineri suam, said
Torquatus in Cicero, and so it is in laws. In the observation of the laws of
Nature the good of every society and every private person is comprised: and
there is no other difference in it, but that in every civil constitution there
is something superadded; not to the reasonableness or justice, but it is
invested with a body of action and circumstances. Jus civil neque in totum a
Naturali ac Gentium jure recedere, neque per omnia ei servire; adeo ut cum juri
communi aliquid additur vel detrahitur, jus proprium, id est, Lib. 6. ^^. de
justit. and jure.
civil efficiatur, said Justinian: The civil law neither does wholly recede
from the law of Nature and Nations, neither does it wholly serve it: for when
any thing is added or detracted from the Natural law it becomes the Civ^l: and
another, leges positivae repetunt Jus Nature quum leges sive pactiones quae
sunt Jura attingunt utilitatem and scopum Naturae; The positive laws of a
Commonwealth repeat the law of Nature, when laws and covenants do promote the
profit and this design of Nature.

But from hence it follows that the law of Nature is the only rule and measure
of all laws, 3.
and superinduced laws of God and Man are but instances of obedienne in those
General precepts of Nature: and since the law of Christianity contains in it
all the law of Nature; and is now the only law that can oblige us primarily,
and others in virtue of it: it is the prime and adequate rule and measure of
Conscience, and the explication of all its precepts will be a full institution
of the Conscience: to which purpose that saying of Laelius in Cicero is very
pertinent: (...).
viros bonos appellandos esse putamus qui assequuntur quantum homines possunt
Naturam optimam recte vivendi Ducem. Nature is the best guide and measure of
living well: and they who exactly observe her measures as far as Men can, are
to be called Good Men.

RULE 3. The first and greatest band of the law of Nature is fear of punishment.
I Have already spoken of this as it is the act and effect of Conscience: here
I am to speak of it more abstractedly, and as it self has effect upon humane
actions; there as it is the Minister of the Judge: here as it is the Sanction
of the law,

Omne malum aut timore aut pudore Natura suffudit, 1.
said Tertullian. Fear and shame are the waiters and handmaids of every sin
which Nature has provided for it. (...). c. 1.
And indeed fear is the band of all laws. For although there is a pravity in
the Nature of injustice which natural reason hates, proceeding partly from the
deficiency from the perfective end of Nature and societies, which is injustice;
partly from the consequent obloquy and disreputation which all wise men and all
talking people put upon it (for they that do it themselves speak ill of it in
others) yet this is but a little. This is a part of the punishment of the
breach of the Natural law; but not strong enough to make a firm obligation.
Now in all laws there must be some penalty annexed, the fear of which may be
able to restrain men from doing against the law: which cannot be unless the
evil be greater then the benefit or pleasure of the praevarication can be: and
therefore it is, that God establishing this law has appointed a Court within
us, a severe judge who will not spare, a wise discerner who will not be
deceived, an exact remembrancer which never forgets any thing that can do the
greatest mischiefs, a just witness who will not be suborned, and is conscious
and privy to all that which he is to judge; and the same also is the
executioner of the delinquent and sinning people.

The stings of Conscience and fear of the Divine vengeance, 2.
is this evil which Naturally restrains us: it is the greatest restraint,
because it is the greatest of evils, and it is Unavoidable, and it is Natural.
I will not add it is lawful to abstain from evil for fear of punishment, but
it is necessary, and it is Natural, and that is more; and this is it which
Epicurus taught, (...); which although Plutarch seems angry at, was well enough
spoken by him; meaning that it is a fear not of temporal discovery and civil
punishment which is only appointed to restrain evil actions, but a fear of
those evils whose apprehension God has made necessary and congenite with the
Nature of Man; fear of Gods displeasure, and the destruction of our Nature and
felicities relying upon that Natural love of our selves and desire of our own
preservation, without which a man cannot be supposed sufficiently provided with
principles of necessary being and providence.

There is another kind of fear of punishment, 3.
that is, a fear of those auxiliary punishments which Princes and Republikes
have superadded to the breakers of Natural laws, which is in some men who are
despisers of all the evils which are threatened hereafter: 7, de Repub,
Such as was that of Thrasymachus in Plato. Nihil esse melius quam facere
injuriam neque poenas dare, nihil pejus quam pati nec posse Ulcisci; medio
autem modo se habere Justitiam, cum quis nec facit nec patitur, quod ut fiat,
esse optabile; sed nempe imbecillibus quorum proinde interest pacisci aut
servare pacta, non autem valentioribus, qui si viri fuerint ac sapuerint,
nullatenus pactum de injuria non inferenda accipendave sint inituri. Nothing is
better then to do injury without punishment: nothing worse then to suffer
mischief and to be able to do none again. In the midst of these is justice,
which neither does injury, nor receives any, which is much to be desired; but
by whom? By none but by weak people. For the stronger, if they be valiant and
wise will never enter into Covenants concerning not doing or receiving injury.
* According to this doctrine, there should be nothing of it self just or
unjust, and if there were, it were not to be regarded, but so long as justice
were profitable, and injustice troublesome and dangerous. And therefore strong
men or crafty might in many cases be exempt from contracts and from doing
justice, and would neither do right, nor take wrong.

Against this it is that all wise men in the world do speak, 4.
De consol. Philosoph.
Vos autem nisi ad populares auras inanesque rumores recta facere nescitis; and
relicta conscientiae virtutisque praestantia de alienis praemia sermunculis
cogitatis, said Boethius in indignation against all those who took accounts of
themselves by public noises not by the testimonies of a just Conscience, that
is, who fear man but do not fear God. And to do good out of fear of
punishment (in this sense) is to do good no longer then I am observed, and no
longer then I am constrained: from both which because very many men are very
often freed, and all men sometimes, there would be no habit, no will, no love
of justice in the world; that is, there would be no virtue of justice, but
single actions as it could happen. This would introduce horrid tyrannies, while
Princes and Generals having power in their hands might do all things as they
pleased, and have no measure but their own private: and all men's conditions
under them would be always precarious and arbitrary, and most commonly
intolerable: And therefore this fear is the characterisme of evil persons,
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. and against such civil laws are made:
Justis lex non est posita, says S. Paul, the law is not made for the
righteous, but for the wicked. If the sons of Israel had continued pious as
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were, the law should not have been given to them as
it was upon Mount Sinai; but the necessities of men brought a law upon them,
and that law a punishment, while good men (...) as Zenocrates in Laertius said
of the Philosophers; they do it Sponte sua, 7. Aenei^*
veterisque Dei se more tenentes. for the love of God; by choice and delight in
the actions of virtue they do excellent things, Plusque ibi boni mores valent
quam alibi bonae leges, as Tacitus said of the old Germans. Good manners
prevailed more then good Laws. Thus did the Patriarchs, Tac, (...)* 3.
and therefore they needed not a law. Vetustissimi mortalium nulla adhuc mala
libidine, sine pretio, sine scelere, eoque si^^ poena and coercitionibus
agebant: neque praemiis opus erat, cum honesta suopte ingenio peterentur: and
ubi nihil contra morem cuperent, nihil permetum vetabantur. Our forefathers
desired nothing against honesty and justice and therefore were not forbidden
any thing by the instrument of fear.

But therefore the civil and positive law is not made for all those men who
have other restraints; 5.
that is, for good men who are moved by better principles; but because these
things that are better are despised by the vicious and the Tyrants, oppressors
and the impudent, the civil power has taken a sword to transfixe the Criminal
and to kill the Crime. And therefore Epicurus in Stobaeus said not amiss: laws
were made for wise men, not for fear they should do ill, but lest they should
suffer evil from the Unjust.

And yet even the wise and the good men have a fear in them which is an
instrument of justice and religion; 6.
but it is a fear of God, not of the secular Judge, it is a fear that is
Natural, a fear produced from the congenite notices of things, and the fear of
doing a base thing; a fear to be a fool, and an evil person. Mi natura dedit
leges a sanguine ductas
Ne possem melior Judicis esse metu.
said Cornelia in Propertius: a good man will abstain from all Unrighteous
things, though he be sure that no man should hear or see any thing of it, that
is, though there were no laws, and superinduced punishments in republikes: and
all this upon the account of such a fear which a good man ought to have; a fear
of being a base person or doing vile things: -- Imposito tenerae custode puellae
Nil agis: Ovid. l. 3. Eleg.
ingenio quaeque tuenda suo est.
Siqua metu dempto casta est, ea denique casta est;
Quae quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit.
That chastity is the Noblest which is not constrained by spies and severity,
by laws and jealousy: when the mind is secretly restrained, then the virtue is
secured. * Cicero puts a case to Torquatus: Si te amicus tuus moriens rogaverit
ut haereditatem reddas suae filiae, nec usquam id scripserit, ut scripsit
Fadius, nec cuiquam dixerit, quid facies? Aruncanus dies and leaves his
inheritance to his daughter Posthumia, and intrusts his friend Torquatus with
it, but privately, without witness, without consignation of tables: will
Torquatus who is a Feoffee in private trust restore this to the child when she
shall be capable? Yes; Torquatus will, and Epicurus will, and yet Cicero had
scarce a good word for him, whom he has fondly disgraced during all ages of
the world, weakly and Unjustly: but the account he gives of it is pertinent to
the rule: Nonne intelligis eo majorem esse vim naturae, quod ipsi vos qui omnia
ad vestrum commodum, and ut ipsi dicitis ad voluptatem referatis, tamen ea
faciatis quibus appareat, non voluptatem vos, sed officium sequi, plusque
naturam rectam, quam pravam rationem valere. Nature is more prevalent then
interest: and sober men though they pretend to do things for their real
advantage and pleasure, yet follow their duty rather then either pleasure or
profit, and right nature rather then evil principles.

The reason of this is, 7.
because Nature carries fear and reverence in the retinue of all her laws, and
the evils which are consequent to the breach of Natural laws are really, and by
wise men so understood to be greater mischiefs then the want of profit, or the
missing of pleasure, or the feeling the rods and axes of the Prince. If there
were no more in a crime then the disorder of Nature, Reg. fusior. inter. 2.
the very unnaturalness it self were a very great matter, S. Basil said well,
ad omnia quae descripta a nobis, a Deo praecepta sunt, consequenda, naturales
ab ipso facultates accepimus. God has given to virtues, Natural Organs, or
bodily instruments; as to mercy he appointed bowels, eyes for pity, hands for
relief; and the proper employment of these is so perfective of a man's condition
(according to their proportion) that not to employ them according to the
purpose of Nature is a disease, a Natural trouble; just as it is to trumpet
with our mouth which was intended for eating and drinking and gentler
breathings. It is punishment enough to do an Unnatural and a base action, it
puts our soul and it is faculties from their center, and the ways of perfection.
And this is fully observed by Seneca: Male de nobis actum erat quod multa
scelera legem and Judicem effugiunt, and scripta supplicia, nisi illa naturalia
and gravia de praesentibus solverent and in locum patientiae timor cederet.
Mankind were in an ill state of provisions, if those wickednesses which escape
the law and the Judge, did not suffer the more grievous inflictions of natural
punishment and fear came into the place of patience; still, fear is the bridle:
but it is an honest fear, a fear of God and of natural disorders and
inconvenience. (...) as Clemens of Alexandria calls it a righteousness not
produced by laws and the sword, fear and interest, but from the love of God,
and something that is within: There is a fear, but it is such a fear as still
leaves the love to virtue, and secures it in privacies and enjoynes the habit
and constant practice of it: a fear that is complicated with a Natural love of
our own preservation, and is constant, and measured by God, and in the Natural
limit cannot be extravagant; a fear that acknowledges Gods Omniscience, and his
Omnipresence, and his eternal justice: and this was the sense of that of
Sophocles. (...)
(...).
Do nothing basely and secretly; for times Father sees and hears all things,
and time will discover it, and truth shall be the daughter of time, and that
which is done in secret shall be spoken upon the tops of houses: so both the
Christian and the Heathen are conjoined in the several expressions of the same
great truth. This fear is deposited in Conscience, and is begotten and kept by
this proposition that God is a rewarder of all men according to their works.

Consequent to this is the love of Virtue.

RULE 4. The second band of virtue is love, and its proper and consequent
deliciousness.
THis is not wholly Natural, 1.
but in much of it is Empirical, (...) proceeding from the grace of God, and
the experience of the deliciousness and rewards of virtue, and the excellency
of a greater hope which does entertain our spirits in the outer courts of
pleasant expectations: (...), as both Aristotle and Xenocrates did speak. It is
the effect of Philosophy and Religion, of virtuous and severe institutions to
do that for love and without constraint, which fools, and vicious, and weak
persons do for fear of laws.

Now this, 2.
I say, is not Natural, that is, although it be agreeable to Nature, yet not
primarily introduced by it, without a Tutor, because Nature forbids injustice,
but does not command justice, but secondarily and by accident and upon
supposition of other contingencies. To do injustice is always a sin but not
to do a justice is not always. For a man may depose the person of a Judge, or
a trustee, or a delegate; but they who habitually do justice, find the rewards
of reputation, and the ease of being freed from the torments of an evil
Conscience which is a delicacy, like the being eased of the horrid gripes of
the colic; and so insensibly grow in love with justice, that they think they
love justice for justice sake. Ipsa sui merces erat and sine vindice praeda.

Concerning which it is fit we consider a little least it become the occasion
of Scruples and nice opinions. 3.
Antigonus Sochaeus an old Jew was famed for saying, Be not servants who serve
their Lord that they may receive a reward from him; but be such who serve him
without consideration of wages, or recompenses, and let the fear of God be upon
you: Baithus and Sadoc his Disciples, from whom the sect of the Saduces did
spring, not well understanding him, took occasion from hence to deny the
Resurrection and rewards after this life. And indeed such sayings as these are
easily abused; and when some men speak Great things, and others believe as much
of it as they Understand, but understand it not all, they make Sects and divide
their Schools, and ignorance and faction keep the doors and sit in the chairs
sometimes. It is impossible a man should do Great things, or suffer nobly
without consideration of a reward; and since much of virtue consists in
suffering evil things, virtue of her self is not a beatitude, but the way to
one. He does things like a fool, who does it for no end: and if he does not
choose a good end, he is worse: and virtue herself would in many instances be
unreasonable if for no material consideration we should undertake her drudgery:
and therefore S. Austin said well, Sublatis aeternis praemiis and poenis verum
staturum a partibus Epicuri: Sensual pleasures were highly eligible, and not
virtuous sufferings, if in this life only we had hope. But if it be accounted
the top of virtue to love virtue for virtues sake, and without intuition of the
reward; many times good men observing that themselves are encouraged by all
Gods promises to obedience and patience, and that in Martyrdom there is no
Natural or sensitive pleasure, and that it cannot be loved for it self, but
wholly for its reward, will find themselves put into fear where no fear is, and
that a nequam humilitas an unworthy opinion of their duty shall affright their
peace and holy confidence. Peregrinus the Philosopher in A. Gellius expressed
this love of virtue for it self, thus; Etiamsi Dii atque homines ignoraturi
forent; to do good though neither God nor Men should know of it: but as this
is impossible in fact, so it is in speculation; for there were no such thing as
virtue, if it were not relative and directed to God or Man: But yet the thing
which they mean is very good. Good men love virtue for virtues sake, that is,
they act it and love it, they do it with so habitual and confirmed elections
and complacency that many times they have no actual intuition to the reward;
they forget this, they are so taken with that; like a man that chooses a wife
upon many considerations, as portion, family, hopes and beauty; yet when he
has conversed long with her and finds her amiable and fruitful, obedient and
wise: he forgets all other considerations, and loves her person for her own
perfections, but will not quit all his other interests. The difference is best
understood by variety of Motions. Some Motions cannot be continued unless some
agent or other do continually urge them; but they are violent and unnatural:
others are perfective and loved, and they will continue and increase by their
own principle if they be not hindered. This is the love of virtue, that is,
fear, or it may be hope; save that hope is a thing between both, and is
compounded of both, and is more commendable then fear. But to love virtue for
it self, is nothing else, but to love it directly and plainly; he that loves it
only for the reward, and is not by the reward brought to love the thing, loves
not this at all but loves something else: but he that loves it at all, sees
good in it, because he finds good by it, and therefore loves it self, now,
whatever was the first incentive: and the wooden arch may be taken away when
that of marble is concentred.

2. Vir fortis and justus.... in summa voluptate est and periculo suo fruitur,
4.
When a good man lays before him the price and redemption of his mortality,
the liberty of his Country, the safety of his friends, he is hugely pleased and
delights in, and enjoies his danger. But if he feels not this pleasure, yet
without trembling and uncertainty he will dare to die, facere recte pieque
contentus; and if you tell him this reputation which he gets of his Citizens
will die almost as soon as he shall die; he answers, all those things are
without the nature and consideration of my work: Ego ipsum contemplor, hoc esse
honestum scio: I look upon the work it self and find it honest, and that is
enough; meaning secretly; that though these outward rewards were pared off, yet
there are secret pleasures which will follow and stick close to virtue, as the
shadow does to the body, and this good men must consider, because they feel it,
and that is part of the reward.

3. They are pleased with the virtue it self, 5.
and their soul is as much delighted with it, and as naturally as the eye with
beauteous colors, or the throat with Unctuous juices, or the tongue with moist
sweetnesses, For God has made virtue proportionable to all the noble ends, and
worthy desires of mankind, and the proper instrument of his felicity: and all
its beauties, and all its works, and all its effects, and all that for which it
can be loved is part of the reward. And therefore to say a man can love virtue
for virtues sake and without consideration of the reward, is to say, a man can
love virtue without any reason and inducement, without any argument to move his
affections.

4. For there can be but two causes of amability in the world, 6.
Perfection and Usefulness, that Beauty and Profit; that in the thing it self,
this as it relates to me: Now he that says, a man may love virtue for its own
sake without consideration of the reward, says no more then that a man may
love a flower which he never hopes to smell of; that is, he may admire and
commend it, and love to look on it, and just so he may do to virtue. But if he
desires either, it is because it is profitable or useful to him, and has
something that will delight him, it cannot else possibly be desired.

Now to love virtue in the first sense is rather Praise then love an act of
Understanding rather then of the Will, 7.
and its object is properly the perfections of the flower or the virtue
respectively: But when it comes to be desired, that is, loved with a relation
to my self, it has for its object other perfections, those things that please,
and that delight me, and that is nothing but part of the reward or all of it.

The question being thus explicated, it follows, 8.
that to love virtue for virtues sake, is so far from being the honor of a
good and perfect man, that it is the character of an evil man, if it goes no
further. For it amounts to nothing but this that the understanding is convinced
of the worthiness of it, -- video meliora proboque. -- it is that which S. Paul
calls a delighting in the law after the inner man. * But it is a Relative,
Material, Practical love of virtue that makes a good man; and the proper
inducement of that is also Relative, Material and Practical. Est profecto Deus
qui quae nos gerimus
Auditque and videt. Been m^renti, been profuerit,
Male merenti par erit:
said the Comedian, (...)
God has so endeared justice and virtue to us, that he hearing and seeing all
things, gives good things to them that do good things; but he will be even
with the evil man.

5. Lastly, 9.
To love virtue for virtues sake, is to love it without consideration of humane
rewards, praise of men honors, riches, rest, power, and the like, which indeed
are the hinges of most men's actions. Cura quid expediat, (...)
prior est quam quid sit honestum,
Et cum fortuna statque caditque fides.
Nec facile invenies multis de millibus unum,
Virtutem pretium qui putet esse sui.
Ipse decor recti, facti si praemia desint,
Non movet, and gratis poenitet esse probum.
Nil nisi quod prodest charum est.
Now he that is a good man and loves virtue virtuously, does not love it
principally for these secular regards; but without such low expectations, and
without apprehension of the angry sentence of the laws; but this does not
exclude the intuition of the Divine reward from having an influence into the
most perfect love of virtue; for this is intrinsecal to the sanction and the
Nature of the law; the other is extrinsecal and accidental. The first is such a
reward as is the perfection of the work; for glory is the perfection of Grace;
and he that serves God for hope of glory, loves goodness for goodness sake; for
he pursues the interest of goodness that he may be filled with goodness; he
serves God here that he may serve him hereafter; he does it well that he may
do it better; a little while that he may do it over again for ever and ever.
Nothing else can be a loving virtue for virtues sake; this is the greatest
perfection and the most reasonable and practicable sense of doing it. * And if
the rewards of virtue were not the great practical inducement of good men's love
to goodness, all the promises of the Gospel were to no purpose in relation to
the faith of good men, and therefore the greatest and the best part of faith it
self would be useless: for there is no purpose or end of faith of the promises
but to enable our obedience by the Credibility and expectation of such promises
to do our duty.

Now that even good men, 10.
even the best men, even all men have an habitual regard to it, besides that it
is impossible to be otherwise (for he that plowes does plow in hope) and will
easily be understood to be so by them who know the causes and nature of things;
it appears also in the instance of as good a man as any story reports of; even
Moses who despised to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, because he had an
eye to the recompense of reward: and by the instance of all those brave persons
whom S. Paul enumerates in the eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews; who all died in
faith not having received the promises; but they looked for better, even such
as were to come; and beyond all this; (...), 12, 2 3.
Our Blessed Lord himself, despised shame and endured the Cross; but it was for
the glory that was set before him. For it is the first and the Greatest article
of the Gentiles Creed, Every one that comes to God must believe that God is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

The sum is this; 11.
Although in Nature herself, and in the Conscience relating to her, there is a
Court punitive and a fear of God, yet the expectation of reward is rather put
into us, than born with us, and revealed, rather then Natural; and therefore
the expectation of good is the second band of Natural laws, but extrinsecal and
adventitious, communicated to us by revelation, and by grace.

RULE 5. The imperfection of some provisions in civil laws are supplied by the
Natural obligation remaining upon persons civilly incapable.
(...)

WHen laws make provision of cases (...), 1.
in as many things as they can foresee, or feel, and yet some things will
emerge which cannot be foreseen, and some contrary reasons will arise; many
times there is no care taken for some things and some persons by any
constitutions of Man. Here Nature as the common Parent of all justice and
necessary obligations, takes the case into her protection.

This happens in many cases:

1. Humane laws give measures of things and persons which fit most men without
a sensible error, 2.
but some it does not. Young persons are at a certain age declared capable of
making profitable contracts; at another age of making contracts that are
hazardous, and they must stand to them, though they be mischievous. At one age
they may marry; at another they may contract a debt; at another they may make a
Testament; at another they may be punished with Capital inflictions. But in
some persons the malice is earlier and the wit more pregnant, and the sense of
their advantages brisk enough: and therefore the contracts which they can make;
and the actions which they do, and the part which they choose is really made,
or done, or chosen; but they not bound to stand to it, by the civil law: and
yet if they can choose they are naturally obliged. Both of them are necessary:
The civil law cannot provide but by common measures Quos ultra citraque nequit
consistere rectum. all their rules are made by as common a measure as they can,
and they are the best rules that have the fewest exceptions: the best
Carpenters make the fewest chips: but some there must be. But then it is
necessary that Nature should provide, by single provisions in all the single
exceptions; for it is necessary it should be done, and she only can do it.
She can do it because Nature has provided an instructed, a judging and a
discerning Conscience, and the person that contracts or receives a benefit, can
bind himself to man as soon as he can bind himself to God; because the laws of
God bind all our contracts with men. That is, plainly thus, God's laws provide
not only for general cases but also for particular circumstances; and of every
thing God and Gods vicegerent, Conscience, can take accounts; and therefore
this abundance supplies the others defect; the perfection of God makes up the
breaches of the imperfection of Man. Which rule is to be understood both of
things and persons. For all our duty is only an obedience to God: and every
one that can hope or fear is bound to this obedience; therefore there can be no
gap here: God has in every thing shut up every person that can use reason, by
some instrument or other. Lib. 2. de lege.
And therefore Cicero said well, Si regnante Tarquinio nulla fuisset Romae
scripta lex de stupris tamen contra illam legem sempiternam Sextus Tarquinius
vim Lucretiae Tricipitini filiae attulit: erat enim ratio profecta a rerum
Natura, and ad recte faciendum impellens, atque a delicto avocans. There was no
civil constitution against rapes, but Tarquin ought not to have done it; for
there was an eternal law against it. For right reason proceeding from Nature
drives us on to good and calls us off from evil. That is, he could not but know
it was ill, and against reason, and against every thing by which he ought to be
governed; and even to the Heathen God was not wanting, but bound these laws
upon them by reason, and inclination, and necessity, and fame, and example, and
contract, and hope, and fear, and by secret ways which we know not of. He made
some inclinations and some reason to become laws, that Mankind might not live
like beasts and birds of prey: in all cases, and in all times, and to all
persons he became a Lord and a Lawgiver some way or other.

Young persons of twelve or fourteen years old can be saved or damned, 3.
they can love or hate, they can Understand yea and nay, they can do a good
turn or a shrewd, they can lead a blind man right or wrong, they can bear true
or false witness: and although the civil laws out of care least their easiness
be abused by crafty people, make them secure from it by nulling the contract,
that the deceiving person may not reap the harvest of his fraud, yet there are
very many cases in which the Minor receives advantage, or at least no wrong,
and though it was fit he should be secured, it was not fit he should be enabled
to do a mischief to another, ut levamen his, aliis sit onus, as S. Paul in a
like case, that they be eased and others burdened. For although the other
Contractor be sufficiently warned to take heed of the Minor, yet there may be
need in it, or charity, friendship or Confidence; all or any of which if they
might be deceived the Minor would suffer often, but the other Contractor but
once. Therefore as the Civil law secures them from harm, so the law of Nature
binds them to do none, but to stand to such contracts in which they have
advantage or equality, and in which they were not abused. * The time when they
come to be obliged is the time when they come to the use of reason * when they
understand their duty * when a prudent man judges them fit to be contracted
with * when they can use fraud to others * when they can consider whether they
be bound or no: these are the best marks and signatures of the time, and
declare the obligation in all cases where there is no deception evident.

2. Sometimes both parties can contract: 4.
but because they doing it without witnesses, may recede from it, either
consentigly or against the will of one of them, the positive constitution of
Man intending to provide against this inconvenience has cut the civil tie in
pieces and refuses to verify the contract, besides that it cannot legally be
proved. In this case Nature relieves the oppressed party, and supplies the
easiness of the civil band, and strains that hard which the others let loose.
And this happens in clandestine contracts: against which in the matter of
marriage all Christian Countries have made severe edicts: but in case they be
done, in some places they are pronounced valid, in some places declared Null.
Where they are nulled, Nature is defeated in making provisions and the parties
are warranted to do a mischief. For if Mauritius and Cluviena contract
marriage; and Mauritius repent his bargain where shall Cluviena be relieved?
The law of the Church forbids it, and will punish her for doing it if she
complains. The Civil law takes no notice of it, for it cannot be legally
proved: and the law of Nature is barred out, if it be declared Null; and then
there is nothing left to hold him. It is the case of the Church of Rome who in
the eighth Session of the Council of Trent declares all clandestine contracts
to be null, and their mixtures to be fornication and uncleanness. But they have
overacted their zeal against a temporal inconvenience, and burn their house to
roast an egg; they destroy a law of Nature by a law of the Church; against the
former practices, counsels and resolutions, even of their own Church. * For if
those contracts are in themselves naturally valid and not forbidden by God,
Navarrus Enclyri^^. c. 25. ^t con^^^gatio Cardinalium quos tal^ and (...)
putidi pudibat (...) rem factum aut dictam, and (...) clandesina etiam poll
concilium rata manner, sicut and eat. Consula^^unt sc. famae Concilii, non
propriae, aut rem tam contam, verba tam (...) non crubuerunt.
then they cannot rescind them: if they be not naturally valid, since they were
always positively forbidden, why were they esteemed valid for so many ages?
For till that Council they were so, but finding that the former prohibitions
were not strong enough, they took this course to break them all in pieces: And
out of desire to prevent an accidental evil, they made it more ready to be
done. For it was before but feared lest they should recede: but yet if they
did, they were esteemed adulterers if they married again: and they themselves
knew when they were precontracted; and therefore stood convicted and pinched in
their own Consciences so long as the old laws remained, and men did not receive
warrants to break the most sacred bands in the world: but by this nullifying
the contract, they have not only leave to go off, but are commanded; and if
they be weary of this, they may contract with another, and there is nothing to
hinder them, if Nature does not. This Nullity therefore is a vehement remedy
that destroies the patient; besides that it is against the law of Nature. The
laws may forbid it to be done; but if it be, they cannot rescind it; because
the civil constitution is less then the Natural, and convenience is less then
Conscience, and man is infinitely less then God.

3. Some pretend to do a greater good, 5.
and to do it, break a contract justly made: and if the civil constitution
allows it, the law of Nature r^claimes, and releeves the injured person. This
was the case of the Pharisees who denied to releeve their Parents out of zeal
to fill the Treasure of the Temple, and thought that their voluntary religion
excused from their Natural duty. The Church of Rome gives leave to either of
the persons who are married solemnly, and contracted rightly to recede from
their vow and enter into religion, and declares the marriage separate and
broken. Here Nature calls upon the obliged party, and ought to prevail above
any other pretense; it being first in possession and faster in obligation: and
if it be naturally an evil to break a lawful contract made without fraud, and
which is in our power to keep; then it ought not to be done for any good in the
world.

4. Hither also are to be reduced, 6.
obligations by Unsolemne stipulations, by command of Parents, by intermination
of curses, by mere delict amongst persons, against whom lies no civil action,
as of servants to their Lords, sons to their Fathers: concerning which proper
accounts are to be given in their own places. Here only they are to be noted
in the general observation of cases in which the law of Nature has made an
obligation, when the civil power could not, or would not, or did against it.

But it is proper to discuss a difficult question which intervenes upon this
rule. 7.
The case is this; By the law of Nature every man has power to make a
Testament of his own Goods: But the civil law requires conditions of every
Testator that the Testament shall be ratified by so many witnesses, or else it
shall be invalid. Sempronius dying leaves Caius his heir, and gives but a small
portion to his son Porcius, but declares this by an Unsolemne Testament. The
like may happen in all donations and actions to which any solemnities of law
are required.

Quest.

THe question is, 8.
Whether the Estate be due to Caius by the law of Nature, or is not Porcius the
son to be releeved by the civil Constitution which makes the Unsolemne
Testament to be invalid? To this it is commonly answered, That to make a
Testament is not a law of Nature, but a right only, which as a man may himself
relinquish, so may the public laws restrain for the public good: for there
being so many frauds in pretended Testaments it is necessary that provisions
should be made to prevent the infinite evils that may happen. Now whatsoever is
necessary, is also just; if the necessity be public, real, and unavoidable by
other means: and if it be just, the public power has sufficient authority to
restrain any man's right for every man's good.

2. Every sentence of the Judge in a clear case that binds in law, 9.
does also bind in Conscience; but if the Judge of civil actions did know that
Sempronius really did appoint the stranger Caius his Heir, yet by the law he
were bound to declare for the son Porcius, and that the real unsolemne Will of
Sempronius were to be accounted nothing: So that although the Law were made to
prevent fraud, yet even when there is no fraud, and the Judge knows there is
none, yet the Unsolemne Testament is to be declared invalid by the law: which
law because it is just, and for a just cause, and by a competent Authority,
must bind in Conscience by the force of the words of S. Paul; Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. And therefore if the law be good and the Judge
just in giving the inheritance from Caius to Porcius, certainly Caius must
needs be unjust if he detains it.

3. And this very thing is consented to in the Canons of the Church, 10.
which are usually framed, and ever to be presumed ( ubi contrarium non
constat) to be more agreeable to the measures of Conscience; and yet in the
Canon law, a Testament framed and signed in the presence of two witnesses is
not good, unless the Parish Priest be present; and that no man can lawfully
detain a legacy upon the Warrant of such a Will.

4. For since every act of man consists of the potestative and elective
faculties, 11.
if either will be wanting, or power, the act is invalid. It is not therefore
enough though the will be manifest and confessed; for if the man have no power,
his will is ineffective.

But this opinion though relying upon fair probabilities and great authority,
12.
is not to be assented to as it lies, but with great caution and provisions.
For a right of Nature cannot be taken away by a civil power, entirely, and
habitually, but only quoad exercitium actus; the exercise of the act of that
right may indeed be impeded for great reasons and to prevent great evils, since
therefore the power of making Testaments is a Natural right, and is wholly
suspended in its act to prevent frauds in Unsolemne Testaments, where the case
is evident and no fraud at all, although the civil law is still valid because
it being established upon a general cause, though it fails in a particular it
does not fail in the General, and therefore still is rate and firm; yet
because it does fail in the particular where that is known, there is a port
open for Chancery, for considerations of piety, and religion. And therefore
although in the case put, Porcius who is the natural Heir of Sempronius, is to
take the advantage of the civil law against Caius; yet if Sempronius had made
an Unsolemne Testament in behalf of his Natural Heir, that ought to have stood
in the Court of Conscience. My reason is, because in the law of Nature, Porcius
the son has as much Natural right to inherit, as Sempronius the Father has to
make a Testament; and therefore although an Unsolemne Testament shall not be
sufficient to interrupt a Natural succession, because the rights of Nature on
either hand are equal; yet the civil power can restrain his right when there is
nothing complicated with it: for his own consent is involved in the public
constitution, and he may consent to the diminution of his own right, when no
duty is infringed, that is, in those things where only his own rights are
concerned.

When therefore any thing of the law of Nature is twisted with the right of
Nature, 13.
there is an obligation past which the civil constitution cannot annull. As if
Sempronius command his son in an Unsolemne Testament, in private and without
witnesses to give such a legacy to Titius his Nephew; although Titius cannot
challenge it by virtue of that Testament, yet the son is bound to pay it by the
law of Nature: for Civil constitutions have effect upon a mere right, but none
against a duty of Nature: and therefore although the Testament of Sempronius
shall not pass into legal, external, judicial warranty, yet it binds the son,
and is valid as to him by the law of Nature and Conscience. And this was rarely
well affirmed by Pliny: Lib. 5. Ep. ad Calvisium.
Hoc si jus aspicias, irritum; si defuncti voluntatem, ratum and firmum est;
mihi autem defuncti voluntas (vereor quam in partem Jurisconsulti quod dicturus
sum accipiant) antiquior jure est. If we regard the civil law such Testaments
are invalid; yet if we regard the will of the Testator it is firm: but though
I know not how the Lawyers will take it, yet to me the will of the dead is to
be preferred before the law: and more fully yet to Antonianus; Lib. 2. Epist.
Tu quidem pro certa tua diligentia admones me, codicillos Attiliani, qui me ex
part instituit haeredem, pro non scriptis habendos, quia non sunt confirmati
Testamento, quod jus nec mihi quidem ignotum est, cum sit iis etiam notum qui
nihil aliud sciunt. Sed ego propriam quandam legem mihi dixi, ut defunctorum
voluntates, etiam si jura deficerent, quasi perfectas tuerer. Constat enim
codicillos istos Attiliani Manuscriptos: licet ergo non sint confirmati
Testamento, a me tamen ut confirmati observabuntur. Every one that knows any
thing knows that in law Unsolemne Testaments are invalid: but I have another
law of my own, if I know it was really the will of the Dead, I will verify it
though it want the solemnity of law: and this also was affirmed by Innocentius,
saying, Electionem quae juri naturae consentit, licet non serventur, juris
solennitates tenere. cap. Quod sicut: de election.

And there is great reason and great piety in this sense of the question; 14.
For when a duty is any ways concerned, there is something owing to God which
no humane power can or ought to prejudice. For it is in Testaments where any
duty of any one is engaged, as it is in contracts of marriage to which every
one that can choose is capable of being naturally obliged: now the relative of
the obligation cannot in humane Courts claim either the advantage of an
Unsolemne Testament, or Unsolemne and clandestine Contract, yet the relative
who is obliged to duty cannot be so quitted: and therefore the Father can
oblige a son in duty to perform an Unsolemn Testament; and every contracted
person is bound to perform privately what the other cannot challenge publicly:
and this is not obscurely intimated by the law: L. hac consultissima C.
detestam. Ex imperfecto autem Testamento voluntatem tenere defuncti non
volumus, nisi inter solos liberos a parentibus utriusque sexus, viz. nisi
liberi in sola dividenda haereditate voluntatem habeant patris, says the Gloss.

And for the confirmation of all this, 15.
it is remarkable that they who affirm an Unsolemne Testament to be utterly
invalid, and that the law of Nature is no remedy in this case, yet affirm that
it is of force in the matter of piety; as in donations to Churches, the poor,
and pious uses, as appears in Imola, Ananus, Antonius Rubeus, Covarruvias and
others: which concession of theirs could not be reasonable or consistent with
their opinion, but that it is made so by the foregoing considerations; which
certainly are the best medium to reconcile duty and prudence, the laws Natural
and Civil, the right of a man with the Government of a Commonwealth, and to
state the question between the two parties who earnestly dispute it to contrary
purposes.

For although the question is probably disputed on both sides: 16.
yet there are no either hand instances in which the solemnity of the law does,
and does not oblige respectively: which shows that the probability is on
either hand right and true; and the thing as it lies in the middle has nothing
certain or resolved; but is true or false as it partakes of differing reasons.
Now the reason of the whole is; because the solemnity of law is wholly to be
regarded where there is not a bigger obligation; where God has not bound, and
Man has bound, Man is to be obeyed: but where God has bound directly, there
God is to be obeyed whatever be pretended by Men: but if God has only bound
indirectly and collaterally, as if it be a case favorable and pious, there the
solemnity of law which is against it, is not to prevail; but yet is to prevail
in the behalf and prosecution of it.

Thus if a Pupil makes a contract in his minority to his ruin, 17.
or signal detriment: he is to be releeved by the advantage of the civil law
which makes his contract invalid, because the person is declared incompetent;
and he may lawfully take his remedy; and is not bound by the law of Nature to
verify it: because he being less naturally capable to contract, the other is
by the law of Nature bound not to do him injury, and take unequal advantages
when every man has equal right: and therefore if he does prevaricate the
Natural law of justice which is equality, he also may lose the privilege which
the others action passed unto him; for the civil law declaring that Minors
shall not be prejudiced, makes up that justice or equality which Nature
intends. For the Minor with his less portion of Understanding, and the
defensative and retreat given him by the civil law is made equal to the
Contractor who is perfect in his Natural capacity. Equality must be done and
had. And this is one way of inferring it.

Another way is, 18.
If the Minor receives advantage by the bargain; then there is equality; for
the want of his Natural capacity is supplied by the advantageous matter, and
therefore such contracts are valid though the one of the Contractors be legally
incapable. But

3. If the bargain give some advantage on either side, 19.
the Minor must not take the advantage offered him by the civil law to himself,
unless he allow to the other his share of advantage in the bargain: for
otherwise there is inequality. But

4. Neither one nor the other is to be done, 20.
nor the Contract to be rescinded if the person was Naturally capable, that is,
unless it be apparent by the Consciousness of his own weakness, or the iniquity
and folly of the contract that he was less in Nature then the other; and
therefore in this case the civil law rescinding the Contract of the Minor does
declare that he is incapable naturally as well as civilly: and the Civil
constitution does no way interfere with the Natural, but Ministers to it;
making the natural instance even with the Natural reason: for this being
always alike, from the first to the last, the instance growing from
imperfection to perfection, must in the progression be defended and supplied
and be fitted to the other.

But in General; 21.
the Rule is true which Panormitan affirms in prosecution of what I have now
disputed; Quando jus civil aliquid disponit contra jus Naturae, standum est
juri Naturae: and in particular to this very instance of Unsolemne Testaments
P. Alexander 3. being asked whether according to the custom that was in the
Diocese of Ostia a Will could be valid which was not attested by seven or five
witnesses at least, gave in answer, cap. cum esses. de testatales leges a
Divina lege and Sanctorum Patrum institutis and a generali Ecclesiae
consuetudine esse alienas; and ideo standum esse contra illas juri Naturali,
secundum quod in ore duorum aut trium stat omne verbum. Which words of his I
only admit so far as they are agreeable to the former measures and limitation.
For that a word is true under the test of two or three witnesses is not a
prohibitive law or command of Nature; but it was urged by our B. Savior to the
Jews as a thing admitted in their law, and it is agreeable to the law of
Nature; but yet not so, but that a greater caution may be in some cases
introduced by the civil constitution, as I affirmed above *: Rule 10. (...).
viz. when the innocent and equal state of Nature to which such simplicity or
small duplicate of testimonies were sufficient, becomes changed by frauds and
artifices of evil men, or new necessities are introduced which Nature did not
foresee and therefore did not provide for, but God has provided for them by
other means, even by a power given to the Civil Magistrate.

Lastly, 22.
to make up the measures and cautions of this discourse complete, it is to be
added; that when the civil laws annull an Unsolemne Contract or Testament: it
is meant, that such are to be declared null when they come into judgment; not
that the action, or translation of any dominion, inheritance or legacy is ipso
facto void: and therefore he that is possessed of any such is not tied to make
voluntary restitution, or to reveal the nullity of the donation, but to depart
from it, when he is required by law: for he has the advantage of a Natural
right or power in the donour, and that being first must stand till it be
rescinded by a competent power; for the whole question being but probable on
either side, the possessour or the Donee has the advantage till a stronger
then he comes and takes away that in which he trusted.

RULE 6. Sins against the laws of Nature are greater or less, not by that
proportion, but by the greatness of the matter, and the evil consequent, or the
malice of the sinner.
THis rule is intended to remedy a great error that is in the World and
prevails very much to the abuse of Men's persuasions in many cases of
Conscience; 1.
viz. that all sins which are Unnatural are the worst: and to be a sin against
Nature is the highest aggravation of it in the world: which if it were true in
thesi, yet because when it comes to be reduced to practice it is wrapped up in
uncertain notices, it ought to be more warily handled. For when Men have first
laid huge loads of declamations upon all Natural rights, and Natural wrongs,
and then endeavored to draw forth a collective body of Natural laws, and they
have done it by chance or as they please, they have put it within their own
powers to make what things they list as execrable as murder or blasphemy;
without any other reason, but that they have called them Unnatural sins.

Concerning which these things are considerable:

1. All sins against Nature are no more the most detestable then all sins
against God: 2.
because if the Kind of sins, or the General reason or object of its
irregularity were all that were considerable in this, nothing could be the
aggravation of a sin more then this, that it were against God. Now because all
sins are against God, and yet amongst them there is difference, the greatness
of this appellative is not the only thing that is considerable. But this is,
that as all sins are against God, so all are against Nature, some way or other:
and the reason that concludes against every sin is that reason that is common
to all wise men; and therefore it must be also Natural: I do not mean, taught
us without the help of revelation or institution, but such as all men when they
are taught, find to be really, and in the Nature of things so constituted, to
be reasonable.

All voluntary pollutions are sins against Nature; 3.
because they are satisfactions of lust in ways otherwise then Nature
intended: but they are not all of them worse then adultery or fornication. For
although all such pollutions are besides natures provisions and order: yet some
of them are more single evils then fornication; which although it be against
Nature too, because it dishonours the body, yet it is by Name forbidden in the
Commandment, which some of the others are not, but come in by consequence and
attendance: and fornication includes the crime of two, which the other does not
always; and it is acted with more vile circumstances and follies, and loss of
time, and other foul appendages. It is said to be against Nature to approach a
woman during her Natural separations. But if it be a sin (which I shall
consider in its due place) yet it is of the smallest consequence and malignity;
so that for a sin to be against Nature, does only denote its material part, or
the body of it; but does not always superinfuse a venom and special
malignity, or greatness of crime into it, above other sins. But it is according
as the instance is. * Every sin against the duty we owe to our parents is
Unnatural: but they have their heightnings and diminutions from other accounts,
and in this they have variety. * And it is observable that there were some laws
made concerning some of these and the like instances in the judicial law of
Moses: but none in the Moral: and therefore that the irregularity in some of
these cases though it has met with a foul appellative, yet is to be estimated
by more certain proportions then such casual appellations.

2. The breach of a Commandment is a surer rule to judge of sins then the
doing against a Natural reason. 4.
For there are many things which are Unreasonable which are not Unlawful: and
some things which are in some circumstances reasonable, but yet in the law
forbidden and irregular: such are all those things which are permitted for the
hardness of our hearts. So was Polygamy to the Patriarchs, and to the Jews. So
is the breach of laws by an Universal deficiency of the people; which though it
be infinitely Unlawful, yet for the Unreasonableness in punishing all, it
becomes permitted to all. Therefore to estimate the goodness or badness of an
action by its being reasonable or unreasonable is infinitely fallacious, unless
we take in other measures. It is unreasonable that a man should marry when he
is fourscore years old, but it is not unlawful. It is unreasonable for an old
man to marry a young maiden, but I find no sin in it. Nothing is more against
Nature then to marry June and December; and it is Unnatural to make productions
by the mixture of an horse and an ass; and yet it is done without scruple. But
in these and the like cases, the Commandment and nothing else is the measure
of right and wrong.

3. When the Measure of the Commandment is observed, 5.
the degree of the sin is not to be derived from the greatness nor smalness of
its Unreasonableness in its own Nature, nor yet by its contradicting a prime or
a secondary reason.

The reason of the first is, because there are no degrees of reason in the
Nature of things. Reason is an indivisible thing, simple as the Understanding;
and it only receives increase by numbers, or by complication with matter and
relations. It is as Unreasonable to think a thought against God, as to kill a
man. It is as Unreasonable and Unnatural to speak against experience, as
against a necessary proposition: against a truth in Mathematics, as against a
truth in Scripture; and in the proper natural reason of things there can be no
difference in degrees, for a truth increases not, neither can it decrease.

* The reason of the second is, because that a reason is prime or secondary is
accidental to the case of Conscience, or to the efficacy of its persuasion. For
before contracts were made or dominions distinguished, it was a prime truth
that such things as every one seized on were his own by the priority of title.
It was a secondary truth, that every one was to be permitted to his right for
which he has contracted, and which is in his possession. Now these reasons are
prime or consequent according to the state of things to which they are fitted,
but the reason from thence receives no increment, nor the fact any alteration.

And this is also true whether the reason be known to us with or without a
teacher. 6.
For the highest truths of God are such as are communicated by revelation; and
it is all one whether God teaches us by Nature or by Grace, by discourse or by
experience. There is this only difference, that in such truths which are
taught, some men can have an excuse because all are not alike instructed in
them; but in those things which are borne with us, or are consented to as soon
as spoken, it cannot be supposed but all men (that are not fools) know them;
and therefore they can have no pretense of ignorance in such cases: So that
sins against prime or secondary truths, against truths Original or Consequent
truths born or taught do not differ in the nature of the things, but may cause
an accidental difference in the person, and may take from him the excuse of
ignorance, and so make the man more sinful, but not the action in it self and
in its own Nature worse.

RULE 7. Actions which are forbidden by the law of Nature either for defect of
power, or for the incapacity of the matter, are not only unlawful but also
void.
THIS is true in contracts, 1.
and acts of donation, in vows and dedition, and all rely upon the same
reason. He that cannot give, and he that cannot be given cannot contract or be
contracted with. Titius intends to marry Cornelia's servant, because he desires
to have children, and to live comfortably with the wife of his youth. He does
so; and in their first access he finds her whom he thought to be a woman, to be
an Eunuch; and therefore not a person capable of making such a contract: she
did ill in contracting, but she has done nothing at all besides that ill, for
the contract is void by the incapacity of the person.

Upon this account the Lawyers amongst the causes of the Nullities of marriage
reckon Error personae, 2.
the mistake of the person; though certainly this is not to be extended beyond
the mere incapacities of Nature, if we speak of Natural nullities. Thus if I
contract with Millenia whom I suppose to be a Lady, and she proves to be a
servant, or of mean extraction, though if she did deceive me she did ill in it;
yet if she could naturally verify that contract, that is, do all the offices
of a wife, the contract is not naturally void; whether it be void upon a civil
account is not here to be enquired: but by the law of Nature it is void, only
if by nature it cannot be consummate. For by a civil inconvenience or mistake
the contracts of Nature cannot be Naturally invalid; because that is after
Nature and of another consideration, and of a different matter. For that a man's
wife should be rich, or free, is no more of the necessity of the contract of
Marriage, then it is that she should be good natured, or healthful: with this
only difference, that if a man contracts upon certain conditions, the contract
is void if the conditions be not verified; and for those things which are
present and actual he can contract, but not for what is future, contingent and
potential. A man may contract with a maiden to take her for his wife if she be
free, or if she have such a portion; but not upon condition that she shall be
healthful for seven years. Because whatever condition can be stipulated for
must be actual before consummation of the Marriage: afterward it is for better
or worse: the want of any such condition is not so great an evil to the man as
it is to the woman to be left after she is dishonored. So that if it be a
thing which can be contracted for, and be actually contracted for, in the
destitution of the condition the contract is void. But if there be no such
express stipulation made, there is nothing can be made a nullity by nature, but
that which is a natural incapacity: and therefore if a Gentleman contracts with
a slave whom he thinks to be a free woman, with a bastard whom he thinks to be
legitimate, with a beggar whom he thinks to be a great Heiress, the contract is
Naturally valid; because there is in it all the Natural capacity; if she be a
woman, if she can be a wife, and can be his, there is no more required to a
verification of the contract in the law of Nature. By the way I desire to be
observed that to separate or disannull a contract is not the same thing with
declaring it to be null of it self or from the beginning. The reason why I
insert this here is lest the explication of the Rule seem infirm upon the
account of other instances: For if a man marries a woman whom he took for a
maid and she proves not to be so, by the Mosaic law she was to be separated by
death or divorce: but this is not a nullity: but a divorce may be for that
cause which was in being before the marriage as well as for the same reason
after.

The other natural cause of invalidity is when the contract is made by him who
had no power naturally to make it. 3.
This happens in case of precontracts. Spurius Fescennius woes a Greek Virgin,
and obtaining her consent contracts himself to her, and promises to marry her
within a certain limited time. But before the expiration of that time Publius
Niger dies, and leave his widow young and rich and noble; which advantages
Fescennius observing, grows in love with them and in a short time quits his
pretty Greek, and marries the rich Roman Lady. But being troubled in Conscience
about the fact inquires what he has done, and what he ought to do: and he was
answered thus, If he was married to the Greek, he must return to her if she
will receive him, and quit his new lady; because he was not a person capable to
contract with her being married to another: a dead man may as well marry as
that an Husband can marry to another, and quit that which had possessed all his
former power. For in all moral actions there must be a substantial, potestative
principle that must have a proportioned power to the effect; a thing cannot be
done without a cause and principle in morality, any more then in Nature. If a
woman goes about to consecrate the holy Sacrament, it is (...), it is an
ineffective hand, she sins for attempting it, and cannot do it afterward; and
it were wiser and truer if men would think the same thing of their giving
baptism, unless they will confess that to baptize children is a mere natural
and secular action to which Natural powers are sufficient; or that women have
received Spiritual powers to do it; and that whether a Priest, or a Woman does
it is no difference, but matter of order only. If an effect be spiritu^^, the
agent must be so too, if the effect be gracious and precarious, so must t^^
active cause; Thus it is in contracts, and donations, which cannot be done
without the power of him that does it. But he who has already given away his
power, has none to act withal: he cannot do one action twice.

But this is to be understood only after the actual cession of the power and
active principle; 4.
not after promises but after possession. Therefore if Fescennius was only
contracted or promised for the future though he sinned grievously in afterward
contracting with the other, yet it is valid. For a promise taken not away our
dominion in a thing, but obliges us to use it in a certain manner* Bartolus
appoints his Cosen Ancharanus to be his Proctor at a Synod, and promises that
he will not revoke the deputation: but afterward does; he is a breaker of
promise; but the revocation is good. So it is in Testaments, and so in
promises. For if after promise we have no right in the thing which we have
promised, then we have no power to perform it; but if we have a right, then
the after act is valid, because it has a natural potestative cause; but if the
power be past from us, as if Fescennius were married to the Greek, he had not
himself to give; for as he in the Comedy said of servants. (...)
(...).
The man has not power over his own body, but the Master has; so has the
wife over the Husband, and therefore he has nothing now to give, and if he
does, he does nothing; the man loses his honesty, but the wife does not lose
her right. But of the instance I am to speak in its own place. Here only I am
to consider the general Rule and its reason.

RULE 8. When an act is forbidden by the law of Nature for the turpitude and
undecency that it has in the matter of the Action, the act is also void when
the turpitude remains or has a perpetual cause.
HE that contracts a marriage with his Fathers wife, 1.
or any marriage, in which every illicite act is a new sin, has not only
sinned in making the contract, but the marriage is void by the law of Nature;
and the reason is, because no man can bind himself to sin; so that here also
there is a defect of power: no man can bind himself against God; and the law of
Nature whose prime rule is to do good and to eschew evil cannot verify an act
which prevaricates her greatest principle. Nature cannot give leave to sin
against Nature; it were a contradiction: L. Si stipuletur. de verb. oblig.
for then the same thing should be according to Nature and not according; and
this is expressly affirmed in the law; Quod leges prohibent, si perpetuam
causam servaturum est, cessat obligatio: ut si sororem sibi nupturam aliquis
stipuletur. He that promises to marry his sister is not bound to verify it,
and if he have done it he is bound to quit her, because every act of
conjunction with her is incestuous, and a state of sin cannot be consented to,
nor verified by Nature who is an essential enemy to it.

This is to be understood only in things forbidden by the law of Nature, 2.
the Eternal law of God, or his positive temporary law; but is not true in
things forbidden only by men: the reason of them both is, because no man has
power to contract against a Divine law: but if he have contracted against a
humane law; his contract is established by a Divine law, and is greater then
the humane; where the Divine does not intervene by some collateral interest.
The law of the Church of Rome forbids some persons to contract marriage; and
yet if they do the contract is valid; because the persons being Naturally or
by Divine law capable of contracting, they only sinned who entered against law
or leave, but they sinned then only; for the after actions being no sins,
cannot be invalidated.

And yet if the contract be made against a Divine law, 3.
it is not invalid, unless the Divine law have a perpetual influence upon the
state, or renewed actions. If a Jew did buy and sell upon the Sabbath he sinned
against a Divine law; but his contract is valid. He that contracts with a woman
of fornicatitions and lies with her for a price, has sinned in so doing, but is
bound to pay her the price of her lust: because nothing here is against the
Divine law but the fornication; but the contract being extrinsecal to the
Nature of the sin, is not made null by that sin: but that which is
intrinsecally evil, is for ever so, and therefore must be broken in pieces.

In all other cases, 4.
whatsoever is forbidden by the law of Nature is a sin if it be done, but it is
valid and effective to all purposes of that law. It is against the law of
Nature to take a great price for a trifle, but if it be contracted for it must
be paid. If a thief makes me promise to pay him 20 l. the next day; though he
sinned against a Natural law in doing me that violence, and exacting of me that
promise, yet the stipulation must stand.

The sum is this; Where ever there is power, and will, and in the permanent
effect consonancy to the prime measures of Nature, there the actions are valid,
though they entered at the wrong door.

But, He that wants power, let his will be never so strong, it effects nothing
without: it is just like the King that commanded the waves of the Sea not to
come to the foot of his chair; they came for all his will to the contrary.

He that wants will, wants also an integral part of the constitution of the
act, and does nothing.

But when he has a Natural and legal power, and an effective will, yet if the
whole state or the after-actions dwell in sin, it cannot be permitted by
Nature, but must be turned out of doors.

RULE 9. The law of Nature can be dispensed with, Vide reg. 1. n. 43, 44. etc.
by the Divine power.
I Am willing publicly to acknowledge that I was always since I understood
it, 1.
a very great enemy to all those questions of the School which inquire into the
power of God: as whether by Gods absolute power a body can be in two places:
whether God can give leave to a man to sin: and very many there are of them to
as little purpose. But yet here I am willing to speak in the like manner of
expression, because the consequent and effect of it goes not to a direct
inquiry concerning the Divine power, for it intends to remonstrate that because
Gods does actually dispense in his own law, this prime law of God, or the law
of Nature is nothing else but the express and declared will of God in matters
proportionable to right reason and the nature of Man.

But in order to the present inquiry; 2.
it is to be observed that Gods dispensation is otherwise then Man's
dispensation; 1.
1. God is the supreme Lawgiver, and has immediate power and influence over
laws, and can cancel these, and impose those, new or old as he please. By this
power it is that he can relaxe to particular persons their personal obligation
quoad hic and nunc and sic; and if he does, the law still remaining in its
force and power to other persons and in other cases, 2.
this is properly dispensation. 2. God is the supreme Lord, and can transfer
dominions and take away Kingdoms, and give them to whom he please; and when he
makes such changes, if he commands any one to be his Minister in such
translations, he does legitimate all those violences by which those changes are
to be effected: and this also is a dispensation; but improperly. 3. God also is
the supreme Judge, 3.
and can punish and exauthorate whom he please, and substitute others in their
room; and when he does so by command and express declaration of his will; then
also he dispenses in those obligations of justice, or obedience, or duty
respectively, by which the successor or substitute, or Minister was hindered
from doing that which before the command was a sin, but now is none: and this
also is another manner of dispensation. Some Doctors of the law are resolved to
call nothing Dispensation, but the first of these: and the other under another
name shall signify the same thing; but say they, He only dispenses who does
take off the obligation directly, by his legislative power without using his
judicative and potestative, he who does it as an act of direct jurisdiction,
not as a Lord, or a Judge, but as a Lawgiver: Now say they, God does never as a
Lawgiver cancel or abrogate any law of Nature: but as a Lord he transfers
rights, and as a Judge he may use what instruments he please in executing his
Sentence, and so by subtracting or changing the matter of the laws of Nature,
he changes the whole action. To these things I make this reply.

1. That this is doing the same thing under another manner of speaking, 3.
for when it is inquired whether the law of Nature is dispensable; the meaning
is, whether or no that which is forbidden by the law of Nature may in certain
cases be done without sin: but we mean not to enquire whether or no this change
of actions from unlawful to lawful be that which the Lawyers in their words of
art and as they define it call Dispensation: for in matters of Conscience, it
is pedantry to dispute concerning the forms and terms of art: which Men to
make their Nothings seem learning dress up into order and methods, like the
dressings and paintings of people that have no beauty of their own: but here
the inquiry is and ought to be more material in order to practice and cases of
Conscience. For if I may by God be permitted to do that, which by the law of
Nature I am not permitted, then I am dispensed with in the law of Nature, that
is, a leave is given to me to do what otherwise I might not.

2. That the doing of this by any of the forenamed instruments or ways is a
dispensation and so really to be called, 4.
appears in the instances of all laws. For if it be pretended that the Pope can
dispense in the matter of vows, or a Prince in the matter of marriages; which
are rate and firm by the law of nature; he cannot do it by direct jurisdiction
or by annulling the law which is greater then either King or Bishop: for when a
dispensation is given in these instances, it is not given but when there is
cause: and when there is cause the matter is changed; and though the law
remains, yet in a changed matter the obligation is taken off; and this is that
which all the world calls dispensation, and so it is in the present question;
when God changes the matter or the case is pityable, or some greater end of God
is to be served, that is, when there is cause, God dispenses, that is, takes
off the obligation. Here only is the difference,

3. In Divine dispensations God makes the cause; 5.
for his laws are so wise, so prudent, so fitted for all needs and persons and
all cases that there is no def^illance or new arising case which God did not
foresee: but because he has ends of providence, of justice, of goodness or
power to serve, he often introduces new causes of things, and then he gives
leave to men to finish his designs by instruments which without such leave
would be unlawful. But in Humane dispensations the cause is prepared before
hand, not by the Lawgiver, but by accident and unavoidable defect: for without
cause dispensations are not to be granted; but in both the dispensation is not
without the changing of the matter, that is, without altering the case. God
does not give leave to any man to break a Natural law, as long as he keeps that
Natural law in its own force and reason; and neither does a Prince or Bishop
give leave to any Subject to break any of his Laws when there is no need; for
the first would be a contradiction, and the second a plain ruin of his power,
and a contempt to his laws: Therefore in the sum of affairs it is all one;
and because actions generally forbidden by the law of Nature may by God be
commanded to be done, and then are made lawful by a temporary command, which he
made unlawful by Nature or first sanction; this is a direct dispensing with
single persons in the law of Nature. And to say it is not a dispensation,
because God does not do it by an act of simple jurisdiction, but by the
intertexture of his dominative and Judicial power, is nothing but to say that
God having made a law agreeable to reason, will not do against that reason
which himself made, till he introduces a higher, or another. For while all
things remain as was foreseen or intended in the law, both divine and humane
laws are indispensable, that is, neither God in his providence, nor Men in the
administration of justice and government do at all relaxe their law. If it be
said, a King can do it by his absolute power, though it be unjust: I confess
this God cannot do, because he can do no wrong: but if God does it, his very
doing it makes it just: and this a King cannot do. But if the question be of
matter of power, abstracting from considerations of just or unjust; there is no
pe^adventure but God can do in his own law, as much as any Prince can do in
his. When the matter is changed, the Divine law is as changable as the humane,
with this only difference, that to change the matter of a Divine Natural law,
is like the changing of the order of Nature; sometimes it is done by Miracle*
and so is the law also changed, by extraordinary dispensation; but this
although it can happen as often as God please, yet it does happen but seldom
as a Miracle; But in humane laws it can and does often happen, and therefore
they are to be dispensed with frequently: and sometimes the case can so wholly
alter, and the face of things be so entirely new, and the inconvenience so
intolerable that the whole law must pass away into desuetude and nullity; which
can never happen in the Divine Natural law; because the reason of it is as
eternal as Nature herself; and can only be interrupted by rare contingencies
of Gods procuring, as the order of Nature is by Miracle; but will revert,
because Nature will return into her own channel, and her laws into their proper
obligation.

4. But now to the matter of fact that God has dispensed not only by
subtraction or alteration of the matter, 6.
but by direct jurisdiction, that is, as he is a Judge, and a Lord, and a
Lawgiver even in all the ways in which dispensations can be made appears in
several instances.

1. That the marriage of one Man and one Woman is by the law of Nature, 7.
appears by the institution of marriage, and by Christ's revocation of it to the
first sanction. It was so from the beginning: and if any thing be a law of
Nature, that is one by the consent of all men: and yet Moses permitted
divorces, and God and Moses his servant permitted Polygamy when there was no
necessity, no change of the matter or of case, but only that men had a mind to
it. For if the conjunction of male and female was established in singulari
conjugio at the first, when there might be a greater necessity of multiplying
wives for the peopling the world, then as the world grew more populous the
necessity could less be pretended; therefore this must be an act of pure
jurisdiction: the causes of exception or dispensation grew less when the
dispensation was more frequent, and therefore it was only a direct act of
jurisdiction. Though I confess that to distinguish dominion from jurisdiction,
and the power of a Judge from that of a Lawgiver, I mean when both are supreme,
and the power of a Lord from them both, is a distinction without real
difference: for as he is our Lord he gives us laws and judges us by those laws:
and therefore nothing is Material in this inquiry, but whether the action can
pass from unlawful to lawful; though because the Lawyers and other Schools of
learning use to speak their Shibboleth, I thought it not amiss to endeavor to
be understood by them in their own way. So again, That brother and sister
should not marry is supposed to be a law of Nature: but yet God dispensed with
it in the case of Cain and his sister: and this he did as a Lord or as a
Lawgiver; he made it necessary to be so, and yet it was not necessary he should
make it so; for he could have created twenty men and twenty women as well as
one: But that which is incest in others was not so in him; but there was no
signal act of dominion or of Judicature in this, but it was the act of a free
Agent; and done because God would do so; whether this be jurisdiction or
dominion, let who can determine.

2. But in some things God did dispense by changing the matter, 8.
using that which men are pleased to call the right of Dominion. Thus God did
dispense with Abraham in the matter of the sixth Commandment; God commanded him
to kill his Son, and he obeyed, that is, resolved to do it, and willed that,
which in others would be wilful murder. Now God was Lord of Isaac's life, and
might take it away himself, and therefore it was just: but when he gave Abraham
command to do it, he did not do it but by dispensing with him, in that
Commandment: It is true that God by his dominion made the cause for the
dispensation; but yet it was a direct dispensation; and it is just as if God
should by his dominion resolve to take away the lives of the men in a whole
Nation, and should give leave to all mankind to kill all that people as fast
as they could meet them, or when they had a mind to it: And this was the case
of the sons of Israel, who had leave to kill the Canaanites and their
neighbors. God dispensed with them in the matter of the sixth and eighth
Commandments: for it is not enough to say, That God as Lord of lives, and
fortunes, had divested them of their rights, and permitted them to others: for
that is not enough, that God as Lord has taken away the lives and liberties
and possessions of any man, or community of Men: for that act of dominion is
not enough to warrant any man to execute the Divine decree; Nay though God has
decreed and declared it concerning a crime that it shall be capital, yet a man
must have more then this to make it lawful to put that man to death. He must be
a Minister of the Divine jurisdiction; he must have a power entrusted to him
from God, and a Commission to execute the Divine Sentence; and from hence it
follows undeniably, that since the delegate power is a delegate jurisdiction
and without this a man may not put a Capital offender to death; that therefore
the supreme power from whence the delegation is commissionated is also a power
of jurisdiction; and therefore if the words of their own Art are true, this
leave given to do that which without that leave were a sin against the law of
Nature, is properly and truly a Dispensation.

3. The third way of dispensing is by applying the power of a Judge to a
certain person or community, 9.
and by way of punishment to take from him what cannot be taken from him but by
a superior power, or by the Supreme; Thus we are commanded by the law of Nature
to give nourishment and to make provisions for our children; but if children
prove rebellious and unnatural; God can command us to neglect that duty, and to
expose them to the contingencies of fortune. It is by the law of Nature
commanded to us to love and honor our Parents; to be loving and kind to our
children: but if Parents enticed their children to idolatry, their children
might lay their hands upon them and stone them to death. * It is a command and
a prime rule of the law of Nature that we should do as we would be done to:
but even in this original rule and great sanction God did dispense with the
Israelites, for they might not exact upon one another by Usury: but to
strangers they might; what they hated to have done to themselves they were
willing and expressly permitted to do to others. In these and the like cases,
although an act of dominion or judgment might intervene, yet that is not enough
to warrant the irregular action; there must be an act of jurisdiction besides,
that is, if God commands it or by express declaration warrants it, then it may
be done. Thus God as a Judge and being angry with David intended to punish him
by suffering his Concubines to be humbled by his son in the face of all Israel,
but though he did it justly; yet because Absalom had no command or warrant to
do what God threatened he was criminal. But Jeroboam and Jehu had commissions
for what they did, though of it self it was otherwise violent, unjust,
rebellious and unnatural, and therefore did need the same authority to
legitimate it, by which it became unlawful. God often punishes a Prince by the
rebellion of his Subjects God is just in doing it; but he hates the
instruments, and will punish them with a fearful destruction unless they do
repent, in this case nothing can warrant the Subjects to strike, but an express
command of God.

Thus I conceive the thing it self is clear and certain; 10.
but for the extension of this, the case is yet in question, and it is much
disputed amongst them that admit this rule in any sense, how many laws of
Nature can be dispensed with: for if all, then the consequents will be
intolerable; if not all, by what are they separated since they all seem to be
established by the bands of Eternal reason. * Some say that the precepts of the
second Table are dispensable, but not the first; But that is uncertain, or
rather certainly false; for if God did please he might be worshipped by the
interposition of an image; or if he essentially should hate that as indeed in
very many periods of the world he has severely forbidden it; yet the second
Commandment and the fourth have suffered alteration and in some parts of them
are exstinguished. * Others say that the Negative precepts are indispensable;
but not the affirmative. But this is not true; not only because every Negative
is complicated with an affirmative; and every affirmative has a Negative in
the arms of it, but because all the precepts of the second Table, the first
only excepted, are Negative; and yet God can dispense with all of them as I
have already proved.

But though it be hard to tell how far this dispensation and Economy can
reach, 11.
and to what particulars it can extend, because Gods ways are unsearchable,
and his power not to be understood by us; yet since our Blessed Savior has
made up a perfect Systeme of the Natural law, and has obtained to himself an
everlasting kingdom, so that his law must last as long as the world lasts, and
by it God will govern mankind for ever; by the eternal reasonableness and
proportions of this law we can tell what is indispensable and what not: and the
measure by which alone we can guess at it is this, Every matter from whence the
ratio debiti, or cause of the obligation can be taken is dispensable. Now
because God is supreme over all his creatures, and can change all their
affairs, and can also choose the manner of his own worship, therefore in these
things he can dispense.

But in that essential duty which his creatures owe to him the case is
different; 12.
for though God can exact more or fewer instances of affirmative duty, these or
others, yet there cannot be an alteration of the main relation; and of the
intrinsic duty, and the intercourse of the soul with God in the matter of the
principal affections there can be no dispensation. It is eternally and
indispensably necessary that we love God: and it were a contradiction that
either God should command us to hate him, or that we could obey him if he did.
For obedience is love; and therefore if we obeyed God commanding us to hate
him, we should love him in hating him, and obey him by our disobedience.

Now if it be inquired to what purposes of Conscience all this inquiry can
minister; 13.
the answer to the inquiry will reduce it to practice; for the proper
corollaries of this determination of the question are these.

1. That our duty to God is supreme; 14.
it is only due to him; it cannot be lessened, and ought not upon any pretense
to be extinguished; because his will is the only measure of our obedience; and
whatsoever is in Nature, is so holy for God and for Gods service, that it ought
to bend, and decline from its own inclination to all the compliances in the
world which can please God. Our reason, our Nature, our affections, our
interest, our piety, our religion are and ought to be Gods subjects perfectly;
and that which they desire, and that which we do, has in it no good, no
worthiness but what it derives from the Divine law and will.

2. That in the Sanction of the Divine laws the reason obliges more then the
letter: 15.
For since the change of the reason is the ground of all mutation and
dispensation in laws, it is certain that the reason and the authority, that in
the thing, this in God, are the soul and the spirit of the law: and though this
must not be used so as to neglect the law when we fancy a reason, yet when the
letter and the reason are in opposition, this is to be preferred before that.
If the reason ceases it is not enough of warrant to neglect the law; unless a
contrary reason arises, and that God cannot be served by obedience in that
instance, but when the case is not only otherwise but contrary to what it was
before; let the design of God be so observed as that the letter be obeyed in
that analogy and proportion. It is a Natural law that we should not deceive our
neighbor: because his interest and right is equal to any man's else: but if God
have commanded me to kill him, and I cannot by force get him into my hand, I
may deceive him whom God has commanded me to kill; if without such a snare I
cannot obey the command of God. But this is but seldom practicable, because the
reasons in all Natural laws are so fixed and twisted with the accidents of every
man's life, that they cannot alter but by Miracle, or by an express command of
God; and therefore we must in the use of this Rule, wholly attend upon the
express voice of God.

3. It hence also will follow, 16.
that if an Angel from Heaven, or any Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, any
teacher and pretendedly illuminate person shall teach or persuade to any act
against any natural law, that is, against any thing which is so reasonable and
necessary that it is bound upon our Natures by the spirit of God and the light
of our reason, he is not to be heard: for until God changes his own
establishments, and turns the order of things into new methods and
dispositions, the natural obligations are sacred and inviolable.

4. From the former discourses it will follow, 17.
that the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament are the light of our eyes, and
the entire guide of our Consciences in all our great lines of duty; because
there our Blessed Lord has perfectly registered all the natural and essential
obligations of Men to God and to one another: and that in these things no man
can or ought to be prejudiced; in these things no man is to have a fear, but to
act with confidence and diligence: and that concerning the event of these
things no man is to have any jealousies; because since all the precepts of
Christ are perfective of our Nature, they are instruments of all that felicity
of which we can be capable, and by these we shall receive all the good we can
hope for: and that, since God has by his holy Son declared this will of his to
be lasting, and never more to be changed by any succeeding lawgiver, we must
rest here, and know that no power less then God can change any thing of this,
and that by this law we shall stand or fall in the eternal scrutiny.

RULE X. The law of Nature cannot be dispensed with by any humane power.
THe reason is, 1.
1. Because Nature and her laws have both the same Author, and are relative to
each other; and these as necessary to the support and improvement of humane
Nature, as nourishment to the support of humane bodies: and as no man can
create new appetites, or make hay or stones to be our nourishment; so neither
can he make that our Nature should be maintained in its well-being without
these laws. 2. The laws of Nature being bound upon us by the law of God, cannot
be dispensed withal, unless by a power equal or the same, or superior to that
which made the Sanction: but that cannot be at all; therefore neither can they
be dispensed with at all, unless it be by God himself. 3. Natural laws are all
the dictates of Natural reason; and he that dispenses with the law, must have
power to alter the reason: which because it can never be done but by
superinducing something upon Nature greater then her own natural need, and none
can do this but God, therefore none but he can dispense.

But because wise men have publicly said it, 2.
L. Manumissiones, and l. jus civil. ff. de justitia and jure. and in Sect.
jus autem. instit. de ju^e Nature. Gentium and civili.
Per jus Gentium and Civil aliquid detrahitur de jure Naturali, By the law of
Nations and the Civil laws something may be diminished from the law of Nature;
it is to be considered what truth they could signify by those words: for
unless by some instances of case they had seen it lawful, it is not to be
supposed it could have been by so wise persons made sacred. But the following
measures are its limit.

1. Whatsoever is forbidden by the Natural law cannot be permitted by the
Civil; 3.
because where the highest power has interposed, there the inferior and
subordinate has no authority: for all it has being from the Superior, it
cannot be supposed it can prejudice that from whence it has all its being; for
if it could be otherwise, then either the inferior must be above the supreme,
or the supreme must submit it self to what is under it.

2. Whatsoever is commanded by the law of Nature cannot be forbidden by the
Civil law; 4.
for God who is here the Lawgiver is to be heard; and he sets up no authority
against himself, nor gives any man leave to disobey him. These rely upon the
same reasons, and are described above.

3. That which the law of Nature has permitted, 5.
and no more, may be made up into a civil law, or it may be forbidden,
according to that rule in the law, Quod licitum est ex superveniente causa
mutatur, That which is only lawful by a supervening cause may be changed. For
rights are before laws in time and Nature; and are only such licenses as are
left when there are no laws. Commands and prohibitions of Nature not being the
matter of Civil laws, unless it be by way of corroboration; there can no laws
be made in a Natural matter unless there be restraints or continued permissions
of their first rights. For that which in morality we call indifferent, in
Nature we call a right: that is, something that is permitted me to do or to
use as I see cause for, is a thing upon which no restraint is made; that is,
there is no law concerning it: but therefore the Civil law may restrain it,
because the liberty and its use may do mischief, and there is no law hinders
it to be disposed by men. For if I may by my private power or interest use any
of it or deny my self the use of it, much more may the Civil power do it. I
might not do it my self, if any law of God had forbidden me; but if no law of
God has forbidden, what can hinder but that the civil power may order it? Such
are Natural liberty, community, powers of revenge, of taking any thing, of
killing any man that injures me.

4. That which is confirmed by the law of Nature, 6.
may by the civil power be altered and dispensed with: which happens in two
cases.

1. When the obligation supposes a foregoing act of the will, and is arbitrary
in one of the terms of relation. Titius owes 1000 l. to Caius; and by the
essential or Natural laws of justice is bound to pay him: but because this
supposes a private right in Caius, upon whom there is no restraint but he may
use it, or let it alone; therefore Caius being at his liberty may refuse to use
his power of demanding the money of Titius, and forgive it him; and if he do,
Titius, although bound by the Natural law to pay him, is by the private power
of Caius dispensed with. Because in obligations as in arguments, if there be
one leg that can fail, the conclusion is infirm. If one part can be loosed, the
continuity of the whole is dissolved.

2. The other case is like this, When the obligation is upon a condition, if
the condition of it self fails or be annulled by any just power or interest,
the obligation which was introduced by the law of Nature can be rescinded or
dispensed with: for Nature binds and loses according to the capacity of the
things. It passes a temporal band upon temporal reasons and necessities, and an
Eternal band upon that whose reason can never fail, and where the necessity is
indeterminable. And if a Natural law could bind longer then that reason lasts
for which it did bind, then a Natural law could be unreasonable, which is a
contradiction. But then if the law does not bind in this case beyond the
condition, then it is but improperly to be called a dispensation when it is
relaxed: but it is usual to call it so, and it is well enough; for it means
this great direction to Conscience, that though the law of God be eternal, yet
it is obligation may cease in the foregoing cases: For even Judges are said to
dispense by interpreting the law, and applying that interpretation to
particulars.

5. The civil law can extrinsecally change the Natural law. 7.
For things may be altered or cease by an intrinsic or by an extrinsick cause.
A Father ceases to be a Father when he dies, and he ceases to be a Father if
all his children die: this alteration is by an extrinsecal cause; but to all
effects and purposes it is the same as to the present case. Now although Nature
cannot die, as Species do not perish; yet Nature may change, as individuals
may die: that is, if the matter of the law be subtracted, or so changed that it
is to be governed with another portion of reason, then the law also must cease
as to that particular. For as in the body of Man there is great variety of
accidents and mutability of matter, but all that variety is governed by the
various flexures of the same reason, which remains unchanged in all the
complications and twistings about the accidents, and is the same though working
otherwise: so it is in the laws of Nature, whose reason and obligation remains
unchanged, even when it is made to comply with changing instances; but then it
cannot but be said to change, ever as Eternity it self has successive parts by
its coexistence with variety of times. Trebonianus swears to pay homage and
acknowledgment for his Villa of Ramola, and the Royalties of Panizza, to his
Landlord Calander and to his Heirs for ever: by the laws of Nature he is now
obliged; but if Calander and his heirs be dead, or the land and possessions be
alien'd, or swallowed up by an Earthquake, or drowned in the sea, the law of
Nature cannot bind him to that which is not, the matter of the obligation is
subtracted, and therefore he is disobliged.

The sum is this: 8.
When Natural and prime laws are in prime and Natural instances whose matter is
unchangeable, there the law of Nature cannot be prejudiced by any but by the
Lord of Nature: and the reason of this is no other but the necessity and
constitution of Nature. God has made it so, and it is so to be served, so to
be provided for; and the law is a portion of the eternal law, an image of the
Divine wisdom, as the soul is the image of the Divine Nature. But when the
Natural laws are in a matter that can be prejudiced, and do presuppose
contract, cession, condition, particular states, or any act of will, whose
cause is not perpetual, the law binds by the condition of the matter; and the
eternal law goes from its own matter as the immortal soul does from the body.
Thus we say that Gods gifts are without repentance, and his love never fails,
and his promises are for ever; and yet God does take away his gifts, and does
repent of his loving kindnesses, and takes away his love, and will not give
what he had promised: but it is not because he changes in himself, but the
correlative of his actions and promises are changed.

So that now upon this account the whole question and practice about the Popes
power in dispensing in the Natural law will appear to be a horrible folly
without any pretense of reason; 9.
and the thing by its chiefest Patrons seems not at all to be understood. For
since the rules of Nature are unalterable and Eternal, the laws being framed
upon those rules complicated with matter, and persons, and events, is also
eternal, excepting only where the matter is or can be changed. Now if the
matter be in prime instances, as the conjunction of Sexes, relation of Parents
and children, etc. the law is the same for ever; only this, if the matter by a
miracle or extraordinary act of God be changed, by the same power the law is to
be changed: but as we say rivers and seas run for ever, and yet Jordan was
opened, and so was the Red sea, and the perpetual course of the Sun and Moon
was once stopped, but it reverted when the extraordinary case was past; so it is
in the law of Nature, which in the prime instances and Natural matter is as
unalterable as the course of the Sun and Seas.

But 2. Sometimes the matter changes alone, or is changed to our hand, as in
conditional contracts; and in this case the law ceases, and the obligation goes
off as to that particular.

But 3. Sometimes the matter is changeable by the will of the interested
persons, and by none else but themselves, and they who have over them the power
which themselves have; such as God, and under him, the supreme humane power,
their own princes. Now to apply this to the Question of the Popes power in
giving dispensations, I consider that

1. To establish his power upon any words of Scripture, is to pretend that his
power of dispensing is an act of jurisdiction and direct authority, that is,
that he has commission to do it with or without reason or cause founded in
the thing it self, but only because he will; and he that does so, says he can
do more then (as many of the most learned Roman Doctors say) God can do: for
he dispenses in the law of Nature in no case but when he changes the matter, in
the prime or second instances of Nature respectively, which when the Pope can
do he also may pretend to a commission of being Lord of Nature: But it is
certain that for this there are no words of Scripture. But 2ly, If this power
of dispensing be such as supposes the matter already changed, that is, that
there is a just cause, which is of it self sufficient, but is not so to him who
is concerned, till it be competently declared, then all the dispute will be
reduced to this, whether he be the most probable Doctor: for to expound when a
Natural obligation ceases, is not an act of power but of wisdom; and that the
Pope is the wisest man, or the only wise man, it is also certain that there
are no words of Scripture to affirm it. But besides this in cases of this
nature, there needs no dispensation, for the law ceases of its self; as in
contracts made upon condition, when the condition is not performed. In humane
laws where the subject is bound more by the authority then the matter of laws,
the law may still be obligatory after the ceasing of the reason or matter of
the law; and so there may be need of dispensation: but we speak here of laws
bound on us by God and Nature, in which the very ceasing of the matter of it
self dispenses with the law. But 3ly, If it be yet more then this, and that in
a changeable matter, I mean in things that are not prime instances of Nature
and of lasting necessity, but in humane contracts, promises, laws and vows,
which depend upon the pleasure and choice of men, but yet are corroborated by
the law of Nature, he pretends to a power of altering the case so to make way
for dispensation; then the pretense reaches to this, that the Pope must be Lord
of actions and fortunes, and the wills of others and the contracts of men; that
is, in effect, that no contract shall be valid unless he please; and no man
shall choose for himself, or if he does he needs not stand to it; and no man can
have a right transferred to him by a contract, but it can be rescinded against
the will of the interested person: and if he can have any such power to do
thus much mischief, then justice will be the most contingent thing in the
world; and the question will not be a question of Theology, but of Empire, and
temporal regard: and therefore for this no words of Scripture can be pretended,
because no words of Scripture of the New Testament ever did transfer an Empire,
or temporal power to a spiritual person for a spiritual reason: so that this
will be a question of war, not of peace and religion. To which I add this by
way of provision; That although supreme Princes have in some cases power to
rescind contracts of their subjects and Parents of their children; yet this is
only in their own circuits, done by mutual consent, in case of public
necessity or utility, of which by reason and the laws they are made competent
Judges: which the Pope also may have in his temporal dominions as well as any
other Prince: but this is not dispensation but the annulling of contracts or
promises; it makes them not to be at all, not to cease after they have a being,
which is the Nature of dispensation, of which we now inquire. But the matter of
this question and the particular instance as it relates to the Bishop of Rome
is of another consideration.

6. The civil law can add to the law of Nature; 10.
not only new obligations by affixing temporal penalties; but by requiring new
circumstances to corroborate and consummate an action: not that the civil law
of a Prince or Republic can annull any thing which nature has confirmed, but
it can hinder it from passing into a civil and public warranty. Thus a
clandestine contract is valid by the law of Nature; and in the Court of
Conscience there are witnesses and Judges and executioners and laws and
penalties to exact the performance of it: But when the civil or Ecclesiastic
law has commanded that in all contracts of marriage there should be witnesses,
it must mean, that the contract shall not be acknowledged for legitimate unless
there be; and therefore that the contract must be solemnly published before it
be civilly firm. No civil power can so enjoyne witnesses as that if the
contract be made without witnesses it shall not be obligatory in Conscience.
For this obligation is before the civil law, and is bound by that power by
which the civil power has a being. But the civil power which cannot annull the
act of Nature and Conscience, can superinduce something upon it. It cannot make
the contractors to go back from what they have done, but to proceed to
something more, that what was firm in the inward may be confirmed in the
outward Court. By our laws the clandestine contract is civilly null before
publication; but in our religion we believe it obligatory in Conscience, and
that it must come into publication. But by the laws of Rome the whole contract
is nullified, and the persons disobliged, and the marriage after consummation
i^ dissolved. This is against the law of Nature, but the other is a provision
for it by additional security, that is, a taking care that the contracts of
Nature may not be denied. For the confirmation of a Natural contract nothing is
necessary but a Natural capacity not hindered by the Lord of Nature. Whatsoever
therefore is superinduced upon Nature cannot disannul that to which all things
competently necessary are ingredient, a condition brought in by a less power
cannot invalidate that which before that condition was valid: but as civil
powers derive their authority from Natural laws and reason, so to these they
must minister, and they may do it by addition and superfetation; but they may
not violate them by irritation.

RULE 11. That the obligation to a Natural law does cease in any particular, is
not to be presumed by every one, but is to be declared by the public voice.
THIS depends upon the foregoing discourses and is Consequent to them. 1.
For the several dispensations in the law of Nature being wrought by the
change of their subject matter, the rule can never be changed; because that is
eternal and is abstract from matter; but the law may be dispensed with, because
that is twisted with matter which is not eternal. But then, because the several
matters of laws can be changed by several powers respectively, that power which
alters the matter, and consequently dispenses with the law, must by some
evidence or other make the change apparent. If God by his power alters the
case, and dispenses in the law, he also is to declare it: because he must do
more; for he must give expressly a leave to do proportionable actions: he
having bound us to the law of Nature, leaves us so till he tells us otherwise:
and the same also is the case if the matter be changed by man: for by the law
of Nature we being bound to obey laws and perform contracts, must remain so
bound till he that holds the other end of the string lets it go or tells us it
is untied: because he has an interest in it, which must not depend upon the
reason of another; but upon that which is common to both. For although we all
agree that every rule of Nature is unalterable, and every law is to be
observed, yet in every thing where a change can be pretended, every man's reason
is equal; and therefore is not to be made use of in relation to others. For we
all agree that theft is evil; but whether this action or this detention be
theft, men's reasons oftentimes cannot agree: and since every man's reason has
the same power and the same privilege, no man's single reason can determine,
because there is no reason why yours more then mine. But therefore it is that
there must be some common reason to declare the case, and the man to be at
liberty, and the law to be loose.

This has no other variety in it, 2.
but this, that although the public voice must declare concerning those
instances that concern that matter of laws Natural which is in her keeping, as
God is to do in those in which only he has immediate power; yet every
private man can declare the obligation of a natural law to be lose when he
holds one end of the string: If by a Natural law Caius be tied to do me an act
of kindness and Justice, it is my right; and as long as I will demand it, I
hold the band of the Natural law in my hand: but if I let it go, and will quit
my right, the obligation is off, because the matter is subtracted. The reason
of all is the same. No man is a good Judge in his own case where there is the
interest of another twisted with it: and it is unequal that my reason should
govern my neighbors interest; or that his should govern mine: this would be
an equal mischief, and therefore something indifferent to both must turn the
balance that there may be equal justice and equal provision. But if a man will
quit his right there is no wrong done. He can sufficiently declare his own will
and acts of kindness, and then the law that combines with the matter, takes the
same lot.

RULE 12. The exactness of Natural laws is capable of interpretation, and may
be allayed by equity, and piety, and necessity.
WHatsoever can be dispensed withal, 1.
is either dispensed with by an absolute power of jurisdiction, or for some
cause in the nature of the thing: and if the laws of Nature can cease to oblige
without reason, but by the will and the command of the Supreme, of God himself,
much more may the same will and power do it when there is also a reason: and
if there be a reason to take off the obligation wholly in some particulars,
then much rather may there be a cause to take off some part of the exactness
upon a proportionable cause; If it may be dispensed with, it may also be
interpreted by equity; for this is less then that in the same kind. Every man
is bound to restore his neighbors goods when they are demanded; but if he
calls for his sword to kill a man withal; there is equity in this case, and I
am not guilty of the breach of the Natural law if I refuse to deliver him the
sword when he is so violent and passionate. To pay debts is a Natural law; but
if a rich man calls for a sum of money which is his due, and I by paying him to
day shall be undone, and he by staying till next week shall not be undone, I
do not break the law of Nature if I detain the money a little longer and offer
him satisfaction for the wrong, if he have received any. I promised my brother
to see him upon the Ides of March; in my journey to him I broke my leg: now
though I by the Natural law am bound to perform promises; and it is possible
that for all my broken leg, I might get to him by the time, yet there is equity
in it and piety that I forbear to go with so great an inconvenience. Surgam ad
sponsalia quia promisi, quamvis non concoxerim, sed non si febricitavero:
subest enim tacita exceptio, si potero, si debebo: said Seneca. There is an
equity and a reasonableness in all these things. Effice ut idem status sit cum
exigitur, qui fuit cum promitterem, If the case be when I am to perform as it
was when I promised, then I am bound pro rata portione; that is,

1. If it become impossible, 2.
I am wholly disobliged.

2. If it become accidentally Unlawful; 3.
I am dispensed with.

3. If it become intolerably inconvenient, 4.
I am in equity to be relieved. For in these cases it is no breach of promise,
but I am just if I desire to do it, and in the degree in which I am disabled,
in the same I am to be pitied. Destituere levitas non erit, L. 4. de bene^.
si aliquid intervenerit novi. Eadem mihi omnia praesta, and idem sum. It is
not levity when I am the same, but my powers and possibilities are changed or
lessened.

But this is to be understood and practiced with these limitations:

1. Not every change of case can excuse or lessen, 5.
or alter the obligation, but such a change as makes the person pityable, or
the thing more vexatious to the doer, then it could be of advantage to the
other.

2. If the cause does not continue, 6.
the first equity does not disannul the obligation, but defers it only, and it
returns when the cause ceases.

3. The obliged person as he is not wholly disobliged for the time, 7.
so neither for the thing it self; for if it be matter of interest, though
without violation of Natures law it may be deferred, and does not bind the man
to a guilt, yet it does to a new duty, the duty of giving satisfaction to him
who suffered injury: for since in the law of Nature all men's rights are equal,
it is unnatural and unjust that to one there should be remission and ease and
to the other a burden. For no man is to be better by the hurt and injury of
another.

4. If the cause be less, 8.
or if it be more, it ought not to be done unless an interpretative leave be
justly or reasonably presumed. In a great matter every man is presumed so
charitable as to be willing to comply with his Brothers need or sad accident.
But if it be less, then the interpretative leave must be presumed upon the
stock of friendship or experience, or something upon which wise men usually
rely. Only in this case, the presumption ought to be less confident, and more
wary.

This rule is to be understood principally in matters of justice, 9.
and relative entercourses: for in matters of religion and sobriety the case is
different: because in Natural religion and natural measures of sobriety which
are founded in prima natura in the very constitution of man's soul and body, in
the first laws of God, and the Original Economy of the body; the matter is
almost as unalterable as the Rule.

CHAP. II. Of the Law of Nature, or of all Mankind, As it is commanded,
digested, and perfected, By our Supreme Lawgiver JESUS CHRIST. viz. Of the
Christian law, the great Rule of Conscience.
RULE 1. When the law of Jesus Christ was established, the old Testament, or
the law of Moses did no longer oblige the Conscience.
THE Doctors of the Jews say that at the command of a Prophet, 1.
that is, of one that works miracles, it is lawful to break any Commandment,
that only excepted, which is concerning the worship of one God. (...). tit.
(...) Synedrio. Josh. 6. 1 Samuel 7. 17. and 13. 8.
Thus at the command of Joshua the children of Israel brake the precept of the
Sabbath at Jericho, and Samuel and Elias offered sacrifice in places otherwise
then the law appointed, 1 King. 18 38.
and the Priests in the Temple did kill beasts and labored upon the Sabbath
and yet were blameless: and Circumcisio pellit Sabbatum, was their own
Proverb, on the Sabbath they circumcised their infants; and the Prophet
Jeremie was author to the Jews in secunda domo, that is, after they were taken
captive that they should change their computation by months, and not begin
with Nisan.

For God being the supreme Lawgiver has power over his own laws; 2.
as being a Creator he has over his own creation: He that gave being can take
it away: and the law may be changed though God cannot. For God is immutable in
his attributes, but his works have variety, and can change every day; as light
and darkness succeed each other, and summer and winter, and health and
sickness, and life and death, and perfect and imperfect; and he that commanded
all men not to kill, might give a commandment to Abraham that he should kill
his son, and when he had established the law of Moses, it was in his power,
without any imputation or shadow of change to give the world a New law, and a
better.

To this purpose our Blessed Lord was endued with power from on high to give a
new law; 3.
for he was a great Prophet, and did many and mighty miracles, and advanced the
Spiritual worship of the only true God; and brought men from childish and
imperfect usages, to the Natural, Spiritual, Manly and Perfective manner of
worshipping God; and therefore it was necessary that a change should be made:
for in Moses law the rites were troublesome and imperfect, chargeable and
useless, not able to wash away sins, nor to perfect the Spirits of the Saints;
it exhibited nothing substantial, but by shadows pointed at the substance to be
revealed afterward: it was fitted to the weakness of imperfect people, and in
some very great instances was exceeded by the lives and piety of some excellent
persons, as Moses and David, who by humility, meekness, forgiveness and charity
did acts of piety beyond the precepts of the law, and many did not divorce
their wives, and yet by their law, all were permitted to do it: for it might
be said of Moses as by the lawgiver of whom Origin speaks, Adv. Cel^. 3^
who being asked if he had given to his Citizens the best laws; he answered,
(...) not absolutely the best, but the best he could, considering the
incapacity and averseness of his citizens: so did Moses; he gave a better law
then ever was before, and the best which that people and the state of things
could then bear: but it was but for a time, and the very Nature of the law
required a better to succeed it, and therefore he that came and gave a better
was not to be rejected, because he disannul'd the worse: L. 1. de non esu anim.
(...); If other lawgivers (says Porphiry) regarding that middle kind of life
which is said to be according to Nature, and to those things of which men are
capable, who esteem things good or evil by proportions of the body, have given
laws Symbolical, yet what hurt does he, that brings in better?

1. For first it is certain, 4.
God himself did permit some things in Moses law which himself had no pleasure
in: I instance in the matter of divorces, of which God by the Prophet said, I
hate putting away.

2. The promises of Moses law, 5.
in which the whole obedience was established and for which it was exacted were
wholly temporal and related to this life; and when the Prophets and holy men of
the Nation began to speak openly of resurrection from the dead, and a life to
come, it was an open proclamation of the imperfection and change of that law by
which nothing of that was promised and nothing at all spoken of by which
Mankind should by obeying God arrive to that felicity which all wise men did
suppose God did design to him.

3. Although good things for this life were promised by the law of Moses yet
toward the end and expiration of it, 6.
the Nation suffered a new dispensation of things; and the godly men were often
persecuted, and the whole Nation continually baffled, and subdued by him that
would; by the Assyrians, and Chaldaeans, by the Persians and by Antiochus, by
the Syrians and the Romans, and therefore it was necessary they should expect
some better Covenant which should be verified in the letter, and make
recompense for the calamities which their best men here did suffer.

4. 7.
The laws of Moses were such which were not of things naturally and originally
good, but which did relate to time and place and person, but it was a law
without which many ages of the world did live, and after it was established it
did only bind that people; for neither did Moses persuade his Father in law
Jethro to receive that law, neither did the Prophet Jonas persuade it to the
Ninevites, nor the Prophets ever reprove the not observing it, in the
Assyrians, or Egyptians, the Idumeans and Moabites, the Tyrians and Sidonians,
or any of their Neighbors, whose vices they oftentimes reproved severely; and
the best men of the first and second world; Abel and Enoch, Noah and
Melchisedec, Sem and Job, Abraham and Isaac, Jacob and Joseph knew nothing of
it, and yet were dear to God: But if the law had consisted of essential, prime
and Natural rectitudes, it had been always and every where; and if it consist
not of such, it is not fit to be lasting, but it self calls for a change when
all the body and Digest of laws excepting some few that were before that law
and shall be for ever, either were experiments of their obedience, or
significations of some moral duty employed in the external ritual, or
compliances with a present necessity, and to draw them far from imitation of
the vile customs of the Nations, or were types and shadows of something to
come thereafter.

5. 8.
The law of Moses was a Covenant of works, and stipulated for exact obedience,
which because no man could perform, and yet for great crimes committed under
Moses law there was there no promise of pardon, no solemnity or perfect means
of expiation, by the Nature of things and the necessity of the world, and the
goodness of God a change was to be expected.

6. 9.
That their law and Covenant should be changed was foretold by the Prophets;
Jer. 31. 31, etc. Psalm. 50. and 51. and 40.
particularly by the Prophet Jeremiah, I will make a new Covenant with you in
those days, and in your minds will I write it: and when God had often
expressed his dislike of sacrifices, in which yet the greatest part of the
legal service was established, God does also declare what that is which he
desires instead of it; Isaiah 1. Jer. 7. Micah 6.
even no other then the Christian law, that we should give to every one their
due, and walk humbly with God; that they should obey him, and give him the
sacrifice of a contrite and a broken heart: and if this be not a sufficient
indication of the will of God for the abolition of the Mosaic law, then let
this be added which was prophesied by Daniel, The Messiah shall cause the
sacrifice and the oblation to cease.

7. 10.
It was prophesied Jer. 23. Isaiah 43. Malach. 1.
that in the days of the Messiah the Gentiles also should be the people of
God; but therefore they were to be governed by a New law, for Moses law was
given to one people, had in it rites of difference and separation of themselves
from all the world, and related to solemnities which could not be performed but
in a certain place, and a definite succession and family; which things being
the wall of partition and separation because Christ has taken away or
confounded in an inseparable mixture and confusion, God has proclaimed to the
Jews that Moses law is not that instance of obedience in which he will be any
longer glorified.

From these premises the pretense of the Jews for the Eternity of Moses law
will be easily answered. 11.
For whereas they say that God called it, an Everlasting Covenant: it is
certain that even amongst the Jews, the word Everlasting did not always
signify infinitely, but to a certain definite period. For the law relating to
the land of their possession, in which God promised to them an Everlasting
inheritance; as their possession of the land is Everlasting, so is the
Covenant, and they expired together: for all the demonstrations of the Spirit
of God, all the miracles of Christ and his Apostles, all the sermons of the
Gospel, all the arguments which were taken from their own books could not
persuade them to relinquish Moses law and adhere to Christ: and therefore when
all things else did fail, God was pleased to give them a demonstration which
should not fail; he made it impossible for them to keep Moses law; for he broke
their law and their Nation in pieces. But as to the word [Everlasting] and
[Eternal] it was usual with them to signify but to the end of a life, or of a
family, and therefore much rather of a Nation. The band of marriage is Eternal,
but it dies with either of the relatives: and the Oath of Allegiance is for
ever, but that for ever is as mortal as the Prince. Exodus 21. 6.
Thus also in Moses law, The servant whose ear was boared should serve for
ever. that was but till the year of Jubilce: and Hannah carried up her son to
the Temple when he was weaned that he might abide there for ever: 1 Samuel 1. 22.
Thus the Priesthood of Phinehas was said to be for ever; 1 Samuel 2. 30.
but God who said that he and his posterity should walk before the Lord for
ever, did put a period unto it in Eli. But besides this, it is observable that
the law and Covenant of Moses according to the manner of speaking of that and
other Nations is used to distinguish it from the more temporary commands which
God gave to persons and to families, and to the Nation it self in the
wilderness, which were to expire as it were with the business of the day, but
this was to be for ever, even as long as they enjoyed a being in the land of
their Covenant: for thus we distinguish the laws of peace from the orders of
war: those are perpetual to distinguish from the temporality of these.

These Arguments are relative to the Jews and are intended to prove the
abrogation of Moses law, 12.
against them. But to Christians, I shall allege the words and reasons of the
New Testament, so far as the thing it self relates to Conscience. For not
only the Jews of old, but diverse Christian Bishops of Jerusalem, fifteen in
immediate succession, did plow with an Ox and an Ass, Iren. l. 1. c. 26.
Epiphan. haer. 18, 28, 30, 66. Hieron. ep. 89. ad Augustine. Damasc. verb.
Nazaraei. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 21. August. haeres. 8, and 9.
and were circumcised; the Converted Pharisees, the Ebionites, the Cherinthians
and the Nazaraei still did believe that Moses law did oblige the Conscience:
and amongst us there are or have been a great many Old Testament Divines whose
Doctrine and manner of talk, and arguments, and practices have too much
squinted toward Moses.

But against all such practices or pretenses I produce the decree of the
Apostles at Jerusalem in the question of Circumcision: 13.
the abrogation of which disannuls the whole law: for I Paul say unto you, if
ye be circumcised ye are debtors to keep the whole law: therefore by a parity
of reason, we are not debtors to keep the law, when that great Sacrament and
Sanction of the law is annul'd. To this purpose are those frequent discourses
of the Holy Scriptures of the new Testament: Luke 16. 16.
The law and the Prophets were until John; since that time the Kingdom of God
is preached: where the two terms of the Law and the Gospel are expressly
described; John the Baptist being the common term between them both, Romans 6. 14.
so that now we are not under the law, but under grace; we are dead to the law,
and that band being separate, we are married to a new Husband, even to Christ:
who is also our High priest, after the order of Melchisedek, not after the
order of Aaron; Romans 7. 4. Heb. 7. 12.
but then the Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a change also
of the law; Gal. 3.
for this was not to last but till Christ's coming, for the law was given but
till the seed should come: till then we were under the law as under a
Schoolmaster, but when faith came, we are no longer under this paedagogy; it
was but until the time appointed of the Father: and to this purpose S. Paul
spends a great part of the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians. For one of
the great benefits which we receive by the coming of Christ is that we are now
treated with by a covenant of faith, that is, of grace and pardon, of
repentance and sincere endeavors, the covenant of Moses being a prosecution of
the covenant of works, can no longer oblige, and therefore neither can the law;
for the law and the Covenant were the constitutive parts of that whole
intercourse, they were the whole relation, and this is that which S. John said,
The law came by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: and ever since
he was made our Lord and our King* he is our Lawgiver and we are his Subjects,
till the day of Judgment in which he shall give up the Kingdom to his Father.

But the greatest difficulty is behind: 14.
For not all Moses law is disannul'd, for some is enjoined by Christ; and some
is of Eternal obligation; and such the Decalogue seems to be: the next inquiry
therefore is, what part of Moses law is annul'd by Christ. To this I answer by
parts.

RULE 2. The Ceremonial law of Moses is wholly void.
FOR this is that hand writing of ordinances which Christ nailed to his Cross,
1.
and concerning this we have an express command recorded by the Apostle, Let no
man judge you in meat or in drink, Coloss. 2, 16.
or in respect of an Holyday, or of the New moon, or of the Sabbath days: and
concerning the difference of meats not only their own Doctors say, the precept
of Moses is not obligatory any where but in Palestine, but they have forgot the
meaning of the names of some of them, or at least dispute it, which is not
likely they would so strangely have lost, if the obligation also had not been
removed. But as to us the case is confessed: for all the arguments before
alleged proceed of this part of the Mosaic law, if of any, this being chiefly
made up of umbrages, figures, and imperfect services, relative to place and
time, to families and separate persons, such which every change of Government
could hinder, and which in the conflict and concussion with other laws did ever
give place, even in that time when they were otherwise obligatory, which could
not cleanse the conscience, nor take away sins; but were a burden made to teach
something else, like letters written upon little cubes, or given as
appellatives to slaves that the children who were waited on by them might learn
the Alphabet; but else they were a trouble to no real perfective purpose of our
Spirits.

Quest.

I Know but of one difficulty which this thing can meet with, 2.
and that is made by the scrupulous inquiries of some tender or curious persons
who suppose the difference of meats not to be so wholly taken away, but that
still under the laws of the Gospel we are bound to abstain from blood and from
things strangled; Acts 15.
pretending for this scruple, the Canon of the Apostles at Jerusalem: which
injoyns this abstinence, and reckons it amongst the (...), things necessary:
and this was for a long time used and observed strictly by the Christians:
Novel. 58.
of which we have testimony from that law of Leo the Emperor, where having
forbidden the use of blood stuffed in the Entrails of beasts, he affirms that
in the old law, and in the Gospel it was always esteemed impious to eat it.
And this was not only for the present, and for compliance with the Jews that
by the observance of some common rites the Gentile converts might unite with
the believing Jews into one common Church, but they supposed something of
Natural reason and decency to be in it; and the obligation to be eternal, as
being a part of that law which God gave to Adam, or at least to Noah after the
flood; for they who use to eat or drink blood are apt to degenerate into ferity
and cruelty and easiness of revenge; and if Origen's fancy had been true, it
had been very material; for he supposed that the Devils were fed with blood:
but however, certain it is that the Church did for diverse ages most religiously
abstain from blood; and it was the great argument by which the Primitive
Christians did confute the calumnies of the Heathens imputing to them the
drinking of humane blood: they could not be supposed to do that, who so
religiously abstained from the blood of beasts, as we find it argued in
Tertullian In Ap. c. 9
, Minutius In Octivio.
, and Eusebius Eccles. hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
, who also tells of Biblis that she rather would die then eat blood in a
pudding: and in the Canons commonly called Apostolical C. 62.
it is forbidden to a Clergy man to eat blood, under pain of deposition, to a
lay man under excommunication: which law was mentioned Vide etiam Clemen Alex.
Paedag. l. 3. c. 3. Niceph. lib. 4. c. 17. and idem vide^^ est apud Lucianum in
Pereg.
and supposed obligatory in the second Canon of the Council of Gangra; and long
after by the Canon of the Council in Trullo; by the Council of Worms under
Ludovicus Pius cap. 65. by Pope Zechary in his epistle to Boniface; and from
hence the penitential books had warrant enough to impose Canonical Penances
upon them that did taste this forbidden dish: and that they did so is known and
confessed,

But to the Question and inquiry, 3.
I answer, 1. That the abstinence from blood is not a law of Nature or of
Eternal rectitude as appears, first in that it was not at all imposed upon the
old world; but for a special reason given to the posterity of Noah to be as a
bar to the ferity and inhumane blood-thirstiness of which the old Giants were
guilty, and possibly others might afterward. For the Jews reckon but six
precepts given to Adam and his posterity after the fall. The first against
strange worship. The second of the worshipping the true God. The third of the
administration of justice. The fourth of disclosing nakedness, or a prohibition
of uncleanness. The fifth against shedding blood. The sixth against theft: and
indeed here are the heads of all Natural laws; but because the old world grew
cruel to beasts, and the Giants were degenerated into a perfect ferity, and
lived on blood; therefore it pleased God to superadde this to Noah, that they
should not eat blood; that is, that they should not eat the flesh of beasts
that were alive; that is, flesh with the blood: and it is not to be despised
that the drinking of blood is not forbidden; but the eating only: meaning that
the blood was not the main intention of the prohibition; but living flesh, that
is, flesh so long as the blood runs from it: flesh with the life thereof, Gen
9. 4.
that is, with the blood: so run the words of the Commandment; and therefore
the Doctors of the Jews expressed it by the not tearing a member of any live
creature: which precept was the mounds of cruelty, God so restraining them from
cruelty even to beasts, lest they might learn to practice it upon men. For God
sometimes places some laws for defensatives to others, and by removing men afar
off from impiety he secures their more essential duty. 2.
2. But even this very precept is by all the world taught to yield to necessity
and to charity, and cruelty to beasts is innocent when it is charity to men:
and therefore though we do not eat them, yet we cut living pigeons in halfs
and apply them to the feet of men in fevers, and we rip the bellies of sheep,
of horses, of oxen, to put into them the side of a Paralytick; and although to
rude people and ignorant, such acts of security were useful, yet to Christians
it is a disparagement to their most excellent institution, and the powers and
prevalencies of Gods spirit, to think they are not upon better accounts secured
in their essential duty. The Jews were defended from idolatry by a prohibition
even of making and having images: but he is but a weak Christian who cannot see
pictures without danger of giving them worship. 3.
3. The secret is explicated by God in the place where he made the law: it was
first a direct design to introduce mercy into the world, by taking care even of
beasts: and secondly it was an outerguard against the crime of homicide: and
Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose expound the meaning of the
whole affair to be nothing else but a prohibition of homicide: for as God would
have men be gentle to beasts Ve^s. 4.
, so if beasts did kill a man, it should be exacted of them Ve^^. 5.
: neither the man's dominion over the beast could warrant his cruelty over them,
nor the want of reason in beasts bring immunity if they killed a man, and the
consequent and purpose of both these is expressed, verse. 6. whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed; and all this put together is a
demonstration how dear lives are to God; even the life of beasts is in one
sense sacred: for even then when they were given to Man for food, yet the life
was not; they must first be dead before they might be eaten: but therefore the
life of Man was sacred in all senses, and should be required of man and beast.
But that God does even take care for Oxen, in the matter of life, appears in
this prohibition, flesh with the life thereof ye shall not eat; that is, you
shall not devour the flesh even while it is alive; for the blood is the life
thereof; that is, when the blood is gone you may eat, till then it is presumed
to be alive. Now there can be no other meaning of the reason: for if blood were
here directly prohibited to be taken and drunk or eaten, this reason could not
have concluded it, [ because it is the life, therefore you may not eat it]
being no better an argument then this; you may not eat the heart of a beast,
for it is the life thereof; but the other meaning is proper, ye shall not eat
flesh with the blood which is the life thereof, that is, so long as the blood
runs, so long ye must not eat; for so long it is alive: and a beast may be
killed but not devoured alive. So that the prohibition of blood is not direct
in the precept, Vide 8. Aug. lib. 2. c 6. con^^^ adve^iari^^ legis and (...).
but accidental, blood is forbidden as it is the sign of life and the vehiculum
of the Spirits, the instruments of life; and so long as it runs so long the
life abides ordinarily; and therefore Zonaras in his notes upon the Council of
Gangra expounds the word (...) or blood supposed in that Canon as unlawful to
be eaten or drunk, by (...), blood diligently or fast running or following the
wound, and thick; that is, as I suppose, blood digested, to distinguish it from
serum sanguinis or the warry blood that is seen in beasts after they have bled,
that they might not have scruple in minutes and little superstitions: (...),
without active blood, so Balsamo: and it is not impertinent to the main inquiry
that it be observed that the Jews use [life] instead of blood, and so does the
Vulgar Latin, that we might the easier understand the meaning to be of life, or
living blood. But then this is nothing to eating the blood when the beast is
certainly dead: and therefore it is observable that they who did make a scruple
of eating blood did not all of them make a scruple of eating things strangled
in which the blood remained: and therefore in some copies of the Apostolical
decree mentioned Acts 15. the word (...) or strangled is left out; and S.
Austin observes that in his time in Africa the Christians did not severely
abstain from things strangled. For if the case were the same between blood
running and blood settled and dead, then the reason of the Commandment were
nothing or not intelligible; and besides it would breed eternal scruples: since
in the very killing of beasts there will some blood remain, and in the neck
pieces and some veins every body has observed some blood remaining even after
the effusion by the knife. 4.
4. This could not be a law of Nature, because not mentioned by Christ in all
his law, which I have already proved to be a perfect Digest of the Natural law:
only that sense of it which I have now given, is involved in a law of Nature,
and consequently enjoined by Christ, viz. under the precepts of mercy,
according to that saying of the wise man, a good man will be merciful to his
beast: and the Athenians put a boy to death because he took delight to prick
out the eyes of birds and so let them fly for his pastime, as supposing that
he who exercised his cruelty upon birds being a boy, 5.
would in time destroy men too. 5. Upon the account of this interpretation we
are to distinguish the material part from the formal; the blood as it is such a
substance from the blood as it is alive: just as the (...) are to be
differenced: for to eat the meat when it is sold in the shambles is a thing
indifferent, 1 Cor. 1^. 25.
said S. Paul, though it was offered to idols; but this very meat might not be
eaten in the Temples, nor any where under that formality, as S. Paul there
discourses: and therefore what the Apostles in their letter to the Churches
call (...), S. James in the decision of the question calls (...) pollutions of
idols that is, all communications in their idolatrous portions and services,
and so it is for blood, abstain from life blood, or blood that runs while the
beast is dying, that is, devour not the flesh while the beast is alive, be not
cruel and unmerciful to your beast: but if blood be taken in its own
materiality when the beast is dead, it may be eaten as other things, without
scruple: they being both in the same sense as in the same obligation (...).
Pho^yl.
There is a letter and a spirit in both of them. 6.
6. One thing only I shall add to make this appear to have been relative,
temporal and ceremonial; and that is, that when God was pleased to continue the
command to the sons of Israel in Moses law, he changed the reason, only
reciting the old reason for which it was imposed to the posterity of Noah, and
superadding a new one as relating to themselves: Levit. 17. 11.
For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the
altar to make an atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that makes an
atonement for the Soul. So that to the blood there was superadded a new
sacredness and religion, it was typical of the great sacrifice upon the Cross,
the blood of which was an holy thing, and it was also instrumental to their
sacrifices and solennities of their present religion: and therefore this ritual
is to cease after that the great sacrifice is offered and the great effusion of
blood is past. But as they had a new reason, so also had they a new injunction,
and they were interdicted the eating of any thing strangled; which they taking
to be a pursuance of the precept given to Noah, were the more zealous of it;
and lest their zeal might be offended, the first Christians in their societies
thought fit to abstain from it. But this ever had a less obligation then the
former, and neither of them had in their letter any Natural obligation: but the
latter was introduced wholly upon the Levitical account: and therefore did
cease with it. 7. 7.
After this so plain and certain commentary upon this precept I shall the less
need to make use of those other true observations made by other learned
persons: as that this Canon was made for a temporary compliance of the Gentile
Proselytes with the Jewish converts, that this was not a command to abstain
from blood, or strangled, but a declaration only that they were not obliged to
circumcision; but they already having observed the other things, it was
declared they need go no further: that whereas these things were said to be
necessary (...), the meaning of the word is not absolute but relative; for it
is (...), to have a thing under some necessary condition, and so it happened to
them to whom the Apostles wrote; for they were Gentile Proselytes before they
were Christians, and so were tied to observe the seven precepts of Noah, before
the Jews would converse with them, and therefore that this did not conce^ne
the Gentiles after they were an entire Church: for although it did while the
separation lasted, and that there were two Bishops in some great Churches as in
Rome and Ephesus: yet when the Church was of Gentiles only, or conversed not
with Jews, this could not relate to them. That blood should be forbidden in
the formality of meat is infinitely against the Analogy of the Gospel: The
decretory and dogmatical words of Christ being, that nothing which enters into
the mouth desiles a man: Math. 15. 1 Cor. 10. 25.
and the words of S. Paul are permissive and preceptive, Whatsoever is sold in
the shambles, eat, asking no question for Conscience sake. For meat commends
us not to God; for neither if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat no
are we the worse: Romans 14. 17.
and the Kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink, but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. The result is this, that
blood as it is a meat cannot be supposed here to be directly forbidden as
Naturally unlawlful, or essentially evil, or of a proper turpitude: but if the
Apostles had forbidden the very eating of blood as meat, it must be supposed to
be a temporary and relative command which might expire by the ceasing of the
reason, and did expire by desuetude; but since it was not so, but a permitting
the Gentile Proselytes and encouraging them for present reasons to abstain from
running or life blood in the sense above explicated, according to the sense of
the Jewish Doctors and their Disciples, it no way can oblige Christians to
abstain from blood when it is dead, and altered, and not relative to that evil
which was intended to be forbidden by God to Noah, and was afterward continued
to the Jews. I end this with the words of Tertullian, ^e jejuniis.
Claves macelli tibi tradidit, permittens esui omnia ad constituendam
idolothytorum exceptionem. God has given to us the keys of the shambles,
only he has forbidden the pollution of idols: in all other things you have
your liberty of eating.

I am only now to give an account of the reasons of the Ancient Churches, 4.
why so pertinaciously and so long they refused to eat boiled blood, or any
thing of that Nature, But for that it is the less wonder when we consider that
they found it enjoined by all the Churches where the Jews were mingled, and
the necessity lasted in some places till the Apostles were dead, and the
Churches were persecuted: and then men use to be zealous in little things, and
curious observers of letters; and when the succeeding ages had found the
precedents of Martyrs zealous in that instance, it is no wonder if they thought
the Article sufficiently recommended to them. 2. But if we list to observe that
the Pythagorean Philosophers were then very busy and interested in the
persuasions of Men and Sects, and Pythagoras and Plato and Socrates had great
Names amongst the leading Christians, it is no wonder if in the percolation
something of the relish should remain, especially having a warrant so plausible
to persuade, and so easy to mistake as this decretal of the Apostles, and the
example of the Ancients living in that time which the Heathens called the
Golden age, Nam vetus illa aetas non polluit ora cruore. Metam. l. 15.
Single life, and abstinence from certain meats, and refusing of blood, and
severity of Discipline, and days of abstinence were sometimes persuaded,
sometimes promoted, sometimes urged, sometimes made more necessary, by the
Montanists, the Essens, the Manichees, the Novatians, the Encratites, the
Pythagoreans, and the very Heathen themselves, when because they would pretend
severity it became fit that the Christians should not be or seem inferior to
them in selfdenial, Discipline and austerities. But I shall make no more
conjectures in this matter, since if the Church at that time did enjoin it, the
Canon was to be obeyed, and it may be in some places it was practiced upon that
stock; upon any other just ground, it could not, as I have already proved.
Only this; it cannot be denied but in the Western Church where this decree
and the consequent Custom was quickly worn out, though it lasted longer even
to this day in the Greek Church, and Balsamo inveighs against the Latins for
their carelessness in this Article; yet there were some intervals in which by
chance this decree did prevail; but it was when the Bishops of Rome were so
ignorant that they could not distinguish the Old Testament from the New, but in
some particulars did Judaize. I instance in Pope Zechary before mentioned; who
in his decretal to Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz is very curious to warn
him to forbid all Christians with whom he had to do, they should abstain from
some certain sorts of birds, as jack-dawes, crows and storks; but especially
that Christians should eat no hares, nor bevers, nor wild-horses: and the
Council of Worms determined something to the like purpose, not much wiser; but
what was decreed then was long before reproved by S. Austin, affirming that if
any Christian made a scruple of eating strangled birds in whom the blood
remained, Lib. 32. c. 13. cont. Faustum Manich.
he was derided by the rest: and that this thing which was useful in the
infancy of the Church should be obtruded upon her in her strength, is as if we
should persuade strong men to live upon milk because their tender Mothers gave
it them as the best nourishment of their infancy.

This thing being cleared I know no other difficulty concerning the choice of
meats in particular, 5.
or the retention of the Ceremonial law in general, or in any of its instances,
but what will more properly be handled under other titles.

RULE 3. The Judicial law of Moses is annul'd, or abrogated, and retains no
obliging power either in whole or in part over any Christian Prince,
Commonwealth, or Person.
EIther the Judicial was wholly civil, 1.
or it was part of the Religion. If it was wholly secular and civil, it goes
away with that Commonwealth to whom it was given; if it was part of the
religion it goes away with the Temple, with the lawgivers authority by cession
to the greater, with the priesthood, with the Covenant of works, with the
revelation and reign of the Messiah: and though the instances of this law
proceeding from the wisest Lawgiver are good guides to Princes and
Commonwealths where the same reasons are applicable in like circumstances of
things and in equal capacities of the Subjects, yet it is wholly without
obligation. In the Judicial law theft was not punished with death, but with the
restitution of fourfold; and unless the necessities of a Republic shall
enforce it, it were consonant to the design of Christian religion, the interest
of Souls, their value, and pity, that a life should not be set in balance over
against a sheep or a cup. In the Judicial law of Moses Adultery was punished
with death; but it will not be prudent for a Common wealth to write after this
Copy unless they have as great reason and the same necessity, and the same
effect be likely to be consequent; it was highly fitting there, where it was so
necessary to preserve the Genealogies, and where every family had honors and
inheritances and expectations of its own, and one whole tribe expected in each
house the revelation of the Messiah, and where the crime of Adultery was
infinitely more inexcusable by the permission of divorces and Polygamy then it
can with us. But with us and so in every Nation, many considerations ought to
be ingredient into the constitution of a capital Law: but they have their
liberty, and are only tied up with the rules and analogies of the Christian
law: only the judicial law of Moses is not to be pretended as an example and
rule to us because it came from a Divine principle; unless every thing else fit
it by which the proportions were made in that Commonwealth; for although God
made Aprons for Adam and Eve, it would not be a comely fashion for the Gallants
of our age and Countries. But concerning this who desires to see long and full
discourses, I refer him to Guilielmus Zepperus de legibus Mosaicis, and the
Preface of Calvin the Lawyer to his Themis Hebraeo-Romana.

But the thing in general is confessed, 2.
and the arguments now alleged make it certain: but then why it should not be
so in every particular when it is confessed to be so in the General, I do not
understand; since there are no exceptions or reservations of any particular in
the New law; the law of Christianity. But in two great instances this Article
has difficulty; the one is 1. The approach of a man to his wife during her
usual term of separation. 2. The other is concerning the degrees of kindred
hindering marriage; both which being taken express care of in the Judicial law,
and yet nothing at all said of them in the laws of Christ, are yet supposed to
be as obligatory to Christians now, as to the Jews of old. Of these I shall
now give because they are of great use in the Rule of Conscience, and with much
unquietness and noise talked of, and Consciences afflicted with prejudices and
authority, with great names and little reasons.

Quest.

WHether the Judicial law of mutual abstinence in the days of Women's
separation obliges Christian pairs? 3.


The Judicial law declared it to be twice poenal. 4.
Once it only inferred a legal Uncleanness for seven days. Levit. 15. 24. But
in the 20. Levit. 18. It is made Capital to them both; they shall be both cut
off from the people.

From hence, 5.
Aquinas, Alexander of Ales, Bonaventure, and Scotus affirm it to be a mortal
sin for a husband then to approach to her: Paludanus and Cajetan deny it; and
amongst the Casuists it is with great difference affirmd or denied but with
very trifling pretenses, as if they were to give laws, and not to inform
Consciences upon just grounds of reason or religion.

They who suppose it to be unlawful affirm this law to be ceremonial, 6.
judicial and Moral. It is ceremonial because it inferred a legal impurity; or
separation for seven days. It is judicial by its appendant sentence of death,
and a Capital infliction. It is moral, because it is against charity as being
hurtful to the child in case any be begotten by such approaches. The whole
ceremoniality of it is confessedly gone; but the punishment of it in the
Judicial law being capital they urge it as an argument that it is moral. So
that the whole weight lies upon this. That which was by the law of God punished
with death, was more then a mere ceremony, and must contain in it some Natural
obliquity and turpitude. And in this case we need not to go far in our inquiry
after it; for it is because of the great uncharitableness, as being a cause of
monstrous productions, or leprosies and filthy diseases in the children: and as
the former of these two signifies its morality; so this does formally
constitute it: and this is confirmed by the words annexed to the prohibition:
For the nations committed all these things, therefore I abhorred them: Levit.
20. ^3.
amongst which, this in the question being enumerated, it will follow more then
probably, that since this thing was imputed to the Heathens who were not under
Moses law, it must be imputed because it was a violation of the law of Nature.

To these things I answer; 7.
1. That the punishment of all such approaches under Moses law with death, was
no argument of any Natural turpitude and obliquity in the approach. For then
circumcision would be necessary by a Natural law, because every soul that was
not circumcised was also to be cut off from his people. But if for this reason
it were only to be concluded unlawful, then since this reason is taken away,
and it is by no law of God punishable, nor yet by any law of man, it follows
that now it cannot be called a Mortal or a Great sin, to which no mortal
punishment is annexed nor indeed any at all.

2. But neither was it just thus in the law of Moses. 8.
For by the law of Moses it was nothing but a legal impurity, a separation from
the Temple and public sacrifices and some sorts of commerce for seven days;
and thus much was also imposed upon the woman though she was locked up and
conversed with no man even for her Natural accident: and if by the gravity or
levity of a punishment we may make conjectures of the greatness of a sin (of
which I shall in the third book give accounts) then it would follow that every
such approach was nothing but a breach of a legal rite or ceremony, since it
was punished only with a legal separation, which also was equally upon every
innocent woman in that period. * Yea, but besides this it was made Capital. I
answer, that could not be, if the case were the same; for two punishments are
not in laws inflicted upon the same offense, directly and primarily: and
therefore Radulphus Flaviacensis supposes here to be a direct contradiction in
the letter of these two laws; Cap. 6. explan. in Levit.
and that they are to be reconciled by spiritual significations in which only
they are obligatory to us under the Gospel; but I do not very well understand
what he would have, nor any ground of his conjecture, but am content it is not
material, since he confesses that the very letter obliged the Israelites, which
how it is possible, and yet be contradictory, I shall never understand. * Hugo
Cardinalis says that the first of these punishments was on him who did it
ignorantly; but it was Capital only to him who did it knowingly and
voluntarily. But this is not probable; for then it would be in effect so that
the man might only contract a legal impurity; and the woman be sure to die for
it: Enimvero dura lege hic agunt mulieres: for although the man could often say
truly, and might always pretend that he did it ignorantly, yet the woman could
not: for it is not likely that she should with much probability at any time say
she did it ignorantly, and since it cannot be but by a rare contingency, it is
not likely to be the subject matter of a regular law, and provided for by a
daily and perpetual provision; especially, since that case is already provided
for in other periods, as being sufficiently included under them that by chance
touch a woman so polluted: and therefore this does not reconcile the
difficulty: but since it must be confessed that on the woman (at least
ordinarily) both these laws must have effect, and yet the woman cannot easily
and ordinarily be supposed to be ignorant in such a case so as to need a law
(for laws use not to be made for rare contingencies) it follows that this
distinction is not sufficient to reconcile the difficulty. But Lyra and
Abulensis have a better, saying that the legal impurity was the punishment
only when the fact was private: but it was Capital when it was brought before
the Judge: and truly for this there was great reason. For since the woman also
was to die, it is not to be supposed that she would accuse her Husband and
condemn her self, and such things use not to be done publicly; it is therefore
to be supposed that who ever did do this so as to be delated for it and
convicted must do it (...) with the hand of pride, in contempt and despite of
Moses law; for which as S. Paul witnesses, a man was to die without mercy. *
But now from hence I infer, that since the contempt and open despite of the
law only was Capital, it was not any natural turpitude that deserved that
calamity; it was nothing but a legal uncleanness, which every child had that
did but touch her finger.

But then for the next argument with which the greatest noise is made, 9.
and every little Philosopher can with the strength of it put laws upon others
and restraints upon men's freed Consciences; I answer first upon supposition
that it were true and real, yet it does not prove the unlawfulness of such
addresses. For if the man and woman have a right to each other respectively,
there is no injury done by using their own right. L. Nemo. de regul. juris.
Nemo damnum facit, nisi qui id facit quod facere jus non habet, says the law.
But that is not the presc^t care, for the married pair use but their own rights
which God has indulged. And therefore Paulus the Lawyer from the sentence of
Labeo has defined, L. 2. de aqua pluvia arcenda.
that no man can be hindered from diverting the water running through his own
grounds, and spending it there, though it be apparent that his Neighbor
receives detriment to whom that water would have descended. I know this may be
altered by laws Customs and Covenants, but there is no essential injustice in
it, if loss comes to another by my using my own right. To which I only add
this one thing, because I am not determining a Title of law in open court, but
writing Rules of Conscience: that though every such interception of water, or
other using of our right to our Neighbors wrong be not properly injustice, yet
unless he have just cause to use it, it is unlawful to do so, because it is
Uncharitable; because then he does it with a purpose to do his Neighbor
injury. And so it is in this case; If any man or woman in such approaches
intend hurt to the child, as hoping the child might not live, or if either of
them designed that the child should by such means become hated, or neglected in
provisions, and another preferred, then I doubt not but to pronounce all such
mixtures impious and abominable: and to this sense those words of S. Austin in
this article are to be expounded: Qu. 64. super Levit.
Per talem legem in Levitico positam non Naturam damnari, sed concipiendae
prolis noxiam prohiberi. The thing it self is not Naturally impure; but it is
forbidden that hurt should be intended or procured to the child: for although
in the instance of Paulus, above reckoned the injury is certain, and the person
definite and known to whom it is done, and in the present question both the
event at the worst is but uncertain, and the person to be injured not yet in
being, and therefore the case is much more favorable here then there, yet when
this case does happen, there can be no excuse for it, because it is the act of
an evil mind, and an uncharitable Spirit.

2. Upon supposition that this allegation were true, 10.
yet it follows not that all such approaches were unlawful: as appears in the
case of a leprous wife with whom that it is lawful to have congress is so
certain that it is told as an heroic story of Dominicus Catalusius a Prince of
Lesbos that he did usually converse with his wife that was a leper, as still
knowing it to be his own flesh, which no man hates: but if with a Leper (whose
issue is as certain to be leprous, as in the other case to be any way diseased)
it be lawful, the effect notwithstanding; then the argument ought not to infer
a prohibition, or conclude it to be unlawful. The same also is the case of both
men and women in all haereditary diseases, and in any diseases which are
resident in any principal part with any of which if either of them be infected,
it is (if this reason be good) equally unlawful for them to beget children, or
to use the remedy which God has given them against uncleanness.

If it be answered that there is difference in the case, 11.
because the present question being of short, frequent and periodical
separations, the married persons may expect Natures leisure who will in a short
time return them to their usual liberties: but if they have a leprosy, that
goes not off, but abides: and therefore either a child must be gotten with that
danger, or not at all; and since it is better for a child to be born a leper,
or subject to leprosy then not to be at all; in this case there is indeed
charity in some sense, but no uncharitableness in any to the child; and there
is a necessity also on the parents part. The same also is the case of a
consumption, or any haereditary disease: but in the monthly separations there
is no such need; because the abstinence is but short, and though a child be not
then begotten, he loses not his being, as in the other cases.

To this I reply; 12.
that the difference of case pretended is not sufficient, 1. because, a
consumption or a leprosy are no such incurable diseases but that for the
preventing of Uncharitableness, and sad effects upon the child, they may expect
Natures time; and if it be said, that there is, or may be danger of fornication
in so long abstinence; I answer, so there may be in the shorter, and is
certainly to some persons; and if the danger be an excuse and can legitimate
the congression even where there is hazard to have a diseased child begotten,
in one case, then so it is in the other. For where there is the same cause in
the same suscipient, there also will be the same effect: so that at least thus
much will be gotten; that if there be a need, in the time of a short
separation, then it is lawful; and if it can upon this account be innocent, it
is certain that it is not naturally criminal. 2. Suppose even this affection or
accident abides on the wife, as on the woman in the Gospel who after twelve
years sufferance was cured by the touch of our Saviors garment; then there is
the same necessity as in an abiding leprosy, consumption, or hereditary
disease, and yet in the Mosaic law those permanent emanations were to be
observed by abstinence as much as the Natural and transient; by which it is
certainly proclaimed to be wholly a legal rite; because if this can abide, and
during its abode an approach be not permitted, although the Jews were releeved
by divorces and Polygamie, and concubinate, and so might suffer the law; ye^
Christians who are bound to an individual bed, will find a necessity, which if
it were not provided for by a Natural permission, the case of some men would be
intolerable and oftentimes sin be unavoidable, and that which by accident may
be lawful and necessary, certainly is not essentially evil: for if it could,
then he who is the Author of such necessity, would also necessarily infer
that evil, and so be Author of that too, which is impossible to be true of God,
the fountain of Eternal goodness. But I add also this consideration; that even
in the Mosaic law such congressions were permitted after childbirth. For the
legal impurity lasted but seven days upon the birth of a Man-child [ according
to the days of the separation for her infirmity shall she be Unclean] that is,
for seven days she shall have the same law upon her as in her usual period, but
no longer: for that which is added [ Levit. 12. 4.] that she shall then
continue in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days; it is not for
abstinence from her husband, but from entering into the Tabernacle, and from
touching holy things: so that the uncleanness being determined five weeks
before her purification was complete, must be in order to contact or to nothing.

But although upon supposition the allegation were true, 13.
yet the reason of it concludes not, yea the argument is infinitely the worse,
since the supposition is false, and the Allegation is not true. For besides
that the popular haeresies of Physic and Philosophy are now rarely confuted
and reproved by the wise Physicians of these later ages, who have improved
their faculty as much as any of the Schools of learning have done theirs, and
the old sayings of Philosophers in this matter are found to be weak, and at the
best but uncertain; the great experience of the world is an infinite reproof to
them who say that by such congressions leprous or monstrous children are
produced: for the world would have been long since very full of them if such
evil effects were naturally consequent to those meetings. ^^. 44. Isai.
S. Hierome was the first who brought this pretension into the Christian
Schools; (so far as I can learn;) afterward the Schoolmen got it by the end,
and the affirmative has passed ever since almost without examination. ^^anc^^
Vict. de Sacram. de read. de^ con.
But the Schoolmen generally affirm (being taught to speak so by Aquinas) that
it is partly ceremonial, partly moral, and that in this only it is obligatory,
ex damno quod sequitur ex prole; which because it has no ground to support it
must fall into the common lot of fancies and errors when their weakness is
discovered. For although those Physicians which say that this natural emanation
is a (...) or cleansing, do believe that with the principles of generation
there may in such times be something minus salubre intermingled; yet besides
that these are opposed by all them who say it is nothing but a (...) or
evacuation; both the one and the other are found to be imperfect, by the new
observations and experiments made by a learned Man who finds that neither one
or other can be the material part of Natures secret fabric. But however,
whether he says true or no, since things are so infinitely uncertain, and man
is made secretly and fashioned in secreto terrae, these uncertain disputes are
but a weak foundation of a pretense for a moral duty.

To the last objection: 14.
That God abhorred the Nation for [all these things] and amongst them this is
reckoned; and therefore there was in this some Natural impurity, for by no
other law were they bound, and they could not be found to be transgressors
against any other: I answer; that [ all these things] are to be taken Concrete
and Confuse, all indiscriminately in an heap, not all by singular distribution;
as appears (besides this in question) by the instance of marriage in certain
degrees; which the servants of God did use, and yet God delighted in them; Le^,
20. ^^
for Abraham married his Fathers daughter, and yet this was reckoned amongst
their Catalogues of crimes, and so also in the case of the Brothers wife, which
is there reckoned, yet we know it was permitted and enjoined in the case of
heiresses being childless widows: but when this thing was by God inserted into
the Digest of their laws and made Capital, it happened to be mingled with other
prohibitions which were of things against the laws of Nature. But to this
objection I shall speak again in the question of Cousin Germans number. 36. and 37.
of this Rule.

The arguments now appearing to be invalid, 15.
I answer to the question 1. That this abstinence was a Mosaic law, partly
ceremonial, partly judicial, but in no degree Moral. 2. That the abrogation of
Moses law does infer the nullifying of this, and has broken the band in
pieces. 3. That the band which tied this law upon the Jews was fear of death
and fear of a legal impurity: which fears being banished, and no new one
introduced by our Lawgiver, we are not under restraint: and if we will be
careful to observe all that is commanded us in Christ's law, it will be work
enough, though we bind not on men's shoulders unnecssary burdens. 4. It is a
part of the spirit of bondage to be subject to ordinances; but God will now be
served by a more spiritual Religion, and to abstain as in the present instance
and to think it is a part of Gods service, is superstition; it is to worship
him with an instance that he has not chosen, or commended: and therefore it is
remarkable that when S. Paul gave order to married paires, 1 Cor. ^^
(...), Defraud not one another; he only gives this exception, except it be by
consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer; and
come together again, that Satan tempt you not, (...), for your want of power
and command over your desires and necessities. Abstinence in order to special
religion is allowed and commended, and that by consent, and that but for a
sudden occasion, and that so short, that it may not become an occasion of
Satan's temptations: whatsoever is over and besides this may be upon the account
of Moses, but not of Christ and Christianity. 5. I speak this only to take off
a snare from men's Consciences, laid for the unwary by unskilful Masters of
Assemblies so that all I say of it, is, that it may be done lawfully. 6. But
that which does only recommend it, is, where there is necessity that it be
done. 7. It is sufficient though the necessity be not absolute, if it be only
ordinary and probable: for if this were not so, instead of allaying storms and
appeasing Scruples and breaking Snares, they would be increased and multiplied:
for it will be a hard thing in most cases of that Nature to say that the
necessity is absolute. 8. But since there is in such congressions a Natural
abhorrency amongst most persons, and a Natural impurity; if that which invites
to it, be not at lest a probable necessity, it must be a great undecency and
violence of a wanton Spirit. 9. It must always be without scandal and
reproach. For even among the Jews it was only a legal impurity if done without
scandal, but if with contumacy and owning of it, it came to outface the modesty
and authority of the law, then it became deadly: and so it may now if that
which is not of good report, be done and offered to the report of all them
which can condemn the folly and impurity, but cannot judge of the necessity or
the cause; and the fact by becoming scandalous is criminal, as much as when it
is done without a probable necessity, and only upon lustful consideration.

Some in their answers to this inquiry, 16.
make a distinction of the persons; affirming it in this case to be unlawful to
ask, but lawful to pay a duty if it be demanded. But if it be Naturally
unlawful it is then inexcusable in both: For neither must the one tempt to an
unlawful act, nor the other consent to it: and there can be no obligation to
pay that debt which no man can lawfully demand. Neither of them has a right
against Gods law; and therefore the case is equal in them both. He or she that
complies does actually promote the sin, as well as the other that invites and
therefore in Moses law they were equally criminal and punished with death. *
But if it be not Naturally unlawful (as it appears it is not) then it may as
well be demanded, as yielded to; when there is a probable necessity; but
concerning that, the passive party is to believe the other; for if it be known
to be otherwise, he or she that consents, does consent to an act which is made
unlawful by evil circumstances.

Of the prohibition of marriage in certain degrees.

But the next inquiry concerning an instance in the Judicial law is yet of
greater concernment; 17.
For all those degrees, in which Moses law has forbidden marriages, are
supposed by very many now adays that they are still to be observed with the
same distance and sacredness, affirming because it was a law of God with the
appendage of severe penalties to the transgressors it does still oblige us
Christians. This question was strangely tossed up and down upon the occasion of
Henry the eighth's divorce from Queen Katherine the relict of his brother
Prince Arthur; and according as the interest of Princes uses to do, it very
much employed and divided the pens of learned men; who upon that occasion gave
too great testimony with how great weaknesses men that have a Biasse do
determine questions, and with how great a force a King that is rich and
powerful can make his own determinations. For though Christendom was then much
divided, yet before then there was almost a general consent upon this
proposition, that the Levitical degrees do not by any law of God b^nd
Christians to their observation. I know but of one Schoolman that dissents; I
mean Paludanus; or if there be any more I am sure they are but very few, Vel
duo vel nemo. -- but the other opinion Defendit numerus, junctaeque Umbone
Phalanges. But abstracting from all interests, and relative considerations, I
shall give as full accounts of this as I can, because the questions of degrees
and the matters and cases of incest are not so perfectly stated as the
greatness of the matter and the necessities of the world require; and besides
this, it is at this day a great question amongst all men, Whether Brothers and
Sisters children, or Cosen Germans may lawfully marry? which question supposes
that not only the Levitical degrees are still thought obligatory, but even all
those other degrees which by a parity of reason can be reduced to those
measures. I shall therefore give an account of the sentence of all laws in this
great question, which can be supposed to oblige us.

Of Parents and Children.

Concerning this, 18.
I suppose it to be evident that Nature has been as free in her liberties, as
in her gifts, open-handed enough to all; save only that she has forbidden
Parents and children, Higher and lower in the direct line for ever to marry.
Just as Rivers cannot return to their fountains, nor Evenings back again to
their own mornings from whence they set out, nor yesterday be recalled and
begin again to morrow. The Course and order of Nature is against it; and for a
child to marry the parent is for to day to marry yesterday, a going back in
Nature. -- illum, illum sacris adhibete nefastis
-- qui semet in ortus Papin. stat. Thebaid. 4.

Vertit, and indignae regerit sua pignora Matri.


To which may be added this other sufficient Natural reason. 19.
That if a Son marries his Mother, she who is in Authority greater by right of
geniture, becomes minor in Matrimonio less upon the same material account upon
which she became greater; and the duty and reverence of a Mother cannot be paid
to her by him who is her Husband: which I find well intimated by Phaedra to
Hippolitus, Matris superbum est Nomen, and potens nimis. It is a contradiction
of rights that the same person should be the superior Mother, and the inferior
wife: whith has also some proportion between a Father and a Daughter, as being
undecent that she from him should claim the rights of a wife, to whom she owes
the duty of a Father.

Besides these, 20.
there is a Natural abhorrency of such mixtures: Contra pudorem esse said
Paulus the Lawyer; it is against Natural modesty: which was rarely verified in
the trial which the Emperor Claudius made (wittily and judiciously, like that
of Solomon upon the two harlots) upon a wicked woman who called him (who indeed
was her son) a stranger, a beggar, the son of another woman, and
supposititious, that so she might defeat him of his Fathers inheritance. The
Emperor espying her Malice, and suspecting her machination found out this
trial: If he be not your son, yet because he is young and handsome, rich and
possessed of the inheritance, the title of which you would snatch from him, you
shall marry him, and so possess him and the inheritance too. She though
desperately base, refused that offer, and though she was unnaturally malicious,
yet would not be unnaturally incestuours; and chose to suffer the shame of
discovery rather then the horrors of such a mixture.

But all this was not sufficient to make it to become a Natural law, 21.
without the authority of God intervening. This made it to be excellenty
reasonable to be established into a law, and therefore God did so, and declared
it, and did not trust man's reason alone with the conduct of it: but then it
became an Eternal law when God made it so: and that was at the very first
bringing of a wife to Adam. Genesis 2. 24.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and his Mother, (said God by his
servant Moses declaring to us what God then made to be a law) and shall cleave
unto his wife, and they shall be one flesh. This could not on both sides
concern Adam, who had no Natural Father and Mother, and therefore was a law
given to all that should be born from him; when they took a wife or husband
respectively, they must forsake Father and Mother, for between them and their
children there could be no such intercourse intervening: and so the Jews
particularly Rabbi Selomoh expounds the place, and it was necessary this should
then be declared, for as yet the marriage of Brother and Sister was not
forbidden says the Gemara Sanhedrin; and in obedience to this because Adam had
no other, he laid aside the love of Earth and Rain, of which he was produced,
said Isaac Abravanel: and by this, they usually reconcile the seeming
difference between these words and the fifth commandment. A man shall leave
his Father and Mother: and yet, he must honor his Father and Mother: he must
never leave to honor them; but when he intends to marry, he must forsake all
thoughts of contracting with either of them. Now the Mother and the wise being
the opposite terms in the progression, he must leave one, and adhere or be
united to the other, it must needs be that dereliction or forsaking, or going
from the Mother, not relating to Honor but to the Marriage, means that the
child must abstain and depart from all thoughts of such conjunction. A mother
is not less to be loved, less to be honored after marriage then before; and
therefore in no sense relating to this is she to be forsaken, therefore it must
be in the other: Matthew. 19. 5.
and this, our Blessed Savior recorded also in his law, where whatsoever is
not sufficiently found, cannot pretend to be a law of Nature; as I have already
proved.

And now this being established and recorded as a law of Nature in that way
only that is competent, 22.
the disagreeing sentences of some men, and the contrary practices of Nations
is no argument against it. Indeed I said in the first Chapter, that the consent
of Nations is not sufficient to establish a Natural law; for God only makes
the sanction, but when he has made it and declared it, the disagreeing
practices of great portions of the world cannot annul the establishment. It is
not sufficient to prove it to be a Natural law because wise people consent to
it; but if God have made it so, it is a Natural law though half the world
dissents: and therefore we are not in this affair to be moved at all, if wise
men should in any age affirm the marriages of Sons and Mothers to be lawful. *
So Diogenes and Chrysippus affirmed upon a ridiculous conceit that Cocks and
Hens did not abhor it. Hist. animal. l. 9. c. 46. Plin. Not. hist. ^. 42. Varro
de re rustic^, 2. 7.
Against which impertinent argument, although it were sufficient to oppose the
Narrative which Aristotle makes of a Camel, and the Scythian horse who brake
his own neck out of detestation of his own act to which he was cousen'd by his
keeper; for Ferae quoque ipsae Veneris evitant nefas
Generisque leges inscius servat pudor.
yet it is better to set down this reasonable proposition; That a thing is
against the law of Nature when (being forbidden by God) it is unnatural to Men,
though it were not against the Nature of Beasts. But as the authority of these
Men is inconsiderable and their argument trifling, so also the disagreeing
practice of some Nations in this particular is wholly to be despised. -- Gentes
tamen esse feruntur, 10 M^an^.

In quibus and nato Genetrix, and nata Parenti
Jungitur --
The Assyrians, the Medes and Persians, especially the most honored Persons
amongst them, their Kings and their Magi did use it frequently, Nam Magus ex
matre and Gnato nascatur oportet.

But the Original and cause of this horrible and unnatural custom we can so
reduce to its first principle that there can remain no suspicion but that they
did prevaricate the law of Nature. 23.
For when Nimrod had married his Mother Semiramis, and presently introduced the
Worship of Fire, making that to be the Assyrians and Persians God, he was
gratified by the Devil. For (as Saidus Batricides the Patriarch of Alexandria
reports) the Devil out of the fire spoke to his first Priest that none should
officiate in his rites, unless he would first lie with his Mother, his Sister,
and his daughter. And Sham the Priest (for that was the name of the Beast) did
so, and so together with his Prince became an Authentic president to all
generations of degenerous brutes: and was imitated by all that Empire. (...)
(...). Eur. in Andro.

(...).
But what Xenophon said of the Persians is also true of all the Nations
together, who were debauched by their laws and accursed customs; Non eo minus
jus esse quia a Persis contemnebatur. It is still the law of Nature though
prevaricated by the Persians and their subjects and friends. For when any thing
appears to be so (...), Michael Ephe. in Arist. (...). Ad Nicomach.
to most and to the uncorrupted Nations and to them who live according to
Natural reason it is a great presumption it is indeed a Natural law; and is so
finally if a command of God has intervened in that instance: for by the Divine
appointment it is made a law, and by the matter, order and use of it, it is
Natural. But for the rest to whom these things seemed otherwise then God and
Nature did decree: they were abused by none but they their own lusts; they were
as a punishment of their vilest sins given over (...), to unnatural, to
dishonorable, and unreasonable desire, -- Cui fas implere Parentem
Quid rear esse nefas?
But this was the product of their idolatry and some other basenesses: of the
first S. Paul is witness, Romans 1. 21. etc.
that as a consequent of their forsaking the true God they were given over to
Unnatural lusts: and Lucan observes the latter of the Parthians, -- epulis
vesana meroque
Regia, non ullos exceptos legibus horret
Concubitus --
Now what is the effect of superinduced crimes and follies is most contrary to
Nature, Vide Tiraq. l. 7. connub. n. 22.
and it were unnatural to suspect that she had not made sufficient provisions
in this prime case, upon pretense, because some unnatural persons have spoiled
and defaced or neglected her laws. One thing by the by I shall insert. I find
Socrates noted by some that he said there is in the marriage of of Parents and
children nothing to be reproved but the disparity of age. But this is a
mistake; for though he brought that incompetent reason against it, yet for
other causes he abhorred it: accounting it to be a law established by God and
Nature (...), Xenoph. l. 3. (...).
etc. That Parents and children should abhor such marriages. For God and all
the world, Heaven and earth do so: insomuch that a Roman Philosopher was in
his dream warned not to bury the corpse of a Persian who had married his Mother.
(...),
(...).
The Earth who is the common Mother of all, Agath. hist. 2.
will not receive into her womb him that defiled the Womb of his Mother: and
the story says, that the ground spued out the corpse of such a one that had been
buried: And Virgil affirms that in hell there are torments prepared for him
Qui thalamum invasit Natae, Lib. 6.
vetitosque Hymenaeos. who pollutes his Daughters bed, and defiles himself with
such forbidden Entertainments.

Of Brothers and Sisters.

2. But though Nature forbids this, 24.
yet the other relations are forbidden upon other accounts. Nothing else is
against the prime laws of Nature, but a conjunction in the right ascending and
descending line. The marriage of Brothers and Sisters was at first necessary;
and so the world was peopled: all the world are sons and daughters descending
from the first marriages of Brother and Sister. But concerning this that I may
speak clearly, let it be observed that although the world does generally
condemn all such and the like Marriages under the title of Incestuous, yet that
is not properly expressed, and leaves us to seek for the just grounds of
reproof to many sorts of unlawful marriages, and some others are condemned by
too great a censure. The word Incest is not a Scripture word, but wholly
Heathen; and signfied amongst them all unchaste and forbidden marriages, such
which were not hallowed by law and honor; an inauspicious conjunction sine
cesto Veneris, in which their Goddess of Love was not President; marriages made
without her girdle, and so Ungirt, Unblessed. This word being taken into the
civil law got a signification to be appropriate to it; for there were three
degrees of unlawful marriages. Damnatae, Incestae, and Nefariae. Damnatae
nuptiae are such which the law forbids upon Political considerations; such as
are between the Tutour or Guardian and the Orphan or Pupil, between a Servant
and his Mistress, between a Freed-man and his Patroness, and such was in the
law of Moses between the High priest and a Widow; and in Christianity between a
Priest and a Harlot, and between any man and her whom he defiled by Adultery
while her first husband was alive, all Marriages with Virgins professed and
vowed. There is in these so much unreasonableness of being permitted, that by
the law they stood condemned, and had legal punishments and notes of infamy
proportionable. * Incestae nuptiae are defined in the law to be coitio
consanguineorum vel affinium; C. lex illa.. incest. 36. q. 1. L. si adult. cum
incest. in prin. D. de adult.
the conjunction of Kindred or Allies, meaning, in those instances which are by
law forbidden: and these are forbidden upon differing considerations from the
former, viz. for their neerness of blood and relation which the laws would have
disseminated more or less: for their approach to unnatural marriages, for
outward guards to the laws of Nature, for public honesty, and compliance with
the customs of their Neighbors, of the same interest or the same religion, or
for necessary intercourse. But because unskilful persons or unwary have called
Unnatural mixtures by the name of incestuous, as incestuous Lot, and the
incestuous Corinthian, therefore whatever any law calls incest, they think they
have reason to condemn equally to those abominable con^unctions. But neither
ought incest to be condemned with a hatred equal to what is due to these; Text.
in authen^ ic. de incest. nupt. (...) p^inc. co^^at. 1.
neither ought these to be called incest: for in true speaking these are not
Incestae nuptiae, but Nefariae, and Naturae contrariae, wicked or abominable,
and contrary to Nature: for although the law sometimes calls those mixtures
which are between Kindred by the title of Nefariae, C. cum secund. leges (...).
or Impious, yet it is to be understood only of that Kindred which is by the
law of God and Nature forbidden to marry: so the Gloss in authentic. de
incest. nupt. affirms, so Archidiaconus, Johannes Andrens, Covarruvias and the
best Lawyers: and the word is derived from the usage of it in the best Authors:
Ferae quoque ipsae veneris evitant Nefas; the conjunction of Parents and
children is nefas veneris, and the marriages nefarious. Now of this deep
tincture none are, excepting marriages in the right ascending and descending
line. The marriages of Brothers and Sisters is incestuous, and the worst degree
of it: and so forbidden by the laws of all civil Nations; but therefore they
are unlawful only because forbidden by positive laws; but because the
prohibition is not at all in the laws of Christ, therefore it cannot be
accounted against the prime law of Nature, of which that is a perfect Systeme.
Not that it can in any case of present concernment or possibility become
lawful, or for any reason be dispensed withal by any power of man; for it is
next to an unnatural mixture, it has in it something of confusion, and
blending the very first partings of Nature, it is of infinite vile report,
intolerably scandalous, and universally forbidden. But though this be enough,
yet this is all:

Michael of Ephesus * says that at the first these marriages were indifferent,
25.
but made unlawful by a superinduced prohibition. In 5. ad N^^.
And indeed if they had been unnatural, they could not have been necessary. For
it is not imaginable that God who could with the same facility have created a
thousand men and as many women, as one, would have built up mankind by that
which is contrary to Humane Nature: and therefore we find that among the wisest
Nations some whom they esteemed their bravest men did this. Cimon the son of
Miltiades married his, Sister Elpinice, non magis amore quam patrio more
ductus, said Aemilius Probus, not only led by love but by his Countries
custom. So Archetolis the son of the brave Themistocles married his sister
Mnasiptolema. Plut. in The^,
Alexander the son of Pyrrhus King of Epirus married his sister Olympias,
Mithridates married his sister Laodice, Artemisia was sister and wife to
Mausolus King of Caria, so was Sophrosyna to Dionysius of Syracuse, Eurydice to
Ptolemaeus Philopater, Cleopatra to Ptolemaeus Physcon, Arsinoe to Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus whom when Sotades had reproved upon that account saying, (...), he
imprisoned him. But I need not bring particular instances of Egyptians: for
Diodorus Siculus affirms that they all esteemed it lawful, Vide Lucian. l. de
sacrificiis,
and Dion Prusaeensis says that all the Barbarians did so.

But all the Greeks did so too, 26.
having learnt it from their first Princes, whom after ages had turned into
Gods, -- Dii nempe suas habuere sorores
Ut Saturnus Opim junctam sibi sanguine, Vide Alex. (...) Alexan. l. 1. c, 24.
Geni^l. dierum.
junxit
Oceanus Tethyn, Junonem Rector Olympi.
Though I suppose that this is but a fabulous narrative in imitation of the
story of Cain and Abel, as appears by their tale of Jupiter and Prometheus;
which is well noted by the observator upon the Mythologies of Natalis Comes
under the title of Jupiter. But that which moves me more then all this is the
answer which Thamar gave to her Brother Amnon: Now therefore speak unto the
King, for surely he will not withhold me from thee, and yet she was his Fathers
daughter, his sister by the Paternal line: and Abraham told the King of Gerar
concerning Sarah his wife; and yet indeed she is my Sister, she is the daughter
of my Father but not the daughter of my Mother, that is, the daughter of Terah
as was generally supposed, of which I shall yet give further accounts. * Now it
is not to be supposed that either Abraham before or David after the law would
have done or permitted any thing against the law of Nature: and if it was
against a positive law, as it happened in the case of Amon and David, the
marriage might be v^lid though forbidden and the persons be excused upon some
other account, which is not proper here to be considered.

But I again renew what I said before, 27.
this d^scourse is not intended so much as secretly to imply that it can now at
all be or be made lawful, or is at any hand to be endured. For the marriage of
Brother and sister is against a secondary law of Nature; that is, it stands
next to the Natural prohibition and is against a Natural reason, though not
against a prime Natural law. Every reason indeed is not a sufficient indication
of a law, nor a Natural reason of a Natural law; but when the reason is
essential to Nature or consigned by God, then it is: and as a reason approaches
nearer to this, so the action is more or less Natural or Unnatural: and this is
the case of Brother and Sister. For the reverence which is due to Parents has
its place here also propter recentem admodum parentum in liberis imaginem; and
therefore it is with greater reason forbidden: and if it were not, the whole
world might be filled with early adulteries. For the Dearnesses of Brother and
Sister, their cohabitation, their likeness of Nature and manners, if they were
not made holy and separate by a law would easily change into Marital loves, but
their age and choice would be prevented by their too early caresses: and then
since many Brothers might have the same kindness to one Sister, or might have
but one amongst them all, the mischief would be horrible and infinite. Dulcia
fraterno sub nomine furta tegemus: Metam. l. 9.

Est mihi libertas tecum secreta loquendi:
Et damus amplexus, and jungimus oscula coram,
Quantum est quod desit?


For these and other accounts, 28.
which God best knew, he was pleased to forbid the Marriage of Brothers and
Sisters: This law the Jews say, God gave to Adam under the title De non
revelanda turpitudine; but yet so, that it was not to be of force till Mankind
were multiplied: but then it took place as men did please. But this they say
upon what ground they please; for it is highly improbable that the law of
Nature should be allowed years of probation, or that it should be a prime law
of Nature, which the Nature of things and the constitution of the world did
make necessary to be broken. But because God did afterward make it into a law
and there is now very great reason that it should be a law, and the reason is
Natural, and will be perpetual, and all Christian Nations, and all that have
any formed religion have agreed to prohibit such marriages; He that shall do
so unreasonably, and as things now stand, so unnaturally and so foolishly as
either to do it, or teach it, must be of no religion, and of no people, and of
no reason, and of no modesty.

Of Mothers in law, and their Husbands Children.

That the marriage of these is not against the law of Nature S. Austin does
expressly affirm in his questions upon Leviticus; 29.
saying that there is forbidden the discovering his Fathers nakedness; Quest.
^^.
but this is not to be understood of the Father while he is alive, for that is
forbidden in the prohibition of Adultery; Sed ibi prohibetur Matrimonium
contrahi cum illis quas seclusa lege licet Uxores ducere; marriage is there
forbidden to be made with them with whom otherwise it were lawful to contract:
But for this there can be no no reasonable and fair pretense. For a Mother in
law and a Mother are all one in the estimation of all the laws of the world,
and therefore were alike in the prohibition: and the contrary was never done
but by them who had no pretense for it, but quod libet licet; whatsoever a man
has a mind to do that he may do: for this was the argument which Phaedra
courts Hippolytus withal. Nec quia privigno videar coitura noverca
Terruerint animos nomina vana tuos.
Ista vetus pietas aevomoritura futuro
Rustica Saturno regna tenente fuit.
Jupiter esse pium statuit quodcunque juvaret;
Et fas omne facit fratre marita soror.
The impiety of their Gods seemed to be their warrant, and their pleasure was
all theit reason, their appetite was their argument. But this we find
sufficiently condemned by S. Paul, it is a fornication which is not so much as
named amongst the Gentiles, that one should have his Fathers wife. Cajetan
supposes that this Corinthian did lie with her while his Father was alive;
because the Apostle calls her not the widow, but the wife of his Father. I am
of his opinion, but not for that reason; because that expression he uses not so
much to describe the person as to aggravate the crime: but that it was in his
Fathers life time I am induced to believe by the word (...), fornication, which
though it be often used for adultery, yet I find it not used for nuptiae
nefariae, or that which is usually called incest. But however, that which S.
Paul notes here and so highly abominates is not the adultery, but the impiety
of it; not that it was a wife, but his Fathers wife; and therefore although
even so it were a high crime and of a deep tincture, yet the unnaturalness and
the scandal of it S. Paul here condemns: It was the same that Antiochus did to
Stratonice the wife of his father Seleucus, and that which Reuben did to the
Concubine of his Father Jacob; a thing so hateful to all Nature that the very
naming of it is a condemnation; and therefore is all one with the prime Natural
law of prohibition of the conjunction of Parents and Children: for she that is
one flesh with my Father, is as near to me as my Father, and that's as near as
my own Mother; as near I mean in estimation of the law, though not in the
accounts of Nature, and therefore though it be a crime of a less turpitude, yet
it is equally forbidden and is against the law of Nature, not directly, but by
interpretation.

Of Uncles and Nieces.

Now if the nearest of kin in the collateral line were not forbidden by a law
of Nature, 30.
much less are they primely unlawful that are further off. The Ascending and
Descending line cannot marry, but are forbidden by God in the law of Nature: So
Mothers in law and their Husbands children: And Brothers and Sisters are by the
laws of all the world, and for very great reason forbidden, but not by the law
of Nature. But for all other degrees of Kindred it is unlawful for them to marry
interchangeably when and where they are forbidden by a positive law, but not
else; and therefore the marriages of Uncles and Nieces, or Aunts and Nephews
become unlawful as the laws of our superiors supervening make it so, but was
not so from the beginning, and is not so by any law of Christ.

In the Civil law of the Romans it was lawful for the Uncle to marry the
Brothers daughter, 31.
and this continued by the space of 250 years from the days of Claudius to the
reign of Constantine or thereabouts: and though this began among the Romans
upon the occasion of Claudius his marrying Agrippina, yet himself affirms (as
Tacitus makes him to speak) Nova nobis in Fratrum filias conjugia, Lib. 12.
Annal.
sed aliis Gentibus solennia, nec lege ulla prohibita. Indeed it is new to us
but to other Nations usual and lawful: and the newness of it scared Domitian so
that he refused it; and not many did practice it; only I find that a poor
obscure Libertine T. Alledius Severus did it, as Suetonius observes: but it was
made lawful by the Civil law, and allowed in the rules of Ulpian; and when
Nerva had repealed the law, Heraclius reduced it again and gave the same
permissions.

But that which moves me more is that it was the practice of the Jews, 32.
the family of Abraham, and the Council of the wise men to do so, as Ben
Maimon the famous Jew reports. In monitis sapientum habetur ut in uxorem ducat
quis ante alias, neptem ex sorore, seu ex fratre neptem, juxta id quod dicitur,
a carne tua ne te abscondas: And Josephus does suppose that when Abraham said
of Sarah, she is my Sister the daughter of my Father, the truth it, she was his
Fathers Grandchild, that is, the Daughter of Abraham's brother: for unless it
had been a known thing in that Nation that Abraham's family would not have
married their German Sisters, it could have been no security to Abraham to
pretend her to be so: for she might be his wife and his sister too, unless such
marriages had been unlawful and rejected. But then when Abraham was reproved
for his lie, he helped the matter out with a device; she was his Fathers
daughter, that is, by the usual idiome of that family, the child of his Father
descending by his brother: L. (...) de civit. D^i. c. 16. L. 5. de sinib. Genesis
13. 8.
and this was S. Austin's opinion, Nam qui maxim propinqui erant solebant
fratres and sorores appellari, and Cicero calls his Cosen Lucius, Brother; so
Lot is called Abraham's Brother, though he was but the son of his Brother Haran,
just as near as his wife Sarah was to him, whom for the like reason he called
Sister. But of this I shall yet give a farther account. But whether Josephus
said true or no, Abraham said true, that's certain; either she was his half
Sister or his Brothers daughter; either of which is forbidden in Leviticus; and
this sufficiently declares that they have their unlawfulness from a positive
law, not from any law of Nature.

If it were needful to instance in any other great examples of such marriages,
33.
it were very easy to do it. Amram the Father of Moses married his Aunt as
some suppose, Diomedes and Iphidamas among the Greeks married their Mothers
Sisters, and Alcinous took to wife Arete his Brothers daughter. Andromede was
promised to her Uncle Phineus. One of the Herod's married his Brothers daughter,
and yet was not (so fas as we find) reproved for it; and he gave his own
daughter to his Brother Pherotas; and some suppose this to be the case of
Othniel in the days, and under the conduct of Joshuah. (...) 15. 17.
For the words in the story are these, [And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the
Brother of Caleb took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife: but of
this I shall give a particular account: for this being against the law of Moses
by which they were bound, was not to be supposed easily to have been done by so
piouspersons: but all that I contend for, is, that it was not unlawful before
the law of Moses: against these marriages there was no opus scriptum in
cordibus, no law of Nature, but they became unlawful upon another account, and
therefore it was unlawful to them only to whom that account was to be reckoned.

Of the marriage of Cosen Germans.

From the premises it will abundantly follow, 34.
that no person ought to be affrighted with the pretenses of any fierce and
misperswaded person that the marriage of Cosen Germans is against the law of
Nature: and in this case a man need least of all to fear; for the law of Nature
is a known and evident thing, it is notorious and felt, and if any man shall
need to be told what is against Natural reason which is the matter out of which
all Natural laws are framed, he may as well have need to be reminded when he is
hungry or thirsty. For although some persons have got a trick to scare their
Proselytes from a practice to which they have no mind, by telling them it is
against the law of Nature, when they can prove it upon no other account to be
unlawful, so making the law of Nature to be a sanctuary of ignorance and an
artifice to serve their end, just as the pretense of occult qualities is in
natural Philosophy; yet concerning the law of Nature, it being imprinted in our
hearts, explicated by Christianity, relying upon plain, prime, Natural reason,
a man may as much need to be told when himself does a thing against his own
will, as when he does against his own reason and his own Nature. Only it is
certain that when education and our Country Customs have from the beginning
possessed our understandings and our practices, so that we never saw any other
usage of things or heard talk of any other, it looks as if it came from Nature
and were something of her establishment: So S. Paul to the Corinthians, does
not even Nature her self teach that it is a shame for a man to wear long hair?
That is, even in Nature there is the signification of some difference in that
matter, which custom has established into a law: but in such cases as these,
a wise man can easily distinguish words from things, and appearances from firm
establishments. But that the law of Nature has nothing to do in the marriage
of Cosen Germans, save only that she has left them to their liberty, appears
from all the premises, which in this instance as being farther removed must
needs conclude stronger then in their own.

But then in the next place if the inquiry be made what it is in the judicial
law of Moses, 35.
which is the main of our present inquiry; supposing the judicial law of Moses
could in any of its instances oblige Christians, yet Cosen Germans were still
free to marry: for I do not so much as find it pretended by any one to be
there forbidden, except S. Ambrose, who disputing fiercely against Paternus for
marrying his son to his Granchild by another venture, that is, S. Amb. ep. 66.
ad Paternum.
so as the young Gentleman was Uncle to his wife, in anger against that, says
that by the law of God (meaning in Leviticus) Cosen Germans are forbidden to
marry, much more (says he) Uncle and Niece: Qui enim leviora astringit,
graviora non solvit sed alligat. He that binds to the less, does not untie the
greater. But the event of this, is, only that S. Ambrose is by all learned men
condemned for an (...) a slip in his memory: and men ought to be wary lest
great names abuse them by opinion and mistaken zeal.

But the law is this, Levit. 18. 6.

None of you shall approach to any that is near akin to him, to uncover their
Nakedness, I am the Lord.

Here the Questions use to be,

1. What is meant by [None of you?]

2. What is intended by [Neer of Kin to you?]

None of you] Vir vir non accedet: 36.
(...) in the Lxx. A man, a man shall not approach; so it is in the Hebrew:
that is, say the Rabbis, the Jew and the Gentile shall not. I shall not
contend for it, or against it. I suppose it may well be admitted that
potentially all mankind was included, that is, all who were borne to Israel, or
adopted by being Proselytes were bound to this law, Jews and Gentiles too when
they became Jews in religion, but that it included others that conversed not
with the Nation, that were strangers to their laws, is as if we should say the
Parthians were to be judged by the Gallick laws, or the Persians guided by the
Greeks. But the purpose of them who would introduce this sense, is, that it
might be intimated that these degrees here mentioned were forbidden by the law
of Nature, and consequently obliging all Christendom: the contrary whereof
because it appears from the premises, I shall only add, that no Nation of old
did observe all these laws, and that there was never any sufficient argument to
enforce upon us their obligation, and because it must needs remain to us as it
was before the law, if they were not obliged then neither are we. But this I
suppose they might be, and some of them were obliged by special laws before the
collection and publication of the body of Moses law. For as the law of Christ
is a collection and perfect explication of the law of Nature and essential
reason: So Moses law was a collection of all the wise and prudent laws by which
God governed those Nations and those ages which were before Moses. Thus the law
of the Sabbath was one great member of this collective body of the Mosaic law;
but it was given before the solemnities of Mount Sinai. The law that the
Brother should raise up seed unto his Brother who dyed without issue, was also
given to that family before the publication of it by Moses as appears in the
story of Judah and Thamars quarrel about Onan and the rest. And thus also I
suppose that all or most of these laws of marriage were given to the nations of
the East and South, descending upon them by the tradition of their
forefathers; from God derived to Adam in part, and in part to Noah, and
something of it to other Patriarchs and eminent persons, and at last by the
commandment of God united into a Digest by Moses.

And upon this account it is that God said that the Canaanites had polluted
themselves in all these things, 37.
and therefore the land did spue them out, which although it cannot infer that
these laws did Naturally oblige, as I have already discoursed Supra n. 14.
yet that they were by some means or other bound upon them is probably enough,
though in this matter there be no certainty. But in this there is; For that all
mankind was not bound by all these laws of consanguinity and affinity appears
in all the foregoing instances: and the marriages of the Patriarchs must
conclude them to be as impious as the Canaanites in theirs, or else that these
laws did not oblige all Mankind: and if not from the beginning, then not now:
if these laws were not natural, they are not Christian, which also will further
appear in the sequel.

2. But there will be more consideration upon the second Quaere; what is meant
by [Neer of Kin to you?]

Our English is not sufficiently ex pressive of the full sense of it. 38.
The Latin is something nearer to the Hebrew, Vir vir non accedet ad
propinquitatem carnis suae; to the neerness of his flesh, (...), or as other
books (...), ad domesticam carnis suae, to her that is so near of Kin, that
they usually dwell in the same house, that is, Parents and Children Brothers
and Sisters, or our Parents Brothers and Sisters. In these cases there being
ever the same account of consanguinity and affinity; this rule takes in all
that is there forbidden. But it is highly observable that there is great
difference between Propinqui and Cognati. God never forbad to marry our Kindred,
but he forbad to marry the neerness of our flesh. Which Phrase when we rightly
understand this whole question will be quickly at an end.

For [Neer of Kin] is an indefinite word and may signify as uncertainly as
[great] and [little] do: 39.
nothing of it self determinately, but what you will comparatively to others:
and it may be extended to all generations of mankind where any records are
kept, as among the Jews they were: from Judah to Joseph the espoused of the B.
Virgin, from Benjamin to Michol, from Levi to Heli: and thus it is in great
proportion amongst the Spaniards and Welsh, and in all Nations in their greater
and more noble families. The Welsh do to this day esteem him near of Kin to
them whom the English do not: and since we see the prohibition of marriage
with Kindred has been extended sometimes, and sometimes contracted, it is
necessary that all Lawgivers do express what is meant by their indefinite
terms.

Hemingius gives a rule for this as near as can be drawn from the words and the
thing. 40.
Propinquitas carnis (says he) quae me sine intervallo attingit. That is, she
that is next to me, none intervening between the stock and me: That is, the
propinquity or neerness of my flesh above me is my Mother, below me is my
Daughter, on the side, is my Sister, This is all: with this addition the these
are not to be uncovered for they own sake; thy own immediate relation they are:
All else which are forbidden are forbidden for the sakes of these: for my
Mothers or my Fathers, my Sons or my Daughters, my Brothers or my Sisters sake;
only reckon the accounts of affinity to be the same: affinitates namque cum
extraneis novas pariunt Conjunctiones hominum, non minores illis quae e
sanguine venerunt: De leg. special,
said Philo. Affinity makes conjunctions and relations equal to those of
Consanguinity: and therefore thou must not uncover that Nakedness which is
thine own in another person of blood or affinity, or else is thy Fathers or thy
Mothers, thy Brothers or thy Sisters, they Sons or thy Daughters nakedness.
This is all that can be pretended to be forbidden by virtue of these words
[Neer of Kin] or [The neerness of thy flesh.]

And this we find expressed in the case of the high Priests mourning: 41.
The High Priest might not be defiled for the dead among his people, Le. it.
21. verse. 2.
but for his kin that is near unto him, he may; for his Mother and for his
Father, and for his Son and for his Daughter, and for his Brother, and for his
Virgin Sister. This is the propinquitas carnis, she that is immediately born of
the same flesh that I am born of, or she out of whose flesh I am born, or she
that is born out of my flesh, is this [Neer of Kin.] There is no other
propinquity but these, all else are removed; and when a bar does intervene, all
the rest are or may be accounted Kindred, but not near of Kin, not the neernes
of my flesh, which only is here forbidden.

Only this more: 42.
That since the prime Natural law does forbid the marriage of the ascending and
descending line, that is, Fathers and children, and so consequently and by a
stronger reason, Grandchildren, and downwards for ever in descent; God was
pleased to set a (...), a bar and a hedge round about this to keep men off, far
off from it, that if men would be impious they might not at first come to the
highest step: and therefore as God placed the prohibition of Brother and Sister
under, so on the side of it he forbad the marriage of Uncles and Aunts: for
they are thy Fathers or thy Mothers near Kin, they are to them the propinquitas
carnis; therefore for the reverence of Father and Mother the Jews were bidden
to keep of one step more, for the last step of lawful is soon passed over into
the first step of unlawful, and therefore God was pleased to set them further
off. And the Christian Divines and Lawyers well understanding this, express the
prohibition to this sense; that Uncles and Aunts are not to be married, because
they are loco Parentis, they are quasi Parents, images of Fathers and Mothers,
for the reverence of which, the marriage of our Uncles and Aunts respectively
are forbidden. * This is just as it was forbidden to the Jews to make an image;
which thing could not have any Moral or Natural obliquity; but it was set as a
(...), a guard and a hedge to keep them off from worshipping them, The case is
the same here: For the Jews were as apt to comply with the Egyptians and
Canaanites in their incestuous mixtures, as in their idolatrous worshippings;
but therefore the hedges were placed before them both. But half an eye may see
the different accounts upon which in this place there was passed an equal
prohibition.

But besides all this, 43.
what better determination can we have of these indefinite words of [ Near of
kin] or [the neerness of thy flesh] (for those are the words in the Hebrew, so
they are to be rendered) then the express particulars made by God himself in
that very place; where none are reckoned in the equal collateral line, but
Brothers and Sisters and their affines or allies, their Husbands and wives
respectively; none in the Unequal collateral line, but Uncles and Aunts and
their allies; in the ascending and descending line, Fathers and Mothers, their
children and their Grandchildren with their allies; in all which there is
nothing at all that concerns Cosen Germans, neither upon any thing of this
account can they be supposed to be forbidden, or to be the neerness of our
flesh.

But if any scrupulous person shall inquire further and suspect that some
degrees or persons are forbidden to marry that are not here expressed, 44.
but included by a parity of reason, as it happens in another instance: for it
is not forbidden to marry our Mothers Brothers wife; but because here it is
made unlawful to marry Fathers Brothers wife, it is to be concluded also for
the other, there being the same degree and the same reason.

I answer to this by parts; 45.
1. It is very likely that it is so intended that in equal cases there is an
equal prohibition; but it cannot certainly be concluded and relied upon that it
is so. 1. Because upon this account cases of fear and scruple might very much
be multiplied to no purpose. For I remember that Fagius reckons out of the
books of the Rabbis twenty persons forbidden to marry, which yet are not
reckoned in Leviticus. 2. Because of the rule of the law. l. Mutus 43. D. de
procur. Quod lege prohibitoria non vetitum est, permissum intelligitur. In
negative precepts that which is not forbidden, is presumed to be allowed. And
to add more out of fear is either to be wiser then the Lawgiver, or to suspect
him to be apt to quarrel by unknown measures, and secret rules of
interpretation. 3. Because I find that amongst wise Nations the same degree
does not always admit the same prohibition. To marry my Fathers Sister was
forbidden, and it was not forbidden to marry my Brothers daughter, but it was
sometimes practiced amongst the Hebrews; and they give this reason for it;
because young men daily frequenting the houses of their Grandfathers and
Grandmothers converse with their Aunts, and are therefore forbidden to marry
lest such conversation should become their snare: but to the houses of their
Brethren their address is not so frequent, their conversation more separate,
and their interest and expectations less, and therefore to marry the daughters
of their Brother might with more safety be permitted because there is less
temptation. Thus by the laws given to the sons of Noah, the Jews observe that
it was permitted to marry the Sister by the Fathers side, but not our Sister by
the Mother. It was Abraham's case; for as Saidus Batricides the Patriarch of
Alexandria about 700 years since in his Ecclesiastical Annals tells out of the
Monuments of the East: Their begat Abraham of his first wife Jona, and she
being dead he married Tehevitha, and of her begat Sarah, Abraham's wife: and
this is it which he said, [she is the daughter of my Father, but not the
daughter of my Mother:] from whence they suppose this not to be permitted, and
that the other was; for so R. Jarchi glosses those words of Abraham now quoted:
Quoniam inter gentes ratio consanguinitatis Paternae neutiquam habebatur:
because among the Gentiles (meaning, by the law of Nature, or the law given to
Noah) there was little or no account made of Kindred by the Fathers side in the
matter of marriages. * So amongst the Romans after the time of Claudius, it was
permitted to marry the Brothers daughter, but not the Sisters daughter, as
appears in the rules of Ulpian, but the reason of this particular instance I
confess I cannot learn, I only observed it to this purpose that amongst wise
Nations, the same degree has not the same prohibition.

But I am willing enough to admit it with these cautions. 46.
1. That there be not only the same degree but the same reason: For as Ulpian
well observes in his rules: In quarto [gradu] permittitur [connubium] extra eas
personas quae parentum liberoumque locum habent: therefore says he they add
that the Great Aunt by the Fathers and by the Mothers side, and the Sisters
niece may not be married quamvis quarto gradu sint, although they are in the
fourth degree: because the prohibition is not always for the neerness or for
the degree, but for the proper reason; and if you could suppose a woman to live
to see six generations of her line, yet it is unlawful for her to marry that
sixth degree of Nephews, and not unlawful to marry the first degree of Cosens.

2. In the descending line the case is otherwise then in the equal line. 47.
Here the further off the persons are the less reason still there is they
should be forbidden: but in the descending line the further the persons are
removed the greater cause there is they should be forbidden: therefore there is
no comparison between the cognation of Uncles and their Neeces, and the
cognation of Cosens in the equal lines: because the reason distinguishes them,
not the Kindred or neerness to the common Parent.

3. It is true which is affirmed in the law, 48.
In pari Cognationis gradu, par idemque jus statuatur: when the Cognation is
the same, the law is so too; that is, If it be measured in the same kind of
Cognation: ascending compared to ascending, equal collateral to equal
collateral, unequal to unequal; for when the comparison is of things in the
same order; then not only the degree but the reason is most commonly the same
too, and that is principally to be regarded.

But though I am willing enough to admit this rule with these cautions, 49.
yet many others will not, nor think it reasonable that any thing should be
supposed to be forbidden in the Levitical law, but what is there set down,
excepting the descent of children in which it is not easy to prevaricate beyond
the degrees forbidden expressly, if a man had a mind to it; and it was never
heard of, that a marriage was thought of between a woman and her Great
Grandfather: and they give this reason why they limit themselves to the degrees
expressed. Because unless God had intended there a perfect enumeration of all
the persons forbidden to contract marriages mutually, it cannot be imagined why
he should be pleased to repeat some degrees twice which are equally forbidden
in the several instances: for if the parity of cognation were to be the
measure, then those degrees which are twice repeated might without such
repetition have better been reduced to the Rule, under which they were
sufficiently prohibited.

2. But whether it be, 50.
or be not so, yet it can no way reach to the case of Cosen Germans: For there
is in Leviticus no degree equally near that is forbidden, except of such
persons which are in the place of Parents, who are prohibited upon another
account.

But that which ought to put it past all question that the marriage of Cosen
Germans was not prohibited by the Levitical law either expressly or by
consequence and parity of reason, 51.
is this: Because it was practiced by holy men both before and after the law,
and so ordered to be done by God himself. In the law there are no words against
it, no reason against it expressed or intimated in a parity of prohibition
given to something else, and it was frequently practiced amongst persons of a
known religion, and was by God given in command to some persons to do it;
therefore nothing is more certainly warranted, excepting only express
Commandments.

The particulars I relate to in Scripture are these; 52.
Jacob married his Cosen German Rachel the daughter of his Uncle Laban. Amram
the Father of Moses begat him of his Cosen German Jochabed. Exodus 6. 20.
That she was his Aunt is commonly supposed, but the Lxx and the Vulgar Latin
report her to be his Aunts daughter, though by the style of the Hebrews she
was called his Aunt: just as Chanameel is called in some books the Uncle of the
Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 32. 12.
when he was really his Uncles Son; and so the Vulgar Latin Bibles read it; and
Loath was called brother by Abraham when he was his Brothers Son. * Caleb having
promised his Daughter Achsah to him that should take Kirjath-Sepher, she fell
to Othniel the Son of Kenaz Calebs Brother; so Pagnine and Arias Montanus read
it [ Filio Kenaz Fratris Caleb] meaning Kenaz to be Calebs Brother: So that
Othniel and Achsah were Brothers children; for it cannot be supposed that
Othniel was Calebs Brother and so was Uncle to Achsah; for that being forbidden
in the law of Moses under which Othniel and Achsah lived was not a thing so
likely to be done, Number. 33.
and consented to by Caleb; as I have already noted.

But the matter was made more notorious in the case of Zelophehads daughters;
53.
Numbers 36.
who because they were heiresses were commanded to marry their kindred; and they
married their Fathers Brothers sons. This was a special case, but therefore it
was a special command; and what was in all cases lawful was made in this case
necessary. For if the woman was an Heiress she was to pleasure her own family
rather then strangers. And this was not only amongst the Jews but amongst the
Greeks and Latins, as appears by that of the Comedy Lex est ut orbae, Ter. in
phor.
qui sunt genere proximi
Iis nubant, and illos ducere eadem haec lex jubet.
If the woman was without children (add also) and without a Father, that is,
if her Father be dead, the next of kindred was bound to marry her: and therefore
when Aeschylus calls the marriage of certain Cosen Germans (...) marriages
which the law forbids, In Danaidib.
and affirms (...) the family is staind by it: the Scholiast adds that
therefore these marriages are unlawful because the Fathers were alive; and so
it was not unlawful upon the stock of kindred; but because the maid was (...) an
Heiress and might not marry without her Fathers leave. This woman was called
among the Greeks (...), a woman determined by law, and already judged to such a
marriage; (...), and (...), or (...), and to them that were so, it was not free
to marry any one, they must marry their Kindred Hic meus amicus illi genere est
proximus, Adelphi.

Huic leges cogunt Nubere hanc --
And we find in the old Civil law that one Cassia was declared inheretrix upon
condition, Si Consobrino nupsisset: if she did marry her Cosen German. l. 2. C.
de instit. and subst. and Papinian l. 23. and 24. D. de ritu nuptiarum affirms,
conditionem illam, si consobrinam duxeris, haereditatis institutioni utiliter
adjici posse; it is a legal and fair condition and may be the limit of an
inheritance that the Heiress be bound to marry her Cosen German. And this in
some measure was the case of Ruth whom Boaz Great Granfather to King David did
marry by the right of a Kinsman. Now it is true (says he) that I am thy near
Kinsman, Ruth 3. 12.
howbeit there is a Kinsman nearer then I: which Kinsman because he refused to
marry Ruth, Boaz took her to wife, and she became a mother in the line of the
Messiah; for Christ came out of her loins according to the flesh.

Into which line because this Argument has led me, 50.
I offer it to consideration as the last and greatest example of the lawfulness
and holiness of such marriages under the law of Moses, and as a warranty to all
ages of the Christians; Luke 3. 23.
The B. Virgin Mary the Mother of our most B. Savior was married to her Cosen
German (as was supposed upon this reason:) For her husband Joseph was the son
of Heli (says S. Luke) that is, the legal son of Heli, for Jacob begat him
(says S. Matthew) Now Heli and Jacob were Brethren the sons of Matthan who was
Grandfather to Joseph and Mary; for unless by the cognation of Joseph and Mary
the same genealogy had served for them both, the reckoning of the Genealogy of
Joseph could not have proved Jesus to have descended from David. But if this
instance should fail, and that their consanguinity (for they were Cosens) did
stand at further distances; yet there are examples and reasons and authentic
presidents already reckoned enough to warrant us in this inquiry.

By all which it appears what was the state of these marriages under the law 51.
of Moses, and yet all the scruple at which weak persons start or stumble, is
derived from that Sanction in Leviticus, which in despite of all reason and all
precedents and all observations whatsoever, they will needs suppose to be a
Natural and moral law, so making eleven Commandments: for certain it is that
the ten Commandments was to the Jews the sum of their Moral law: in which,
since some things that were ceremonial were inserted, it is not likely that any
thing that was moral should be omitted. In the ten words of Moses there was
nothing less then their whole Moral law, though something more there was: but
this of forbidding Cosens to marry was no where put: If it had been put in
Leviticus it was but National and temporary: for I have proved it was not
against the law of Nature which permitted nearer relatives then Cosen Germans
to marry: I have also proved that the Sanction of Moses did only oblige Jews
and Proselytes: That if they had obliged all, yet Cosen Germans are not there
expressly forbidden, and if they be not there expressly forbidden they are not
forbidden at all; but in case that other degrees of equal distance and reason
were there forbidden, though not expressed, yet this of Cosen Germans is not by
any consequence or intimation of that forbidden, because no degree is there
forbidden which can involve this, but it has a special case of its own in
which this is not at all concerned, and all this I strengthened with examples
greater then all exception.

It remains now that we descend to the Christian law, 56.
and enquire whether our great Master and Lawgiver Jesus Christ has forbidden
Cosen Germans to marry? But this is soon at an end, for Christ spoke nothing at
all concerning marriage but one sentence which reduced it to the first state of
Nature, save only that he left us in all things bound by the laws of Nations
and our just superiors, of which two last I shall give account in the following
periods. But of that which Christ said the sum is this only: For this cause
shall a man leave Father and Mother and cleave to his wife, and they two shall
be one flesh. By which words he did establish all that was Natural and Moral in
this affair. [A man shall leave Father and Mother] by these words are forbidden
the marriage of Parents and children. [He shall cleave to his wife] by this is
forbidden concubitus masculorum. [His wife] by this is forbidden adultery or
the lying with another man's wife, and extra-nuptial pollutions. [ Erunt duo]
They two, by that is forbidden Polygamy, [In carnem unam] shall be one flesh,
by this is forbidden bestiality or the abuse of Caro aliena, the flesh of
several Species; which are all the unlawful and unnatural lusts forbidden by
God in the law of Nature, and that which was afterward given to all mankind,
and inserted in the Levitical law as the consummation and main design of the
other prohibitions which were but like hedges and outer guards to these.

There is in the New Testament only one law more which can relate to this
question of marriages [ Provide things honest in the sight of all men] and [
Follow after things which are of good report] That is, 57.
Whatsoever is against public honesty, the law of Nations, the common sense of
Mankind, that is not to be done by Christians, though of the instance there be
no special prohibition in the laws of Jesus Christ: and Modestinus the Lawyer
said well, In nuptiis non solum quod liceat, sed etiam quid honestum sit,
semper est respiciendum. Concerning which lest there be a mistake in it, I
premise this caution in general, that we do not take false or weak estimates
of Public fame and honesty. Nothing but the laws of God and Men or the
universal sentence of that part of mankind with whom we any ways converse is
the measure of public honesty. Thus for a Bishop to ride on hunting in his
Pontificals, or for a Priest to keep an alehouse is against public honesty: of
the same nature are, for a woman to paint her face, or to go in man's apparel.
But when a thing is disputed on both sides by good and learned Men, to do
either is not against public honesty. That's a certain rule; for when a thing
is called good and honest by wise and good Men, the question is divided, and
therefore cannot be united against either of them. * Upon this account S. Paul
reproved the incestuous Corinthian because he had done a fact which was not so
much as named, that is, approved amongst the Gentiles, that one should have his
Fathers Wife. Caracalla indeed did it afterward, and it was before his time
done in the family of Seleucus; but these were insolent examples, ever
disallowed by the Romans and all the Nations within their circuit: and
consequently the Greeks had long before S. Paul's time been more restrained in
their too great licentiousness of marriages. And when the custom of this thing
had procured a license for it amongst the Scots, S. Margaret, wife to Malcome
III. their King did reduce the contrary law of Nations, and forbad a son to
marry his fathers wife, or a Brother to marry his Brothers widow.

Beyond this the New Testament having nothing, 58.
if we reduce this to the present question we must consider whether the
marriage of Cosen Germans be against public honesty or good report, that is,
whether it be condemned by the law of Nations and the prevailing sentences or
practice of wise men.

Concerning this, 59.
I find that Plutarch speaking of the ancient laws and usages of the Romans in
marrying their Kindred, says it was a practice before it was a law: and there
happened to be a case of a good man who had a great advantage by marrying his
Cosen German: upon occasion of which the people made a law that it should be
permitted to any one to do it (...). Now this was very ancient; and before
this law for it I find no law against it, only if Claudius in Tacitus said
true they were diu ignorata, no notice of them, or but seldom examples.
Concerning which discourse though men are pleased to talk as serves their
turns, yet it is very certain that the elder the times were, the more liberty
there was of marrying their Kindred. However there was an early law for it and
none against it, that I find; and when it began to be considered, tempore
addito percrebuerunt said Tacitus, they in time grew frequent. In the Oration
of Sp. Ligustinus in Livy there is this clause, Pater mihi Lxorem fratris sui
filiam dedit: My Father gave to me wife his own Brothers daughter: and
Quintilian mourning for the immature death of his Son, Annal. l, 12.
affirms that he was designed to be son in law to his Uncle. So Cicero pro
Cluentio says that his Sister married Melinus her Cosen German: and Augustus
Caesar gave his daughter Julia to Marcellus the son of his Sister Octavia. The
brave Brutus who was the example of a rare moral man and a noble Patriot was
married to Portia the daughter of his wise Uncle Cato; and that incomparable
Prince Marcus Antonius the Philosopher and Emperor was married to his nearest
Cosen Annia Faustina; she was his Cosen German. But thus it was at the
beginning; and thus it was at the ending of the Roman state and Empire. At the
beginning; the two daughters of Servius Tullius were married to their Cosen
Germans Lucius and Aruns, L. 1. ad V. C.
the Nephews of Priscus Tarquinius, Livy indeed says it was not certain
whether these young Gentlemen were Uncles or Cosen Germans to their wives; that
is, whether they were sons or Nephews to Tarquinius Priscus, but Dionysius
Halicarnasseus contends earnestly that they were Nephews. L. 4. Anti^*
Toward the declination of the Roman period and state we find that Constantius
the Emperor gave his Sister to her cosen Julianus.

These and all the foregoing examples of the wisest, 60.
of the best, of the most holy Persons, Patriarchs, and Kings, Consuls and
Philosophers, Lawgivers and Saints; the practice and customs of the greatest
and most civil Nations are infinitely sufficient to dash in pieces this weak
pretense (if any should make use of it) that the marriage of Cosen Germans is
against public honesty, and so consequently not of good report; For that which
God never forbad, but sometimes did actually command, which the Patriarchs did
practice, which the church of the Jews never scrupled at, but always were
accustomed to it, which wise men and good men have done without reproof: which
was admitted by the law of Nations; and is no where contradicted in Scripture,
which records many authentic precedents of such marriages, in all reason ought
to be of good report. And certainly nothing has done dishonor and so lessened
the fame and good opinion of such marriages, as the very making a question
concerning its lawfulness, and making a scruple even after the question is well
determined. To be suspected, lessens the fame of any man or any thing. The
doing justice to this article will do it reputation enough.

If we now shall inquire how the civil law of the Romans did determine of these
marriages we shall be helped much in the cure of the former fear. 61.
For if the law of the Romans allowed it, that law which had so many brave and
wise composers, and which so many Nations allowed of and practiced, and still
do in very many Kingdoms and Republikes, we have no reason to think it can be
of ill report. But concerning this the matter is not very disputable, it is
notorious that the Civil law did allow it. l. 1. duorum inst. de nupt. l. 3.
and l. non solum. 1. D. de ritu nupt. l. C. de inst. and subst. * Paulus the
Lawyer said; Si Nepotem ex filio and neptem ex altero filio in potestate habeam
nuptias inter eos me solo authore contrahi posse Pomponius scribit, L^^si
Nepot. 3. D. de ^it. nupt.
and verum est: and Antontnus the Emperor said, ^. conditioni. 2. C de instit.
and subst.
Non videri potest sub specie turpium nuptiarum viduitatem tibi induxisse cum
te filio sororis suae consobrino tuo, probabili consilio Matrimonio jungere
vol^erit: I need in this say no more. It was always permitted in the Greek and
Roman Laws, till the time of Theodosius, who being overruled by S. Ambrose,
forbad it by an express law; tantum pudori tribuens continentiae ut
consobrinorum nuptias vetuerit tanquam sororum, said Aurelius Victor; he
thought it more nice and modest if he should enlarge the Laws and restrain what
was not restrained before: But this as it arose suddenly, so as suddenly was
extinguished; for it was abrogated by Arcadius and Honorius his sons, whose
constitution to this purpose is in Justinian l. celebrandis C. de nuptiis, in
which these words are remarkable, [ Revocata prisci juris authoritate,
restincisque calumniarum fomentis, matrimonium inter Consobrinos habeatur] The
law that forbad them was occasioned and fomented by calumnies; which being
dispersed, the authority of the Ancient law was recalled.

This only I am to admonish; 62.
That in the Theodosian Code the law of these Emperors seems to say otherwise,
as is to be seen under the titles of [ si nuptiae ex rescript. petant: and de
incestis nuptiis.] But the forgery is notorious enough. For when Alaric King of
the Goths had commanded his Subject Arrianus the Lawyer to make a Breviary of
the Code, he fitted those laws to the Customs of his own Country, and so
abused the law of Arcadius and Honorius, as appears plainly by comparing those
constitutions which passed under the fingers of Arrianus, with those which
under the same Rubricks are in the Code of Justinian. For in this there is not
one word spoken of the marriage of Cosen Germans under those Titles. And as he
has done in the Breviary of the Theodosian Code, so he has done in the
Epitome of Caius institutions (he, or some such fellow as bad) and made the
civil law as he pleased expressly against the known Sanction of all the old law
of the Braver Romans. *The same also was done by Theophilus who recited this
law according to the manners of his own time, and recites the law of Justinian
exactly contrary to Justinian's sense by clapping a perfect Negative to his
direct affirmative. But Curtius the Latin interpreter of Theophilus has set it
right again according to the true intent of the Civil law. But it may be I do
not well to trouble the Question with these little things, L. 15. c. 16. de
civit. Dei.
when the great lines of duty are so plain and legible: and concerning this we
have a full testimony from S. Austin; who having observed that in his time
Cosen Germans did not often marry: Experti sumus (says he) in conjugiis
consobrinorum etiam nostris temporibus..... quam raro per mores fiebat, quod
fieri per leges licebat, quia id nec Divina prohibuit, and nondum prohibuer at
lex humana. That is, for Cos^n Germans to marry was neither prohibited by the
laws of God nor man: and so we have a testimony beyond exception concerning the
Civil law, and the law of God, and the law of the Church till his time. Now if
it be objected that he says it was done but seldom, it is no wonder. S.
Ambrose and Theodosius a little before that time had caused some restraint and
made the matter uneasy and besides this; If any man could observe concerning
any one sort of persons how seldom they marry, that is, how few examples any
one man can observe of any degree though never so distant, this will appear but
light, as the dew upon a flower, or the down of a thistle. It is lawful for a
Father and his Son to marry a widow and her daughter; and for two Brothers to
marry two Sisters; and no man questions any thing so it: but quam raro hoc per
mores fiat; how many examples can any one man reckon? Can he tell so many in
one age and of his own notice, as to make them up a multitude? and yet this
would be but a weak argument against it; and not worth a further consideration.

That which is to be inquired next into is the Canon law; 63.
and that indeed does forbid it: but how, and to what purpose, and with what
obligation will not be wholly useless to consider.

1. In the very first Canons of the Church (excepting only that one framed in
the Council of Jerusalem Acts 15.) 64.
which are commonly called the Canons of the Apostles there is a caution
against incestuous marriages, but the instances are only, [ He that marries
two Sisters, or his Brothers Widow, or Daughter.] The penalty is, He may not be
received into Holy Orders: but for the matter of Cosen Germans it was not
forbidden: Until S. Austins time and thereabouts it was true that Nondum
prohibuerat lex humana, Divina nunquam: Gods law had never, and till then man's
law had not forbidden it, that is, it was then in all senses lawful: and in the
Synod of Paris almost six hundred years after Christ, those are defined to be
unlawful marriages quae contra praeceptum Domini contrahuntur, which are
against the Divine law; None else; amongst which the present case is not to be
suspected: and in the old Canons of the Church all the prohibited instances
were comprised in these verses, which was their Authentic Table: Nata, Soror,
Neptis, Matertera, Fratris and Uxor,
Et Patris Conjux, Matter, Privigna, Noverca,
Uxorlsque Soror, Privigni Nata, Nurusque,
Atque Soror Patris, C. lit. extr. de ^^stit. sponsal.
conjungi lege vetantur.
But in some assemblies of the Bishops about this time, a little before or a
little after, the manners of the Nations being spoiled with wars, rudeness
and Barbarism, they contracted incestuous marriages: and it was therefore
thought fit that as the marriage of Uncles and Nieces were forbidden as a hedge
to keep them farther off from Father and Mother, Son or Daughter, so this of
Cosen Germans was set as a (...) or an outward Court to keep them from marrying
Brother and Sister. And therefore Harmenopulus says they were forbidden by the
laws of the Greeks. And it was amongst them no more then was highly needful for
a reason which every one knows. But both there and in the Latin Church, when
the prohibition of Cosens marriage is joind in the same decree with the
marrying of Sisters, the cause is rendered too suspicious. * And yet there was
an external cause that had influence upon these Sanctions of the Church. The
Goths then prevaild by the sword, and the Church to comply with the Conqueror
was forward to receive this law from them: for the Goths had it before the
Romans, and it is very probable that those barbarous people were the great
presidents and introducers of the prohibition.

2. These laws were made by time and accidents, 65.
and were extended or contracted as it pleased the Popes of Rome, who (as one
observes*) were for a long time iniquiores and invidi in maritos, apt and easy
to make all restraints upon marriages. If it were seasonable and fit it were
not useless to observe many instances out of the Canon law to this purpose. But
I forbear, that which I now observe, is, that the prohibition amongst them
began with Cosen Germans then it went to the third and fourth degrees; then to
seven, then to four again, sometime to six, as in the Synod at Cabaillon;
sometimes usque dum generatio agnoscitur, aut memoria retinetur, as long as any
memory of kindred remains, and that will be very far in Wales where they reckon
eight degrees and special names of Kindred after Cosen Germans, and then Kin for
ever, Council. Tolet. 2. c. 5.
and truly these Canonists proceed as reasonably as their Principles would
admit. Council. Worm.
For if Cognation or Consagu^nity was the hindrance of marriage, where ever
they could reckon that, they had some pretense to forbid marriage: but if they
only forbad it upon the accounts of Nature, or by the precedent of the Divine
law given to Moses they were to stop there where Nature stopped, or the Divine
law. But that they would not, as knowing it to be an easy thing to make laws
at the charge of other men's trouble.

3. The reasons why the Projectors of the Canon law did forbid to the fourth or
to the seventh degree, 66.
were as fit a cover for this dish as could be imagined. They that were for
four gave this grave reason for it. There are four humors in the body of a man
to which because the four degrees of consanguinity do answer, it is
proportionable to Nature to forbid the marriage of Cosens to the fourth degree.
Nay more; there are four Elements; Ergo, To which it may be added, that there
are upon a man's hand four fingers and a thumb. The thumb is the stirps or
common Parent; and to the end of the four fingers, that is, the four
generations of Kindred we ought not to marry, because the life of a man is but a
span long. There are also four quarters of the world; and indeed so there are
of every thing in it, if we please, and therefore abstain at least till the
fourth degree be past. Others who are graver and wiser (particularly
Bonaventure) observe cunningly, that besides the four humors of the body,
there are three faculties of the Soul, which being joined together make seven,
and they point out to us that men are to abstain till the seventh generation.
These reasons such as they are, they therefore were content withal, because
they had no better: yet upon the strength of these they were bold even against
the sense of almost all mankind to forbid these degrees to marry.

4. When the Canonists appointed what degrees of Kindred they would have
restrained from mutual marriage, 67.
they took their precedent and measure from the Civil law, making this their
standard, that so long as by the Civil law inheritances did descend, so long by
the Canon law it should not be permitted to kindred to marry: and upon this
account they forbad marriage to the seventh degree, because so far the laws
appointed inheritances to descend. Now that this is a weak and a false ground
appears, because inheritances descend even to the tenth degree: and yet suppose
it otherwise: yet the Popes and other compilers of the Canons overshoot their
mark extremely: because while they forbidding marriages to the seventh degree
pretended to follow some proportions and usages of the Civil law, do yet reckon
the degrees otherwise then the Civil law does, and consequently do forbid
marriage to the fifteenth civil degree exclusively. For whereas by the Canon
law so far as either of the persons is distant from the Common Parent, so far
he is distant from the other in the equal line: so that by this computation
Cosen Germans are distant in the second degree and no more. But by the Civil
law there are accounted so many degrees as there are persons besides the Common
Parent, so that in this computation Cosen Germans are distant in the fourth
degree; and consequently the seventh Canonical degree is the fourteenth civil
degree, the unequalness and unreasonableness of which, all Lawyers will deride.
The same is in proportion to be said of their later reduction of the Canonical
prohibition to the fourth degree inclusively.

5. These laws gathered by the Roman Canonists are not now, 68.
nor ever were they, obligatory but by the consent of the People, and the
allowance of Princes. For Bishops in their mere spiritual impresses have no
proper legislative power, were Princes are Christian: and if the Prince please
he may enlarge or restrain their power, so that he make no intrenchment on the
Divine law, and do what is useful and profitable, Fac legi tuae sepem, said
the Jews: it makes the law firm if you put a hedge about it; and where viler
people who had no fear of God were apt to marry Sisters or Aunts, it was not
ill to prohibit something that was lawful, lest they should run into what is
unlawful. But this is matter of prudence only and ought to be separated from
the question of lawful or unlawful. But then when the Prince does not bind, the
Subjects are free. Honesta and justa esse quae Regi placent, and regno utilia.
Those things which please the King and are profitable to the Kingdom are
honest and just. It was truly said but ill applied by Antiochus Seleucus.

6. These laws are neither allowed by the Prince, 69.
nor by the Ecclesiastical state in England, and because they were useless and
burdensome they were laid aside; for they were but drains for money and levies
of rents; for even under the Pope the way was, and is now, open enough to Cosen
Germans if they have gold enough to purchase the lead. And so it was when the
Civil law was tuned to the air of the Canon law and both to the manners of the
Goths. Cosens might marry with a dispensation from the Prince; a form of which
is to be seen in Cassiodore. L. 7. varia^ (...)
But this is one of the many blessings of the Protestant religion that we are
not tied to pay money for leave to do a lawful action; so that as the Jews
were wont to say, He that has married a wife that is too near of Kindred, let
him turn Proselyte and then she is not of Kin to him, I may in some sense use
in the contest between our laws and those of the Roman Churches: He that has
or desires to marry a wife of his kindred which is not to near by Gods law but
is by the Popes law, let him become a Protestant, and then though nothing can
be allowed to him which God has forbidden, yet that leave which God has given
him, Man shall not take away.

7. If it were at all considerable what is done by the Canon law, 70.
there is a new device brought in of spiritual kindred; and marriages forbidden
to be between such as answer at the Font for the same child; that is, if we
value the Roman Canons, all Mankind are in perpetual snare, and that to no
purpose.

8. But as for the present inquiry it is considerable that the Canon law it
self does not pretend it to be against the Divine law, 71.
but does it wholly upon other accounts, as I have already instanced; and this
appears in the epistle of Rabanus to Cardinal Humbert. Quod Pontifices usque ad
sextum vel septimum gradum conjugium prohibent, magis ex consuetudine humana
quam ex lege Divina cos praecepisse credendum. The Canons did not intend to
signify it to be against the law of God for Cosens to marry in the degrees
forbidden by the Canon law.

9. And after all, 72.
the laws of England do expressly allow it; as is to be seen in the tables of
marriage set up in Churches usually, and in the Statute of 32 of Henry 8.
chapter 38. And it is observable that in England they were allowed to do it
ever since they were Christians, unless they were Papists. For till Pope
Gregory's time and Augustine the Monk (though Christianity had been here almost
500 years before it was used by the Britains: and P. Gregory did not think it
fit that Augustine should put a restraint upon them (as is to be seen in the
British Councels collected by that learned and good man Sr Henry Spelman) but
it was no little interest and power, which the Popes afterward procured in the
families of Princes and other great personages by giving leave to them to marry
their near relatives; and their posterity for their own sakes would in all
likelihood preserve that power to which (as things then went) they did owe
their legitimation.

Although I have passed thorough all laws that can oblige us, 73.
in this present inquiry; yet because the chief disquisition is concerning the
Natural law, and whether or no any prohibition can from thence descend upon the
marriage of Cosen Germans is the main question; it will be proper here to add
one topic more, that is, the Prudence or reasonableness of the thing.

Concerning which it is observable, 74.
that whoever shall go about to assign the proper reasons why certain degrees
are forbidden to marry by the law of God, will by experience find it to be too
hard for his head: and Rabbi Menahen Racanatensis observed, Quod ad rationem
attinet interdictorum incesti, Magistri traditionum de ea nihil certi
acceperunt. The Masters of traditions have received no certain account of those
reasons for which God forbad incestuous mixtures: Indeed if we could find out
the prime and proper reason; then by proportions to it we could better
understand how far the prohibitions were to be extended. But this is to be
despaired of. But yet Men have ventured to give such reasons as they could,
which how far they are applicable to the present question shall be considered.

1. That Kindred ought not to marry is therefore decreed, 75.
ne emulatio fiat in eadem domo, says one. The same degree of Kindred will be
apt to love the same man, and so emulation will arise. * Well suppose that: But
if it does; the marrying one of them will determine all the rest, and quiet the
strife. But because this proves too much, it proves nothing at all. For upon
the same account, a young man should not marry in a family where there are many
daughters, ne aemulatio fiat in eadem domo to avoid emulation and competition.

2. Cosens would do better not to marry (says another) ne habeat duas
necessitudines una persona; 76.
that one person may not be a double Relative: Cicero de sia.
for so names will be confounded and the same person shall be Father and Cosen
to his own child. * But what if he be? and what if a King be both a Lord over
and a Son under his own Mother? what if a man be a Father and a Judge, a
Brother in law and a Natural Brother, as when two Brothers marry two Sisters?
The more relations and necessitudes there are, it is so much the better, and a
twofold Cord is not easily broken.

3. It were well that Cosens might not marry, 77.
that by their Kindred they might be defended from the injury of their Husbands,
in case they should need it. * Well suppose this too: yet, 1.
This does not at all concern the Man, for he will not need a defense by his
Kindred against his wife. 2
For the woman, unless she marries all her kindred, the other may be a defense
against the violence of one whom she does marry; and will be more likely to
prevail in the defense against a Kinsman, then against a stranger. 3.
But if a woman be brought to that pass, her Cosen shall do her little
advantage against her Husband; for such defenses do but exasperate and make
eternal animosities: but the laws are the best defenses. 4.
If the Cosen will be a sure defense against the Husbands injury: then if the
Cosen be married to her, he will be sure to do her no injury. For he that will
do evil himself, is but an ill security to be engaged against another, and he
that will prevaricate in the duty of a Husband, will hardly secure the peace of
the woman by the duty of a Kinsman.

4. S. Austins scruple is this. 78.
Inest nescio quomodo humanae verecundiae quidam natural ac laudabile ut cui
debet causa propinquitatis verecundum honorem ab ea contineat quamvis gener
atricem tamen libidinem. There is in the Modesty of Mankind something that is
Natural and laudable; by which they abstain from congression with them to whom
they own the honor of Reverence and modest bashfulness. This indeed is a good
account where the modesty of Nature does really make restraints and owes duty
and reverence: and therefore is one of the most proper and Natural reasons
against the marriage of Parents and children, and is by the allowance of some
proportions extended to Brother and Sister: but if it be sent out one step
further, you can never stop it more, but it shall go as far as any man please
to fancy: therefore let it stop where God and Nature has fixed its first
bounds; and let not the pretense of a Natural reason or instinct, carry us
whether Nature never did intend; for it is certain she gave larger commissions,
however the fears, or the scruples, or the interest of some men have made them
to speak otherwise: and I remember concerning Cicero who sometimes speaks
against the marriage of Cosens, that it is but too reasonable to suppose he did
it to remove suspicion from himself; it having been objected against him by Q.
Fusius Calenus in Dio that he was too kind and amorous to his own daughter.
Lib. 46.
Filia matris pellex tibi jucundior atque obsequentior quam parenti par est; So
unequal, so uncertain a way it is to trust the sayings of a man, when so
frequently the man's opinion is not caused by his reason, but by a secret
interest.

5. Pope Gregory in his Epistle to the Archbishop of Canterbury tries another
way: 79.
Experimento didicimus ex tali conjugio sobolem non posse succrescere. If Cosen
Germans marry they will have no children. But the good man did not remember
that the whole Nation of the Jews came from the marriage of the two Cosen
Germans of Jacob, Rachel and Leah; and although by this discourse it seems it
was an usual practice to do it; for from the practice only he could pretend
to an observation of this event; yet as to the event of the thing it self; it
is a very great experience which the world has, by which his observation is
confuted.

6. But the best reason given against the convenience of it; 80.
for none pretends higher; is, that it were better if Cosen Germans should not
intermarry propter multiplicandas affinitates, as S. Austin expresses it, ut
conjugiis augeant necessitudines, that so they might scatter friendships and
relations in more families for the dissemination and extension of charity. For
Cosens being already united and loving, it were well by marriage to endear
others which are not so loving, not so united. Of this every one makes use that
is pleased to dissuade these marriages. But to this I answer, 1.
That suppose this were well and without objection as to the material part, yet
this does no ways prove it unlawful, and indeed is not by the contrivers of it
intended it should: as appears in Philo and Plutarch from whom S. Chrysostom
and S. Austin did borrow it. 2.
There may be one inconvenience in it, and yet many conveniences and advantages
which may outweigh that one; and that there are so, will appear in the sequel.
3.
This very reason when Philo the Jew had urged in general for the scattering
friendships and not limiting alliances to one family, he adds, Quod respiciens
Moses alias etiam multas propinquorum nuptias vetuit: Meaning that this
argument is sufficiently provided for by the restraints that Moses made, and if
we marry out of those limits, the friendship is enough scattered. For beyond
Brother and Sister, Uncles and Nieces, the relation is far enough off to be
receptive of and to need the renovation or the arrests of friendship.

7. It were well if Cosen Germans did not marry lest by reason of their usual
familiarity, 81.
converse and natural kindness, fornications should be secretly procured; it
being too ready for Natural love to degenerate into lust. I answer that
therefore let them marry as the remedy. For it were a hard thing that Cosens
who do converse and are apt to love should by Men be fobidden to marry, when
by God they are not. For this aptness to love being left upon them, together
with their frequent conversation is a snare; which because God knew he
permitted them to their remedy; and if men do not they will find that their
prohibition of marriage will not be a sufficient security against fornication.
For Brothers and Sisters where the danger is still greater, God has put a bar
of a positive law, and Nature has put the bar of a Natural reason and
congruity and the laws of all Mankind have put a bar of public honesty and
penalties, and all these are sufficient to secure them against the temptation:
and this was observed by a wise man long since in this very instance: (...).
Xenophon. l. 5. de Cy^ instic.
The Father is not in love with the Daughter; nor a Brother with his S^ster:
the reason is, (...), fear and the laws are restraint enough for this love: but
because to Cosens this bar is not set, the greater propensity they have to
love, the more need there is they should be permitted to marry. * And this very
thing was observed by Rabanus in his Epistle to Humbert. Hujusmodi
prohibitiones adulterii occasionem praebere; such laws of Restraint are
occasions of Adultery and therefore he infers from thence, Bonum esse ut
praetermissis illis prohibitionibus legis Divinae servetur constitutio. It were
good if standing in the measures of the Divine law, we should lay a snare for
no man's foot by putting fetters upon his liberty, without just cause, but not
without great danger.

I know of no more reasons pretended against this affair; 82.
I think these are all; and I am sure they are the most considerable. But then
on the other side, although it were hard to require any more reason for the
marriage of Cosen Germans, then we do for any other marriage, that is, that we
love the person, that she be virtuous and fitted for our condition, yet I say
ex abundanti, that there are conveniences and advantages which are not
contemptible, not yet are so readily to be found in the marriage of other
persons.

1. There is the advantage of a great and most perfect parity of condition that
is regularly to be expected. 83.
There is no upbraiding of Kindred, greatness or weakness of fortune occasioned
by the difference of elder or younger Brother; (for this being in all families
is not a reproach to any) and here is the greatest probability of a similitude
of passions, humors and affections, and they that have experience in
oeconomical affairs know that these things are not contemptible.

2. It is observable that when God intended to bless a family and a Nation, 84.
there he permitted, and in some cases commanded the marriage of Cosen Germans,
as in the families of Israel. And although it was lawful for one tribe to marry
into another, as appears in David who married Michol Readiness daughter of the
tribe of Benjamin; and the Benjamitish families were restored by the
intermarriages of the other tribes after that sad war about the Levits
concubine; and Hillel the Pharisee was of the tribe of Benjamin by his Father,
and of Judah by his Mother, yet this was done so seldom, that it was almost
thought not lawful; but the most general practice was to marry in their own
nearer Kindred, in their own tribe.

3. In the case of the (...) or Heiresses it was commanded both in the Hebrew
and in the Attick laws that Cosen Germans should marry, 85.
lest the inheritance should go from the family; of which I have already given
an account; but now I only observe the reasonableness and advantage. S.
Austin's [ largius sparge amicitias] is nothing; for when any considerable
advantage is to be done, certainly our own are to to be preferred before
strangers. And the same also is true in proportion, when any one of the family
is passionately and to pious purposes in love with his Cosen.

4. In the case of an Aunts Daughter to be married to her Cosen by her Mothers
Brother, 86.
there is this advantage to be gotten to the female side; she preserves her
Fathers name in her own issue, which she had lost in her own person and
marriage.

5. In the accidents of household conversation, 87.
and in the satieties of a Husbands love, the stock of Kindred comes in by way
of auxiliary forces to establish a declining or tempted love: and they
understood this well, who made it an objection against the marriage of Kindred,
lest the love being upon two accounts should be too violent, as Aristotle in
the second book of his Politics, seems to intimate. But I suppose that they
who are concerned in such marriages, will not fear the objection; but they have
reason to value the advantage. -- dum pietas geminato crescit amore (...). 10
Met.
while the marital love is supported with the cognation.

6. S. Augustins argument is to me highly considerable. 88.
Fuit antiquis patribus religiosae curae, Lib. 15. c. 16. de civis. Dei.
ne ipsa propinquitas se paulatim propaginum ordinibus dirimens longius abiret,
and propinquitas esse desisteret, eam nondum long positum rursus matrimonii
vinculo colligare, and quodammodo revocare fugientem. The dearness of Kindred
will quickly wear out, and Cosens will too soon grow strangers, therefore the
Patriarchs had a religious care to recall the propinquity which was dividing
and separating too fast; and as it were, to bind it by the ties of marriage,
and recall it when it was flying away. And indeed there is no greater stability
to a family, no greater band to conjugal affections then the marriage of Cosens.

I should now speak no more to this question, 89.
but that I have often met with a trifling objection concerning which I could
never find any reasonable pretense, or ground of probability to warrant it.
Second Cosens may not marry, but are expressly forbidden, therefore much rather
first Cosens though they be not named. To this I answer that I never knew the
marriage of second Cosens forbidden, but by them who at the same time forbad
the marriage of the first: and indeed I have searched and cannot fix my eye
upon any thing that I can imagine to be the ground of the fancy: therefore I
can say no more to it; but that the law of God does not forbid either, nor the
laws of our Church or State, nor the laws of Nature or Nations, or right
reason, but these marriages have advantages in all these. And we find that
Isaac married his second Cosen, and that was more for it then ever could be
said against it. Abraham was careful and Rebeccah was careful that their
children respectively should marry within their own Kindred: for it so was
designed because those families were to be greatly and specially blessed; and
they called one another into the participation of it. I conclude this question
with as much warranty to the marriage of Cosen Germans as can derive from the
Premises; they may without scruple own it, and say Viderit amplexus aliquis
laudabimur ambo. I know no other pretenses of any instance obliging Christians,
derived only from the Judicial law. These two do not oblige; and therefore
the Rule is true in its direct affirmation.

RULE 4. The ten Commandments of Moses, commonly called the Moral law, is not
a perfect digest of the law of Nature.
1.
THE Jews in their Cabala say that the law of God was made before the creation
of the World two thousand years and written in black burnt letters on the back
side of a bright shining fire; according to that of David, Thy word is a
lanthern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. Their meaning is, (for under
Fantastic expressions they sometimes intended to represent a material truth)
that the Decalogue or their Systeme of Moral precepts was nothing but an
express or the Tables of the law of Nature; long before Moses time given and
practiced by their Fathers. But this was not a perfect Systeme; it was the best
that ever was since Adam brake the Tables of the Natural law and let sin and
weak principles into the world; and it was sufficient in the present
constitution of the world; but even this also was but like a Paedagogue to
bring us to Christ. In the Schools of Moses they practiced the first rudiments
of perfection; but Christ was the last and therefore the most perfect Lawgiver;
and they that did commence under Moses the servant of God, were to proceed
under Jesus Christ the son of God: and therefore the Apostle calls Christ
(...): Romans 7. 1^.
and if we will acknowledge Christ to be our lawgiver, and the Gospel to be his
law, called in the New Testament, The law of liberty, a Royal law; then we must
expect that our duty shall be further extended then to a conformity in our
lives to the ten words of Moses.

I do not here intend a dispute whether Christ has given us laws of which
neither before Moses nor since there are no footsteps in the Old Testament; 2.
for I think there are none such, but in the letter or in the analogy they were
taught and recommended before: but this I say; that some excellencies and
perfections of morality were by Christ superadded in the very instances of the
Decalogue; these also were bound upon us with greater severity, are indeared to
us by special promises, and we by proper aides are enabled to their
performance; and the old commandments are explicated by new commentaries, and
are made to be laws in new instances to which by Moses they were not obliged;
and some of those excellent sayings which are respersed in the old Testament,
and which are the dawnings of the Evangelical light, are now part of that body
of light which derives from the Son of righteousness: insomuch that a
commandment which was given of old, was given again in new manner, and to new
purposes, and in more eminent degrees; and therefore is also called a new
commandment. 1 Job. 2. 7,^.
Thus the conversation Evangelical is called an old Commandment and a new one.
So that in the whole this will amount to the same thing as if they were new
Commandments. I will not therefore trouble this article with those artificial
Nothings; or endeavor to force any man to say Christ has given us new
Commandments; but this I suppose to be very evident; That we are by Jesus
Christ obliged to do many things to which the law of Moses did not oblige the
sons of Israel: but whether this was by a new Imposition, or a new explication
of the old, it matters not, save that some men will be humor'd in their own
manner of speaking.

I give an instance; 3.
The Christians are obliged to love their Brethren, and their Neighbors: The
Jews were so too: but Christ commanded us to love those whom the Jews did not
call Brethren or Neighbors; even all that have the same Nature, even all that
are in calamity. For to the question asked by the Pharisees, and who is our
Neighbor? Christ answered by the Parable of him that fell among the Thieves:
He that is in need is our neighbor. The Jews understood this to mean nothing
but one of the same Nation or Religion, the rest they hated. Here then is a new
duty; to which the Jews in the same latitude and in the same expressions were
not bound by the Decalogue; and this is as much as a new Commandment: for it
is new to me if it imposes a new duty. So if God forbids incest: and by it
only means the conjunction of Parents and children, if afterward he commands
us to abstain from Brother and Sister, Uncles and Aunts; this is a new law
under the old words. Levit. 19. 1^.
The Jews might hate their enemies; but Christians have none, that is, they
have none whom they are to repute such by a legal account. The seven Nations in
Palestine were legally and properly to be accounted Enemies; but to Christians
all are to be esteemed as Brethren in some account or other; (...), Hierocles.
To a good man no man is enemy: So that by alteration of the subject matter,
the old law is become new, that is, we have a new law. Lex vetus amorem docet
in proximos, Tertul.
nova in extraneos. The old law teaches love to Neighbors, the new to
strangers, that is, to such whom the Jews called so; but yet the Christians are
to treat as Neighbors. For that is a duty to us which was not so to them; and
we may perish for omitting that, to which they were not obliged so much as
under the pain of a legal impurity.

But not only in the object of our duty; 4.
but in the expression and signification of action Christ is a New lawgiver.
They and we are bound to love our Brethren; but the precept of love did not
bind them to what we are bound: 1 John. 3. 16.
We must die for our Brethren; and of this we have an express commandment,
which it is certain they had not; Job. 15. 12, 13.
and no sign of it in their Moral law. And it is not the same words, but the
same intension of duty that makes the same law. The Jews were bound to love
their wives; but an easiness of divorce did consist with that duty exacted by
that law, but it will not do so in ours. Now as in moral actions a degree
alters the kind; so it is in laws; for every new degree of duty that is
required supposes a new authority or a new Sanction to infer it; for the same
law does not in one age directly permit an action, and in another forbid it; it
does not reward that person which in another it will condemn.

But I add other instances. 5.
If Repentance be a precept, and not only a privilege; it is certain that in
the Gospel there is a precept which was not permitted, much less enjoined; for
this obedience supposes Christ to be our Redeemer in Nature before he is our
lawgiver, and therefore that it could be no part of their Moral law. But
Repentance is not properly and primarily a law of Nature; for though it was the
first action of religion that we find was done in the world, yet it is such a
one as supposes Nature lapsed; and therefore at the most can be but adopted
into the law of Nature: but yet because it is as much a part of the law of
Nature, as Restitution is a part of Natural Justice, this instance is not
altogether an improper illustration of this Rule.

But there are also many things for which provisions are made in the law of
Nature; 6.
for which there is no caution in the Decalogue. I instance in the matter of
incest; and if any man will reduce it to the fifth Commandment, it is certain
he must then suppose, only the mixture of parents and children to be, and that
of Brother and Sister not to be incestuous; for these cannot come under the
Title of Father and Mother; and if it be referred to the seventh Commandment it
will be as improper as to suppose jeering to be forbidden in the sixth. I could
add that there being but two affirmative precepts in the Decalogue, there is
no caution against sins of omission in any other instances.

I will not instance in those precepts which relate to our B. Lord himself, 7.
and are superinduced by Christianity upon the law of Nature; such as are [
faith in Jesus Christ, hope of eternal life, fraternal correption, avoiding
scandal, custody of the tongue in many instances, the Sacraments, to stand fast
in Christian liberty, searching the Scriptures, humility, mortification,
bearing the infirmities of the weak] and many more; all which proclaim Christ
to be our lawgiver; but do not properly denore the imperfection of the
Decalogue as it is a Systeme of the laws of Nature.

But I add from the very stock of Nature many others. 8.
For though by the Decalogue we are forbidden to do evil, yet we are not
commanded to do good: and that is a material consideration; and cannot by way
of reduction be brought hither: because they are wholly different things, and
are the effects of several reasons, and to be encouraged by distinct promises
or immunities respectively, and are not consequent to each other. For the sons
of Israel and all the world are bound to do evil to no man, but are not bound
to do good to every man: The first is possible, the second is not: and the
Jews never understood that they were bound to give alms by the sixth
Commandment: and in Nature the obligation to do good is upon a positive
account; as the obligation it self is. Of the same Nature is Gratitude,
readiness to help a man in need, to keep a secret entrusted to us, to perform
promises: all which are of greater concernment to mankind then to be entrusted
only to analogies, uncertain inferences and secret corollaries, and yet for
these there is no provision made in the ten commandments.

Neither can this measure of the Decalogue be reproved by saying that all these
laws of Nature, 9.
and all the laws of Christ may be reduced to the Decalogue. I know it is said
so very commonly, and the Casuists do commonly use that Method, that the
explication of the Decalogue be the Sum of all their Moral Theology; but how
insufficiently, the foregoing instances do sufficiently demonstrate: and
therefore how inartificially will also appear in the violence and convulsions
that must needs be used to draw all these dissonancies into one center. I
remember that Tertullian (I suppose to try his wit) finds all the Decalogue in
the Commandment which God gave to Adam to abstain from the forbidden fruit.
Lib. adv. Jud.
In hac enim lege Adae data omnia praecepta condita recognoscimus, quae postea
pullulaverunt data per Mosen. And just so may all the laws of Nature and of
Christ be found in the Decalogue, as the Decalogue can be found in the precept
given to Adam: but then also they might be found in the first Commandment of
the Decalogue, and then what need had there been of ten? It is therefore more
then probable that this was intended as a digest of all those moral laws in
which God would expect and exact their obedience; leaving the perfection and
consummation of all unto the time of the Gospel: God intending by several
portions of the Eternal or Natural law to bring the world to that perfection
from whence Mankind by sin did fall; and by Christ to enlarge this Natural law
to a similitude and conformity to God himself as far as our infirmities can
bear. It was very well said of Tertullian, Intelligimus Dei legem etiam ante
Moysen; nec in Oreb tantum, Ibid.
aut in Sina and in Eremo primum, sed antiquiorem, primum in Paradyso, post
Patriarchis, atque ita ex Judaeis certis temporibus reformatam: ut non jam ad
Moysi legem ita attendamus, quasi ad principalem legem, sed ad subsequentem
quam certo tempore Deus and gentibus exhibuit, and repromissa per Prophetas in
melius reformavit. The law of God was before Moses, neither given in Horeb nor
in Sinai, in the wilderness [nor in the land] but first given in Paradise;
afterward to the Patriarchs, and then being reformed it was given to the Jews:
so that we are not to look after Moses law as the principal, but to the law
that comes after the law of Moses, which being promised by the Prophets God in
the fullness of time gave unto the Gentiles in the times of reformation.

The effects of this Rule in order to Conscience are these: 10.


1. That we acknowledge Christ to be our Lord and Master, 1.
our lawgiver and our Teacher.

2. That we understand the ten Commandments according to his Commentary. 2.


3. That the Customs, 3.
explications, glosses, and usages of the Jews may not be the limit of our
practice.

4. That we expect not justification by our conformity to the Decalogue. 4.


5. That we endeavor to go on to perfection; 5.
not according to the pattern which Moses, but which Christ showed in the Mount.

6. That we do not reckon any Systeme of the Natural law, 6.
but the books of the New Testament.

7. That we do not esteem it sufficient for us to live according to Nature (as
the expression is commonly used) but that we live according to Grace, 7.
that is, the measures of reformed Nature. For in this sense these words of
Justin Martyr are true and useful, (...), To live according to Nature is the
ornament or praise of one that is yet an Unbeliever: meaning that the Disciples
of Jesus must do more. For according as the world grows in age, so also it is
instructed in wise notices; and it must pass on to glory by all the measures
and progressions of grace; and all that law by which we live in all the periods
of the world is nothing else but the several degrees and promotions of the law
of Nature. For children are governed by one measure and young men by another,
and old men still by a more perfect; and yet the whole is nothing else but
right reason drawn into laws, and that which fits our Nature bound upon us by
the decree of God: some laws fit our Natures as they are common to us and
beasts: some fit us as we are next to Angels; and some fit us as we are
designed to immortality, and the fruition of God: and the laws of Nature do
grow as our Natures do. And as we see is in matters of speculation, those
principles enter into us, or are drawn from their hidden places, in our age of
which we had no sign in our youth; and when we are children we admire at those
things and call those discourses deep and excellent which when we are grown up
we are ashamed of as being ignorant and pitiful. So it is in our manners, and
so it is in our practical notices; they all grow till they arrive at their
state and period: but because the Eternal laws of God, that is, those laws
which are not fi^ted to times and persons and relations, but to the Nature of
man, that is, to all Mankind, intend to bring us to God and to all that
perfection of which we are capable; therefore it is that they also must
increase according to the growth of Nature: when therefore the Nature of man
was rude and in its infancy, God drew out of the Eternal fountain but a few of
these Natural laws: but he still superadded more as the world did need them,
and at the last by his Son, who by his incarnation has adorned our Nature with
a robe of glory, has drawn out all those by which we are to converse with God
and men in the best and greatest Entercourses: that he might enable our Nature
to dispositions proper and immediate to a state of glory. Not but that they all
were potentially in the bowels of the great Commandments; but that God did not
by any Prophets or Lawgivers draw them all forth, till the great day of
reformation, at the Revelation of the Son of God. Lib. 4. c. 26. in princip.
But in this the sentence of Irenaeus is wise and full. Consummata vitae
praecepta in utroque Testamento cum sint eadem, eundem ostenderunt Deum qui
particularia quidem praecepta apta utrisque praeceptis, sed eminentiora and
summa, sine quibus salvari non potest, in utroque eadem suasit. The precepts of
perfect life are the same in both Testaments, and do demonstrate the same God
of both; who indeed has given severally several instances of Commandments;
but the more eminent and the chief, without which salvation is not to be had,
are the same in Both. Meaning, that there are the same general lines of
Religion, and of Justice in the old and in the new; but the special and
particular precepts are severally instanced by Christ and Moses.

RULE 5. All the explications of the Moral law which are found in the Prophets
and other holy writers of the Old Testament, are to be accounted as parts of
the Moral law, and equally obliging the Conscience.
HE that will explicate the Mosaic law according to the perfections of the
Gospel, 1.
does expound the words of a child by the Senses and deepest policies of a
witty man. I have seen some parts of Virgil changed into impure Fescennines;
and I have also seen them changed into the sense and style of the Gospel; but
Virgil intended neither, though his words were capable of both; and yet the way
to understand Virgil is by the Commentaries of men of his own time, or Nation,
or learned in the language and customs of the Romans. So it is in the
Decalogue of Moses. If Christians understand it by all the severities and
enlarged notices of the Gospel, they accuse their own Commentary as too large,
or the practice of the Jews who never obeyed them at that rate; and therefore
all those wild reductions of all good and bad to that measure is of no good
use, but it is full of error, and may have some ill effects; of which I have
already given caution: but then because they may be explicated and can admit a
commentary, as all laws do beyond their letter; there is nothing more
reasonable, then that the commentaries or additional explications of their own
Prophets and Holy men, and the usages of their Nation be taken into the
sacredness of the text and the limits of the Commandment.

Thus when God had said, 2.
Thou shall do no murder; when Moses in another place adds these words, Thou
shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; nor be mindful of an injury: Lev. 19.
17, 18*
this is to be supposed to be intended by God in the Commandment; and to be a
just commentary to the text, and therefore part of the Moral law. When they
were commanded to worship the God of Israel and no other: this was to be
understood according to David's commentary; and when he had composed forms of
prayer to God, to pray to him was to be supposed to be a duty of the
Commandment. God commanded that they should honor Father and Mother, which
appellative when Moses and the Holy Writers of the Old Testament had given to
Princes and Magistrates, and had in another place expressly commanded obedience
to them, it is tohe supposed that this is an explication of the fifth
Commandment.

This also is to be extended further, 3.
and by the sayings of the Prophets they could understand what things were
permitted by Moses, which yet God loved not: and that the Commandment had a
further purpose then their usages would endure: and though (as our Blessed Lord
afterward expressed) Moses permitted divorces for the hardness of their heart;
yet that from the beginning it was not so, and that greater piety was intended
in the Commandment they were sufficiently taught by the Gloss which God
himself inserted and published by the Prophet Hosea, I hate putting away. In
this and all other cases the Natural reasonableness of things, Natural justice,
and Essential piety, and the first institution of them were the best
indications of these effects which such sayings of the Prophets and other Holy
Men ought to have in the enlargement of the Moral law, or restraint of
privileges and liberties.

The use of this Rule in order to the Government of Conscience is to describe
of what usefulness in our religion, 4.
and what influence in our lives is the Old Testament; all the Moral precepts
which are particulars of the Natural law or universal Reason are either
explications of the Decalogue or precepts Evangelical, by which the old
Prophets did prepare the way of our Lord, and make his paths strait. It is the
same religion theirs and ours as to the Moral part: intending glory to the same
God by the same principles of prime reason, differing only in the clarity and
obscurity of the promises or Motives of Obed^ence, and in the particular
instances of the general laws, and in the degrees of duties spiritual: but in
both, God intended to bring Mankind to Eternal glories by religion or the
Spiritual worshippings of one God, by justice and sobriety, that is, by such
ways as Naturally we need for our Natural and perfective being even in this
World. Now in these things the Prophets are preachers of righteousness, and we
may refresh our souls at those rivulets springing from the wells of life, but
we must fill and bath our selves in fontibus salvatoris in the fountains of our
Blessed Savior: for he has anointed our heads, prepared a table for us, and
made our cup to overflow and of his fullness we have all received, Grace for
Grace.

But this is at no hand to be extended to those prohibitions or reprehensions
of their prevarications of any of the signal precepts of religion, 5.
by which as themselves were distinguished from other Nations, so God would be
glorified in them. For sometimes the Prophets represented the anger of God in a
ceremonial instance: when either they sinned with a high hand in that instance,
that is, with despite and contempt of the Divine Commandment, or when the
Ceremony had a mixture of morality, or when it was one of the distinctions of
the Nation, and consignation of them to be the people of God. But this will be
reduced to practice by the next Rule.

RULE 6. Every thing in the Decalogue is not obligatory to Christians, is not a
portion of the Moral or Natural law.
WHen Moses delivered the ten Commandments to the people, 1.
he did not tell them in order which was second, which was fifth: and upon this
account they have been severally divided as men did please to fancy. I shall
not clog these annotations with enumerating the several ways of dividing them;
but that which relates to the present inquiry is whether or no the prohibition
of graven images be a portion of the first Commandment; so as that nothing is
intended but that it be a part or explication of that: and that it contain in
it only the duty of confessing one God, and entertaining no other Deity viz.
so that images become not an idol, or the final object of our worship as a God;
and therefore that images are only forbidden as Dii alieni, not as the
representations of this one God, and they are capable of any worship but that
which is proper to God: or else it is a distinct Commandment; and forbids the
having, or making, and worshipping any images with any kind of religious
worship. These are the several effects which are designed by the differing
divisions of the first Table; I will not now examine whether they certainly
follow from their premises and presuppositions; but consider what is right, and
what follows from thence in order to the integrating The Rule of Conscience.
That those two first Commandments are but one was the doctrine of Philo the
Jew (at lest it is said so) who making the Preface to be a distinct
Commandment; reckons this to be the second; Deos sculptiles non facies tibi,
nec facies omne abhominamentum Solis and Lunae, nec omnium quae sunt supra
terram, nec eorum quae repunt in aquis, Ego sum Deus Dominus tuus Zelotes, etc.
And the same was followed by Athanasius, Synops. Scripr. tom. 2*
This book has these ten Commandments in Tables; The first is (...) I am the
Lord thy God: The second, thou shall not make an idol to thy self, nor the
likeness of any thing: and this division was usual in S. Cyrils time who brings
in Julian thus accounting them. L. 5. contr. Jul.
I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt: The second
after this: Non erunt tibi Dii alieni praeter me, non facies tibi simulacrum,
etc. and the same way is followed by S. Jerome and Hesychius: In c. 10. Hos. In
26. Levit.
These make the introduction to be one of the Commandments; and those which we
call the first and the second to be the second only.

Of the same opinion as to the uniting of these two is Clemens Alexandrinus; 2.
and S. Austin, L. 6. strom.
Et revera quod dictum est, Non erunt tibi Dii alieni, hoc ipsum perfectius
explicatur, cum prohibentur colenda figmenta. Qu. 71. in Ex.
The prohibition of images is a more perfect explication of those words, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me. To the same sense Ven. Bid In 20. Exodus
, S. Bernard, Sup. salv. Reg.
, the [Ordinary Gloss, Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis] Lombard, the Church of Rome, and
almost all the Lutheran Churches do divide the Decalogue.

On the other side these are made to be two distinct Commandments by the
Chaldee Paraphrast ( in c. 20. Exodus 3.
) and by Josephus; L. 3. Antiq. c. 4.
Primum praeceptum Deum esse unum, and hunc solum colendum. Secundum, nullius
animalis simulachrum adorandum. L. 3. hom. 8. in Exodus In Carm.
And these are followed by Origin, Gregory Nazianzen [S. Ambrose, and S. Hierom
In 6. Ephesians*
] even against his opinion expressed in another place, S. Chrysostom, S.
Austin, or whosoever is the Author of the Questions of the old and New
Testaments, Sulpitius Severus, Zonaras; and admitted as probable by Ven. Bid:
but followed earnestly by all the Churches that follow Calvin; and by the other
Protestants not Lutherans.

In this great contrariety of opinion that which I choose to follow is the way
of the Church of England, 4.
which as it has the greater and more certain authority from Antiquity, so it
has much the greater reasonableness. For when God had commanded the worship of
himself alone excluding all false Gods: In the next words he was pleased also
to forbid them to worship him in that manner by which all the Gods of the
Nations were worshipped, which was, by images: insomuch that their images were
called Gods, not that they thought them so; but that the worshipping of false
Gods, and worshipping by images were by the idolaters ever joined. Now this
being a different thing from the other: one regarding the object, the other the
manner of worship it is highly reasonable to believe that they make two
Commandments. 2.
2. God would not be worshipped by an image, because none could be made o^ him;
and therefore it is remarkable that God did duplicate his caution against
images of him, by adding this reason to his precept, Remember that ye saw no
shape, but only heard a voice: which as it was a direct design of God that
they might not make an image of him, and so worship him as the idolaters did
their false Gods, so it did indirectly at least intimate to them, that God
would be worshipped in spirit and truth, that is, not with a lying image: as
every image of ^im ^^ust needs be: for it can have no truth when a finite body
represents an infinite Spirit. And this is most likely to be thus: because this
being a certain digest of the law of Nature, in it the Natural Religion and
worship of God was to be commanded, and therefore that it should be spiritual
and true, that is, not with false imaginations and corporal representment, was
to be the matter of a Commandment. 3.
3. Since the first Table did so descend to particulars as by a distinct
precept to appoint the day of his worship: it is not unlikely that the
essential and Natural manner of doing it should also be distinctly provided
for, since the circumstantial was: but that could not be at all, if it was a
portion of the first Commandment: for then the sense of it must be according
to the first intention, that images should not become our Gods. 4.
4. The Heathens did not suppose their images to be their Gods, but
representments of their Gods, and therefore it is not so likely that God should
by way of caution so explicate the first Commandment; when there was no danger
of doing any such thing; unless they should be stark mad, 5.
or fools and without understanding. 5. When God forbad them to make and
worship the likeness of any thing in heaven and earth; he sufficiently declared
that his meaning was to forbid that manner of worshipping not that Object; for
by saying it was the likeness of something it declared that this likeness could
not be the Object of their worshipping; for because it is the image of a thing,
therefore it is not the thing they worshipped; and it cannot be supposed of a
man that he can make the image of the Sun to be his God, when he makes that
image of the Sun, because he thinks the Sun is the most excellent thing. When
therefore in the first Commandment he had forbidden them to acknowledge the
Sun, or any thing else but himself to be God; In the next he forbids the
worshipping himself or any thing else by an image. But of this I shall speak
more afterward; because it relates to the moral duty.

But I observe that all those Modernes who confound these two Commandments
have not that pretense which the Ancients had; 5.
and have quitted all that by which such confusion could have been in any sense
tolerable. For Philo and those Ancients who followed him; reckon the first
Commandment to be; [ I am the Lord thy God, etc.] by which God would be
acknowledged to be the Lord: and the second did forbid any other besides him.
So that there might be some appearance of reason to make the first Commandment
affirmative, and the second Negative; The first to declare who is God; The
second to forbid Polytheisme, The first to declare his Entity; the second to
publish his Unity: The first to engage their duty to him who had so lately
endeared them by freedom from captivity: The second to forbid the adopting the
Gods of the Nations with whom they were not to converse. I confess that these
reasons are not sufficient; for they multiply where there is no need; and make
a division without difference; and leave all those periods which are about
images to be of no use, no signification; and concerning their own practice and
religion in the matter of images, though it is certain they wholly derived it
from the Commandment, yet they take no notice of any warrant at all derived
from thence; but supposing that they did make the division for these reasons,
and that these reasons were good, yet all the Modernes quit all this
pretension; and allow but three Commandments to the first Table, and divide
the second into seven; to effect which they make two Commandments against
Concupiscence: concerning which I will not say they might have reckoned more
according to the multiplication of the objects; four as well as two: but this I
say, as it is wholly without necessity, and very destitute of any probability;
so it is done against the very order of words. For although Moses in
Deuteronomy reckons the Concupiscence of the wife first, yet in Exodus, which
is the copy of the Decalogue as it was given, Moses reckons the Concupiscence
of the house first: So that the ninth Commandment lies in the body of the
tenth; and the tenth lies part of it before the ninth, and part of it after:
which is a prejudice against it greater then can be outweigh'd by any or all
the pretenses which are or can be made for it: especially since by the opinions
of the Roman Doctors, these two cannot as they lie here make two objects: for
to covet another man's wife, is the same as to covet another man's servant, that
is, as a possession; for multitude of wives was great riches, and the peculiar
of Princes, as appears in Nathans upbraiding David, and the case of Solomon:
but to covet the wife propter libidinem is forbidden by the seventh
Commandment, as the Roman Doctors teach, and under that they handle it.
Therefore the wife, and the servant and the beast of another man being here
forbidden to be desired as matter of Covetousness make but one object, and
consequently but one Commandment: and if because a difference can be fancied,
the wife and the house make two objects: then the servant makes a third: for a
house differs from a wife no more then a servant from a house, the use of these
is as different as of those and can make as distinct objects of appetite and
desire; and therefore either they all must make but one Commandment, or they
must make more then two.

But the Church of Rome and the Lutherans have several interests, 6.
for other reasons they have none in so doing. The Church of Rome confounds the
two Commandments, lest the worshipping of images should appear to be
forbidden. For if it be a distinct Commandment which forbids the worship of
images; then because all false objects of worship are sufficiently forbidden in
the first; it will not be a competent answer to say, we do not worship images
as Gods, we do not make idols of them; for to worship any thing as God is not
forbidden in the second Commandment, but in the first: but therefore lest the
second Commandment should signify nothing, it follows, that the taking of
images into religion, or the worshipping God whether true or false by an image
is there forbidden. But if these two Commandments were one, then they suppose,
that this of forbidding images being a pursuance of the prohibition of having
any other Gods, expounds it self only to mean, the making images to be God,
which because they do not; they hope to stand upright in the Scrutiny
concerning this Commandment.

But to this I return this account: 7.
That although it be certain that if these Commandments be divided, it will
follow that this manner of Religion by image worship, is particularly forbidden
as a false manner of worshipping and consequently is upon no pretense to be
introduced into religion; yet if we should suppose them to be but one
Commandment, it will not follow that images are not forbidden to be used in
religious worshippings. For if God forbad them to make Deos sculptiles,
Engraven Gods, that is, to worship such Gods as may be depicted or engraven,
such as the Sun and Moon, Apis and Jupiter; the ox of Egypt or the fire of
Persia; then by the same reason we conclude that Deus sculptilis is no God, and
therefore to make the God of Israel to be a God depicted or engraven does
dishonor and depress him to the manner of an idol. For therefore in the
Decalogue recited by Philo and in the sense of all the Ancients; the reason
against making an engraven God is, Ego sum Deus tuus Zelotes, I am thy God, I
am thy Jealous God; that is, I who cannot be represented by such vanities, I am
thy God, but they are not, who can. * Add to this; that since the Doctors of
the Roman Church make the Decalogue to be the fountain of all Moral Theology
and by that method describe all cases of Conscience; it is necessary that they
take into the body and obligation of every Commandment not only what is
expressed in the letter and first signification, but the Species, the
relations, the similitudes, the occasions, any thing that is like the
prohibition, and concerning which we cannot tell whether it be or no; and upon
this account if they can retain images or think to honor God by the use and
worshipping of them; they may be confident of any thing, and may as well use
some pollutions of the flesh, as such pollutions of idols.

But there is also more in it then thus. 8.
For although it is usually supposed by learned persons, that Philo the Jew,
Athanasius, S. Hierom, and S. Austin are of opinion that the two Commandments
are not to be divided, but are all one: yet if we look into their sayings we
shall find them to have other effects then they suppose. For they making the
Preface to be the first Commandment, [ I am the Lord thy God which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt] do suppose that the object of Religion and
Divine worship is sufficiently declared in that they think the same of that as
all other men do of the following words: [ Thou shall have no otber Gods but
me] viz. That God proposing himself as their God, whom only they were to
worship, did by that sufficiently exclude the worship of all false Gods, or
giving Divine worship to any thing besides himself: So that when the object is
sufficiently provided for as it is in the first Commandment however it be
computed, the former arguments will return upon them, and it will be most
probable that the next provision be made for the manner of the Divine worship;
and then the use of images in religion and the Religious worship of them will
be by a necessary and immediate consequent forbidden: for the forbidding Deos
sculptiles: forbids not only other Gods; but forbids them with that reason and
demonstration. They that can be engraven or painted are no Gods, and therefore
images and false Gods are equally forbidden, where ever an image is joined to a
God, there is a false God, or no true God: for an image and the true God are
inconsistent. So that where ever there are two Commandments before that of
taking Gods Name in vain, as it is amongst all the Ancients ( Clemens
Alexandrinus only excepted) there it is most likely that the first provides
for the object of Divine worship affirmatively, and the second for the manner
negatively: and the effect of this will be, that they are in their Division of
the Decalogue almost wholly destitute of authority or warrant from the
Ancients, for they all make four Commandments in the first Table, at least;
The Jews usually indeed did reckon five: taking in that of honoring our
Parents, but they always made that of the Sabbath to be the fourth; by all
which it must needs be, that they must lie under the same objection which they
would fain avoid: and though they confound those two which we usually now
reckon the two first; yet because the Jews and ancient Christians who reckoned
otherwise did account one Commandment to the same purpose as we reckon the
first; that which follows can never be proved to mean any thing but a
prohibition of that manner of Divine worship by images; for it implies that to
worship God by an image, is to worship an idol: an image of God when it is
worshipped is an idol, for neither can the true God have an image, neither will
he be worshipped by an image. Now though this will not at all concern the
images of Saints, but only the worship of God by an image, yet even this also
when they think this image worship shall be a worshipping and honoring of God
indirectly, and an act pleasing to him, will come under this Commandment, as
certainly and more apparently then fornication or intemperance shall come under
the sixth or seventh; whither their Doctors usually reduce them.

This thing more I am willing to add concerning the division of the Decalogue:
9.
That when the Ancients did reckon the preface or introduction to be the first
Commandment; it is not certain that they put the words of [ Thou shall have no
other Gods but me] to the Second: For as for Philo, he does not recite them at
all, but reckons the second otherwise then it is in Moses books, and it is not
certain how he thought in this question to him that well considers his copy of
the Decalogue. For he thus begins [I am the Lord thy God who brought thee out
of the land of Egypt. Thou shall not make any graven Gods to thy self: nor any
abomination of Sun and Moon: nor of any thing that is on the earth, or that
creeps in the waters: I am thy Lord, the jealous God, etc.] Now in this which
is first and which is second is plain enough though Philo does not number them:
but whether the words of that which we call the first Commandment, by him are
understood in the first or in the second does not hence appear. But then for S.
Athanasius whom the adversaries reckon theirs, the case is yet clearer against
them: for [I am the Lord thy God] he reckons to be the first, omitting all that
which follows until the second Commandment: but the second he plainly and
perfectly reckons as we do, [ Thou shall not make to thy self an idol, or
graven image, nor the likeness of any thing] So that it is probable, He begins
the first Commandment with the Preface: but it is certain he reckons the
second as we do. S. Hierome and S. Austin are pretended for them* but they
also testify against them, and against themselves by an uncertain and
contradictory sentence (as I have showed:) indeed the Apostate Julian is much
more for them and does confound those which we call the two Commandments, but
yet reckons one before them, just as Philo: so that excepting Julian there will
be found in antiquity, Vel duo vel nemo, scarce one or two that is on their
side. However against them there is a great authority and very great
probabilities of reason: of which in the following periods, I shall add a more
full account: In the mean time as the Church of Rome is destitute of any just
ground of their manner of dividing the Ten Commandments, so they will find it
will not serve that interest they have designed.

But then for the Lutheran Churches they have indeed as little reason for their
division, 10.
and a much less interest and necessity to serve and to provide for. They
therefore thrust the second into the first: lest it should be Unlawful to make,
or to have Pictures or images; for they still keep them in their Churches, and
are fearful to be aspersed with a crime forbidden in the second Commandment;
they keep them I say, but for Memory only, not for worship or direct Religion.
But in this they are more afraid then hurt. For suppose the second Commandment
to be distinct and wholly against images and their worship; yet every thing in
the Commandment is not Moral, though the Commandment it self be. For God was
pleased to appoint such temporary instruments of a Moral duty as were fitted to
the necessities of that people; but such instruments were but like temporary
supporters; placed there but till the building could stand alone. But whether
this clause of having or making images be referred to the first or to the second
Commandment, it is all one. If to the first, it means that therefore they are
not to be made by them, lest they become the object of Divine worship. If to
the second, then they were not to be made lest they become instruments of a
false manner of the Divine worship: but in both, the prohibition is but
Relative, as appears in the Parallel places of Levit. 19. v. 4. But especially
Levit. 26. v. 1. Ye shall make ye no idols, nor graven image, neither rear ye
up a standing image, neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land
[to bow down unto it] for I am the Lord your God: by which it is plain that the
prohibition is not terminated on the image but referring to religion; and is of
the same Nature as the forbidding them to converse with idolaters, or to make
marriages with them; which God himself expressed to be lest they learn their
evil customs; and all the reason of the world tells us, that such clauses whose
whole reason is relative and instrumental, may be supplied by other
instruments, and the reason of them or their necessity may cease, and
consequently there can be no part of a Natural law, whose reason without a
Miracle and the change of Nature can never alter. So that this fear of theirs
being useless, they may without prejudice and interest follow that which is
more reasonable. And this was sufficiently indicated by the act and words of
God himself who gave order for the brazen serpent to be made, Vid. Manasseh Be^
lsrael in Council. q 30. and Tertul. l. 2. contr. Marcion. c. 12. Gab. Vasquez.
disp. 104. c. 6.
and the images or rather Hieroglyphics * of Cherubim to be set over the
propitiatory; which it is not to be supposed he would have done if it had been
against his own Eternal law: He suffered them not to worship them; but to make
them; to show that this was not against the Moral part of the Commandment,
though that was: and the Ark could endure the five golden Mice and the five
golden hemorrhoids because though they were images yet they were not idols,
that is, were not intended for worship: but because Dagon was, it fell before
the Ark; that could not be suffered: and in Solomon's Temple beside the
pomegranates and other imagery, there were twelve brazen bulls; but they were
not intended for worship, and therefore it was free to the Jews to use them or
not: but the calves of Dan and Bethel because they were fusiles Dei, graven
images used in Divine worship were an abomination: and upon the shekel of the
Sanctuary was impressed the image of Aarons rod and a pot of Manna, or
thurible: it was lawful while there was no danger of worshipping them.

This then is the first instance of the Rule: 11.
The having or making of images though it be forbidden to the Jews in the
second Commandment, yet it is not unlawful to Christians. But of this I shall
say more in the following periods.

Now concerning the Religion of images, 12.
that is, worshipping God by them directly or indirectly; whether that be
lawful to Christians; although I have sufficiently declared the negative
already, by reproving the great ground of that practice, I mean, the thrusting
the two Commandments together, and have proved that they ought not to be so
confounded; or if they ought, yet that the worship of images is not concluded
from thence to be lawful or permitted, yet I hope it will be neither useless
nor unpleasant if I determine this case upon its proper grounds, in these two
inquiries? 1. Whether it be lawful to make a Picture or image of God? 2.
Whether it be lawful to worship God by a picture?

Quest.

WHether it be lawful to make a picture or image of God?

I answer negatively: 13.
and that upon the plain words of God in Deuteronomy which upon the account of
the fifth Rule are to be accounted as an explication of the Moral law, and
therefore obligatory to Christians: as relating to the matter of the
Commandment, giving a Natural reason for a Natural duty, and pursuing that
with argument which before he had established with authority, and writing that
in the Tables of the heart which at first he delivered to Moses in Tables of
stone. Deuteronomy 4 15. 16.
Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of
similitude, in the day when the Lord spoke unto you in mount Horeb out of the
midst of the fire: lest ye corrupt your selves and make you a graven image, the
similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female, etc. Now why did God
so earnestly remind them that they saw no image, but because he would not have
them make any of him. And this is frequently pressed by God in that manner
which shows it not only to be impious to do it against his Commandment, but
foolish and impossible and against all Natural reason. Isai. 40. 18.
To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him? said God
by the Prophet. Meaning that there is none, there can be none, and you may as
well measure Eternity with a span, and graspe an infinite in the palm of your
hand, as draw the circles and depict him that has no color or figure, no
parts nor body, no accidents nor visibility. And this S. Paul argued out of
Aratus. (...). We are his offspring: that is, we are made after his image and
similitude; Christ is the Prototype, and we are efformed after his image who is
the firstborn of all Creatures: Man is made after the likeness of God; Not man
in his body; but Man in his soul, in his will and powers of choice, in his
understanding and powers of discerning, in his memory, and powers of recording,
and he that cannot make the image of a will, or by a graven image represent the
understanding of a man, must never hope to make any thing like God: there is no
way to do that, but to make a man; and that although it be but an imperfect
image of God, yet an image it is, and the best that is upon the earth. Acts.
17. 29.
But now from hence the Apostle argues, Forasmuch then as we are the offspring
of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone graven by art, and man's device: If the invisible, inexpressible part of
man is the image of God, and we are his sons by Creation expressing in our
Souls some little things of his infinite perfection, it cannot be supposed that
this image can make an image like God; and if it cannot be like him; it is not
to be made for him; for nothing is more unlike him then a lie. The Athenians
were dull people and knew not how to answer S. Paul's argument; but we are now
adays taught to escape from this. For it is said, that it is true; Gods
essence cannot be depicted or engraven; but such representations by which he
has been pleased to communicate notices of himself, can as well be described
with a pencil as with a Pen, and as well set down so that idiots may read and
understand as well as the learned Clerks. Now because God was pleased to appear
to Daniel like the Ancient of days, and the Holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove,
and Christ in the form of a man, these representations may be depicted and
described by images without disparagement to the Divinity of God.

To these I give these answers; 14.
First the vision of Daniel seeing the ancient of days, tells of no shape,
nothing like an old man: but by that Phrase did seem to signify the Eternal
God; he tells of a head and hair like pure wool, that is, pure and white, one
of the Synonyma of light or brightness, like that of his garment, like snow;
his wheels were a burning fire, his throne a fiery flame; that is in effect,
when Daniel was asleep he had a vision or Phantasme in his head: where he had a
representment of the Eternal God, in a circumfusion and a great union of light
and glory, which he when he was awake expressed by metaphors imperfectly
telling, what phantasme that was in which he perceived the representment and
communication of God; that is, he there set down the shadow of a dream of a
bright shining cloud: for the metaphor is a shadow, and his vision was a dream,
and what he dreamt he saw was but the investiture of God; like as when God by
his Angel went in a cloud of fire before the sons of Israel, nay, not so much,
for that was really so, this but a Prophetic ecstasy in his sleep: the images
of which are but very unfit to establish a part of Divine worship, and an
article of practice, against Natural reason and the letter of a Commandment.
But, 2. I demand, whether did Daniel see the eternal God then or no? If he did
not, then at the most it was but an angel of light in the place of God: and
then this can never infer the lawfulness of making any image of God, for it
was only Gods Angel, or a globe of glory instead of God and not God that
appeared in his own person. But if it be said he did see God, it apparently
contradicts the Scripture: 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.
No man has seen God at any time: and again, The eternal God whom no man has
seen or can see. The issue then is this, Daniel did not see God the Father,
neither could he: Therefore God the Father was not represented to him by any
visible species: therefore neither can we by any help or authority from this
dream. And it is not sufficient to say, that though Daniel did not see Gods
essence, yet he saw the representment: for he did not see any representment of
God; he did not see God by any thing that expressed his person: for as for
essences, no man can see the essence of a Be, or a Bird: but sees it by some
proper representment, but yet by that representment he properly and truly sees
the bird: but Daniel did no way see Gods person or Nature, not so much as by
any phantasme or image: an Angel of light, or the brightness of an Angel he
might dream of in the ecstasy: but in no sense could he be said to see God,
except only by his Angel or Ambassador. So that when it is said, No man can
see God, it cannot be meant, that Gods essence can not be seen; for this had
said no great matter: for no essence can be seen, but it must mean that God
dwells in an inaccessible light whither no man can approach out of which he
will send no emissions of representment or visibility; for if he had so done at
any time, or would do at all; it were not true, that no man had seen him, or
could see him: for if he had communicated himself personally in any
representment or visibility, then he had been seen, and in that instance and at
that time he were not the invisible God. 3. Suppose Daniels vision had been of
God himself; yet as it was done to him by special ^avour so it was for a
special purpose; it was for a design of Prophecy and to declare future events
in the matters of war and peace; not to establish a practice prejudicial to a
Commandment: and it is strange that a vision or nights dream expressed by way
of rapture and clouds of Metaphor, communicated to one man, signifying
uncertainly, told imperfectly after the manner of raptures and prophetic
ecstasies, intended to very distant purposes, never so extended by his own
Nation or used to any such end, should yet prevail with Christians (who are or
ought to be infinitely removed from such a childish Religion, and baby tricks)
more then an express Commandment, and Natural and essential reason, and the
practice both of all the Jews and the best Christians. There is nothing in the
world though never so bad, but by witty and resolved men may have more colors
laid upon it to set it out, then this can from this pretension. 4.
4. The vision it self if it were expressed in picture as it is set down, would
be a most strange production of art, and a horrid representation of Nature; and
unless something were supposed which is not expressed, it would be a strange
new Nothing. For [the Ancient of dayes] does by no violence signify an old
man; for it being a representment of Eternity, is the worst of all expressed by
an old man; for that which is old is ready to van^sh away; and nothing is more
contrary to eternity. Again, here is no mention of the appearance of a man.
There is indeed mention of a head, but neither of Man nor beast, bird nor fly
expressed: and hair like pure wool, but in what it is like excepting only the
purity is not told, nor can be imagined: after this there is nothing but a
throne of flames and wheels of fire, and all this together would make a strange
image, a Metaphor to express eternity, a head of I know not what light without
substance, visibility without a figure, a top without a bottom, the whiteness
of wool instead of the substance of hair, and a seat upon wheels and all in
flames and fire: that it should ever enter into the head or heart of an
instructed man to think that the great, the immense, the invisible, the
infinite God of heaven, that fills heaven and earth and hell should be
represented in image or picture by such a thing, by such a nothing is as
strange and prodigious as the combination of all the daughters of fear and
sleep and ignorance, 5.
5. After this vision of Daniel it was in the Church of the Jews esteemed as
unlawful as ever to make an image of God; and by this the primitive Christians
did not believe a warrant or confidence could be taken to do any thing of that
Nature: and they that now adays think otherwise have a new understanding and a
new religion, defying a Commandment and walking by a dream; and are such whom
a precept cannot draw, but they follow what they understand not, and what was
not intended to conduct their religion, but to signify only the events and
great changes of the world. 6.
6. If because mention is made of the Ancient of days in Daniel, it were
lawful to picture God like an old man; we might as well make a door and say it
is Christ, or a vine and call it our Master, or a thief and call it the day of
judgment: a Metaphorical or Mystical expression may be the vail of a
mysterious truth, but cannot pass into a sign and signification of it: it self
may become an hieroglyphick when it is painted, but not an image which is a
(...) and the most proper representation of any thing that can be seen and is
not present. They that paint a child to signify Eternity do it better then
they who by an old man signify him that can be no older to morrow then he was
yesterday. But by this I only intend to note the imprudence and undecency of
the thing: the unlawfulness is upon other accounts which I have reckoned.

Concerning the humanity of our B. Savior, 15.
that being a creature he might be depicted, I mean it was naturally capable of
it: it was the great instrument of many actions, it conversed with mankind
above thirty years together, it was the subject of great changes, and the
matter of a long story, and the conduit of many excellent instructions, and
therefore might without all question be described as well as Cesar's or
Meletius, Marc Anthony or the Kings of the Gentiles. It might be done: and the
question being here only of the making or having of it, abstractedly from all
other appendages or collateral considerations, I need say no more of it under
this title; but that it is neither impious nor unreasonable of it self to have
or to make the picture or image of Christ's Humanity, or rather of his humane
Body. For against this there is neither reason nor religion, and if it be made
accidentally unlawful that is not of present consideration.

But for the usual image of the Holy Ghost in the form of a dove the pretense
is great and fairer; 16.
no less then the words of Scripture. For in this instance that reason ceases
for which God did prohibit the making of his image; for here they did not
only hear a voice, but also they saw a shape; for the Holy Ghost descended in
the likeness of a dove: (...): in a bodily shape. So S. Luke. To this I answer,
that the Holy Ghost did not appear in the shape of a dove at all; but the dove
mentioned in the story relates only to the manner of his descending, and
hovering over Christ. And this 1. 1.
appears by the words in S. Matthew (...), He saw the Spirit of God [descending
like a dove] that is, 2.
as doves use to descend, hovering and overshadowing of him. 2. The word (...),
which signifies an imperfect resemblance, or a limited similitude, does not
infer the direct shape of a dove; but something of it; the motion or the
quantity, the hovering or the lighting, like that of his appearance on the day
of Pentecost; Act. 2. 3.
cloven tongues (...), as it were of fire; that is, something of it; to shine
it may be but not to burn; to appear bright but not to move. 3.
3. This appears yet more plainly in the words of S. Luke, (...). The Holy
Ghost did descend in a bodily shape; as a dove upon him: where the [bodily
shape] cannot mean the bodily shape of a dove, for then it must have been
(...), as of a dove, like that of the Acts, (...); but it must wholly be
referred to (...): he descended as a dove uses to do: but then for (...) the
bodily shape, it was nothing but a body of light; the greatest visibility,
called by the Apostle, (...), the excellent Glory: 2 Pet. 1. 17.
which indeed was the usual investiture of Gods messengers in their appearances
and visibilities: and that there appeared a fire in Jordan at that time, Justin
Martyr against Tryphon the Jew affirms expressly. 4.
4. That this similitude was relative to the motion or the manner of a doves
descent is so much the more probable because this acceptance and understanding
of it is more agreeable to the design and purpose of the Holy Ghost's
descending. For by [ flying] the Jews did use in their Symbolical Theology to
signify, a Divine influxe or inspiration says Rabbi Jaccai upon the ninth of
Daniel: This descent therefore of the Holy Ghost in the manner of a doves
flight signifies the gift of the spirit of God to his holy Son; who received
him not by measures but the fullness of him: and from his fullness we all receive
our portions.

I cannot deny but that amongst learned men there is great difference of
apprehension concerning it; 17.
and the generality of men without examining it suppose the H. Ghost to have
descended being invested with the direct shape of a Dove [(...), so Justin
Martyr: for he expresses the words otherwise then all the four Evangelists;
they all say, (...), meaning as a Dove descends; he changes the case and makes
it to be the shape or form of a Dove: (...), so Origin calls it* the Phantasme
or appearance of a bird; yet I will for the present suppose it so; because the
ancients did generally believe so: but then I answer to the objection; That 1.
although the Ancients did suppose it so; yet in the sixth Council, that at
Constantinople Can. 83. it is expressly forbidden to depict Christ like a Lamb,
or the Holy Spirit like a Dove. 2. Suppose the fancy of the Ancients to have
some reality in it; yet it amounted to no more then this, It was nothing but a
light or fire effigiated into such a resemblance; or like a bright cloud which
represents strange figures imperfectly, any thing according to the heart or
fancy of them that behold it; and therefore is not so imitable as if it were a
direct and proper appearance: So the Gospel of the Nazarens expresses it,
(...). Presently a great light did shine round about the place; and their
apprehension of a dazeling light in such a resemblance is but an ill warrant to
make a standing figure and proper imagery. 2.
2. Tertullian supposes it was really and properly a very Dove indeed: (...)
and if so, the whole business is at an end: for any Dove may be pictured; but
the Holy Ghost must not be pictured in that shape, though his errand and design
was ministered to by a Dove. 3.
3. And that indeed is the proper and full solution of this objection.
Supposing that the shape of a Dove did appear, yet this no way represented him,
or was to be used as a sign of him; and therefore it is observable when God had
told the Baptist how he should know the Messiah, and that the Holy Ghost should
consign and signify him, (...)
he makes no mention of a Dove; but of descending only: not only plainly
intimating that the mention of a Dove was for the similitude of Motion not of
shape, but also to signify that the Holy Ghost himself was not at all to be
represented as a Dove. But then if there was the shape of a Dove, as the
Ancients suppose, it looks downwards not upwards; and was ^ Symbol not to
signify any thing of the Divinity, or the personality of the Holy Spirit; but
to signify something in Christ, or in Christ's body the Church, to represent
the excellency and sweetness of Christ and of the Church, his perfection and
our duty, the state of his institution and of our religion, and so they who
thus teach of the apparition of a Dove, I^^. 42. 2, ^^.
express the Symbol. The Dove was to represent that great meekness which was in
Christ, and which he would insert into his institution as no small part of a
Christians duty: which our B. Savior was pleased also to express in the same
similitude, [ be as harmless as Doves.] Luke 9. ^^
Philo says that in the Jews Discipline a Dove signifies Wisdom. that is, a
good, a wise, a Gentile, and Debonaire comportment, not the severity of
retirement and a Philosophical life, but of a civil, sweet, and obliging
conversation. Some say that this Dove did relate to that Dove which signified
to Noah by an olive branch of peace that God was again reconciled to the world;
and so did it please God to use the like Symbol when he would signify that
reconcilement which was by Christ to be effected, and of which the other was
but a weak representment, and type, or figure. The world was now also to be
renewed at the appearance of this Dove. But because this no way relates to the
person or the Nature of the H. Ghost, it can no way hence be inferred that the
H. Ghost may be represented by an image. This apparition if it was at all was
Symbolical of something below, not representative of any thing above: and in
that sense and to that purpose I do not doubt but it may be lawful to make a
picture of the dove that was seen, if I say, it was at all; and of the fiery
tongues sitting upon the Apostles; for these were not representative of the
Nature or person of the Holy Ghost but descriptive of the impression that from
the Holy Ghost was made upon them: and of this Nature is the expression of the
Baptist. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire; that is, from
his baptism, or by his immission you shall receive graces and gifts whose
effect is properly expressed by fire, which also shall be its Symbol.

And after all this; 18.
if it should please God any person of the Blessed and most holy Trinity should
appear in any visible shape; that shape might be depicted; of that shape an
image might be made; I mean, it might naturally; it might if it were done for
lawful ends, and unless a Commandment were to the contrary; and therefore so
long as God keeps himself within the secret recesses of his sanctuary, and the
Majesty of his invisibility, so long it is plain he intends the very first
sense and words of his Commandment: but if he should cancel the great reason
of his Commandment; and make that by an act of his own to become possible
which in the Nature of things is impossible, that is, that an image can be made
of God; I should believe that God did intend to dispense in that part of the
Commandment, and declare that he intended it only for a temporary band: For
if the reason of the commandment were taken away; either the Commandment also
ceases to oblige; or must be bound upon us by another reason, or a new
Sanction, or at lest a new declaration; or else it would follow that then his
visible appearance would become a snare to mankind. But because yet he has not
yet appeared visibly and has by no figure or idea represented the Godhead; and
that it is a truth which must last as long as Christian Religion lasts, that No
man can see God, therefore it follows that it is at no hand lawful to make an
image of God or relating to the Divinity. If a Dove be made it must not be
intended to represent the Holy Ghost, Si quis dicat quod Spiritus S. in columba
apparuit, and Pater in Veteri Testamento sub aliquibus corpo^alibus form^^
ideoque possunt and illi per imagines repraesentari; dicendum quod illae formae
corporales, non fuerunt a Patre vel Spiritu Sancto assumptae, and ideo
repraesentatio eorum per imagines, non est repraesentatio personae Divina; sed
repraesentatio illius formae secundum se. propterea non debetur ei aliqua
reverentia sicut nec illis formis secundum se. Nec illae formae fuerunt ad
repraesentandas Divinas personas, sed ad repraesentandum effectus, quos Divinae
personae faciebant in rebus. Durand. in 3. Sent. Did. 9 q. 2. n. 15.
for besides that no Dove did appear, nor shape of a Dove, yet if it did, it
related not to the person of the Holy Ghost, but to the impression made upon
the person on whom the light descended: and if the figure of the crucifixe be
made, or of Jesus in the flesh; it is wholly relative to the Creature, not to
him as God; for that is impious, and unreasonable and impossible to be done in
any Natural proportion. And the like also is to be said of those expressions in
Scripture, of the hand of God, his eye, his arm; which words although they are
written yet they cannot, ought not to be painted: I do not doubt but it is
lawful to paint or ingrave an eye or a hand; but not an eye or hand of God,
that is, we may not intend to represent God by such sculpture or picture;
because the Scripture does not speak them to that end; that by them we may
conceive any thing of God; for as Hesselius well notes, these and other like
expressions are intended to represent some action of God: Bibl. Vulg.
such as is that of Psalm. 78. alias 77. verse. 65. who brings in God, excitatum
tanquam dormientem, tanquam potentem crapulatum a circo: awakened out of sleep,
and as a giant refreshed [filled, gorged,] with wine: by which if any man shall
represent God in picture, his saying, it may as well be painted as written,
will not acquit him from insufferable impiety.

Now this which I have discoursed is evidently according to the doctrine 19.
and practice both of the Jews and primitive Christians. Concerning the Jews
Tacitus says of them Mente sola, unumque numen intelligunt: profanos, qui Deum
imagines mortalibus materiis in species hominum effingunt. Idem ^^iam videre
est apud Diodo^. S^^^l.
They acknowledge but one Deity, whom they understand in their mind only:
esteeming all them to be profane who efforme the images of their Gods of
corruptible matter into the shapes of men. And the testimony of S. Clemens of
Alexandria is very full to this purpose: S^romat. 1.
Deum ex Mosis Disciplina nec hominis effigy, nec ulla alia re repraesentari,
God by the law Moses was not to be represented in the shape of a man or any
other figure: and for the Christians that they also understood themselves to be
bound by the same law to the same religious abstaining from making images of
God is openly and generally taught by the Doctors of the Christian Church for
the four first ages together; as without scruple appears in the express words
of Origin l. 7. con. Celi.
, Tertullian de coron. mil.
, Eusebius l. 1. c. 6. praep. Evang.
, Athanasius Orat. contra Gentes.
, S. Hierom in c. 40. Is^i.
, S. Austin de fide and Symbol. c. 7.
, Theodoret in Deuteronomy. q. 1.
, Damascen l. 4. de Orth. fide c 17.
, and the Synod of Constantinople as is reported in the sixth action of the
second Nicene Council: the sense of all which together with his own Polydore
Virgil l. 2. c. 23. de invent.
thus represents; Cum Deus ubique praesens sit, nihil a principio post homines
natos stultius visum est, quam ejus simulacrum pingere, Since the world began
never was any thing more foolish then to picture God who is present every
where: for this is (according to the sharp reproof of the Apostle) to change
the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude (...) Romans 1. 23.
, so it is in the Greek; into the similitude of an image of a corruptible man,
and of birds and beasts, etc. then which words nothing can be plainer to
condemn the picturing God: a thing which the very Heathens did abhominate, Sed
nulla effigies, simulachraque nota Deorum,
Majestate locum and sacro implevere timore,
said Silius Italicus of the Temple of Cadiz; they had no images, no pictures
of the Gods, but the house was filled with Majesty and a holy fear. And this
they did not of ignorance, nor of custom; but out of reason and wise discourse.
When Seneca entreated his friend Lucilius to make himself worthy of God, he
tells him how: Finget autem non auro, non argento: non potest ex hac materia
imago Dei fingi similis: Not with gold and silver; for of these an image like
to God can never be made. And therefore Tacitus says of the Germans, that they
nec cohibere parietibus Deos, nec in ulla^ humani oris speciem assimilare
exagnitione coelestium arbitrantur, They think they do not know the nature of
the Gods, if they should thrust them into walls, or depict them in the
resemblance of a Man or woman; Nullum simulacrum finxisse antiquitatem, said
Macrobius; The old world never made an image (meaning of God) Quia summus Deus
nataque ex eo men's, L. 1. in Somn. Scip. c. 2.
sicut ultra animam ita supra naturam sunt, quo nihil fas est de fabulis
pervenire; because the supreme God, and the mind that is borne of him, as it is
beyond our Soul so it is beyond all Nature, and it is not fit that fables and
fictions should be addressed to him, Nulla auri effigies, nulla commissa
metalla.
Forma Dei mentes habitare and pectore gaudet.
God dwells in minds and hearts of good men, not in images and metals.

The next question is of greater effect, 20.
and though the answer of it must needs be concluded from the former, yet
because it has some considerations of its own and proper arguments it is worth
a short inquiry.

Quest. Whether it be lawful for Christians to worship God by an image?

Concerning which the best ground of resolution is the Commandment; 21.
which it is certain the Church of the Jews did understand so, that they
accounted it idolatry to worship God in any image whatsoever; Thus the
Israelites were idolaters when they made the golden calf, for so they
proclaimed, These are thy Gods o Israel who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt: and to morrow is a solemnity of Jehovah; said Aaron. The calf they
intended as an image of their God and by it they intended to worship him, In c.
7. Acts.
which is not improbable says Bellarmine; which is certainly true said Ferus:
and which is affirmed by the Spirit of God; they changed their glory into the
similitude of a calf that eats hay: that is, they represented God who was
their glory, by a golden calf; And concerning Micah though his Mother made an
image, Judge. 17.
yet that it was for the worshipping of the God of Israel appears in all the
story; for upon this account he hoped that the Lord would bless him, he took a
Levite for his Priest, he asked council of the Lord; yet these also he called
his Gods which were but the images of God, by which it appears he was an
idolater because he worshipped the true God by an image, which he had
forbidden. The same was the case of Gideon who made a Covenant with them that
God should be their King, yet he made an Ephod; that is, instituted a forbidden
service to him; which thing became a snare to his house; and being a
prevarication of this Commandment, was in its Nature an idolatrous worship;
and yet it was but a superstitious or false worship of the true God: Ep. 31. ad
Val.
And this is affirmed by the Christian Doctors. Non vult Deus in lapidibus
coli, said S. Ambrose, God will not be worshipped in stones or graven images:
119. ep. ad Januar.
and S. Austin affirms that God in this Commandment did prohibit, ne quis
colat ullam imaginem Dei nisi unam eandem quae cum ipso est Christus: that we
should worship no image of God but him that is the lively image of his person,
that is, Jesus Christ: and this is so affirmd by all the Fathers, so confirmed
by the doctrine and practice of the Church, so adhered to by all the Doctors of
the Jews, that Vasquez finds himself constrained to confess, clare deducitur,
non licuisse tum verum Deum in aliqua imagine venerari: it is clearly
consequent, that then it was not lawful to worship the true God in any image or
representment.

But it is said, 22.
that though it was not then, yet now it is: for that was only a temporary
precept, relative to the Jews because of their proneness to idolatry. So
Catharinas affimes, Ut vid. est ap. Bellar. de imag.
totum hoc praeceptum esse positivum, non morale. This whole Commandment is
positive, not moral: for however something related to the Jews, yet by this
Commandment is only forbidden to worship the images of false Gods, or the
image of the true God with Divine worship.

Against this I have many things to say, 23.
1. That idolatry is a sin against the law of Nature, or of prime religion;
therefore whatsoever was idolatry in the Jews, is the same sin in the
Christians. Indeed in the Intercourses between Man and Man, though the relative
duty be bound upon us by the Commandment of God, yet the instances can be
altered by humane authority and consent; as new kinds of incest; several
instances of Murder, of treason and the like; but where not only the law but
the instances also are of Gods appointment; what is once is always, unless God
change the particular, which he never did in the present question. One case
there is in which the particulars even of the present article can vanish: viz.
when a particular is commanded apparently for a transient reason, and has in
it no essential reason no Natural rectitude; but the worshipping of God by an
image is against Natural reason as I have proved by the unlawfulness and
unreasonableness of making an image of God and shall further prove in the
sequel; therefore although by reason of the Jews proneness to direct and prime
idolatry the Commandment put new and accidental necessities (I mean the not
having or making any pictures) yet the prohibition of worshipping God by an
image having a Natural and essential rectitude and conformity to the Simplicity
of a Natural and to the Spirituality of the Christian religion, it cannot be
changed as the fancies or the interests of Men shall require, and of this
besides the apparent reasonableness of the thing we have an express testimony
from Origin. L. 7. con. Cells.
Caeterum Christiani homines and Judaei sibi temperant ab his propter illud
legis, Dominum Deum timebis... Item propter illud, Non erunt tibi Dii alieni
praeter me, and non facies tibi ipsi simulacrum, etc. aliaque multa his similia
quae adeo nos prohibent ab aris and simulacris, ut etiam emori jubeant citius
quam contaminemus nostram de Deo fidem talibus impietatibus. Both Christians
and Jews abstain from these [worshippings] because the law says; thou shall
have no other Gods but me: And thou shall not make to thy self any Graven
image, and for many other things like these; which so severely restrain us from
altars and images, that they command us to die rather then to pollute our faith
of God with such impieties. The sum of which is, that Christians as well as
Jews understood themselves bound equally by this Commandment; and they were to
suffer death rather then image worship.

2. To worship false Gods, 25.
or to give Divine honor to an image which is not God, is all one kind of
formal idolatry; they may differ Materially, as the worshipping of Silver does
from bowing the head to Gold; but they are formally the same thing; for it is a
making that to be our God which is no God; and this is sufficiently forbidden
in the first Commandment: Now since there are more sins against that
Commandment then one; let us suppose that the two first (as we reckon them)
are but one: yet the next must be that which is forbidden in the explication;
that is, to worship the true God with a false image; it is making God to be
like an idol by representing him in the same cheap impossible way; by using him
like the false Gods, by making his image to become an idol; by giving him a
forbidden, hated worship, by honoring him with a lie; all which if they be not
great violations of the Commandment to which they do belong; then there is
but one kind of sin there forbidden, and this is an act of so great simplicity
and incommunicability that it has neither Brother nor Sister, Mother nor
Daughter, Kiff nor Kin, analogy nor correspondencies, addresses nor degrees: If
it have not, why are so many particulars reduced to this Commandment by all
Casuists, friends or foes in this Article: If it have, this superstitious and
forbidden worship being here named in the Commandment, and standing next to
the prime idolatry, must at lest have the degree of the same obliquity.

3. He that makes an image of God and worships it; 26.
gives it the worship of God, whom it represents, or a different. If he gives a
different and consequently a less worship he does not worship God in the image;
but his worship such as it is is terminated on the image; and then comes not
into this inquiry: it is no more then loving a bird for Lesbia's sake, or
valewing a pendant for her sake that gave it me; and this may be a civil
valuation, and is to be estimated according to its excess or temper. But if by
the image I mean to worship God; then I join them together in the act of
adoration, and make them the same integral object: but then I give to both the
same worship; and therefore unless they can both be united into an identity, I
must needs give Divine worship to that which is no God; which is direct
idolatry. If an image of God pass the worship, which I give unto God, then it
goes first to the image, then to God; therefore it must needs be the same: for
that which passes from the image to God must not be less then what is fit to be
given to God: But if it be the same; then it ought not at all to pass upon
that: If it be less then Divine it must not be given to God; if it be not less,
it must not pass upon that which is not God. If it be less, it is impiety when
it is offered to the Prototype, if it be the same and not less, it is idolatry
when it is offered to the image.

But I need not make use of both parts of the dilemma; 26.
for it is certain that every relative worship must be the same in the middle
and the end; and it is confessed by most of those who worship God and his
Christ and his Saints by images, that the same honor is given to both. Eundem
honorem deberi imagini and exemplari says Almain: ac proinde imagines S.
Trinitatis, Christi, and Crucis cultu latriae adorandas esse: The images of the
Trinity, of Christ, and of the Cross are to be adored with Divine worship. The
same is the opinion of Alensis, Aquinas, Bonaventure, Albertus, Richardus,
Capreolus, Cajetan, Coster, Valentia, the Jesuits of Colen, Triers and Mentz:
who approved Costers opinion; and indeed generally of all the Roman Schools,
if we may believe a great Man amongst them; Constans est Theologorum Sententia,
imaginem eodem honor and cultu honorari and coli quo colitur id cujus est
imago, said Azorius: In^^^. Moral. part. 1. l. 9. c. 6.
and he supposes this to be the mind of the Council of Trent, and insinuated by
the second Nicene, and certainly he was in the right. For though the Council of
Trent used much caution in their expression of this invidious article, and
expressed no particular honor, but that due honor and worship be given to
them; yet when at the latter end of the decree it approves the Second Nicene
Council and refers to that in the Article; it is plain that the Council of
Trent intended such honor and worship to be due, as the Council of Francfurt
said was not due; neither is it to be imagined they durst contradict so
constant an opinion, or openly recede from their great Aquinas. They have
amongst them many fine devices, to make this seem what it is not; but that
which is sufficient is this, that no distinction, no artifice will file the
harshness off from this: for whereas the great thing that they say is this,
that this worship being not for the image but for Gods sake passed through the
image; does not give Divine honors to the image. But I reply: Is it a Divine
honor that is given to the image or no: is it the same that is given to God;
or is it another? If it be the same then though it be not for the image, but
for God, yet it is for God that the Divine worship is given to the image; that
is, it is for Gods sake that what is due to God alone is given to that which is
not God; that is, for Gods sake they commit idolatry. But if it be not the
same, then how do they worship God by the image? Idem est motus ad imaginem
and exemplar; says Aristotle, and upon this account they suppose what is done
to the image accrues to God; but then as they must take care that nothing be
given to God that is less then himself, I mean that he be not worshipped with
less then a Divine worship; so they may also remember, that by one motion and
act of worship they cannot give less to the image then they do to God;
whatsoever is less then another is not the same with another: if therefore the
worship given to the image be in any sense less then that which is given to
God, then it is not the same: if it be not the same, then by the same motion,
by the same act of worship there are two kinds of worship given: which is a
contradiction, that one should be two: and also evacuates their great pretense
of the reasonableness or possibility of doing worship to God by an image;
because upon this account the same does not pass at once to both.

4. A good man is more an image of God then any Painter or Engraver can make:
27.
but if we give Divine honors to a good Man it were idolatry: therefore much
more if we give it to an image. I use this instance to take off the trifle of
worship Relative, and worship Terminative; for if we should offer sacrifice to
a man, build temples and altars to him over against his doors, burn lamps, make
vows, appoint Holy days, processions, Letanies, institute fraternities, give
him the appellatives of honor which we usually ascribe to God, it would not
serve our turns to say; we do it to God whose image this man is, and we
intend the honor to God finally; there it rests, it only passes thorough the
good man, to be united to the glories of God; it were idolatry without all
contradiction. I find that acts of humility have been done to the poor for
Christ's sake; and the actions were referred to Christ just as all other acts of
charity and alms use to be; but if Divine honor be done to them it is so far
from being entertaind by God as the correlative of that worship, that it is a
dishonor to him; he being curious of his own peculiar, and having given no
warrant no instance that can amount to any thing of that Nature, and he will be
worshipped as Plato's expression is (...); in that way (not that we choose, but)
that he best likes. He that will pass worship to God by the mediation and
interposition of a creature, must do it by using that creature in all the
endearments and regards for Gods sake of which it is capable. Thus by
reverencing the Gray head and rising up to him, we do honor to the great
Father of Men and Angels: by releeving the poor we do honor to Christ; but
neither is Christ honored by us if we have a rich present to a King for
Christ's sake, or call a poor beggar, My Lord: but when for Gods sake we pass
those regards to several estates of Men which are the best usages which
prudently they can rerequire, then the good we do to them, whether it be
honor or releef, relates to God: But for Gods sake to give Divine honors to a
man; is as if to honor the Master we made his servant equal; or out of
reverence to the body we should wear the shoo upon our head: and this argument
must needs conclude against the worshippers of images; for although Vasquez,
and I think he alone of all the world, owns the worst that this Argument can
infer, and thinks it lawful to give Divine worship relatively or transitively
to a man; yet when that whole Church excuses their worshipping of Saints by
saying they give only such veneration to them as is proportioned to them, not
Latria but Dulia, that is, not Divine worship in any Sense, for so they would
be understood to speak and do; it must needs be certain, that this argument is
not to be answered, nor yet to be outfac'd. However, this is certain; that when
the Arrians who believed Christ to be a mere creature, though they could not
deny but that (according to the express words of Scripture) he was the express
and bright image of his Fathers glory, yet because they gave to Christ Divine
honors for his relation sake to his Father the Eternal God they were by the
Fathers of the Church expressly called idolaters, as is to be seen in the
first, third and fourth Orations of S. Athanasius against the Arrians and in S.
Cyril in Joh. l. 9. c. 41. and diverse other places: and whatever Vasquez or any
man else is pleased to think of it; yet S. John was twice rejected by an Angel
when he would have given Divine honor to him: when he would have worshipped
him: and yet that Angel represented God, and was the servant of Jesus. And upon
this account we may worship every Creature; every fly, every Tulip, even the
Onyons of Egypt; for every plant is more an image of God then a dead piece of
Metal, or Marble can be Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba Deum. And it is
in images as it is in the matter of Oaths, ^f which our B. Savior said that he
that swears by Heaven, or by the Earth, by the Temple, or by the Gold, it is
all a case: it all alike refers to God and does him dishonor if the matter be
vain or false; so it is in images: every creature of God represents him and is
capable of transmitting honor to him, as a wooden image: and yet because the
best images of God are not susceptive of Divine honors so much as by relation,
much less shall the worse images: and if it be idolatry to give such to a man,
though with an intuition upon God: to do so to a dead image which has less
likeness to God cannot be put of by a distinction, and a vain imagination. * I
will not aggravate the evil practices or Doctrines which are in the Church of
Rome, concerning this Question, but it is obvious to observe, that although
this distinction of relative and terminative is invented by superstitious
persons to make the question hard, and to themselves greater opportunity of
quieting the Scruples of tender persons: yet they do give, and openly profess
to give Divine honors to that which is no God, which I thus demonstrate. The
Cross on which Christ sufferd is but a creature: but to the image of this they
give a relative Divine honor, therefore to the Exemplar, which is that Cross
whereof the other are but images, they terminate the Divine honor. So Jacobus
Almain in the words a little before quoted: The same honor is owing to the
image and the Exemplar; and therefore the images of the Trinity, and of Christ,
and OF THE CROSS are to be adored with the worship of Latria; [that is,
Divine.] To this purpose is that clause in the Pontifical published by the
authority of Clement the eighth; ^^it Romans p 672.
Crux legati quia debetur ei Latria, erit a dextris. The Legates Cross must be
on the right hand; because Latria or Divine Honor is due to it. Now this being
the image can challenge but this Divine honor relatively; but the Cross that
Helena found at Jerusalem was the Exemplar, therefore to that the Divine
worship is due ultimate and terminative, it rests there; which is as down right
idolatry as can be defined. But Aquinas proves it ought to be so by this
Argument, That in which we place the hope of our salvation to that we exhibit
the worship of Latria, or Divine worship: but in the Cross we place the hope of
our salvation, for so the Church sings, O Crux Ave spes Unica
Hoc passionis tempore:
Auge piis justitiam,
Reisque dona veniam.
All hail O Cross who art our only hope in this time of our suffering:
Increase the righteousness of the righteous, and give pardon to the guilty. I
could add many more things to the same purpose; Salve sancta facies nostri
Redemptoris,
In qua nitet species Divini splendoris,
Impressa panniculo nivei candoris.
Salve vultus Domini, imago beata,
Nes deduc ad propria ^ felix figura
Ad videndum faciem Christi, quae est pura.
...
Ave ferrum triumphale, felix hasta.
Nos amore per te fixi saucia.

but because I Intend not an accusation of any one, but institution to every
one that needs it; I shall only observe that this distinction is used with
them as Miracles and the gift of tongues was; not for them that believe, but
for them that believe not: so is this, for strangers, and them that make
objections, not for the obedient that worship images and break the
Commandment: for they must or may do more then give a relative worship: but
yet because it concerns us and them, I add this observation.

5. That if Divine worship, 28.
or Latria be in any sense given to an image, no distinction can save it
ha^^less: For if it be given at all, it is not changed in kind, by being
altered in circumstance. It is that kind of worship which all the world
understands to be proper to God; now whether it be for it self or for any other
thing, is nothing but an inquiry for what cause this incommunicable worship is
communicated to them; that is, a looking after the cause of a thing, which no
cause can legitimate, and whether this be proper or improper, yet still it is
idolatry in one of the senses; whether it be direct or indirect, it still gives
but an appellative and specificates the idolatry: for that which in its whole
Nature is unlawful, and unnatural, cannot be lawful in a certain respect. L. 1.
de Trin. c. 6.
Idololatrae dicuntur qui simulachris eam servitutem exhibent quae debetur Deo,
said S. Austin: He who gives that to an image which is due to God is an
idolater: But he who answers that he does that thing but in this or this
manner, confesses the thing done and tells you how: but if the manner destroys
the thing, then it is not the same worship; and then what need the distinction
of the manner which must suppose the same matter; but if the manner does not
destroy the thing, then for all the distinctions it is idolatry.

6. I consider that in the first Commandment where Atheism and Polytheisme,
29.
and Allotheisme are forbidden directly and principally, and whatever is like
it, or even with, or under it; the preface or the reason of it is expressed by
God; [ I am the Lord thy God.] plainly declaring that whatsoever is introduced
against that Commandment is also against that reason: God is not our God, if
we acknowledge none, or if we accept of many, or any other; so that by this
precept and upon this account, idolatry in the object is forbidden. But in the
next precept, or (if it be the same with this) in the next periods of this
Commandment, there is another thing forbidden upon another reason: Thou shall
not worship any graven image, for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, meaning
that as his being our God infers that none else must be made our God or have
Divine honors done to it; so the superaddition of this attribute and
appellative of God, that as he is our God, so also he is a jealous God, in this
very matter of Intercourse with us, infers that we must not only do what he
bids, but also in his own way, the thing and the manner too are taken care of.
And if he had in the second precept only forbidden Divine worship to be given
to any artifice or to any Creature; the proper reason for it had been [ for I
am the Lord thy God] but when to other words he puts another reason, it is
certain it must mean something new and not signified in the first periods: But
then, because the worshipping of any image of God with Divine worship for the
sake of the Exemplar is that which is nearest and likest the manner of the
Gentiles; and does insensibly steal the heart of man away, and depresses our
great thoughts of the Eternal immense God into the circumscription of an image,
and draws the mind from spiritual to material entercourses, and therefore does
by immediate consequence lessen the honor of God and the propriety of the
Divine worship, that all this should be forbidden is justly inferred from the
reason; for of these things no better reason in the world can be given, then
that God is a jealous God; and will not have his honor directly or indirectly
given to any thing to whom himself is not pleased expressly to impart it; and
therefore there is a Natural proportion in the reason to the prohibition: for
since it is usual in Scripture to call idolatry by the name of fornication or
adultery: God is pleased here also to forbid that manner of worship which he
accounts adulterous, and declares he will not endure it because he is jealous:
and let it be imagined, what can be the effect of that reason? something
special must be apportion'd to it, lest it be to no purpose: but that images be
not taken for very God, that they may not finally and for themselves receive
Divine honor is the effect of the first reason, and of the first precept:
whatsoever is next to this, must be what is also next expressed, that is, Not
that images be not worshipped for God; but that in the worshipping the true God
which is commanded in the first period, we do not bow the head and knee before
images which is forbidden in the second periods: And if men were in their
proportion as jealous of their duty and of avoiding Gods anger and escaping the
Divine judgments, and of preserving their Eternal interest, as God is of his
Honor; they would never so much intricate their duty, and brande the
Commandment, and do that which is so much against the letter of it, and
against the doctrine of that Church to whom the law was given, and against so
much reason; and for the doing of which they are forced to use so much violence
of answer, such convulsions of distinction: a jealous Man will not endure such
comportments in his wife; for the justification of which she is so hardly put
to it, that she must have half a dozen answers before she can please her self,
or think that she does well; and which after all, will look but like pitiful
excuses. But above all excuses it would seem the worst, if she should say I do
admit another man but not as my Husband, but with a less regard and another
sort of complication then I use to him; and that which I do I do it for his
sake, he is so like him that he is his very picture; and he is his very great
friend, and what I do, is for that very regard. A jealous man would hardly take
this for satisfaction. And if it be considered that there is nothing so clear
but something may be said against it, and (...) Every word can be contradicted
by a word; and then how many presumptions, how many reasons, how many express
words, how many ages, and how many religions do join in the condemnation of
worshipping God by an image; it may very well be concluded that our jealous God
will not endure half so much disobedience, wilful ignorance and obstinacy in
such persons as against so much reason and religion and for so few and trifling
pretenses will worship God and his Christ by images against the words of his
own Commandment.

7. If it be inquired how an image can be an idol; 30.
the answer must be; by giving to it Divine worship, or something that is due
and proper to God: Now whoever knows it to be an image of a thing, if he have
any use of reason, if he be not a changeling, believes better of the Exemplar
then of the image; and knows that the worship sticks not in the image: he
cannot worship it for it self, but for something to which it relates, or for
something that adheres to it, or is derived upon it; still the honor goes
beyond the Natural or artificial image. The image has no worth of its own
beyond the art or Nature; and can be estimated, but as Silver, or Marble, or
Carved; and therefore no religion passes upon it for its own sake: Since
therefore whatsoever passes on it is for the sake of that which it represents;
an image that is understood to be an image can never be made an idol; or if it
can it must be by having the worship of God passed thorough it to God; it must
be by being the analogical, the improper, the transitive, the relative (or what
shall I call it) object of Divine worship. Now that this consideration may have
its effect, I shall not need to say that an idol and an image is all one;
though that be true in Grammar; and Erasmus said that S. Ambrose knew no
difference between them, In 1 Cor. 8.
but that every image (made for religion) is an idol; and that he himself saw
no difference: but because the Church in some ages has supposed a difference;
I shall also allow it: but find all the danger of any such allowance taken away
by the instance of the brazen Serpent which did pass under both Notions, for it
was a mere image or representment of a Serpent and the commemoration of Gods
delivering his people from them: but when it came to be used in a religious
worship then it was an idol; permitted when it was a bare image, but broken
when it passed into an idol. An image or an dol do not differ in themselves
but by use and custom of speaking: the Church calling it an image so long as
it is used lawfully: but it is an idol when it is used unlawfully, that is in
plain speaking, an image is lawful to be made or kept for some purposes, but
not for other. It is lawful for story, for memory of an absent friend or valued
person that is away, for the moving an affection, for ornament and the beauty
of a place; but it is not lawful to have them, not lawful to make them with
designs of ministering to religion or the service and worship of God: which I
choose to express in the words of the Author of the famous books under the name
of Charles the Great, L. 4 p. ^^
Nos imagines in basilicis positas, idola non nuncupamus; sed ne idola
nuncupentur, adorare and colere eas recusamus. We do not call all images by
the name of idols, but lest they become idols we refuse to worship them. But
yet this I add, that although in the use of the two Greek words, (...) and
(...), and of the Latin, idolum and imago, Men have troubled themselves with
finding material differences; yet although it might be of some use in inquiring
the meaning of the Ancient Doctors of the Church in the question of images, yet
it will be wholly impertinent as to the Commandment. For God forbidding images
used the word (...) which signifies properly a graven image; and because there
were more sorts besides this, God was pleased to forbid (...) which the LXX
render by (...), the likeness of any thing; and it conteins sculptile, fusile,
ductile, conflatile, that is, all sorts of representations, flat or extant,
painted or carved; and the force of this word can be eluded by no distinction.
But then as to the meaning of these words in the use of the Ancient Doctors,
this is certain: that although about the time of the Second Nicene Council,
this distinction of idolum and imago was brought into the Christian Church, yet
it was then new, and forced, made to serve the ends of new opinions, not of
Truth: for in Tertullian's time there was nothing of it, as appears by his
words in his book de idololatria. c. 3. Ad hoc necessaria est vocabuli
interpretatio: (...) Graece formam sonat; ab eo per diminutivum (...) deductum
aeque apud nos formulam fecit. Igitur omnis forma, vel formula idolum se dici
exposcit: estque idololatria, omnis circa omne idolum famulatus and servitus.
Every image (meaning, of God) is an idol, and all worship and service about
them is idolatry. This is plain, and short. And that once for all I may make it
clear, that an idol and an image was all one in the sense of the word and of
the Ancient Church it is undeniably so used in Cicero lib 1. de fin. bonor. and
mal. Imagines quae idola nominant, quorum incursione non solum videamus sed
etiam cogitemus, etc. and for the Church S. Chrysostom is an authentic
witness, for he calls the pictures by which they then adorned their houses by
the names of idols, (...), we trim our houses, placing every where idols and
pictures.

Upon this account we may understand the meaning of the primitive Fathers who
would not endure that a picture should be made, 31.
or kept, who condemned the art it self, as deceving and adulterous, who said
that God forbad the very trade it self: So Tertullian, De spect c. 23.
Jam vero ipsum opus personarum quaero an Deo placeat qui omnem similitudinem
vetat fieri, quanto magis imaginis suae? Can the making visors please God who
has forbidden all similitudes or images and pictures to be made, and how much
more any image of himself? S^^ma^. l. 6 and in Protrep. p. 41. ed^^ Paris. L.
4. con. Cel^.
Nobis enim est aperte vetitum artem fallacem exercere; said S. Clement
speaking of pictures and images, the very art is forbidden to Christians. The
same is affirmed by Origin, and long after by S. Chrysostom; but Tertullian
said, D^ idol. c. 3.
that the Devil brought painting and carving into the world; and adds, Toto
mundo ejusmodi artibus interdixit servis Dei, that God has forbidden to all
his servants in all the world to use such arts. But they are to be understood
by their own words spoken when they had the same reason and less heat; for that
the very making of images was forbidden by God by way of caution only and
provision, not for any turpitude or unreasonableness in the thing, but for the
danger which then was pregnant themselves affirm: Similitudinem vetans fieri
omnium.... ostendit and causas, idololatriae sc. substantiam cohibentes:
subjicit enim non adorabitis ea, etc. So Tertullian. To the same purpose is
that of Origin; speaking of the Jews, L. 2. c. 22. adv. Marcion.
There was no painter or statuary admitted into their cities, their laws
driving away all this kind of people, ne qua occasio praeberetur hominibus
crassis, neve animi eorum a Dei cultu avocarentur ad res terrenas per hujusmodi
illecebras: lest any occasion should be given to rude people of drawing their
minds from the pure worship of God to earthly things. Now if this sense was
also in the Commandment, it is certain that this was but temporary; and
therefore could change: and that it was changeable appears in this that God by
a Divine Spirit assisted Bezaleel and Aholiab in the like curious arts; and by
other instances which I have already reckoned Sup. r. 6. n. 10.
: Now this sense and severity might perpetually oblige the Jews; because during
the whole abode of their Synagogue there was almost an equal danger by their
perpetual conversation with idolatrous Nations: and therefore it was very well
said of Tertullian in the matter of the brazen Serpent, De idol. c. 5.
If thou regardest the law, thou have Gods law, Make not the likeness of any
thing: But if thou considerest that afterward Moses did command them to make
the likeness of a Serpent, do thou also imitate Moses, and against the law
make no likeness, unless God also give thee a Commandment as he did Moses.
Meaning that the singular example was no prejudice to the law: Exceptio firmat
regulam in non exceptis: This part of the Commancement was by God dispensed
within that instance and in a few more; but these few confirm the rule in all
things and instances, besides themselves, for they say, that without Gods leave
we may not break this Commandment. In Tertullian's time this very necessity
did still abide, and therefore they had the same zeal against images and
whatsoever gave substance to idolatry; that's Tertullian's phrase for Painters
and Statuaries. But then this also is to be added: That all those instances in
the Old Testament of the brazen Serpent, the bulls, the Pomegranats, the
Cherubims, the curious works of Bezaleel, are not to be used as arguments
against the morality of the second Commandment: because there single causes,
and had their special warrant or approbation respectively from the same
fountain whence the prohibition came, at least let them prevail no further then
they ought; let them mean no more then they say, and let us go no further then
the examples: by which we find images made, for other uses, but not for
worship: and therefore the Commandment may be moral in all the periods of it,
this only excepted which relates to the making of them.

But when we consider further that Solomon caused Golden Lions to be made about
his throne and the Jews imprinted images on their money, and in Christ's time
they used the images of Caesar on their Coin, and found no reprover for so
doing, this shows that there was something in the Commandment that was not
moral; I mean the prohibition of making or having any images: For to these
things we find no command of God, no dispensation, no allowance positive: but
the immunity of reason and the indemnity of not being reproved, and therefore
for so much as concerns the making or having pictures and images we are at
liberty without the warranty of an express Commandment from God: The reason of
the difference is this, The first instances (excepting that of the brazen
serpent which because it was to be instrumental in a miraculous blessing must
suppose a Divine Commandment; like a Sacrament or Sacramental) were of images
used in the Tabernacle or Temple, and so came within the verge of Religion; and
for their likeness to the main superstition might not be ventured upon without
special leave or approbation: and therefore God gave command for the images of
the Tabernacle, and by his Majestatick presence in the Temple approved all that
was there. Upon what confidence Solomon ventured upon it; and whether he had a
command or no I find not recorded, but ex post facto we find it approved. But
for the other images which related wholly to civil use; right reason and the
common notices of things was their sufficient warrant; while they could have no
end in disobedience, no temptation to it, no reward for it; when it did not
contradict any Natural or Religious reason; there was no danger of idolatry, no
semblance of Superstition. So that the result is this; The Jews were forbidden
to make or have any images; and this was because of their danger: but this was
no moral law. But the very making and having them for worship is forbidden as
the thing it self is. Just as adultery and wanton looks are forbidden in the
same Commandment, and are acts of the same sin; so is worshipping and having
them for worship, it is that which S. Paul calls in the matter of uncleanness,
Making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Making images and
pictures to this end, is providing for the flesh: For this also is fornication
and spiritual whoredom. And as we may look upon a woman; and be innocent; so we
do not look upon her for lust: so may we have or make pictures and images,;
but for worship we may not: and in this sense of the words even this period of
the Commandment is also moral; and obliges us as much as the Jews: but if
those words did abstractedly and without their relation bind the Jews; it did
never bind us but by way of caution and prudence; that is, when we are in the
same dangers as were the Israelites, in the rudeness and infancy of their
Church especially. * And this we find in Tertullian; that when he had affirmed
the very art of painting and engraving to be unlawful; to them who enquire what
then shall the poor men do who have no other means to get their living; he
answers; let them paint tables and cupboards, and remove their art from danger
of religion to necessary and fit provisions for life; let them do things as
like as they were enabled by their art; so they were unlike the violations of
religion; and therefore the Church celebrates on the eighth of November the
memory of Claudius Nicostratus and their fellows who chose to die rather then
make images for the Heathen Temples; they were excellent statuaries, but better
Christians. By which it is plain that he means the very art as it ministered to
idolatry; for abstracting from that ministry and that danger it was lawful
enough, Qui fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille Deos; qui colit ille facit.
He that worships the image he makes it an idol; and he that designs any
assistance to the idolatry, or knowingly ministers to it, he adopts himself
into a partnership of the crime. De idol. c. 6.
To which purpose was that of Tertullian, Facio (scil. imagines) sed non colo:
quasi ob aliam causam colere non audeat, nisi ob quam and facere non debeat,
scilicet ob Dei essentiam utrobique: imo tu colis, qui facis ut coli possint.
He answers the objection of them that say, I make images, but I do not worship
them: as if (says he) there were any reason forbidding thee to worship them;
but the same for which thou ought not to make them; I mean, the Omnipresence
of God. Nay thou worshippest them, who make them that they may be worshipped.
But in all other senses the making a picture, is not making an idol; and
therefore that severe sense of the Commandment though as it is most probable
it did oblige the Jews, and all persons in equal danger; yet because the reason
may cease, and the danger be secured, when it is ceased, the obligation also is
null; and therefore though that was in the Commandment; yet it is no part of
its morality; but that excepted, every other clause is moral and Eternal.

8. And all this is perfectly consenting to the analogy of the Gospel which is
a spiritual worship, 32.
unclothed of bodily ceremonies, stripped naked of beggarly rudiments, even
those which God had commanded in the Old law; Christ placed but two mysterious
ceremonies in the place of all the shadows of Moses: and since Christianity
has shak'd off that body and outsides of religion, that law of a carnal
commandment, that we might serve God in spirit and truth, that is,
proportionable to his perfections, it cannot be imagined that this spiritual
religion which worships God in praises and love, in charity and alms, in faith
and hope, in contemplation and humility, in self-denial and separations from
all corporal adherencies that are not necessary, and that are not Natural, I
say it cannot be imagined that this spiritual religion should put on a
fantastic body, which as much as it can separates from a real: that
Christianity should make a Vizor for God, who has no body, De idol. c. 7.
and give that to him which the Heathens gave to their Devils; Daemoniis
corpora contulerunt; they gave a body to their Demons says Tertullian, when
they made images to them; that he who under the law of carnal ordinances could
not endure an image, should yet be pleased with it under the pure and spiritual
institution of the Gospel. A Christian must (...) worship God with genuine and
proper worshippings, that is, (...) with the pure and only worship of the Soul.
Now if the Ceremonials of Moses were contrary to this spirituality, and
therefore was taken away by the Gospel: it cannot be imagined that images which
are more contrary to a spiritual worship, should be let in by Christ, when they
were shut out by Moses. * To this purpose they are excellent words which were
spoken by Clemens Alexandrinus. S^ro^^^.
Moses many ages before made a law that there should be no graven, no molten,
no painted image or likeness of a thing made amongst them, that we should not
attend sensible things, but pass to those which are perceived by the
understanding only. For the daily custom of seeing him ( in effigy) makes
that the Majesty of God becomes vile and contemptible, and by material
Substances (Gross images) to worship that essence, which is only discerned by
the mind, is by the sense to undervalue the Eternal mind.

9. And upon these accounts we find that the Christians were great haters of
image worship, 33.
and even of images themselves: and did deride the heathen follies, who in the
midst of their witty disputations and wise discourses of God, did so unman
themselves and baffle their own reason as to worship this invisible God by
looking upon a contemptible image. To this purpose Origin discourses wisely;
God has chosen the folly of the world, L. 7. con. Ce^^.
those amongst the Christians whose lives were most simple, modest, and more
pure then that of the Philosophers, that he might put to shame those wise men
who blush not to speak to liveless trunks as if they were Gods or images of the
Gods. For what sober Man does not easily discern him who after his excellent
and Philosophical discourses of God or of the Gods, does presently look upon
images, and offers prayers to them, or by the beholding them as some
conspicuous sign, strives to lift up his mind to the imagination of an
intelligible Deity? But the Christian though but unlearned yet he believes
verily that the whole world is the temple of God, and he prays in every place,
shutting his bodily eyes, but lifting up the eyes of his mind....and being
raped as it were beyond this world, he makes his prayers to God for great
things. This is the advantage, the Spirituality and devotion of the Christian.
Concerning which it were easy to bring many ancient Testimonies; which whoever
is desirous to see, may find them frequently in the Fathers of the four first
ages: but especially in Irenaeus. l. 1. cont. haer. c. 34. Origin. l. 7. contr.
Cells. Tertull. de idol. c. 5. and de coron mil. and de Spectac. c. 23. Clemens
Romans Recogn. l. 5. and Clem. Alex. strom. 1, and 5. S. Chrysostom. in Synod. 7.
Act. 6. and in 1 Cor. 8. Epiph. haer. 29. Amphiloch. apud Syn. 7. action. ead.
Optatus l. 3. contr. Donat. S. Ambrose ep. 31. ad Valent. S. Austin in Psalm.
113. all which speak of this Article so as needs no commentary, and admits of
no evasion, decretorily and dogmatically and zealously.

Now against this heap of plain testimonies there is not any one clear sentence
and dogmatical proposition to be brought; 34.
and if there could be brought forty particular instances of a contrary
practice, though there are not three to be had in pure antiquity and in
authentic testimony, yet it could not in any degree abate the certainty of this
doctrine: because the Doctors of those ages say that where ever there is any
such thing, it is unlawful. Epiphanius did rend in pieces the veil at Anablatha
near Bethlehem, because it had in it the picture of a man; and this is so
notorious that Alfonsus a Castro calls him an Iconoclast: but Epiphanius gives
this account of it to the Bishop of Jerusalem, Contra authoritatem Scripturarum
esse ut in Christi Ecclesia hominis pendeat imago; and, istiusmodi vela contra
religionem nostram veniunt: It is against the authority of the Scriptures, it
is against our religion that the image of a man, that such veiles should be in
the Church: and Lactantius as plainly, L. 2. c. de orig. erroris.
Dubium non est quin religio nulla sit, ubicunque simulachrum est; where an
image is, it is certain there is no Religion: and S. Austin answers all
pretensions to the contrary which can readily be drawn from Antiquity. I know
(says he) many that are worshippers of pictures but such as neither know nor
exhibit the force of their Profession, but they are such who are superstitious
in their very religion, such which the Church would condemn, and daily seek to
correct like evil children. This being the doctrine of the Primitive Church; if
a contrary practice comes in, it is certain it is by corruption of faith and
manners. The Temples of Gods and the images of Gods they had in equal
detestation: not that they hated public places of worship; but Templa, non
Ecclesias, or Dominicas; for we must know that in the language of the Fathers
by Temples they did mean such as the Gentiles had; such as the Holy Scriptures
call the place of Micah's images; [ an house of Gods] according to that famous
saying of Isidore: Judges 17. 5.
Templi nulla ratio quod non coronat simulachrum: It is no Temple that is
without an image, and it is no Church that has one according to the Primitive
Christian doctrine: and it was remarkable what is told by Aelius Lampridius in
the life of Alexander Severus, that when Adrian the Emperor had commanded
Churches to be built without images, it was supposed he intended them for the
service on Christ: then which there needs no greater or cleerer instance of the
doctrine and practice of the Holy Primitives.

But the best and most perfect account that can be given of the Christian
religion in this article, 35.
is by the Ecclesiastical laws. The Council of Eliberis in Spain made a Canon:
(...).
placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere ne quod colitur aut adoratur in
parietibus depingatur. Pictures must not be in Churches, lest that which is
worshipped or adored be painted upon the walls. From which plain place
Bellarmine, Perron, Binius and diverse others take great pains to escape: it
matters not how, as to the question of Conscience; it is sufficient what
Agobardus Bishop of Lions above 800 years ago says in this very particular.
Now error is so grown, and is perspicuous that they approach near the heresy of
the Anthropomorphites and worship images, and put their hope in them, the cause
of which error is, that faith is departed from men's hearts, and they put their
confidence in what they see. But as when we see Soldiers armed* or Husbandmen
plowing or mowing or gathering grapes in picture, or the pictures of huntsmen
pursuing their game, or of Fishermen throwing their nets, we do not hope to
receive from them a Mullet, or a Months pay, handfuls of barley or clusters of
grapes: So if we see winged Angels painted, Apostles preaching, Martyrs dying,
we are not to expect any aid or good from the images we see, because they can
neither do good nor hurt. Therefore for the abolishing of this s^perstition,
recte ab Orthodoxis Patribus definitum est, it was rightly defined by the
Orthodox Fathers that pictures ought not to be in Churches lest that which is
worshipped (viz. God or his Christ) be painted upon their walls. To the same
purpose the Fathers of the fourth Council at Constantinople did quote the words
of Epiphanius as we learn from the acts of the second Nicene Council, Syn. 7.
Act. 6.
in these words. Take heed to your selves and hold the traditions which ye have
received, decline not to the right hand or to the left: and remember my belowed
sons that ye bring not images into the Churches, nor into the Coemeteries of
the Saints: but by remembrance place God in your hearts. To the same purpose
was it decreed by another Synod at Constantinople of 338 Bishops, An. Dom. 753.
under Constantius Copronymus; forbidding all use of images in Churches or out
of them: and so much of their decree as forbad the worship of images was
followed by Charles the Great, and the learned men of that age, and confirmed
by the Synod at Franckfurt where the Bishops of Italy, France and Germany were
called by the Emperor to that purpose. To these if we add the Council of
Mentz, and the second Council of Sens *, Senon. 2. c. 20.
who commanded populum moneri ne imagines adoret, that the people should be
warned that they do not worship images; we have testimony enough of the
Christian doctrine and usages of the best Men, and the best times.

Concerning the Christian doctrine; 36
I suppose my self to have said enough in this Article. But besides the
premises there is something peculiar to be superadded which concerns both Jews
and Gentiles, and the uninstructed Laity of the Christians.

1. 37.
Concerning the Jews I have already made it appear that their religion was
perfectly against images: But I have two things to add which relate to them:
First that in the disputations between the Jews and Christian Doctors in the
Primitive Church, they never objected against the Christians that they either
had images or did worship them: as is evident to them that read the conference
between Justin Martyr and Tryphon; and in the book which Tertullian wrote
against the Jews, and in diverse other rencontres; in which the Jew was
forward to object all that he could asperse the Christian withal, and he on
the other side as ready to defend his cause. But not one word in any of them of
objection against the Christians in the matter of images, which is an evident
argument, that the use of images was not as yet known to the Church of the
first ages.

2. For when the doctrine and manners of the Christians began to be sullied and
degenerate; and she who was a pure Virgin and dear to Christ began to fornicate
with strange imaginations; the Jew instantly became clamorous and troublesome
in the Article; professed himself to be scandalized at the whole religion, and
in all disputations was sure to lay it in the Christians dish. There was a
famous Dialogue written a little before the time of the seventh Synod in which
a Jew is brought in, thus speaking to the Christian; Scandalizer in vos
Christiani quia imagines adoratis: Scriptura quippe ubique praecipit non facere
quenquam sibi sculptile, Syn. 7. Act. 5.
vel omnem similitudinem. I am offended at you Christians because ye worship
images; whereas the Scripture every where commands that no man should make to
himself any graven image or the likeness of any thing. Of the same accusation
Leontius Bishop of Cyprus takes notice in his Apology against the Jews: and
that the Jews make great noises with this accusation of the Christians, and put
very much upon it, we may see in the Epistle of Ludovicus Carretus, and the
Catechetical Dialogues of Fabianus Fiogus. * But this observation is very
remarkable out of the Jewish Talmud: For in the first part of it which they
call the Misna there is not one word of declamation or reproof against
Christians in the matter of images (as has been long since observed by learned
Men:) for this was made about two hundred years after Christ, in all which time
the Christians did hate images as much as the Jews did. But in the Gemara
Babylonicum which is the second part of the Talmud that is of authority amongst
them, which was finished about five hundred years after Christ, at which time
also images began to be received in Churches: there and in all the Commentaries
of the Rabbis published in the tenth or eleventh age, the Jews call the
Christian Churches (...) Beth havoda zara The house of idolatry: and it will be
impossible that ever they can become Christians so long as they see images
worshipped in our Churches: and the second Commandment left out of the
Catechismes of those with whom especially they do converse.

That which I am to say concerning Heathens is this: 38.
That it is impossible that those Christians who worship images of God should
distinguish their manner of worshipping the true God from the manner by which
the Heathens worshipped their Gods. For they did not suppose their images to be
Gods, and therefore they would laugh at the Christians if they had nothing else
to say against them but that God is not a stone, or Metal polished by the
Ingravers tool. Thus Arnobius brings in the Gentiles speaking, Neque nos era,
neque auri argentique materias quibus signa confiunt, Deos esse and religiosa
decernimus esse Numina, sed eos ipsos in his colimus, quos dedicatio infert
sacra, etc. we do not think the gold, or the brass, or the silver, of which we
make our images to be Gods: but in these images we worship them. Hoc Deus est
quod imago docet, sed non Deus ipsa,
Hoc videas, sed mente colas quod cernis in ipsa.
The image is not God, but represents him: your eye upon the image and your
mind upon God. Quis enim alius est nisi si sit plane fatuus, qui haec Deos esse
putet, (...)
non autem Deorum donaria and simulachra: None but fools (said Celsus) will
call them God, which are but images of the Gods: and it is very pertinent which
Lucian told the Matron, who took it ill that she was complemented too high and
compared in beauty to the Goddesses; I never did (says he) Fair Lady, compare
you to the Goddesses, but with their images made by the best workmen of stone,
or brass, or ivory. And I do not think it impious to compare things with men,
if those things are made by Men, unless you will suppose that Phidias made
Minerva, or that to be the Heavenly Venus which a great many years ago
Praxiteles made at Cnidus. But take heed, for it is an undecent thing to think
such things of the Gods, whose true representations (as I suppose) no Humane
industry can make. The same is to be seen in Athenagoras Legate. pro Christian.
, in Arnobius L. 6 adv: Gentes.
, in Lactantius L. 2. div. inst. c. 2. in init.
S. Austin De civi^ Dei l. 8. c. 23. and in Psalm. 113. conc. 2. and l. 3. de
doctr. Christ.
, and diverse others. Signa ad Junonis sospitae cruore manaver;, Said Livy Dec.
3. l. 3.
; The signs (meaning the images in Juno's Temple) did drop blood: and Clemens
Romanus Recog. l. 5.
brings in the Heathens saying, We worship visible images to the Honor of the
invisible God; and they could sometimes laugh at their Gods whom their Priests
exposed to worship, and yet themselves knew them to have been a plum-tree. Olim
truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum faber incertus, scamnum faceretne Priapum
Maluit esse Deum: Deus inde ego furum, aviumque
Maxima formido --
It was a great question amongst the Carpenters whether this wood should be a
God or a stool: now they that talked thus, knew what that was which their
Mystic persons called a God: they were sure they could be but images of them.
So that these Christians who worship God by an image, although they otherwise
sin against the first Commandment then Heathens do, who worship false Gods;
yet they sin equally against the second Commandment, and by images transmit
worship to their God respectively. I do not doubt but the ruder among the
Heathens did suppose the very image to be their God, or that their God did
dwell in their Temple, and in their image, or that a Divine power was
communicated to it; Ut pueri infantes credunt signa omnia ahena
Vivere, Lucil.
and esse homines, and sic isti omnia ficta
Vera putant: credunt signis cor esse in ahenis.
for some are such very children as to think the wooden Poppet to be a
woodman: and therefore when the Prophets discoursed against them in the matter
of images they called them wood and stone, Gold and Silver, and represented the
folly of putting trust in things that had no life, which themselves placed
there, which Cats did sit upon and birds build their nests in: but either by
these arguments they did reprove those fools amongst them who did suppose them
to be Gods indeed (who also sinned directly against the first Commandment, and
committed idolatry in the object of their worship) or those better Spirits and
wiser heads among them, who though they derided that folly, yet they put their
trust in the images, as supposing them invested with power from their God, and
that by them he would do them benefit.

3. Now how far differing this is from the practice of Christians in some times
and places, we may guess by the complaints made by learned men, particularly by
Cassander, and Polydore Virgil, Consult. loc. de imagine. De invent. rer. In
Decal. parc. 1. c. 66.
and Hesselius the Regius Professor at Lovain; but without the aid of their
testimony, it is plain by their public and authorized treatment of their
images, they consecrate their images, they hope in them, they expect gifts and
graces from them, they clothe them and crown them, they erect Altars and
Temples to them, they kiss them and bow their head and knee before them, they
light up tapers and lamps to them, which is a direct consumptive sacrifice, and
reliquam observationem circa eas similiter ut gentes faciunt; they do to their
images as the Heathens do to theirs; they are the words of Irenaeus by which
he reproves the folly of some that had got the pictures of Christ and
Pythagoras and other eminent persons: but that which is most to be reproved and
can be less excused is their prayers and forms of dedicating their golden or
wooden images; Sanctify o God this form of the B. Virgin, Pontific. Romans
that it may bring saving help to thy faithful people, that thunders and
lightnings may be driven away the sooner, that immoderate rains or floods, Vid.
Missal. Romans sub tit. Der^tu servan.
and civil wars or the invasion of Heathens may at the presence of this be
suppressed. As bad or worse are in the Pontifical in the dedication of an image
of the Cross, and of S. John, and at the hallowing the Agnus Dei. Now these
things are as bad as can be; and yet done to images (I do not doubt) for their
sakes whom they represent; but yet with some regard to the image it self, for
so they value our Lady of Hales, our Lady of Walsingham, of Loretto, of Sichem,
Aspricollis, Prurietana, Ardilleriana, more then our Lady of Nostredame, or
Florence, or S. Denis. Now when the relatives of one term do differ, it is for
themselves that the difference is, not for the correlative which is still the
same: and here for the common people to discern the niceties and the intricate
nothings that their learned Men have devised to put a Vizor upon this folly; is
so impossible that it will not be easy to make them understand the terms
though a learned man were by them at every cringe they make. They cannot tell
whether the worship be to the image or the exemplar; which is prime and which
is secondary; they cannot distinguish of Latria, and dulia, and Hyperdulia, nor
can they skill in proper or improper worship, mediate and immediate, univocal,
equivocal, and analogical, nor say how much is for this, and how much for that,
or which is simple and which is allayed, which is absolute and which is
reductive. And although men in the Schools, and when they have nothing to do
but to make distinctions which no body can understand, can separate word from
word, form from matter, real from notional, the shadow from the body, a dream
from a vision, the skin from the flesh, and the flesh from the bone, yet when
they come to action and clothe their theoremes with a body of circumstances, he
that attends the present business of devotion and desire, will not find himself
able or at leisure then to distinguish curiously; and therefore it was well
said of Hesselius of Lovain; Images were brought into use for the sake of the
Laity, and now for their sakes they are to be removed again, lest they give
divine worship to the image, or fall into the heresy of the Anthropomorphites;
(he might have added) or lest by worshipping God by an image they commit the
sin of superstition and idolatry, breaking the second Commandment. For the
same folly which in the Heathens was reproved by the Primitive Christians, the
same is done now adays by Christians to their images. I shall conclude this
with a story out of an Italian who wrote commentaries of the affairs of India:
Pietro (...) Hist. delle Ind* l. 20. c. 11.
when the poor Barbarians of Nova Hispania in the Kingdom of Mexico had one
day of a sudden found their idols taken down and broken, they sent four
principal persons of their country to Alfonsus Zuasus the licentiate who had
commanded it; they complaining of the injury supposed also, and told him, they
did believe it to be done without his consent or knowledge, as knowing that the
Christians had idols and images of their own, whom they valued, and adored and
worshipped: and looking up and espying the image of S. Sebastian whom Alfonsus
had in great veneration hanging by his bed side, they pointed at him with their
finger saying, the same regard which he had to the image of S. Sebastian, the
same they had to theirs. The Governor being troubled with this quick and not
barbarous discourse; turned him about a little, and at last told them, that the
Christians did not worship images for their own sakes, but as they represented
holy persons dwelling in heavenly places: and to demonstrate that, took down
the images of S. Sebastian, and broke it in pieces. They replied that it was
just so with them; and that they were not so stupid to worship the images for
their own regards; but as they represented the Sun and Moon and all the lights
of heaven. Alfonsus being yet more troubled, was forced to change the state of
the question: by saying that the object was differing though the manner was
not, that the Christians did by their images pass honor to the great Creator
of the world, but they did it to creatures, to evil Spirits, and false Gods:
which was indeed very true, but it was a removing the question from the second
Commandment to the first: For although in relation to the first the Heathens
have the worst of it; yet as to the second these Christians and the poor
Indians were equal: and the wit of man cannot tell how they differ.

But I shall add this, 40.
that though it be impossible to know how the worship of God by an image should
come into the world; unless it be as Tertullian said of the very art of making
images, that it came from the Devil; yet it is observable that it never
prevailed any where but in a degenerating people. The Jews at first were pure
worshippers of the God of their Fathers, but at any time when Satan stood at
their right hand and made Israel to sin, then they would play the fool with
images. In the purest times of Christianity they kept themselves clean from
images; but as they grew worse, so they brought in Superstition, and worship of
images, and so it was amongst the Heathens too. While they kept themselves to
the principles of their institution and tradition which they had from the
Patriarchs of Nations who had been taught by God, and lived according to
Nature; they worshipped God simply and purely. Si Deus est animus --
Hic tibi praecipue pura sit mente colendus.
a pure and immaterial substance is dishonored by any worship but that of a
pure and a holy mind; and the ancientest Romans for 170 years together
worshipped without an image, said Varro; who adds this judgment of his own,
quod si adhuc mansisset castius Dii observarentur: if the same had been still
observed; the Gods had been more purely, more chastely worshipped. The word
which Varro uses is very proper and according to the style of Scripture which
calls idolatrous worshippings by the name of fornication. But Varro adds this
reason. Qui primi simulachra Deorum populis posuerunt eos civitatibus suis and
metum dempsisse, and errorem addidisse. The introduction of images brought in
error and cast out fear, Stulte verebor ipse cum faciam Deos. if I worship what
I make, I will not fear what I worship. Well and wisely did he suppose (said S.
Austin) that the greatness of their Gods might soon become despicable by the
foolishness of images: and it might reasonably prevail against the old
superstition, to suppose that he who governed all the world ought to be
worshipped without an image. The same testimony we have in Plutarch in the life
of Numa. The Gods had houses and cells but no images, as supposing it to be
impious to express the greatest things by the basest; and knowing that there is
no other way of coming to God but by the mind.

From hence I infer that neither God nor Nature, 41.
neither reason nor religion brought images into the worship of God; but it was
the invention of superstitious men, or rather of the enemy of Mankind that he
might draw the heart of man from contemplation of the invisible and depress it
to low phantasmes and sensible adherences, to diminish the fear of God, and to
produce confidencies in dead substances clothed with accidents of art; to amuse
the foolish, and to entertain the weakest part of him that is wiser, and that
religion might be capable of tricks and illusions which could not happen to
immaterial and Spiritual worshippings. But that all the reason of the world is
against it; may be the rather presumed because although the patrons of images
offer at some reasons for the use of images in story and ornament and
instruction; yet no man pretends to any reasonableness of worshipping God by a
image, or giving Gods due to an image: Some of them say that the same worship
passes from the image unto God, and therefore it is lawful, and God is not
dishonored: but upon no reasonable account can it be said, that therefore it
is good, that it pleases God, that it promotes his honor, that it is without
danger; and however any man may intend to pass the relative honor that way,
yet no man has any warrant that God will accept it, or that he will endure it,
that way; that he will receive his sacrifices most readily when they are first
washed (shall I call it? or fould') in the Borborus, by the pollutions and
abominations of images: for that they are called so in Scripture is evident;
but they are never commended there, not one good word of them is there
recorded: but of the worship of them nothing but prohibition and execration and
foul appellatives. There is no necessity of it, no advantage by it, no man is
helped by it, no command, no license, no promise, no Scripture for it; all the
religions that ever God did institute are expressly against it, and to sum up
all, it is against the law of Nature: of which I need no other witnesses but
the testimony of all those wise personages who affirm the two Tables of Moses
to be moral in every precept excepting that of the Sabbath, L. 4, c. 31, 32. de
idolatr. L. 3. ad Quirin c. 59. etc. 1. de exhort. Marty. Origin. hom. 8. in
Ex. l. 15. contr. Faust, c. 4. and 7.
and to be of the law of Nature. So Irenaeus expressly: So Tertullian, S.
Cyprian, Origin, S. Augustine, and generally all antiquity. The sum of all I
express in the words of S. Paul, (...). God is not worshipped with men's hands,
that is* with the productions of art and imagination.

I conclude that the second Commandment is a Moral and Natural precept in the
whole body and constitution of it; 42.
if the first words of it be relative to the last; that is, if the prohibition
of making images be understood so as to include an order to their worship: but
if these words be made to be a distinct period; then that period was only
obligatory to the Jews: and to Christians in equal danger, and under the same
reason; and therefore can also pass away with the reason which was but
temporary, transient and accidental: all the rest retaining their prime,
Natural, and essential obligation.

Of the Jewish Sabbath, and the Lords day.

There is one instance more in which the Rule is more apparently verified; 43.
which I mentioned a little above: and that is the precept of the Sabbath:
which God instituted for many reasons. 1. To be a perpetual memorial of the
Creation, and that God might be glorified in the works of his hands by the
religion of that day. 2. To preserve the memory of their deliverance from the
captivity of Egypt, Deuter. 5. 14. and upon the same account to do ease and
remission (...) to servants reasonable and unreasonable. L ^ c. 4^.
R. Moses Ben Maimon in his Moreh Nebochim affirms that the end of the Sabbath
is, Septimam vitae partem homini praestare liberam, and vacuam a labor and
defatigatione, tum conservare and confirmare memoriam, and fidem Creationis
Mundi, that we should spend the seventh part of our life in ease and rest; and
preserve the faith and memory of the Article of the worlds creation, (...).
Homer.
because upon the seventh day all things were finished: and therefore according
to that of Linus cited by Eusebius, (...),
(...).
The seventh day is the day of the worlds Nativity, or the feast of its birth,
it is the chiefest and most perfect of days. S. Aug. l. 4. de Genes. ad li^.
c. 11.
3. S. Austin has another fancy; and he intends to offer at no higher rate:
Dici probabiliter potest, observandum Sabbathum Judae is fuisse praeceptum in
umbra futuri quae spiritualem requiem figuraret, quam Deus exemplo hujus
quietis suae fidelibus bona opera facientibus arcana significatione
pollicebatur. It may be said probably that the precept of the Sabbath to the
Jews was a type and shadow of that Spiritual rest which God by his example did
by a secret signification promise to the faithful that did good works. I
acknowledge that there is a fair proportion in the sign and in the thing
signified; but whether this was so intended by God, or so understood by the
Jews is but probabiliter dictum, a probable conjecture taken only from the
Natural similitude of the things.

But allowing this: the consequent of all will be; 44.
that what was for temporary reasons established cannot pass an eternal
obligation. Concerning which it is to be observed that those are to be called
temporary or transient reasons, not only when the thing ceases to have a
being; such as those laws which were to separate the Jews from the Gentiles,
and those which related to the tabernacle, or the land of their dwelling, or
the manner of their sacrifice, or their addresses to their chief city; for
these cease by subtraction of the matter and the natural abolition of the
material cause; because the wall of partition is taken down; and the law of
Ceremonies is abolished, and the people are exterminated from their Country,
and their sacrifices are ceased, and their City is destroyed, and their temple
burnt: but that reason also is transient and temporal, which in a like instance
passes into a greater of the same kind. Thus the deliverance of Israel from the
Egyptian bondage, though being a matter of fact it is eternally true that it
was once done, yet it is a temporary transient reason because all Gods people
now rejoice in a greater deliverance and from a bondage that was infinitely
worse; from the slavery of sin, and the powers of Hell. And thus also the great
reason of the Sabbath, I mean Gods rest from the works of the Creation is a
temporary transient reason; because there is now a new Creation; vetera
transierunt, old things are passed away and all things are become new; and the
Gospel is (...) a new Creation, and our Natures are regenerated and reformed
and made with new principles of a new life to higher ends then before; and
therefore; though the work of Gods creation is to be remembered and God to be
glorified by us in his works, yet when there is a greater reason, the solemnity
must relate to that, and the lesser duty can be well served by that day which
can also minister to the greater.

And therefore we find that something of this very reason is drawn into the
observation of the Lords day, 45.
or the first day of the week, by Justine Martyr, Apol. 2.
(...). We celebrate conventions or assemblies commonly upon the Sunday,
because it is the first day in which God separated the light from the darkness
and made the world, and on the same day Jesus Christ our Savior arose from the
dead. The first of these looks more like an excuse then a just reason; for if
any thing of the Creation were made the cause of a Sabbath, it ought to be the
end not the beginning; it ought to be the rest not the first part of the work;
it ought to be that which God assigned, not which man should take by way of
after justification.

But in the precept of the Sabbath there are two great things. 46.
One was the rest, the other the religion of the day. The rest was in
remembrance of their deliverance from Egypt; and therefore they kept their
first Sabbatick rest upon the very day in which their redemption was completed,
that is, as soon as ever Pharaoh and his host were overthrown in the Red sea;
and this because it was external, ritual, National, relative and temporary,
abused by superstition, and typical of something to come, without all
contradiction is so perfectly ceremonial and consequently abrogated, that there
can be no greater wonder then to see some Christians such superstitious
observers of the rest of that day, that they equal even the greatest follies of
the Jews; who as Munster out of the Rabbis observes, thought it unlawful to
put an apple to the fire to be roasted upon that day, and would not pour wine
upon Mustardseed, nor take a clove of garlic from its skin and eat it, nor
thought it lawful to pursue a skipping flea, nor to kill any creeping thing
that had variety of sexes, nor to climb a tree lest they break a bough, nor by
singing to still the crying of a child, nor to play upon the harp, nor by
walking on the grass pluck up a leaf with the shoe. These trifles as they were
such which even the Jew was no ways obliged to, so they are infinitely against
Christian liberty and the analogy and wisdom of the Religion.

But the Jews say that Enoch and Noah, Abraham and Jacob kept a festival to
God, 47.
a memorial of the Creation. If so, yet we find no rest observed by them, nor
any intermission of their journeys; but it is reasonable to believe that by
some portions of their time they did specially serve God, as well as by some
actions of their life, and some portions of their estate: and to this it is not
improbable that Moses did relate when to the words in Deuteronomy; Remember to
keep the day of the Sabbaths to sanctify it (...), according as the Lord thy
God had commanded thee, meaning, at the beginning of the world: But in this
part of the precept there was nothing of rest, but much of holiness and proper
sanctification.

Now concerning this the resolutions will be easy; 48.
That God should be served and glorified by us is a part of Natural and
essential religion: this cannot be done with nothing; there must be bodies, and
gifts and places and time to do it in: The Patriarchs did bind themselves or
were bound by God to certain circumstances; for that which is indefinite and
unlimited, shall neither be done constantly nor regularly: but since the day of
the creations ending was afterward made the rule of fixing a day, it is also
probable that that also was the limit and rule for the Patriarchs religious
solemnity: This indeed is denied by S. Irenaeus and Tertullian and some others,
affirming that the Patriarchs who kept no Sabbath were yet pleasing to God, but
because certainly it was so to the Jews, upon a reason which though it can be
involved in greater, yet it cannot totally be forgotten; it is more then
probable that the religion of the day must never be forgotten; but God must
have a portion of our time for his service, and the blessing which they were
both in and before the law, to commemorate, must also by implication or else
expressly be remembered.

Upon this or some equal account the Primitive Christians did keep the Sabbath
of the Jews; 49.
not only for their compliance with the Jews till the distinction were
confessed and notorious; but because the moral Religion which was served by
that day was not brought into the religion of the Lords day as yet; therefore
the Christians for a long time together did keep their conventions upon the
Sabbath, ^ Acts. 15. 21.
in which some portions of the law were read *: and this continued till the
time of the Laodicean Council; Can. 16. A. D. 364.
which also took care that the reading of the Gospels should be mingled with
their reading of the law: which was in a manner the first public reasonable
essay of uniting the religion of both days into one.

At first they kept both days with this only difference that though they kept
the Sabbath, 50.
yet it was after the Christian, that is, after the spiritual manner: in these
exuberancies and floods of religion which overflowed their channels, one day of
solemnity was not enough: but besides that they by their Sabbath meetings had
intercourse with the Jews in order to their conversion, and the Jewish
Christians in order to the establishment of their religion, they were glad of
all occasions to glorify God: but they did it without any opinion of essential
obligation; and without the Jewish rest, and upon the account of Christian
reasons. Of this custom of theirs we find testimony in Ignatius, Epist. ad Mag.
(...). That was their way of observation of the Sabbath. Let every one of us
keep the Sabbath Spiritually, delighting in the meditation of the law not in
the ease of the body, wondering at the works of God, not in indulging to
delicious banquets, and softer drinkings or dancings that do not better the
Understanding. So that they kept the Sabbath not as did the Jews; who as
Munster affirmed supposed it to be a keeping of the Sabbath if they wore better
clothes, or, eat more meat, or drank the richest wines: Idleness and luxury,
and pride are the worst ceremonies of the religion of the Sabbath: the proper
employment of that day is religion, which the Jews, and from them some of the
most ancient Christians signified by [ meditation of the law.] But then he
adds; (...). After they have kept the Sabbath let every one that loves Christ
keep the day of the Lord: the day of the memorial of his resurrection; which is
the Queen and the Supreme of all other days: and without further testimony we
find it affirmd in general by Balsamo (...). The Sabbath day and the Lords day
were almost in all things made equal by the Holy Fathers and some of them
called them Brethren: so Gregory Nyssen; some, (...), so Asterius, an excellent
combination or yoke of the Sabbath and the Lords day: L. 7. c. ^^.
and (...), so the Canon of the Apostles, the feast days which Zonaras well
explicates to the present Sense, but the Constitutions of S. Clement (which is
indeed an ancient book) gives the fullest account of it; (...). Let the Sabbath
and the Lords day be kept festival; L ^
that, because it is the memorial of the Creation, this of the resurrection:
and therefore whereas it is in the Commandment; six days shall thou labor,
etc. he says, that servants are to labor but five days: and upon this
account it was in the Greek Church especially, and is to this day forbidden to
fast upon the Sabbath and the Lords day.

The effect of which consideration is this; 51.
that the Lords day did not succeed in the place of the Sabbath; but the
Sabbath was wholly abrogated, and the Lords day was merely of Ecclesiastical
institution. It was not introduced by virtue of the fourth Commandment;
because they for almost three hundred years together kept that day which was in
that Commandment; but they did it also without any opinion of prime
obligation, and therefore they did not suppose it moral. But there was together
with the observation of the day a piece of natural religion which was
consequently Moral; that is, a separation of some time for the glorification of
God and the commemoration of his benefits: not that it can be reasonably
thought that the assignation of a definite time can be a moral duty, or that an
indefinite time can be the matter of a Commandment: and therefore I suppose it
to be unreasonable to say, that although the seventh day is not moral: yet that
one day is, or at least that some time be separate is moral; for that one day
in seven should be separate can have no natural, essential and congenite
reason, any more then one in ten, or one in six; for as it does not naturally
follow that because God ceased from the Creation on the seventh day, therefore
we must keep that holy day, so neither could we have known it without
revelation, and therefore what follows from hence must be by positive
constitution: Now if it be said that it is moral that some time be set apart
for Gods service: I say it is true, that it is necessary, naturally necessary
that it be so, but this cannot be the matter of a special Commandment; because
it being naturally necessary that God should be solemnly worshipped this must
suppose a time to do it in, as a natural circumstance, and needs not a
Commandment; which is sufficiently and unavoidably included in the first
Commandment, in which we are bound to serve God with religion. The fourth
Commandment enjoined a definite time, but that was ceremonial and abrogated:
but an indefinite time is not a duty of this Commandment, but supposed in that
which commands us to worship God. For we may as well worship God and do no
action, as worship him in no time. The definite time here named is taken away,
and the indefinite time cannot be a distinct duty, but yet in imitation of the
reasonableness and piety of that law, and in commemoration of a greater benefit
then was there remembered, a day of more solemn Religion was used by the
Christian Church; for as on the the Jewish Sabbath they remembered the Creation
and their redemption from Egypt: so on the Lords day they commemorated the
works of God, and their redemption from Sin, Hell and the Grave: but the first
reason was to yield to the second; as the light of a lesser star falls into the
glories of the Sun, and though it be there yet it makes no show, because a
bigger beauty fills up all the corners of the eyes and admiration: and now the
Lords day has taken into it self all the Religion but not the Rest of the
Sabbath; that is, it is a day of solemn worshipping of God and of remembering
his blessings, but not of rest save only as a vacancy from other things is
necessary for our observation of this: because as the Italians say, Io non pua
cantare and portare la Croce, I cannot sing and carry the Cross too; a man
cannot at once attend to two things of contrary observation.

That we are free from the observation of the Sabbath S. Paul expressly
affirms; 52.
adding this reason, feasts, new moons, and Sabbath days, and meats and drinks
are but the shadow of things to come, Coloss. 2. 16.
but the body is of Christ: Where by the way let it be observed that upon the
occasion of this and some other like expressions the Christians have supposed
that all the rites of Moses were types and figures of something in
Christianity, and that some mystery of ours must correspond to some rite of
theirs: this fancy makes some impertinencies in the discourses of wise men, and
amuses and entertains the Understandings of many with little images of things
which were never intended, and has too often a very great influence into
doctrines: whereas here the word (...) [The shadow of things to come] means, a
shadow in respect of the things to come, that is, if these rituals be compared
to the (...), those things which were to come, they are but very shadows, and
nothings: (...) or shadow signifies not in relation but in opposition to
Corpus. The shadow, that is, a religion consisting but in rituals and exterior
solemnities; but Christianity is the body, that is, that durable, permanent,
true and substantial religion which is fit for all men, and to abide for all
ages: And therefore Hesychius by Corpus Christi in this place understands the
word of doctrine: that is, a religion which consists in wise notion, (...) in
truth, not in external rituals that signified nothing of themselves, but
something by institution. Others by [ the body of Christ] here, understand the
Christian Church: in which sense the word is used by S. Paul to the
Corinthians; 1. Cor. 12. 17.
and in this very place it means so if the words be read as some Greek copies
do, that is, with conjunction and reference to the next verse: (...), etc. Let
no man make a gain of you who are the body of Christ. However that S. Paul
affirms the customs of the Pythagoreans in abstinence from flesh and wine; and
of the Jews in their feasts and Sabbaths to be no fit matters in which men are
to be judged, that is, for the not observing of which they are to be condemned,
but to be shadows and umbrages, not substantial parts of religion, is evident
by the antithesis however it be understood: but in order to other purposes I
observed here that he does not mean they are types and figures; for the
Pythagorean vanities did never pretend to this, but they and the other too are
but shadows, empty and unprofitable in respect of the religion which Christ
brought into the world. They were ineffective and insignificative; but only
present Entertainments of their obedience, and divertisements and fixings of
their thoughts apt to wander to the Gentile Customs; but nothing of Natural
religion.

Now although the primitive Christians did also meet publicly upon the Jewish
Sabbaths, 53.
yet that they did it not by virtue of the fourth Commandment appears because
they affirmed it to be ceremonial and no part of the Moral law, as is to be
seen in Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, S. Cyprian and others before quoted:
numb. 41. And in the Council of Laodicea the observation of the Jewish Sabbath
which till that time had continued amongst Christians was expressly forbidden:
Non oportet Christianos Judaizare and in Sabbato vacare, sed operari eos in
eadem die, Can. 29.
Dominicam praeponendo eidem diei. Si hoc eis placet, vacent tanquam
Christiani, Quod si inventi fuerint Judaizare, anathema sint. Christians must
not keep the rest of the Sabbath, but work upon that day, preferring the Lords
day before it. If they will rest on that day let them rest as Christians; but
if they rest as Jews let them be accursed: that is, if they will keep the day
holy, let them sanctify it as Christians should sanctify their day, that is,
only with such a rest as ministers to the opportunities of religion, not so as
to make the rest to be the religion of the day.

The Jewish Sabbath being abrogated; 54.
the Christian liberty like the Sun after the dispersion of the clouds appeared
in its full splendour; and then the divisions of days ceased, and one day was
not more holy then another, Gal. 4. 10.
as S. Paul disputes in his epistle to the Galatians, and from him S. Hierom;
and when S. Paul reproved the Corinthians for going to law before the
unbeleevers, In hunc locum
who kept their Court-dayes upon the first day of the week, he would not have
omitted to reprove them by so great and weighty a circumstance as the
profaning the Lords day; in case it had been then a Holy day, either of Divine
or Apostolical institution: for when afterward it grew into an Ecclesiastical
law, and either by law or custom was observed together with the Jewish
Sabbath, Constantine made a favorable edict that the Christians should not be
impleaded on those two festivals. Apud Eusebius.
Of which I only make use to this purpose, that among the Gentiles these were
law-daies; and therefore the Corinthians must needs have been prophaners of
that day by their lawsuits, and therefore have been upon that account
obnoxious to the Apostolical rod; if the day had then in any sense of authority
been esteemed holy.

But although there was no holiness in any day; 55.
yet they thought it fit to remember the great blessings of God which were done
upon certain days. An action cannot be separated from time; it must be done
some day or other, and most properly upon the Anniversary, or the monthly, or
weekly minds, but yet this they did with so great indifferency of observation,
that it cannot look less then that there was a providence in it. For although
all the Christian Church that kept the Sunday festival, did it and professed to
do it in remembrance of the Resurrection of our Lord, yet that the day of its
memory was not more holy then any day, and was not of necessary observation; it
appears by the Eastern Churches and all the Disciples of S. John who kept the
feast of the Resurrection of our Lord, I mean the Anniversary, the Great, the
prime feast, and that which was the measure of all the rest, not upon that day
of the week on which Christ did rise, but one the day of the full Moon, when
ever it should happen. Now this must needs be a demonstration, that the day of
the resurrection was not holy by Divine or Apostolical institution: The memory
of the blessing was to be eternal; and though the returning day was the fittest
circumstance, yet that was without obligation; for if the principal was
mutable, then the less principal could not be fixed, and this was well observed
by S. Austin; Contr. Adam. Man. c. 16.
Hoc in iis culpat Apostolus, and in omnibus qui serviunt Creaturae potius quam
Creatori. Nam nos quoque and Dominicam diem and Pascha solenniter celebramus;
sed quia intelligimus quo pertineant, non tempora observamus, sed quae illis
significantur temporibus. He first esteemed it to be a serving the Creature
more then the Creator to observe any day as of divine institution; but then if
it be objected that we also observe the Lords day and the feast of Easter; he
answers, It is not the day we keep, but we remember the things done upon that
day. For the day is indifferent, and has no obligation. God himself declared
his dislike of the Religion or difference of days, ^^i. ^6. 23.
by an Evangelical Prophet: and what God the Father did then sufficiently
declare, his Holy Son finished upon the Cross; and his Apostles published in
their Sermons: only such days are better circumstanc'd, but not better days.
The same is affirmed by S. Hierome upon the fourth chapter the Galatians.

But now that we are under no Divine law or Apostolical Canon, 56.
concerning the Lords day; we may with the more safety inquire concerning the
Religion with which it was accidentally invested. S. Cyprian and S. Austin
suppose that because Circumcision was commanded to be on the eighth day, Ep*
59. ad. Fid. (...) 119. ad Januar. Can. 13.
it did typically represent the Lords day, which is the eighth from the
Creation: The Council of Foro-Julium says, that Isaiah prophesied of this day;
and that the Jewish Sabbath was the type of this day, was the doctrine of the
Fathers in the Council of Matiscon. This is the day which the Lord has made;
Can. 1.
said the Psalmist, as he is expounded by Arnobius and diverse other: Exultemus
and laetemur in eo, In Psalm. 118.
qui a lumine vero nostras tenebras fugaturus illuxit; nos ergo constituamus
diem Dominicam in frequentationibus usque ad cornua altaris. Let us rejoice and
be glad in it, because the Sun of righteousness dispersing the clouds of
darkness has on this day shined upon us: Let us therefore keep the Lords day
in solemn assemblies even unto the horns of the altar. Upon this day Christ
finished the work of our redemption which was greater then the cessation from
creating the world; on this day he rose again for our justification, and
therefore this is called by S. Ignatius The Queen of days; upon this day
Christ twice appeared to his Apostles after the resurrection; upon this day S.
Paul appointed the collection for the poor, 1 Co^. 10. 2.
and consequently enjoined or supposed the assemblies to be upon this day: upon
this day the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles; and on this day S. Peter
preached that operative Sermon which won three thousand Souls to the Religion:
on this day S. John was in ecstasy and saw strange revelations: Apoc. 1. 1^.
so that it is true what Justin Martyr said, Our B. Lord himself changed this
day; that is, by annulling the Sabbath and by his resurrection and excellent
appearances and illustrations upon that day; not by precept, but by
indigitation and remarking that day by signal actions and an heap of blessings;
so that it is no wonder that S. Cyprian and S. Leo, S. Ignatius and S. Austin,
the Councels of Laodicea, Matiscon and Foro-Julium, of Palestine and Paris
speak so much of the advantages and prerogatives of this day, the celebration
of which was so early in the Christian Church that it was, though without
necessary obligation, or a law, observed in all ages and in all Churches. It is
true that Socrates said; (...); It was the purpose of the Apostles to make no
laws concerning Festival days: but it is also very probable what one said;
that it descends from Apostolical institution, Servata tamen liberate
Christiana, that is, the Apostles did upon the Lords day often meet, break
bread, and celebrate the memory of Christ; and by their practice recommended
the day as the most fitted for their Synaxes or Conventions; but they made no
law, imposed no necessity, but left the Church to her Christian Liberty, and
yet (that I may use the words of the Fathers in the Council of Matiscon) justum
est ut hanc diem celebremus per quam facti sumus quod non fuimus, It is fit we
celebrate this day because of the blessing of the resurrection happening on
this day by which we became that which before we were not.

Quest.

AND now if it be inquired how we are to celebrate this day?

I answer; 57.
That we are sufficiently instructed by those words of the Laodicean Council;
vacent tanquam Christiani: there is a certain rule and measure by which
Christians keep their Festivals. The Jewish manner was a perfect rest: The
Christian manner is an excellent religion and devotion; but no rest excepting
such a rest as ministers to religion: Abstinence from such works, which if we
attend to, we cannot attend to the religion that is commanded, is essentially
necessary, when the keeping of the day religiously and solemnly becomes
necessary. There are also some corporal works which are proper celebrations of
the day, or permitted in all religions upon their Festivals: such as are acts
of public or private benefit: works of necessity, little things, and
unavoidable; which are sometimes expressed in this verse, Parva, necessarium,
res publica, res pia fratri. Among the old Romans in their most solemn
festivals some things were specially permitted, Quippe etiam fest is quaedam
exercere diebus
Fas and jura sinunt: Macrob.
rivos deducere nulla
Religio vetuit, segeti praetendere sepem,
Insidias avibus moliri, incendere vepres,
Balantumque gregem fluvio mersare salubri.
It was lawful to turn the water lest it might do mischief, or that it might
do good; to stop a gap in a hedge, to prevent a trespass, to lay snares for
birds, to water the cattle, to burn weeds: and no religion forbids things of
this Nature.

But besides the laws and practices of Heathens in the Natural religion and
observation of festivals; 58.
we may be instructed by the same religion amongst the Jews and Christians:
Reading and meditating the law was the relgion of the Jews upon their feasts
and Sabbaths: Moses of old has them that preach him in every city being read
in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; Acts 15. 21. V. Act. 13. et. 14. 27. 44.
Luke 4 16 31, and 13. 10.
said S. James. They met (...), as Philo calls their Synagogues, and they heard
Moses and the Prophets read and expounded: there they did all the actions of
Natural religion; there they taught piety and holiness, justice and government,
Oeconomical and Political affairs; and the measures of things good and bad and
indifferent; and though in their Synagogues the exposition and meditation of
the law was their principal employment; yet in their Tabernacle and in their
Temple which were their places of worship, they offered sacrifice and sang
hymns and praises and glorifications of God. This was the duty and the
Religion of their Sabbath; not as it was a special separate feast; but because
this was the employment fitted for all spiritual and religious feasts
whatsoever. Sancta dies oritur, linguisque animiaque favete,
Hoc dicenda bono sunt bona verba die.
All holy days are days designed for holy offices, for the celebration of the
Divine name and the Divine Attributes; for charitable and holy discourses. That
rest which God superadded, being only commemorative of their deliverance from
the Egyptian servitude, was not moral, nor perpetual; it could be dispensed
with at the Command of a Prophet; it was dispensed with at the Command of
Joshuah, it was broken at the siege of Jericho, it always yielded when it
clash'd with the duty of any other Commandment; it was not observed by the
Priests in the Temple, nor in the stalls by the Herds-man, nor in the house by
the major domo; but they did lead the ox to water, and circumcised a Son; that
is, it yielded to charity and to religion, not only to a moral duty but to a
Ceremonial; and therefore could not oblige us: But that which remained was
imitable, the natural religion which was used upon the Jewish festivals was fit
also for the Holy days of Christians.

And this also plainly was the practice of the Christians, 59.
and bound upon them by the command of their Superiors. 1. It was not (...) as
S. Ignatius expressly affirms; Ep^ad Magn^^.
the rest of the body is no essential duty of the Christian festivals: that was
a Judaical rite; but the Christian is bound to labor, even upon that day;
says that holy Martyr: for then there had been no positive inhibition. And the
Primitive Christians did all manner of works upon the Lords day; even in the
times of persecution when they are the strict est observers of all the Divine
Commandments: but in this they knew there was none: L. omnes c. de fer^is.
and therefore when Constantine the Emperor had made an edict against working
upon the Lords day; yet the excepts and still permitted all agriculture or
labors of the Husbandman whatsoever: for God regards not outward cessation
from works more upon one day then another, as S. Epiphanius disputes well
against the Ebionites and Manichees.

Thus far was well enough when the Question was concerning the sense and extent
of a Divine Commandment; 60.
labor is a Natural duty, but to sit still or not to labor upon a whole day
is no whereby God bound upon Christians.

2. 61.
It was not (...), but it is (...), and (...), so the same Father: Ibidem.
The meditation and exercise of the word of God, and admiring the works of God,
that was the work of Christian festivals: and that they might attend this, they
were commanded to abstain from servile works more or less, these or others
respectively in several times and places. Apol. 2.
This we find in Justin Martyr speaking of the Christian Sabbath and Synaxes;
the Citizens and Countrymen are assembled together, and first are read the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles; then the Priest or President makes a
Sermon or exhortation to them to practice what they heard read, then all go to
prayers, after this they receive the Holy Eucharist, then they give alms to
the poor. This is the manner of the Christian festivity. Now what cessation
from the secular works is necessary in order to the actions of religion; all
that we may suppose to be accidentally the duty also of the day. L. 11. ep. 3.
To this purpose is that saying of S. Gregory; Dominico die a labor terreno
cessandum est, atque omni modo orationibus insistendum, ut si quid negligentiae
per sex dies agitur per Diem resurrectionis Dominicae precibus expietur. On the
Lords day we must cease from worldly labor, and by all means persevere in
prayer: that whatsoever in the six days was done amiss may be expiated by the
prayers of the seventh, the day of the Lords rerection. In the Synod at Tours
in France; the Religion of this day was also strictly enjoined. Oportet
Christianos in laud Dei and gratiarum action usque ad vesperam perseverare.
Christians must persevere in praising God and giving thanks to his holy Name
until the Evening: that is, until the Evening song be finished, for then the
Ecclesiastical solemnity is over: They who were tied to this long office, could
less be permitted to do any secular business, and according as the piety of
the Church increased, so the prohibitions of labor were the more strict; for
that which was wholly relative must increase and diminish according to the
diminution or enlargement of the correspondent. Constantine forbad all labor
but the labors of Husbandry: but affirms the Lords day to be the fittest for
dressing or setting of Vines, and sowing Corn. L. omnes 3. Cod. de feriis*
Can. 21,
Leo and Anthemius Emperors forbad all public pleasures, vexatious suites or
actions, arrests, and law-daies, appearances in Courts, advocations and legal
solemnities on the Lords day. The third Council of Orleans permitted wagons,
and horses and oxen to travel upon Sundaies, but forbad all husbandry that the
men might come to Church. In an old Synod held at Oxford I find that on the
Lords day Conceduntur opera carrucarum and agriculturae; and I find the like in
an old injunction of Queen Elisabeth, Corn may be carried on Sundaies when the
Harvest is unseasonable and hazardous. In these things there was variety;
sometimes more sometimes less was permitted. Sometimes fairs and markets,
sometimes none: In which that which we are to rely upon is this;

1. That because it was a day of Religion; only such things were to be
attended to, which did not hinder that solemnity which was the public religion
of the day.

2. Nothing at all to be admitted which was directly an Enemy to religion, or
no friend.

Of the first I have already produced sufficient witness. Of the second there
is the less doubt, not only because Natural reason does abhor all
irreligious actions especially upon a day of religion; but because all the
pious men and law givers of the Christian Church have made complaints and
restraints respectively of all criminal or scandalous actions upon that day.
Witness S. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians, Tertullian apolog. c. 42.
S. Gregory in his Epistle to Augustine Archbishop of Canturbury; and S.
Augustine Bishop of Hippo, in his 64 Epistle to Aurelius; the 23 Canon of the
Council of Toledo, the edict of Leo and Anthemius, all which complain of and
forbid the evil usages of the prophaner men who spend the Lords day, which by
the Church of God and in imitation of God himself and in celebration of the
greatest Mystery of our redemption was appointed for the solemn service of God,
in riotous eating and immoderate drinkings, vain feastings, and wanton
dancings, Enterludes and Songs, as if they intended to verify the scoff of
Rutilius, Septima quaeque dies turpi damnata Veterno, In Itinerat.

Ut delassati turpis imago Dei.
and that the rest of the day did represent God to have been weary, but
therefore was designed for wine and the licentiousness of his servants.

3. The rest of the day was so wholly for the ends of religion, so merely
relative to the public services of the Church, so nothing of the proper and
absolute duty of the day, that the Fathers of the Church affirm it to be
better to work then upon that day to be idle and do nothing. L. de december
chordis. c. 3.
So S. Austin expressly; melius faceret.... in agro suo aliquid utile quam si
in agro otiosus existeret: and melius faeminae eorum die Sabbati lanam facerent
quam quae tota die in neomeniis suis public saltarent. To do something that
is profitable in the field is better then to sit there idle, and to spin is
beter then to dance.

4. In those places where the offices of the Church are not expensive of the
whole day, it is lawful to do (upon just cause) any work that is not forbidden
by our Superiors, or scandalous to our Brethren; in those portions of the day
which are unimployed: and to deny this is called perverseness and contrary to
faith, cap. perven. de Consecr. did. 3. Quidam perversi Spiritus homines
pravainter vos aliqua, and Sanctae fidei adversa seminarunt, ita ut die Sabbati
aliquid operari prohiberent. They that forbid all manner of work as unlawful by
Divine law upon the Sabbath are praedicatores Antichristi, preachers of
Antichrist: for he when he comes (says S. Gregory) diem Sabbathi atque
Dominicum ab omni faciet opere custodiri: shall forbid all working upon the
Sabbath and the Lords day.

5. The Lords day being set apart by the Church for Religion ought to be so
employed as the laws of the Church enjoin; and no otherwise; and although it
were an act of piety (not only to attend to public offices, but even) to
attend to especial and more frequent private devotions on that day then others,
yet this is without all obligation from the Church; concerning whose intention
to oblige we can no ways presume but by her words and laws when she has
declared her self.

6. The question concerning particular works, or permitted recreations is
wholly useless and trifling: for quod lege prohibitoria vetitum non est,
permissum intelligitur, says the law: all that is permitted which in the
Negative precept is not forbidden: but as for some persons to give themselves
great liberties of sport on that day is neither pious nor prudent; so to deny
some to others is neither just nor charitable. The plowman sits still in the
Church and the Priest labors; and the wearied man is permitted to his
refreshment, and others not permitted because they need it not; Gloss. ordinar.
in 28. Matthew.
and there is no violation of any Commandment of God, even when there is a
profanation of the day indulged upon pious and worthy considerations.

I end this with the words of Gerson: 62.
Quilibet eo die abstineat ab omni labor aut mercatione aut alio quovis
laborioso opere secundum ritum and consuetudinem patriae, In Decal.
quam consuetudinem Praelatus Spiritualis illius loci cognoscens non prohibet;
quod si aliqua super tali consuetudine dubietas occurrat, consulat superiores:
Upon the Lords day we are to abstain from all merchandises or other laborious
work according to the Custom and law of the Country: provided that the Bishop
knowing of any such custom do not condemn it: and if there be any doubt
concerning it, let him inquire of his Superiors. In all these cases, Custom
and the Laws, the analogy of the Commandment, and the designs of piety,
Christian liberty, and Christian Charity are the best measures of determination.

I have now done with the two great exceptions which are in the Decalogue, 63.
and are not parts of the Moral law. All the rest are Natural precepts of
Eternal obligation; and are now also made Christian by being repeated and
renewed by Christ, and not only left in their prime, Natural necessity, but as
they are expounded into new instances of duty, so they put on new degrees of
obligation.

As a supplement to this Rule, 64.
and in explication of many emergent Questions concerning the Matter of the
Divine Laws, and their respective obligations, it will be useful to enumerate
the signs and characteristicks by which we can without error discern which
Precepts are Moral, and which are not: for this is a good and a general
instrument and Rule of Conscience and useful in many particulars.

The measures of difference to discern between Moral precepts and precepts not
moral in the all laws of God.

1. 65.
All Moral laws are such whose prime and immediate Measures are Natural reason:
but of precepts not Moral the reasons may be oeconomical or Political, some
emergency of state or accident, a reason that passes away or that is introduced
by a special blessing or a special caution, a personal danger, or the accidents
of conversation. That we should obey our Parents is a Moral law. This we know,
because for this we naturally and by our very Creation, and without a Tutour
have many reasons, and see great necessities and find abundant usefulness. For
whoever is in need cannot be releeved but upon such conditions as they who are
to releeve them will impose upon them: Love and obedience are but gratitude and
necessity; because all children are imperfect and helpless persons; living upon
the love and care of Parents and Nurses: they derive their Natures and their
birth, their education and maintenance from them, that is, they owe to them all
that for which any Man can be obeyed and loved; they have on them all the marks
and endearments of love and fear; they are in respect of their children useful
and powerful, better in themselves, and beneficial to their descendants; and
therefore the Regal power is founded upon the Paternal. (...). And unless where
God did speak by express voice, he never did speak more plainly, or give power
to one man over another so plainly as to Parents over their Children; their
power is the fountain of all other, and the measure of all other; it has in it
the end and usefulness of all Government, it has love and it has caution, it
is for the good of the Subjects; and though it keeps the honor in it self yet
the advantage ever passes on to others: And then if we consider that children
are a part of their Parents, that the Parents are blessed and cursed in them,
that there is in them toward their children a Natural affection, that the
little image of immortality in which Men desired to last for ever is supplied
to them by succession, which preserves their Name and Memory; that Parents are
more wise, and more powerful, and before in time, and useful in all regards;
that children cannot at first understand, nor do, nor speak; that therefore
Naturally they must be in the possession of them that can; that no man will
quit his interest without just reason; and these reasons of Subjection being
prime and Natural, and some of them lasting, and all of them leaving an
obligation and indearment behind them, they cannot pass away without leaving
indelible impressions; it must necessarily and Naturally follow that children
must pay to their Parents the duties of love and obedience, (...), Eurip.

(...).
It is the voice of Nature: He that honors his Parents is dear to God. * Now
when there is so much prime and Natural reason: or if there be but any one that
is so, which by Nature we are taught, it is Gods mark upon an Eternal precept:
and whatsoever God has commanded that is Naturally reasonable, that is, if it
be Naturally known, or if it be a reason that is not relative to t^mes and
persons, a reason that will not pass away with the changes of the world; a
reason that injoines a thing that is perfective of our Nature, and which cannot
be supplied by something else; all that is to be confessed to be a part of the
Moral law. But on the other side if we take the instances of circumcision, and
enquire whether this can be an Eternal law; besides the ways of discovering
this by the lines and measures of revelation, we can also tell by the causes of
its injunction: it was appointed as a mark of a family, a separation of a
people from other Nations, the seal of a temporary Covenant, a violence to
Nature, not Naturally apt to signify or to effect any thing beyond the wound
made by the sharp stone, a rite for which no Natural reason can be given; and
therefore it was never written in our hearts, but given in tables that could
perish.

2. That of which no reason can be given is not a moral precept. 66.
Because all Moral laws being also Natural are perfective of humane Nature, and
are compliances with our Natural needs, and with our Natural and measured
appetites; they are such in which all mankind feels a benefit; and where he
sees his way; they are and have been found out by the Heathen, drawn into their
digests of Laws; and there was never any law pretended to be Moral, but they
that did pretend it, offered at a reason for it, derived from the fountains of
Nature. For every Moral law being Natural; either it must be Naturally
consonant to the understanding, or only to the Natural desires: If to the
understanding; then there is a discernible reason; if only to the desires;
then the measure might be this, that whatsoever we Naturally desire shall
become a Natural duty; which if it could be admitted, would infer all the
mischiefs and disorders of the world. Upon this account all Sacraments and
Sacramentals are excluded from being moral laws because they depending wholly
upon Divine institution, whose reasons are very often secret and unrevealed, we
can neither Naturally know, nor Naturally consent to them, and therefore can
stand bound to them no longer then to the expiration of that period for which
they were invented.

3. 67.
The consequents of Natural reason are no indications of a Moral Commandment.
For Moral laws are few, and founded upon prime reason, such as appears so to
all discerning persons; but when once men begin to argue, and that their art or
observation is also to be relied upon; it is so often deceived and always so
fallible, that Gods wisdom and goodness would never put our Eternal interest
upon the disputations of men. It is said by some men to be of the law of Nature
that Spiritual persons should be exempt from secular jurisdiction; but because
they infer this from some proportions of Nature, the Natural distinction of
Spiritual and Temporal, by two or three remote and uncertain consequences, it
is to be despised; though we had not 1. so many precedents in the Old Testament
to the contrary, and 2. the example of our Blessed Lord, who being the head of
all Spiritual power was yet subject to the Civil Magistrate; and 3. the express
words of S. Paul speaking of the secular Magistrate; and commanding every Soul
to be subject to them; that is, Priests and Monks, Apostles and Evangelists and
Prophets (as S. Chrysostom thence argues, ^^ hunc locum.
) and all this 4. besides the Notoriety of the thing it self; Spirituality
being a capacity superadded to persons, who by a former that is a Natural duty
are subordinate to secular superiors. But besides all this; If the deduction
of Consequents shall be the measure of Moral duties, then the wittiest
disputant shall be the Lawgiver, and Logic will be the Legislative; and there
will be no term or end of multiplication of laws: for since all truth depends
upon the prime and Eternal truth, and can be derived from thence and return
thither again, all actions whatsoever that can be in any sense good or useful
will be in all senses necessary and matter of duty. There is a chain of truths,
and every thing follows from every thing if we could find it out: but that
cannot be the measure of laws; for besides that a thing is reasonable, there
must be a Divine Commandment; and if a good reason alone is not sufficient to
make a Moral law, a bad one is not sufficient to declare it. That all who are
obliged by a law should at least by interpretation consent to it, is said by
many to be of the law of Nature; yet this is so far from being a Moral
Commandment, that in some very great Communities of Men, the Clergy who are
not the ignoblest part of the people have no vote in making laws, nor power to
choose their representatives. Indeed it is very reasonable and full of equity
that all states of men who are fit to choose for others, should at least be
admitted to choose for themselves; yet because this relies not upon any prime
Natural reason that necessarily infers it; but is to be trusted to two or three
consequences and deductions, men have leave to use their power, and may choose
whether they will in this thing use the absolute power of a Prince, or the more
compliant poster of a Father. This is better, but that is not evidently against
a moral Commandment.

4. 68.
A law that invades the right of Nature is not always the breach of a Moral
Commandment: By the law of Nature no man is bound to accuse himself, but
because it is not against the law of Nature if he does, and only against a
privilege or right of Nature, 1. the complicated necessities of Men, 2. the
imperfection of humane Notices, 3. and the violence of suspicion, 4. and the
dangers of a third person, 5. or the interest of the Republic, 6. or the
Concerns of a Prince may make it reasonable that a Man be asked concerning
himself; and tied to give right answers. A Natural right is no indication of a
Moral law. But of this I have already spoken upon another occasion.

5 Every Consonancy to Natural Reason is not the sufficient proof of a Moral
law: 69.
For as we say in Natural Philosophy; that (...) and (...), Things Natural and
things according to Nature are not all one: It is according to Nature that they
who have the yellow jaundies should look of a yellow color: but this is not a
Natural affection, but praeternatural all the way: So it is in Moral instances,
it is consonant to Nature that we should not boil a Kid in her mothers Milk,
Vid. Aquinat. 12. q. 95. art. 2.
but this makes no moral law, for it is not against a Natural law if we do. *
There are some little rationalities and proportions and correspondencies of
Nature which are well and decent and pretty, but are not great enough to
establish a Commandment, or to become the measure of eternal life and death.
Nothing less then the value of a Man, or the concernment of a man is the
subject of Moral laws, and God having given to a man reason to live justly and
usefully, soberly and religiously, having made these reasonable and matters of
Conscience by a prime inscription, has by such prime reasons relating to God
or man bound upon us all Moral laws. Man only is capable of laws, and
therefore to man only under God can Moral laws be relative.

6. When God gives a law and adds a reason for it; 70.
it is not always the sign fication of a Moral law though the reason be in it
self Eternal, unless the reason it self be proper, relating to the Nature of
the thing, and not matter of Empire. For example, when God commanded the people
of Israel to give the first born to him or to redeem it, (...) 1^.
he adds this reason, I am the Lord: Now although this reason be eternal, yet
it is not a proper reason for this; but a reason by which he does or might
injoin all Commandments: and it is also matter of Empire and Dominion, by
which he can remonstrate his absolute supreme Legislative power, which is
reason sufficient for our obedience, but yet it is extrinsecal to the Nature of
the precept, and therefore upon this account it cannot be called Moral, whose
reason is always Natural, proper and immediate. But yet even this very reason
although it is a matter of Empire, yet when it is put to a Commandment as a
proper reason and refers to the matter of the law, it is certain token of
Morality: for thus this is the preface or thereason affixed to the first
Commandment; and something like it is in the second: For here when God says,
I am the Lord; it is a proper, Natural, essential reason inferring that
therefore we must have no other Gods, nor to any other thing that is not God
give Divine honor.

7. 71.
When God in the old Testament did threaten the Heathens or punish them for any
fact, it was not a sufficient argument to conclude that fact to be done against
a Moral Commandment; unless other things also concurred to the demonstration.
This I made to appear in the instance of some marriages: and it relies upon
this reason; because the Nations were obliged by the precepts of Noah, all the
instances or particulars of which were not Eternal in their obligation.

8. 72.
All the instances or pursuances of a Moral law, are not as Moral or necessary
as their fountain; but that Moral law is only to be instanced in those great
lines of duty, which are named or apparently designed in the letter or Analogy
of the law. That those who minister at the Altar should be partakers of the
Altar is a Moral law, and a part of natural and essential justice and religion:
in pursuance of this, the Priests did eat of the sacrifice; and were maintained
by tithes and offerings; and thus this Moral law amongst them was instanced and
obeyed: but though these were the ways in which the Jews did obey a Moral law;
yet these instances are not Moral and Eternal; because the Commandment can be
performed without them: and though the Ox be muzled when he treads out the
Corn, yet if he eats his fill before and after his work there is no breach of
the Commandment. Thus also it is commanded that we should rise up to the Gray
head; which is a pursuance of the fifth Commandment, but yet this expression
of reverence to old Men, is neither necessary at all times nor yet to be done
by all persons: another expression may do all the duty that is intended, and
he that with civil circumstances gives an alms to an old beggar has done more
regard to him then he that gives him a complement: For although Moral
Commandments are sometimes signified with the investiture of circumstances or
particular instances, yet because great reason is their measure, prime,
natural, essential and Concreated reason, it is easy to make the separation.

9. 73.
The strong, violent and firm persuasions of Conscience in single persons, or
in some communities of Men is not a sufficient indication of a Moral law. The
weak Brother of whom S. Paul speaks durst not eat flesh, but thought it an
impiety next to unpardonable, but he was abused: and there are at this day some
persons, some thousands of persons against whose Conscience it is to dress
meat upon the Lords day, or to use an innocent permitted recreation: Now when
such an opinion makes a Sect, and this Sect gets firm confidents and zealous
defenders, in a little time it will dwell upon the Conscience as if it were a
Native there, whereas it is but a pitiful inmate and ought to be turned out of
doors.

10. 74.
The consonant practices of Heathens in a matter not expressly commanded by God
to them, is no argument that what they did in that instance was by the light of
Nature, or a duty of a Moral Commandment. The Heathens paid tithes to
Hercules, they kept the seventh day sacred, they forbad their holy persons to
make second marriages; but it will be too great an easiness upon this account
to suppose these to be matter of Essential duty: not only because (as
Tertullian observes) the Devil was willing to imitate the serity or customs
and rites of Gods Church, to make his own assemblies the more venerable,
Symbolical, alluring and persuasive; but because the Nations to whom God
commanded tithes, Sabbaths and the like, had intercourse with many others, and
were famous in the world by blessing and Miracles, by the laws and Oracles of
God, by excelent Government and the best learnings: The Phoenicians conveyed
many Hebrew customs into Greece and some learned persons went to School in
Palestine and taught their own Nation some mysteriousnesses which themselves
learnd under the Jewish Doctors: and when the Judaizing Christians did
pertinaciously retain circumcision; they might upon this ground have pretended
it to be consonant to the law of Nature; because even the Gentiles, the
Egyptians, the Arabians, all the Nations that descended from Ishmael and Esau,
and diverse other nations their neighbors did use it. But, Consent is no
argument, when it is nothing but imitation.

11. 75.
The appendant penalty of temporal death imposed by God Almighty upon the
breakers of a law, does not prove that law to be of eternal obligation. I
instance in the gathering sticks upon the Sabbath, the omitting Circumcision,
the approaching a wife in diebus pollutionis; all which were made sacred by the
greatest penalty, but yet had not the greatest obligation, they were not Moral.

12. 76.
When two laws are in conflict and contest and call for an impossible
obedience, one must yield to the other; but that which must yield is not moral
and Eternal. The observation of the Sabbath, and doing acts of charity did
often enterfere in the actions and occurrences of our Blessed Saviors life;
but the Sabbath was always made to yield to charity. Thus Sacrifice and mercy,
the outward work and the inward, the letter and the Spirit do often make
contrary pretensions; but sacrifice, and the outward work, and the letter are
to yield and to comply, and therefore are but the expressions or instances, or
significations of a Moral duty; but of themselves have no morality. This holds
in all instances and has no exception.

13. 77.
By the not considering of these measures a great part of Mankind have been
deceived; but they could only be secured by the first; which because it is
also possible to be mistaken in the application, by reason of the miscarriages
and confidence of some men; therefore the last resort of all Moral laws is to
the Scriptures of the new Testament; in which whatsoever is commanded to all
Mankind is either moral in its Nature or is so by adoption; which last clause I
put in, by reason of the Sacraments, and some glorious appendages of Morality,
and heroical acts of charity commanded by Christ: the observation of which
although it be not moral, or of prime Natural necessity, yet because they are
commanded by Christ whose law is to oblige us as long as the Sun and Moon
endures: to us Christians and to all to whom the notice of them does arrive, it
is all one in respect of our duty, and has no real difference in the event of
things. But if from the old Testament Men will (as it is very often attempted
in several instances) endeavor to describe the measures of Moral laws, the
former cautions are of necessary observation.

RULE 7. There is no state of Men or things but is to be guided by the
proportion of some Rule or precept in the Christian law.
THat is, 1.
where there is no law to restrain us, we may do what we please; but where we
are tied up to rules and measures, we have no Lawgiver or fountain of religion
but God, who in these last days has spoken to us only by his Son, who as he
is supreme in all things, so he is every way allsufficient, and as by him only
we can be saved, so by him only and by his Spirit we must be governed. To this
purpose we believe that he has taught us all his Fathers will: He is the
Author and finisher of our faith; and therefore to him and to an obedience to
him we must bring our understanding: we pray that his will may be done here as
it is in heaven; and therefore he is perfectly to rule our wills here, for we
are sure he does rule all above: we have no lawgiver but him, no rule but his
will; no revelation of his will but in his word: and besides this we have no
certain place where we can set our foot. The laws of the Jews were either for
them and their Proselytes alone, or were adopted into the Christian Code; right
reason gives measures of things, but of it self makes no laws unless it be
conducted by a competent authority; The Prophets were either expounders of
Moses law, or preachers Evangelical; that is either they called to obedience in
things not Moral, or if they did, they only spoke the Sermons of the Gospel;
and whatsoever was excellent in all the world was but a derivation from the
wisdom of the Eternal Father; and all this was united into a Systeme of Holy
precepts at the appearing of the Eternal Son: and since there is no name under
heaven by which we can be saved but only the Name of Jesus, and he saves us
not only by procuring pardon for them, but by turning us from our iniquities,
by efforming us anew, by reforming whatsoever was amiss in manners and
persuasion, by conforming us to the similitude of the Holiness and perfections
of God, and bring us to glory by the ways and methods of Grace, that is, never
leaves us till our graces are perfect and even with Eternal felicities, it
follows that we must go to him, that he must teach us and guide us, that he
must govern us and persuade us, that his laws must be our measures, his
wisdom must be our star, his promises our aims, and we may as well say there
can be two principles as that besides him there can be any eternal and supreme
lawgiver. One is more then all the numbers of the world.

And if we look into the Nature of his Laws we shall handle this truth as the
people on mount Sinai did see thunder: 2.
all excellencies have as perfect Unity as any one has; and there can be but
one justice, and it is the same grace of mercy which dwells in the bowels of
all the good men and women in the world, and of temperance there can be but one
general measure, and unchastity is a certain prevarication of one excellency
that is known to all the world; and as for religion since there is but one God,
and he is to be worshipped as himself pleased, and to convey his blessings to
us by what Mediator and by what instruments himself shall elect; there can be
in these things no variety, unless there be a plain deficiency in the means of
the Divine appointment. All the duty of Mankind is in Religion, justice and
sobriety; and in all these things God by Jesus Christ has given us many laws,
and besides them he has given us no other, we have but one Lord, and therefore
but one Lawgiver and measure of justice: we have but one faith, and therefore
but one Religion; we have but one Baptism, or solemnity of renunciation of the
flesh, the world and the Devil, and therefore but one Rule for our comportment;
one measure of Sobriety according to the Unity of our Nature, which being made
after the image of God, is one as God is one. If therefore our Blessed Lord be
a perfect Lawgiver, his law alone must be the measure of our duty and
obedience; but if he be not a perfect Lawgiver, John. 6. 68.
whither shall we go to understand the will of God? Master whither shall we
go? for thou have the words of eternal life, said S. Peter; there is the
question and the answer too, and they together make the argument a
demonstration. For if we can obtain Eternal life by the words of Christ, then
they contain in them the whole will of God; for he that fails in one is
imperfect and loses all: and therefore in the words of Christ there is a
perfect provision for an entire obedience, because they are a sufficient way to
life Eternal.

The effect of this Consideration is; 3.
that all the measures of Good and Evil must be taken by the Evangelical lines:
Nothing is to be condemned which Christ permits, and nothing is to be permitted
which he condemns. For this is the great prerogative and perfection of Christ's
law above that of Moses; some things by Moses were permitted for necessity, and
because of the hardness of their hearts, thus divorces and Polygamy became
legally innocent, because a perfect law was too hard for that people, and like
a yoke upon a young Ox would have galled them, not subdued them; and if he had
strained too hard, the silver cords of Discipline would have been first broken
and then despised. But when Christ came he gave perfect laws, and more perfect
graces; he made the capacities of his obedience larger, and fitted the law and
the Subject by even and Natural and gracious proportions; and permitted nothing
which his Father loved not; and now every plant that God has not planted must
be rooted up: and therefore this law must needs be absolute, and alone, and
unalterable, and perfect, and for ever: and this appears infinitely upon this
account; that although our Nature is such that it will always be growing in
this world toward perfection, and therefore that it is imperfect, and our
obedience will be imperfect: yet even this Christ does not allow or positively
permit; but commands us to be perfect, that is, to go on toward it, to allow
nothing to our selves either of crime or of suspicion, to be perfect in our
desires, to be restless in our endeavors, to be assiduous in our prayers,
never to think we have comprehended, never to say it is enough: and if our
Blessed Master does not allow of any imperfection of degrees* but thrusts the
most imperfect forwards to perfection it must be certain that in his provisions
and his laws there can be no imperfection, but he has taken care for all
things on which eternity depends, and in which God is to be glorified and
obeyed. And therefore in no case can it be allowed to any man, or to any
company of Men to do any thing which is not there permitted.

Quest.

UPon the account of this Rule it is to be inquired whether it can be lawful 4.
for a Prince or Republic to permit any thing for the public necessities of
the people which is forbidden by the laws of Jesus Christ.

To this I answer a distinction: 5.
That if the Question be whether in any cases there may be actual impunity;
there is no peradventure but there may, for sometimes it is necessary, as when
a multitude sins, for then the remedy is much worse then the disease, and to
cut off all would effect, ut nemo sit quem peccasse poeniteat; there would be
justice without discipline, and Government without Subjects, and a cure without
Remedy: And therefore it is that Princes in the Mutinies of armies or in the
rebellion of their people use to cut off the heads of offenders, or Decimate
the Legions, as Caesar and Germanicus did: but if it be part of the people
though a considerable part, and the action highly Criminal, we find great
examples that executions have been done by Subjects, by the innocent part, and
then all the offenders suffered: Thus it happened in the mutiny of Caecina's
Legions and their defection to the Ubii; The innocent part cut off all the
rebels: and thus it was commanded by Moses who punished all them who worshipped
the golden Calf by the sword of the Levites, he set every man's hand against his
Brother, and none of the Criminals did escape. But sometimes it is impossible
to punish all; and very often the evil would be more then the good. For in all
penal laws and inflictions although there be much of Vindictive justice, yet
this justice is but a handmaid to Government and Correction. When revenge is
not also discipline, then it is no Government, unless Tyranny be the name of
it. So that in such cases, it may be lawful to spare some who need it indeed
but deserve it not.

But if by impunity be meant a legal impunity; 6.
it must either mean that a law shall warrant the action, or that it shall
before hand promise indemnity: if it warrant the action, which the Evangelical
law has forbidden, it is like the laws of Omri, it is statutum non bonum, and
erects a Government against the law of Christ: if it condemns the action but
promises indemnity, it disparages it self, and confesses its own weakness: but
as the first can never be lawful; so neither can the second ever be made so but
with these Cautions.

Cautions to be observed in Civil permissions of an unlawful act or state:

1. That the thing so permitted, 7.
be in the present constitution of affairs necessary; and yet will not be
without the evil appendage. Thus it is necessary that in all communities of Men
there be borrowing and lending; but if it cannot be without usury, the
Commonwealth might promise not to punish it; though of it self it were
uncharitable and consequently unlawful. For it is either lawful; or else it is
unlawful for being against Justice or or against Charity. If it be against
Justice, the Commonwealth, by permitting it, makes it just: for as it is in
the economy of the world, the decree of God does establish the vicissitudes of
day and night for ever: but the Sun by looking on a point not only signifies
but also makes the little portions of time and divides them into hours; but Men
coming with their little arts and instruments make them to be understood, and
so become the Suns interpreters: so it is in the matter of justice, whose great
return and firm establishments are made by God, and some rules given for the
great measures of it; and we from his laws know just and unjust as we
understand day and night: but the laws of Princes, and the contracts of men
like the Sun, make the little measures and divide the great proportions into
minutes of justice and fair intercourse; and the Divines and Lawyers go yet
lower, and they become expounders of those measures, and set up dials and
instruments of notice by which we understand the proportion and obligations of
the law, and the lines of Justice: just and unjust we love or bate respectively
by our warrant from God; and from him also we are taught to make the General
lines of it; as Do what you would be done to, restore the pledge, hurt no man,
rob not your neighbor of his rights, make no fraudulent contracts, no unjust
bargains: but then what are his rights, and what are not, what is fraudulent
and what is fair, in what he has power, in what he has none, is to be
determined by the laws of Men: So that if a Commonwealth permits an usurarious
exchange or contract, it is not unjust, because the laws are the particular
measures of justice and contracts, and therefore may well promise impunity
where she makes innocence (as to the matter of justice.) * But if usury be
Unlawful because it is uncharitable: then when it becomes necessary it is also
charitable comparatively; and as to charity no man by the laws of God is to be
compelled (because it is not charity if it be compelled; for God accepts not an
unwilling giver, and it is not charity but an act of obedience and political
duty when by laws men are constrained to make levies for the poor;) so much
less can they be compelled to measures and degrees of charity; and if to lend
upon usury be better then not to lend at all, it is in some sense a charity to
do so: and if it be when it will not be otherwise, there is no question but
the Prince that allows indemnity, is not to be damnifi'd himself. I instanced
in this, but in all things else where there is the same reason there is the
same conclusion.

2. Impunity may be promised to any thing forbidden by the law of Christ, 8.
if it be in such cases in which the Subject matter is disputable and uncertain
whether it be so or no; then it may. Thus it happens in questions of religion,
in which it is certain there are many resolutions against the truth of God; but
yet they may be permitted, because when they are probably disputed, no man is
fit to punish the error, but he who is certain and can make it appear so to
others, that himself is not deceived.

3. Whatsoever is against the law of Christ in any instance may not be directly
permitted for the obtaining a greater good, 9.
but may for the avoiding of a greater evil which is otherwise indeclinable. If
a Prince be perfectly persuaded that the suffering the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is against the laws and words of Christ it may not be
suffered, though the parties interested promise to pay all the Gabels of the
Nation and raise an army to defend it: but if a rebellion cannot otherwise be
appeased it is lawful; not only upon many other accounts which are appendant
to the Subject matter, but because when two evils are before me, neither of
which is of my procuring, I am innocent if I suffer either, and I am prudent if
I choose the least, and I am guilty of no crime because I am but a suffering
person: but if I do it to obtain a greater good, I choose the evil directly,
because I am not forced to pursue the greater good; I can be without it; and
although I may chose the least evil because I cannot avoid that or a greater;
yet when the Question is, whether I shall permit an evil or lose an advantage,
I may escape all evil, at no greater price then by loosing that advantage: so
that here is no excuse because there is no necessity; and in matters of duty,
no good can make recompense for doing any evil: but the suffering of a greater
evil is highly paid for by the avoiding of a greater.

4. When any such evil against the laws of Christ is permitted, 10.
the evil it self must be so reproved, that the forced impunity may not give so
much encouragement to the crime as the censure must abate. The reason is,
because no evil must be done at any price; and we must rather lose our life
then cause our Brother to offend; and if each man is bound to this, then every
man is bound to it. But because impunity is the greatest encouragement to sin,
and next to the pleasure or interest of it, is the greatest temptation; care
must be taken that what serves the interest of the Republic, may not deceive
the interest of Souls; and this being the greatest ought infinitely to be
preferred; and therefore unless something be directly done that may be
sufficient security against the probable danger, no interest of the
Commonwealth is to be served against it; because none is sufficient to be put
in balance against one Soul.

5. This impunity (especially if it be in the matter of sobriety) 11.
must not be perpetual, but for a time only, and must be rescinded at the
first opportunity. Thus S. Austin when he complained of the infinite number of
ceremonies which loaded the Church and made her condition more intolerable then
that of the Jews under the Levitical yoke, adds this withal, that this was no
longer to be tolerated then till there was a possibility to reform. And when
S. Gregory had sent Augustine the Monk to convert the Saxons, he gave him
advice not to press them at first too passionately to quit their undecent
marriages, which by their long Customs and the interest of their families they
would be too apt to hold too pertinaciously and with inconvenience, but
afterward it would be done.

6. Till the impunity can be taken away, 12.
it were an act of prudence and piety, and (in many cases) of duty, to
discountenance the sin by collateral and indirect punishments: Thus the old
Romans confined their lupanaria to the outer part of the city; It was a
Summaenium, and their impure women had a name of disgrace, and a yellow veil
was their cognizance: and so the Jews are used in some places: but thus we find
that S. Paul and the Apostles tolerated those Christians which from among their
own Nation gave up their Names to Christ; who yet were Polygamists, or which
was equivalent, had married a second wife their first being living and
divorced, but although this could not well be avoided, lest they should be
vexed into Apostasy, and their Judaical hardness of heart was not yet interated
sufficiently by the softer and sweeter Sermons of the Gospel; but yet to
represent their dislike of such marriages which they were forced to tolerate
they forbad such persons to be taken into their Clergy, so punishing such
persons by a privation of honor whom they could not punish by a direct
infliction of censures, or separation from their wives.

7. In all such tolerations of evil, 13.
the secular interest must be apparently separate and declared to stand far off
from any thing of the Religion; and the Consciences permitted to stand or fall
under them, who are to take care of them and answer for them; the permission by
the civil power is not to rescue them from the Ecclesiastical rod: for it being
a matter of civil interest is not to derive any countenance from religion, so
much as accidentally; for no powers of Man can forbid the servants of Christ to
preach his law, to declare his will, and to get Subjects to his Kingdom, and
to turn sinners from the error of their way: if they do, they must not be
obeyed, but God must, and if they die for it they are well enough.

But now against the doctrine of the Rule many things may be objected; 14.
for there seem many things and great cases to be for which the laws of the
holy Jesus have made no provision. I instance in a very great one, That is, the
whole state of war, and all the great cases and incidents of it. For since it
is disputable whether Christianity allows of war, and it is not disputable
but very certain that it speaks nothing of it expressly, neither gives any
cautions concerning it in particular, it will seem to be a casus omissus in the
law. To this there may be many considerations offered.

Of the measures of war by Christ's law.

1. If it be said that all war is unlawful, 15.
against the analogy and against many express lines of our religion; it is
indeed a short way of answering this difficulty, but will involve the whole
Christian world in many more; but of this in the following numbers I shall give
accounts.

2. If it be said that Christianity leaves that matter of war wholly to be
conducted by the laws of Nature and Nations: 16.
we shall find that this will entangle the whole inquiry, but we shall never
come to any certainty. For if the Christian law be (as I have proved) a perfect
digest of the Natural law; to say the affairs of war are to be conducted by
the laws of Nature is not to put them from being determined by the Christian
law, because they are the same; and if in the law of Christ there be no rules
of war, neither can there be any in Nature. But besides this, if the laws of
Nature which concern war be not set down in the Gospel and writings of the
new Testament, but that we be sent to look for them in the tables of our own
hearts in which some things are disordered by passion, and many more are
written there by interest, and some by custom, and others by education, and
amongst men these are the authors of contrary inscriptions; we shall find the
law of Nature a strange thing by that time we have drawn it from thence only,
and looked over it to find some rules of war, whose whole being is very much
against the excellent and perfective laws of Nature.

3. If it be said that War is to be conducted by the measures of peace; 17.
we speak what is impossible to be true: for inter arma silent leges, not only
because the sword is licentious and impudent; but because the cases of peace
and war are wholly different.

4. If it be said that right reason must be the measures; 18.
I answer, that if right reason could be heard possibly, there would be no
war at all: and since one part begins the war against, reason it is not
likely that he for any reason that can be urged shall lose his advantage. But
besides this who shall be judge? whose reason shall rule? whose arguments shall
prevail? and will he who is minor in causa be minor in praelio, be who has the
worst at the dispute yield also in the fight? and are not the pugnacissimi the
fighting men such as will hear and understand the least reason?

5. Some will have the law of Nations to be the measure of war; 19.
and possibly it might if there were a Digest of them, and a compulsory to
enforce them; but there being neither, they are uncertain what they are, and
are admitted with variety and by accident, and they shall oblige strangers when
the men are conquered; and Subjects by the will of the Prince, that is, the
measures of war shall be the edicts of any single General and nothing else.

In the midst of these oppositions it will be hard to find something certain:
20.
but that which can most be relied upon is this. * That Christian Religion has
made no particular provisions for the conduct of war under a proper title,
because it has so comm^nded all the actions of men, has so ordered the
religion, so taken care that men shall be just, and do no wrong, has given
laws so perfect rules so excellent, threatenings so severe, promises so glorious
that there can be nothing wanting toward the peace and felicity of mankind,
but the wills of men. If men be subjects of Christ's law, they can never go to
war with each other; but when they are out of the state of laws and peace,
they fall into the state of war; which being contrary to peace, is also
without all laws. So that the injurious person is not to inquire how to conduct
his war, for he is gone beyond all law; into a state of things where laws are
of no value: but for the injured person he is just so to comport himself as he
can; having one measure of action, and another of defense.

For his defense: 21.
it is not to be measured by laws, but by privileges: that is, things being
gone beyond the laws of Nature: he is left to his natural powers and defenses;
and is to do this without any other limit, but that he defend himself and his
relatives and drive away the injury. That is, there being no law of God to
forbid him to defend himself he is at his liberty which Naturally every man
has: Cic. pro Mil.
Hoc and ratio doctis, and necessitas barbaris, and mos gentibus, and feris
Natura ipsa praescripsit, ut omnem semper vim, quacunque open possent, a
corpore, a capite, a vita sua propulsarent. The learned are taught by reason,
the barbarous nations by necessity, the civil by custom, the very beasts also
by Nature, to defend their head, their body, their life from all injury by all
means. For God has no where forbidden that a man shall be defended, Armaque in
armatos sumere jura sinunt; Ovid.
we may put on armor to defend us against an armed malice: he has indeed
forbidden private revenges, because those are entrusted to the laws and public
persons; but when a single person is injured he can defend himself or crave the
patronage of Princes and the laws; but when public interests are violated,
when Kingdoms and Communities of Men and Princes are injured, there is no law
to defend them; and therefore it must be force: for force is the defensative of
all laws: and when all laws are injured, there can be no way to reduce men to
reason, but by making them feel the evils of Unreasonableness. If this were
not so then all Commonwealths were in a worse state of affairs then single
persons: for Princes are to defend each single person; and the laws are to
secure them; but if the laws themselves be not defended, no single person can
be; and if they could, much rather should all. Whatsoever is absolutely
necessary is certainly lawful, and since Christ has no where forbidden Kings
to defend themselves and their people against violence; in this case there is
no law at all to be considered; since there is a right of Nature which no law
of God has restrained; and by that right all men are equal; and therefore if
they be not safe from injury it is their own fault or their own unhappiness;
they may if they will, and if they can: and they have no measures in this but
that they take care they be defended, and quit from the danger and no more. The
Jus naturae, the rights and liberties, the equalities and privileges of Nature
are the warrant of the defense, or rather there needs no warrant, where there
is no law at all: But this right of Nature is the measure of the defense, we
may be defended as much as we need.

But then if it be inquired, 22.
what is the measure of actions which must be done in the conduct of the
defense by the injured Prince or Republic, and how shall they be measured if
Christ in his laws has made no provisions and described no rules? I answer,
That the measures of action in public are no other then the measures of the
private; the same Rule of justice is to be between Princes and between Private
persons: they also must do as they would be done to; they must keep covenants,
perform their words, hurt no innocent person whom they can preserve, and yet
preserve themselves, they must keep themselves within the limits of a just
defense: and as in private contentions and repetitions of our right we must
look after justice, but do nothing against charity, we must defend our rights,
but do the adversary no wrong, and by no vexatitious measures secure our own
interest, and destroy his just right, in an unnecessary conduct of our own, so
it is with Princes: He that is injured may drive away the injury, he may fight
against invaders, he may divert the war if it be necessary; but he may not
destory the innocent with the guilty, the peacable Countrymen with the fighting
Soldiers: and nothing can legitimate that but an absolute necessity that is,
it must not be done at all when it can be understood and when it can be
avoided: and there is no direct action of war but it is to be ruled by
necessity, and justice and charity, and in these there is no variety of the
rule, and no change except what is made by the Subject matter, which must be
made to combine with the measures of justice and charity by the instruments of
reason and customs and public fame, and all the measures of wise and good Men.

Wars are so to be managed as private contentions are; 23.
and there are the same rules for both, that is, when they are equals: but if
it be a war betwixt Subject and Superior, it is on the Princes part to be
conducted as other acts of public justice: when a single executioner can
punish offenders, that is enough; if one cannot, more must; for it is every
man's interest that the injurious should be punished; and he that can raise the
Country Troops by law, to assist the executions of justice, may raise all the
Troops of his Kingdom to do the same duty when there is a greater necessity:
But for the Subjects who take up arms against their Superior, there is no
answer to be given by what measures they must conduct their arms, there is no
measure at all for them, but one, to lay them down and never to take them up
again. For it can not be expected that a wise and a holy lawgiver should give
rules for the Banditi to manage their violences, or the Circassians how to
conduct their plunder and their robberies: Christ never gave any laws
concerning rebels, but obedience and repentance: and for just wars, that is,
the defensive wars of Princes (for there is no other just but what is
defensive directly or by a just equivalency) Christ has given no other laws
but the same by which single persons in their contentions or differences are to
be conducted: and thus also S. John the Baptist gave the same measures to the
Soldiers which contain every man's duty; Do violence to no man, and be content
with your wages. For war is but the contention of many: and as it is in
social contracts which are to be governed by the same justice as private
Merchandise; so it is in social contentions: for in this case, two and two
thousand make no difference in the rule, but much in the circumstances of the
matter.

Quest.

BUT upon this instance it is seasonable to inquire whether the precedents of
the old Testament be so imitable by them that go to war, 24.
that they can pass into a law, or if not, yet whether they are safe or no?

The question though instanced in the matter of war, 25.
yet is of use in all affairs whatsoever; because there are diverse portions of
mankind, 1. who think every thing is imitable which they find done in the
Scriptures, and 2. nothing safe or warrantable that is not: These being their
measures of right and wrong have great influence into the questions of
Conscience, and therefore are to be established upon certain rules.

Of the Negative measures of examples in the Old Testament.

1. Therefore it is evident that not every thing done in the old Testament is a
warrant for us: 26.
I instance in all the injustices and violences, rapines, and open
prevarications of Natural rights, concerning which there needs no further
disquisition; but we are to keep our selves to the rule; that is, to Gods
measures not to man's, Seneca de vita beata. c. 2.
non qua itur, sed qua eundum; and we must not follow a multitude to do evil,
Argumentum pessimi turba est. Quaeramus quid optime factum sit, non quid
usitatissimum; and quid nos in possessione felicitatis aeternae constituat, non
quid vulgo veritatis pessimo interpreti probatum sit. The crowd is the worst
argument in the world: let us inquire not what is most usual but what is most
excellent; let us look after those things which may place us in the bosom of
beatitude, not those which can tune with the common voices which are the worst
interpreters of truth in the whole world: and therefore that some persons were
recorded in the Scriptures is no hallowing of the fact, but serves other ends
of the Spirit of God. But in this there is no question.

2. The actions of good men in Scriptures are not a competent warrant for our
imitation; 27.
not only when they are reproved, but even when they are set down without
censure. The reasons are plain, 1. Because all the stories of the Bible are not
intended to be Sermons: and the word of God is useful for doctrine, for
reproof, for exhortation and for information; not every comma and period for
every one of these purposes; for they are contrary: but in the whole there is
enough to make the man of God perfect and readily instructed to every good
work, to every holy purpose. Therefore as we must not imitate the adultery and
murder of David, which are expressly condemned, so neither may we dissemble
madness as he did at Gath, not persuade another to tell a lie for us, as he did
to Jonathan, that he should say he was gone to Bethlehem, when he went but into
the fields, and to pretend sacrifice, when it was a very flight. 2. Because
every man is a liar, and therefore unless himself walks regularly he can be no
rule to us. 3.
3. Every servant of God was bound up by severe measures, and by his rule he
was to take account of his own actions, and therefore so are we of his. 4.
4. There were in the old Testament greater latitudes of permission then there
are to us: Polygamy was permitted for the hardness of their hearts, but it is
severely forbidden to us; and though without a censure we find Jacob to be
husband to two sisters at once; yet this cannot warrant us who are conducted by
a more excellent Spirit, taught by a more perfect institution, governed by a
severer law under the last and Supreme Lawgiver of Mankind: (...) said S.
Chrisostom: De Virgin.
we Christians ought to show a greater virtue and more eminent Sanctity;
because we have received abundance of the Spirit of God and Christ's coming is
a mighty gift: and if we should derive our warranties from the examples of the
old Testament, it were all one as if from the licenses of war we should take
pattern for our comportment in the days of peace and laws, or from children
learn what were the measures of a man. 5.
5. Because sometimes the actions of good men were in them innocent because
done before a law was given to them; but the Symbolical actions by a
supervening law afterward became criminal. Thus although the drunkenness of
Noah is remarked without a black character, and plainly told without a censure,
it cannot legitimate drunkenness in us, because he was not by any positive law
bound from a freer use of wine, directly by proper provision; but we are. 6.
6. Because the actions of holy men in Scripture are complicated, and when they
are propounded as examples, and the whole action described, there is something
good and something bad; or something naturally good, and something peculiar and
personally good which cannot pass into example. Thus when S. Paul speaks of
Gideon and Jephthah, Samson and David, Deborah and Baruch, who thorough faith
subdued kingdoms; here their subduing Kingdoms by invasion and hostility is
not propounded as imitable; but their faith only, and therefore let us follow
their faith but not their fighting: and carry the faith to Heathen Countries
but not arms. So when the fact of Razis is propounded as glorious and great
when he killed himself to avoid Nicanor, 2 Mac. 15.
the whole action is not imitable, but only so much of it as was pious and
prudent; and the other is to be praised as being the choice of a lesser evil,
or is to be left to its excuse, as being necessary and unavoidable.

3. The actions of men in the old Testament though attested and brought to
effect by the providence of God, 28.
is no warrant for our practice nor can they make an authentic precedent. I
instance in the fact of Jeroboam, who rebelled against the house of Solomon;
although God was the author of that change, and by his providence disposed of
the event, yet Jeroboam had rules to have gone by, which if he had observed God
would by other means have brought his purposes to pass; and Jeroboam should not
have become a prodigy and a proverb of impiety. For a man is circumscribed in
all his ways by the providence of God just as he is in a ship: for although
the man may walk freely upon the decks, or pass up and down in the little
continent; yet he must be carried whither the ship bears him: A man has
nothing free but his will, and that indeed is guided by laws and reasons, but
although by this he walks freely; yet the Divine providence is the ship, and
God is the Pilot, and the contingencies of the world are sometimes like the
fierce winds which carry the whole event of things whither God pleases: So
that this event is no part of the measure of the will: that has a motion of
its own which depends not upon events and rare contingencies, or the order of
secret providence: and therefore this which could not commend his action cannot
warrant our imitation.

4. Actions done in the old Testament though by a command of God do not
warrant us or become justificable precedents without such as express command as
they had: 29.
if the command was special and personal, the obedience was just so limited;
and could not pass beyond the person. Thus Jehu took up arms against the house
of Ahab by the command of God; who intended to punish him severely. But we may
not lift up our hand against our Prince though he be wicked; unless God give us
such an express Commandment: For nothing is imitable but what is good: but in
this there was nothing good but the obedience; and therefore nothing can
legitimate it but a Commandment.

5. Actions of good men if done upon a violent cause, 30.
or a great necessity are not imitable unless it be in an equal case and a like
necessity. David when he was hungry went into the Priests house and took the
bread which was only lawful for the Priests to eat, and to this example Christ
appeals; but it was in a like case in a case of necessity and charity, He that
does the same thing must have the same reason, or he will not have the same
innocence.

6. Examples in matters of war are ever the most dangerous precedents: 31.
not only because men are then most violent and unreasonable, but because the
rules of war are least described; and the necessities are contingent and
many, and the reason of the action depending upon heaps of circumstances (of
which peradventure no notice is recorded) can less be understood; and after all
this, because most commonly they are unreasonable and unmerciful. That David
made the people of the Ammonites to pass under Saws and harrows of iron is not
safely imitable by Christian Soldiers; because it had so much cruelty, which
either must be criminal or have an extraordinary legitimation, which it is
certain Christian Princes cannot have unless it be by a rare contingency, and a
new revelation, to which they can never reasonbly pretend. But that they may
drive out an invading army, that they may kill them that resist, that they may
by war defend the public rights in which all the private are involved, they
may safely take for their warrant; the example of Abraham fighting in behalf of
the King of Sodom; the act of Melchisedek in blessing God for the success of
that battle; the wars of the Judges and of David, because these were just and
necessary by special command, or necessary defense, faith was the great
instrument, and Gods blessing gave them prosperity; they were against no law,
and the like cases God has not since restrained, and therefore we of our
selves being left to the rights of our Nature, and unconfined by the laws of
God, proceed prudently when we have the confidence of such great examples;
against which the interest of no law is publicly, the interest of no virtue is
secretly engaged.

7. When a law is changed, 32.
the Examples which acted in proportion to that law lose all manner of
influence and causality, and cannot produce a just imitation. Among the Jews it
was lawful for a private person to transfixe his Brother or his Father if
either of them tempted him to idolatry; and in a cause of God they might do
public justice by a private hand. All the actions of their Zealots done in
such instances are no examples to Christians: because when that Priesthood was
changed, the law was changed, and then the Nature of the action passed from
lawful to unlawful; and therefore could not be imitated. He that is to write
Greek must not transcribe it by the Hebrew Alphabet, and when the copy is
altered, the transcript must also receive variety and specific difference.
Thus the Disciples of our Lord would fain have done as Elias did; but Christ
told them that he was not imitable in that, by telling them the spirit which is
the principle or great instrument of action was wholly changed. It was not safe
for them to do as Elias did, because they were to do as Christ commanded.
Thus we find in the old Testament King Solomon dedicating and consecrating of a
Temple, it was a new case, and he was an extraordinary person, and the
Christian Church has transcribed that copy so far as to dedicate and
consecrate Churches or Temples to the service of God, but she does it by the
ministry of Bishops who are amongst us the precedents of prayer, and have
those special assistances and Emanations of the holy Spirit upon their order
which Solomon had in his own person and much more; and therefore though the act
is exemplar, yet it is not imitable as to the person officiating: because to
do so is not properly the effect either of power or of office; but being to be
done in the way of prayer is by the reason of the thing it self; and the
constitution of the Church appropriate to the Presidents of Religion.

Of the Example of Christ.

8. In the new Testament we have so many, 33.
so clear, so perfect rules, that we have no need of examples to instruct us or
to warrant our practices; but examples to encourage and to lead us on in the
obedience of those rules. We have but one Great Example; Jesus Christ; who
living in perfect obedience to his Father, did also give us perfect instruction
how we should do so too in our proportion. But then how far Christ is
imitable, and ought to be imitated by us is best declared in this short rule.

In whatsoever he gave us a Commandment, 34.
in that only we are bound to imitate him: but in whatsoever he propounded to
us as excellent, and in whatsoever he did Symbolically to it, in all that also
we may imitate him.

This rule establishes the whole case of Conscience in this affair. 35.
Because our Blessed Savior being an extraordinary person was to do some
extraordinary things, in which either we cannot, or we ought not to imitate
him. He fasted forty days, we cannot: He whipped the buyers and sellers out of
the Temple, we may not without the authority of a public person: He overthrew
the Tables of the Merchants, but the young man in Portugal who being
transported with zeal and ignorance beat the chalice and the Sacrament out of
the Priests hand out of passion against his idolatrous service (as he
understood it) Fox Martyros.
had a sad event of his folly amongst men; and what reward of his zeal he found
with God is very uncertain. But whatsoever he taught to mankind, of that also
he became a glorious example: S. Cyprian.
but by the Sermons only we are instructed, by the example encouraged: for
admonetur omnis aetas fieri posse quod aliquando factum est: we see it possible
to be done what Christ commanded us to do, and then did, that we might follow
his steps. But his example in these things makes up no part of our Rule,
because it is perfect without them: Here our rule is perfect, and so is our
example; but because Christ did some things beyond our rule, and past our
measures, and things of personal virtue and obligation, therefore we are to
look upon Christ as imitable just as his life was measured by the laws he gave
us, where they are, even there we also must endeavor to be so. * There is this
only to be added: That in the prosecution of his obedience to his heavenly
Father; he sometimes did action in gradu heroico, of great excellency; which
although they are highly imitable, yet they pass no obligation upon us but that
we endeavor to tread in his steps, and to climb up to his degrees, and to
desire his perfections. * That these pass upon us no other obligation appears
because they are sometimes impossible to be attained to; and they are the
highest and the best, and therefore are not direct matter of duty, which
belongs to all, to the highest and to the lowest. * But that these do pass upon
us an obligation to endeavor to attain them, and of labor toward them in our
circumstances, appears in the greatest instance of all, the highest obedience,
even that which was unto death; ^ Pet. 2. 21.
for therefore Christ has suffered for us, leaving an example to us, that we
might follow his steps: that is, when he had given his Church precepts and
propounded to them rewards of suffering: he also was pleased to give us the
greatest example as a commentary upon his own text; declaring that the
Commandment did extend to the greatest instance; and that we should do as he
did, obediens factus usque ad mortem, he was obedient even unto death; and so
must we when God requires it in particular. * And that this is our duty, and
that the obligation reaches thus far, is certain upon the interest of love;
for we must love him who is our Lord and our God; we must love him with all our
heart and with all our powers; and therefore endeavor to be like him: (...).
The greatest honor we can do to God and Gods law, Hiercel. in ca^m. aur.
is to understand God and to become like to him. For every one imitates that
which he loves. Religiosissimus culturest imitari, said Lactantius, that is an
excellent instance of the Divine worship, to endeavor to become like to the
Holy Jesus.

9. 36.
But this is to be reduced to practice so as that 1. The duty be certainly
imitated; and 2. The degree of duty aimed at; 3. And the instance be chosen
with prudence and liberty. Thus when we find that Christ did spend whole nights
in prayer; the duty here recommended is earnestness and diligence in prayer. In
this we must imitate our Blessed Lord; because his rule and his example make
(...), an excellent confederation and society. But then to do it with that
vehemence and earnestness, that degree of diligence, is a rare perfection which
we can only tend to in this life, but we must do what moral diligence we can:
And as for the instance and particularities of duty and devotion, we are yet at
greater liberty, for we are not obliged to pernoctation in prayer, so we pray
earnestly and assiduously, which is the duty, and endeavor to do it like
Christ, which is the passion of the duty, and the degree of love, and the way
of perfection; but that it be in the night, or in the day is but the
circumstance of the duty, nothing of the Nature, nothing directly of the
advantage of it; and is to be wholly conducted by prudence and consideration of
accidents.

10. Afterall this; as Christ must be imitated in all matter of duty; 37.
and is imitable in degrees of duty; and that for the circumstances of it we
are wholly at liberty: so also it is in matters of his own ordinance and
institution in which the Religion is to be obeyed, the design is to be observed
and promoted, the essentials of the observation to be infallibly retained; but
in the incidencies, and collateral adherencies which are nothing to the Nature
of the rite, nor at all appertain to the religion, there is no obligation, no
advantage, no love, no duty in imitating the practice of our Blessed Savior.
Thus to celebrate the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper with bread and
wine, to do it in remembrance of his death, to do it as he commanded, in
obedience to him, to receive it a praesidentium manu, from the hands of the
Presidents of Religion, is matter of duty, and matter of love, and matter of
obedience; but to suppose we are bound so to imitate the actions and
circumstances of the actions of Christ, as that it is duty or necessity that we
take it in unleavened bread, to mingle water with wine, to receive it in wines
of Judaea, to receive it lying or leaning on a bed, to take it after Supper, is
so far from being matter of love or duty, and a commendable imitation of
Christ, that it is mimical and theatrical, trifling and superstitious, a snare
to Consciences, and a contempt of religion; it is a worshipping of God with
circumstances in stead of forms, and forms in stead of substances, it is like
burning mushromes upon the altar, and a converting dreams into a mystery; It is
flattery, not love, when we follow our Lord in those things in which he neither
gave command, nor did any thing of Religion or excellence, that is, in which he
neither propounded himself imitable, nor to be obeyed. For what worthiness was
there in it that Christ did eat this Supper at Supper time; or that when he did
institute this he was at his other Supper, and did as the fashion of the
Country was at his supper? what religion was there in it that he drank the
wine of his own Country? and what ceremony or mystery was it if according to
the usages of Sober persons he put water into his wine for his ordinary
beuvrage? and how could these become matters of Religion or imitation, when
they were only the incidencies and investitures of the ordinary actions of
life and conversation? and in these things the interest of Religion is
conducted competently by common reason. He that follows the vices of his Prince
does like the man that worshipped Mercury by throwing stones at him; and he
serves him with a mischief, and to please his vicious Prince thrusts him
forward to Eternal ruin. But he that to humor him carries his neck aside, or
shrugs his shoulders in the same manner, or holds his knife at dinner by his
pattern, is a flatterer; but he only loves his Prince and is a worthy servant,
who fights bravely if his Prince be valiant, and loves worthy things by his
example, and obeyes his laws and celebrates his fame and promotes his interest,
and does those things in imitation, for which his Lord is excellent and
illustrious in all the world.

But because against a Rule no example is a competent warrant; 38.
and if the example be according to the Rule, it is not the example, but the
Rule that is the measure of our action; therefore it is fit to inquire of what
use it can be to look after the examples either of the old or new Testament;
and if it be at all, since the former measures are not safe, to inquire which
are. In which inquiries we are not to consider concerning examples whose
practices are warranted by rules; for in them as there is no scruple, so
neither is there any usefulness save only that they put the rule into
activity, and ferment the spirit of a man; and are to the lives of men, as
exhortation is to doctrine; they thrust him forward to action, whose
understanding and Conscience was preingag'd.

Of the use of examples in the (...) and new Testament.

But then if it be inquired, 39.
What use examples are of beyond the collateral encouragement to action, and
which are safe to be followed? I answer,

1. That in cases extraordinary, 40.
where there is no rule, or none that is direct or applicable with certain
proportions to the present case, then we are to look for example, and they are
next to the rule the best measures to walk by. But this is of no use in any
matter where God has given a law; but may serve the ends of humane inquiry in
matters of decency and personal proportions, when men are permitted to
themselves and their intercourse with others. For the measures of humane
actions are either the (...), That which is holy, and that which is just; and
of this our Blessed Lord has given full rules and measures: or else the
measure is, (...), That which is worthy and becoming such a person: and
because laws do not ever descend to such minuits, the practices and examples
of imitable and exemplary persons is the auxiliary of laws. But this is
coincident to that of fame and reputation, thus if it be inquired in the days
of persecution, whether is be fit to fly or to abide the worst; although we are
by all general rules unlimited and unconstrained, and so the question of lawful
or unlawful will cease, yet because it may be a Question of the (...), we may
look about and see what such men as we are and ought to be, have done: Shall
such a man as I fly? said the brave Eleazar: he did not, and so made up the
Rule by becoming a worthy precedent.

2. In complicated questions when liberty and necessity are mingled together,
41.
Rule and example together make the measures. Thus if it be inquired how we are
to comport our selves toward our King, and what are the measures of our duty
toward a Tyrant or a violent injurious Prince: the rule is plain, we must not
strike Princes for justice; and we must not hurt the Lords anointed, nor revile
the Ruler of the people: but if we inquire further concerning the extension of
a just defense, the Example of David is of great use to us, who not only
comported himself by the laws of God and Natural essential reason; but his
heart smote him for that he had cut off the lap of Saul's garment: and by his
example kept us so far within the moderation of necessary defense, that he
allowed not any exorbitancy beyond it though it was harmless and without
mischief.

3. In the use of privileges, 42.
favors and dispensations where it is evident that there is no rule, because
the particular is untied from the ligatures of the law; it is of great
concernment that we take in the limits of the best examples. And in this we
have the precedent of our Blessed Savior to be our guide: For when in the
question of Gabels or tribute-money, he had made it appear that himself was by
peculiar privilege and personal right, free; yet that he might not do any
thing which men would give an ill name to, he would not make use of his right,
but of his reason, and rather do himself an injury, then an offense to others.
This is of great use in all the like inquiries: because it gave probation that
it is better to depart from our right, then from our charity: and that
privileges are then best made use of, when they are used to edification.

4. In all matters of doubt, 43.
when the case seems equal to the Conscience on either hand, so that the
Conscience cannot determine, there the examples of wise and good men are of
great use to cast the balance and to determine the action: for to an equal
Scale every grane that is added will be sufficient to make the determination.
If it be disputed whether it be lawful to rely upon the memory of our good
works, and make them as an argument of confidence in God; and the rules of
conduct seem antinomies, and when we think Gods goodness and justice is warrant
for the affirmative, and yet the rules and precepts of humility bear us to the
Negative; between these two, if they stand on equal terms, the Example of
Hezekiah is sufficient to make the determination.

5. The greatest use of examples is in the interpretation of laws: 44.
when the letter is equivocal, and the sense secret, or the degrees of action
not determined; then the practice of good men is the best external measure we
can take: for they are like sententiae judicatae in the law: the sentences of
Judges and the precedents in the like cases, by which the wisest men do often
make their determinations. Thus the example of David in dividing the spoil
between them that fought and them that guarded the stuff, as being a sentence
in a question of equity, became a precedent in the armies of Israel for ever
after.

These are the uses we may make of Examples in Holy Scriptures and
Ecclesiastic writers; 45.
which uses are helps to our weakness, but no arguments of the imperfection of
Christ's law; for all these uses are such which suppose us unable to make use of
our rule, as in the case of a doubting Conscience, or not to understand it, as
in case of interpretation; or else are concerning such things which are not
direct matter of duty, but come in by way of collateral obligation: as in
matter of decency and personal proportions; for which although examples may
apply them, yet the laws of Christ have given us the General measures.

But then since there is this use to be made of them, 46.
and the actions of men in Scripture are upon so many accounts as I before
reckoned inimitable and unfit precedents: the next inquiry is, What are the
positive measures by which we may know what examples are imitable and fit to be
proceeded in.

The positive measures of example, and which may be safely followed?

1. In this the answer has but little difficulty not only because of the
Cautions already given in the Negative measures, 47.
but because the inquiry is after examples in cases where the Rule is not clear
and evident, not understood, or not relied upon; and they being in some sense
used only in the destitution of a rule, may with the less scruple be followed,
because if there be no rule clear enough to guide the action, neither will
there be any to reprove the example Therefore that which remains is this;

2. That example is safe, 3
whose action is warranted by Gods blessing. Thus the piety of the Egyptian
Midwives was imitable, in that they refused to kill the Lords people at the
command of Pharaoh; for it is said, Therefore God did build them houses, it was
mingled with an officious lie, but that was but accidental to their action and
no part of its constitution, and therefore not relative to the reward: but
whatsoever God says he rewards with a blessing, that in equal circumstances
may be safely imitated. I do not say whatsoever is blessed or is prosperous,
is imitable: for it may be prosperous and yet unblessed in one regard and
accursed in another, or successeful to day and blasted to morrow, or splendid
in this world and damned in the next; or permitted for the trial of Gods
servants, or the extinction of their sins, or the very thriving of it may be
the biggest curse, and nurse up the sin into its monstrous ugliness, and is no
other but like the tumor of an Ulcer, it swells indeed and grows very great,
but it is a sore all the way and is a contradiction to prosperity; and sin
never thrives unless it be in the most Catachrestical and improper way of
speaking in the world: but I say when it is said or plainly enough signified in
Scripture that God did bless the man for so doing; that for which he was
blessed, that I say is only imitable. * And on the other side though an action
be described in story without its mark of good or bad, it is a great
condemnanation of the action if the event was intolerable and the proper
production was a mischief: and thus was the drunkenness of Lot condemned,
because incest was the product, and of Noah, because shame and slavery were the
two daughters of it.

3. Because in these examples for which there is no perfect rule the
concernment is not a direct but a collateral duty, 49.
not matter of direct obedience, but fame and reputation, that things honest in
the sight of all men be provided; therefore such examples only are to be
followed which are of good report. A man shall not be called a just person if
he invades his neighbors rights, and carries war to dispossess a people that
live in peace, upon pretense because we find in Scripture that Nimrod did so;
because he was an infamous person: but when Joshuah kept the Gibeonites alive
because though he was deceived by them yet he swore to them, and yet did make
them to be slaves to his people; he is very imitable both in one part and in
the other, and we may not break our words upon pretense we were deceived, but
yet we may do all that we can justly do for the interest of our relatives:
and all this can well depend upon the example of Joshuah because his fame is
entire and illustrious he is accounted a good and a brave man.

4. We must be careful to distinguish the examples of things lawful from the
examples of things good and just: 50.
and always imitate these, but with caution follow those (...) not only
because what was lawful in the old Testament is not always so in the New, but
that what is lawful at all times, at some times is not fit to be done. But
then, let every example be fitted to the question: If the inquiry be whether
this action be holy or no? an example that declares it lawful does not answer
that question, but if it be asked whether it be lawful, the example proving it
to be holy does conclude the other more strongly.

5. When evident signs of piety like veins of Silver in the grosser earth are
mingled with the example, 51.
it adds many degrees of warranty to the determination. Thus our B. Savior in
his apology made for his Disciple appeald to the example of David eating the
bread of proposition: it was indeed an argument to them depending upon the fame
of the Patriarch, but yet our B. Savior knew there was in it great charity and
lines of piety to his hungry followers when David neglected a ceremony that he
might do a charity and releeve a necessity, and therefore Christ did it not
because David did it, but because he might: David's action was not Christ's
warrant, but the piety of the thing was warrant to them both. And indeed this
is the right use of examples: by the advantage of the man's fame they may
reprove an adversary, but by the great lines of piety mingled with the body of
the action they may become a precedent for our imitation.

I have now given accounts concerning that principle (mentioned number. 25.) which
affirms [every thing to be imitable if done and described in the Scripture]
unless it be signally forbidden. Concerning the other [That nothing is safe or
warrantable that is not] I reserve it for its proper place.

CHAP. III. Of the Interpretation and Obligation of the Laws of JESUS CHRIST.
RULE 1. In Negative precepts the Affirmatives are commanded, and in the
Affirmative commandments the Negatives are included.
NOT he that gives the law only, 1.
but he who authoritatively expounds the law becomes to us a (...) ^giver: and
all who believe in God and in Jesus Christ confess themselves Subjects of the
Christian Laws; but all do not obey alike, who confess themselves equally
bound, and are equally desirous to obey: because men by new or false or
imperfect interpretation of laws become a law unto themselves or others, giving
them measures which our Blessed Lord never intended: and yet an error in these
things is far more dangerous then in a thousand others in which men make
greater noises. I shall therefore endeavor to describe plain and rational
measures of interpretation, that we may walk securely.

It is observable that in the Decalogue and so in the whole law of Moses there
are more negative Precepts then affirmative. 2.
The Jewish Doctors say that there are six hundred and thirteen precepts
given by Moses, according to the number of letters in the Decalogue which are
six hundred and thirteen But of these 348. are affirmative according to the
number of the joints of a man's body: but 365. are Negative according to the
number of the days of the year: but to omit these impertinent and aerie
observations of the Jews it ministers some useful and material considerations,
that in the Decalogue all the Moral precepts one only excepted, are Negative
(for that of the Sabbath is the caput ceremoniarum:) But that of obedience to
our Superiors is only positive and affirmative: The reasons were these, by
which also we can understand the usefulness of the observation.

1. 3.
Because this being the first great reformation of the world was to proceed by
the measures of Nature; from imperfection to growth: from the beginnings of
Religion to its greater excellencies: but in Nature the first step of our
progression is to abstain from evil; Virtus est vitium fugere, and sapientia
prima
Stultitia caruisse. --
and therefore the face of the Commandment was covered with the robe of
discipline, and God would so secure their services that they should not
displease get him; but the excellencies of holiness by which he was to be
indear'd to mankind were especially the glories of Christ, not the horns of
Moses, the perfections of Evangelical Sanctity, not of the beginnings of the
law.

2. The great Sanction of the law was fear of punishment; 4.
and therefore God chose to represent his law to them in Negatives, that
according to the endearment so might be the obedience: Now to abstain from evil
is the proper effect of fear, but to do good for fear of punishment is as
improper as to threaten a man into love. Fear is the bridle of servants and
boys, love is the spur of brave and good men. Non furtum feci, nec fugi, si
mihi dicat
Servus, habes pretium, loris non ureris, aio:
Non hominem occidi, non pasces in cruce corvos.
That's the dialogue of Masters and Servants. If you be a thief you shall be
condemned to the mill; if you be a murderer, you shall be broken upon the
wheel; but if you abstain from such crimes, your reward shall be, you shall
escape the furca: since therefore the spirit of the law was the spirit of fear
and of bondage, God did transact his Covenant with them in negative measures.

3. The law of Moses was a pursuance of the Covenant of works; 5.
and since it had in it very little beside the Umbrages of the (...) the sweet
yoke of the Gospel, it did stipulate for exact measures: but therefore the
precepts were negative that the obedience might be the more possible, and the
injunction the nearer to paternal: for it is much more possible to abstain from
sins of commission then from sins of omission: So that, Optimus est qui minimis
urgetur, is the best measure of obedience to the Mosaic law: he is the good
Man who cannot be accused to have done what the law forbids, he who has done
the fewest evils, not he who does the most good: and thus also the Pharisees
understood their duty: and they were not reproved by our blessed Lord, for
understanding the Negative precepts by the rules of abstinence and a Negative
duty; but because they understood their Negative duty only by the measures of
the letter, not of the intention and Spirit of the law: and 2. because when
they had been by the Commentaries of the Prophets and other holy men instructed
in some Evangelical measures and more perfect intendments, secretly at first
designed by God, and so expounded by the Prophets by way of Evangelical
preparation; yet they would still adhere to the old and first understandings of
the law; because they loved some sins which (as they had known) were forbidden
by those Negative precepts if they would have opend their hearts to understand
them as they should.

4. That the fifth Commandment is affirmative in the midst of all the
Commandments that are Negative, 6.
has a peculiar reason, but nothing against the former discourse: for it being
a Sanction of obedience to our Superiors under God, is to be expressed in
actions and external significations; Not only because these only can do
benefit, service and advantages to our Parents and Princes, but because of
nothing else can they be judges: Men take no cognizance of thoughts and secret
purposes; but of outward significations; and therefore the precept was to be
affirmative, that is, preceptive of outward actions. 2. There is in children
toward their Parents so much natural love and so much fear, and they are so
long under their power and the needs of minority, that it will very rarely
happen that children can despise their parents or curse them: their own
interest, and their own passions, and their own affairs will secure the
negative measures of that Commandment; and therefore the world was in this
instance disposed to receive greater degrees of injunction and a higher
Commandment: Nature in this instance doing the same office for them as the
whole law did in the other; that is, it was (...) a Schoolmaster to bring them
to Christ: and if they had been as much disposed for the entertainment of the
rare and excellent affirmative Commandments of Christ in the matter of
chastity and charity and meekness and humility as in the matter of duty to
their Parents, there would have been less need of the interposition and
interval of the law of Moses before the coming of Christ.

And these observations are verified by the (...) or corresponding part: 7.
for the precepts of Christ are positive and affirmative, as appears in his
Sermon on the Mount, which is the Summary of his Law, in which when he
expounded the Negative commands of Moses, he still superadded an affirmative of
his own: So that it will be nothing but matter of speculation to discourse
whether or no in the law of Moses, the affirmatives were included in the
Negatives; it is certain the Pharisees did not understand them so; and they are
not always involved in the nature of each other, and the promises of the law
were not sufficient to encourage the (...) the doing of good works, though the
fear was enough to restrain the evil: but that which concerns the Conscience is
that which now is evident and palpable: In the laws of Jesus Christ the
negative and affirmative are but correlatives; opposita relativa, and do
infer each other. Thus we find it expressed often Whosoever looks on a woman to
lust, Matthew. 5. 28, 29
has committed adultery: that was our Blessed Lords commentary on the sixth
Commandment which was negative; but he adds; 39, 40.
If thy right eye offend thee pluck it out. So again, Resist not evil, that's
the negative precept, but Christ adds, If any man sues thee at the law and
takes thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. So in the matter of oaths, Christ
said, Swear not at all: for he still added a more severe negative to the
Negative of the Law; but then he adds his own affirmative: Let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; that is, let it be plain and simple, meek
and positive, easy and ingenuous.

Thus our Blessed Lord did in his recitation and exposition of the Moral
Commandments delivered by Moses; 8.
in the interpretation and enlargement of which although it was proper to
declare a Negative; by a Negative; yet he would follow his own method and
design, and superadde his own affirmative; and when he was doing the office of
a Lawgiver rather then of a Prophet and expounder of the old law, there his
words were positive and affirmative. Witness the eight Beatitudes; the precepts
of charity and humility, of giving and forgiving, of fasting and prayer, and
many others: but because in the doing all this, he made large discourses and
gave laws and exhortations, precepts and reasons, promises and threatenings in
complication and mutual consequences; therefore we are without further inquiry
sufficiently instructed that our duty is now intended to be complete, and as we
must abstain from all evil, so we must do all the good we can.

But this is to be understood with its proper caution. 9.
For we say in Logic, ad Negationem non sempter sequitur affirmatio oppositi:
every Negative does not presently infer every contrary affirmative, as a
matter of duty. It follows well, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but thou
shall pay to the Lord thy vewes, but it does not follow, that therefore thou
shall make vows: So in these also there is no consequence of obligation. Thou
shall not take from thy Neighbor what is his; therefore thou shall give to thy
Neighbor. Thou must take from none, therefore thou must give to all: Thou must
not give false testimony; therefore thou must tell all the truth thou know:
Thou may not give wrong judgment, therefore you must give right; for it may
so happen that you need not give any at all: These instances point out to us
the measures of affirmatives which follow from the contrary Negations. Thus:

1. Affirmative duty follows from the Negative; 10.
not in contraries but in contradictories. To make a vow and break a vow are
contraries; and therefore it follows not, because I must not break a vow
therefore I must make one: but to break a vow and not to break it are
contradictories, and therefore if one be forbidden the other is commanded; and
if the Commandment be expressed in Negatives; Thou shall not break thy vows,
the affirmative is in the bosom of it, therefore thou shall keep them:
because, unless this part of the contradiction be done, the other is, and
therefore it is not enough, that we do nothing expressly against the instance
of the vow; but we must also understand our selves obliged to the performance
of it according to the first intention. The reason of this is, because between
two contraries there can be a third thing of a disparate Nature; not at all
included or concluded by either part, either by inference or by opposition.

2. From a Negative an affirmative is not always inferred in a particular
instance: 11.
We must not be uncharitable in any instance; but it follows not that by virtue
of this Commandment, therefore we must be charitable, or do our alms in
every instance: for every man is not bound to redeem captives, or to visit
prisoners: the reason is, because uncharitableness and visiting prisoners are
not opposed in their whole matter and nature; but the Commandment which is
contrary to uncharitableness can be obeyed according to all its intention
although it be not instanced in that particular. But this is to be added; that
when by accidents and circumstances and the efficacy of some other Commandment
we are called upon to this instance; then that this be done is by virtue even
of the negative, by the prohibition of uncharitableness, because when we are
determined to an instance, the Sanction of the whole Commandment is incumbent
on it; and will not be satisfied without it; but in other cases it is
indifferent, and is obeyed by any instance that is fitted to our circumstances
and to our powers. It is like a man's stomach, which of it self is indifferent
to any good meat, but when by a particular (...) or accident it requires this
and nothing else, it must either have this or it will fast: So are affirmative
laws; though they oblige to every instance, and are indifferent to any that we
can and may, yet sometimes we are determined to this and no other, and then the
whole force of the law is upon it. But else, ordinarily it is true; that the
universal negative infers only the indefinite affirmative; not the particular:
The Universal is only inferd by the consequence, the particular by accidents
and circumstances.

3. From a Negative law the affirmative is inferred but not in the same degree
of duty and necessity. 12.
It is not so great a sin if we neglect an act of charity, or an opportunity of
doing glory to God, as if we do an act of uncharitableness, or positively
dishonor God. The reason is, because sins of omission are less then sins of
commission, because negligence is not so bad as malice, and of omission
sometimes there is no evil cause, but a mere negative or unavoidable
inadvertency; but of a sin of commission, the cause is always positive, and
therefore always intolerable.

4. The affirmative which is inferred by the Negative law of Christ is not
absolute and unlimited like the Negative, 13.
but modificated and limited by its proper and extrinsick measures. We must in
no case and for no regard hinder our innocent Neighbor from doing his
necessary work, but it does not follow, that therefore we must always set his
work forward, and lend him oxen to plough his land: for it is in no case lawful
to do evil, but in many cases it is lawful not to do good: that is, there is
something more required to specificate a positive act besides the consequence
of a Negative law: For although the body of an action is there commanded, yet
because the body of the action must be invested with circumstances, they also
must have their proper causes, or they cannot have a direct necessity. Never
turn thy face from any poor man, is a negative precept: to which the
affirmative of Christ does rightly correspond, Give to every one that asks: Now
although the Negative is universally to be observed in its own just sense, Ut
ne aversemur a paupere; that is, that we deny not to be charitable to him; yet
when this comes to be specificated by positive actions, the Commandment is not
the only measure; but some conditions are required of him that is to receive;
and some of him that is to give: for for to him that will not work when he can,
we are not to give; and he that needs it for himself is not obliged to part
with it to his Brother; supposing their needs are equal or not extreme. To this
purpose is that known rule, that Negative precepts oblige always, and to an
actual obedience in all times: but affirmative although they always oblige,
yet they can be obeyed but in their own season. So that although every Negative
precept is infinite and has no limit; yet the affirmative have extrinsick
measures and positions of their own, something to make them laws to me and you,
though the consequence of the negative is sufficient to make them to be laws to
all Mankind. So that although Negative precepts may be the mother of
affirmatives, yet the child is but a dwarf and not like the Mother; and besides
that it is exposed to be nursed by chance and by circumstances, by strangers
and all the measures of contingency.

5. When affirmatives are included in, and inferred from the Negatives, 14.
the proportion of them is not positive but comparative: Thus when our Blessed
Lord had given Commandment, Resist not evil, That is, we should not do evil
for evil: the affirmative which is properly consequent from this, is, Do good
for evil: and this is obliging according to the former measures: but when you
inquire further into the proportions, and ask after the instances, which our B.
Savior made, we shall find that their obligation is not positive but
comparative: If a man strike thee on thy cheek, turn the other also, that is,
rather then revenge thy self for one jnjury, receive another: and rather then
vex him who forces thee to go a mile, go with him two mile: not that Christ
intends you should offer to do thy self a shrewd turn, or invite another; nor
that thou should suffer it, if thou can fairly avoid it: but that thou
should choose rather to suffer two evils, then do one. But this is
especially to be reduced to practice in matters of Council rather then Precept;
that is, when the affirmative inferred from the Negative is matter of
perfection rather then positive necessity; then the comparative proportion is a
duty; but the absolute proportion and measure is but Council. To oblige an
Enemy and do him acts of favor and benefit is an excellency of charity: for
which Christians shall receive a glorious reward: but this is a Council of
perfection, which if upon probable reasons, and fairly inducing circumstances
it be omitted, a man shall give no answer for: but when the case is so, that it
must be that I must either take revenge of him, or else rescue him from that
revenge by an act of kindness, by a labor of love, or an expense of charity,
then this becomes a duty; for in comparative measures every affirmative is at
least obligatory: that is, we must rather be at any trouble, or expense to do
an affirmative, then prevaricate a Negative Commandment.

But then as to the other part of the Rule; 15.
that [ in the affirmative Commandment the Negative is included;] there is no
other difficulty but this, that caution be had that the negative be opposed to
the affirma^ive in relation to the same Subject: for because we are bound to
love our friends therefore we must not hate them; but it follows not (as the
Pharisees did falsely comment on this text) Because we must love our friends
therefore we must hate our enemies; for these two are not opposed as
affirmative and negative in the same subject; but as two affirmatives relating
to Subjects that are diverse.

But this is sometimes not to be understood of the precise Commandment it
self, 16.
but of the appendages; I mean the promises and threatenings: for though it
follows, we must do good to our Neighbor; therefore we must do no evil to
him: yet it does not follow, Do this and live, therefore if ye do not do it
ye shall die: the reason of that is this, because there are some things
encouraged with excellent rewards, the negatives of which are permitted to us
with impunity: Thus it is said by our blessed Savior, When thou make a
feast, invite the poor, and thou shall have recompense in heaven; but then if
we do not invite the poor it does not follow that we shall be punished in
Hell; but we shall not have that recompense which the Hospitable man shall
have: So that to invite the poor is an affirmative precept; but in this the
Negative included is not; [Thou shall not invite the rich] or if thou do
thou shall be punished: but that [it is not so excellent a thing, it is not so
encouraged by the proposition of an eternal reward;] but expires in a temporal
interest: So that the Negative included relates to the reward, not to the
precept, and means this only: if thou do not invite the poor thou shall not
have any reward in heaven; for feasting and making entertainments. But the sign
of this is, 1. when the precept is only in the particular instance of a
general commandment; as this of inviting the poor is of alms or charity: or
else 2. When it is matter of Council and not of express precept: then the
Negative is not directly included in the preceptive words, but in the reward
that is appendant.

Lastly, 17.
when it is said that in the affirmative precepts the Negatives are included;
the word [Negative] is to be understood in the Moral sense; that is, so as to
include the privatives also: Thus when we are commanded to love our Brother, it
is not only forbidden to us to hate him; but we are also commanded not to omit
to express our love by Symbolical actions: for not only contrarieties and
repugnancies to the duty of the Commandment; but even omissions also are
forbidden: and this is highly to be regarded in the matters of charity; which
toward Enemies we use to estimate by our not cursing him, our not hurting him,
our not being revenged on him: these indeed are proper instances of the
Negative included; but the privatives also are to be considered; for not loving
him is hating him; our refusing to do him kindness, our not praying for him,
our unaptness to do him good offices, our remembering and reporting his
injustice, our refusing to converse with him and denying him the comforts of
our Society, when without danger or injury to our selves we may converse; is a
prevaricating the Negative or privative measures of the Commandment.

RULE 2. When a Negative and an Affirmative seem opposite in any sense, the
Affirmative is to be expounded by the Negative, not the Negative by the
Affirmative.
THus are those various expressions of our Blessed Savior to be considered and
understood. 1.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you: and yet our Blessed Lord says, He that eats the flesh of the Son of
man has life abiding in him. Now to them who suppose these words to relate to
the Sacramental manducation, the question is, Whether or no it be necessary to
drink the blood in specie as well as to eat the flesh? because of the exclusive
Negative requiring both under the forfeiture of eternal life; or shall it
suffice to receive the flesh only, because life is promised to to be in him
who eats the flesh, in that place no mention being made of drinking the blood.

To this the answer is made by this Rule; 2.
the Negative cannot be lessened by the Affirmative, because a Negative can
have no degrees as an Affirmative can; and if the Affirmative were in this case
sufficient, when the Negative is express to require more, then the Affirmative
were directly contrary to the Negative: but on the other side, though the
Affirmative requires less then the Negative, there is no contradiction. 1.
Because in matters of duty whatsoever is any where required is every where
supposed; and no interpretation can lessen it from what it is in its whole
integrity. 2. Because all our duty is not every where repeated, but the not
repeating it in any place cannot annull the obligation in that place where it
is expressly required. 3. Because a threatening in all laws is of more force and
efficacy then a promise; and therefore when under a threatening more is
required, the promise that is affixed to a part of it must be understood by the
analogy and promise to that threatening, because one thing is enough to destroy
us, but one thing is not enough to preserve us, Bonum ex integra causa, malum
ex qualibet particulari. 4. Because it is ordinary in Scripture to give the
promise to every part of duty* which yet shall never be paid to that alone:
thus to purity, to poverty of Spirit, to mercy, to faith, to alms, to
patience, to hope, the promises of blessedness are given; but although it is
said, the pure in heart shall see God; and the poor in spirit shall have the
Kingdom, and they that quit houses and lands for Christ's sake shall receive the
reward of the other world; yet unless all that is required be put together in
the duty, nothing of the reward shall be given to the person. Every part of an
exclusive negative is an indispensable duty; but every affirmative that is
encouraged by a promise does not contain a whole duty, but a part of duty,
which by being Symbolical to the whole is encouraged as every other part is,
but is not paid but in an entire payment, to an entire obedience.

This also is true when in the affirmative more is put then in the Negative, 3.
for even then the Negative is the strict measure of the Commandment, and the
limit of its absolute necessity and exaction. He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, Mark. 16.
but he that believes not shall be damned. Here the negative is the utmost
limit; the necesse esse is described in that; the been esse, and the ordinary
expectation in the other: by which we are thus to understand this and such
other expressions, that the Negative contains the indispensable duty, and
supposes an obligation that nothing can excuse in persons capable; but the
Affirmative that supposes more is yet for that which is over and above content
with a less necessity, and admits of easier dispensation: For it containing all
that is expected is like a Summum jus which though by the method of laws it is
often expressed that obedience may be invited as forward as it can, yet the
(...) or the abatement is in the Negative; that's the lowest, and therefore it
is bound up with the penalty. For to the highest duty the reward is promised,
and it is more then enough to pay it, but the punishment is threatened by lower
measures: God abates much before he smites; and though he will reward every
good we do, yet every good that is omitted is not punished with death. But
this is to be understood when the good is of that Nature that it may be omitted
upon a probable cause, or without malice; or without the direct prevarication
of an express Commandment. For many good things are wholly put to us upon the
account of hope and promises, and not of Commandments, and obedience: though
in these also God makes what abatements he please: but we are to make none at
all.

RULE 3. In the Affirmative and Negative precepts of Christ, not only what is
in the words of the Commandment, but whatsoever is Symbolical or alike, is
equally forbidden or commanded.
WHen S. Paul had enumerated the works of the flesh, 1.
and had put into the Catalogue most of those crimes which are commonly named
in laws and fame and the manners of men; Gal. 5. 21.
he adds, (...), and those things which are like to these. For 1. there are
some things which are too bad to name, such were the impurities of the
Tribades, Fellatrices, Dranci, Pathici, Paedicatores, of which the Apostle
says, it is a shame even to name such things as are done of them in secret:
(...), that's the general word which the Apostle uses for them all,
dishonorable lusts: Now when all unnatural lusts are forbidden, all mixtures
but what are hallowed by marriage, the order of Nature, it is no part of the
perfection of the law, to name the species of impurity, and the circumstances
of that vileness which gets new names as men please to undo themselves by
tricks and artifices of shame.

2. There are some sins which are like new diseases, vile and infectious in one
year, or in one age which were never heard of before, and die with reproach and
are never heard of again. That a woman should grow to that impudence as to
marry her adulterer in the same town where her husband was living, and a
Prince, was so rare a contingency, that though it was once done in Rome, yet no
law was needful to prevent it: and there needed no law to forbid a man to marry
a boy; yet Nero did marry Sporus, and he married Doryphorus, whom Tacitus calls
Pythagoras: but this was no less a sin, because it was not the express vocal
contradiction of a law; it was against a law that named it not.

3. There are some sins which Nature and the public manners of the world do
so condemn, that they need no special mention in the laws. No law forbids us
to eat man's flesh, and yet all the civil part of mankind hate and condemn them
that do it; and those Egyptians who did Deperire desunctarum cadavera, fall in
love with the dead bodies which they did anoint, were condemned by the voice of
all the world, without the charges of an express law; and all that read the
Narratives of the Gnostick impurities, how they did in the impurest sense,
Litare in sanguine femineo, and make their Eucharist of matter of abomination,
have enough of prime reason and common notices of laws and things to condemn
their vileness, though they never study the question or inquire which
Commandment they prevaricate.

4. There are some sins like others that are named; which are not distinct
kinds, but like the monsters of Africa produced by heterogeneous mixtures, or
equivocal generation: Thus to geld a child to make him have a good voice is so
like cruelty, and the unmercifulness of homicide or mutilation, and is such a
curiosity of voluptuousness and sensuality, that though it wants a name to
signify its whole sinfulness, yet it must stand condemned though there be no
text against it described expressly in the Tables of the law. To give money for
Ecclesiastical preferments is so like the sin of Simon Magus, that it has
obtained his name and his reproach, and yet it is not the same crime; but upon
the account of S. Paul's (...) or Similitude, it has the same condemnation.
Thus Polygamy is like adultery, and marrying after divorce (except only in the
case of fornication) is like Polygamie. Concerning which things, there is one
measure in general, and some other more particular. 1. In General.

* The likeness of things to those which are expressly forbidden is not to be
estimated by forms and outsides, 2.
and material resemblances, but by the intrinsic irregularity and reason of
the prohibition. To kill a wife or daughter taken in Adultery even in those
Countries where by the laws it is permitted, looks as like murder, as killing
can: but because the laws allow the interested man to be the executioner, it is
the public hand not the private that takes the vengeance: and therefore they
are not alike in a culpable similitude. But on the other side, to take my goods
wherever I find them looks like justice; but because of justice a man is not
to be Judge and executioner in his own case, and this thing is in many cases
forbidden by the laws, this is against justice; for it is not enough that it is
his own; for although it is justum, a just thing to take my own, yet to do it
from a thief by private authority where it is forbidden by the public, is
justum injuste factum, a just thing done after an unjust manner. But if there
be a likeness of injustice, a prevarication of the same reason, an equal
injury, then not the letter of the law, but the reason and the spirit of it is
its condemnation. Par pari refer, to give back the good I have borrowed is
one of the great lines of Justice; and upon this account we are bound to pay
debts, to perform contracts, to make equal returns of valuable
considerations, and whatever is against this is against justice. But then
because acts of kindness are the transition of a good from one to another, and
although it is without a bargain, yet it is not without an obligation
ingratitude comes under the (...), it is so like injustice that it is the worse
for it. It is expressly commanded that we should provide for our children
according to our powers: and therefore they that expose them are worse then
infidels and have denied the faith: but then to deny to nurse their own
children (unless it be upon a just and a reasonable cause, upon charity or
necessity) is so like exposing them, that it must stand as reprobate under the
sentence of the same Commandment.

2. But the particular measures of this Rule are these: 3.
watsoever is of the same specification is of the same obligation and
necessity. But if men would be ingenuous and worthy in giving sentences of
their actions and understanding the measures of their duty, there could be no
difficulty in this. For men are easy enough to consent to a General rule, but
they will not suffer their own case to be concerned in it: and they understand
the particulars too fast, when it is the interest of their Brother, but if it
be their own they know nothing of it. It is written, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God, and all the world consented to the law since the promulgation:
but yet many nations and many ages of Christendom did admit the trials of
rights by duels, and of innocence by fire Ordeal: which was as direct a
tempting of God as any thing next to desperation it self: and by this is
sufficiently reproved. If the labourer be worthy of his hire, then so is the
Priest: if the Priest of the old Law, then also the minister of the Gospel:
which particular I choose to instance in, that by occasion of it I may give
caution against that which causes error in the application of this measure and
sense of laws unto the Conscience.

For because all actions are invested and varied with many circumstances, 4.
they who are concerned in a particular with which they are willing to escape,
think every new circumstance to be a warrant great enough to exempt him from
the general rule. Thus if a rule was given in the law of Moses, they who would
not have it drawn into consequence in the Gospel; observe that differing
circumstance of the diverse laws: and think it answer enough to say, it was so
in the Law, but what is that to the Gospel? Now this answer is only true when
the law and the Gospel have contrary measures in the same instance; that is,
when the instance did not only relate to the law of Moses, but is against the
analogy of the Gospel. Thus, no unclean thing was to come into the presence of
the Lord: and therefore the leper or the polluted in profluvio sanguinis or
seminis might not come into the Temple; but then if we argue; this is much more
true in the Gospel which is a state of greater purity then the law; we can
conclude nothing: because the measures of legal and Evangelical purity are
wholly differing; and therefore here the relation to the several states and
laws is considerable and makes a material difference: But when there is nothing
in one that appropriates it to it self, and nothing in the other that excludes
it, then the circumstance and relation alters nothing of the proposition: and
so it is in the matter of maintenance for the Evangelical Minister.

But no circumstance can alter the question, unless it be a material ingredient
in the very constitution of it, and changes the reason of the former usage.
Thus when by the Commandment we are tied to give every one their own, if the
owner be a madman, and in his fury demands his sword; although this particular
be a specification of the General rule, yet it is altered by a circumstance
which changes the reason of the law, or supposes it changed. * So when David
brought his men to eat Show bread in the days of need, the Priest asked if the
young men had abstained from their wives; saying, That then they might: but he
that shall argue from hence, that no man can receive the Sacramental bread but
he that has been continent in that instance, may be surely enough answered by
telling him that such contacts did sometimes and to some purposes contract
legal impurities, but not Evangelical, in which only the purity of the Spirit
is required, or if also corporal were required, yet such approaches under the
protection of marriage are declared to be (...) as great a purity as chastity
its self, of which this is one kind. But when there is no cause of change of
the ingredient in the article; if it be of the same Nature, though differing in
extrinsecal or unconcerning circumstances, it is by way of specification
included in the Rule, and is to be conducted by its measures.

3. Whatsoever is equivalent to the instance of the law, 5.
is also within its Sanction and constitution: By [ equivalent] (speaking
Morally not Logically) I mean that which is inferred from the greater to the
less affirmatively: or 2. from the less to the greater Negatively: or 3. from
that which is equal to it both affirmatively and negatively. For thus laws are
extended on all hands: The same law that forbids murder, forbids cruel thoughts
and violent anger, whatsoever tempts to murder or is the beginning of it, or is
in the Natural progression toward it. So on the other side, the law commands
us to obey our Superiors (meaning the Spiritual) the same law though it there
names them not, does more strongly command us to obey Princes: for they also
are ov^^ us and watch for the good of our souls, and must give an account for
them. Hebr. 13.
Thus if Husbands must give honor to their wives, then wives must give honor
much rather to their Husbands. If you may not steal out of my house you must
not spoil my goods in them, much less may you fire my house and burn my goods
too: if you must be faithful in little things, much more in greater things: if
you must give your life for God, much rather must you give your goods: if you
must not defile a Temple much less must you dishonor your bodies.

This also is to be extended to the proportionable obligation of Correlatives.
6.
For if the Relative be bound by the laws of Christ, then so also is the
correlative, which Rule has no exception but an explication of it is
sufficient. For either the duty of relatives is equal, or unequal in degrees,
and it is either in the same instance or in diverse. If the instances be diverse,
they are in all cases expressed competently in the new Testament; as the duty
that Husbands and Wives, that Children and Parents, that Masters and Servants,
that Princes and Subjects owe to each other respectively, and they need not to
be conducted by involution and consequence, for their duties are described in
distinct lines. But if the duty and instances be in the same kind but differ in
degrees; then the measure of the degrees is to be conducted by proportion to
the difference of persons by public honesty and the sayings of wise and good
men and the common usages of the best, and the measures of reason. But if they
be the same in kind and degree; then the rnle and measure of one is the rule
and measure of both, though one only be named in the law. And this is of use
not only in the equal instances of unequal relatives, but in all the instances
of equals; as in Friendships, Societies, Guilds, Colleges, Exchanges,
Traffiques and the like. There must be care taken that according to S. Paul's
rule, there must not be (...) ease, remission and advantage to one, and (...)
trouble, burden and disadvantage to the other; but in relations that are equal,
the duty and the expression must be so too; ever with this caution, that, If
the duty be the same between Relatives it cannot follow that the privileges are
the same. The husband and wife are equally obliged in the duties of love and
justice: but they have not equal powers, neither can the woman put away the
man, as the Man can the woman. For though man and woman are pares in conjugio,
tied to an equal love and an equal duty, yet they have not an equal power, nor
an equal liberty, in government and divorces they are not equal.

But upon the account of this Rule the Christians have a most certain
demonstration 7.
of the unlawfulness of Polygamy or of having many wives at once: For our
Blessed Savior said, He that puts away his wife unless it be for fornication,
and marries another commits adultery: therefore he much more is an adulterer
who marries mother when his wife is not put away, and has not committed
fornication. But in this and the like cases we are to proceed by the measures
of reason, and the common usages of laws.

1. A law drawn from a law must be evidently and apparently in the bowels of it
before such extraction, 8.
or else it must not be obtruded as the Sentence and intendment of the
Lawgiver; Obey them that have the rule over you] is a plain Commandment: But
if you infer therefore in all things that they say, deny your own reason, and
submit your understanding; this follows not, because we are commanded to obey
them only in such things where they ought to rule over us, but that is not in
our understandings, over which God alone is the Ruler, and those whom he has
sent are rational and authorized Guides, they have power to teach and power to
exhort, they are to do any thing that can inform us and invite us to good; and
we must follow them in all ways that lead us to God: and that they do we are
to believe until we have reason to believe the contrary: but because beyond
these measures the law neither said nor meant any thing, therefore the
obligation extends not so far.

2. Whatsoever is not in the letter of the law is then understood to be
intended by the law when it is drawn from thence by a prime and immediate
Consequence; 9.
in which there is no violence, nor artificial chains, nor devices of wit and
labor. For laws ought to be but few, and they love not to be multiplied
without apparent necessity, and he that makes more then Christ intended, lays
a snare for his own foot, and is cosen'd by his own argument: Christ commanded
us that we should do our alms and prayers in secret: from hence it follows,
that all solemnities of pride, and all the dressings and adornements of our
prayers designed for vanity and publication are criminal: and under this
prohibition comes all acts of proper specification. But then if I argue from
hence further and say, Therefore it is not lawful to appoint public assemblies
for prayer; or if it be yet it is not lawful to appear to men to be passionate
and devout: and further yet, that private prayer is better then public, and
therefore that it is to be preferred before the public, and therefore yet that
we may safely neglect the assembling of our selves together for prayer, I argue
foolishly, and cannot impose a necessity of obedience upon any. The law
warrants me to go no further but within sight of it: If I go one step from
her words, I am within the call of her voice: and my obedience can well be
exacted, where it can be well proved, but never else. * It is in laws as it is
in articles of belief, to which we are obliged primarily, and afterward to
every thing that is certainly and immediately drawn from thence. But if you go
beyond one consequence, there are so many certain but indiscernible
fallibilities, so many intriques of fancy in the disputer, and so much
unaptness in the hearer, that it is ten to one they either do not understand
one another, or do not understand the article, and so it is in laws; so long
as we go on in the strait line of its letter and known intention we commit no
error, or can soon be reproved if we do: but if we once double a point, we
presently lose sight of the law: as appears in the instance now given in the
precept of [ praying in secret:] against which it is no objection to say, the
consequents were not rightly deduced from the words of that precept. For I
grant it; it is true they are not; but then I say it is also ten to one but
it will be so in any instance that shall be made fruitful with anfractuous and
involved consequences: for that is it that I say: A man's reason is to be
suspected when he goes a great way from this Rule; and we by our Logic shall
become but ill Lawgivers. Whatsoever can certainly and truly be deduced from a
law does as certainly oblige us as the instance that is named, or the first
specification of it, or the direct consequent; if it could be made as evident
as it is certain: but because it cannot, therefore it can oblige but in the
degree of its clarity and manifestation, for that is to the remote instance,
the same as publication is to the Commandment it self. But the precepts or
laws of Christ are like the Radix Prosapiae, the Grand Parent of a Family; from
whom the direct descendants are for ever to be reckoned to the Kindred in the
strait and proper line: but when once it goes to the transverse and collateral,
they not only have no title to the inheritance, but every remove is a step to
the loosing the cognation and relation to the chief house.

3. In drawing consequent duties from express laws the first presumption is for
piety and the honor of God; 10.
that is, if the obligation be no evident, yet if it be evident that such
obedience is for the honor of God, it is more probably to be supposed that
that consequent was intended by the law of God, whom it so apparently serves.
But where this or the like material ingredient is not, we are to presume for
our liberty rather then for the multiplication of laws; because that is charity
and prudence, and both of them are very considerable in the constitution and
interpretation of a law: But this is more full in the next rule.

RULE 4. When any thing is forbidden, by the Laws of Jesus Christ, all those
things are forbidden also which follow from that forbidden action, and for
whose sake it was forbidden.
1. THIS Rule is of use in all laws, and is expressed to the same caution both
in the Code of the Civil law, and in the Decretals, and the reason of it is,
because the laws of any lawgiver being the effects of his greatest wisdom are
designed to the best end, and are intended only to operate toward and to
effect that end: to this purpose laws are made to prevent evils, and though the
evils are not always named, yet against them it is that the laws are
cautionary and provi^ionary; so that the evil is much more forbidden then that
which brings it, or leads it in: because sometimes the evil instrument may be
destitute of its evil effect, and therefore is in many degrees innocent and
harmless, but if the evil be introduced it is all that which the laws were
afraid of. (...) 1. c. 8.
And therefore Aristotle said right; (...) we are to consider the end of every
Republic, for they choose all things in order to their end; and the laws are
made for public defense, security, and profit, so it is in Religion and the
laws of God. When we give alms we are commanded not to blow a Trumpet, so
being warned against pride; but if without that instance or signification we be
really proud, or value our selves upon that account, or despise our Brother as
less holy, or oppress the Fatherless and Widow, though without that pretense
of holiness and the advantages of hypocrisy, they are greater Breakers of the
Commandments then by their fond and fantastic proclamations of their charity.
Thus we find in S. Paul an express prohibition, Romans 13. 14.
that we should not make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof;
that is, that we do not take in great stowage of meat and drink, or use arts
of sharpning the desire, or caressing the fancy to make the pleasures brisk and
active, and the sense quick and pleased: but some there are that make
temperance the instrument of pleasure, and the minister of Sensuality, and can
be most pleased when they take the least care: and some mind the pleasures so
as they will not tarry for the instruments or need them not; in these and the
like cases if there were no distinct prohibition of that evil effect, yet it
were sufficiently prohibited in the prohibition of the instrument. But because
most of the evil effects of evil instruments are expressly and by name
forbidden in the New Testament, this Rule is of use principally in the
aggravation and condemnation of sin; and it means that every judgment and
every evil we suffer which we were fortold of, and which is a foreseen effect
of such an action; is to be imputed to us; and besides the direct sin we are
also guilty of uncharitableness by doing that which we know will hurt us. God
in the forbidding the sin commands us also to preserve our selves, and besides
the sin is angry at the very death.

This Rule has two limitations; 2.
1. It is not to be understood of events contingent and accidental; but either
natural and proper, or foretold and threatened, or at least usual and noted. He
that maliciously sowes false doctrine in the Church is answerable not only for
the Heresy but for the mischief that he intends, or is willing it should
produce; but if another man to spite him or to hinder his fame shall set up a
contrary Heresy, although this was the spawn of the first toad, yet because it
was an equivocal production it shall be no otherwise imputed but to reproach
him amongst men, to reprove his folly, and to be an argument of a speedy
repentance.

But 1. Whatsoever effect is natural to a forbidden action is directly upon the
same account. 3.
Thus, whosoever divides the Church, to him are imputed all the evil effects of
Schism which are its natural productions. If an imperious foolish woman by a
continual inquietude, by her evil nature and a vexatious spirit so disturb her
husbands quiet and the ease of his soul and the comforts of his life that he
also loose his health, she is not only guilty of the violation of the laws of
love and duty and meekness by which she is bound to God and to her husband, but
is guilty of murder, or high injuriousness and uncharitableness according to
the degree of the mischief which she sees impressed and growing upon him.

2. Whatsoever event is foretold and threatened all that also is imputed to him
that does the forbidden action to which it is threatened; 4.
and he is directly felo de se who by lust brings upon himself the rottenness
of life far worse then the putrefaction of the grave, and he is a perfect
prodigal of his fortune who by committing Sacrilege invites the worm and calls
a spirit of unthriftiness and consumption to his estate; and he that grieves
the Spirit of God and causes him to depart is guilty of that beggary and
baseness of Spirit with which such evil usages of the holy spirit of God are
often punished. For as God forbad some sins not only for their own sakes, but
that others which are their foul issues might be strangled in the womb; So he
forbad all sins and laid direct and collateral restraints upon them, that man
might not be unhappy, and extremely miserable. As therefore he who by one sin
introduces another is guilty of both; so he who brings any evil which God
graciously intended should not fall upon us, to him that evil is to be imputed,
and that evil also does either directly or accidentally according to the nature
of the Subject matter increase his guilt.

3. If an evil effect be not either natural, 5.
or threatened, yet if it happens ordinarily and be noted, it is to be imputed
to him who does that evil and forbidden action which does infer it. The
reason is because he wilfully sins against the purpose of the law, who will not
prevent that evil which the law intends to prevent, and makes the law void
and illusory, that is, destitute of its effect, and perfectly in vain as to
that intention. Thus it is observed that the Fathers or the Mothers curse
destroies the pleasures of a sin, and the gayety of a fortune, and the
prosperity of an offending child: He therefore that shall do a forbidden
action which shall bring such a curse upon himself is not only justly punished
and is to impute that to himself perfectly and alone, but if upon his account
evil descend upon his posterity or relatives, he is guilty of that evil and is
a direct sinner in their punishment.

2. The other limitation which I am to interpose is this; 6.
That the evil effects of an evil action are imputed but in proportion to the
will and actual understanding, beyond the sphere of which whatsoever does
happen, it is collateral and accidental both to the intention and to the time.
A man's action has a proper life of its own, and it leaves a permanent effect,
or is productive of the same by a continuing emanation, this if it be foreseen,
and considered and chosen is as imputable as if it were present, or immediate.
But because a man can see but so far, and has a limited effluxe and
impression by all his actions, he is not to be judged or condemned by any thing
that shall happen beyond that proper extension; and if some Polonians or
Transylvanians, English or French make ill use of the arguments of Arius it is
not to be supposed that it shall be put upon Arius his account at the day of
judgment, and that his or any man's damnation shall increase upon such
accounts, which as they are beyond the intention of the man, or the efficacy of
his action, so also beyond the distance of his prevision.

But for this that rule which is nearest to exactness is this, 7.
No effect which happens after a man's death is imputable to him as a new sin.
So far as it was actually intended and designed in his life time, or foreseen
and not reversed so far it is imputed upon the stock of the present malice, not
of the future event; his own act and his own intention for the present, and his
actual design of the future are sufficient load upon him; but then because his
act and his actual design could not live after his death, therefore nothing
beyond the life of the man can be a new sin: because as he cannot actually or
habitually will that event, so neither can he rescind it; If he cannot will it
in any sense, it can in no sense be imputed, but if it could be willed, then it
may also be refused and rescinded, which because it is impossible, therefore
the increase of evil stands not at his door that occasioned it, and cannot
either will it any more or hinder it. This is that which is meant by our B.
Savior; The night comes when no man works, and whatsoever is beyond the line
of life is also beyond the line of works, and therefore cannot increase or
begin upon a new score, when the whole stock is spent.

Lastly, 8.
that which proves all this, does also further explicate the Rule: Whatsoever
event depends upon the will of another is so contingent in respect of him that
first set the evil on work, that it is no longer upon his account then he
actually or habitually desires it or endeavors: because now the evil has a
new cause and every emergent event is upon such a cause as cannot be, forced or
indeed produced by any thing besides it self: and therefore to it self only it
is to be imputed, excepting where the malice of the first agent has an actual
or intended influxe into the second.

RULE 5. The laws of Jesus Christ are the measures of the Spirit, and are
always to be extended to a Spiritual signification.
IT was a fair Character that was given of the Christians, 1.
(...). They obey the laws appointed for them, Per Scriptor Diognetum.
and by the piety and charity of their lives, excel even the measure of the
laws themselves: For by what instance soever God would be glorified and by what
charity soever our Brother can be releeved, and by what justice societies are
established and continued, in all that they exercise themselves according to
their whole power, and would do more if they could, and sometimes do more then
they are required: and oftentimes with better circumstances then are exacted,
and always with a mind more ready then their hand.

Humane laws can exact but the outward action; 2.
they neither can command the understanding, nor judge the will, because they
cannot secure that nor discern this: and without these two their interest is
well enough preserved. He that paies my money though it be against his will
does me justice and is quit before the King, and if he dissembles, yet if he
gives me good words, I cannot implead him of calumny or slander. Thus the
Pharisees understood the law of Moses, Matthew 6. and Math. 23.
and called him innocent whom the laws could not charge; but therefore Christ
calls them to new accounts. He that offers a pure lamb to God may dishonor him
with a foul thought: and no sacrifice is pure by the skin and color but by the
heart and hand of him that presents it. Acts of external religion are
publications of the Divine honors, but the heart does only pay them: for
there it is that God does sit judge alone; and though he has given us bodies
to converse below with a material world; yet Gods Temple is in heaven in the
intellectual world,; and the Spirit of a man is the Sacrifice, and his purest
thoughts are Oblations, and holy purposes are the best presents, and the
crucifixion of our passions is the best imm^^tion, the only beasts of
sacrifice, and the Cross of Christ is the altar, and his passion is the salt of
all our sacrifices, and his intercession makes the swee^ perfume, and so
atonement is made by the blood of the Lamb, and we are accepted in our
services, and our wills are crowned with the rewards of a holy obedience: If
our hearts be right, our services will never be wanting, or rejected, and
although our hearts can supply the want of external power, yet it is certain
that nothing can supply the want of our hearts, and of good affections; these
must be entire; for they are Gods peculiar portion, and therefore must not be
divided. Deiis qui tarde a Numine pu^iuntur.
Plutarch tells of Apollodorus that he dreamd he was taken by the Scythians,
flayed alive and then cut in pieces and thrown in a bo^^ing caldron, where his
heart leapt forth into the midst of all the little portions of flesh and told
them, I am the cause of all this evil: It was something like that saying of S.
Bernard, Nihil ardet in inferno nisi propria voluntas; Nothing burns i^ the
Eternal flames of hell, but a man's heart, nothing but his will: for from the
heart proceed evil thoughts, Matthew. 12. 34. 15. 19.
adulteries, etc. said our Blessed Saviour^^ but therefore God requires the
heart, that is, that the principle of actions be secured, and the principalis
Domus the chief house where God loves to dwell and reign be kept without
thieves and murderers. * This then is the first sense of the Rule; That our
obedience which Christ exacts is a sincere obedience of the will, and is not
satisfied with the outward work. He that gives alms to the poor, and curses
them in his heart: He that entertains an Apostle in the name of an Apostle, and
grutches the expenses of his diet is neither charitable nor hospitable, and
shall neither have the reward of an Apostle nor a Brother. In vain it is to
wash a goblet if you mean to put into it nothing but the dead lees and vappe of
wine; and a fair tomb of amber was too beauteous and rich an enclosure for
Martials viper and his fly. Introrsum turpes, speciosae pelle decora. But this
is a caution against Hypocrisy in the Moral sense of the words, but the legal
sense of the Rule is, that in all laws, the first intention is, that God be
served with the will and the affections; and that these be never separated from
the outward work.

2. But it is also meant that the whole design of the laws of Jesus Christ is
to be perfective of the Spirit, 3.
and his Religion is a Spiritual service; that is, permanent and unalterable,
virtuous and useful, Natural and holy, not relative to time and place, or any
material circumstances, nor integrated by corporal services; The effect of
which is this.

1. The body of the Christian services does wholly consist of Natural religion,
4.
that is, such services whereby we can glorify God and represent our own
needs; that is, prayers and Eucharists, acts of love and fear, faith and hope,
love of God and love of our Neighbor, which are all those things by by which
we can be like God: by which we can do good, and by which we can receive any:
and excepting the Sacraments whose effect is Spiritual, and the sense
mysterious, and the rites easy, and the number the smallest of all, there is
in the digest of the Christian law no Commandment of any external rite or
ceremony.

2. As it intends wholly an exclusion of the Mosaic ceremonies, 5.
so it will not admit a body of new and superinduced ceremonies: for they are
or may be as much against the analogy of the Spiritual law of Christ, as the
other. The Ceremonies of the Christian services must be no part of the
religion; but either must be the circumstances of the Religion, or the imperate
acts of some virtue: The Christian must be in a place when he prays, and that
place may be determined, and thither he must go, and yet he may go any
whither else, his action is finite and must be done in time, and that time may
be appointed him, and then he must do it at that time, and yet he may do it
at any time else: If he be commanded by his Superiors to pray kneeling, he
must kneel at the appointment of the law; and yet he may in his own devotions
at another time fall upon his face or pray standing. * But the Christian and
the Mosaic ceremonies thus differ:

1. The Mosaic rites were appointed by God; the Christian only by Men.

2. Consequently they are necessary parts of the Religion, these are not.

3. The Mosaic Ceremonies did oblige every where; the Christian only in
public.

4. They were integral parts of the Religion; these are but circumstances and
investitures of the Religious actions.

4. These are to be done with liberty; but the Jews were in bondage under
theirs.

5. Ours are alterable, theirs lasting as their Religion.

6. Theirs were many and burdensome, ours ought to be few; of the number of
which our Superiors are to judge by charity, and the Nature and common notices
of things, and the analogy of the liberty and laws of Christianity. But
although there are no publicly described measures beforehand by which Princes
or Prelates shall appoint the number of their ceremonies; yet there is in
reason and common voices sufficient to reprove the folly of him who because he
would have his body decently vested shall wear five and twenty cloaks: stola
and tunica; something for warmth and something for Ornament does well; but she
that wears so many adornements on her and girdle, that it is the work of half a
day to dress her, is a servant of the tiar of her own head; and thinks neither
her Soul nor her body, but her clothes to be the principal. By this I intend to
reproove the infinite number of Ceremonies in the Roman Church; they are
described in a great book in folio, Quem mea vix totum Bibliotheca capit. my
purse will not reach to buy it: but it is too like the impertinency of the
buisily idle women I now mentiond: and although by such means Religion is made
pompous and apt to allure them that admire gay nothings, and fine prettinesses;
yet then it also spends their religious passions and wonder in that which
effects nothing upon the Soul. It is certain that actions of religion must be
fitted with all those things which minister to decent and grave and orderly and
solemn action: but they must be no more but a just investiture or the religious
action; and every thing can distract us in our prayers, and all the arts of
watchfulness and caution are too little to fix our intentions on them, and
therefore whatsoever can become a proper entertainment of the mind, can also be
a diversion of the devotion and a hindrance to the prayer. The sum is this;
Ceremonies may be the accidents of worship but nothing of the substance. this
they were among the Jews, that they may be amongst the Christians, Time and
place for the action: Habit and posture for the men; that's all that religion
needs, whatsoever else is grave and decent, and whatsoever else is orderly is
not to be rejected: but if it be not these, it is not to be imposed: and when
they become numerous or grievous they are to be removed by the same lawful hand
that brought them in.

3. In the Christian law all purities and impurities are Spiritual; 6.
and the soul contracts no religious charge without her own act: He that
touches a dead body though he does not wash, may lift up pure hands in prayer;
but if his Soul be unclean, no water, no ceremony will wash him pure without
repentance: O nimium faciles qui tristia crimina caedis
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua.
It had been well if in all ages this had been considered, and particularly in
the matter of marriage: for when single life was preferred before the married
for the accidental advantages to piety (especially in times of persecution)
which might be enjoyed there rather then here, some from thence extended their
declamation further, and drawing in all the auxiliaries from the old law, began
to prefer single life before marriage, as being a state of greater purity,
and then by little they went on thinking marriage to be less pure till at last
they believed it to be a state of carnality; and with the persuasions of men
effected by such discourses were also mingled the discourses of Heretics who
directly condemned marriage, and that which descended from this mixture of
doctrines some false, and the others not true, was a less honorable opinion of
that holy institution on which God founded the first blessing of Mankind; and
which Christ has consecrated into a mystery, and the Holy Spirit has
sanctified by the word of G^d and prayer, and which is the seminary of the
Church, and that nursery from whence the Kingdom of heaven is peopled. But if
marriage be lawful, then he that lives in that state as he should, contracts no
impurities, but is capable of any holy ministry, and receptive of any
Sacrament, and fit for any employment, and capable of any office, and worthy of
any dignity. Let them who have reason and experience to verify their
affirmative speak all the great things of single life that can be said of it,
and they may say much; for the advantages are many which are in a single life,
and in a private state, and an unactive condition, and a small fortune, and
retirement; but then although every one of these has some; yet a public
state, and an active life, and a full fortune, and public offices, and a
married life have also advantages of their own, and blessings and virtues
appropriate; and in all God may be equally served, according as the men are,
and the advantages neglected or improved. But that which I insist upon is, that
to be rich is no sin, and to be a public person^s no crime, and to be married
is no imparity: and therefore to suspect a disproportion between this state,
and Spiritual actions or offices, is a jealousy whose parent is heresy, and
pride and interest are its nurses. Fornication is uncleanness, and concubinate
and voluntary pollutions, and unnatural lusts are uncleanness and makes us
unworthy to approach either to the Altar or to the railes, but marriage that
fills heaven makes no man unfit for Churches or holy offices.

Upon this account I am also to take away those scruples which have been thrown
into men's Consciences by some indiscreet persons, 7.
concerning involuntary pollutions; concerning which we find many absurd
stories of Friars, and of pretended temptations and spites of the Devil to
hinder them from receiving the Holy Sacrament by procuring such accidents to
them before the solemnity: which persuasion was wholly upon this account that
the Spirit could be polluted by something that is without; and that the
accidents of the body could defile the Soul and this and the like were the
accidents that could do it. In which cases it is without all peradventure
true, that if the Soul consented not before or after, neither Nature, nor
Natures enemy are to be taken into the accounts of just dispositions or
indispositions to Spiritual ministeries; if we serve God with our whole mind,
and with all our heart, and do what we can that is good, and avoid all evil
that we can avoid, we can not be prejudiced by what we cannot avoid.

4. Although the Spirituality of the Gospel excludes all shadows of ceremonies,
8.
and all bodily rites from being of the Substance of religion; yet this
Spirituality does not exclude the ministry and service of the body: for the
worship of the body may also be Spiritual: to worship God with our bodies is
(...) a reasonable, and therefore a Spiritual worship. Thus when the eyes are
lift up in prayer, Romans 12. 1.
when the bowels yerne with pity, when the hands are extended to fill the poor
man's basket, the body serves the Spirit, and the Spirit serves God, and all is
a Spiritual religion. But because a bodily religion such as was that of the
Jews cannot be a Spiritual religion such as must be that of the Christians, and
yet the service of the body is also a part of the ministry of the Spirit; the
Rule which can determine our Conscience in the instances of this article is
this:

Whatsoever is an elicite or imperate act of virtue whether it be acted by the
Soul or by the body is an act of Spiritual religion.

For in virtues there is a body and a foul; and all transient actions, or ad
extra have something of materiality in them which must be ministered to by the
body. For therefore our Blessed Lord has commanded mortification of our
bodies, that our bodies may become Spiritual; and as acts of understanding are
ministered to by material Phantasms, so are the most spiritual acts of virtue,
the love and the fear of God by sad spectacles, and gracious accidents, by
feeling good and suffering evil; and as the actions of discerning sensitive
objects are direct products of the Soul, but yet have for every one of the
faculties a proper Organ in the body: So have the virtues of a Christian; they
are acts and habits of a sanctified Soul, but to some the hand does cooperate,
to some the eyes, and to some all the body, that as the graces of the Soul are
commencements and dispositions to glory; so these spiritual ministeries of the
body may nourish it and dispose the body to its perfect spirituality in the
resurrection of the just.

But then these ministeries of the body, 8.
are then only to be adjudged a spiritual service; when the soul and the body
make but one entire agent, just as when the Soul sees by the eye, we say the
eye sees; because that seeing is the action or passion of the Soul, which uses
that Organ in her operation: so when the act of the body and Soul is but one
and the same product of Religion, it is the Soul and the Spirit which is the
principal agent, and from thence the action must be denominated to be
Spiritual. But as when the eye is made to twinkle and look spritefully, or
amorously, or is proposed as a piece of beauty and does something of its own,
but no Natural and proper ministry of the Soul, it is the instrument of vice
or vanity and not of the Soul: so it is in the services of the body, if the
body of our services be not the product of the Soul, and the imperate act of
some virtue, or the proper specific act of some grace, it can never be a part
of the Religion. S. Paul has given us perfect measures in this inquiry, To
give our body to be burned, to give all our goods to the poor, to have all
faith, 1 Cor. 13.
are but the bodies and outsides or material parts of our Religion, and are
good for nothing: but when all these proceed from charity, that is, from a
willing, a loving Spirit, from a heart that is right to God, that is desirous
to please him, then faith justifies, and giving gifts to the poor is true
alms, and giving our bodies to the fire is a holy Martyrdom: and in this
sense, dressing bodies to their burial is an act of a Spiritual grace, to adorn
places of prayer, to build them and fit them for the service of God, is an act
of Spiritual Religion, to minister to the poor, to dress children, to make them
clean, to teach them their Catechismes, though bodily ministeries, are yet
actions of the Spiritual Religion of a Christian. But from this, those things
only are excluded, which either are not the direct productions of a sanctified
soul, or proper and prudent ministeries to some virtue.

5. The Spirituality of the laws of Jesus Christ have yet one effect more: 9.
In all contrasts or interfering of laws, or Senses of the laws, the spiritual
Sense is to be preferred, the spiritual action is to be chosen. By which it is
not meant that ever there can be a dispute between the act of the mind and an
act of the body; because as no man, and no thing can hinder the soul from
willing or understanding, from loving or hating, from fearing or slighting,
from valuing or neglecting its proper object: So the act of the body which is
to minister to the Soul cannot stand in contradiction to that to which in the
very nature of the thing it is subordinate: But the meaning is, when laws are
to be expounded, that sense is to be chosen which more relates to an act of
Grace, then that which is nothing but an external ministry: Thus, if the
question be between the beautifying of a Chapel, or the rescuing of the poor
from famine, although that might be an act of spiritual Religion, when Religion
requires that specification of an act; yet because that has less of the spirit
in it then the other, and is nor required in the presence of the other: this is
to be adjudged the more spiritual; because it is the more holy. If the question
be between keeping of a Holy day, or doing charitable releefs to necessitous
people, Christ in the instance of the Sabbath has taught us to prefer
Charity before external ministeries; obedience before Sacrifice, mercy before
Oblations; and did not only make way for the taking off all mere bodily rites,
but also for the expounding his own laws to the more spiritual sense, that is,
to the compliance with the most excellent and useful grace. So also for the
exposition of laws expressed by material significations: as cutting off the
hand, plucking out the right eye, eating the flesh of Christ, drinking his
blood, the flesh, that is, carnal commentaries profit nothing: but these words
are Spirit and Life: that is, they are neither to be understood nor practiced
in the material but Spiritual Sense.

But as to the general conduct of the Conscience in all these inquiries, 10.
the Rule is this: All acts of virtue are to be preferred before the
instruments of it: and that which exercises it, before that which signifies it;
and inward acts before the outward. Thus when fasting is appointed in order to
prayer, and yet both cannot be together, (for that by fasting we are disabled
to pray) there it is, that prayer must be preferred and fasting let alone. If
corporal austerities be undertaken for mortification of a rebellious body; if
they hinder the body in the direct ministeries to the Soul in other cases, and
become uncharitable, charity is to take place, and the austerities may be
supplied by something else. Now this Rule has in it no exception nor variety
but this: that it is to be understood in instances of corporal and spiritual
acts that are of a disparate Nature, and but only accidentally subordinate, as
fasting to prayer, keeping Holy Days for the special ministeries of Religion,
lyings upon the ground to chastity, and the like: but in the actions external
which are proper exercises of a virtue, the external which is directly,
naturally or by institution subordinate to the internal must never be omitted
upon pretense of preferring the internal; because they never can contradict one
another, as it never can be disputed whether the Soul or the eye shall see; for
the Soul sees by the eye and cannot see without it; and it may so happen in the
external acts of Virtue ministering to the internal; as in some cases a man is
not charitable, unless he extends his hand to the poor, or lifts him out of a
ditch, or guide him in the way. This instance and sense of the Rule we learn
from S. James: James 2. 15.
If a Brother or a Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you
say unto them, Be ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye give them not those
things which are needful to the body, What does it profit? That is, it is in
vain to pretend internal charity without the external: in many cases it cannot
be without it, and when it can, it is because there is no object for the act,
or no possibility to do it, and then the internal is to be done not by way of
preference to the external, but in destitution of it and supply. But this will
be yet further explicated in the following Rule.

RULE 6. The imperate acts or outward expressions of the Virtue of one
Commandment, must not contradict the elicite acts of another.
BY imperate acts I mean such which are commanded to be done by the interest of
any virtue whatsoever, 1.
not proper to the virtues but such as may minister to it, or signify it: Thus
to deny the impure solicitations of an unchaste person is a proper, an elicite
act of the virtue of chastity; but to lie upon the ground, to wear an hairen
shirt, to use disciplines, to roll our naked body upon thorns, to sleep in
snowes are imperate acts, that is, such which the virtue may choose and exercise
for its own advantage and interest; but such which are not necessary to any man
in particular, not to most men in the General; useful indeed in some cases but
not necessary in any. To eat and drink sparingly and so as may minister to
health and Religion is directly, that is, a proper and elicite act of
temperance: but if a man spares to eat that he may have wherewithal to pay his
debts, it is an imperate act of Justice, if to make himself healthful and
strong to war, it is an act of fortitude: the terms being so explicated, the
measures of the Rule are these following particulars.

The elicite acts of several virtues can never be contrary to each other: 2.
as an act of Religion is never against an act of charity: chastity is never
against justice, temperance is never against piety. The effect of which
proposition is this, that one ought not to be pretended against another, and no
piety to Parents can engage us to be drunk for their sakes, no pretense of
Religion can make it lawful to neglect the care of our children, and to this
purpose was that excellent precept of the Son of Sirach, Let not the reverence
of any man cause thee to sin; it is no good manners to comply with our
Superiors against our Supreme, and there is a time and a place for every
virtue: but no time nor place, no cause or opportunity of doing against any. *
It may so happen that the external actions of several virtues cannot consist,
as sometimes I cannot pay the Gabel to the Prince; and the offering to the
Priest; I cannot feed my child and the poor that begs; I cannot at some times
tell truth and yet preserve the life of my Brother. Now when the two external
elicite acts of virtue are inconsistent, the one must of necessity give place:
the Rules of which are to be given more properly in another place *: Lib. 3.
but that which for the present I am to say, is this, that although the outward
act cannot at all times be exercised and so must in certain cases be omitted,
yet in no case can it be lawful for the interest of one virtue to do against
another.

2. The imperate acts of one virtue may contradict the imperate or instrumental
and ministering acts of another: 3.
as fasting when it is commanded by Religion may be against the advice of our
Physician, whom to observe it is sometimes a precept of prudence, sometimes of
charity. Religion commands us sometimes to feast, and at the same time our
charity bids us save our expense, that the poor may be fed the more
plentifully. The reason of this is because all the imperate acts of virtue are
external and must depend upon something from without: which because it can
unavoidably be hindered, it must needs also be, that it may inculpably be
omitted. But then the Rule is this; Because all imperate acts of virtue, are
nothing in themselves but wholly in relation to the virtue; that imperate act
which ministers to that virtue which is then to be preferred, must also be
preferred: The reason is plain: The accessory must follow the nature of the
principal: and therefore if we must now prefer the virtue, we must also
prefer the instrument. The case is this; Don Antonio Licente of Portugal
according to the Portuguese and Spanish vanity, loved to see his wife painted;
and one evening commanded her to appear with him so disguised at a Masque: she
having notice that a young Gentleman who was passionately in love with her
would be there, and knowing that it would inflame his passion if she were so
adorned, inquires of her Confessor by what means she should restrain the folly
of that, Inamorato, and receives this amongst other advices, that at no hand
she should appear before him with any Artificial handsomeness: If she obeyes
her Husbands humor at that meeting, she does hurt to a Soul, and gives fuel to
an impure flame which already is too big: If she does not obey him in that
instance, her Husband will lose the pleasure of his fancy. But because she
finds there is no other evil will be consequent to her omission, but that her
Husband shall want a little Fantastic pleasure; and the consequent of her
obeying him would be (for ought she knew) that God might lose a Soul: she chose
to do an act ministering to Spiritual charity and the chastity of her Brother,
rather then an act that could be instrumental to nothing but the aerie pleasure
of her Husband: though otherwise she had been bound to signify her obedience
to him by any thing that had been lawful.

But in this there is some variety, and ought to be some caution: 4.
For although the principal virtue is to be preferred not only in it self or
in its proper and elicite acts, but also in its imperate and instrumental; yet
this is to be understood to be true, when the instruments are in equal order to
their respective virtues, or when there is no considerable difference. For if
the action in question ministering to the less principal virtue do very much
promote it, and the other which is instrumental to the more principal do it
but an inconsiderable advantage; the ministry of the less principal is in that
case to be preferred; the reason is, because by this omission of an
inconsiderable instrument the present duty is not hindered; but the service of
God is advantaged in the other, because it is able to effect something that is
confiderable toward the service of God, which the other is not. The case is
this; I knew a brave man who by a conspiracy of evil persons was condemned to
die: He having of a long time used to fast till the morning office was
completed, because he found fasting to be practiced by Antiquity, and by Holy
persons in their more solemn offices, and thinking it might or did him some
advantage in order to the bettering of his prayer; did think to do so in the
morning before his Execution. But then on the other side he considered that if
he fasted he should suffer a great diminution of Spirits, and possibly might be
suspected of pusillanimity if he did suffer a natural lipothymy, and therefore
could not tell what he should do. He was sure that to acquit himself before
God in his duty was much to be preferred before the other of appearing brave
and hardy before men, and therefore that his private prayers were more to be
regarded then his public confidence; and therefore was choosing to fast: but
then he reflected on the actions instrumental again, and considered that his
abstinence from a little meat would bring but a very little and inconsiderable
advantage to his prayers, but his eating would very much strengthen his heart
and do him a very considerable advantage that way, he chose this, because the
other could easily be supplied by the intenseness of his Spirit, his zeal, and
his present necessity, but this could not but by Natural supplies and
supportations of the strengths of the body.

But in the like cases, 5.
prudence and the conduct of a good guide is the best security to him that
inquires with an honest heart and pure intention; and then the determination is
best, and the Conscience is safest when both can be reconciled: but when they
cannot, the former measures are to be observed.

3. Those actions which can only signify or serve the interest of virtue 6.
by way of collateral advantage and indirect ministry must ever give place
when they hinder the proper acts of any virtue whatsoever. Fasting must never
be used when to fast is against charity: because charity is directly commanded,
but fasting is relative to something else, and is not commanded for it self.
Now in those things which are of a disparate Nature, a principal is ever to be
preferred before an instrument, and an act of duty before an act of prudence,
and necessity before convenience.

4. But in things subordinate, 7.
that is, when the outward act is an elicite act of virtue, and truly
subordinate to the internal, there can be no contradiction of one to the other;
but the outward act and the inward must be both performed; that is, neither of
them must be pretended in objection to the other; for they cannot hinder each
other; but the outward can be hindered only by something from without, but the
inward by nothing. So that in order to Conscience, the Rule is this; He that
does an inward and elicite act of virtue, will certainly if it be in his power,
do the outward elicite act: that is, the hand will move at the command of the
Will, and the foot will go if it be commanded, and if the Soul be charitable
the hand will be apt to minister. For it is not well within, unless it be well
without; that is, unless the virtue express it self in outward action where it
can. And on the other side; an outward elicite act of virtue can never go
alone, unless it be the product of a good heart and of an inward elicite act,
it is the imperate act of pride, or ambition, or a vicious fear, or
covetousness, or something criminal, but neither the imperate nor the elicite
act of any virtue whatsoever.

5. Though the words of Art here used be not common, 8.
yet the practice of these Rules in the Questions of Conscience will not be
difficult if we shall but with some diligence observe but the difference of
external actions, and be able to discern what outward actions are the elicite
or proper, and which are the imperate and instrumental acts of virtue; because
these being to give place to other acts by the events and constitution of their
own nature, and the other never but when they are hindered from without, our
duty will be easy when we once understand of what nature the outward action is.
The Rule therefore for the direction of our Conscience in this affair is this;
Those actions which either are commanded by name and in particular, or by
direct and proper consequence from the General, they are the elicite and proper
actions of a virtue. Thus to give alms is a proper and elicite act of charity:
to condemn the Criminal is a proper act of justice: To speak well of all men
behind their backs, so far as we can with truth, is an elicite act of equity.
But whatever is of that nature that it can be done innocently and yet not be an
act of virtue properly, that only is instrumental to a virtue, and is an
imperate action. Thus to invite rich men to a feast may be done prudently and
without Scruple, but he that does so and no more shall have no reward in heaven
for it: but yet to invite rich men to a banquet may minister to friendships or
peace, or it may obtain releef to a poor oppressed Brother, and then it may be
a good instrument of that virtue to which by accident or the personal intention
of the man (not the Natural order or intention of the thing) it does minister.
* By the serious observation of this difference of acts we may be guided in
many cases of Conscience and in the interpretation of some of the Laws of our
Religion.

RULE 7. When any thing is forbidden by the Laws of Christ, all those things
also by which we come to that Sin are understood to be forbidden by the same
Law.
IN this there is one great difference between Positive and Negative laws. 1.
When any thing is commanded or enjoined, to take or use any instrument to it
is left to our choice, and is matter of prudence and not duty: As when we are
commanded to mortify the lusts of the body: we are not commanded to lie upon
the ground, or to masticate Rhubarb, or to go barefoot, or to put on S.
Francis his girdle upon the bare body: as we find these actions aptly
instrumental to the duty, and fitted to the person, so we may use them: but if
the fear of Hell, or the hopes of Heaven can mortify us sufficiently to all the
purposes of the Spirit, or if he who is married be not tempted, or he who is
unmarried be by Nature abstinent, or by disease and imperfection, these
instruments are out of use, as to these purposes. For here nothing is under
command but the duty it self; and if by any good instrument it be done, it is
all one as to the law. * But in Negative precepts the case is otherwise: for
the crime is not only to be abstained from, but every instrument of it, every
path that leads to it, whatsoever can begin or promote it: and the reason is,
because all these things are of the same nature with the sin; and therefore
although every thing that is or may be good is not commanded, yet every evil is
forbidden. O^e fly can spoil a pot of Ointment: But this we are plainly taught
by our Blessed Saviors Sermon in the Mount; where he expounded the precepts of
the Ancients, not only to signify the outward act, but the inward desire: and
in this our Blessed Masters law is much more perfect then the Digest of Moses;
for although there also God forbad Concupiscence; yet it was only instanced in
the matter of Covetousness; and was not extended to the other instances of
duty; but in Christ's law, Non concupisces is the apex juris, it is the
Conservatory and the last duty of every Commandment Nam scelus intra se tantum
qui cogitat ullum
Facti crimen habet. --
He that thinks a lustful thought has broken a Commandment; and if the eye be
full of Adultery, or the mouth be impure, or the hand be unclean, the whole man
is polluted before God, and stands guilty of the breach of the main law.
Exercetur, atque aperitur opere nequitia, non incipit. The deed tells the
heart, and opens the shop of crimes, but they begin in the heart, and end in
the outward work.

But in this there is no difficulty: 2.
for God being Lord of all our faculties, and the searcher of hearts, and the
judge of our thoughts, he must be served by all, and he searches that he may
judge all, and judges that he may punish or reward all. But the Rule is only
thus to be limited: that in those sins whose being criminal is wholly
relative to persons with whom we converse; every thought is not a sin unless
that thought also be relative. As he sins not that thinks a lie, if he resolves
not to abuse any body with it, and a man may love to please himself with false
news, and put on a fantastic confidence and persuasion of the truth of what he
would fain have to be true; though to his reason it seem improbable. In this
there is some folly, but no malice: but to lie is a relative action; and if he
have but a thought or purpose to abuse the credulity of any one, then that
thought or purpose is a lie; that is, it is of the same nature with a lie, and
therefore of the same condemnation. The case is the same in all things which
are forbidden only because they are uncharitable or unjust to my Brother, but
are permitted when they are otherwise.

2. But the intention of the Rule is more: 3.
For it means that all the addresses and preparations to Criminal and forbidden
actions are also forbidden. Thus because Christ gave a law against fornication
he has also forbidden us to tempt any one to it by words, or by wanton
gestures, or lascivious dressings, and she fornicates that paints her face with
idle purposes.

3. It is also meant concerning temptations to a forbidden instance; 4.
for they also are forbidden in the prohibition of the crime: which is to be
understood with these Cautions:

1. If the temptation be in a Natural and direct order to the Sin, 5.
it is forbidden, where the sin is. Thus because lusts of the flesh are
prohibited, it is also our duty, that we do not make provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts of it. Eating high, and drinking deep are actions of
uncleanness, as well as of intemperance: and in the same proportion also is
every thing that ministers directly to the lusts of the lower belly though in a
less degree; as lying soft, studying the palate, arts of pleasure and
provocation, enticing gestures: with this Caution;

2. If the effect be observed in these less and lower instances then they are
directly criminal: 6.
for whatsoever did bring a sin and is still entertained knowingly and
choosingly, is (at least by interpretation) chosen for the sins sake: but at
first and before the observation it may enter upon another account; which if it
be criminal, to that these instances are to be reckoned, and not to that sin to
which they minister unknowingly.

3. Every temptation is then certainly to be reckoned as a sin when it is
procured by our own act; 7.
whether the temptation ministers to the sin directly or accidentally: for if
we chose it, it can have no excuse: tute quod intristi tibi comedendum est: and
unless the man be surprised, his chosing of an instrument to sin withal, is not
for the sake of the instrument, but for its relation: and this is true,
although the usual effect does not follow the instrument. For there is
sometimes a fantastic pleasure in the remembrances of sin, in the approaches
of it, in our addresses to it: * and there are some men who dare not act the
foul crime, who yet love to look upon its fair face; and they drive out sin as
Abraham did Ismael with an unwilling willingness (God knows) and therefore give
it bread and water abroad though no entertainment at home and they look after
it, and are pleased with the stories of it, and love to see the place of its
acting, Hic locus, haec eadem sub qua requiescimus arbor
Scit quibus ingemui curis, quibus ignibus arsi.
And they roll it in their minds: now they that go but thus far and love to
tempt themselves by walking upon the brink of the river, and delight themselves
in viewing the instrument of their sin, though they use it no further, they
have given demonstration of their love of sin when they make so much of its
Proxy.

* But there are others who have great experience of the vanity of all sin and
the emptiness and dissatisfaction that is in its fruition, 8.
and know as soon as ever they have enjoyed it, it is gone, and that there is
more pleasure in the expectation then in the possession; and therefore they had
rather go toward it then arrive thither; and love the temptation better then
the sin: These men sin with an excellent Philosophy and wittiness of sinning;
They love to woe always and not to enjoy, ever to be hungry and sitting down
to dinner, but are afraid to have their desires filled, but if we consider what
the secret of it is, and that there is in these men an immense love to sin, and
a perfect adhesion to the pleasure of it, and that they refuse to enter lest
they should quickly pass thorough, and they are unwilling to taste it, lest they
should eat no more, and would not enjoy, because they will not be weary of it;
and will deny any thing to themselves even that which they most love, lest for
a while they should loath their beloved sin; we shall see reason enough to
affirm these men to be the greatest breakers of the Laws of Jesus Christ;
though they only tempt themselves, and handle the instruments of sin, and
although these instruments serve nothing but the temptation, and the temptation
does not serve the sin, whether in its own nature it is designed.

4. If the temptation be involuntary, 9.
then it is not imputed: and yet this is to be understood with this provision;
that it be neither chosen directly, nor by interpretation; that is, that it be
not entered into by carelessness, or confidence, or choice. If it be by choice,
then it is directly against that law of Christ which forbids that sin whither
the temptation leads; but if it enter by carelessnesse or confidence, it
belongs not to this Rule; for although every such temptation is against the
laws of Christ, yet they are not under the same law by which the effect is
prohibited, but unlawful because they are against Christian prudence and
Christian charity.

RULE 8. The suppositive propositions with the supervening advices of our
Blessed Savior are always equivalent to matter of duty, and are by
interpretation a Commandment.
THIS Rule is intended as an explication of the precepts of prayer, 1.
alms, and fasting: all which our Blessed Savior in his Sermon upon the Mount
expressed by way of supposition; which way of expression although it be not a
positive and legal expression of a Commandment, yet it either supposes a
preceding law, or a confirmed practice, or at least that those to whom such
words are directed are willing and loving and obedient people, understanding
the intimations and secret significations of the Divine pleasure. When ye give
alms, do not blow a Trumpet, said our Blessed Savior. When ye pray stand not
in the corners of the streets, when you fast do not disfigure your faces. Now
concerning prayer and alms there is no difficulty, because our Blessed Lord and
his Apostles have often repeated the will of God in express Commandments
concerning them, but because of fasting he has said much less, and nothing at
all but these suppositive words, and a prophecy that his Disciples should fast
in the days of the Bridegrooms absence, and a declaration of the blessed
effects of fasting; this has a proper inquiry and a special difficulty,
whether or no these words have the force of a Commandment.

Concerning which we may take an estimate, 2.
by those other expressions of our Lawgiver concerning alms; which we without
further scrutiny know to be Commandments, because in other places they are
positively expressed: and therefore if we can find it so concerning fasting,
this inquiry will be at an end. Now concerning this I will not only observe
that the three great heads and Representatives of the law, the Prophets, and
the Gospel, Christ, Moses and Elias, who were concentred and inwrapped in one
glory upon mount Tabor were an equal example of fasting, which in their own
persons by a Miracle was consigned to be an example and an exhortation to
fasting to all ages of Religion, and each of them fasting forty days upon
great occasions told to them who have ears to hear, what their duty is in all
the great accidents of their life: but that which is very material to the
present inquiry is, that this supposition of our Blessed Lord, [When ye fast]
was spoken to a people who made it a great part of their Religion to fast, who
placed some portions of holiness in it, who had received the influence of their
greatest, their best, their most imitable examples for religious fasting; and
the impression of many Commandments not only relative to themselves as bound
by such a law, but as being under the conduct of Religion in general. Such was
the precept of the Prophet Joel, Joel. 2. 12.
Thus says the Lord turn ye even to me, with all your heart, with fasting and
with weeping and with mourning. Now whatever the Prophets said that related to
Religion abstractedly, or morality, all that is Evangelical (as I proved
formerly in this Book:) Cap. 2. Rul. 5.
* Besides there was an universal solemn practice of this exercise, under
Joshua at Ai, under the Judges at Gibeah, under Samuel at Mizpah, under David
at Hebron; fasts frequently proclaimed, frequently instituted; at the preaching
of Jeremy and Daniel, of Joel and Zechary; before the captivity, under it, and
after it; in the days of sorrow and in the days of danger, in their religion
solemn and unsolemn, after they had sinned and when they were punished, at
Jerusalem among the Jews and at Niniveh amongst the Gentiles: Now because it is
certain that all this could not be confined to the special Religion of the
Jews, but was an expression and apt signification and instrument of a Natural
religion our B. Savior needed not renew this and efforme it over again into
the same shape, but had reason to suppose the world would proceed in an
instance whose nature could not receive a new reason and consequent change in
the whole.

This heap of considerations relates to that state of things in which our
Blessed Savior found this Religious exercise at his coming. 3.
Now if we consider what our Blessed Savior did to it in the Gospel; we shall
perceive he intended to leave it no less then he found it: 1.
for first, he liked it and approved it, he allowed a time to it, a portion of
that by which God will be served; and he that gave us time only to serve him
and in that to serve our selves, would not allow any time to that by which he
was no way served. 2.
2. We cannot tell why Christ should presuppose that a thing was to be done,
which God did not require to be done: such things Christ used to reprove, not
to recommend, to destroy not to adorn by the superfetation of a new
Commandment. 3.
3. These words he speaks to his Disciples in the promulgation of his own
doctrine, in his sermon upon the Mount, which is the great institution and
Sanction of the Evangelical doctrine, and therefore left it recommended and
bound upon them by a new ligature, even by an adoption into the Everlasting
Covenant. 4.
4. He represents it equally with those other of prayer and alms, which in
this excellent digest of laws he no otherwise recommends, but as supposing men
sufficiently engaged to the practice of these duties: when ye pray enter into
your chamber, and when ye pray say Our Father, and when ye fast, be sincere and
humble. 5.
5. He that presupposes does also establish; because then one part of the duty
is a postulate and a ground for the superstructure of another; and is
sufficiently declared by its parallels in the usual style of Scripture. My Son
when thou servest the Lord prepare thy soul for temptation, 1 King. 8. 3^.
So the Son of Syrach: and again, When thou hear forgive: and again, When
thou art afflicted call upon him, which forms of expression suppose a perfect
persuasion and accepted practice of the duty; and is more then a conditional
Hypothetick: Si jejunatis has in it more contingency, but Cum jejunatis is an
expression of confidence and is gone beyond a doubt. 6.
6. That exercise which Christ orders and disposes, which he reformes and
purges from all evils superinduced appendage is certainly dressed for the
Temple and for the service of God; now this of fasting Christ reforms from its
being abused as he did prayer and alms; and therefore left it in the first
intention of God and of a Natural Religion to be a service of God, like that of
bowing the head, or going to worship in the houses of prayer. 7.
To this duty he promises a reward: Our heavenly Father that sees thy fasting
in secret shall reward thee openly: that is, its being private shall not hinder
it from being rewarded; for God sees it, and likes it, and loves it, and will
reward it.

Now for confirmation of all this, 4.
and that this was to this purpose so understood by the Disciples and followers
of our Lord: S. Paul was in fastings often; 2 Cor. 11. 27.
and this was a characteristick note of the Ministers of the Gospel 2 Cor. 6. 4.
In all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God in much
patience....in watchings, in fastings: and when Paul and Barnabas were ordained
Apostles of the Uncircumcision, they fasted and prayed and laid their hands on
them and so sent them away; Acts 13. 3, 4.
and esteemed this duty so sacred, that S. Paul permitted married persons (...)
to appoint vacant times from their endearments that they may give themselves to
fasting and prayer: 1 Cor. 7 5.
and the Primitive Christians were Generally such Asceticks in this instance of
fasting, that the Ecclesiastical story is full of strange Narratives of their
prodigious fastings.

Lastly, 5.
fasting is an act of many virtues: it is an elicite and proper act of
temperance, and of repentance, and of humiliation, and of mortification of the
flesh with its affections and lusts; it is an imperate and instrumental act
ministering to prayer, and is called a service of God: So the good old
Prophetess served God night and day in fasting and prayer: Luke 2.
and that which serves God, and ministers so much to religion, and exercises so
many graces, and was practiced by the faithful in both Testaments, and was part
of the Religion of both Jews and Gentiles, and was the great solemnity and
publication of repentance, and part of a Natural religion, and an indearment of
the Divine mercy and pity; that which was always accounted an instrument of
impetration or a prevailing prayer; which Christ recommended and presupposed,
and adorned with a cautionary precept and taught the manner of its observation,
and to which he made promises, and told the world that his Heavenly Father will
reward it; certainly this can be no less then a duty of the Evangelical or
Christian Religion.

But yet although it be a duty, 6.
yet it is of a Nature and obligation different from other instances. When it
relates to Repentance, it is just a duty, as redeeming captives is commanded
under the precept of mercy: that is, it is the specification or positive
exercise and act of an affirmative duty: it is a duty in it self, that is, an
act whereby God can be served; but it becomes obligatory to the man by other
measures, by accidental necessities and personal capacities, in time and place,
by public authority and private resolution. Not that a man cannot be said to
be a true penitent unless he be a faster: but that fasting is a proper, apt,
natural, usual, approved expression, and an exercise of repentance: it is more
fitted to the capacities of men, and usages of Religion then any other outward
act, it has some Natural and many collateral advantages more then other
significations of it; and it is like bowing the head or knee in prayer, and is
to repentance the same outwardly as sorrow is inwardly, and it is properly the
penance or repentance of the body, which because it has sinned must also be
afflicted, according to that of S. James, Be afflicted, and mourn and weep, let
your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness: Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord: that is, repent ye of your sins: for all these
expressions signify but this one duty, and this great exercise and
signification of it is so much a duty in the General, that it cannot be omitted
without good reason, nor then neither unless it be supplied by something else,
in its just time and circumstances.

In order to other ends fasting is to be chosen and preferred before
instruments less apt, 7.
less useful, less religious, that is indeed, before the imperate and
ministering acts of any kind whatsoever; for it is the best in many respects and
remains such unless it be altered by the incoveniences or healthlesness of the
person.

RULE 9. The institution of a Rite or Sacrament by our Blessed Savior is a
direct law, and passes a proper obligation in its whole integrity.
THIS Rule can relate but to one instance; 1.
that of the Holy Sacrament of Christ's body and blood; for although Christ did
institute two Sacraments, yet that of Baptism was under the form of an express
Commandment, and therefore for its observation needs not the auxiliaries of
this Rule. But in the other Sacrament the institution was by actions, and
intimations of duty, and relative precepts, and suppositions of action; as
quoties feceritis, and the like. Now whether this do amount to a Commandment
or no, is the inquiry; and though the question about the half Communion be
otherwise determinable, yet by no instrument so certain and immediate as this.

In order therefore to the Rule of Conscience in this instance I consider, 2.
that an institution of a thing, or state of life by God, and by his Christ is
to be distinguished from the manner of that thing so instituted. When a thing
is instituted by God it does not equal an universal Commandment; but obtains
the force of a precept according to the Subject matter and to its appendant
relations. Thus when God instituted marriage, he did not by that institution
oblige every single person to marry: for some were Eunuchs from their Mothers
wombs, and some were made Eunuchs by men; and some make themselves Eunuchs for
religious and severe ends, or advantages of retirement and an untroubled life.
But by this institution (say the Doctors of the Jews) every man was at first
obliged, and so they are still, if they have Natural needs or natural
temptations; But because the institution was relative to the public
necessities of Mankind, and the personal needs of a man, therefore it was not
an universal or unlimited Commandment; but only so far as it did min^ster
to the necessary end, so far it was a necessary Commandment. It was not
instituted for Eunuchs; but for whom it was instituted, to them it was a remedy
against sin, and the support of the world, and the original of Families, and
the seminary of the Church, and the endearment of friendships, and the parent
of societies, and until the necessities of the world were abated, and the
needs of single persons were diverted, or broken in pieces by the discipline of
a new institution, it was esteemed infamous, and it was punishable not to marry.

But then if we consider the manner of this thing so instituted, 3.
it is certainly a perfect, unalterable, and universal Commandment. For
although every man in every circumstance be not by virtue of the institution
obliged to marry; yet if he does marry, by the institution he is tied up
strictly that at no hand he must prevaricate the measures and limits of the
institution. He that marries must marry by that Rule and by no other. He must
marry one woman only while she is alive: he must leave Father and Mother and
adhere to her, he must treat her with charity and honor, he must use her by
the limits of Nature and sobriety, he must make her the Mother of his family,
he must make her serve no desire but what is Natural, and so in every thing is
he limited to the first institution.

The reason is, 4.
because a Divine institution is the whole cause, and the entire beginning, and
the only warranty and legitimation of the state or of the action: and
therefore whatsoever is otherwise then the institution, is not from God, but
from ourselves: So that although the institution does not oblige us in all
cases to do the thing at all; yet in all cases it obliges us to do it in the
manner it is appointed: and in this sense the word is used in good Authors. Nam
is quanquam tri^nnium nutricibus dederit, tamen ab illis quoque jam formandam
quam optimis institutis mentem infantium judicat, L. 1. c. 2.
said Quintilian. The understanding even of infants is from the very beginning
with the best institutions: that is, with the best laws and precepts of
manners. Institutiones sunt praeceptiones quibus instituuntur and docentur
homines, said Laurentius Valla: the precepts by which men are taught what to
do are called institutions: so Quintilian inscribed his books, de institutione
oratoria, and Lactanius wrote Institutions; that is, Commentaries on the
precepts and laws of Christianity. But it has in it this peculiarity of
signification, that the word [institution] does signify properly Rules and
precepts of manners; properly the measures of practice, or Rules teaching us
what we are obliged to do. So that institution does not directly signify a
Commandment, but it supposes the persons obliged, only it superaddes the
manner and measures of obedience. Cum ad literas non pertineat aetas, Ubi supra.
quae ad mores jam pertinet, etc. says Quintilian; since that age is not
capable of letters, but is capable of manners, they are to be efform'd by the
best and noblest institutions.

And thus it is in the matter of the Sacrament as it is in the matter of
marriage. 5.
All men are not always obl^g'd to receive the Sacrament; for the institution
of it being in order to certain ends, and in the recipients certain capacities
and conditions required by way of disposition, there can be but a relative and
therefore a limited Commandment of its reception: but to them who do receiv
it, the institution is a perfect indispensable Commandment for the manner in
all the essential parts, that is, in all which were intended in the
institution. Now whence I argue,

Whatsoever is a part of Christ's institution of the Sacrament is for ever
obligatory to all that receive it.

But the Sacrament in both kinds is a part of the institution of the Sacrament,
Therefore,

It must for ever oblige all that communicate or receive it.

The first proposition relies upon the nature of Divine institutions, which
giving all the authority and warranty to the whole action, all its moral being
and legitimation, must be the measure of all the natural being, or else it is
not of God, but of man. Indignum dicit esse Domino qui aliter mysterium
celebrat, quam ab eo traditum est. Non enim potest devotus esse qui aliter
praesumit quam datum est ab Authore, In 1 Cor. 11.
says S. Ambrose. S. Paul says, he is unworthy of the Lord who celebrates the
mystery otherwise then it was delivered by him. He cannot be devout who
presumes otherwise then it was given by the Author: and to this purpose are
those severe words of the Apostle, Gal. 1.
Si quis Evangelizaverit praeter quod accepistis, if any man preach any other
Gospel then what ye have received, let him be Anathema, that is, from Christ we
have received it, and so as we received it, so we deliver it, and so it must
descend upon you without the superfetation of any new doctrine.

And indeed how is it possible to pretend a tradition from Christ by the hands
of his Apostles, 6.
and the ministry of the Church if we celebrate it otherwise then Christ
delivered it? Religion nostrae congruit, and timori, and ipsi (...), and
officio Sacerdotii nostri custodire traditiones Dominicae veritatem. Et quod
priut videtur apud quosdam erratum, Domino monente corrigere, ut cum in
claritate sua and majestate coelesti venire coeperit, inveniat nos tenere quod
monuit, observare quod decuit, facere quod fecit; they are the excellent words
of S. Cyprian, (...)
and perfectly conclusive in this Article. For there were some who out of an
impertinent pretension of sobriety would not use wine, but water in the
Sacrament; the instrument by which S. Cyprian confutes their folly, is a
recourse to the institution. See, how did Christ deliver it: inventmur non
observari a nobis quod mandatum est, nisi eadem qua Dominus fecit, nos quoque
faciamus. Unless we do what Christ did, we do not observe what he commanded;
plainly implying that the institution it self was a Commandment: we must hold
what he admonished, we must observe what he taught, we must do what he did.
Not every thing done at the time of the institution, but everything of it. For
(says he) Christ did institute it after Supper, but we in the morning. But
every thing by which he did signify what he did exhibit, and exhibit what he
did promise, every such thing was a part of the institution, and cannot be
changed. And therefore S. Paul when he instructs the Corinthians in the mystery
of the holy Eucharist, uses no demonstration of the Rites but this. 1 Cor. 11.
23, 24.
I have received this of the Lord: and This I have delivered unto you, other
things I will set in order when I come; That is, whatsoever I did not receive
from the Lord Jesus; whatsoever was not of his institu^ion, I have power to
dispose of; but not of any thing which he appointed.

Now there is no peradventure, 7.
but the Apostles understood this institution to be a Commandment, (...) said
Justin Martyr. Ap^. 2.
speaking of the distribution of the Bread and Wine, (...) to every one that
was present, he says that the Apostles did deliver that Jesus so commanded
them. * For what Commandment have we to consecrate in bread and wine? What
precept is there that the consecration should be by a Priest? Nothing but the
institution. For if it be said that Christ added the preceptive words of [ Hoc
facite,] This do in remembrance of me. I reply, He did so. But [ Hoc facite]
is no Commandment of it self, but when it is joined with, in mei
commemorationem, in remembrance of me; 1 Cor. 21. 25.
That is, when ye remember me, then do thus: So S. Paul more expressly, This
do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. Therefore Hoc facite will be
but ill expounded to be a Commandment for the Priests consecration, unless it
borrow all its force from the whole institution: for it plainly says only
this; when ye remember me, then do this which ye see me do. But hoc facite
does not signify any particular Commandment, but that which is relative to
the whole action; and all the discourses of Mankind, can never extract any
other signification.

But 2. The Apostles received an express Commandment; 8.
Drink ye all of this. If therefore Christ instituted the Sacrament for the
whole Church, and that they were the representatives of the whole body of
Christ, then all the whole Church when they communicate, are bound by the
Commandment to receive the Chalice. But if they did not represent the whole
Church, then where shall we find a warranty that the people may receive at all?
For if they received only in the capacity of Clergy men, then the institution
extends no further; and it is as much sacrilege for the people to eat and drink
the Symbols as to offer at the consecration. But if they received in the
capacity of Christians only, then they received the Commandment of drinking
in the chalice, for themselves and for all Christians.

And indeed the Apostles were not then Priests. 9.
True, say they of the Church of Rome, they were not; but James Payva a
Portuguese in the Council of Trent talked merrily, and said that the Apostles
as Laics received the Bread, but then when Christ said, Hoc facite, this do,
he made them Priests; and then gave them the Chalice as representatives of the
Clergy, not of the people. But as merry a fancy as this seemed then, it was
found to be the best shift they had, and therefore upon better advice it was
followed by Canisius, Suarez, Bellarmine, and diverse others. But if this be
stood upon, besides that it must be crushed to nothing by the preceding
argument, the pretense it self crosses their own devices. For if it be said
that the Apostles were made Priests by Hoc facite, spoken before the
institution of the Chalice, then Hoc facite does not signify, Offerte
Sacrificium, and consequently cannot make them Priests, that is (with them)
Sacrificers, For by their own doctrine to offer both kinds is necessary to its
being a Sacrifice. Since therefore the first Hoc facite (which indeed is the
only one mentioned by the Evangelists) can but relate to the consecrating of
the Bread, as the second (mentioned by S. Paul) does to the consecrating of the
Chalice, either they are Priests without a power of Sacrifice, or the Sacrifice
is complete without the Chalice, or else they were not then made Priests when
Christ first said, Hoc facite; and if they were by the second: besides that a
reason cannot be fancied why the same words should, and should not effect so
differing changes, without difference in the voice, or in the action, or in the
mystery, besides this I say, It is plain, that Christ reached the cup to them
commanding them all to drink before he made them Priests, that is, they
received the Chalice as representatives of the people: for being Laics, at
least till all that Ceremony was done, they did represent the people; and
consequently as such, received a Commandment to drink. Let them choose by what
part they will be reproved. Every one of these overthrows their new doctrine,
and all of them cannot be escaped. * But let it be considered whether it be
likely that Christ should at one time institute two Sacraments (for they
pretend Ordination to be as very a Sacrament as the Lords supper) of so
different Natures, and yet speak nothing of the use, or the reason, the benefit
or the necessity of one of them; nor tell them that he did so, nor explicate
the mystery, nor distinguish the Rite, or the words, but leave it to be
supposed or conjectured by the most imperfect and improbable construction in
the world. But suppose it; yet at least it must be confessed that the words
which Christ used, and the same ritual, must in the Apostle ministry be able
to effect the same grace: and if so, then a Priest has power to ordain
Priests; for he has power to say, Hoc facite, in all the same meanings which
Christ had, when he used them: and if this be not accepted, yet at least a
Bishop may ordain all the congregations Priests if he please, by saying of one
Mass; which are pretty fancies, and rare propositions in our Divinity.

To which I add this consideration that if our Blessed Lord did by those words
of Hoc facite make his Disciples Priests, 10.
then they were Priests before the Lord himself; for although he was designed
for ever; yet he was consecrated on the Cross, there he entered upon his
Priestly office; but officiates in that Office not on earth but in heaven,
Hebr. 8 4.
For if he were on earth he should not be a priest, says S. Paul, therefore
being consecrate on the Cross, he ascended into heaven to be there our priest
for ever there making intercession for us. Now it were strange if the Apostles
should be declared Priests before the Consecration, or first Sacerdotal action
of their Lord; or that they should be Priests without the power of the Keys,
without the commission to baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, for these were given afterward. But this device is so very a dream, so
groundless and aerie a phantasme, so weakly laid and employed to such trifling
purposes, that it needs no further an inquiry into it, it was raised to serve
the end of this question, to answer an objection, and pretends no strength of
its own, neither can it weaken that which has; and that it is indeed only
pretended for a shift, and intended to operate no further appears in this
manifestly; because if the Apostles did drink of the Chalice in the capacity of
being Priests, then it ought to be followed at least so far, and all the
Priests that are present ought to receive the Chalice, which because they do
not in the Church of Rome, it is apparent they prevaricate the institution, and
that they may exclude the Laity from the cup, they use their Clergy as bad,
when themselves do not officiate.

3. This trifling pretense being removed, 11.
it remains that the words of institution, Drink ye all of this, be also the
words of a Commandment; and although they were spoken to the Apostles only,
as being only present, yet the precept must equally concern all Christians
and Disciples of Christ. Just like those of Watch and pray lest ye fall into
temptation; Matthew. 26 41.
and unless ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of God; Matthew. 18. 3.
which were spoken only in the presence of the Apostles: But as these precepts
and moral Rules concern all Christians; so do the words of institution of
the H. Sacrament and Commandment of [ Drink ye all of this] For, Oportet
coenam Dominicam esse communem, quia ille omnibus Discipulis suis qui aderant*
aequaliter tradidit Sacramenta, In 1 Cor. 11.
said S. Hierom. The Lords Supper is common to all, and so ought to be; because
our Lord did equally deliver it to all that were present: Ration. l 4 c* 1.
and upon this very account Durandus affirms: In primitiva Ecclesia singulis
diebus omnes qui celebrationi missarum intererant communicare solebant, eo quod
Apostoli omnes de calice biberunt, Domino dicente, Bibite ex eo omnes. In the
Primitive Church all that were present did every day receive, because the
Apostles did all drink of the Chalice, and the Lord said, Drink ye all of this.

And this appears beyond all contradiction to have been so intended. 12.
So S. Ignatius; there is one bread broken to all, Ep. ad Philad.
(...), and one Chalice distributed to all, and there is no difference in this
between the priest and the people, Sup. 1 Cor* 11. and sup 2 Cor. hom. 18.
said S. Chrysostom; and it is evident that S. Paul gives the same Commandment
of drinking the Chalice, as of eating the Bread; six times distinctly
mentioning both the Symbols, and directing the Rule and the precepts of eating
and drinking to all that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2.
even to all who are to examine themselves; 1 Cor. 11.
for let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of
that cup: and that it was so the custom of the Church, and their Doctrine that
all are to receive the Chalice, that there was no Scruple made by the Church
concerning it, we are fairly induced to a belief; by the addition made to the
Greek text of 1 Cor. 10. 17. by the Vulgar Latin; for whereas it is in the
Greek [ we all partake of the same bread] the Vulgar Latin adds [ and de uno
Calice] and of the same cup. This I the rather note because the Jesuits of
Colein did use this for an argument of the half Communion; because when S. Paul
had spoken of the consecration he mentions breaking bread, and drinking the
cup; but when he speaks of sumption or participation, he only mentions the
bread, now supposing that: yet that defect is supplied by the Vulgar Latin, the
Author of which knowing the universal custom of the Church and the doctrine of
it, supplied that out of the sentence of the Church which is not in the Greek
text. Though if it had not been yet the argument would have been just nothing,
as being a conclusion drawn from a particular Negative in one place; and
against his custom in other places, and besides the institution.

For the doctrine and practice of the Church is so notorious in this Article
that in the Greek Church there was never any variety in it; 13.
and to this day it is used as it was in the beginning and in all the
intermedial Ages: and in the Latin Church for a thousand years it was not
altered; Nay to this day the Church of Rome sings in the Hymn upon Corpus
Christi day, Dedit fragilibus corporis ferculum,
Dedit and tristibus salutis poculum,
Dicens, Accipite quod trado vasculum:
Omnes ex eo bibite.
He gave his body to be the food of the weak, and the Cup of salvation to the
sorrowful, saying, Take this Vessel that I reach unto you, Drink ye a^l of
this. Indeed it was often attempted to be changed upon the interest of diverse
Heresies and superstitious fancies, and rare emergencies. For,

1. It was attempted to be omitted in the time of S. Cyprian when some
impertinent people would have water only; 14.
But not the Chalice of the Lords institution in the fruit of the vine: but
these men's folly went not far, for being confuted and reprov' by S. Cyprian in
a letter to his Brother Caecilius, Lib. 2. ep. 3.
I find no mention of them afterward.

2. It was attempted to be changed upon occasion of the Eremites, 15.
who coming but seldom to Church could but seldom receive the Chalice, but
desiring more frequently to communicate, they carried the consecrated bread
with them into their cells, and when they had a mind to it, in that imperfect
manner did imitate the Lords Supper. That they did so is certain, that they had
no warrant for so doing is as certain; and therefore their doing so can be no
warrant to us to do as they did, much less ought it to be pretended in
justification of the denying the Chalice to the whole Laity, when the desire it
and may have it. However this unwarrantable custom of the Eremites was taken
away by the first Council of Toledo in the year 390. and afterward again
forbidden in the year 500. by the Fathers met in Council at Caesar Augusta. The
words of the Council of Toledo are these; Can. 14.
Si quis autem acceptam a Sacerdote Eucharistiam non sumpserit, velut
sacrilegus propellatur: but this is fuller explicated in that of Caesar
Augusta, Eucharistiae gratiam si quis probatur acceptam non consumpsisse in
Ecclesia, anathema sit in perpetuum: so that under the pain of a perpetual
curse, and under the crime of Sacrilege they were commanded to spend the
Eucharistical Symbols in the Church; and this took from them all pretense of
the necessity in some case of not receiving the chalice.

3. In the time of P. Leo the first, 16.
the Manichees who abstained from wine as an abomination, would yet thrust
themselves into the societies of the faithful, and pretend to be right
believers; but S. Leo discovered them by their not receiving the Chalice in the
holy Eucharist; (...)
and whereas they would have received in one kind only, he calls it sacrilege;
and reproves them with the words of S. Paul; (...)
Mark them which cause divisions amongst you, and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have received. This was about the year 449.

4. A while after, 17.
about the year 490. Some had gotten some superstitious fancy by the end; and
out of reverence to the Holy Sacrament, or some other device of their own, they
thought it fit to abstain from the consecrated Chalice: but P. Gelasius made
short work with them; he condemned their superstition and gave sentence, Aut
integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, Either all or none:
Drive them from the H. Bread, if they refuse the Sacrament of the Lords blood.
(...). 2.


5. The Church had sometime in extraordinaay cases, 18.
as in communicating infants or dying people, dipped the holy Bread into the
Chalice, and so ministered the Sacrament: upon occasion of which some fell in
love with the trick, and would have had it so in ordinary ministrations: we
find it mentioned in the History of Serapion in Eusebius, and in S. Cyprian 4.
de lapsis, and in Prosper^. De (...) c. 6. and 26 q 6. C. 15. in decr.
But against this breach P. Julius opposed himself and stood in the gap,
declaring it to be against the Divine order and Apostolical institutions, and
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel and of the Apostles and the custom of
the Church; (...) A^gypt. De consecrat. (...). 2. Can. (...) omne.
and his words are remarkable to show from whence this Article is to be
adjusted and determined: Non difficile hoc ab ipso font veritatis probatur, in
qua ordinata ipsa Sacramentorum mysteria processerunt; The very ordination or
institution of the Sacrament is the fountain from whence we are to derive the
truth in this inquiry. But when this Superstition was again revived about the
year 580. the now mentioned decree of P. Julius was repeated in the third
Council of Braccara, and all set right again according to the perpetual custom
of the Church, and the institution of our B. Lord, and their pretense (which
was lest they should spill any thing of the holy Chalice) laid aside as
trifling and superstitious.

6. And yet after all these motions made by Heretics and superstitious
persons, 19.
and so many cautions, suppressions, and decrees against them; about the year
920. the order of Cluniack Monks did communicate with the Bread dipped in the
Chalice as Cassander reports: L. 2. c. 35.
and about the year 1120. it was permitted in some Churches so to do: For by
this time the world was so rude and ignorant that they knew little of the
mysteries of Religion, and cared less; so that for the danger of effusion of
the holy wine they in some places chose that expedient: which although it was
upon great reason condemned by P. Julius and the Council of Braccara, yet it is
a great argument that they still believed it necessary to communicate under
both Symbols.

7. But about the time that the Schoolmen began to rule the chair, 20.
this danger of spilling the Chalice wrought so much in their wise heads that
they began about the year 1250. in some Churches to leave out all use of the
Chalice, excepting to the Priests and some Great men who would be careful not
to spill. 3 part sum. Q. 80 art 12. 4. (...) 11. ar^. ^. q. 1.
This was but in some Churches said Aquinas; and it was permitted to all the
Priests present, de quibus praesumitur quod magis sint cauti: and to some
Grandees of the people too for the same reason, as we find in Richard
Middleton, Innocent the fourth, and Petrus de Tarantasia.

8. But by little and little the abuse went further, 21.
and grew confirmed, and Miracles pretended and invented, as Alexander of Ales
reports, to stop the outcries of certain Religious who were extremely troubled
at the loss of the Chalice: and now at last it became the general custom of
the Western Churches; and it grew scandalous to desire it; and it was
established into a doctrine in the Council of Constance, and the institution of
Christ, and the custom of the Primitive Church were openly defied, taking
notice of and so laid aside, and Anathema pronounced on them that should insist
upon their right, or deny whole Christ to be under each kind in the Council of
Trent; and so it abides at this day.

The question being now reduced to this short issue; 22.
whether under each kind whole Christ be received; it is not unworthy a short
inquiry, concerning the truth, and concerning the consequence of it.

1. For the truth. 23.
I consider that the effect of external rituals and ceremonials cannot be
disputed Philosophically; as we inquire into the portions of effect which every
herb has in an infusion; but we are to take and use them in the simplicity of
their institution; leaving them under that secrecy of their own mysteriousness
in which they were left in their first appointment and publication. The Apostle
explicating the mysteries of our Religion, says, that Christ was delivered
(meaning unto death) for our sins, Romans 4 25.
and was raised again for our justification; Romans 5. 9.
and yet that we are justified by his blood. Upon these accounts we can say
that by Christ's death and by his resurrection we are justified, and therefore
we are to be partakers of both; but because we are justified by faith in his
blood, it will at no hand follow, we may let alone our faith, or neglect to
procure our part in his resurrection. So it is in the Symbols Eucharistical:
supposing it had been said of the Bread, This is Christ, or This is the death
of Christ, and the same said of the Chalice; yet one alone is not sufficient to
be received when both are instituted: for as all the mysteries of our
redemption are effective to our pardon and salvation; so are both the Symbols
of the Eucharist to our reception of Christ; and Baptism or absolution may
better be pretended to the exclusion of the whole Eucharist, then the
sufficiency of bread to the exclusion of the Chalice; for remission of sins is
perfectly the grace of Baptism; and those sins return not, but in the case of
Apostasy: but what is the effect of bread alone is no where told, but that it
is the commemoration or remembrance of the broken body of Christ, and the
communication of that body: But then the chalice is also the remembrance of
Christ's blood powered forth, and the exhibition of that which is for the
remission of sins: and how these two do work that in us which we hope for, we
know not, but that they work as mysteries and Sacraments do work, but not as
herbs, or natural agents, that we may believe.

2. I consider that when Christ appointed to the two Symbols two distinct
significations, 24.
and that we believe that the Sacraments exhibit to worthy communicants what
they represent to all, it must be certain that all Christ, that is, that all
the benefits of Christ are not conveyed by each, which are conveyed by both,
because, as they signify so they exhihite; but they do not each signify what
both together do. The breaking of the body does not signify the effusion of
the blood; neither does the shedding of the blood signify the breaking the
body: and to think that the reduplication of the Symbols is superfluous, is to
charge Christ with impertinency; and if it be not superfluous, then there is
something of real advantage by both, that is not in each. I will not venture to
assign to each their portion of effect: for what they have they have not
naturally, but by Divine donation and appointment, and therefore I will not
take notice that the same chalice is representative and effective of union and
charity, (though that is usual enough in societies and friendships, -- Pylades,
L. 6. ep. 11.
Marce, bibebat idem.) but this I shall observe that the whole effect of the
Sacrament is equally attributed to the worthy receiving the chalice as to that
of the bread; and therefore S. Remy caused these verses to be written on the
chalice, Hauriat hinc populus vitam de sanguine sacro,
Inflicto aeternus quem fudit vulnere Christus.
let the people from hence draw live issuing from the wounds of Christ: now
whatsoever effect is attributed to one is not in exclusion of the other: but in
concomitance with it: and therefore as it would be a strange folly to dispute
what benefit we receive by Christ's flesh distinctly, and how much of our
redemption is wrought by his blood, and it could have no use and no certainty:
so it would be as strange to say there is so much distinctly in the H. bread,
so much in the wine; and it is worse to attribute to one that which can be
employed to exclude the other: and it is certain there can be nothing said of
advantage that either one or the other has; and therefore the chalice may
exclude the bread as well as the H. bread the chalice, both alike, that is,
indeed neither.

But it is to be observed that in this inquiry the question cannot be
concerning the receiving Christ; 25.
but of receiving the Sacraments of Christ, of his body and of his blood. For
we receive Christ in Baptism, and we receive Christ by faith; and yet
nevertheless we are to receive the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood: and
therefore suppose we did receive Christ in the Holy bread, yet that bread is
but the Sacrament of his broken body; and therefore we must also receive the
Sacrament of his blood spilt for us: or else we omit to receive the one half of
the Sacrament: and if the question were only about receiving Christ, we might
pretend the whole Sacrament to be needless, because a spiritual communion, and
faith alone will do that work, but yet faith alone, or the Spiritual communion
does not give us the Sacrament, nor obey Christ in this instance, nor
commemorate and represent his death, which is the duty here inquired of, and
here enjoined.

And therefore the dream of the Church of Rome that he that receives the body,
26.
receives also the blood, because by concomitance, the blood is received in the
body, is neither true nor pertinent to this question. Not true, because the
Eucharist being the Sacrament of the Lords death, that is, of his body broken,
and his blood powered forth, the taking of the Sacrament of the body does not by
concomitance include the blood; because the body is here Sacramentally
represented as slain and separate from blood: and that is so notorious that
some superstitious persons A. D. 490. refused the Chalice, because (said they)
the body of Christ represented in the holy Sacrament exangue est, it is without
blood; but now the Romanists refuse the Chalice because the body is not without
blood: they were both amiss, for it is true the body is represented
Sacramentally as killed, and therefore without blood, which had ran out at the
wounds; and therefore concomitance is an idle and an impertinent dream: but
although the body is without blood in his death; yet because the effusion of
the blood is also Sacramentally to be represented, therefore they should not
omit the Chalice.

But as to them of the Roman Church; 27.
if the blood be in the body by Concomitance, and therefore they who receive
the body receive also the blood; then they who sacrifice the body do also
sacrifice the blood; and then it will be no more necessary to celebrate in both
kinds then to communicate in both, and indeed though the Roman Schools will not
endure that the sacrifice (as they call it) or the consecration should be in
one kind, yet Volaterranus says that P. Innocent the eighth gave leave to the
Norvegians to sacrifice in bread only: certain it is the Priest may as well
do so, as the people receive in one kind, for the people do in their manner
as much celebrate the death of Christ as the Priest, nor he alone, nor they
alone, but the whole action is the due celebration however the argument of
concomitance concludes equally: against the celebration in both kinds, as
against the participation; and why the Priest should be obliged to drink the
chalice and cannot be excused by Concomitance, and yet the people are not
obliged, but are excused by that pretension, abating the reasons of interest,
cannot easily be imagined.

Certain it is they had other thoughts in the Council of Turon; 28.
for when they considered the necessities of sick and dying people, they
appointed the consecrated bread to be sopp'd in the consecrated Chalice; adding
this reason, Ut veraciter Presbyter dicere possit, Corpus and Sanguis Domini
nostri Jesu Christi proficiat tibi in remissionem peccatorum and vitam
aeternam: that the Priest may say truly, The body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ be profitable unto you for the remission of your sins and unto life
eternal. If they had then understood the device of Concomitance, they would
have known that the Priest might have said so truly, without sopping the H.
Bread in the chalice: but the good Fathers had not yet learned the new
Metaphysics.

2. Now for the consequenee of this pretension; 29.
I consider that let the thing be as true as the interested persons would have
it; yet it is not well that we should dispute against a Divine institution upon
a pretense of our vain arguings. The Apostles with great simplicity took in
both kinds at that time in which only the device of concomitance was or could
be true, for then when they received it the blood was in the body of Christ;
but it was Sacramental of the blood to be powered out the next day; however they
obeyed with simplicity and without inquiry, and never feared spilling, nor
argued, nor sought excuses; such simplicity would equally become us: and as to
the usefulness of receiving in both kinds, although it will ill become any man
to argue concerning the usefulness of a Divine institution, and to pretend
excuses against Christ, upon the account of a Philosophy of their own
invention, is very much unlike the spirit of humility and wisdom and
obedience which ought to be the investiture of a Christians heart and the tiar
of his head, yet I observe that even in this particular the disadvantage is not
little.

For if receiving the Sacrament be of any advantage to souls, 10.
then it is certain he that does not receive it is a loser; and yet he that
does not receive the Chalice does not receive the Sacrament, but a piece of it
only; Now in Sacraments half is as good as none: as he who should only dip a
child in pure water, and yet not invocate the Trinity should do nothing at all
with his half Baptism; so it is certain that the effect of a Sacrament is not
imparted by a half Communion. Quaest. 32. memb 1. art 2.
And therefore Alexander of Ales said well, Sumpto hoc Sacramento digne in
utraque specie major est effectus unius corporis mystici cum capite, quam
sumpto sub altera: and in another place he says to receive under both kinds is
majoris meriti tum ratione augmentationis devotionis, Quaest. 53.
tum ratione fidei dilatationis actualis, tum ratione sumptionis completioris:
it is of greater merit or value, there is a greater mystical Union between the
head and the members, a greater increase of devotion, a larger and more actual
extent of faith, and a more complete Sacramental reception of Christ himself.
To the same purpose there are good things spoken in Albertus Magnus 4. Sent.
did 8. art. 13.
, and in Thomas Aquinas 3. part. Sum. q. 66. art. 2.
, Bonaventure ^^ist* 8. q. 2.
, and Petrus de Palude did. 11. art. 1.
, and diverse others, all agreeing that one alone does not make a Sacrament, but
a piece of one, and that there is advantage by both kinds which is not to be
had in one: which advantage if it be spiritual (as it is, if it be at all) then
he that robs the people of a spiritual good which our Blessed Lord has
designed for them and left unto them, is sacrilegious and profane; it is
uncharitable and it is impious. I say it is impious.

For it is not to be despised that our B. Lord gave this Sacrament as his last
will and Testament; 31.
and though he gave it in his body and blood, yet he expressed only the New
testament in his blood; and for any Church to violate the Testament of our B.
Lord, however men may make no great matter of it; yet it will receive a
punishment according as God sets a value upon it; and he that shall pluck one
seal from a Testament, and say that one is as good as two, when two were put to
it by the Testator, cannot be excused by saying it was nothing but a formality
and a ceremony. Gods ceremonies are bound upon us by Gods Commandment; and
what he has made to be a sign, does signify and exhibit too: and as the
brazen serpent though it was but a type or shadow of the H. Crucifixe; yet did
real cures; so can the Symbols and Sacraments of the crucifixion being hallowed
by the Divine institution, and confirmed by his power; and therefore a
violation here is not to be called only a question in a ceremony; it is a
substantial part of the Christian religion, it is the sanction of the New
Testament, Gal. 3. 15.
the last will of our dying Lord. Now if it be but a man's testament, says S.
Paul, yet no man disannulleth or adds thereto: and therefore to disannul or
lessen a portion of the Testament of the Son of God must needs be a high
impiety. Testamentum quia individuum est pro part agnosci and pro part
repudiari non possit, says the law, L. 7. jus nostr. D. de reg. iur. If you
pudiate a part of the will, you must renounce it all; If you permit not to the
people the blood of Christ, you hinder them from having a part in the death of
Christ, so far as lies in you. Add to this; that this Holy mystery being
acknowledged by all to be the most mysterious solemnity of the religion, and by
the Church of Rome affirmed to be a proper sacrifice, and so contended for; it
would be remembered that our B. Savior did adapt, and fit this rite to the
usages and customs both of Jews and Gentiles; amongst whom laws, and
societies, and contracts and sacrifices were made solemn by effusion and
drinking of blood; and instead of blood (amongst the more civil Nations) they
drink wine; and by that were supposed partakers even of the blood of the
Sacrifice. (...) (says Philo) (...). To be drunk, viz. in the Greek has its
name from their drinking wine after their sacrifices: and with this Custom
among the Gentiles, and with the Paschal ceremony of this nature amongst the
Jews our Blessed Lord complying looses the wisdom and prudence of it; if the
Priest shall sacrifice, and the people drink none of the blood of the
sacrifice, or that which ritually and Sacramentally represents it. The covenant
of the Gospel, the covenant which God made with us our Blessed Savior
established and ratified with blood: Wine was made to represent and exhibit
it: He therefore that takes this away, takes away the very Sacramentality of
the mystery, and without blood there is no remission. For as he that gives
bread and no water does not nourish the body but destroy it: so it is in the
Blessed Sacrament: for (that I may use S. Austins expression which Paschasius
and Algerus in this Article did much insist upon) Nec caro sine sanguine, nec
sanguis sine carne jure communicatur. Totus enim homo ex duabus constans
substantiis redimitur, and ideo carne simul and sanguine saginatur. Neither the
flesh without the blood, nor the blood without the flesh is rightly
communicated. For the whole man consisting of two substances is redeemed, and
therefore nourished both with the flesh and the blood. Chrysostom. hom. 18. in 2
Cor.
(...). It is not now as it was in the old Test^ment* where the Priest eat one
portion, the Prince another, and the people another; here it is alike to all,
the same body and the same chalice is to all. L. 2. ep. 3.
I end this inquiry with the saying of S. Cyprian, Si ne unum quidem ex minimis
mandatis legis solvere debet, multo minus ex his magn^ mandatis pertinentibus
ad ipsum Dominicae passionis and nostrae redemptionis Sacramentum fas^ est
ullum infringere, vel humana traditione mutare. If it be not permitted to break
one of the least Commandments of the Law, much less is it to be endured, to
break any one, or by humane tradition to change any belonging to the Sacrament
of our Lords passion and of our redemption: and therefore if ever any Sect or
any single person was guilty of the charge, it is highly to be imputed to the
Church of Rome, that they teach for doctrine the Commandments of men; and make
the Commandment of God of none effect by their tradition.

RULE 10. If the sense of a Law be dubious, we are sometimes to expound it by
Liberty, sometimes by Restraint.
ALthough all he Laws of Jesus Christ are so legible in the sense intended 1.
that all good men being placed in their proper circumstances conducted by the
Divine providence, making use of all their prepared and ready instruments can
certainly read the prime intention and design of God, yet because some laws are
so combined with matter and twisted with material cases, so intricated by the
accidents of men and the investiture of actions, that they cast a cloud upon
the light of Gods word, and a veil upon the Guide of our lives; and because the
sense of words do change, and very often words cannot be equal with things, it
comes to pass that the laws are capable of differing senses; when therefore any
thing of this Nature happens; the first sense of the words is either to be
enlarged or restrained according to the following measures.

In what cases the stricter sense of the laws of Christ is to be followed.

1. When the duty enjoined by the law is in deliberation, 2.
and is to be done, we are to use restraint, and take the severer sense of the
Law. The reason is because that is the surer way, and has in it no
inconvenience or impossibility; but being it is the matter of choice, in all
deliberation for the future we must give sentence for God, and for the interest
of Religion This when it is commanded we should judge our selves that we be not
judged of the Lord; in the inquiry which every peni^ent man makes concerning
the extension of the duty of judging our selves,, if the question be whether
judging our selves means only to condemn our selves for having sinned, and to
confess our selves justly liable to the Divine judgment; or does it also mean,
to punish our selves, and by putting our own sentence against our sin into a
severe execution of that sentence upon our selves by corporal inflictions; he
that can no otherwise be determined in the question, can safely proceed by
chosing the severer side: for there is no loss in it, no omission, it contains
all that any man can think to be required, and therefore has in it prudence
and charity, caution and regard, to God and to himself.

2. This is not to be understood only in case there is a doubt no otherwise to
be resolved but by the collateral advantage of the surer side; 3.
but this severer sense of the law is of it self most reasonable to be chosen,
as being the intended sense and design of the Lawgiver, who certainly puts no
positive measures to his own laws of love and duty. For since the great design
of the law is such a perfect on which must for ever be growing in this world,
and can never here arrive to its state and period, that sense which sets us
most forward is the most intended; and therefore this way is not only to quiet
the doubt, but to govern and to rule the Conscience: This is not only the
surer way, but the only way that is directly intended. It is agreeable to the
measures of charity, or the love of God, which is to have no other bounds, but
even the best we can in the measures of God and the infirmities and capacities
of man.

3. In the interpretation of the laws of Christ, 4.
the strict sense is to be followed when the laws relate to God and to
religion, and contain in them direct matter of piety and glorifications of God,
or charity to our Neighbor, because in them the further we go, the nearer we
are to God, and we are not at all to be stopped in that progression till we are
at our journeys end, till we are in the state of comprehension. To this purpose
are those words of Ben-Sirach, Ecclus. 43. 30, 31, 32.
When you glorify the Lord, exalt him as much as you can, for even yet will he
far exceed, and when you exalt him put forth all your strength, and be not
weary, for you can never go far enough. Who has seen him that he might tell
us, and who can magnify him as he is? There are hid greater things yet then
these be, for we have seen but a few of his works, meaning, that although we
cannot glorify God sufficiently for the works of power and mercy which we see
and feel, yet because there are very many works which we see not, and infinite
numbers and seas of glories above the clouds, which we perceive not and cannot
understand, the only measures of Religion and the love of God which we are to
take, is to pray continually, to love God always, to serve him without end, to
be zealous beyond all measures, excepting those of duty and prudence, to be
religious without a limit, always to desire, always to endeavor, never to
rest as long as we can work, never to give over as long as any thing is
unfinished, and consequent or Symbolical to all this, that in all disputes of
Religion we choose the sense of love, not of weariness, that we do not contend
for the lesser measures, but strive in all our faculties and desire beyond
their strength, and propound Christ for our precedent, and heaven for our
reward, and infinity for our measures toward which we are to set forth by our
active and quick endeavor, and to which we are to reach by our constancy and
desires, our love and the divine acceptance.

When the laws of Christ are to be expounded to a sense of ease and liberty?

If to the sense of the duty there be a collateral and indirect burden and evil
appendage, 5.
and the alleviating of that burden is to be an ingredient into the
interpretation of the law, and the direct duty is to be done in such measures
as may do the most good with suffering the least evil. This happens in two
cases:

1. If the strict and severer sense of the law be too great for the state and
strength of the man, 6.
that is, if it be apt to make him despair, to make him throw away his burden:
to make him tire, to be weary of, and to hate religion, his infirmities are to
be pitied, and the severest sense of the law is not to be exacted of him.
Apices juris non sunt jus, say the Lawyers: The little punctilios and minutes
of law are not law; because if our duty be extended to every little tittle of
duty it were necessary that our observation and attendance should be as
particular and punctual; but because that cannot always be actual and intent,
particular and incumbent, those things which insensibly pass by the observation
of a diligent watchful person, do also inculpably pass by the man. But of
this I have already given accounts in another place Doctrine and practice of
Repentance. c. 3.
. For the present I further consider, that charity being the great end of the
law, and every law being a design of making a man happy, every Commandment of
God is then best understood when it is made to do most good, and rescued from
being an occasion of evil. The Government of Jesus Christ is most paternal and
serene: his Rod is not heavy, his Commandments are not grievous, his bands are
not snares; but they are holiness, and they are liberty, they are glory to God,
and good will toward men.

But this at no hand means that any material or integral part of duty can be
omitted, 7.
and the omission indulged in compliance with any man's infirmity or danger, for
the law is to be our measure, our weaknesses cannot be the measure of the
integrity of the law; That infirmity by which we omit any part of du^y is a
sta^e of sin; and God who knew all our infirmities and possibilities or
impossibilities of obedience, complied sufficiently in the Sanction of the law,
and imposed no more burden then was even with our powers, and therefore for
what remains we must stoop our shoulder and bear the burden which Gods wisdom
made reasona^le and tolerable, and our necessity and interest makes
unavoidable, and love will make easy and delectable.

But the burden which can be lessened is the burden of degrees of intension or
any thing which consists not in a mathematical point, 8.
but is capable of growth: whatsoever is of such a nature as is always to
increase in this life, in that such abatements may be made as will fit the
person and the state; and no man is to be quarreld at for degrees in the
beginn^ngs, or in the first progressions of his piety, only he is to be invited
on by proper and fair inducements, and if he stands still always as he is to
be suspected for want of love, so he is to be warned of his danger, and thrust
forward by the memory of the best examples. Thus it may not upon any terms be
permitted to any weak person to do an act of injustice, to blaspheme God, to
reproach his Father, to be wanton, he may not be allowed to slander his
Brother, to neglect his children, to despise his wife, to part from her because
he is weary of her, for fear the not indulging any thing of this nature to him
should provoke him to anger against the Religion. We may not give easy answers
in cases of Conscience, or promise heaven to them that live evil lives, for
fear that our severity should make them forsake our Communion and go to the
Roman Church; that is, we must not allow any man to do one evil to hinder him
from another, or give leave to him to break one Commandment that we may
preserve another. But of this I have already given more particular account Vide
Book 1. Chapt. 5. Rul. 8. n. 16. etc. usque ad finem.
. That which at present I intend is, that no sin or omission of duty is to be
permitted, no law of Christ is to be expounded to comply with us against God,
but when a less severe sense is within the limits of duty, that our weaknesses
are to be complied withal is affirmed as being most charitable and necessary.
Thus if i^ be inquired whether our sorrow for our sins ought to be punitive and
vindictive, sharp and sensible as the perception of any temporal evil, as the
sorrow of a Mother for the death of her only child this being a question of
degrees which cannot consist in an indivisible point, is never limited and
determinate; any degree that can consist with the main duty may be permitted to
him whose necessity requires such indulgence; and if he be sorrowful in such a
degree as to move him to pray passionately and perseveringly for pardon, to
beget in him a wise and a wary caution against temptation, to produce in him
hatred against sin, and dereliction of it, a war and a victory, the death of
sin, and the life of righteousness, the penitent is not to be prejudiced by the
degree of his sorrow, or the thickness of its edge, and the Commandment is so
to be expounded, as to secure the duty and secure the man too: and if he be
told that a less degree of sorrow then the supreme will not serve his turn,
and that the Commandment is to be expounded in the greatest and severest
measures, he that finds this impossible to him, will let it all alone, for as
good never a whit as never the better; but then, he that tells him so, has
laid a snare for his Brothers foot, and binds upon his shoulder a burden too
heavy for him. For to what purpose can we imagine that there should be a
latitude in the Commandment, and yet no use to be made of the least degree?
and if God cherishes the babes in Christ, and is pleased in every step of our
progression, then it is certain that they who are but babes are to be treated
accordingly, and the Commandment is to be acted by the proportions of the man.
* But then if the question be concerning the integrity of the Repentance, he
that is troubled at heart because he is told that a resolution to leave sin is
not enough, that without restitution there is no repentance; he that will kick
at Religion because it requires all the duties which integrate the
Commandment, is not to be complied with, nor permitted to his folly. * I have
read of a Gentleman who being on his deathbed and his Confessor searching and
dressing of his wounded Soul, was found to be obliged to make restitution of a
considerable sum of Money, with the diminution of his estate. His Confessor
found him desirous to be saved, a lover of his religion, and yet to have a
kindness for his estate, which he desired might be entirely transmitted to his
beloved Heir: he would serve God with all his heart, and repented him of his
sin, of his rapine and injustice, he begged for pardon passionately, he humbly
hoped for mercy, he resolved in case he did recover, to live strictly, to love
God, to reverence his Priests, to be charitable to the poor* but to make
restitution he found impossible to him, and he hoped the Commandment would not
require it of him, and desired to be releeved by an e^sy and a favorable
interpretation, for it is ten thousand pities so many good actions and good
purposes should be in vain, but it is worse, infinitely worse* if the man
should perish. What should the Confessor do in this case? shall not the man be
releeved; and his piety be accepted? or shall the rigor and severity of the
Confessor, and his scrupulous fears and impertinent niceness cast away a Soul
either in future misery, or present discomfort; neither one ^or other was to be
done; and the good man was only to consider what God had made necessary, not
what the vices of his penitent and his present follies should make so. Well!
the Priest insists upon his first resolution, Non dimittitur peccatum nisi
restituatur ablatum: The sick man could have no ease by the loss of a duty. The
poor Clinick desires the Confessor to deal with his Son and try if he could be
made willing that his Father might go to Heaven at the charge of his Son,
which when he had attempted, he was answered with extreme rudenesses and
injurious language; which caused great trouble to the Priest and to the dying
Father. At last the religious man found out this device, telling his penitent,
that unless by corporal penances the^e could be made satisfaction in exchange
for restitution he knew no hopes, but because the profit of the estate which
was obliged to restitution was to descend upon the Son, he thought something
might be hoped if by way of commutation the Son would hold his finger in a
burning candle for a quarter of an hour. The glad Father being overjoyed at
this loophole of eternity, this glimpse of heaven, and the certain retaining of
the whole estate, called to his Son, t^^d him the condition and the advantages
to them both, making no question but he would gladly undertake the penance. But
the Son with indignation replied he would not endure so much torture to save
the whole estate. To which the Priest espying his advantage made this quick
return to the Old man, Sir, if your Son will not for a quarter of an hour
endure the pains of a burning finger to save your Soul, will you to save a
portion of the estate for him endure the flames of Hell to eternal ages? The
unreasonableness of the odds, and the ungratefulness of the Son, and the
importunity of the Priest, and the fear of Hell, and the indispensable
necessity of restitution awakened the old Man from his lethargy, and he bowed
himself to the Rule, made restitution, and had hopes of pardon and present
comfort.

2. The other case in which the law is to be expounded to the sense of ease and
liberty is when the question is concerning outward actions, 9.
or the crust and outsides of Religion. For the Christian Religion being wholly
Spiritual, and being ministered to by bodily exercises, and they being but
significations of the inward, not at all pleasing to God for themselves, but as
they edify, instruct, or do advantages to men, they are in all cases to be
exacted, but in such proportions as can consist with charity, which is the life
of Religion: and therefore if a Soul be in danger to be tempted, or
overburden'd with a bodily exercise if there be hazard that all Religion will
be hated, and that the man will break the yoke if he be pinched in his skin, it
is better to secure the great and internal pr^nciple of obedience, then the
external instance and expression. This Caution is of use in the injunction of
fasting days, and external acts of mortification, which are indeed effects of
the laws of Christ, but the measures of these laws are to be such as consist
with the great end of the laws, that is, mercy and internal Religion. And the
great reason of this is; because all external actions are really such as
without our fault they may be hindered; there may be some accidents and causes
by which they shall not be at all, and there may be many more by which they may
be eased and lessened. An external accident, or a corporal infirmity is to be
complied withal in the matter of external m^nisteries; that is, when there is
mercy in it: and so must every virtue and inward grace, because it is for the
interest of Religion. Now what must be permitted in the action ought to be so
in the sentence, and that is the meaning of the law which is either commanded
to the strong or indulged to the weak. Add to this, that outward actions of
Religion are for the weak, not for the strong; they are to minister to weakness
and infirmities, and by bodily expressions to invite forward, to entertain, to
ferment, to endear the spirit of a man to the purposes of God; but even the
body it self shall be spiritual, and it is intended that it shall wholly
minister to God in spiritual services hereafter. In the mean time, by outward
acts it does something Symbolical, or at least expressive of the inward duty.
But therefore if the external do disserve the Spirit of God by oppressing the
spirit of the man; that whose Nature and institution is wholly instrumental
must be made to comply with the end; and therefore must stand there when it is
apt to minister to it, but must go away if it hinders it.

3. In the interpretation of the laws of Christ to a sense of ease and liberty,
10.
there must be no limits and lessenings described beforehand; or in general;
because any such proceeding would not only be destitute of that reason which
warrants it in some cases, but would evacuate the great purpose of the law in
all: that is, it would be more then what is necessary to comply with new and
accidental necessities, and to others it would be less then what is intended in
the law, it would either tie the weak to impossibilities, or give leave to the
strong to be negligent and unprofitable; it would command too much or permit
too much; it would either hold the bridle too hard, or break it all in pieces.
But the interpretation and ease must be as accidental as the cause that
inforces it, or the need that invites it; that is, every law of Christ intends
that we should obey it in the perfection, that we should do it in the best way
we can; and every man must do so; but because all cannot do alike, every man's
best is alike in the event, but not in the action; and therefore the law which
is made for man must mean no more then every man can do; but because no man is
to be supposed to be in disorder and weakness, till he be found to be so,
therefore beforehand no compliance or easy interpretation is to be made of the
degrees of duty.

4. No laws of Christ are to suffer diminution of interpretation in the degrees
to persons that make themselves weak, 11.
that they may bear but a little burden: but the gentler sentence and sense of
laws is to be applied to ease the weary and the afflicted, him that desires
much and can do but little; to him that loves God and loves religion; to him
that endeavors heartily, and inquires diligently, and means honestly; to him
that has every thing but strength, and wants nothing but growth and time, and
good circumstances and the prosperities of piety. The best indications of which
state of persons are these:

Who are truly and innocently weak and to be complied with?

1. They are to be complied with who are new beginners in religion, 12.
or the uninstructed; they who want strengths not by reason of any habitual
sin, but by the nature of beginnings and new changes; for none can more
innocently pretend to a forbearance and sufferance, then those who have the
weakness of infancy. But I added also that the uninstructed have the same
pretension, for according as their degrees of ignorance are, so are the degrees
of their excusable infirmity. But then by uninstructed is only meant such who
have not heard, or could not learn; not such who are ever learning and never
sufficiently taught; that is, such who love to hear but not to be doers of the
word, such who are perverse and immorigerous, such who serve a humor or an
interest, an opinion or a peevish Sect in their learning. For there are some
who have spent much time in the inquiries of religion, whom if you call
ignorant they suppose themselves injured; and yet will require the privileges
and complyances of the weak: these men trouble others, and therefore are not to
be eased themselves; their weakness of state is the impotency of passion, and
therefore they must not rejoice in that by which they make others grieved.

2. They are to be complied with according to the foregoing measures who in all
things where they know and can, 13.
do their hearty endeavors, and make no abatement to themselves, but with
diligence and sincerity prosecute their duty. For this diligence and sincerity
is a competent Testimony that the principle of their necessity is not evil but
innocent and unavoidable. Whatsoever is not an effect of idleness or
peevishness may come in upon a fair, but always comes in upon a pityable
account; and therefore is that Subject which is capable of all that case of
rigor and severity which the wise Masters of assemblies and interpreters of
the Divine laws do allow to any persons in any cases.

3. The last sign of Subjects capable of ease is infirmity of body; 14.
and that is a certain disposition to all the mercies and remissions of the law
in such cases as relate to the body and are instanced in external ministeries.
To which also is to be referred disability of estate in duties of exterior
charity; which are to be exacted according to the proportions of men's civil
power, taking in the needs of their persons and of their relations, their
calling and their quality, and that God intends it should be so appears in
this; because all outward duties are so enjoined that they can be supplied, and
the internal grace instanced in other actions, of which there are so many kinds
that some or other can be done by every one; and yet there is so great variety
that no man or but very few men can do all. I instance in the several ways of
mortification, viz. by fastings, by watchings and pernoctations in prayer,
lyings on the ground, by toleration and patience, laborious gestures of the
body in prayer, standing with arms extended, long kneelings on the bare ground,
suffering contradiction and affronts, lessenings and undervaluings, peevish and
cross accidents, denying our selves lawful pleasures, refusing a pleasant
morsel, leaving society and meetings of friends, and very many things of the
like Nature; by any of which the body may be mortified and the Soul
disciplined: or the outward act may be supplied by an active and intense love
which can do every thing of duty: So also it is in alms, which some do by
giving money to the poor; some by comforting the afflicted, some by givi^g
silver and gold, others which have it not, do yet do greater things: but
since it matters not what it is we are able to do, so that we do but what we
are able, it matters not how the grace be instanced, so that by all the
instances we can, we do minister to the grace, it follows, that the law can be
made to bend in any thing of the external instance so that the inward grace be
not neglected; but therefore it is certain that because every thing of matter
can by matter be hindered; and a string or a chain of Iron can hinder all the
duty of the hand and foot, God who imposes and exacts nothing that is
impossible, is contented that the obedience of the Spirit be secured, and the
body must obey the law as well as it can.

But there are some other considerations to be added to the main Rule.

5. When the action is already done, 15.
and that there is no further deliberation concerning the direct duty, yet the
law is not at all to be eased and lessened, if there be a deliberation
concerning the collateral and accidental duty of Repentance: and this is upon
the same reasons as the first limitation of the rule. for when a duty is to be
done, and a deliberation to be had, we are in perfect choice, and therefore we
are to answer for God and for Religion, and this is all one, whether the
inquiry be made in the matter of inocence or repentance, that is, in the
preventing of a sin or curing of it. For we are in all things tied to as great
a care of our duty after we have once broken it as before; and in some things
to a greater; and repentance is nothing but a new beginning of our duty, a
going from our error, and a recovery of our loss, and a restitution of our
health, and a being put into the same estate from whence we were fallen; so
that at least all the same severities are to be used in repentance, as great a
rigor of sentence, as strict a caution, as careful a walking, as humble and
universal an obedience, besides the sorrow and the relative parts of duty which
come in upon the account of our sin.

6. But if the inquiry be made after the sin is done, 16.
and that there is no deliberation concerning any present or future duty, but
concerning the hopes or state of pardon, then we may hope that God will be
easy to give us pardon, according to the gentlest sense and measures of the
law. For this, provided it be not brought into evil example in the measures of
duty afterward, can have in it no danger: it is matter of hope, and therefore
keeps a man from despair; but because it is but matter of hope, therefore it is
not apt to abuse him into presumption, and if it be mistaken in the measures of
the law, yet it makes it up upon the account of Gods mercy, and it will be all
one; either it is Gods mercy in making an easy sense of the law, or Gods mercy
in giving an easy sentence on the man, or Gods mercy in easing and taking off
the punishment, and that will be all one as to the event, and therefore will be
a sufficient warrant for our hope, because it will some way or other come to
pass as we hope. It is all alike whether we be saved because God will exact no
more of us, or because though he did exact more by his law yet he will pardon
so much the more in the sentence: But this is of use only to them who are
tempted to despair, or oppressed by too violent fears; and it relies upon all
the lines of the Divine mercy, and upon all the arguments of comfort by which
declining hopes use to be supported: and since we our selves by observing our
incurable infirmities espy some necessities of having the law read in the
easier sense, we do in the event of things find that we have a need of pardon
greater then we could think we should in the heats of our first conversion and
the fervors of our newly returning piety; and therefore God does not only see
much more reason to pity us upon the same account; but upon diverse others, some
whereof we know and some we know not; but therefore we can hope for more then
we yet see in the lines of Revelation, and possibly we may receive in many
cases better measure then we yet hope for: but whoever makes this hope to
lessen his duty will find himself ashamed in his hope; for no hope is
reasonable but that which quickens our piety, and hastens and perfects our
repentance, and purifies the Soul, and engages all the powers of action, and
ends in the love of God, and in a holy life.

7. There are many other things to be added by way of assistance to them who
are pressed with the burden of a law severely apprehended, 17.
or unequally applied, or not rightly understood; but the sum of them is this.

1. If the sense be hidden or dubious, do nothing till the cloud be off, and
the doubt be removed.

2. If the law be indifferent to two senses, take that which is most pious and
most holy.

3. If it be between two, but not perfectly indifferent, follow that which is
most probable.

4. Do after the custom and common usages of the best and wisest men.

5. Do with the most, and speak with the least.

6. Ever bend thy determination to comply with the analogy of faith, and the
common measures of good life, and the glorifications and honor of God, and the
utility of our Neighbor.

7. Then chose thy part of obedience, and do it cheerfully and confidently,
with a great industry and a full persuasion.

8. After the action is done enter into no new disputes whether it was lawful
or no, unless it be upon new instances and new arguments, relating to what is
to come, and not troubling thy self with that which with prudence and
deliberation thou did (as things were then represented) well and wisely chose.

RULE 11. The positive laws of Jesus Christ cannot be dispensed with by any
humane power.
I Have already in this book given account of the indispensability of the
Natural laws which are the main constituent parts of the Evangelical: 1.
but there are some positive laws whose reason is not natural nor eternal,
Chap. 1. R^^ 12.
which yet Christ has superinduced; concerning which there is great question
made whether they be dispensable by humane power. Now concerning these I say
that all laws given by Christ are now made for ever to be obligatory, and he is
the King of heaven and earth, the Head and Prince of the Catholic Church, and
therefore has supreme power, and he is the wonderful Counselor, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, and his wisdom is supreme, he is the
wisdom of the Father, and therefore he has made his laws so wisely, so
agreeably to the powers and accidents of mankind that they can be observed by
all men and all ways, where he has passed an obligation. Now because every
dispensation of laws must needs suppose an infirmity or imperfection in the law
or an infirmity in the man, that is, that either the law did infer
inconvenience which was not foreseen, or was unavoidable; or else the law meets
with the changes of mankind with which it is not made in the sanction to
comply, and therefore must be forced to yield to the needs of the man* and
stand aside till that necessity be past: it follows that in the laws of the H.
Jesus there is no dispensation; because there is in the law no infirmity and no
incapacity in the man: for every man can always obey all that which Christ
commanded and exacted: I mean he has no natural impotency to do any act that
Christ has required, and he can never be hindered from doing of his duty.

And this appears in this, 2.
because God has appointed a harbor whether every vessel can put in when he
meets with storms and contrary winds abroad: and when we are commanded by a
persecuter not to obey God, we cannot be forced to comply with the evil man;
for we can be secure against him by suffering what he pleases, and therefore
disobedience to a law of Christ cannot be made necessary by any external
violence: I mean every internal act is not in it self impedible by outward
violence: and the external act which is made necessary can be secured by a
resolution to obey God rather then men.

2. 3.
But there are some external actions and instances of a Commandment which may
accidentally become impossible by subtraction of the material part; so for want
of water a child cannot be baptized; for want of wine or bread we cannot
communicate; which indeed is true, but do not infer that therefore there is
a power of dispensing left in any man or company of men; because in such cases
there is no law, and therefore no need of dispensation; For affirmative
precepts in which only there can be an external impediment do not oblige but
in their proper circumstances and possibilities: and thus it is even in human
laws. No law obliges beyond our power; and although it be necessary sometimes
to get a dispensation even in such cases, to rescue our selves from the malice
or the carelessness, the ignorance or the contrary interests of the ministers
of justice, who go by the words of the law, and are not competent or nor
instructed judges in the matter of necessity or excuse, yet there is no such
need in the laws of God. For God is always just and always wise, he knows
when we can and when we cannot, and therefore as he cannot be deceived by
ignorance, so neither can he oppress any man by injustice, and we need not have
leave to let a thing alone, which we cannot do if we would never so fain; and
if we cannot obey, we need not require of God a warrant under his hand or an
act of indemnity; for which his justice and his goodness, his wisdom and his
very Nature are infinite security: and therefore it cannot be necessary to the
Church that a power of dispensing should be entrusted to Men, in such cases
where we cannot suppose the law of God to bind. That's our best security that we
need no dispensation.

3. 4.
In external actions and instances of virtue or of obedience to a Commandment
of Jesus Christ where ever there can be a hinderance, if the obligation does
remain, the instance that is hindered can be supplied with another of the same
kind. Thus releeving the poor hungry man, can be hindered by my own poverty and
present need, but I can visit him that is sick, though I cannot feed the
hungry, or I can give him bread when I cannot give him a cloak; and therefore
there can need no dispensation when the Commandment if it be hindered in one
instance can as perfectly and to all the intentions of our lawgiver be
performed in another.

4. In external actions which can be hindered and which cannot be supplied by
the variety of the instances in the same kind, 5.
yet if the obligation remains, they may be supplied with the internal act, and
with the spiritual. Thus if we cannot receive actual baptism, the desire of it
is accepted, and he that communicates spiritually, that is, by faith and
charity, by inward devotion and hearty desire, is not guilty of the breach of
the Commandment if he does not communicate sacramentally, being unavoidably
and inculpably hindered. For whatsoever is not in our power, cannot be under a
(...), and where we do not consent to the breach of a Commandment, we cannot
be exposed to the punishment. This is the voice of all the world, and ^^^s is
natural reason, and the ground of justice, without which there can be no
Government but what is Tyrannical and unreasonable. These things being
notorious and confessed the consequents are these:

1. 6.
That there is no necessity that a power of dispensing in the positive laws of
Christ should be entrusted to any man, or to any society. Because the law needs
it not, and the Subjects need it not: and he that dispenses must either do it
when there is cause, or when there is none. If he dispenses when there is no
cause, he makes himself superior to the power of God by exercising dominion
over his laws: If he dispenses when there is cause, he dispenses when there is
no need. For if the Subject can obey, he must obey, and man cannot untie what
God has bound: but if he cannot obey, he is not bound, and therefore needs not
be untyed: he may as well go about to unbend a strait line, or to number that
which is not, as to dispense in a law, to which in such cases God exacts no
obedience.

C. proposuit. de concess. praebend. ^. 20.
Panormitan affirms that the Pope has power to dispense in all the laws of
God, 7.
except in the Articles of faith; and to this purpose he cites Innocentius in
c. Cum ad Monasterium, de statu Monachorum. In c. quae in Eccles. inconst. n.
19, 20.
Felinus affirms that the Pope can change the form of Baptism, and that he
can with one word, and without all solemnity consecrate a Priest, and that he
can by his word alone make a Bishop: and though these pretenses are insolent
and strange, yet in fact he does as much as this comes to: for the Pope gives
leave sometimes to a mere Priest to give confirmation, which by divine right is
only belonging to Bishops by their own confession: That the Blessed Eucharist
is to be consecrated in both kinds is certainly of Divine right; and so
confessed by the Church of Rome: but the Pope has actually dispensed in this
article and given leave to some to consecrate in bread only, and particularly
to the Norvegians a dispensation was given by Innocent the eighth, as I have
already noted out of Volaterranus.

There are some learned men amongst them who speak in this question with less
scandal, 8.
but almost with the same intentions and effects. Some of their Divines, Can^s
re^ect. (...) 5. ad finem.
particularly the Bishop of the Canaries, says that the Pope has not power to
dispense in the whole, or in all the laws of God, but in some only; namely
where the observation of the law is impeditiva majoris boni, a hindrance or
obstruction to a greater Spiritual good; as it may happen in oaths and vows:
and ( Sanchez adds) in the consecration of the Blessed Sacrament in both
kinds: in these, say they, the Pope can dispense: But where the observation of
the laws in the particular brings no evil, or inconvenience, and does never
hinder a greater good, there the laws are indispensable; such as are
Confession, Baptism, using a set form of words in the ministration of the
Sacraments. So that the meaning is, the Pope never wants a power to do it, if
there be not wanting an excuse to color it, and then in effect the Divines
agree with the Lawyers; for since the power of dispensing is given in words
indefinite and without specification of particulars (if it be given at all;)
the authority must be unlimited as to the person, and can be limited only by
the incapacity of the matter; and if there could be any inconvenience in any
law, there might be a dispensation in it: So that the Divines and the Lawyers
differ only in the instances; which if we should consider, or if any great
interest could be served by any, there can be no doubt but it would be found a
sufficient cause of dispensation. So that this is but to cozen mankind with a
distinction to no purpose; and to affirm that the Pope cannot dispense in such
things which yield no man any good or profit: such as is the using a set form
of words in Baptism, or the like; and they may at an easy rate pretend the
Popes power to be limited, when they only restrain him from violating a Divine
law, when either the observation of it is for his own advantage, as in
Confession (meaning to a Priest) or when it serves the interest of no man to
have it changed, as in the forms of Sacraments.

But then, 9.
that I may speak to the other part; to say that the Pope may dispense in a
Divine law when the particular observation does hinder a greater spiritual
good, and that this is a sufficient cause is a proposition in all things false,
and in some cases, even in those where they instance, very dangerous. It is
false, because if a man can by his own act be obliged to do a thing which yet
is impeditive of a greater temporal good, then God can by his law oblige his
obedience, though accidentally it hinder a greater spiritual good. Now if a man
have promised, he must keep it though it were to his own hindrance, said David;
and a man may not break his oath though the keeping of it hinder him from many
spiritual comforts and advantages; Psalm. 15.
nay a man may neglect a spiritual advantage for a temporal necessity; and in
the Bohemian wars, the King had better been at the head of his Troops, then
at a Sermon when Prague was taken.

* But I consider (for that is also very material) that it is dangerous. For
whenmen to justify a pretense or to verify an action or to usurp a power
shall pretend that there is on the other side a greater Spiritual good they may
very easily deceive others, because either voluntarily or involuntarily they
deceive themselves, for when God has given a Commandment, who can say that to
let it alone can do more good to a man's Soul then to keep it? I instance in a
particular which is of great interest with them. If a man have vowed to a woman
to marry her, and contracted himself to her per verba de praesenti; she
according to her duty loves him passionately, has married her very Soul to
him, and her heart is bound up in his: but he changes his mind, and enters into
religion: but stops at the very gate and asks who shall warrant him for the
breach of his faith and vows to his Spouse? The Pope answers he will; and
though by the law of God he be tied to that woman, yet because the keeping of
that vow would hinder him from doing God better service in religion this is a
sufficient cause for him to dispense with his vow. This then is the case
concerning which I inquire: 1.
1. How does it appear that to enter into a monastery is absolutely a greater
Spiritual good then to live chastely with the wife of his love and vows? 2.
2. I inquire whether to break a man's vow be not of it self (abstracting from
all extrinsecal pretensions and collateral inducements) a very great sin? and
if there were not a great good to follow the breach of it, I demand whether
could the Pope dispense or give leave to any man to do it? If he could, then
it is plain he can give leave to a man to do a very great evil; for without
the accidentally consequent good, it is confessed to be very evil to break our
lawful vows. But if he cannot dispense with his vow unless some great good were
to follow upon the breach of it, then it is clear he can give leave to a man to
do evil that good may come of it. For if without such a reason or such a
consequent good the Pope could not dipense, then the consequent good does
legitimate the dispensation, and either an evil act done for a good end is
lawful and becomes good, or else the Pope plainly gives him leave to do that
which is still remaining evil, for a good end: either of which is intolerable,
and equally against the Apostles Rule, which is also a rule of natural religion
and reason: No man must do evil for a good end. * But then, 3.
3. who can assure me that an act of religion is better then an act of justice?
or that God will be served by doing my wife an injury? or that he will accept
of me a new vow which is perfectly a breaking of an old? or that by our vows to
our wives we are not as much obliged to God as by our Monastical vows before
our Abbot? or that marriage is not as great an act of religion if wisely and
holily undertaken (as it ought to be) as the taking the habit of S. Francis? or
that I can be capable of giving my self to religion when I have given the right
and power of my self away to another? or that I may not as well steal from a
man to give alms to the poor, as wrong my wife to give my self to a Cloister?
or that he can ever give himself to religion, who breaks the religion of vows
and promises, of justice and honor, of faith and the Sacramental mystery that
he may go into religion? or that my retirement in a cloister, and doing all
that is these intended can make recompense for making my wife miserable, and it
may be desperate and calamitous all her life time? Can God be delighted with my
prayers which I offer to him in a cloister, when it may be at the same time my
injured Spouse is praying to God to do her justice and to avenge my perjuries
upon my guilty head, and it may be, cries loud to God and weeps and curses
night and day? who can tell which is better, or which is worse? For marriage
and single life of themselves are indifferent to piety or impiety, they may be
used well, or abused to evil purposes; but if they take their estimate by the
event, no man can beforehand tell which would have been the greater spiritual
good. But suppose it as you list, yet,

I consider that when God says that obedience is better then Sacrifice, 11.
he has plainly told us that no pretense of Religion, or of a greater
spiritual good can legitimate vow-breach, or disobedience to a divine
Commandment: and therefore either the Pope must dispense in all laws of
Christ, and without all reason, that is, by his absolute authority and
supereminency over the law and the power that established it, or else he cannot
dispense at all; for there is no reason that can legitimate our disobedience.

But then if we consider the Authority it self, 12.
the considerations will be very material. No man pretends to a power of
dispensing in the law of God but the Pope only; and he only upon pretense of
the words spoken to S. Peter, Matthew. 16. 19.
Whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Now did ever
any of the Apostles or Apostolical men suppose that S. Peter could in any case
dispense with vow-breach, or the violation of a lawful oath? Was not all that
power which was then promised to him wholly relative to the matter of Fraternal
correption? and was it not equally given to the Apostles? for either it was
never performed to S. Peter, or else it was alike promised and performed to all
the Apostles in the donation of the Spirit, Matthew. 18. 18. John 20. 23.
and of the power of binding, and the words of Christ to them before and after
his resurrection: so that by certain consequence of this, either all the
successors of the Apostles have the same power, or none of the Successors of
S. Peter. Or if the Successors of S. Peter only, why not his successors at
Antioch as well as his Suceessors at Rome? since it is certain that he was at
Antioch, but is not so certain that he was at all at Rome, for those things
that Ulrichus Velenus says against it in a Tractate on purpose on that Subject
and published by Goldastus in his third Tome are not inconsiderable allegations
and arguments for the Negative, but I shall give account of that inquiry in
some of the following pages. And yet suppose he was, yet it is as likely, that
is, as certain as the other; that after the Martyrdom of S. Peter and S. Paul
there were two Bishops or Popes of Rome; as it is conjectured by the different
Catalogues of the first successions, and by their differing Presidencies or
Episcopacies, one being over the Circumcision and the other over the
Uncircumcision (if I say they were at all, concerning which I have no occasion
to interpose my sentence.) But if either this gift was give in common to all
the Apostles, or if it was given personally to S. Peter, or if it means only
the power of Discipline over sinners and penitent persons, or if it does not
mean to destroy all justice and humane contracts, to rescind all the laws of
God and man, to make Christ's laws Subject to Christ's Minister, and Christ's
Kingdom to be the Popes inheritance and possession, in alto Dominio, if those
words of Christ to S. Peter are so to be understood as that his Subjects and
servants shall still be left in those rights which he has given and confirmed
and sanctified, then it follows undeniably that S. Peter's power of the keys is
not to be a pick lock of the laws of his Master, but to bind men to the
performance of them, or to the punishment of breaking them, and if by those
words of [ Whatsoever thou shall loose] it be permitted to loose and untie the
band of oaths and vows, then they may also mean a power of loosing any man's
life, or any man's right, or any man's word, or any man's oath, or any man's
obligation solemn, or unsolemn, when he has really an interest or reason so to
do, of which reason himself only can be the warrantable Judge: which things
because they are unsufferably unreasonable, that pretense which inferrs such
evils and such impieties must be also unsufferable and impossible.

I conclude therefore with this distinction. 13.
There is a proper dispensation, that is, such a dispensation as supposes the
obligation remaining upon that person who is to be dispensed with: but no man
or society of men can in this sense dispense with any law of Christ. But there
is a dispensation improperly so called, which does not suppose a remanent
obligation, and therefore pretends not to take away any, but supposes only a
doubt remaining whether the law does by Gods intention oblige or no? He that
has skill and authority, and reason to declare that in such special cases God
intended not to oblige the Conscience, has taken away the doubt, and made that
to become lawful which without such a declaration by reason of the remaining
doubt was not so. This is properly an interpretation; but because it has the
same effect upon the man which the other has directly upon the law, therefore
by Divines and Lawyers it is sometimes also called a Dispensation, but
improperly.

But the other Consequent arising from the first observations which I made upon
this Rule is this; 14.
That as there is no necessity that there should be any dispensation in the
laws of Jesus Christ; so in those cases where there may be an improper
dispensation, that is, an interpretation or declaration that the law in this
case does not bind at all, no man must by way of equity or condescension and
expedient appoint any thing that the law permits not, or declare that a part of
the law may be used; when the whole is in the institution. For example; The
Norvegians complaind that they could very seldom get any wine into their
Country, and when it did come it was almost vinegar or vappe; He who had reason
and authority might then certainly have declared that the precept of
consecrating did not oblige, when they had not matter with which they were to
do it; because no good law obliges to impossibilities, But then no man of his
own head might interpose an expedient, and say, though you have no wine to
consecrate and celebrate with all, yet you may do it in ale or mead; nor yet
might he warrant an imperfect consecration and allow that the Priests should
celebrate with bread only. The reason is because all institutions Sacramental,
and positive laws depend not upon the Nature of the things themselves,
according to the extension or diminution of which our obedience might be
measured; but they depend wholly on the will of the lawgiver, and the will of
the Supreme, being actually limited to this specification, this manner, this
matter, this institution; whatsoever comes besides it has no foundation in the
will of the Legislator, and therefore can have no warrant or authority. That it
be obeyed or not obeyed is all the question and all the variety. If it can be
obeyed it must, if it cannot it must be let alone. The right Mother that
appeard before Solomon demanded her child; half of her own was offered; but
that was not it which would do her any good, neither would she have been
pleased with a whole bolster of goats hair, or with a perfect image of her
child, or with a living lamb; it was her own child which she demanded: So it is
in the Divine institution, whatsoever God wills that we must attend to: and
therefore whatsoever depends upon a divine law or institution, whatsoever is
appointed instrumental to the signification of a mystery, or to the collation
of a grace or a power, he that does anything of his own head, either must be a
despiser of Gods will, or must supose himself the author of a grace, or else to
do nothing at all in what he does, because all his obedience and all the
blessing of his obedience depends upon the will of God which ought always to
be obeyed when it can, and when it cannot, nothing can supply it because the
reason of it cannot be understood, for who can tell why God would have the
death of his Son celebrated by Bread and wine? why by both the Symbols? why by
such? and therefore no proportions can be made, and if they could, yet they
cannot be warranted.

This Rule is not only to be understood concerning the express positive laws
and institutions of our Blessed Lawgiver, 15.
but even those which are included within those laws, or are necessary
appendages to those institutions are to be obeyed, and can neither be dispensed
withal nor diverted by any suppletory or expedient. Thus to the law of
representing and commemorating the death of our dearest Lord by the celebration
of his last supper it is necessarily appendant and included that we should com
worthily prepared, lest that which is holy be given to Dogs, and holy things be
handled unholily. In this case there can be no dispensation; and although the
Curates of souls having the key of knowledge and understanding to divide the
word of God rightly, have power and warrant to tell what measures and degrees
of preparation are just and holy; yet they cannot give any dispensation in any
just and required degree, nor by their sentence effect that a less degree then
God requires in the appendant law can be sufficient to any man, neither can any
human authority commute a duty that God requires; and when he demands
repentance no man can dispense with him that is to communicate, or give him
leave to give alms in stead of repentance. But if in the duty of preparation
God had involved the duty of confession to a Priest: this might have in some
cases been wholly let alone: that is, in case there were no Priest to be had
but one, who were to consecrate and who could not attend to hear my
confessions: And the reason is, because in case of the destitution of any
material or necessary constituent part of the duty, there is no need of equity
or interpretation, because the subject matter of degrees of heightnings and
diminutions being taken away, there can be no consideration of the manner or
the degrees superstructed. When any condition intrinsecally and in the nature
of the thing included in an affirmative precept is destituent or wanting, the
duty it self falls without interpretation.

Lastly; 16.
This Rule is to be understood also much more concerning the Negative precepts
of the Religion: because there can be no hindrance to the duties of a Negative
precept; every man can let any thing alone; and he cannot be forced from his
silence or his omission; for he can sit still and die; violence can hinder an
action, but cannot effect it or express it: and therefore here is no place for
interpretation much less for dispensation, neither can it be supplied by any
action or by any omission whatsoever.

But upon the matter of this second Consequent remarked above [numb. 14.] 17.
it is to be inquired whether in no case a supply of duty is to be made? or
whether or no it is not better in some cases, that is, when we are hindered from
doing the duty commanded, to do something when we cannot do all; or are we
tied to do nothing when we are innocently hindered from doing of the whole duty?

When we may be admitted to do part of our duty, and when to supply it by
something else.

1. Negative precepts have no parts of duty, 17.
no degrees of obedience, but consist in a Mathematical point; or rather in
that which is not so much; for it consists in that which can neither be numbered
nor weighed. No man can go a step from the severest measure of a Negative
Commandment; if a man do but in his thought go against it, or in one single
instance do what is forbidden, or but begin to do it, he is entirely guilty.
He that breaks one is guilty of all said S. James; it is meant of negative
precepts; and then it is true in every sense relating to every single precept,
and to the whole body of the Negative Commandments. He that breaks one has
broken the band of all; and he that does sin in any instance or imaginary
degree against a Negative has done the whole sin that is in that Commandment
forbidden.

2. All positive precepts that depend upon the mere will of the Lawgiver (as I
have already discourted) admit no degrees, 18.
nor suppletory and commutation: because in such laws we see nothing beyond the
words of the law and the first meaning and the named instance; and therefore it
is that in individuo which God points at; it is that in which he will make the
trial of our obedience; it is that in which he will so perfectly be obeyed,
that he will not be disputed with, or inquired of why and how, but just
according to the measures there set down; So, and no more, and no less, and no
otherwise. For when the will of the Lawgiver is all the reason, the first
instance of the law is all the measures, and there can be no product but what
is just set down. No parity of reason can infer any thing else, because there
is no reason but the will of God; to which nothing can be equal, because his
will can be but one. If any man should argue thus; Christ has commanded us to
celebrate his death by blessing and communicating in bread and wine; this being
plainly his purpose; and I finding it impossible to get wine, consider that
water came out of his side as well as blood, and therefore water will represent
his death as well as wine; for wine is but like blood, and water is more then
like it self; and therefore I obey him better, when in the letter I cannot obey
him; He I say that should argue thus, takes wrong measures; for it is not here
to be inquired which is most agreeable to our reason, but which complies with
Gods will, for that is all the reason we are to inquire after.

3. In natural laws and obligations depending upon true and proper reason drawn
from the nature of things; 19.
there we must do what we can, and if we cannot do all that is at first
intended, yet it is secondarily intended that we should do what we can. The
reason is, because there is a natural cause of the duty, which like the light
of the Sun is communicated in several degrees according as it can be received;
and therefore whatever partakes of that reason is also a duty of that
Commandment. Thus it is a duty of natural and essential religion that we
should worship God with all the faculties of the soul, with all the actions of
the body, with all the degrees of intension, with all the instances and parts
of extension: For God is the Lord of all; he expects all, and he deserves all,
and will reward all; and every thing is designed in order to his service and
glorification: and therefore every part of all this is equally commanded,
equally required; and is Symbolical to the whole; and therefore in the
impossibility of the performance of any one, the whole Commandment is equally
promoted by another; and when we cannot bow the knee yet we can incline the
head, and when we cannot give, we can forgive, and if we have not silver and
gold, we can pay them in prayers and blessings; and if we cannot go with our
Brother two mile, we can (it may be) go one, or one half; let us go as far
as we can, and do all that is in our power and in our circumstances. For since
our duty here can grow, and every instance does according to its portion do in
its own time and measures the whole work of the Commandment, and God accepts
us in every step of the progression, that is, in all degrees; for he breaks not
the bruised reed, and he quenches not the smoking flax; it follows, that
though we are not tied to do all, even that which is beyond our powers; yet we
must do what we can toward it; even a part of the Commandment may in such
cases be accepted for our whole duty.

4. In external actions which are instances of a Natural or Moral duty, 20.
if there be any variety, one may supply the other; if there be but one, it can
be supplied by the internal only and spiritual. But the internal can never be
hindered, and can never be changed or supplied by any thing else; it is capable
of no suppletory, but of degrees it is: and if we cannot love God as well as
Mary Magdalen loved him, let us love him so as to obey him always, and so as
to superadded degrees of increment to our love, and to our obedience; but for
this or that expression it must be as it can, and when it can, it must be this
or another; but if it can be neither upon the hand, it must be all that is
intended upon the heart; and as the body helps the Soul in the ministeries of
her duty; so the Soul supplies the body in the essentialities of it and
indispensable obedience.

RULE 12. Not every thing that is in the Sermons and Doctrine of Jesus Christ
was intended to bind as a law or Commandment.
EVery thing that is spoken by our Blessed Savior is to be placed in that
order of things where himself was pleased to put it. 1.
Whatsoever he propounded to us under the Sanction of love, and by the
invitation of a great reward, that is so to be understood as that it may not
become a snare, by being supposed in all cases, and to all persons to be a law.
For laws are established by fear and love too, that is, by p^om^ses and
threatenings; and nothing is to be esteemed a law of Christ but such things
which if we do not observe we shall die, or incur the Divine displeasure in
any instance or degree. But there are some things in the Sermons of Christ
which are recommended to the diligence and love of men; such things whether men
must tend and grow. Thus it is required that we should love God with all our
heart; which is indeed a Commandment and the first and the chiefest: but
because it has an infinite sense, and is capable of degrees beyond all the
actualit^es of any man whatsoever, therefore it is encouraged and invited
further by a reward that will be greater then all the work that any man can
do. But yet there is also the minimum morale in it, that is, that degree of
love and duty, less then which is by interpretation no love, no duty at all;
and that is, that we so love God, that 1. we love nothing against him, 2. that
we love nothing more then him, 3. that we love nothing equal to him, 4. that we
love nothing disparately and distinctly from him, but in subordination to him;
that is, so as to be apt to yield and submit to his love, and comply with our
duty. Now then, here must this law begin, it is a Commandment to all persons,
and at all times to do thus much; and this being a general law of which all
other laws are but instances and specifications, the same thing is in all the
particular laws which is in the General: there is in every one of them a
minimum morale, a legal sense of duty, which if we prevaricate or go less then
it, we are transgressors: but then there is also a latitude of duty, or a
sense of Love and Evangelical increase, which is a further pursuance of the
duty of the Commandment; but is not directly the law, but the love; to which
God has appointed no measures of greatness but has invited as forward as the
man can go.

For it is considerable that since Negative precepts include their
affirmatives, 2.
and Affirmatives also do infer the Negatives (as I have already discoursed)
and yet they have differing measures and proportions, and that the form of
words and signs Negative or Affirmative, are not the sufficient indication of
the precepts, we can best be instructed by this measure; There is in every
Commandment a negative part and an affirmative: The Negative is the first, the
least and the lowest sense of the law and the degree of duty; and this is
obligatory to all persons and cannot be lessened by excuse, or hindered by
disability, or excused by ignorance, neither is it to stay its time or to wait
for circumstances; but obliges all men indifferently. I do not say that this
is always expressed by negative forms of law or language, but is by
interpretation Negative; it operates or obliges as do the Negatives. For when
we are commanded to love our Neighbor as our self; the least measure of this
law, the legal or Negative part of it is, that we should not do him injury:
that we shall not do to him, what we would not have done to our selves. He
that does not in this sense love his Neighbor as himself, has broken the
Commandment; he has done that which he should not do; he has done that
which he cannot justify; he has done that which was forbidden: for every
going less then the first sense of the law, then the lowest sense of duty, is
the commission of a sin, a doing against a prohibition.

But then there are further degrees of duty then the first and lowest; 3.
which are the affirmative measures, that is, a doing excellent actions and
instances of the Commandments, a doing the Commandment with love and
excellency, a progression in the exercise and methods of that piety; the
degrees of which because they are affirmative therefore thy oblige but in
certain circumstances; and are under no law absolutely, but they grow in the
face of the Sun, and pass on to perfection by heat and light, by love and zeal,
by hope and by reward.

Now concerning these degrees it is that I affirm that every thing is to be
placed in that order of things where Christ left it: 4.
and he that measures other men by his own stature, and exacts of children the
wisdom of old men, and requires of babes in Christ the strengths and degrees
of experienced Prelates, he adds to the laws of Christ, that is, he ties where
Christ has not tied; he condemns where Christ does not condemn. It is not a
law that every man should in all the stages of his progression be equally
perfect, the nature of things has several stages, and passes by steps to the
varieties of glory. For so laws and Counsels differ, as first and last, as
beginning and perfection, as reward and punishment, as that which is simply
necessary, and that which is highly advantageous; they differ not in their
whole kind; for they are only the differing degrees of the same duty. He that
does a Counsel Evangelical does not do more then his duty, but does his duty
better: He that does it in a less degree shall have a less reward, but he shall
not perish if he does obey the just and prime or least measures of the law.

Let no man therefore impose upon his brother the heights and summities of
perfection, 5.
under pain of damnation or any fearful Evangelical threatening; because these
are to be invited only by love and reward, and by promises only are bound upon
us, not by threatenings. The want of the observing of this, has caused
impertinent disputes and animosities in men, and great misunderstandings in
this question. For it is a great error to think that everything spoken in
Christ's Sermons is a law, or that all the progressions and degrees of Christian
duty are bound upon us by penalties as all laws are. The Commandments are made
laws to us wholly by threatenings; for when we shall receive a crown of
righteousness in heaven, that is, by way of gift, merely gratuitous, but the
pains of the damned are due to them by their merit and by the measures of
justice, and therefore it is remarkable that our Blessed Savior said, when ye
have done all that ye are commanded, ye are unprofitable servants; that is, the
strict measures of the laws or the Commandments given to you are such which if
ye do not observe ye shall die according to the sentence of the law; but if ye
do, ye are yet unprofitable; ye have not deserved the good things are laid up
for loving Souls: but therefore toward that we must superadde the degrees of
progression and growth in grace, the emanations of love and zeal, the methods
of perfection and imitation of Christ. For by the first measures we escape
hell; but by the progressions of love only and the increase of duty, through
the mercies of God in Christ we arrive at heaven. Not that he that escapes hell
may in any case fail of heaven; but that whosoever does obey the Commandment
in the first and least sense, will in his proportion grow on toward
perfection. For he fails in the first, and does not do that worthily, who if
he have time does not go on to the second.

But yet neither are there Counsels of perfection left wholly to our liberty so
as that they have nothing of the law in them; 6.
for they are pursuances of the law; and of the same nature, though not
directly of the same necessity; but collaterally and accidentally they are. For
although God follows the course and nature of things, and therefore does not
disallow any state of duty that is within his own measures; because there must
be a first before there can be a second, and the beginning must be esteemed
good or else we ought not to pursue it and make it more in the same kind; yet
because God is pleased to observe the order of nature in his graciousness, we
must do so too in the measures of our duty; Nature must begin imperfectly, and
God is pleased with it, because himself has so ordered it; but the nature of
things that begin and are not perfect, cannot stand still. God is pleased well
enough with the least or the Negative measure of the law; because that is the
first or the beginning of all; but we must not always be beginning but pass on
to perfection, and it is perfection all the way, because it is the proper and
the natural method of the grace to be growing: every degree of growth is not
the perfection of glory; but neither is it the absolute perfection of grace,
but it is the relative perfection of it: justas corn and flowers are perfectly
what they ought to be when in their several months they are arrived to their
proper stages: but if they do not still grow till they be fit for harvest,
they wither and die and are good for nothing: he that does not go from
strength to strength, from virtue to virtue, from one degree of grace to
another, he is not at all in the methods of life, but enters into the portion
of thorns, and withered flowers, fit for excision and for burning.

Therefore 1. No man must in the keeping the Commandments of Christ set
himself a limit of duty; 7.
hither will I come and no further: for the tree that does not grow is not
alive, unless it already have all the growth it can have: and there is in these
things thus much of a law: Evangelical counsels are thus far necessary, that
although in them, that is, in the degrees of duty, there are no certain
measures described; yet we are obliged to proceed from beginnings to perfection.

2. Although every man must impose upon himself this care that he so do his
duty that he do add new degrees to every grace; 8.
yet he is not to be prejudiced by any man else, nor sentenced by determined
measures of another man's appointment: God has named none, but intends all; and
therefore we cannot give certain sentence upon our Brother since God has
described no measures; but intends that all, whither no man can perfectly
arrive here; and therefore it is supplied by God hereafter.

2. But the Rule is to be understood in great instances as well as in great
degrees of duty; 9.
For there are in the Sermons of Christ some instances of duties which although
they are pursuances of laws and duty, yet in their own material, natural being
are not laws, but both in the degree employed, and in the instance expressed are
Councels Evangelical; to which we are invited by great rewards, but not obliged
to them under the proper penalties of the law. Such are making our selves
Eunuchs for the Kingdom of heaven, selling all and giving it to the poor. The
duties and laws here signified are chastity, charity, contempt of the world,
zeal for the propagation of the Gospel: The virtues themselves are direct
duties and under laws and punishment, but that we be charitable to the degree
of giving all away, or that we act our chastity by a perpetual coelibate are
not laws; but for the outward expression we are wholly at our liberty; and for
the degree of the inward grace, we are to be still pressing forwards toward
it, we being obliged to do so by the nature of the thing, by the excellency of
the reward, by the exhortations of the Gospel, by the example of good men, by
our love to God, by our desires of happiness, and by the degrees of glory. Thus
S. Paul took no wages of the Corinthian Churches; it was an act of an excellent
prudence, and great charity, but it was not by the force of a general law, for
no man else was bound to it, neither was he; for he did not do so to other
Churches; but he pursued two or three graces to excelent measures and degrees;
he became exemplary to others, useful to that Church, and did advantage the
affairs of Religion: and though possibly he might, and so may we, by some
concurring circumstances be pointed out to this very instance and signification
of his duty, yet this very instance, and all of the same nature are Councels
Evangelical; that is, not imposed upon us by a law, and under a threatening; but
left to our liberty that we may express freely, what we are necessarily obliged
to do in the kind, and to pursue forwards to degrees of perfection.

These therefore are the Characteristick notes and measures to distinguish a
Counsel Evangelical from the laws and Commandments of Jesus Christ. 10.


The notes of difference between Counsels and Commandments Evangelical.

1. Where there is no Negative expressed not involved, there it cannot be a
law; but it is a Counsel Evangelical. For in every law there is a degree of
duty so necessary, that every thing less then it, is a direct act or state of
sin, and therefore if the law be affirmative the Negative is included, and is
the sanction of the main duty. Honor thy Father and Mother, that is a law: for
the lowest step of the duty there enjoined is bound upon us by this Negative,
thou shall not curse thy Father or Mother; or, thou shall not deny to give them
maintenance. Thou shall not dishonor them, not slight, not undervalue, not
reproach, not upbraid, not be rude or disobedient to them: when ever such a
Negative is included, that is the indication of a law. But in Counsels
Evangelical, there is nothing but what is affirmative. There are some who make
themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: that is the intimation of a
religious act or state: but the Sanction of it is nothing that is negative, but
this only; He that has ears to hear let him hear, and Qui potest capere
capiat: He that can receive it let him receive it: and he that has power over
his will, and has so decreed in his heart, does well. In Commandments it is
[He that does the duty, 1. Cor. 7.
does well; He that does not, does ill:] but in Counsels it is; [He that does
not, may do well: but he that does, does better:] as S. Paul discourses in the
question of marriage; in which instance it is observable that the comparison of
Coelibate and marriage is not in the question of chastity, but in the question
of religion, one is not a better chastity then the other. Marriage is (...) an
undefiled state; and nothing can be cleaner then that which is not at all
unclean; but the advantages of coelibate above marriage as they are accidental
and contingent, so they are relative to times and persons and states, and
external ministeries; For to be made an Eunuch for the Kingdom of heaven, is
the same that S. Paul means by, the unmarryed cares for the things of the
Lord; that is, in these times of trouble and persecution, they who are not
entangled in the affairs of a household, can better travail from place to place
in the ministeries of the Gospel, they can better attend to the present
necessities of the Church, which are called the things of the Lord; or the
affairs of the Kingdom of heaven: but at no hand does it mean that the state
of single life is of it self a Counsel Evangelical, or a further degree of
chastity; but of an advantageous ministry to the propagation of the Gospel.
But be it so, or be it otherwise; yet it is a Counsel and no law, because it
has no Negative part in its constitution, or next appendage.

2. When the action or state is propounded to us only upon the account of
reward, 11.
and there is no penalty annexed, then it is a Counsel and no law: for there is
no legislative power where there is no coercitive; and it is but a precarious
Government, where the lawgiver cannot make the Subject either do good or
suffer evil: and therefore the Jus gladii and the merum Imperium are all one:
and he that makes a law and does not compel the involuntary does but petition
the Subject to obey, and must be content he shall do it when he has a mind to
it. But therefore as soon as men made laws, and lived in communities, they made
swords to coerce the private, and wars to restrain the public irregularities
of the world. -- dehinc absistere bello,
Oppida coeperunt munire, and condere leges,
Ne quis fur esset, neu latro, neu quis adulter.
For it was impossible to preserve justice, or to defend the innocent, or to
make obedience to laws if the Consuls lay aside their rods and axes: and so it
is in the Divine laws; the Divine power and the Divine wisdom makes the
Divine laws, and fear is the first Sanction of them: it is the beginning of all
our wisdom; and all humane power being an imitation of and emanation from the
Divine power is in the sum of affairs nothing but this, habere potestatem
gladii ad animadvertendum in facinorosos homines, and therefore we conclude it
to be no law, to the breaking of which no penalty is annexed: and therefore it
was free to S. Paul to take or not to take wages of the Corinthian Church; for
if he had taken it, it had been nothing but the making of his glorying void;
that is, he could not have had the pleasure of obliging them by an uncommanded
instance and act of kindness. Hope and reward is the endearment of Counsels;
fear and punishment are the ligatures of laws.

3. In Counsels sometimes the contrary is very evil: 12.
Thus to be industrious and holy, zealous and prudent in the offices
Ecclesiastical, and to take holy orders in the days of persecution and
discouragement, is an instance of love (I doubt not) very pleasing and
acceptable to God, and yet he that suffers himself to be discouraged from that
particular employment, and to divert to some other instance in which he may
well serve God, may remain very innocent or excusable: But those in the
Primitive Church who so feared the persecution or the employment that they cut
off their thumbs or ears to make themselves canonically incapable, were highly
culpable; because he that does an act contrary to the design of a Counsel
Evangelical, is an enemy to the virtue and the grace of the intendment: He that
only lets it alone does not indeed venture for the greater reward, but he may
pursue the same virtue in another instance or in a less degree, but yet so as
may be accepted. He that is diverted by his fear and danger, and dares not
venture, has a pityable but in many cases an innocent infirmity: but he that
does against it, has an inexcusable passion; and is so much more blameable
then the other, by how much a fierce enemy is worse then a cold friend, or a
Neuter more tolerable then he that stands in open hostility and defiance. But
in laws, not only the contrary, but even the privative is also criminal; for
not only he that oppresses the poor is guilty of the breach of charity, but he
that does not releeve them; because there is in laws an affirmative and a
negative part; and both of them have obligation; so that in laws both omissions
and commissions are sins, but where nothing is faulty but a contrariety or
hostility, and that the omission is innocent, there it is only a Counsel.

4. In internal actions there is properly and directly no Counsel, 13.
but a law only: Counsels of perfections are commonly the great and more
advantageous prosecutions of an internal grace or virtue: but the inward cannot
be hindered by any thing from without, and therefore is capable of all increase
and all instances only upon the account of love; the greatest degree of which
is not greater then the Commandment: and yet the least degree if it be sincere
is even with the Commandment: because it is according to the capacity and
greatness of the Man. But the inward grace in all its degrees is under a law or
Commandment, not that the highest is necessary at all times, and to every
person; but that we put no positive bars or periods to it at any time, but
love as much as we can to day, and as much as we can to morrow, and still the
duty and the words to have a current sense: and [ as much as we can] must
signify still more and more; now the using of direct and indirect min^steries
for the increasing of the inward grace, this I say because it has in it
materiality and an external part, and is directly subjicible to the proper
Empire of the will, this may be the matter of Counsel in the more eminent and
zealous instances, but the inward grace directly is not. To be just consists in
an indivisible point, and therefore it is always a law, but if to signify and
act our justice we give that which is due, and a great deal more to make it
quite sure, this is the matter of Counsel; for it is the external prosecution
of the inward grace, and although this has no degrees, yet that has; and
therefore that has liberty and choice, whereas in this there is nothing but
duty and necessity.

RULE 13. Some things may be used in the service of God which are not commanded
in any Law, nor explicitly commended in any doctrine of Jesus Christ.
THIS Rule is intended to regulate the Conscience in all those questions 1.
which scrupulous and superstitious people make in their inquiries for
warranties from Scripture in every action they do; and in the use of such
actions in the service of God, for which particulars because they have no word,
they think they have no warrant, and that the actions are superstitious. The
inquiry then has two parts;

1. Whether we are to require from Scripture a warrant for every action we do,
in common life?

2. Whether we may not do or use any thing in religion, concerning which we
have no express word in Scripture, and no Commandment at all?

1. Concerning the first the inquiry is but short, because there is no
difficulty it but what is made by ignorance and jealousy; and it can be
answered and made evident by common sense and the perpetual experience and the
Natural necessity of things. For the laws of Jesus Christ were intended to
regulate humane actions in the great lines of Religion, justice and sobriety,
in which as there are infinite particulars which are to be conducted by reason
and by analogy to the laws and Rules given by Jesus Christ; so it is certain
that as the general lines and rules are to be understood by reason how far they
do oblige, so by the same we can know where they do not. But we shall quickly
come to issue in this affair. For if for every thing there is a law or an
advice; let them that think so find it out and follow it. If there be not for
everything such provision, their own needs will yet become their lawgiver and
force them to do it without a law. Whether a man shall speak French or English?
whether baptized persons are to be dipped all over the body, or will it suffice
that the head be plunged? whether thrice or once? whether in water of the
spring, or the water of the pool? whether a man shall marry, or abstain?
whether eat flesh or herbs; choose Titius, or Caius for my friend; be a Scholar
or a Merchant; a Physician or a Lawyer; drink wine or ale; take Physic for
prevention, or let it alone; give to his Servant a great pension, or a
competent; what can the Holy Scriptures have to do with any thing of these, or
any thing of like Nature and indifferency?

For by nature all things are indulged to our use and liberty; 2.
and they so remain till God by a supervening law has made restraints in some
instances to become matter of obedience to him, and of order and usefulness to
the world; but therefore where the law does not restrain, we are still free as
the Elements, and may move as freely and indifferently as the atoms in the eye
of the Sun. * And there is infinite difference between law and lawful, indeed
there is nothing that is a law to our Consciences but what is bound upon us by
God, and consigned in holy Scripture (as I shall in the next Rule demonstrate)
but therefore every thing else is permitted, or lawful, that is, not by law
restrained: liberty is before restraint; and till the fetters are put upon us
we are under no law and no necessity, but what is natural. * But if there can
be any natural necessities, we cannot choose but obey them, and for these there
needs no law or warrant from Scripture. No Master needs to tell us or to give
us signs to know when we are hungry or athirst; and there can be as little need
that a lawgiver should give us a command to eat when we are in great necessity
so to do. * Every thing is to be permitted to its own cause and proper
principle; Nature and her needs are sufficient to cause us to do that which is
for her preservation; right reason and experience are competent warrant and
instruction to conduct our affairs of liberty and common life; but the matter
and design of laws is Honest vivere, alterum non laedere, suum cuique
tribuere; or as it is more perfectly described by the Apostle, that we should
live a godly, a righteous, a sober life; and beyond these there needs no law:
when nature is sufficient Jesus Christ does not interpose, and unless it be
where reason is defective or violently abused, we cannot need laws of
self-preservation, for that is the sanction and great band and indearment of
all laws: and therefore there is no express law against self-murder in all the
new Testament; only it is there and every where else by supposition; and the
laws take care to forbid that, as they take care of fools and madmen, men that
have no use or benefit of their reason or of their natural necessities and
inclinations must be taken under the protection of others; but else when a man
is in his wits, or in his reason, he is defended in many things, and instructed
in more without the help or need of laws: nay it was need and reason that first
introduced laws; for no law, but necessity and right reason taught the first
ages, Juvenal. l. 5. Satyr. 15.
Dispersos trahere in populum, migrare vetusto
De nemore, and proavis habitare, and linquere sylvas,
Aedificare domos, laribus conjungere nostris
Tectum aliud, tutos vicino limine somnos
Ut collata daret fiducia. Protegere armis
Lapsum, aut ingenti nutantem vulnere civem.
Communi dare signa tuba, defendier iisdem
Turribus, atque una portarum clave teneri.
to meet and dwell in communities, to make covenants and laws, to establish
equal measures, to do benefit interchangeably, to drive away public injuries
by common arms, to join houses that they may sleep more safe: and since laws
were not the first inducers of these great transactions, it is certain they
need not now to enforce them, or become our warrant to do that without which we
cannot be what we cannot choose but desire to be.

But if nothing were to be done but what we have Scripture for, 3.
either commanding or commending, it were certain that with a less hyperbole
then S. John used, the world could not contain the book, which should be
written; and yet in such infinite numbers of laws and sentences no man could be
directed competently because his Rule and guide would be too big, and every man
in the inquiry after lawful and unlawful would bejust so enlightened as he that
must for ever remain blind unless he take the Sun in his hand to search into
all the corners of darkness, no candlestick would hold him, and no eye could
use him. But supposing that in all things we are to be guided by Scripture,
then from thence also let us inquire for a conduct or determination even in
this inquiry; whether we may not do any thing without a warrant from
Scripture? and the result will be that if we must not do any thing without the
warrant of Scripture; then we must not for every thing look in Scripture for a
warrant; because we have from Scripture sufficient instruction that we should
not be so foolish and importune as to require from thence a warrant for such
things in which we are by other instruments competently instructed, or left at
perfect liberty.

Thus S. Paul affirms, 4.
All things are lawful for me; he speaks of meats and drinks, and things left
in liberty concerning which because there is no law, and if there had been one
under Moses, it was taken away by Christ, it is certain that every thing was
lawful, because there was no law forbidding it: and when S. Paul said, This
speak I, not the Lord; he that did according to that speaking, did according to
his own liberty, not according to the word of the Lord; and S. Paul's saying in
that manner is so far from being a warranty to us from Christ; that because he
said true, therefore we are certain he had no warranty from Christ, nothing but
his own reasonable conjecture. * But when our Blessed Savior said and why of
your selves do ye not judge what is right? he plainly enough said that to our
own reason and judgment many things are permitted, which are not conducted by
laws or express declarations of God.

Add to this that because it is certain in all Theology, that whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, that is, whatsoever is done against our actual persuasion
becomes to us a sin, though of it self it were not; and that we can become a
law unto our selves, by vows and promises, and voluntary engagements and
opinions, it follows that those things which of themselves infer no duty, and
have in them nothing but a collateral and accidental necessity, are permitted
to us to do as we please, and are in their own nature indifferent, and may be
so also in use and exercise: and if we take that which is the less perfect part
in a Counsel Evangelical, it must needs be such a thing as is neither commanded
nor commended, for nothing of it is commanded at all; and that which is
commended is the more not the less perfect part; and yet that we may do that
less perfect part, of which there is neither a Commandment, nor a commendation
but a permission only appears at large in S. Paul's discourse concerning
Virginity and Marriage 1 Corinthians. 7. 6, 37. But a permission is nothing but a
not prohibiting, and that is lawful which is not unlawful, and every thing may
be done that is not forbidden: and there are very many things which are not
forbidden, nor commanded; and therefore they are only lawful and no more.

But the case in short is this; 5.
In Scripture there are many laws and precepts of holiness, there are many
prohibitions and severe cautions against impiety: and there are many excellent
measures of good and evil, of perfect and imperfect: * whatsoever is good, we
are obliged to pursue; * whatsoever is forbidden must be declined; * whatsoever
is laudable must be loved, and followed after. Now if all that we are to do
can come under one of these measures, when we see it, there is nothing more for
us to do but to conform our actions accordingly. But if there be many things
which cannot be fitted by these measures, and yet cannot be let alone; it will
be a kind of madness to stand still, and to be useless to our selves and to
all the world, because we have not a command or a warrant to legitimate an
action which no Lawgiver ever made unlawful.

But this folly is not gone far abroad into the world; 6.
for the number of madmen is not many, though possibly the number of the very
wise is less: but that which is of difficulty is this,

Quest. Whether in matters of religion we have that liberty as in matters of
common life? or whether is not every thing of religion determined by the Laws
of Jesus Christ, or may we choose something to worship God withal, concerning
which he has neither given us Commandment or intimation of his pleasure?

Of Will Worship.

To this I answer by several Propositions.

1. All favor is so wholly arbitrary, 7.
that whatsoever is an act of favor, is also an effect of choice and perfectly
voluntary. Since therefore that God accepts any thing from us is not at all
depending upon the merit of the work, or the natural proportion of it to God,
or that it can add any moments of felicity to him, it must be so wholly
depending upon the will of God that it must have its being and abiding only
from thence. S. August. de vera relig. c. 55. Non sit nobisreligio in
phantasmatibus nostris. Melius est enim qualecu^que verum quam omne quicquid
arbitrio cogi potest. Lib. 1. de consens. Fvan^. cap. 18.
He that shall appoint with what God shall be worshipped, must appoint what
that is by which he shall be pleased; which because it is unreasonable to
suppose, it must follow that all the integral, constituent parts of religion,
all the fundamentals and essentials of the Divine worship cannot be warranted
to us by nature, but are primarily communicated to us by revelation. Deum sic
colere oportet quomodo ipse se colendum praecepit, said S. Austin. Who can tell
what can please God, but God himself? for to be pleased, is to have something
that is agreeable to our wills and our desires: now of Gods will there can be
no signification but Gods word or declaration; and therefore by nothing can he
be worshipped, but by what himself has declared that he is well pleased with:
and therefore when he sent his Eternal Son into the world, and he was to be the
great Mediator between God and Man, the great instrument of reconciling us to
God, the Great Angel that was to present all our prayers, the only beloved by
whom all that we were to do would be accepted, God was pleased with voices
from Heaven and mighty demonstrations of the Spirit to tell all the world that
by him he would be reconciled, in him he would be worshipped, through him he
would be invocated, for his sake he would accept us, under him he would be
obeyed, in his instances and Commandments he would be loved and served; saying,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

2. Now it matters not by what means God does convey the notices of his
pleasure; 8.
(...), in sundry ways and in sundry manners God manifests his will unto the
world: so we know it to be his will, it matters not whether by nature or by
revelation, by intuitive and direct notices, or by argument or consequent
deduction, by Scripture, or by tradition, we come to know what he requires and
what is good in his eyes; only we must not do it of our own head. To worship
God is an act of obedience and of duty, and therefore must suppose a
Commandment; and is not of our choice, save only that we must choose to obey.
Of this God forewarned his people: He gave them a Law, and commanded them to
obey that entirely, without addition or diminution; neither more nor less then
it, [ whatsoever I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto
nor diminish from it] and again, De^^^ 12. 32. Verse. 8.
[ ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man
whatsoever is right in his own eyes] that is, This is your Law that is given by
God; make no laws to your selves or to one another, beyond the measures and
limits of what I have given you: nothing but this is to be the measure of your
obedience and of the Divine pleasure. So that in the Old Testament there is an
express prohibition of any worship of their own choosing; all is unlawful, but
what God has chosen and declared.

3. In the New Testament we are still under the same charge; 9.
and (...) or Will Worship is a word of an ill sound amongst Christians most
generally, meaning thereby the same thing which God forbad in Deuteronomy, viz.
(...), as the Lxx. expresses it, when every man does that (not which God
commands, or loves) but which men upon their own fancies and inventions think
good, that which seems good in their own eyes, Matt. 15. 8, 9. Mark 7. 7.
or as our Blessed Savior more fully, teaching for doctrines the traditions,
the injunctions or Commandments, of Men: the instance declares the meaning.
The Pharisees did use to wash their hands before meat, cleanse the outside of
cups and dishes, they washed when they came from the judgment hall; and these
they commanded men to do, saying that by such things God was worshipped and
well pleased. So that these two together, and indeed each of them severally, is
will worship in the culpable sense. He that says an action which God has not
commanded is of it self necessary, and he that says God is rightly worshipped
by an act or ceremony concerning which himself has no way expressed his
pleasure, is superstitious, or a will-worshipper. The first sins against
charity; the second against religion: The first sins directly against his
neighbor; the second against God: The first lays a snare for his neighbors
foot; the second cuts off a Dogs neck and presents it to God: The first is a
violation of Christian liberty; the other accuses Christ's law of imperfection.
So that thus far we are certain, 1. That nothing is necessary but what is
commanded by God. 2. Nothing is pleasing to God in religion that is merely of
humane invention. 3. That the commandments of men cannot become doctrines of
God, that is, no direct parts of the religion, no rule or measures of
conscience.

But because there are many actions which are not under command, 10.
by which God in all ages has been served and delighted, and yet may as truly
be called (...) or will worship as any thing else, and the name is general and
indefinite, and may signify a new religion, or a free will-offering, an
uncommanded general or an uncommanded particular, that is, in a good sense, or
in a bad, we must make a more particular separation of one from the other, and
not call every thing superstitious that is in any sense a will worship, but
only that which is really and distinctly forbidden, not that which can be
signified by such a word which sometimes means that which is laudable,
sometimes that which is culpable ^ Therefore,

What Voluntary or Uncommanded actions are Lawful or Commendable.

1. 11.
Those things which men do, or teach to be done by a probable interpretation
of what is doubtful or ambiguous, are not will worship in the culpable sense.
God said to the Jews that they should rest or keep a Sabbath upon the seventh
day. How far this rest was to be extended, was to be taught and impressed not
by the law, but by the interpretation of it; and therefore when the Doctors of
the Jews had rationally and authoritatively determined how far a Sabbath-daies
journey was to extend, they who strictly would observe that measure which God
described not, but the Doctors did interpret, all that while were not to be
blamed, or put off with a quis requisivit? who has required these things at
your hands?] for they were all that while in the pursuance and in the
understanding of a Commandment. But when the Jew in Synesius who was the pilot
of a ship, let go the helm in the even of his Sabbath, and did lie still till
the next even, and refused to guide the ship though in danger of shipwreck, he
was a superstitious fool, and did not expound but prevaricate the
Commandment. * This is to be extended to all probable interpretations so far,
that if the determination happen to be on the side of error, yet the consequent
action is not superstitious if the error it self be not Criminal. Thus when the
Fathers of the primitive Church did expound the sixth chapter of S. John's
Gospel of sacramental manducation; though they erred in the exposition, yet
they thought they served God in giving the Holy Communion to Infants: and
though that was not a worship which God had appointed, yet it was not
superstition, because it was (or for ought we know was) an innocent
interpretation of the doubtful words of a Commandment. From good nothing but
good can proceed, and from an innocent principle nothing but what is innocent
in the effect. In fine, Whatsoever is an interpretation of a Commandment is
but the way of understanding Gods will, not an obtruding of our own; always
provided the interpretation be probable, and that the gloss do not corrupt
the text.

2. 12.
Whatsoever is an equal and reasonable definition or determination of what God
has left in our powers, is not an act of a culpable will worship or
Superstition. Thus it is permitted to us to choose the office of a Bishop, or to
let it alone; to be a Minister of the Gospel, or not to be a Minister. If a man
shall suppose that by his own abilities, his inclination, the request of his
friends, the desires of the people; and the approbation of the Church, he is
called by God to this Ministry, that he should please God in so doing, and
glorify his Name, although he has no command or law for so doing, but is still
at his liberty, yet if he will determine himself to this service, he is not
superstitious or a will-worshipper in this his voluntary and chosen service,
because he determines by his power and the liberty that God gives him, to a
service which in the general is pleasing to God; so that it is but voluntary in
his person, the thing it self is of Divine institution.

3. 13.
Whatsoever is done by prudent Counsel about those things which belong to piety
and charity, is not will worship or superstition. Thus when there is a
Commandment to worship God with our body; if we bow the head, if we prostrate
our selves on the ground, or fall flat on our face, if we travail up and down
for the service of God, even to weariness and diminution of our strengths, if
we give our bodies to be burned, though in these things there is no
Commandment, yet neither is there superstition, though we design them to the
service of God, because that which we do voluntarily is but the appendage, or
the circumstance, or the instance of that which is not voluntary but imposed by
God.

4. 14.
Every instance that is Uncommanded if it be the act or exercise of what is
commanded, is both of Gods choosing and of man's, it is voluntary and it is
imposed; this in the general, that in the particular. Upon this account, the
voluntary institution of the Rechabites in drinking no wine and building no
houses, but dwelling in Tents, was pleasing to God; because although he no
where required that instance at their hands, yet because it was an act or state
of that obedience to their Father Jonadab which was enjoined in the fifth
Commandment, God loved the thing, and rewarded the men. So David powered upon
the ground the waters of Bethlehem which were the price of the young men's
lives; he powered them forth unto the Lord: and though it was an Uncommanded
instance, yet it was an excellent act, because it was a self denial and an act
of mortification. The (...), the abundant expressions of the duty contained in
the Law, though they be greater then the instances of the Law, are but the
zeal of God, and of religion; the advantages of laws, and the enlargements of
a loving and obedient heart. Charity is a duty, and a great part of our
Religion. He then that builds almes-houses, or erects hospitals, or mends high
ways, or repairs bridges, or makes rivers navigable, or serves the poor, or
dresses children, or makes meat for the poor, cannot (though he intends these
for Religion) be accused for will worship; because the laws do not descend
often to particulars, but leave them to the conduct of reason and choice,
custom and necessity, the usages of society and the needs of the world. That
we should be thankful to God, is a precept of natural and essential religion;
that we should serve God with portions of our time, is so too: But that this
day, or to morrow, that one day in a week, or two, that we should keep the
anniversary of a blessing, or the same day of the week, or the return of the
month, is an act of our will and choice; it is the worship of the will, but
yet of reason too and right religion. Thus the Jews kept the feast of Purim,
the feast of the fourth, the fifth, the seventh, the tenth month, the feast of
the dedication of the Altar; and Christ observed what the Maccabees did
institute: and as it was an act of piety and duty in the Jews to keep these
feasts, so it was not a will worship or superstition in the Maccabees to
appoint it, because it was a pursuance of a general Commandment by symbolical
but uncommanded instances. Thus it is commanded to all men to pray: but when
Abraham first instituted morning prayer; and Isaac appointed in his family the
Evening prayer, and Daniel prayed three times a day, and David seven times, and
the Church kept her Canonical hours, Nocturnal and Diurnal Offices, and some
Churches instituted an Office of forty hours, and a continual course of
prayer, and Solomon the perpetual ministry of the Levites, these all do and
did respectively actions which were not named in the Commandment; but yet they
willingly and choosingly offered a willing but an acceptable sacrifice, because
the instance was a daughter of the law, encouraged by the same reward, serving
to the same end, warranted by the same reason, adorned with the same piety,
eligible for the same usefulness, amiable for the same excellency, and though
not commanded in the same tables, yet certainly pleasing to him who as he gave
us laws for our rule, so he gives us his Spirit for our Guide, and our Reason
as his Minister.

5. 15.
Whatsoever is aptly and truly instrumental to any act of virtue or grace,
though it be no where signified in the law of God, or in our religion, is not
will worship in the culpable sense. I remember to have read that S. Benedict
was invited to break his fast in a Vineyard: he intending to accept the
invitation betook himself presently to prayer; adding these words, Cursed is he
who first eats before he prays. This religion also the Jews observed in
their solemn days; and therefore wondered and were offended at the Disciples of
Christ because that early in the morning of the Sabbath they eat the ears of
corn. This and any other of the like nature may be superadded to the words of
the law, but are no criminal will worship, because they are within the verge
and limits of it; they serve to the ministeries of the chief house. Thus we do
not find that David had received a Commandment to build a Temple; but yet the
prophet Nathan told him from God, 1 King. 8. 18.
that he did well because it was in his heart to build it: It was therefore
acceptable to God because it ministered to that duty and religion in which God
had signified his pleasure. Thus the Jews served God in building Synagogues or
places of prayer besides their Temple; because they were to pray besides their
solemn times, and therefore it was well if they had less solemn places. So
Abraham pleased God in separating the tenth of his possessions for the service
and honor of God; and Jacob pleased the Lord of Heaven and Earth by
introducing the religion of Vows; which indeed was no new religion, but two or
three excellencies of virtue and religion dressed up with order and solemn
advantages, and made to minister to the glorification of God. Thus fasting
serves religion; and to appoint fasting days is an act of religion and of the
worship of God, not directly, but by way of instrument and ministry. To double
our care, to intend our zeal, to enlarge our expense in the adorning and
beautifying of Churches is also an act of religion or of the worship of God;
because it does naturally signify or express one virtue, and does prudently
minister to another; it serves religion, and signifies my love.

6. 16.
To abstain from the use of privileges and liberties though it be no where
commanded, yet it is always in it self lawful, and may be an act of virtue or
religion if it be designed to the purposes of religion or charity. Thus S. Paul
said he would never eat flesh while he did live rather then cause his brother
to offend: and he did this with a purpose to serve God in so doing, and yet it
was lawful to have eaten, and he was no where directly commanded to have
abstained; and though in some cases it became a duty, yet when he extended it
or was ready to have extended it to uncommanded instances or degrees, he went
not back in his religion by going forwards in his will. Thus not to be too free
in using or requiring dispensations, is a good handmaid to piety or charity,
and is let into the kingdom of heaven, by being of the family and retinue of
the Kings daughters, the glorious graces of the Spirit of God. Thus also to
deny to our selves the use of things lawful in meat and drink and pleasure,
with a design of being exemplar to others and drawing them to sober counsels,
the doing more then we are commanded, that we be not tempted at any time to do
less, the standing a great way off from sin, the changing our course and
circumstances of life that we may not lose or lessen our state of the Divine
grace and favor, these are by adoption and the right of cognation accepted as
pursuances of our duty and obedience to the Divine Commandment.

7. 17.
Whatsoever is proportionable to the reason of any Commandment and is a moral
representation of any duty, the observation of that cannot of it self be
superstitious. For this we have a competent warranty from those words of God by
the prophet Nathan to David. 2 Samuel 7. 5. 1 Ch^on. 22. 8. and 28. 3.
Thou shall not build a house to the honor of my Name, because thou art a man
of blood. In prosecution of this word of God, and of the reasonableness of it,
it is very warrantable that the Church of God forbids Bishops and Priests to
give sentence in a cause of blood; because in one case God did declare it unfit
that he who was a man of blood should be employed in the building of a house to
God. Upon this account all Undecencies, all unfitting usages and
disproportionate states or accidents are thrust out of religion. A Priest may
not be a fiddler, a Bishop must not be a shoemaker, a Judge must religiously
abstain from such things as disgrace his authority, or make his person and his
ministry contemptible; and such observances are very far from being
superstitious, though they be under no express Commandment.

8. 18.
All voluntary services, when they are observed in the sense and to the
purposes of perfection, are so far from being displeasing to God, that the
more uncommanded instances and degrees of external duty and signification we
use, S. Chrysostom. in Romans 8.
the more we please God. (...), Spiritual men do their actions with much
passion and holy zeal, and give testimony of it by expressing it in the
uncommanded instances. And Socrates speaking of certain Church offices and
rituals of religion, says, (...), Since no man has concerning this thing any
written Commandment, it is clear that the Apostles permitted it to the choice
of every one, that every one may do good not by necessity and feare] but by
love and choice. Such were the free will-offerings among the Jews, which
always might expect a special reward, (...), Those things which are in the
tables of the Commandment shall be rewarded, but those which are more then
these shall have a greater; the reason is, because they proceed from a greater
intension of the inward grace: and although the measures of the Commandment
were therefore less because they were to fit all capacities; yet they who go
farther, show that they are nearer to the perfections of grace then the first
and lowest measures of the Commandment, and therefore are disposed to receive
a reward greater then they shall have who are the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven. But of this I have already given accounts in the foregoing rule, and
Doctrine and pract. of Repen cap. 1.
otherwhere.

9. 19.
The circumstance of a religious action may be undertaken or imposed civilly
without being superstitious. As to worship God is a duty which can never be a
superstitious will worship, so to worship God by bowing the head or knee
toward the East or West is a circumstance of this religious worship; and of
this there may be laws made, and the circumstance be determined, and the whole
action so clothed and vested, that even the very circumstance is in some sense
religious, but in no sense superstitious; for some way or other it must be
done, and every man's act is determined when it is vested with circumstances,
and if a private will may determine it, so may a public law, and that without
fault: but of this in the sequel.

10. The sum is this: Though the instance, the act or state be uncommanded,
yet it is not a culpable will worship, if either it be a probable
interpretation of a Divine Commandment, or the use of what is permitted, or
the circumstance or appendage to a virtue, or the particular specification of a
general law, or is in order to a grace instrumental and ministering to it, or be
the defalcation or the not using of our own rights, or be a thing that is good
in the nature of the thing, and a more perfect prosecution of a law or grace,
that is, if it be a part or a relative of a law: if a law be the foundation,
whatsoever is built upon it, grows up toward Heaven, and shall have no part
in the evil rewards of superstition. But that what of it self is innocent or
laudable may not be spoiled by evil appendages, it is necessary that we observe
the following cautions.

1. Whatsoever any man does in an uncommanded instance, 20.
it must be done with liberty and freedom of conscience; that is, it must not
be pressed to other men as a law which to our selves is only an act of love,
or an instrument of a virtue, or the appendage and relative of a grace. It
must, I say, be done with liberty of conscience, that is, without imposing it
as of it self necessary, or a part of the service of God: Socrat. lib. ^. c. 22.
and so it was anciently in the matter of worship toward the East: for though
generally the Christians did worship toward the East, yet in Antioch they
worshipped toward the West. But when they begin to have opinions concerning the
circumstance, and think that abstracting from the order or the accidental
advantage, there is some religion in the thing it self, then it passes fromwhat
it ought to what it ought not, and by degrees proves folly and dreams. For
then it comes to be a Doctrine and injunction of men. when that is taught to be
necessary which God has left at liberty, and taken from it all proper
necessity; it then changes into superstition and injustice; for it is an
invading the rights of God and the rights of man; it gives a law to him that is
as free as our selves, and usurps a power of making laws of conscience, which
is only Gods subject and Gods peculiar. Dogmatizing and Censoriousnesse makes
a will worship to be indeed superstition.

In prosecution of this it is to be added, It is as great a sin to teach for
doctrines the prohibitions of Men, as the injunctions and commandments; to say
that we may not do what is lawful, as that it is necessary to do that which
is only permitted, or is commended. He that imposes on men's conscience an
affirmative or a negative that God has not imposed, is equally injurious, and
equally superstitious; and we can no more serve or please God in abstaining
from what is innocent, then we can by doing what he has not commanded. He that
thinks he serves God by looking to the East when he prays, and believes all
men and at all times to be obliged to do so, is a superstitious man: but he
who believes this to be superstition, and therefore turns from the East, and
believes it also to be necessary that he do not look that way, is equally
guilty of the same folly; and is like a traveller that so long goes from the
East, that he comes to it by his long progression in the circle. If by the law
of God it be not sinful, or if by the law of God it be not necessary, no
doctrines of men can make it so: to call good evil, or evil good, is equally
hateful to God: and as every man is bound to preserve his liberty that a yoke
be not imposed upon his conscience, and he be tied to do what God has left
free; so he is obliged to take care that he be not hindered, but still that he
may do it if he will. That this no way relates to humane laws I shall
afterward discourse: I now only speak of imposition upon men's understandings,
not upon their wills or outward act. He that says that without a surplice we
cannot pray to God acceptably, and he that says we cannot well pray with it,
are both to blame; but if a positive law of our superior intervenes, that is
another consideration: for, quaedam quae licent, tempore and loco mutato non
licent, said Seneca; and so on the contrary, that may be lawful or unlawful,
necessary or unnecessary, accidentally, which is not so in its own nature and
the intentions of God.

2. Whatsoever pretends to lawfulness or praise by being an instrument of a
virtue and the minister of a law, 21.
must be an apt instrument, naturally, rationally, prudently, or by institution
such as may do what is pretended. Thus although in order to prayer I may very
well fast, to alleviate the body and make the spirit more active and
untroubl'd; yet against a day of prayer I will not throw all the goods out of
my house, that my dining room may look more like a Chapel, or the sight of
worldly goods may not be in my eye at the instant of my devotion: because as
this is an uncommanded instance, so it is a foolish and an unreasonable
instrument. The instrument must be such as is commonly used by wise and good
men in the like cases, or something that has a natural proportion and efficacy
to the effect.

3. Whatsoever pretends to be a service of God in an uncommanded instance, 22.
by being the specification of a general command, or the instance of a grace,
must be naturally and univocally such, not equivocally and by pretension only:
of which the best sign is this, If it be against any one commandment directly
or by consequent, it cannot acceptably pursue or be the instance of any other.
Thus when the Gnostics abused their Disciples by a pretense of humility,
telling them that they ought by the mediation of Angels to present their
prayers to God the Father, and not by the Son of God, it being too great a
presumption to use his name and an immediate address to him (as S. Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and O Ecumenius report of them) this was a culpable will worship,
because the relation it pretended to humility was equivocal and spurious, it
was expressly against an article of faith Joh. 16. 23.
and a Divine Commandment. So did the Pythagoreans in their pretensions to
mortification; they commanded to abstain from marriages, from flesh, from fish,
as unclean, and ministeries of sin, and productions of the Devil. Both these
the Apostle reproves in his epistle to the Colossians; and therefore condemns
all things of the same unreason ableness.

4. All uncommanded instances of piety must be represented by their own proper
qualities, 23.
effect and worthiness; that is, if all their worth be relative, they must not
be taught as things of an absolute excellency, or if it be a matter of
abstinence from any thing that is permitted, and that abstinence be by reason
of danger or temptation, error or scandal, it must not be pressed as abstinence
from a thing that is simply unlawful, or the duty simply necessary. Thus the
Encratites and Manichees were superstitious persons, besides their heresy;
because although they might lawfully have abstained from all ordinary use of
wine, in order to temperance and severe sobriety, yet when they began to say,
that such abstinence was necessary, and all wine was an abomination, they
passed into a direct superstition, and a criminal will worship. While the
Novatians denied to reconcile some sort of lapsed criminals, they did it for
discipline and for the interests of a holy life, they did no more then diverse
parts of the Church of God did; but when that discipline, which once was
useful, became now to be intolerable, and that which was only matter of
Government became also matter of doctrine, then they did that which our blessed
Savior reproved in the Pharisees, they taught for doctrines the injunctions of
men, and made their will worship to be superstition.

5. When any uncommanded instance relative to a Commandment is to be
performed, 24.
it ought to be done temperately and according to its own proportion and
usefulness: for if a greater zeal invites us to the action, we must not give
the reins and liberty to that zeal, and suffer it to pass on as far as it
naturally can; but as far as piously and prudently it ought. He that gives alms
to the poor, may upon the stock of the same virtue spare all vain or less
necessary expense and be a good husband to the poor, and highly please God with
these uncommanded instances of duty: but then he must not prosecute them beyond
the reason of his own affairs, to the ruin of his relations, to the danger of
temptation. To pray is good; to keep the continual sacrifice of morning and
evening devotions is an excellent specification of the duty of [ pray
continually:] now he that prays more frequently does still better, but there
is a period beyond which the multiplication and intension of the duty is not to
extend. For although to pray nine times is more then is described in any
diurnal or nocturnal office; yet if a man shall pray nine and twenty times, and
prosecute the excess to all degrees which he naturally can, and morally cannot,
that is, ought not, his will worship degenerates into superstition; because it
goes beyond the natural and rational measures, which though they may be
enlarged by the passions of Religion, yet must not pass beyond the periods of
reason, and usurp the places of other duties civil and religious.

If these measures be observed, 25.
the voluntary and uncommanded actions of religion, either by their cognation
to the laws, or adoption into obedience, become acceptable to God, and by being
a voluntary worship, or an act of religion proceeding from the will of man,
that is, from his love and from his desires to please God, are highly
rewardable: (...), said S. Paul, If I do this thing with a voluntary act or
free choice, then I have a reward. And that no man may be affrighted with those
words of God to the Jews, Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13.
who has required these things at your hands? as if every thing were to be
condemned concerning which God could say, Quis requisivit? meaning, that he
never had given a commandment to have it done; it is considerable, that God
speaks not of voluntary, but of commanded services; he instances in such things
which himself had required at their hands, their sacrifices of bulls and goats,
their new moons and solemn assemblies, their sabbaths and oblations: but
because they were not done with that piety and holiness as God intended, God
takes no delight in the outward services: so that this condemns the unholy
keeping of a law, that is, observing the body, not the spirit of religion; but
at no hand does God reject voluntary significations of a commanded duty, which
proceed from a well-instructed and more loving spirit, as appears in the case
of vows and free-will-offerings in the Law; which although they were
will-worshippings, or voluntary services, and therefore the matter of them was
not commanded, yet the religion was approved. And if it be objected that these
were not will-worshippings because they were recommended by God in general; I
reply, Though they were recommended, yet they were left to the liberty and
choice of our will, and if that recommendation of them be sufficient to
sanctify such voluntary religion, then we are safe in this whole question; for
so did our blessed Savior in the Gospel, as his Father did in the Law, Qui
potest capere capiat; and he that has ears to hear, 1 Cor. 7. 37.
let him hear; and so says S. Paul, He that stands fast in his heart, that
is, has perfectly resolved and is of a constant temper, having no necessity,
but has power over his own will, and has judged in his heart that he will
keep his virgin, does well. But the ground of all is this; all voluntary acts
of worship or religion are therefore acceptable quia fundamentum habent in lege
Divina, Gods law is the ground of them; that is the Canon, and these
will-worshippings are but the Descant upon the plain-song: some way or other
they have their authority and ground from the law of God; For

Whatsoever has its whole foundation in a persuasion that is merely humane,
26.
and no ways relies upon the Law or the expressed will of God, that is
will worship in the criminal sense, that is, it is superstition. So the vulgar
Latin and Erasmus render the word (...), or will worship; and they both
signify the same thing, when will worship is so defined: but if it be defined
by [ a religious passion or excess in uncommanded instances relating to, or
being founded in the Law and will of God,] then will worship signifies nothing
but what is good, and what is better; it is a free-will-offering (...), like
the institution under which S. Paul was educated, the strictest and exactest
sect of the religion, and they that live accordingly, are (...) the voluntary
and most willing subjects of the law. So that although concerning some
instances it can be said, (...), this is directly a commandment; and
concerning others, (...), this is a virtuous or a right action of my choice;
yet these are no otherwise opposed then as in and super, for the one are (...)
in the order and constitution of the commandment, the other (...) (as S.
Chrysostom expresses it) are above the commandment, yet all are in the same
form or category: it is within the same limits and of the same nature, and to
the same ends, and by the same rule, and of the same holiness, and by a
greater love; that is all the difference: and thus it was from the beginning of
the world, in all institutions and in all religions, which God ever loved.

I only instance in the first ages and generations of mankind, 27.
because in them there is pretended some difficulty to the question. Abel
offered sacrifice to God, and so did Cain; and in the days of Enoch men began
to call upon the name of the Lord; Multi commentariorum and (...) versiarum
scriptores ex his verbis (...), homines illius seculi novos rius, no^^s
ceremoni as and religionis formas instit^isse; quia scil. certum est, ab
exor^^o humani generis homines Deum colu^se, atque adeo invocasse nomen Domini.
Hoc ergo quod quasi de novo factum (...), est institutio novorum rituum, quibus
quasi de proprio Deum ^olere volucru^^ At notandum est in horum verborum sensu
nihil esse certii quod ad hanc rem possit pertinere. Nam passim in Hebraeorum
co^mentariis seculum Enoch tanquam impium memoratur: Et Hebrai expon^re
solebant hunc locum quasi sensus esset, tunc cum Enoch natus (...) homines
pr^fanasse nomen Domini invocando nomea ejus super Creatur^s, sic ^^^rbum
(...), derivatum scil. a voce Colin, i. e. pr^sana, profanasse interpret^^
sunt: homines sc^^ tunc coepisse appellare ^^lios hominum, and animalia, and
herb (...) nomine Dei sancti benedicti. Abenez^^ a. and Abrabaneel simpliciorem
horum ^erborii sensum re^inuerunt: caeperu^^ scil. commemorate creatorem suum,
and ad nomen ejus opera and orationes dirigere.
and a priesthood was instituted in every family, and the Major-domo was the
Priest, and God was worshipped by consumptive oblations: and to this they were
prompted by natural reason, and for it there was no command of God. a 12 de
Statuis.
So S. Chrysostom, (...) Abel was not taught of any one, neither had he
received a law concerning the oblation of first fruits; but of himself and
moved by his Conscience he offered that sacrifice: and ad Quest. 83.
the Author of the answers ad Orthodoxos in the works of Justin Martyr
affirms, (...), They who offered to God before the law the sacrifice of beasts
did not dee (...) by a Divine Commandment, though God by accep(...) gave
testimony that the person who offered it was (...) to him. What these instances
do effect or per(...) we shall see in the sequal; in the mean time I ob(...)
that they are by men of differing persuasions used to contrary pur(...) Some
there are that suppose it to be in the power of men to ap(...) new instances
and manners of religion, and to invent distinct matters ^^ormes of Divine
worship; and they suppose that by these instances they are warranted to say,
that we may in religion do whatsoever by Natural reason we are prompted to;
for Abel and Cain and Enoch did their services upon no other account. Others
that suspect every thing to be superstitious that is uncommanded, and believe
all sorts of will worship to be criminal, say, that if Abel did this wholly by
his natural reason and religion, then this religion being by the law of Nature
was also a command of God; so that still it was done by the force of a law, for
a law of Nature being a law of God, whatsoever is done by that is necessary,
not will worship, or an act of choice and a voluntary religion.

Now these men divide the truth between them. 28.
For it is not true that whatsoever is taught us by Natural reason, is bound
upon us by a Natural law: which proposition although I have already proved
competently, yet I shall not omit to add some things here to the illustration
of it, as being very material to the present question and rule of Conscience.
Socinus the lawyer affirmed Reason to be the Natural law, by which men are
inclined first, and then determined to that which is agreeable to reason. But
this cannot be true, least we should be constrained to affirm that God has
left the government of the world to an uncertain and imperfect guide; for
nothing so differs as the reasonings of men, and a man may do according to his
reason, and yet do very ill. Sicut omnis citharoedi opus est citharam pulsare,
Ethic l. 1. c. 7.
periti vero ac probe docti recte pulsare: sic hominis cujuscunque est agere
cum ratione, probi vero hominis est recte cum ratione operari. So Aristotle. It
is the work of every Musician to play upon his instrument; but to play well
requires art and skill: so every man does according to reason; but to do
righteous things, and according to right reason, must suppose a wise and a good
man. The consequent of this is, that reason is not the natural law, but reason
when it is rightly taught, well ordered, truly instructed, perfectly commanded;
the law is it that binds us to operate according to right reason, and commands
us we should not decline from it. He that does according to the natural law, or
the law of God, does not, cannot do amiss: but when reason alone is his
warrant and his guide, he shall not always find out what is pleasing to God.
And it will be to no purpose to say, that not every man's reason, but right
reason shall be the law. For every man thinks his own reason right, and whole
nations differ in the assignation and opinions of right reason; and who shall
be Judge of all, but God, and he that is the Judge must also be the lawgiver,
else it will a be sad story for us to come under his Judgment, by whose laws
and measures we were not wholly directed. If God had commanded the Priests
pectoral to be set with rubies, and had given no instrument of discerning his
meaning but our eyes, a red crystal or stained glass would have passed in
stead of rubies: But by other measures then by seeing we are to distinguish the
precious stone from a bright counterfeit. As our eyes are to the distinction of
visible objects, so is our reason to spiritual, the instrument of judging, but
not alone; but as reason helps our eyes, so does revelation inform our reason;
and we have no law till by revelation or some specific communication of his
pleasure God has declared and made a law. Lex Dei mentem nostram incendens,
eam ad se pertrahit, conscientiamque nostram vellicat quae and ipsa mentis
nostrae lex dicitur. Damascen. lib. 4. cap. 23. de fide. ^ibi Clichtovaeus sic
exponit, lex mentis nostrae est ipsa naturalis ratio Dei legem habens sibi
inditam, impressamque and insitam qu bonum a malo interno luminc di^adicam ^^.
S. Hieronymus episi. 151. ad Algasi. q. 8. hanc lege appellat legem
intelligentiae, quam ignorant pueritia, nescii infantia, tunc a venit and
praecipit, quando incipit intelligentia. B. Maximus tom. 5. Biblioth. centur.
5. c. 13. Lex naturae est ratio naturalis, quae captivum tenet sensum ad
delendam vim irrationalem. Hoc dixit imperfecte, quia ratio naturali^ ta^^m est
maieria legis naturalis. Rectiusa. S. Augustinus, l. 2. de sermon Domini in
monto, Nullam animam esse quae ratiocinar^ possit, in cujus conscientia non
loquatur Deus: quis n. legem naturalem in cordibus hominum scribit nisi Deus?
hoc scil. innuens non ratione^ solam, sed Deum loquentem ex principiis nostra
rationis sanxisse legem. Idem dixit explicatius, l. 22. contr. Faustum c. 27.
legem aeternam esse Divinam rationem vel voluntatem ordinem naturalem
co^servari jubentem perturbari vetantem.
Now all the law of God which we call natural is reason, that is, so agreeable
to natural and congenit reason, that the law is in the matter of it written in
our hearts before it is made to be a law. Lex est Naturae vis, and ratio
prudentis, juris atque injuriae regula. So Cicero lib. 1. de leg. But though
all the law of Nature be reason; yet whatsoever is reason is not presently a
law of Nature. And therefore that I may return to the instances we are
discoursing of, it follows not that although Abel and Cain and Enoch did do
some actions of religion by the dictate of natural reason, that therefore they
did it by the law of nature: for every good act that any man can do is
agreeable to right reason; but every act we do is not by a law, as appears in
all the instances I have given in the explication and commentaries on these two
last rules. Secondly, On the other side it is not true, that we may do it in
religion whatsoever we are prompted to by natural reason. For although natural
reason teaches us that God is to be loved, and God is to be worshipped, that
is, it tells us he is our supreme, we his creatures and his servants; we had
our being from him, and we still depend upon him, and he is the end of all who
is the beginning of all, and therefore whatsoever came from him must also tend
to him; and whosoever made every thing, must needs make every thing for
himself, for he being the fountain of perfection, nothing could be good but
what is from, and for, and by, and to that fountain, and therefore that every
thing must in it is way honor and serve and glorify him: now I say, although
all this is taught us by natural reason, by this reason we are taught that God
must be worshipped; yet that cannot tell us how God will be worshipped. Natural
reason can tell us what is our obligation, because it can discourse of our
nature and production, our relation and minority; but Natural reason cannot
tell us by what instances God will be pleased with us, or prevailed with to do
us new benefits; because no natural reason can inform us of the will of God,
till himself has declared that will. Natural reason tells us we are to obey
God; but Natural reason cannot tell us in what positive commandments God will
be obeyed, till he declares what he will command us to do and observe. So
though by Nature we are taught that we must worship God; yet by what
significations of duty, and by what actions of religion this is to be done,
depends upon such a cause as nothing but it self can manifest and publish.

And this is apparent in the religion of the old world, 29.
the religion of sacrifices and consumptive oblations; which it is certain
themselves did not choose by natural reason, but they were taught and enjoined
by God: for that it is no part of a natural religion to kill beasts, and offer
to God Wine and Fat, is evident by the nature of the things themselves, the
cause of their institution, and the matter of fact, that is the evidence that
they came in by positive constitution. For blood was anciently the sanction of
laws and Covenants, Sanctio a Sanguine say the Grammarians; because the
sanction or establishment of laws was it which bound the life of man to the
law, and therefore when the law was broken, the life or the blood was
forfeited: bt then as in Covenants, in which sometimes the wilder people did
drink blood, the gentler and more civil did drink wine, the blood of the grape;
so in the forfeiture of laws they also gave the blood of beasts in exchange
for their own. Now that this was less then what was due is certain, and
therefore it must suppose remission and grace, a favorable and a gracious
acceptance; which because it is voluntary and arbitrary in God, less then his
due, and more then our merit, no natural reason can teach us to appease God
with sacrifices. It is indeed agreeable to reason that blood should be poured
forth, when the life is to be paid, because the blood is the life; but that
one life should redeem another, that the blood of a beast should be taken in
exchange for the life of a man, that no reason naturally can teach us. Ego vero
destinavi ^um vobis in altari ad expiationem faciendam pro animis vestris: nam
sangui^ est qui pro anima expiationem facit, said God by Moses. Levit. 17. 11.
The life of the flesh is in the blood; and I have given it to you upon the
Altar to make an atonement for your Souls: for it is the blood that makes an
atonement for the Soul: according to which are those words of S. Paul, without
shedding of blood there is no remission; meaning that in the Law, all expiation
of sins was by sacrifices, to which Christ by the sacrifice of himself put a
period. But all this Religion of sacrifices, was (I say) by Gods appointment;
Ego vero destinavi, so said God, I have designed or decreed it: but that this
was no part of a law of nature, or of prime, essential reason appears in this,
* 1. Because God confined it among the Jews to the family of Aaron, and that
only in the land of their own inheritance, the land of promise; which could no
more be done in a natural religion then the Sun can be confined to a
village-Chappel. * 2. Because God did express oftentimes that he took no
delight in Sacrifices of Beasts; as appears in Psalm 40. and Psalm. 50. and
Psalm. 51. Isai. 1. Jerem. 7. Hosea 6. Micah 6. * 3. Because he tells us in
opposition to sacrifices and external rites, what that is which is the natural
and essential religion in which he does delight; the sacrifice of prayer and
thanksgiving, a broken and a contrite heart; that we should walk in the way he
has appointed; that we should do justice and judgment, and walk humbly with
our God: He desires mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then
burnt-offerings. 4. Because Gabriel the Archangel foretold that the Messiah
should make the daily sacrifice to cease. 5. Because for above 1600. years God
has suffered that nation to whom D. ^
he gave the law of sacrifices to be without Temple, or Priest, or Altar, and
therefore without Sacrifice.

But then if we inquire why God gave the law of sacrifices, 30.
and was so long pleased with it; the reasons are evident and confessed. 1.
Sacrifices were types of that great oblation which was made upon the altar of
the Cross. 2. It was an expiation which was next in kind to the real
forfeiture of our own lives: it was blood for blood, a life for a life, a less
for a greater; it was that which might make us confess Gods severity against
sin, though not feel it; it was enough to make us hate the sin, but not to sink
under it; it was sufficient for a fine, but so as to preserve the stake; it was
a manuduction to the great sacrifice, but suppletory of the great loss and
forfeiture; it was enough to glorify God, and by it to save our selves; it was
insufficient in it self, but accepted in the great sacrifice; it was enough in
shadow, when the substance was so certainly to succeed. 3. It was given the
Jews (...), Lib. 6. c. 18.
as the Author of the Apostolical constitutions affirms, that being laden
with the expense of sacrifices to one God, they might not be greedy upon the
same terms to run after many: and therefore the same Author affirms, before
their golden calfe and other idolatries, Sacrifices were not commanded to the
Jews, but persuaded only; recommended, and left unto their liberty. By which
we are at last brought to this truth, That it was taught by God to Adam, and by
him taught to his posterity, that they should in their several manners worship
God by giving to him something of all that he had given us; and therefore
something of our time, and something of our goods: and as that was to be spent
in praises and celebration of his name, so these were to be given in
consumptive offerings; but the manner and the measure was left to choice, Number.
7.
and taught by superadded reasons and positive laws: and in this sense are
those words to be understood which above I cited out of Justin Martyr and S.
Chrysostom. To this purpose Aquinas cites the gloss upon the second of the
Colossians, saying, Ante tempus legis justos per interiorem instinctum
instructos fuisse de modo colendi Deum, quos alii sequebantur; postmodum vero
exterioribus praeceptis circa hoc homines fuisse instructos, quae praeterire
pestiferum est. Before the Law the righteous had a certain instinct by which
they were taught how to worship God, to wit in the actions of internal
religion; but afterward they were instructed by outward precepts. That is, the
natural religion consisting in prayers and praises, in submitting our
understandings and subjecting our wills, in these things the wise Patriarchs
were instructed by right reason and the natural duty of Men to God: but as for
all external religions, in these things they had a Teacher and a guide; of
these things they were to do nothing of their own heads. In whatsoever is from
within there can be no Will Worship, for all that the Soul can do is Gods
right; and no act of faith or hope in God, no charity, no degree of charity, or
confidence, or desire to please him can be superstitious. But because in
outward actions there may be undecent expressions or unapt ministeries, or
instances not relative to a law of God or a Council Evangelical, there may be
irregularity and obliquity, or direct excess, or imprudent expressions,
therefore they needed Masters and Teachers, but their great teacher was God.
Deum docuisse Adam cultum divinum quo ejus benevolentiam recuperaret quam per
peccatum transgressionis amiserat; ipsumque docuisse filios suos dare Deo
decimas and primitias, said Hugo de S. Victore. God taught Adam how to worship
him, and by what means to recover his favor, from which he by transgression
fell (the same also is affirmed by S. Athanasius In Epi^^. de perfidia Euic^^^
and libro super illud, Omnia mihi: radia sunt. Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 3.
:) but that which he adds, that Adam taught his children to give first fruits
and tenths, I know not upon what authority he affirms it. Indeed Josephus
seems to say something against it: (...), God is not pleased so much in
oblation of such things which the greediness and violence of man forces from
the Earth, such as are corn and fruits; but is more pleased with that which
comes of it self naturally and easily, such as are cattle and sheep. And
therefore he supposes God rejected Cain and accepted Abel, because Cain brought
fruits which were procured by labor and tillage; but Abel offered sheep, which
came by the easy methods and pleasing ministeries of Nature. It is certain
Josephus said not true, and had no warrant for his affirmative: but that which
his discourse does morally intimate is very right, that the things of man's
invention please not God; but that which comes from him we must give him again,
and serve him by what he has given us, and our religion must be of such things
as come to us from God: it must be obedience or compliance; it must be
something of mere love, or something of love mingled with obedience: it is
certain it was so in the instance of Abel.

And this appears in those words of S. Paul, 31.
By faith Abel offered sacrifice: Hebr. 11.
it was not therefore done by choice of his own head; but by the obedience of
faith, which supposes revelation and the command or declaration of the will of
God. And concerning this, in the traditions and writings of the Easterlings, we
find this story. In the beginning of mankind, when Eve for the peopling of the
world was by God so blessed in the production of Children that she always had
twins before the birth of Seth, and the twins were ever male and female, that
they might interchangeably marry, ne gens sit unius aetatis populus virorum,
lest mankind should expire in one generation; Adam being taught by God did not
allow the twins to marry, (...), whom nature her self by their divided birth
had separated and divided; but appointed that Cain should marry the twin-sister
of Abel, and Abel should marry Azron the twin-sister of Cain: But Cain thought
his own twin-sister the more beautiful, and resolved to marry her. Adam
therefore wished them to inquire of God by sacrifice; which they did: and
because Cains sacrifice was rejected, and his hopes made void, and his desire
not consented to, he killed his Brother Abel; whose twin-sister afterward fell
to the portion of Seth, who had none of his own. Upon this occasion sacrifices
were first offered. Now whether God taught the religion of it first to Adam, or
immediately to Cain and Abel, yet it is certain from the Apostle (upon whom we
may rely, though upon the tradition of the Easterlings we may not) that Abel
did his religion from the principle of faith; and therefore that manner of
worshipping God did not consist only in manners, but in supernatural mystery;
that is, all External forms of worshipping are no parts of moral duty, but
depend upon divine institution and divine acceptance: and although any external
rite that is founded upon a natural rule of virtue may be accepted into
religion, when that virtue is a law; yet nothing must be presented to God but
what himself has chosen some way or other. Superstitio est quando traditioni
humanae Religionis nomen applicatur, said the Gloss [ in Coloss. 2.] when any
tradition or invention of man is called Religion, the proper name of it is
superstition; that is, when any thing is brought into Religion and is it self
made to be a worship of God, it is a will worship in the Criminal sense. Hanc
video sapientissimorum fuisse sententiam, legem neque hominum ingeniis
excogitatam, Lib 1. and lib. 2. de legibus. Videl^^ dial. to de legibus.
neque scitum aliquod esse populorum, sed aeternum quiddam, quod universum
mundum regeret, imperandi prohibendique sapientia. Ita principem legem illam,
and ultimam mentem esse dicebant omnia ratione aut cogentis aut vetantis Dei,
said Cicero. Neither the wit of man, nor the consent of the people is a
competent warranty for any prime law; for law is an eternal thing, fit to
govern the world, it is the wisdom of God commanding or forbidding. Reason
indeed is the aptness, the disposition, the capacity and matter of the eternal
law; but the life and form of it is the command of God. Every plant which my
Heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. Some plants arise from
seed, some from slips and suckers, some are grafted, and some inoculated; and
all these will grow, and bring forth pleasing fruit; but if it grows wild,
that is, of its own accord, the fruit is fit for nothing, and the tree is fit
for burning.

RULE XIV. The Christian law both of Faith and Manners is fully contained in
the Holy Scriptures; and from thence only can the Conscience have divine
Warrant and Authority.
OF the perfection and fullness of the Christian law I have already given
accounts; 1.
but where this law is recorded, and that the Holy Scriptures are the perfect
and only Digest of it, is the matter of the present Rule, which is of great
use in the Rule of Conscience; because if we know not where our Rule is to be
found, and if there can be several Tables of the law pretended, our obedience
must be by chance or our own choice, that is, it cannot be obedience, which
must be voluntary in the submission, and therefore cannot be chance, and it
must be determined by the superior, and therefore cannot be our own antecedent
choice, but what is chosen for us.

That the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament do contain the whole
will and law of God is affirmed by the primitive Fathers, 2.
and by all the reformed Churches; that the Scriptures are not a perfect Rule
of Faith and manners, but that Tradition is to be added to make it a full
repository of the Divine will, is affirmed by the Church of Rome. For the
establishing of the truth in this great rule and directory of Conscience, I
shall first show, as matter of fact, that the Church of God in all the first
and best ages, when tradition could be more certain, and assent to it might be
more reasonable, did nevertheless take the Holy Scriptures for their only rule
of faith and manners. 2. Next, I shall show what use there was of Traditions.
3. That the topic of traditions, after the consignation of the Canon of
Scripture, was not only of little use in any thing, but false in many things,
and therefore unsafe in all questions; and as the world grew older, traditions
grew more uncertain, and the argument from tradition was intolerably worse.

1. That the first ages of the Church did appeal to Scripture in all their
questions, 3.
I appeal to these testimonies. S. Clemens of Alexandria has these excellent
words, Clem. Alex. ^^onat. 7.
(...), It is not fit that we should simply attend to the affirmatives of men,
for our Nay may be as good as their Yea. But if the thing be matter of faith,
and not of opinion only, let us not stay for a testimony of man, but confirm
our question by the word of God; which is the most certain of all, or is indeed
rather the only demonstration. Now that there may be no starting-hole from
these words of the Saint, I only add this, that it is plain from the whole
order of his discourse that he speaks only of the word of God written. For
the words before are these, Do they take away all demonstration, or do they
affirm that there is any? I suppose they will grant there is some; unless they
have lost their senses. But if there be any demonstration, it is necessary that
we make inquiry (...), and from the Scriptures to learn demonstratively. And a
little after he adds, they that employ their time about the best things, never
give over their searching after truth (...), until from the Scriptures they
have got a demonstration. He speaks against the Gnostics, who pretended to
secret traditions from I know not who: against them he advises Christians
(...), to wax old in the Scriptures, thence to seek for demonstrations, and by
that rule to frame our lives.

S. Basil in his Ethics definit. 26. (...), 4.
whatsoever is done or said ought to be confirmed by the testimony of the
Divinely-inspired Scripture; both for the full persuasion of the good, as also
for the condemnation of the evil: (...), that is, every thing that belongs to
faith and manners, not every indifferent thing, but every thing of duty; not
every thing of a man, but every thing of a Christian; not things of natural
life, but of the supernatural. Which sense of his words clearly excludes the
necessity of tradition, and yet intends not to exclude either liberty, or
humane laws, or the conduct of prudence.

5. To the like purpose is that of Origin: Debemus ergo ad testimonium verborum
quae proferimus in doctrina, in. Matthew. (...).
proferre sensum scripturae, quasi confirmantem quem exponimus sensum, we ought
to bring Scripture for the confirmation of our exposition: which words of his
are very considerable to those who are earnest for our admittance of traditive
interpretation of Scriptures. Concerning which in passing by (because it will
be nothing to the main inquiry, which is not how Scripture is to be understood,
but whether being rightly understood it be a sufficient rule of faith and
manners) I shall give this account: That besides there are (I mean in matters
of faith, not in matters ritual and of government) no such traditive
commentaries; there being no greater variety and difference amongst the ancient
and modern writers commonly and respectively in any thing than in their
expositions of Scripture; no where so great liberty, no where so little
agreement; besides this, I say, that they are in commentaries of Scripture to
be looked upon as so many single persons, because there was no public
authentic commentary any where, no assemblies in order to any such
expositions, no tradition pretended for the sense of controverted places; but
they used right reason, the analogy of faith, the sense of the words, and the
notice of the originals, and so they expounded certainly or probably according
as it happened, according to that of S. Athanasius Sunt vero etiam multi
Sanctorum Magistrorum libri in quos si quis incurrat assequetur quodammodo
scripturarum interpretationem, O^a^. contra. Gentes.
There are many books of the holy Doctors, upon which if one chance to light,
he may in some measure attain to the interpretation of the Scriptures. But when
they (according to Origens way here described) confirmed an exposition of one
place by the doctrine of another, then and then only they thought they had the
(...) the Scripture-demonstration, and a matter of faith and of necessary
belief, and that this was the duty of the Christian Doctors, in cap. 3. ep. Romans
Origin does expressly affirm. Afterward, as Paul's custom is he would verify
from the holy Scriptures what he had said; so also giving an example to the
Doctors of the Church, that what they speak to the people should not be of
their own sense, but confirmed by divine testimonies: For if he, such and so
great an Apostle, did not suppose his own authority sufficient warrant to his
sayings, unless he make it appear that what he says is written in the Law and
the Prophets: how much more ought we little ones observe this, that we do not
bring forth ours, but the sentences of the holy Spirit, viz. from Scripture;
for that was the practice of S. Paul, whom he in this place for that very thing
propounds as imitable. And in pursuance of this example and advice, S. Cyril.
Hierosol. (...). 12. illumin torum.
S. Cyril expresses himself perfectly, (...) attend not to my inventions; for
you may possibly be deceived: but trust no words, (...), unless thou do
learn it from the Divine Scriptures. And more fully yet he speaks in another
place; speaking of faith in the H. Trinity he advises them to retain that zeal
in their mind, which by heads, or summaries is already lightly expounded to
you, Catech. 4. illuminat.
but if God grant, shall according to my strength be demonstrated to you by
Scripture, (...). For it behooves us not to deliver so much as the least thing
of the holy mysteries of faith without the Divine Scriptures, nor to be moved
with probable discourses. Neither give credit to me speaking, unless what is
spoken be demonstrated by the holy Scriptures: (...), for that is the security
of our faith which is derived not from witty inventions, but from the
demonstration of divine Scriptures. Omne quod loquimur debemus affirmare de
scripturis Sanctis, in Psalm. 89
said S Hierome, Every thing that we speak we must prove it from the holy
Scriptures; not every thing absolutely but every thing of religion, every thing
of faith and manners: and if all this be not in the Scriptures, it can have no
just authority. Hoc quia de scripturis authoritatem non habet eadem facilitate
contemnitur qua probatur, Idem in Matthew cap. 23.
If it have not its warrant from Scripture, it may with as much ease be
despised as it was offered. Where though S. Hierom speaks of a particular
question, viz. whether Zecharias the son of Barachias were the Father of John
the Baptist; yet it could not have been applied to this particular if it had
not been true in the general, That every thing of religion may be rejected that
is not proved from Scripture. Homil. in Psalm. 95
But this is expressly affirmed by S. Chrysostom; Nam si quid dicitur absque
Scriptura auditorum cogitatio claudicat, etc. If any thing be spoken without
Scripture the thought of the hearers is lame; sometimes inclining to assent,
sometimes declining; sometimes rejecting the opinion as frivolous, sometimes
receiving it as probable: but when a testimony of the Divine voice proceeds
from Scripture, it confirms the speech of him that speaks, and the mind of
him that hears. And upon this account it was that S. Cyril of Alexandria,
being to dispute with Theodoret concerning some mysterious questions of
Religion, ad Euoptium.
refused to confer but from the fountains of Scripture. It became him (says
he) being exercised in Scriptures, since his desire was to confer with me
about divine mysteryes, to speak with us only out of the Holy Scriptures, and
so to frame his discourse as becomes holy things. And I should wonder if
Theodoret should do otherwise: Dialog. 1. cap. 6.
for he himself brings in the orthodox Christian saying to Eranistes, (...)
Tell not me of your logismes and syllogismes: I rely upon Scripture alone. In
which short sentence he makes provision against all devices of man's inventing;
but he establishes a remedy and an affirmative that is equally strong against
all pretension of traditions besides Scripture, by saying that Scripture alone
is the ground of his confidence, the argument of his persuasion in matters of
Religion. But S. Austin establishes the same sufficient and only rule of
Scripture, Contra Maximinum lib. 3. cap. 14.
and by way of instance excludes the Authority of Councels. Sed nunc nec ego
Nicenum nec tu debes Ariminense tanquam praejudicaturus proferre Concilium.
Neque ego hujus authoritate neque tu illius detineris: Scripturarum
authoritatibus, non quorumcunque propriis, sed utrisque communibus testibus,
res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet, I ought not to urge
the Nicene Council, nor you that of Ariminum; as prejudging the question on
either side. But let the causes be confronted, argument against argument,
matter against matter, thing against thing by the authorities of Scripture,
which are the witnesses common to us both. By which words, if S. Austins
affirmative can prevail, it is certain that nothing ought to be pretended for
argument but Scripture in matters of Religion. For if a General Council, which
is the best witness of tradition, the best expounder of Scripture, the best
determiner of a question, is not a competent measure of determination, then
certainly nothing else can pretend to it, nothing but Scripture. And if it be
replied, that this is only affirmed by him in case that two Councils are or
seem contrary: I answer that if Councils can be or seem contrary, so that wise
and good men cannot competently insist upon their testimony, it is certain a
man may be deceived, or cannot justly be determined by any topic but the words
and consequences of Scripture; and if this be the only probation, then it is
sufficient, that is certain. But that will be a distinct consideration. In the
mean time that which I intend to persuade by these testimonies, is that the
Fathers of the primitive Church did in all their mysterious inquiries of
religion, in all matters of faith and manners, admit no argument but what was
derived from Scripture. (...) and remigant animi popul^rum. Nemo vobis credat,
nemo nobis: (...) sunt Judues si Christiani, de utra^que part dari non
possunt, quia studtis (...) et Ju^ex: si (...), non potest nosse Christiana
secreta; si Judaus, inimi^us est (...) Ergo in (...): de coelo quarendus est
Judex. Sed ut (...) cum ^^beamus in E^^gelio testamentum? Optat. lib. 5. contr.
Parmen.

(...) didici hunc (...) honoremque defer, ut nullam eorum scribendo (...) ut
quantalibet (...) polleant: non ideo verum putem quia ipsi (...) per illo^
auti^^^ Canonico^, vel probabilit (...), quod a veritate non abhorreat,
persuadere (...) August (...) 19. ad (...).

(...), quae Canonica in Ecclesia nominantur, perspiciua aliquid firmatur
authoritate, (...) est, Aliis vero testibus vel testimontis quibus aliquid
credendum esse suadetur, tibi credere (...) etc. Idem Epist. 112. Vide cundem
libr. ad (...) ^^llationem cap. 15. and lib. de Unitate (...).




2. Next to this and like it is, 6.
that the primitive Doctors did confute all heresies from Scripture; which
could no way be done, but that because Rectum est index sui and obliqui, that
which is straight will demonstrate its own straightness and the crookedness of
that which is crooked. Scripture must be a rule of all religion and all faith,
and therefore sufficient to reprove all vice and every heresy. So Tertullian
discourses, Aufer haereticis quae cum Ethnicis sapiunt, De (...) carnis cap. 3.
ut de Scripturis solis quaestiones suas sistant, Take from heretics their
Ethnic learning, that they may dispute their questions out of Scripture only.
To this purpose Origin brings in the precedent of our Blessed Lord, T^act 23.
in M^^h.
from Scriptures confuting the heresy of the Sadducees about the Resurrection.
As Christ did, sic facient and Christi imitatores exemplis Scripturarum, quibus
oportet secundum sanam doctrinam omnem vocem obmutescere Pharaonis, So will the
followers of Christ do by the examples of Scriptures, which will put to
silence every voice of Pharaoh; that is, every doctrine of the adversaries.
Plainer yet are those excellent words of S. Athanasius, speaking but of a small
part of Scripture, even so much as was sufficient to prove the articles of the
Nicene Creed: (...), (...)
he says, That faith which the Fathers confessed at Nice, according to the
Holy Scriptures, was sufficient to reprove all [heretical] impiety, and to
establish our Religion or faith in Christ. Ho^^^. 58. in Johan.
And therefore S. Chrysostom compares the Scriptures to a door: (...)....,
For they lead us to God, and open to us the knowledge of God, and keep
heretics from entering in. The metaphor is dogmatical and plain enough without
a commentary. The Scripture must be the port at which every article of faith
must go forth, and by which every heresy can be kept from the fold of Christ.
Ad illud. ad docendum] in 2 (...). 3. (...).
Quae ignoramus ex ea discimus. So Theodoret. Whatsoever we are ignorant of, we
learn from thence. Nihil est quod nequeat Scripturis dissolvi. So Theophylact.
There is no difficulty but may be untied by the Scriptures.

The Author of the imperfect work upon S. Matthew, 7.
usually attributed to S. Chrysostom, discourses pertinently and extreme fully
to this article. Then [when ye shall see the abomination of desolation standing
in the holy place] that is, when ye shall see impious heresy, which is the army
of Antichrist, standing in the holy places of the Church, in that time [he
which is in Judaea let him flee to the mountains,] that is, they who are in
Christianity, let them run to the Scriptures. And why does he command all
Christians in that time to run to the Scriptures? Because ever since heresy did
infest those Churches, there can be no proof of true Christianity, nor any
other refuge for Christians who would know the truth of faith, but that of the
Divine Scripture. And a little after, Now by no means can he that desires,
come to know which is the true Church of Christ, but only by the
Scriptures....Our Lord therefore knowing that there would be so great a
confusion in the last days, commands that all Christians who would be
established in the truth of faith should fly to nothing but to the Scriptures.
These words in some editions of the works of S. Chrysostom are scratched out
by a Roman hand, to the regret of some of his own party, and the shame of them
that suffered it or are pleased with it. All that I shall say to the book is
this, that it is very often urged by the greatest patrons of tradition to serve
their ends in many other questions, and therefore cannot be rejected upon
pretense of not being S. Chrysostom's; much less upon pretense that it was
written or interpolated by an Arrian; because the Arrians called for Scripture
in the use of the word (...), but for the thing it self they offered to be
tried by tradition: and so did the Catholics, as it happened, or as the
peevishness of their adversaries, or the advantages of the question did prompt
them; but the Catholics and the Arrians never did differ upon the question of
the sufficiency of Scripture. De script. Eccl. de S. Joh. Chrysostom.
But as for the book, it is liber doctus and minime spernendus, says
Bellarmine; and so is this testimony: and the rather because it is perfectly
agreeing with the doctrine of the other Fathers.

So S. Augustine, 8.
Contra insidiosos errores ^^us vol^it ponere firmamentum in Scripturis, Tract.
2. in Epist. Johan.
contra quas nullus audet l^qui qui quoquo modo se vult videri Christianum,
Against treacherous e^^ors God would place our strength in the Scriptures;
against which none that would any way seem a Christian dares to speak. And a
little after he adds this example. When Christ offered himself to Thomas to be
handled, non illi suffecit nisi de Scripturis confirmaret cor credentium,
Christ thought (...) not enough unless out of the Scriptures he had confirmed
the heart of the believers: prospiciebat enim nos futuros, He foresaw that we
should come after: For if they therefore believed because they held and handled
him, what do we? Christ is ascended into heaven, not to return but at the end
of the world that he may judge the quick and the dead: whence shall ^e bel^^ve
but by that by which he confirmed them who handled him? He opened unto them the
Scriptures] The Scriptures therefore are the great repository and the great
security of faith. They are also the great and the only deletery of heresies.
So Justus Orgilitanus expounds that of the Canticles [take the little foxes]
that is, convincite haereticos eorumque versutias sanctarum Scripturarum
concludite testimoniis; convince heretics, and restrain their subtleties and
crafts with the testimonies of Holy Scriptures. And thus in fact the Fathers
did conclude against the Gnostics, the Valentinians, the Marcionites, the
Manichees, the Photinians, the Arrians, the Novatians, Eutichians, Eunomians,
Nestorians, Macedonians, and all the pests of Christendom. Hos percussit
gladius. The word of God is sharper then a two-edged sword; and the magazines
of Scripture were the armories of the Church.

3. The Fathers did reject whatsoever was offered as an article of faith or a
Rule of manners, 9.
that was not in, or could not be proved from Scriptures. So Tertullian, ^. C^^
cap. 12.
Sed quoniam unum aliquod attigimus vacuae observationis, non pigebit caetera
quoque denotare, quibus merito vanitas exprobranda est, siquidem sine ullius
aut Dominici aut Apostolici praecepti authoritate fiunt. Hujusmodi enim non
religioni, sed superstitioni deputantur, affectata and coacta, and curiosi
potius quam rationalis officii. If you cannot show the authority of a divine or
Apostolical praecept, your office is not religion, but superstition, not a
reasonable service, but curiosity, coaction or affectation. Pamelius supposed
these words to be very dangerous against Ecclesiastical Traditions. They are
indeed against all such traditions as either were mere matters of fact without
command, or were postnate to the days of the Apostles, of which nature are
almost all now in reputation and practice amongst the Romanists. But more full
yet and explicative of the former are those other words of Tertullian against
Hermogenes: Whether all things were made of praeexisting matter, Cap. 22.
I have no where read, let the school of Hermogenes show where it is written.
Si non est scriptum, timeat Vae illud adjicientibus aut detrahentibus
destinatum, If it be not written, let him fear the curse of them that add or
detract to or from what is written in the Scriptures. But S. Basil is yet more
decretory: Homil. de fide.
(...), It is a manifest defection from the faith, and a conviction of pride,
either to reject any thing of what is written, In Asceticis, (...) 80.
or to introduce any thing that is not. And therefore in pursuance of this
great truth and measure of conscience, he gives this rule, (...), Whatsoever is
without Scripture, not dervi'd from thence, is not of faith, and therefore is a
sin: and therefore every such thing S. Austin accurses; Siquis sive de Christo,
Lib. 3. contra liter. Petiliani, cap. 6.
sive de ejus Ecclesia, sive de quacunque alia re quae pertinet ad fidem
vitamque nostram, non dicam si nos, sed, quod Paulus adjecit, si Angelus de
coelo vobis annunciaverit praeterquam quod in Scripturis legalibus and
Evangelicis accepistis, anathema sit, If any of us I will not say, but if any
Angel (for that S. Paul added) shall say any thing of Christ or of his Church
or of any other thing pertaining to faith and our life, except what we have
received from the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospels, let him be Anathema.
Scripturis non loquentibus quis loquetur? If the Scriptures speak not, De
vocat. gentium in 20. tomo operum Ambros. l. 2. c. 3.
who will speak? said S. Prosper. All things which are delivered to us by the
Law and the Prophets and the Apostles we receive, acknowledge and confess,
neither do we inquire after any thing else: For it cannot be that beside those
things which are divinely spoken by the divine oracles of the Old and New
Testament, we should say or at all think any thing of God. lib. de Trinit. and
persona Christi.
So S. Cyril. These Fathers speak dogmatically, generally and peremptorily:
nothing but what is in Scripture; nothing of God, nothing of Christ, nothing of
his Church, nothing of any thing else. Add to these, that by their doctrine of
the sufficiency and sole use and necessity of Scripture in matters of Religion
they do exclude by name every thing that pretends against Scripture. Paschali
2.
So Theophilus Alexandrinus; Daemonici spiritus est instinctis sophismata
humanarum mentium sequi, and aliquid extra Scripturarum authoritatem sequi, It
is the instinct of the Devil to follow the inventions of men's minds, and to
follow any thing without the authority of the Scriptures. No devise, no wit, no
argument or invention of man is to be admitted into religion; nothing but
Scriptures: but neither may traditions be received. Quae absque authoritate and
testimoniis Scripturarum quasi traditione Apostolica sponte reperiunt and
confingunt, In Agge. c. 1.
percutit gladius. So S. Hierome. These things which they feign as if they were
traditions Apostolical, the sword shall smite, if they be without authority and
testimonies from Scripture. in Regni. bre^^ reg. 95.
And so S. Basil to the Question, Whether new converts are to be accustomed to
the Scriptures; he answers, It is fit that every one should out of the Holy
Scriptures learn what is for his use; yea it is necessary, (...), both for the
full certainty of godliness, and also that they may not be accustomed to humane
traditions. Where it is observable, he calls all humane traditions that are not
in Scripture; for if there were any divine traditions which are not in
Scripture, he ought to have advised the learning of them besides Scripture, for
the avoiding of traditions which are not divine: but the Scripture being
sufficient for all, whatsoever is besides it is humane, and to be rejected. I
sum up this particular with an excellent discourse of the same Saint to the
same purpose: in Reg. brev. reg. 1.
He asks a question, Whether it be lawful or profitable to any one to permit
himself to do or to speak what himself thinks right, without the testimony of
the Holy Scriptures. He answers (after the quotation of many places of
Scripture) Who therefore is so mad, that of himself he dare so much as in
thought to conceive any thing, seeing he wants the Holy and good Spirit for his
guide, that he may be directed both in mind, in word and in action into the
way of truth, or that he would remain blind without our Lord Jesus Christ who
is the Sun of righteousness, etc? But because of those things which are
disputed amongst us some are determined by the Commandment of God in holy
Scripture, others are passed over in silence; as for those things which are
written, there is absolutely no power at all given to any one, either to do
any of those things which are forbidden, or to omit any of those things which
are commanded: since our Lord has at once denounced and said, Thou shall keep
the word which I command thee this day, thou shall not add to it, nor take
from it. For a fearful judgment is expected and a burning fire to devour them
who dare any such thing. But as for those things which are passed over in
silence, the Apostle Paul has appointed us a rule, saying, All things are
lawful to me, but all things are not expedient; all things are lawful, but all
things do not edify: Let no man seek to please himself, but every one another
good. So that it is altogether necessary to be subject to God according to his
Commandment. The sum is this, Nothing is matter of duty either in word or
deed, in faith or manners, but what is written in the Scriptures: whatsoever is
not written there it is left to our liberty, and we are to use it as all
indifferent things are to be used, that is, with liberty and with charity. Now
if concerning such things as these there be any traditions, it matters not;
they are no part of our religion, but to be received like laws of man, or
customs, of which account is to be given in the proper place.

4. The Fathers of the Church did affirm the Holy Scriptures to be a
sufficient and a perfect rule of faith and manners. Adoro Scripturae
plenitudinem, said Tertullian, Advers. Hermogen. Cap, 22.
quae mihi and factorem manifestat and facta. I adore the fullness of Scripture,
which declares God and Gods works. His instance is in one article, but that
without the rest can be no fullness; as Virgils Georgics cannot be full, because
he tells a few things well of Bees and tillage. But I will not choose any
authorities concerning which I need to argue; there are enough that are
extremely plain, affirmative and concluding. I instance in Irenaeus. Credere
haec talia debemus Deo qui and nos fecit, rectissime scientes qui Scripturae
quidem perfectae sunt, Lib. 2. cap. 47.
quippe a verbo Dei and Spiritu ejus dictae, We know assuredly that the
Scriptures are perfect, for they are the word of God, and spoken by the spirit
of God. But therefore he advises, Lib. 4. cap. 66.
Legite diligentius id quod ab Apostolis est Evangelium nobis datum, and legite
diligentius Prophetas, and invenietis universam actione^, and omnem doctrinam,
and omnem passionem Domini nostri praedicatam in ipsis, Read the Gospel which
the Apostles left us more diligently, read the Prophets more diligently, and
you shall find declared in them all the doctrine of Christ, all his action and
all his passion. By [ universam actionem] he means his life indefinitely, and
in general: and certainly the New Testament needs nothing to its being a
perfect Rule, when it contains all Christ's doctrine, Apud Theodoret. hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 6. and apud Gelasium Cyzicenum in actis Council. Nicen. l. 2.
c. 7.
and all his story, viz. so far as concerns us. (...), said Constantine the
Emperor. The Evangelical books, and those of the Apostles, and the orcales of
the old Prophets, do evidently teach us to believe those things which we ought
to believe concerning that which is divine. And therefore S. Athanasius, or
whoever is the Author of the Exhortation to the Monks, Cura in canonicis
ponenda est salubriter monumentis, non quod Apocrypha praesertim ignorata
debeamus da^nare, sed quod ad scientiam Dei digestam Canonis seriem putemus
posse sufficere: Be careful in reading the Canonical Scriptures; not that the
apocryphal (especially before they are known) ought to be rejected, but that we
suppose the Canon is sufficient [ to the knowledge of God.] The same with
Constantines (...), that which is concerning God; that is, the religion. But
more full is that short sentence of S. Athanasius, Orat. contra Gentes in initio
(...), The holy and divinely-inspir'd Scriptures are in themselves sufficient
for the preaching or enunciation of the truth. Homil. 9. in 2. T^m.
To the same purpose are the words of S. Chrysostom; If there be need to learn
any thing, or to be ignorant of any thing, thence we learn; if we would reprove
falsehood, thence we draw; if any thing be wanting to correction, to
castigation, to comfort, and that we ought to get it, from thence we learn it.
(...), Look for no other teacher, Homil. 9. in ep. Coloss.
thou have the oracles of God: none teaches thee like them. He that uses not
the Scriptures, but comes into the fold of Christ some other way, that is,
appoints a way to himself which the law [of God] has not established, he is a
thief. For the Scriptures are like a most strong gate, Homil. 58. in Johan.
and keep out heretics from entering, and make us altogether sure of all
things whatsoever we will: [of all things] that is, of all things of religion;
for that is the subject of the discourse, and explicitly delivered by him in
another place. Homil. 41. opi. (...). in Matthew.
Quicquid quaeritur ad salutem totum jam adimpletum est in Scripturis, In the
Scriptures fully there is whatsoever is looked for unto Salvation. l. 2. c. 9.
de doctri. Christiana.
And this is so expressed in an excellent place of S. Austin, In iis quae
aperte in Scripturis posita sunt inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem
moresque vivendi, spem scil, atque charitatem. More fully yet was that of Abbat
Odilo of the Cluniac order, Omnis ratio qua vel Deum vel nos cognoscimus,
Collat. l. 1. c. 1.
divinis libris continetur, In those things which are openly or plainly placed
in the Scriptures all things are to be found which contain faith, and the
manners of life, viz. hope and charity: every me asure or manner by which we
know God or our selves is contained in the divine books. What can be more plain
or more affirmative? But S. Austin says the same thing over and over; Legite
sacram scripturam in qua quid tenendu^ and quid fugiendum sit plene invenietis,
(...).
Read the holy Scriptures; in which ye shall [perfectly, or] fully find what is
to be held, what is to be avoided. And again, Sancta Scriptura nostrae
doctrinae regulam figit, (...) c. 1.
The Holy Scripture fixes or limits the rule of our doctrine. In hoc volumine
cuncta quae aedificant, omnia quae erudiunt, scripta continentur, ^omil. 9. in
(...).
faith S. Gregory Bp. of Rome, In this volume whatsoever can instruct us,
whatsoever can edify us is contained. (...), lib. 1. de ortho fide c. 1.
said S. Damascen; All things delivered to us by the Law and the Prophets, the
Apostles and Evangelists, we receive and know and reverence, looking for
nothing beyond these. And to bring in any thing that is a stranger to Scripture
Theodoret calls it an extinguishing of the Spirit; in Levit. q. 9.
something contrary to that duty whereby we are obliged to stir up the grace
of God we have received. * For the Church of Christ dwells in and possesses
assemblies in all the world being joined by the unity of the Spirit, and has
cities of the Law and the Prophets, of the Gospel and Apostles, she departs not
out of her own bounds, that is, in Michae. c. 1.
from the Holy Scriptures, but retains her first possession. So S. Hierome. And
in his commentary on Psalm. 86. (if he be the Author of it, as Rupertus
affirms,) expounding those words, Dominus narrabit in Scriptura populorum and
principum horum qui fuerunt in ea, he says, [ Et principum] hoc est
Apostolorum and Evangelist arum: [horum qui fuerunt in ea] videte quid dicat,
Qui fuerunt, non qui sunt, ut exceptis Apostolis, quodcunque aliud postea
dicitur, abscindatur, non habeat postea autoritatem. Quam vis ergo Sanctus sit
aliquis post Apostolos, quamvis disertus sit, non habet autoritatem, quoniam
Dominus narrat in Scriptura populorum and principum qui fuerunt in ea. The
Princes of the people] that is, the Apostles and Evangelists: [of them which
have been in her] which have been, not which are in her; that excepting what
the Apostles say, every thing after them may be cut off, it has after them no
authority. For if there be any wise man, any Saint after the Apostles, he has
no authority; because our Lord says in the Scripture or writing of the princes
that have been in her. Sufficit Divina Scriptura ad faciendu^ eos qui in illa
educati sunt sapientes, and probatissimos, and sufficientissimam habentes
intelligentiam; indigemusque ad hoc prorsus nihil externis Magistris. lib. 7.
contra Julian.
So S. Cyril of Alexandria. The divine Scripture is sufficient to make them who
are educated in it wise and most approved and having a most sufficient
understanding, and be sides this we need no external Masters. lib. 8.
anagogicae contempl. in Hexaemeron.
To the same purpose is that of Anastasius of Antioch, Quod quae silentio
praeteriit Scriptura divina non sint scrutanda, perspicuum: Omnia enim quae
faciunt ad nostra^ utilitatem dispensavit and administravit Spiritus sanctus:
It is manifest that those things are not to be inquired into which the
Scripture has passed over with silence. For the holy Spirit has dispensed to
us and administered all things which conduce unto our profit. Quicquid est de
verbo Dei, Rupert. Abbas Tuitiensis Comment. in lib. Regum. l. 3. c. 12.
quicquid sciri vel praedicari oportet, de Incarnatione, de vera Divinitate and
Humanitate filii Dei, duobus ita continetur Testamentis, ut extra haec nihil
sit quod annunciari debeat aut credi. Totum in his comprehenditur coeleste
oraculum, quod tam firmiter scire debemus, ut extra haec audire neque hominem
nobis liceat, neque Angelum. Whatsoever is of the word of God, whatsoever ought
to be known or preached of the Incarnation, of the true Divinity and Humanity
of the Son of God, is so contained in both the Testaments, that besides these
there is nothing that may be believed or preached. All the whole celestial
oracle is comprehended in these, which we must so firmly believe, that besides
these it is not lawful for us to hear either Man or Angel: and indeed it were
not to be imagined how the Scripture should be a Canon or Rule to Christians,
if it were so imperfect that it did not contain the measures of faith and
manners. (...), said Varinus, A Rule or Canon is an unerring measure, which at
no hand can receive addition or suffer diminution. And S. Basil reproved the
heretic Eunomius for folly besides his false doctrine, Lib. 1. contr. Eunomium.
because that he affirmed tradition of the Fathers to be the Gnomon or Canon of
faith, and yet said (...), that it wanted some additament to make it exact; one
part contradicts the other. (...), says S. Chrysostom, Homil. 12. in 3.
Philip.
If anything be put to it, or taken from it, it ceases to be a Canon. And
therefore Scriptures are not the Christian Canon, they are not Canonical, if
they need to be supplied by traditions. The same is also affirmed by
Oecumenius, and the very words of Chrysostom are transcribed by Theophylact.

5. Whatsoever Christ taught to his Apostles by his Sermons and by his Spirit,
11.
all that the Apostles taught to the Church, and set it down in writing.

This we learn from S. Irenaeus, Lib. 3. cap. 1.
Non per alios dispositionem salutis nostrae cognovimus quam per eos per quos
Evangelium pervenit ad nos, quod quidem hinc praeconiaverunt, postea vero per
Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt, fundamentum and columnam fidei
nostrae futurum. We have known the Economy of our salvation by no other but by
those by whom the Gospel came to us; which truly they then preached, but
afterward by the will of God delivered to us in the Scriptures, which was to
be the pillar and ground to our faith:] viz. what the Church was afterward to
minister, the Scriptures did consigne, and both of them were pillars and
grounds of faith, the Church (...), the Scriptures (...), the Church by way of
Ministry, Tract. 49. in Johan.
the Scriptures by their Authority. To this purpose are those words of S.
Austin, Cum multa fecisset Dominus Jesus, non omnia scripta sunt, sicut idem
ipse sanctus Evangelista testatur, multa Dominum and dixisse and fecisse quae
scripta non sunt: electa sunt autem quae scriberentur quae saluti credentium
sufficere videbantur. Our Lord Jesus did do many things which are not written;
and the Holy Evangelist does witness that he both did and spoke many things
which are not written: but those things which were seen to suffice to the
salvation of believers were chosen to be written. And therefore S. Austin and
Optatus compare the Scriptures to the Will of the Testator: Exposit. 2. Psalm.
21. contr. Parmen. l. 5.
concerning his goods the kindred may strive, one affirming this, and another
that; but proferte tabulas, show the Will, peruse the writings; then the Judge
listens, the Advocates are silent, the people are in suspense, the litigants
wait: let The testators words be read, that must end all contention. Now this
Will was therefore consigned in writing, that when our Testator was gone from
us we might not doubt concerning his Legacies and his Commandments. The same is
by Nicephorus particularly affirmed of S. Paul, Lib. 2. Hist. cap. 34.
Quae praesens oratione sua dilucide docuerat, eadem per compendium absens in
memoriam revocans per epistolas dedit. The things which he plainly and
explicitly preached, he being absent, to recall into their memory what he had
delivered, set them down in his Epistles as in a summary. And S. Peter having
(as appears in his Epistle) promised to do something to put them in mind
after his decease (meaning to remind them of the doctrine delivered) caused S.
Mark to write his Gospel.

Thus I have sufficiently demonstrated the Rule so far as this topic can
extend; 12.
that is by matter of fact, and the doctrine of the Church. For if Tradition be
regardable, then that the Scriptures are a sufficient and a perfect Rule of
Faith and Manners is competently proved by that which our adversaries in this
question pretend to regard: but if Tradition be not considerable, then the
Scriptures alone are; and there is indeed no Tradition so clear, so regular, so
unreprovable as those which are concerning Scripture. That these books are
Scripture, that is, the written word of God, and that the written word of God
is all that we have of Gods will, is universally delivered by the Christian,
and of that which of late is questioned I have given a specimen: for if the
concurrent testimony of so many Fathers cannot persuade this article, then the
topic of Tradition will be wholly useless in all questions; but if they can,
as indeed they ought in this question, then we are fixed upon this great rule
of Conscience; the Holy Scriptures are the great Rule of Conscience both in
doctrines of Faith, and in doctrines of Manners.

2. The next inquiry is what use there is of Traditions, 13.
and if they cannot be a part of the Rule, what aides do they bring to the
Conscience in faith or manners.

1. To this I answer, 14.
that Tradition is of great use for the conveying of this great Rule of
Conscience, the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. For when I affirm
that the Holy Scriptures are a perfect rule of faith and manners, that is, that
they contain all the word of God; it is to be understood, that it is a rule, a
perfect rule to them who believe them to be the word of God. For the question
is not whether Scriptures be a Rule, but whether they be a perfect Rule: not
whether they be the word of God, but whether they be all the word of God that
is of necessity to be preached to the Church. So that the Traditions concerning
Scripture it self, being extrinsecal to Scripture, are also extrinsecal to the
question: and supposing that Tradition were the only instrument of conveying
Scripture to us; yet that Tradition must not, cannot possibly be any part of
the question, for Scripture must be supposed as delivered to us and accepted
for the word of God, before we can inquire whether this Scripture so delivered
be all the word of God or no. And indeed Tradition of Scripture is the hand
that reaches forth this repository of the Divine word, but it self is not
directly any part of it; it ministers to the will of God, but is no part of the
matter of it: and therefore the common pretense for the necessity of Tradition
besides Scripture (because by universal Tradition we understand these to be the
books of Scripture) will come to nothing; because the question of the plenitude
of Scripture is after the admission of that tradition which reports Scripture
to us to be the word of God: but it matters not how or why we believe it,
whether by universal or particular Tradition, whether because my Priest tells
me so or my Father, whether I am brought into it by reason or by education, by
demonstrative or by probable inducements: if it be believed heartily it is
sufficient; and then it is that we affirm the Scriptures so believed to be the
word of God, to be a perfect Rule of all that we are to think or speak or do
in order to Salvation.

2. Besides this, 15.
to inquire of what use traditions are is to no purpose for us, for there is no
tradition of any doctrine of Faith or Rule of life but what is in Scripture;
but if there were, Traditions would be of the same use as Scripture is, if the
tradition were from Christ and his Apostles, and were as certain, as universal,
as credible as that is by which we are told that Scripture is the word of God.
For the word which is now written was first delivered, that which is now
Scripture was at first tradition; and because it was afterward called so, it
has been made use of by these persons, who, knowing that the change of words
in descending Ages is least discerned by mankind, and that from words which are
fewer then things most advantages can be made by them who love every thing
better then truth, have pretended every saying of the Scripture and Fathers, in
which Tradition is used, to be a competent argument of the imperfection of
Scripture, and of the necessity of a supply to be made by tradition.

(...), Tradition, 16.
is any way of communicating the notice of a thing to us: (...), I have
delivered to you that Christ died for our sins. But this tradition is also in
Scripture: so S. Paul adds that Christ died for our sins, (...) according to
the Scriptures; (...) 15.
and he commands the Thessalonians to preserve the traditions which they had
learned from his mouth or from his hand, from his preaching or his writings:
and this use of the word continued in the Church for diverse Ages, even till all
traditions that were not in Scripture were lost, or made uncertain. Si ergo aut
Evangelio praecipitur, Epist. 74. ad Pompei.
aut in Apostolorum epistolis aut actibus continetur....observetur divina haec
and sancta traditio. So S. Cyprian. If this be commanded in the Gospel, or be
contained in the Epistles or Acts of the Apostles, let this Divine and holy
tradition be observed. Such was that which S. Basil calls (...) the tradition
of baptism, ^^b. 3. contra (...).
(...), Our Lord himself having delivered or given the order in the tradition
of baptism. And S. Irenaeus calls it a tradition Apostolical, Christum
accepisse calicem, and dixisse sanguinem suum esse, etc. That Christ took the
cup, and said it was his blood; and that the Barbarians did diligently keep the
tradition, Credentes in unum Deum and in Christum qui natus est ex Virgin,
Lib. 3. cap. 4.
believing in one God and in Christ who was born of a Virgin. Such traditions
as these the whole Church had before the consignation of Scripture-Canon, and
she retained them better by help of the Scriptures. Tradition is a giving or
delivering of it; and so long as it is a tradition of God, it is well enough:
but if it comes to be your traditions, there is in them nothing of Divinity,
nothing of that authority which is to prescribe in faith and holiness. So that
in short the thing is this;

If God by his Son or by his Apostles, or any way else, has taught his Church,
there is no disputing of it, let it be made appear that it is a tradition of
God, whether written or unwritten, it matters not. If it cannot be made to
appear, then idem est non esse and non apparere, it is not obliging to us: we
cannot follow the light of a candle that is hid in a dark lanthorn, or thrust
into a bushel. But that there is nothing of Faith and manners which the Church
of God ever did hold necessary, or ought to have held necessary, but what is in
the Scriptures, I have already largely proved, and shall in the consequents
illustrate with other collateral lights.

In the mean time it ought to be known that in the first ages of the Church the
Fathers disputing with Heretics did oftentimes urge against them the constant
and universal tradition of the Church* 17.
and it was for these reasons. 1. Because the Heretics denied the Scriptures:
so did the Manichees reject the four Gospels; Ebion received only S. Matthews
Gospel, Cerinthus only S. Mark, Marcion only S. Luke, and not all of that,
Valentinus none but S. John, but the Alogi received all but that; Cerdo,
Cherinthus, Tatianus and Manichaeus rejected the acts of the Apostles; the
Ebionites all S. Paul's Epistles; the Church of Rome for a long time rejected
the Epistle to the Hebrews, so did Marcion; others also refused to admit the
Epistles of S. James and S. Jude, the second of S. Peter, the second and third
of S. John, as we learn from Lib. 3. hist. cap. 25.
Eusebius and S. Lib. de viris illustr.
Hierom. Now to such men as these, and in all the interval till the whole Canon
was consigned and accepted, it was of great use to allege Tradition,
especially because the doctrine of the Scriptures was entirely and holily
preached in all the Apostolical Churches, and by the known and universally
preached doctrines they could very well refute the blasphemies of wicked and
heretical persons* But in all this here is no objection, for all this tradition
was nothing else but the doctrine of the holy Scriptures.

2. The heretics did rely upon this topic for advantage, 18.
and would be tried by Tradition; as hoping because there were in several
Churches contrary customs, there might be differing doctrines, or they might
plausibly be pretended; and therefore the Fathers had reason to urge tradition,
and to wrest it from their hands, who would fain have used it ill. Thus did the
Carpocratians in Irenaeus, Lib. 2. cap. 2.
When they are reproved from Scripture, they accuse the Scriptures, as if they
were not right, as if they had no authority, as if from them truth could not be
found by them that know not tradition: Lib. 2. cap. 24.
For they affirm that Jesus spoke some things in mystery to his Disciples
apart, and that they required that they might deliver them to the worthy, and
to them that would assent to them. Hist. lib. 5. c. 27.
Upon this pretense Arte^^ exposed his errors, says Eusebius, and Papias
introduced the Millenary heresy; and by tradition the Arians would be tried, S.
Basil. l. 2. contr. Eunom Tract. 97. in Johan.
and S. Basil was by them challenged in an appeal (...) to custom or tradition
and by this Eunomius did suppose he had prevailed; and S. Austin affirm^^ that
all the most foolish heretics pretend for their most senseless figments those
words of our Blessed Savior [ I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now.] And to this purpose was that which the Basilidians did
affirm, that the mysteries of their sect were no things of public notice, but
conveyed in secret. Now to such as these there were (...) two ways of
confutation: one was, which they most insisted upon, that the Holy Scriptures
were a perfect rule of faith and manners, and that there was no need of any
other tradition; the other, that the traditions which they pretended were
false, and that the contrary was the doctrine which all the Churches of God did
preach always. Now thus far Tradition was useful to be pleaded; that is,
though the heretics would not admit the doctrine of Christianity as it was
consigned in Scripture, yet they might be convinced that this was the doctrine
of Christianity because it was also preached by all Bishops and confessed by
all Churches. But in all these contests the Fathers did not pretend to prove by
Tradition what they could not prove by Scripture; but the same things were
preached which were written, and no other articles of Faith, no other rules and
measures of good life: only because they did not consent in the authority of
one instrument, they ought to be convinced by the other.

3. There is yet one use more of Traditions, 19.
but it is in Rituals, and in such instances concerning which S. Paul wrote to
the Corinthians these words [ The rest will I set in order when I come.] Such
are, 1. The observation of the Lords day, solemnly once a year, and less
solemnly once a week, that is, the feast of Easter, and the weekly Sunday; 2.
The Government of the Church by Bishops, which is consigned to us by a
tradition greater then some books of Scripture, and as great as that of the
Lords day: and that so notorious, that thunder is not more heard then this is
seen in all the monuments of Antiquity; 3. Offices Ecclesiastical to be said
and done by Ecclesiastical persons: such as are the public Prayers of the
Church, the consecration of the blessed Eucharist, the blessing of the Married
paires and joining them in the holy and mysterious rite of Marriage, the
consecration of Bishops by Bishops only, and of Priests by Bishops and
Presbyters, though for this last there is not so universal tradition, that
every where requiring the imposition of the Bishops hand, and but in some
places requiring the assistance of the Presbyters. These three are the most
Universal and Apostolical traditions, which although they also have great
grounds in Scripture, yet because the universal practice and doctrine of the
Church of God in all Ages and in all Churches primitive is infinitely evident
and notorious, less liable to exception, and an apt Commentary upon the certain
but less evident places of Scripture, therefore these may be placed under the
protection of universal Tradition; for they really have it beyond all
exception. And although in these the Scripture is sufficient to all wise and
good men, to all that are willing to learn and obey, and not desirous to make
Sects and noises; yet because all men are not wise and good and dis-interess'd,
Tradition in these things is to Scripture as a Burning-glass to the Sun, it
receives its rays in a point, and unites their strength, and makes them burn
as well as shine, that is, it makes them do that which in their own nature
they are apt to do, and from doing which they are only hindered accidentally.

By these instances it is evident that we ought not to refuse Tradition when it
is universal, 20.
nor yet believe that in any thing of great concernment, though it be but
matter of rite and government, the Scripture is defective; for in these things
we admit Tradition to be the Commentary, but Scripture to be the Text: Lib 5 c.
20.
(...), as Irenaeus in Eusebius expresses it, all must be agreeable to
Scripture. And although a tradition so absolutely universal as these, were a
warranty greater then any objection can be against them, and were to be
admitted though they had not express authority in Scripture, as all these have;
yet that even these things also are in Scripture, is a very great argument of
the perfection of it.

For all other things the Scripture is abundant, 21.
and whatever else is to be used in the Externals and appendages of Religion
the authority of the Church is a sufficient warranty, as I shall prove in it is
proper place. But if in these Externals there be a tradition, according to the
degree of it is antiquity and universality, so it puts on degrees of
reasonableness, and may be used by any Age of the Church: and if there be
nothing supervening that alters the case, it is better then any thing that is
new; if it be equally fit, it is not equally good, but much better.

This is all use which is by wise and good men made of Traditions, 22.
and all the use which can justly be made by any man; and besides the premises
this will be yet further apparent, That although there are some universal
practices which ever were and still are in all Churches, which are excellent
significations of the meaning of these Scriptures, where the practices are less
clearly enjoined, yet there are no traditive Doctrines distinct from what are
consigned in Scripture. And this I shall represent in the third particular
which I promised to give account of, viz.

That the topic of Tradition, 23.
after the consignation of the Canon of Scripture, was not only of little use
in any question of Faith or Manners, but falsely pretended for many things, and
is unsafe in all questions of present concernment.

In order to the proof of this, 24.
I divide the great heap of Traditions, which are shovel'd together by the
Church of Rome, into three little heaps: 1. of things necessary or matters of
Faith, 2. of things impertinent to the Faith and unnecessary, 3. of things
false.

The Traditions of things necessary, 25.
are the Trinity of Persons, the consubstantiality of the Eternal Son of God
with his Father, the Baptism of infants, the procession of the Holy Ghost from
the Son, and Original sin, that the Father was not begotten, that the Holy
Ghost is God, and to be invocated, that Baptism is not to be reiterated, that
in Christ there are two natures and one person. Now that these be appertaining
to the Faith, I easily grant; but that the truth of these articles and so much
of them as is certain or necessary is also in Scripture, I appeal to all the
books of the Fathers, and of all moderns who do assert them by testimonies
from Scripture. Quicquid sciri vel praedicari oportet de Incarnatione, de vera
Divinitate atque humanitate filii Dei, duobus ita continetur Testamentis, ut
extra haec nihil sit quod annunciari debet aut credi, said Rupertus Abbas, as I
before quoted him. De author. S. Script. l. 3. p. 53 Tom. 1. contr 1. de verbo
Dei cap. 19. In colloq. Ratisbon. lib. 3. c. 3. contre le Roy Jaques, and l. 2.
c. 7. de Euchar. cont. Du Plessis and cap. 5. obser. 4. Resp. ad quaest. 9.
Jacobi Regi^ Epiphaen. haere. 69.
All the mysteries of Christ's nature and person, of his humanity and Divinity
are clearly set down in both Testaments. But they are not clearly reported in
Tradition: the Fathers having sometimes spoken in these articles more in the
Arian then in the Catholic style, say Hosius, Gordon, Huntly, Gretser, Tanner,
Perron and Fisher. By Scriptures therefore the Church confuted the Arians, the
Eutychians, the Nestorians, the Monothelites, the Photinians and the
Sabellians. The other articles are also S. Ambros. c. 5. lib. de side co^tra
Arianos. S. Aug. tract. 97. in Johan. and epist. 174, and 178. S. Athanas. in
libel. de decret. Synod. Nicen. Tertul. adv. Praxeam. Theodoret. Dial. 2. c. 4.
Salmero, disp. 4. in 2. ad Timoth.
evidently in the words of Scripture or in the first consequences and
deductions. And when we observe the men of the Church of Rome going about with
great pretensions to confirm all their articles by Scriptures, they plainly
invalidate all pretense of necessity of Traditions. If they say that all the
articles of Trent are not to be found in Scripture, let them confess it
plainly, and then go look out for proselytes. If they say there are Scriptures
for all their articles, then Scripture is sufficient, or else their faith is
not. For all these I before reckoned, it is certain both they and we have from
Scripture many proofs, and if there were not, I believe Tradition would fail
us very much; for the heresies which oppugned them were very early, and they
also had customs and pretenses of customs to prescribe for their false
doctrines; as I shall make appear in the following periods.

There are also traditions pretended of things which are not necessary, 26.
such as are the Fast of Lent, Godfathers and Godmothers in baptism, the
mixture of wine and water in the Eucharistical chalice, the keeping of Easter
upon the first day of the week, trine immersion in baptism, the Apostles
Creed, prayer for the dead, the wednesday and the friday Fast, Unction of sick
people, Canon of the Scripture, the forms of Sacraments, and the perpetual
Virginity of the Virgin Mary. Now that these are not Divine traditions nor
Apostolical appears by the destitution of their proper proof. They are
Ecclesiastical traditions and of several ages, and some of them of very great
antiquity; but of what obligation they are I shall account in the Chapter of [
Laws Ecclesiastical.] In the mean time they neither are of the necessity of
faith, or the essential duty of Christian religion: and therefore as a
Christian can go to heaven without the observation of them in certain
circumstances, so is the Scripture a perfect Canon without giving rules
concerning them at all.

But then as for others, 27.
there are indeed a great many pretended to be traditions, but they are false
articles, or wicked practices, or uncertain sentences at the best. I reckon
some of those which the Roman Church obtrudes: such as are invocation of Saints
and Angels, adoration of them, and worshipping of Images, the doctrine of
Purgatory, prayer in an Unknown tongue, the Popes power to depose Kings, and to
absolve from lawful and rate oaths, the picturing of God the Father and the
holy Trinity, the half Communion, the doctrine and practice of Indulgences,
Canon of the Mass, the doctrine of proper sacrifice in the Mass, Monastical
profession, the single life of Priests and Bishops. Now these are so far from
being Apostolical traditions, that they are some of them apparently false, some
of them expressly against Scripture, and others confessedly new, and either but
of yesterday, or, like the issues of the people, born where and when no man can
tell. Concerning Indulgences, Summa Theol. p. 1. tit. 10. c. 3. de Indulg. fol.
202. Venet. 1582. Vtle etiam (...). cap. 2. dexs Indulgent. Na^^r. Comment. de
J^^al. and indulgent. Biel lect. 57. in Can. Missae.
Antoninus the famous Archbishop of Florence, says that we have nothing
expressly recited in holy Scripture, nor are they found at all in the writings
of the ancient Doctors. The half-communion is by the Council of Constance
affirmed to be different from the institution of Christ and the practice of the
primitive Church. Concerning invocation of Saints, Cum scriberentur Scripturae
nondum coeperateusus vovendi Sanctis. De cultu Sanctorum cap. 9. praeterea.
Bellarmine confesses that in the age in which the Scriptures were written, the
use of making vows to Saints was not begun; and Contre le Roy de la Grand
Bretagne, p. 1009.
Cardinal Perron excludes the next ages from having any hand in the invocation
of them. Et quant aux autheurs plus proche du siecle apostolic, encore qu'il
ne se trouve pas de vestiges de ceste coustume etc. In the authors more near
the Apostolical age no footsteps of this custom can be found.

Concerning making an image of the Father or of the Holy Trinity Baronius cites
an Epistle of Gregory the second, An. Dom. 726. in which he gives a reason why
the Church did not make any picture of the Father; which forces him to confess
that the beginning of the custom of painting the Father and the Holy Ghost
postea usu venit in Ecclesia, came into use afterward in the Church.

The doctrine of Purgatory is not only expressly against Scripture, saying,
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, that they
rest from their labors; but it is also certain that it was not so ancient as
the Canon of the Roman Mass, the age of which no man can tell any more then they
can tell the age of a flock of sheep, or a company of men and children
together; for one piece is old, and another is late, and another of a middle
age. But the prayer which in the Canon is for the Dead, supposes that they are
not in Purgatory; but prays for them which are asleep in rest and quietness.

I shall not instance in any more, 28.
because I shall in other places meet with the rest: but these are a sufficient
indication how the Church has been abused by the pretense of tradition, and
that a bold man may in private confidently tell his parishioner that any
doctrine is a Tradition; and he is the more likely to prevail because he cannot
be confuted by his undiscerning hearer, since so great parts and so many Ages
of the Church have been told of things that they were traditions Apostolical,
when the articles themselves are neither old nor true. Is it imaginable by a
man of ordinary understanding, or that has heard any thing of antiquity, that
the Apostles should command their followers to worship the relics of S.
James, or S. Stephen; or that S. Peter did ever give leave to a man that had
sworn, to go from his oath, and not to do what he had sworn he would? Is it
likely that S. Peter or S. Paul should leave secret instructions with S.
Clement or S. Linus that they might depose Kings lawfully when it was in their
power, and when Kings did disagree in opinion from them? Is there any instance,
or precept, or line, or doctrine, or history that ever any Apostle or
Apostolical man consecrated the Holy Communion where there was none to
communicate? It was never heard that a Communion could be single, till the
Catholic Church came to signify the Roman: and yet if Scripture will not prove
these things, Tradition must. The experience and the infinite unreasonableness
of these things does sufficiently give a man warning of attending to such new
traditions, or admitting the topic in any new dispute, it having been so old a
cheat: and after the Canon of Scripture was full, and after that almost the
whole Church had been abused by the tradition of Papias in the Millenary
opinion, which for 300. years of the best and first antiquity prevailed, all
the world should be wiser then to rely upon that which might introduce an
error, but which Truth could never need, it being abundantly provided for in
Scripture.

Sometimes men have been wiser, 29.
and when a Tradition Apostolical has been confidently pretended, they would
as confidently lay it aside, when it was not in Scripture. Clemens Alexandrinus
reckons many traditions Apostolical; but no man regards them. Who believes that
the Greeks were saved by their Philosophy, or that the Apostles preached to
dead Infidels, and then raised them to life, although these were by S. Clement
affirmed to have been traditions Apostolical? Did the world ever the more
believe that a Council might not be called but by the authority and sentence of
the Bishop of Rome, though Marcellus was so bold to say it was a Canon
Apostolical? And after S. Hierom had said these words, praecepta majorum
Apostolicas traditiones quisque existimat, that what their Fathers commanded,
all men were wont to call them Traditions Apostolical; no man had reason to
rely upon any thing which by any one or two or three of the Fathers was called
Tradition Apostolical, unless the thing it self were also notorious or proved
by some other evidence. But this topic of Tradition is infinitely uncertain,
and therefore if it be pretended new, it can be of no use in any of our
questions. For if in the primitive Church Tradition was claimed by the opposite
parties of a question, who can be sure of it now? Artemon pretended it to be an
Apostolical tradition that Christ was (...) a mere man, and the Nicene Fathers
proved it was not so, but much rather the contrary: but that Topic would not
prevail for either side. In the question of Rebaptization of persons baptized
by Heretics, both sides pretended Tradition; so they did in that impertinent,
but (as they then made it) great question of the time of keeping Easter. L. 1.
Stroma^. Lib. 2. cap. 39.
Clemens Alexandrinus said it was an Apostolical Tradition that Christ preached
but one year; but Irenaeus said it was an Apostolical Tradition that Christ was
about fifty years old when he died, and consequently that he preached almost
twenty years. But if they who were almost at the fountain were uncertain of the
Rivers head; how shall we know it who dwell where the waters are ready to
unbosome themselves into the Ocean? And to pretend an Apostolical Tradition in
matters of Faith, now that the books of the Fathers have been lost, and yet
there are a very great many to be read for the proving of Tradition, that is,
that there are too many and too few, that in the loss of some of them possibly
we have lost that light which would have confuted the present pretenses of
Tradition, and the remaining part have passed through the limbecs and strainers
of Heretics and Monks and ignorants and interested persons, and have passed
through the corrections and deturpations and mistakes of transcribers, (a trade
of men who wrote books that they might eat bread, not to promote a truth) and
that they have been disordered by Zeal and Faction and expurgatory Indices, and
that men have been diligent to make the Fathers seem of their side, and that
Heretics have taken the Fathers names and published books under false titles,
and therefore have stamped and stained the Current; is just as if a Tartar
should offer to prove himself to have descended from the family of King David,
upon pretense that the Jews mingled with their Nation, and that they did use
to be great keepers of their genealogies.

But after all this, 31.
the question of Tradition is wholly useless in the questions between the
Church of Rome and the other parts of Christendom. Not only because there are
many Churches of differing rites and differing doctrines from the Roman, who
yet pretend a Succession and Tradition of their customs and doctrines per
tempus immemoriale, they know not when they began, and for ought they know they
came from the Apostles, and they are willing to believe it, and no man amongst
them questions it, and all affirm it; particularly the Greek Church, the
Russians, the Abyssines: but also because those articles which they dispute
with the other Churches of the West cannot be proved by Tradition universal, as
infinitely appears in those pitiful endeavors and attempts which they use to
persuade them to be such; which if they did not sometimes confute themselves,
the Reader may find confuted every where by their learned adversaries.

Therefore although the perfection of Scripture be abundantly proved, yet if it
were not, 32.
Tradition will but make it less certain, and therefore not more perfect. For
besides that nuncupative records are like diagrams in sand and figures efform'd
in air, volatile and soon disordered, and that by the words and practice of
God, and all the world, what is intended to last was therefore written, as
appears in very many places in Scripture, [and therefore Job calls out, O that
my words were now written, O that they were printed in a book, Exodus 17. 14 and
34. 27. Job. 19. 23, 24. Psalm. 102. 19. Isai. 30. 8. Jer. 30. 2. Revd. 1. 11,
19. and 21. 5.
that they were engraven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever: upon
which words the Greek Catena says, He draws a similitude from them who put
those things in writing which they very greatly desire should remain to the
longest posterity] and that the very nature of things is such, that a Tradition
is infinitely better preserved in writing then in speaking, and besides all
those very many weak and uncertain and false Traditions with which several Men,
and several Ages, and several Churches have abused others, or been abused
themselves; I instance in two great things, by the one of which we may see how
easily the Church may be imposed upon in the matter of Tradition; and by the
other, how easily those men impose upon themselves whose faith has a temporal
bias and divertisement.

The first is, 33.
That very many Epistles of Popes, viz. from S. Clement to S. Gregory, that is,
for above 500. years, were imposed upon the Church as the genuine writings of
those excellent men who governed the Church of Rome in all her persecutions and
hardnesses; and of these Epistles the present Church of Rome makes very great
use to many purposes, and yet no imposture could be greater then this.

For 1. 34.
they are patched up of several arguments and materials not at all agreeing
with the Ages in which they were pretended to be written, but are snatched from
the writings of other men and latter times. 2. They were invented after S.
Hieroms time, as appears in the citation of the testimonies of Scripture from
S. Hieroms translation, and the Author cited S. Hieroms version of the Hebrew
Psalter. 3. They were not known in Rome for eight Ages together: which were a
strange thing that the records of Rome should have no copies of the Epistles of
so many of the Bishops of Rome. 4. They are infinitely false in their
Chronology, and he that invented them put the years of false Consuls to their
date, as Baronius himself confesses quite reckoning otherwise: and in the
Epistles of the whole five and forty, the decrees of Councils and the words of
Ecclesiastical writers are cited, who yet were not at all in their ages, but
wrote after the death of those Popes who are pretended to have quoted them, or
something is said that could not be done or said by them, or in their times. 5.
They are written with the same style; and therefore it is no more probable that
they should be the genuine Epistles of so many Popes, then that so many men in
several Ages should have the same features in their faces: but these Epistles
say over the same things several times, even unto tediousness, and yet use the
very same words without any differing expressions. 6. And sometimes these words
were most intolerably barbarous, neither elegantly fine, nor elegantly plain,
but Solecismes, impure words and the most rude expressions, not unlike the
Friars Latin or the Epistolae obscurorum virorum. 7. None of the Ancient
writers of the Church did ever cite any testimony from these Epistles for 800.
years together, only one part of one of the Epistles of S. Clement was
mentioned by Ruffinus and the Council of Vase. 8. None of those who wrote
histories Ecclesiastical, or of the Church-writers, made mention of them: but
all that do were above 830. years after the Incarnation of our Blessed Lord.
9. And all this beside the innumerable errors in the matter which have been
observed by the Centuriators of Magdeburg, David Blondel and diverse others. And
a more notorious cheat could never have been imposed upon the world; but that
there are so many great notorieties of falsehood, that it is hard to say which
is greater, the falsehood of the Pontifical Book, or the boldness of the
Compiler. Now if so great a heap of Records can at once be clapped upon the
credulity of men, and so boldly defended as it is by Turrian and Binius, and so
greedily entertained as it is by the Roman Confidents, and so often cited as it
is by the Roman Doctors, and yet have in it so many strange matters so
disagreeing to Scripture, so weak, so impertinent, and sometimes so dangerous,
there is very great reason to reject the topic of Traditions, which can be so
easily forged, and sometimes rely upon no greater foundation then this, whose
foundation is in water and sand, and falsehood that is more unstable.

The other thing is, 35.
that Heretics and evil persons, to serve their ends, did not only pretend
things spoken by the Apostles and Apostolical and Primitive men, (for that was
easy) but even pretended certain Books to be written by them, that under their
venerable names they might recommend and advance their own heretical Opinions.
Thus some false Apostles (as Origin relates) wrote an Epistle and sent it to
the Church of Thessalonica under S. Paul's name, which much troubled the
Thessalonians, and concerning which, when S. Paul had discovered the imposture,
he gives them warning that they should not be troubled about any such Epistle,
as if he had sent it. Thus there was a Book published by an Asian Priest under
S. Paul's name (as S. Hierome reports) containing the Vision of Paul and Tecla,
and I know not what old tale of the baptizing Leo. Some or other made S.
Clement an Eunomian, and Dionysius of Alexandria an Arrian, and Origin to be
every thing, by interpolating their Books, or writing Books for them. Ruffinus
tells that the Heretics endeavored to corrupt the Gospels: and that they did
invent strange Acts of the Apostles, and make fine tales of their life and
death, we need no better testimony then Tertullians instances in his Books
against Marcion: and for this reason Origin gives caution, Oportet caute
considerare, ut nec omnia secreta quae feruntur nomine Sanctorum suscipiamus,
Homil 26. in Matthew.
We must warily consider, and not receive all those secret traditions which go
up and down under the names of Saints, [ viz. of the holy Apostles.] And of the
same nature is that famous cheat that usurps the name of Dionysius the
Areopagite, called [ The Passion of Peter and Paul] as who please may see in
Laurentius Valla and Erasmus. And such is the Book of the same Passions
attributed to Linus, which was invented so foolishly and carelessly that it
contradicts the Scriptures most apparently; as every one that reads it may
without difficulty observe. Now the observation from these things is plain: In
the matter of Traditions as they are now represented there is so much of humane
failings, and so little of Divine certainty, they are often falsely pretended,
and never truly proved, and if they should need to be proved, were therefore
not to be accepted; because no particular proofs can make them universal, and
if they be not universal, of themselves they cannot be credible, but need
something else to make them so; they are (whether true or false) so absolutely
now to no purpose, because it is too late to prove them now, and too late to
need them, the Church having so long accepted and relied upon the Canon of
Scripture, that we are plainly, and certainly, and necessarily devolved upon
Scripture for the Canon of our Faith and lives. For though no man ought to
reject Tradition if he did need it, and if he could have it, yet because he
neither can want it (because Scripture is a perfect Rule) nor can have it
(because it cannot in any of our questions be proved) we must rely upon what we
have. It is in the matter of traditions as in the Epistle of S. Paul to
Laodicea: if this or those were extant and sufficiently transmitted and
consigned to us, they would make up the Canon as well as those we have: but
there is no such thing as the Laodicean Epistle, and there is no such thing as
tradition of doctrines of Faith not contained in Scriptures. The Fathers that
had them, or thought they had them, might call upon their Churches to make use
of them; but we that cannot have them, must use what we have; and we have
reason to give thanks to God that we have all that God intended to be our Rule.
God gave us in Scripture all that was necessary; it was a perfect Rule; and yet
if it had not, it must become so when we have no other.

But upon the matter of this Argument, 36.
there are three Questions to be considered in order to Faith and Conscience.

1. Whether there be not any rules and general measures of discerning
tradition, by which although tradition cannot be proved the natural way, that
is, by its own light, evidence of fact and notoreity, yet we may be reasonably
induced to believe that any particular is descended from tradition Apostolical,
and consequently is to be taken in, to integrate the rule of Conscience?

2. How far a negative Argument from Scripture is valid, and obligatory to
Conscience?

3. Whether there may be any new Articles of Faith, or that the Creed of the
Church may so increase, that what is sufficient to salvation in one Age cannot
serve in another?

1. Question is concerning the indirect ways of discerning Tradition.

In vain it is to dispute whether traditions are to integrate the Canon of
Scripture, 37.
when it cannot be made to appear that there are any such things as Apostolical
traditions of doctrines not contained in Scripture. For since the succession in
all the Chairs has been either interrupted or disordered by wars or
heresies, by interest or time, by design or by ignorance, by carelessness or
inconsideration, by forgetfulness or unavoidable mistake, by having no
necessity of tradition, and by not delivering any, it is in vain to dispute
concerning the stability of atoms, which as of themselves they are volatile
and unfixt, so they have no basis but the light air: and so are traditions;
themselves are no argument, and there are no traditions* they are no necessary
or competent stabiliment of doctrine or manners, o^ if they were, themselves
have no stabiliment.

For it is certain there can be no tradition received for Apostolical at a less
rate then the rule of Vincentius Lirinensis. 38.
For to prove by Scripture that there are any traditions not written in
Scripture is a trifling folly; since there might be necessity of keeping
traditions before all that which is necessary was set down in writing. So that
all the pretensions taken from Scripture in behalf of traditions are absolutely
to no purpose, unless it were there said, There are some things which we now
preach to you which shall never be written; keep them: but the naming of [
traditions] in some Books of Scripture, and the recommending them in others, is
no argument to us to inquire after them, or to rely upon them; unless that
which was delivered by Sermon was never to be delivered by writing, and that we
knew it as certainly as that which is. * And the same is to be said of the
sayings of Fathers who recommend traditions: for although the argument lessened
every year, yet it was better then, then it can be now; it could serve some
uses then, it can serve none now; it might in some instances be certain, and
safe in many, but now it cannot be either, neither certain, nor safe, nor
necessary, nor of any use at all: which having made to appear in the preceding
numbers, it must follow that there can be no doctrinal traditions besides the
matters of Scripture; because there are none such recommended to the Church by
the measures of Vincentius L^rinensis. There is no doctrine, no rule of Faith
or Manners which is not in the Holy Scriptures, and yet which was believed
always, and in all Churches, and of all men in those Churches. For although it
is very probable that Vincentius by this rule intended to reprove the novelties
and unusual doctrines which S. Austin by his great wit and great reputation had
brought into the Church, contrary to the sentiments and doctrines of the
Fathers which were before him; yet it will perfectly serve to reprove all our
late pretensions to traditions. For by this measure, we find it not to be
enough that a Doctrine has been received for a thousand years together by the
Catholic Church, reckoning from this period upwards; unless it were also
received by the Apostolical ages and Churches throughout the world, it is
nothing: and if it were received by all the Apostolical Churches, and all good
and wise men in those Churches, and so downwards; wherever any Church failed,
it was to their own prejudice, not to the prejudice of the doctrine; for that
was Apostolical which was from the beginning; and whatsoever came after could
not change what was so before; and the interruption of an Apostolical truth,
though for a thousand years together, cannot annul the obligation, or introduce
the contrary. So that if we begin to account by this rule of Vincentius and go
backwards, it is nothing unless we go back as far as to the Apostles
inclusively: but if we begin there, and make that clear, it matters not how
little a way it descends: and therefore although it is an excellent rule to
reprove vain and novel pretensions, yet there is nothing to be proved by it
practicably; for we need not walk along the banks and intrigues of Volga, if we
can at first point to the fountain; it is that whither the long progression did
intend to lead us. If any thing fails in the principle it is good for nothing;
but if the tradition derive from the fountain, and the head be visible, though
afterward it ran under ground, it is well enough. For if a doctrine might
invade the whole Church which was not preached by the Apostles, or if the
doctrine might to many good and wise persons seem to have possessed the whole
Church, that is, to be believed by all those that he knows, or hears of, or
converses with, and yet not have been the doctrine of the Apostles; it is
certain that this universality, and any less then that which takes in the
Apostles, can never be sufficient warranty for an article of Faith or a Rule of
life, that is, the instance and obligation of a duty necessary to salvation.
But how shall we know concerning any doctrine, whether it be a tradition
Apostolical? Here the Rule of Vincentius comes in. If it can be made to appear
that all Churches and all Men did from the Apostles times down to the time of
inquiry accept it as true, and report it from the Apostles, then it is to be so
received and continued. Indeed a less series and succession will serve. For if
we can be made sure that the Age next to the Apostles did universally receive
it as from the Apostles, then we may not reject it. But what can make faith in
this? certainly nothing; for there is no doctrine so delivered but what is in
Scripture. Indeed some practices and rituals are, because the public exercise
and usages of the Church being united and notorious, public and acted, might
make the rite evident as light; but in doctrines (besides Scriptures) we have
not records enough to do it: and therefore this general rule of Vincentius not
being practicable, and the other lesser rules or conjectures rather being
incompetent, (...), we must remain as we are, and give God thanks for the
treasures of Holy Scripture, and rejoice and walk in the light of it.

But let us try a little. 39.
The first Rule which is usually given is this; That which the Catholic Church
believes as an article of faith, which is not found in Scriptures, is to be
believed to descend from Apostolical tradition. This Rule is false and in
sufficient upon many accounts.

1. For if the Church can err, then this Rule can have no firmament or
foundation. If she cannot err, then there is no need either of Scriptures or
Tradition; and there is no use of any other argument to prove the truth of an
article or the Divinity of a truth, but the present belief and affirmation of
the Church, for that is sufficient whether it be written or not written,
whether it be delivered or not.

But 2. Supposing the Church could not err in matters of Faith, yet no man
says but she may err in matter of fact: but whether this thing was delivered
by the Apostles is matter of fact; and therefore though the Church were
assisted so that she could not mistake her article, yet she may mistake her
argument and instrument of probation: the conclusion may be true, and yet the
premises false; and she might be taught by the Spirit, and not by the Apostles.

3. No man now knows what the Catholic Church does believe in any question of
controversy; for the Catholic Church is not to be spoken with, and being
divided by Seas, and Nations, and interests and fears, and Tyrants, and
poverty, and innumerable accidents, does ^ot declare her mind by any common
instrument, and agrees in nothing but in the Apostles Creed, and the Books of
Scripture; and millions of Christians hear nothing of our controversies, and if
they did, would not understand some of them.

4. There are thousands that do believe such an article to be taught by the
Catholic Church, and yet the Catholic Church with them is nothing but their
own party; for all that believe otherwise they are pleased to call Heretics.
So that this Rule may serve every party that is great, and every party that is
little, if they will add pride and contumacy to their article: and what would
this Rule have signified amongst the Donatists, to whom all the world was
heretic but themselves? and what would it signify amongst those peevish little
Sects that damn all the world but their own congregations? even as little as
it can to the Church of Rome, who are resolved to call no Church Catholic but
their own.

5. The believing of such an article of faith could not be indication of a true
Catholic, that is, of a true member of the Catholic Church; because if the
article is to be proved to be Apostolical by the present belief of the (...),
either the Catholic Church is the (...) we can never tell what the believes in
a particular (...) nothing in the question, because i^ is be a question, (...)
Church is divided in her sense of it^ or else the Catholic (...) or Church of
Christians separate from the rest, and then (...) by other means be first known
that she is the Catholic Church (...) accept her belie^ to be an argument that
the article is an (...). Add to this, that the Churches believing it, is not,
(...) argument that the doctrine is Apostolical; but on the (...) be proved to
be Apostolical before it is to be admitted by the (...). And it it be answered,
that so it was to those Churches (...) it first, but to us it ought to be
sufficient that the Church (...) we ought therefore to conclude it to be
Apostolical: I reply* (...) is a it was at first proved to the Church to be
Apostolical; but (...) primitive Church would not receive the doctrine without
such (...) sign that this was the right way of proceeding, and therefore (...)
to be with us* they would not receive any doctrine unless it were (...) come
from the Apostles, and why should we? and to say that (...) received it, we
ought to suppose it to have been Apostolical, (...) to beg the question: for
when we make a question whether the Church did well to receive this doctrine,
we mean whether they did receiv^^ it from the Apostles or no. And therefore to
argue from their (...), that it was Apostolical, is to answer my question by
telling (...) to suppose that, and to make no question of it. But if this rule
should prevail, we must believe things which even to affirm were impudent. The
Church of Rome, calling her self the Catholic Church, affirms it to be Heresy
to say that it is necessary to give the Communion under both (...) to the
Laity: but he that will from hence, though he believe that Church to be the
Catholic, conclude that doctrine to be the Aposto lick, must have a great
ignorance or too great a confidence. Nay this rule is in nothing more
apparently confuted then in this instance; for the C^non in the Council of
Constance which establishes this for Catholic doctrine, by confessing it was
otherwise instituted by Christ, and otherwise practiced at the beginning,
confesses it not to be Apostolic. So that upon this account it is obvious to
conclude that either the universal Church can err, or else the same thing can
come and cannot come from Tradition Apostolical. For the half-Communion is no
where commanded in Scripture; therefore either the Ancient Catholic Church did
err in commanding the whole Communion, or the, modern Catholic Church (I mean
the Roman, which pretends to the name ^oes err in forbidding it; or else, if
neither does err, then the Communion under both kinds did come and did not
come from Tradition Apostolical.

But 6. suppose it were agreed that one Congregation is the Catholic Church,
and resolved upon which is that Congregation, yet if it be but a part of
Christians, and that interested, it is not in the nature of the thing to
infer, that because this interested, divided part believers it, therefore the
Apostles taught it: this Consequent is not in the bowels of that Antecedent, it
cannot be proved by this argument: if it can be proved by revelation, that what
the present Church believes, was a Tradition Apostolical, let it be shown, and
there is an end of it. In the mean time this rule is not of it self certain, or
fit to be the proof of what is uncertain, and therefore not a good rule, till
it be proved by revelation.

7. It is evidently certain that what one Age believes as a necessary doctrine,
another Age (I mean of the Catholic Church) did not believe for such; and it
is not sufficient for the making of a Catholic doctrine that it be ubique,
believed every where, unless it be also semper and ab omnibus, always and by
all men. I instance in the Communicating of Infants, which was the doctrine of
S. Austin and of Pope Innocentius, and prevailed in the Church for 600. years
(says Maldonat the Jesuit) that it was necessary to the salvation of Infants,
In cap. 6. Johan. n. 11^
that they should receive the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Now it is
also as certain that for 600. years more, the Church which calls her self
Catholic believed the contrary. Which of these can prove Apostolical
Tradition? For if it be objected that this was not the doctrine of the
Catholic Church in those ages in which the most eminent Fathers did believe
and practice it, besides that it is not probable that they would teach it to be
necessary, and generally practice it in their Churches, if the matter had been
nothing but their own opinion, and disputed by others; I add this also, that
it was as much the doctrine of the Catholic Church, that it was necessary, as
it is now, that it is not necessary: for it is certain the Holy Fathers did
believe and teach and practice it, and the contrary was not disputed; but now
though it be condemned by some, it is still practiced by very great parts of
the Catholic Church, even by all the Greek Church, Vide Hierem. Patriar. C. P.
doctr. and exho^. ad Germanos.
and by those vast numbers of Christians in Ethiopia. So that although no
doctrinal Tradition is universally received but what is contained is
Scriptures; yet those that have been received as universally as any other
matter of question is, have been and have not been believed by the Church in
several ages: and therefore if this rule be good, they must prove that the same
doctrine was and was not a Tradition Apostolical.

8. This Rule were good (and then indeed only) if there were no way to make an
opinion to be universally received but by derivation from the Apostles. But 1.
there are some which say every Age has new revelations: where this is believed
it is apparent an opinion which the Apostles never heard of, may be adopted
into the faith and universally received. But besides this are more ways of
entry for a popular error then any man can reckon or any experience can
observe. 2. It is not impossible that some leading man may be credulous and apt
to be imposed upon by Heretics and Knaves; but when he has weakly received
it, it shall proceed strongly upon his authority. The matter of Papias about
the doctrine of the Chiliasts is notorious in this particular. 3. It is also
very possible that what is found at first to be good, shall be earnestly
pressed by a zealous man, and he may over-express himself, and consider not to
what consequence it may afterward be extended; and then following ages may
observe it, and make a Logical conclusion from a Rhetorical expression; and
then what only good men had entertained when it was called useful, all men
shall receive when it is called necessary; and it is no great progression from
what all men believe good, that some men should believe necessary, and from
them others, and from others all men. It was thus in many degrees in the matter
of Confession and Penance. 4. It is not very unlikely, certainly it is no way
impossible, but that the reputation of some great man in the Church may prevail
so far by our weaknesses and his own accidental advantages, that what no man at
first questions, very many will afterward believe, and they introduce more,
and from more to most, and from most to all men, are no impossible
progressions, if we consider how much mankind especially in Theology, have
suffered the authority of a few men to prevail upon them. 5. Does not all the
world see that zeal makes men impatient of contradiction, and that impatience
makes them fierce in disputing, and fierce in fighting, and ready to persecute
their enemies? and what that Unity and Universality is which can be introduced
by force, a great part of the world has had two long an experience to be
ignorant. 6. Beyond all this, a proposition may be supposed to follow from an
Apostolical Tradition, and prevail very much upon that account; and yet it
would be hard to believe the Scholars deduction equally with the Masters
Principle, and a probable inference from Tradition equal to the very
affirmative of the Apostles. A man may argue, and argue well too, and yet the
Conclusion will not be so evident as the Principle: but that it may equally
prevail, is so certain, that no man can deny it but he that had never any
testimony of the confidence of a disputing man, and the compliance of those who
know not so well, or inquire not so strictly, or examine not suspiciously, or
judge not wisely.

2. The next Rule which is pretended for the discovery of an Apostolical
Tradition is this, 40.
That which the Universal Church observes, which none could appoint but God,
and is not found in Scripture, it is necessary to say that it was delivered by
Christ and his Apostles. This Rule must needs be false, because it does
actually deceive them that rely upon it. Because their Church, which they will
fondly suppose to be the Catholic, uses certain Sacramentals to confer
grace, (which none could institute but Christ, who alone is the fountain of
grace) and the Holy Spirit to his servants: but yet to pretend that they are
Traditions Apostolical were the greatest unreasonableness in the world. I
instance in holy water, baptizing of bells, hallowing of agnus Dei's, roses,
swords, hats, Chrisme and the like, which no man can fairly pretend to be
Traditions Apostolical, but yet they are practiced by all their Catholic
Church, and they are of such things as no man but God could be the author of,
if they were good for any thing; but then to conclude from hence that they are
Traditions Apostolical, were just as if one were to give a sign how to know
whether lying were lawful or unlawful, and for the determination of this
question should give this rule, Whatsoever mankind does universally which they
ought not to do without Gods law, that certainly they have a law from God to
do; but all mankind are given to lying, and yet nothing can make it lawful to
lie, unless there be a warranty or no prohibition from God to lie; therefore
certain it is that to lie descends from the authority of God. Indeed if the
Catholic Church could not be uncharitable, if they could not sin against God,
then it were certain, if they all did it, and it were not warranted in
Scripture, it must be from God: but it does not follow, it would be by
Tradition; because it may be by the dictate of right reason, by natural
principles, or it would be a thing indifferent; but that it must be by
Tradition, if it were not by Scripture, or by the Church, were as if we should
say, if Laelaps be not a horse, or begotten by a Lion, he must needs be a Bear:
but these rules are like dead men's candles, they come from no certain cause,
and signify no determined effect, and whether they be at all, we are no surer
then the reports of timorous or fantastic persons can make us. But this Rule
differs not at all from the former, save only, that speaks of doctrinal, and
this of ritual Traditions: but both relying upon the same reason, and that
reason failing (as I have proved) the propositions themselves do fail. But
then as to rites, it is notorious beyond a denial, that some rites used in the
Universal Church, which are also said to be such which none ought to appoint
but God, were not delivered by the Apostles. I instance in the singularity of
baptism of Heretics, which the whole Church now adheres to, and yet if this
descended from Apostolical Tradition, it was more then S. Cyprian or the
African Churches knew of, for they rebaptized Heretics, and disputed it very
earnestly, and lived in it very pertinaciously, and died in the opinion.

3. The third rule is, 41.
Whatsoever the Catholic Church has kept in all ages bygone, may rightly be
believed to have descended from the Apostles, though it be such a thing which
might have been instituted by the Church. This rule is the same with that of
Lirinensis, of which I have already given account: and certainly in those
things in which it can be made use of (which are extremely few) it is the best,
and indeed the only good one. But then this can relate only to Rituals, not
to matter of Doctrine; for nothing of this can be of Ecclesiastical institution
and appointment: it cannot be a doctrine of Faith unless it be of Divine
Tradition; for Christ is the Author and finisher of our Faith, which the Church
is to preach and believe, not to enlarge or shorten, not to alter or diversify.
But then as to Rituals, the keeping of Easter on the first day of the week by
this rule cannot be proved to be an Apostolical Tradition; because the Asian
Churches kept it otherwise: and by this rule the keeping of Lent fast for 40.
days will not be found to be an Apostolical Tradition; because the observation
of it was very full of variety, and some kept it 40. hours, some a day, some a
week, as I shall afterward in its proper place make to appear. But by this
rule the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters is an Apostolical Tradition
(besides the Scriptures, by which it appears to be Divine;) by this the
consecration of the Blessed Eucharist by Ecclesiastical persons, Bishops and
Priests, is certainly a Tradition Apostolical; by this the Lords day is derived
to us from the Apostles; and by this the Baptism of infants is much confirmed
unto the Church: and whatsoever can descend to us and be observed in this
channel, there is no sufficient reason to deny it to be Apostolical: but then
how far it can be obligatory to all Ages and to all Churches, will be another
consideration; it being on all hands confessed, that some Rituals which were
observed in the Apostles times are with good cause and just authority laid
aside by several Churches. But of this I shall give particular accounts.

4. When all the Doctors of the Church by common consent testify concerning any
particular that it descends from Apostolical tradition, 42.
we are to hold it for such: whether they affirm this in all their writings, or
together in a Council. To this Rule I answer, That where it would do good
there it is not practicable, and where it is practicable there it is not true.
For it is indeed practicable that a Council may give testimony to a particular
that it came from the Apostles; but it does not follow that they are not
deceived, for it never was, and it never will be that all the Doctors of the
Church shall meet together in Council, and unless they do, their testimony is
not universal. But if all the Fathers should write in their Books that such a
thing was delivered by the Apostles, unless it were evidently against Scripture
or right reason, there could be no sufficient cause to disbelieve it; and it
were the best way we have of conveying and handing the tradition to us, next to
the universal practice of the Church in her Rituals. But there is no such thing
so conveyed to us: and therefore Bellarmine plays at small game with this Rule,
and would fain have the world admit Tradition for Apostolical, if some Fathers
of great name say so, and others that speak of the same thing contradict it
not. But this is a plain begging that, when he cannot prove a thing to be
Tradition Apostolical by a good argument and sufficient, we will be content to
take it without proof, or at least to be content with such as he has, and
believe his own word for the rest, though he knows nothing of it. If it fails
or goes less then Omnibus, and Semper, and Ubique, which is Vincentius his
measure, it cannot be warranted, and he that allows it is more kind then wise.
(...).
S. Basil proves the perpetual Virginity of the Blessed Virgin Mary by a
Tradition that Zechary was slain by the Jews between the Porch and the Altar
for affirming her to be a Virgin after the birth of her most Holy Son: (...) 23.
but S. Hierom says it is Apocryphorum somnium, a dream of Apocryphal persons.
But it was a long time before the report of the Millenary Tradition was
contradicted, and yet in that intervall in which many of the most eminent
Fathers attested it to have descended from the Apostles, it was neither true
nor safe to have believed it. But then as to the particular and more
practicable part of this rule, That if a general Council affirms it to be
Tradition Apostolical it is so to be accepted, it is evidently fallacious and
uncertain; for the second Council of Nice affirmed the veneration of Images to
be an Apostolical Tradition: but it is so far from being true that it was so as
they affirmed, that not only the Apostolical but diverse of the following ages
hated all Images, and did not think it lawful so much as to make them; (...) 6.
of which I have already given a large account in this book.

5. When the Apostolical Churches, 43.
which from the Apostles have had uninterrupted succession, do witness
concerning any thing that it is Apostolical tradition, it is to be admitted for
such. This rule was good before the Channels were mingled with impure waters
entering in: It was used by Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Augustine, and others; and
it was to them of great advantage. But although it was good drinking of
Euphrates when it newly ran from the garden of Eden, yet when it began to
mingle with the Borborus it was not good: and who durst have trusted this Rule
when Dioscorus was Bishop of Alexandria, who yet was lineally descended from S.
Mark? And who durst have relied upon this Rule when Pope Julius absolved the
Sabellian Heretics, and communicated with Marcellus Ancyranus? and when S.
Basil complains of the Western Bishops, 1 pist. 10.
and particularly the Roman, quod veritatem neque norunt, neque discere
sustinent... cum iis qui veritatem ipsis annunciant contendentes, haeresin
autem per se ipsos stabilientes: that they neither know the truth, nor care to
learn it; but they contend with them who tell them the truth, and by themselves
establish heresy. Quia multi Principes and summi Pontifices and alii inferiores
inventi sunt apostatasse a fide, Lyra in Matthew. c. 16.
propterea ecclcsia consistit in illis personis in quibus est notitia vera, and
confessio fidei and veritatis. How can this rule guide any man when all the
Apostolical Churches have fallen into error, and many Popes have been apostates
from the Faith, and the Church consisted not of Prelates, but indifferently of
all that believed and professed the truth which the Popes and Princes and
Prelates did deny? The Apostolical Church of Antioch is not; and the
Patriarchal Church of Alexandria is accused by the Latins of great errors; and
the Mother Church of Jerusalem has no succession, but is buried in ruins; and
the Church of Rome is indeed splendid, but he that will take her word for
Tradition is sure to admit many false ones, but not sure of any true, but such
as she has in common with all the Churches of the world.

44. I conclude therefore this question, 44.
that amongst those rules of discerning Traditions truly Apostolical from them
that are but pretended such, there is no rule competent but one, which is
scarcely practicable, which indeed transmits to the Church a few Rituals, but
nothing of Faith or rule of good life; and therefore it is to no purpose to
look any where else for the Divine Rule of Conscience but in the pages of the
Old and New Testament: they are sufficient, because they were intended by God
to be our only Rule; and yet if God had intended Traditions to be taken in to
integrate the Rule and to oblige our Conscience, it is certain that God intends
it not now, because the Traditions are lost if there were any, and if they be
now, they do not appear, and therefore are to us as if they were not.

II. Question.
The second Question also does very nearly relate to Conscience and it is
conduct. 45.
viz. Since the Scripture is the perfect Rule of Conscience, and contains in it
all the will of God, whether or no, and how far is a negative argument from
Scripture to prevail?

The resolution of this depends upon the premises. 46.
For if Scripture be the entire Rule of Faith, and of Manners, that is, of the
whole service and worship of God, then nothing is an article of Faith, nothing
can command a moral action, that is not it is whole kind set down in Scripture.
This I proved by direct testimonies of Tertullian, S. Basil, S. Austin, S.
Cyril, Theophilus Alexandrinus and S. Hierome, in the Vide (...) 9.
foregoing numbers. To which I add these excellent words of S. Cyril of
Jerusalem, speaking of the Jerusalem Creed, which he had recited and explicated
and promised to prove from Scripture; he gives this reason, Nam Divinorum
sanctorumque fidei mysteriorum nihil, ne minimum quidem, absque Divinis
Scripturis tradi debet, neque simplici probabilitate neque verborum ornatu
traduci. Not the least part of the Divine and Holy mysteries of Faith must be
delivered without the Divine Scriptures. Believe not me telling thee, unless I
demonstrate what I say from the Divine Scripture. For the safety and
conservation of our Faith relics upon the proof of the Divine Scriptures. But
because there are some particulars and some variety in the practice of this
rule, I am to consider it now to other purposes.

1. Nothing is necessary either to be believed or done unless it be in
Scripture. 47.
Thus S. Gregory Nyssen argues, O^^. 2 co^^^ Eunomiu^.
Ubinam dixit Deus in Evangeliis oportere credere in unum and solum verum Deum?
Non possent ostendere nisi habeant ipsi novum aliquod Evangelium. Quae n. ab
antiquis per traditionem ad haec usque tempora in Ecclesiis leguntur, hanc
vocem non continent quae dicat, oportere credere vel baptizare in unum solum
verum Deum, quemadmodum isti autumant, sed in nomen Patris and Filii and
Spiritus Sancti. I have I confess something wondered at the matter of this
discourse. For either the Arrians have infinitely imposed upon us, and
interpolated Scripture in a very material article; or else S. Gregory forgot
the 17. of S. John and the 3. verse; or else he insisted only upon the words
(...), for the same sense is in the place now cited. For if this be life
eternal to know him the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ,
then also to believe in them only is life eternal, and then we are tied to
believe in none else; for we cannot believe in that we do not know. Indeed the
words are not there or any where else, that we ought to believe in [God the
Father] him, the one, only true God, etc. But certainly, if we are to know him
only, then only to believe in him seems to be a very good consequent. But S.
Basil therefore only insisted upon the very words, and thought himself safe
(as indeed he was) upon the reverse of another argument. For since the words
oportere credere in unum solum verum Deum were not in S. John or any where
else, he concluded the contrary sense from a very good argument: we are
commanded to be baptized into the faith of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
therefore we are to believe in three: and because the word [ believe] was not
set down expressly, where knowledge is confined to one or two, therefore it
cannot be said that we are tied to believe only in one or two: but because to
believe in three can be inferred as a duty from another place, therefore it
cannot be denied as a consequent from this; and therefore he had reason to
insist upon his negative argument. Lib. 2. de Trinit. cap. 5. and cap. 6.
contr. haer. l. 2. tom. 2.
Thus S. Austin also argued, Pater enim solus nusquam legitur missus, The
Father is never in Scripture said to be sent; therefore no man must say it. So
Epiphanius, Ipsa dictio non omnino cogit me de Filio Dei dicere: non enim
indicavit Scriptura, neque quisquam Apostolorum meminit, neque Evangelium. The
manner of speaking compels me not to understand it of the Son of God: For the
Scripture has not declared it; neither the Gospel nor any of the Apostles has
made any mention of it.

2. A negative argument from the letter of Scripture is not good, 48.
if the contrary affirmative can be drawn by consequent from any part of it.
Thus our Blessed Savior confuting the Sadducees in the article of the
Resurrection has given us a warranty for this proceeding; God is the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. These were the words of Scripture. But these
directly would not do the work. But therefore he argues from hence, God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living: therefore these men are alive. That the
Holy Ghost is God is no where said in Scripture; that the Holy Ghost is to be
invocated is no where commanded, nor any example of its being done recorded. It
follows not therefore that he is not God, or that he is not to be invocated:
and the reason is, because that he is God is a certain consequent from
something that is expressly affirmed; and therefore the negative argument is
imperfect, and consequently, not concluding. Quae neque a Christianis dicuntur
neque creduntur, S. Greg. Nys^^n. ibid.
neque ex consequente per ea quae apud nos certa sunt and concessa
intelliguntur, etc. If Christians did never speak, nor believe any such thing,
nor can they be drawn from the consequence of those things which are certain
and granted amongst us, then indeed it is to be rejected from our Creed. Now
amongst Christians this is believed as certain, that we may pray to him in whom
we believe; that we believe in him into the faith of whom we are baptized; that
we are commanded to be baptized into the belief and profession of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: from hence Christians do know that they are to invocate
the Holy Ghost. For S. Paul's argument is good, How shall we call on him on whom
we have not believed? therefore we may call on him if we believe on him:
according to that Rule of reason, Negatio unius diversum affirmat, The denying
of one is the affirmation of its contrary in the like matter. Lib. de Spi^^ c.
1.
And something of this was used by Paschasius the Deacon: and the effect of it
prevailed upon the account of a negative from Scripture; In nullis autem
Canonicis libris, de quibus Symboli textus pendet, accepimus, quia in Ecclesiam
credere sicut in Spiritum Sanctum Filiumque debemus, We are taught in no
Scripture (from whence the Creed is derived) to believe in the Church, as we
believe in the Son and in the Holy Ghost: and therefore we ought not to do it;
but it being plain in the Creed, and consequently in the Scripture, that we
must believe in the Holy Ghost, therefore also we may pray to him, and confess
him to be God. To the same purpose S. Basil argues concerning the Holy Spirit;
Dignitate namque ipsa secundum esse a Filio pietatis sermo fortassis tradit:
natura vero tertia uti nec a Divinis Scripturis edocti sumus, nec ex
antecedentibus possibile est consequenter colligi, That the Holy Spirit is of a
nature distinct from the Father and the Son we neither are taught in Scripture,
neither can it be drawn into consequence from any antecedent pretenses. Nonne
perspicuum est, ista, tametsi non dicantur, tamen ex illis colligi quae haec
necessario efficiant ac probent? Quae tandem? Ego sum primus, and post haec,
and ante me non est alius Deus, and post me non crit. Totum enim quicquid est,
mecum est, nec principium habens, nec finem habiturum. His a Scriptura
acceptis, illud quidem, quod ante eum nihil sit, nec anti quiorem causam
habeat, Anarchum and Ingenitum appellasti: quod autem nunquam defiturum sit,
Immortale, exiti^que expers. Nazianz. lib. 5. Theol. interpret Jacobo Billio.
Et infra, Cum ergo in nominibus and rebus tantum discrimen reperiatur, quid
causae est cur literae tantopere s^rvias, Judaicaeque sapientiae teipsum
adjungas, relictisque rebus syllabas consecteris? Quod si te bis quinque aut
bis septem dicente, december aut quatuor decim ex verbis tuis colligerem, aut ex
eo quod animal ratione praeditum. and mortale diceres, hominem esse
concluderem, an tibi viderer delirare? Neque enim verba magis sunt ejus qui
loquitur quam illius qui loquendi necessitatem simul affert.


3. A negative argument of a word or an expression cannot be consequently
deduced to the negation of the mystery signified by that word. 49.
The Arrians therefore argued weakly, Show us in all the Scripture that the Son
is called (...) or Consubstantial to the Father; if you cannot, you ought not
to affirm it. For we know God is one; if therefore we find in Scripture that
the Son is true God, we know he must needs be of the same substance with his
Father; for two substances cannot make one God. So though the Blessed Virgin
Mary be not in Scripture called (...) the Mother of God, yet that she was the
Mother of Jesus, and that Jesus Christ is God, and yet but one person, that we
can prove from Scripture, and that is sufficient for the appellative: and if
the Church of Rome could prove the mystery of Transubstantiation from
Scripture, we would indulge to them the use of that word, or any other aptly to
express the same thing.

4. A negative argument from Scripture is sufficient to prove an article not to
be of necessary belief, 50.
but is not sufficient to prove it not to be true: because although the
Scripture is the measure of Faith and of Manners, yet it is an adequate measure
of all truth. The meaning of which rule takes in all truths of art, experience,
of prudence, of tradition and common report. Thus although it be no where said
in Scripture that our Blessed Savior said, Nunquam laeti sitis nisi cum
Fratrem vestrum in charitate videritis, Be never very merry but when you see
your Brother in charity; yet S. Hierome reports it of him, and it is a worthy
saying, and therefore may very well be entertained, not only as true and
useful, but as from Christ. The Scripture no where says that the blessed Virgin
was a Virgin perpetually to the day of her death: but as therefore it cannot be
obtruded as an article of faith, yet there are a great many decencies and
probabilities of the thing, besides the great consent of almost all the Church
of God, which make it very fit to be entertained. There are some things which
are pie credibilia, there is piety in the believing them: and in such cases it
is not enough that there is nothing in Scripture to affirm it; if there be any
thing in any other topic, it is to be entertained according to the merit of
the thing.

5. A negative argument from Scripture does not conclude in questions of fact:
51.
(...)
and therefore S. Hierome did not argue rightly, Quanquam excepto Apostolo non
sit manifest relatum de aliis Apostolis quod Uxores habuerint, and cum de uno
scriptum sit ac de caeteris tacitum, intelligere debemiis, sine uxoribus eos
fuisse, de quibus nihil tale Scriptura significat; The Scripture names only
Peter's wife, and does not say that any of the other Apostles were married,
therefore we are to conclude that they were not. For besides that the
allegation is not true, and S. Paul intimates that the other Apostles as well
as Peter did lead about a Sister, a Wife; and that from thence the Fathers did
believe them all to have been married except S. John, and some also except S.
Paul; yet the argument is not good: for it may as well be concluded that S.
Peter never had a child, or that Christ did never write but once when he wrote
upon the ground, because the Scripture makes no mention of either.

6. When a negative argument may be had from Scripture for both the parts of
the contradiction, 52.
nothing at all can be concluded thence, but it must be wholly argued from
other topics. The Scripture neither says that Christ did ever laugh, nor it
does not say that he did never laugh; therefore either of the contradicting
parts may be equally inferred, that is truly neither. And indeed this is of it
self a demonstration that in matters of fact and matters not necessary a
negative argument from Scripture is of no use at all.

7. But when the question is of lawful or unlawful, 53.
then it is valid. If it be not in Scripture forbidden directly or by
consequent then it is lawful; it is not by God forbidden at all. And on the
other side, if it be not there commanded it is not necessary. Lucentius thus
argued in the Council of Chalcedon, Dioscorus Synodum ansus est facere sine
authoritate sedis Apostolicae, quod nunquam licuit, nunquam factum est. That it
was never done, proves not but it may be done; but if it was never lawful to be
done, then it was forbidden; for whatsoever is not forbidden is not unlawful:
but if it was not in Scripture forbidden, then aliquando licuit, it once was
lawful, and therefore is always so, if we speak of the Divine Law; and if
Lucentius speaks of that, he ought to have considered it in the instance: but I
suppose he means it of custom, or the Ecclesiastical Law; and therefore I
meddle not with the thing, only I observe the method of his arguing.

8. An argument from the discourse of one single person omitting to affirm or
deny a thing relating to that of which he did discourse, 54.
is no competent argument to prove that the thing it self omitted was not true:
Lib. de fide, ^ 28.
and therefore Ruffinus had but a weak argument against the traduction of the
soul when he argued thus, Si anima quoque esset ex anima secundum illorum vanas
opiniones, nunquam profecto hoc Adam praeterisset. Nam sicut os ex ossibus
meis, and caro de carne mea dicebat, sic etiam anima ex anima mea dicere
potuisset. Sed tantum hoc dixit quod sibi videlicet sciebat ablatum. Adam
seeing his wife, said, this is bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh, for he
knew what was taken from him; but he could have said, soul of my soul, if the
soul had been derived from him. This I say is no good argument, unless every
one must be supposed when he says any thing to say all that is true, and all
that he knows: so that Ruffinus in this particular defended a good cause with a
broken sword.

9. But if that which is omitted in the discourse be pertinent and material to
the inquiry, 55.
then it is a very good probability that that is not true that is not affirmed.
When the Jews asked our Blessed Savior, Why do the disciples of John and of
the Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast not? he gave an answer that
related to the present state of things and circumstances at that time, and said
nothing of their not fasting in the time of the Gospel: from which silence we
may well conclude that there is nothing in the Religion disobliging Christ's
disciples from fasting; if it had, it is very likely it would have been then
expressed when there was so apt an occasion, and the answer had been imperfect
without it. Lib. de Script: Eccles. in Luca
S. Hieromes was also very good, but not so certain as the other, against the
tale of Leo baptized after his death, and the periods of Paul and Tecla; Igitur
periodos Pauli and Teclae and totam baptizati Leonis fabulam inter apocryphas
Scripturas computamus. Quale enim est ut individuus comes Apostoli inter
caeteras ejus res hoc solum ignor ^verit? It is not likely that S. Luke, who
continually attended on S. Paul, observed all his actions, remarked his
miracles, described his story, should omit things so strange, so considerable,
if they had been true.

The reason of these things is, 56.
Every thing is to be suspected false that does not derive from that fountain
whence men justly expect it, and from whence it ought to flow. If you speak of
any things that relates to God, you must look for it there where God has
manifested himself; that is, in the Scriptures. If you speak of any humane act
or ordinance, or story and matter of fact, you must look for it in its own
spring and original, or go the nearest to it you can. And thus the Bishops at
the conference had with the Acephali, Heretics who had Churches without
Bishops, C. Pli. A^. Dom. 532.
refused their allegations of the authority of Dionysius the Areopagite, upon
this account, Illa testimonia quae vos Dionysii Areopagitae dicitis, unde
potestis ostendere vera esse sicut suspicamini? Si enim ejus essent, non
potuissent latere Beatum Cyrillum. Quid autem de B. Cyrillo dico, quando and B.
Athanasius, si pro certo scisset ejus fuisse, ante omnia in Niceno Concilio de
Consubstantiali Trinitate eadem testimonia protulisset adversus Arii diversae
substantiae blasphemias? Si autem nullus ex Antiquis recordatus est ea, unde
nunc potestis ostendere quia illius sunt, nescio. If neither S. Cyril, nor S.
Athanasius, who were so diligent to inquire, so skilful in knowing, so
concerned that these Books should be the works of S. Dionys, did yet know
nothing of them, and if amongst the Ancients they were not known, for you
Moderns now to tell of Antiquity, what by them who then lived was not told, is
a folly that can never gain credit amongst reasonable persons. Let every fruit
proceed from its own root. We cannot say, because a thing is not in Scripture,
therefore it is not at all; but therefore it is nothing of Divine Religion. So
it is also in things relating to the Ancient Church; from thence only can we
derive any notice of their doctrine and of their practices. For if an article
prevailed in S. Austins time, it was no argument that therefore it was believed
in S. Cyprians time: but a negative argument from any Age ought to prevail in
reference to that Age; and if there be in it nothing of Antiquity, no argument
of the Moderns can prove it to be Ancient: and Baronius said well, Quod a
recentiori Authore de rebus antiquis sine alicujus vetustioris authoritate
profertur, contemnitur, What the Moderns say of the Ancients without warranty
from themselves is to be despised. One thing only I am to add to this out of
Vincentius Lirinensis, (...)
Quicquid vero ab Antiquo deinceps Uno praeter omnes, vel contra omnes Sanctos
novum and inauditum subinduci senserit, id non ad religionem sed ad tentationem
potius intelligat pertinere, If one of the Fathers say a thing, and the others
say it not, but speak diversely or contrarily, that pertains not to Religion,
but to temptation. I doubt not but he intended it against S. Austin, who spoke
things in the matter of Predestination, and the damnation of infants, and other
appendant questions against the sense of all the Fathers that were before him;
Lib. 4 cap. 2. (...) Ma ^cion.
one (it may be) or scarce one being excepted. And to the same purpose
Tertullian argued against Marcion concerning a pretended Gospel of S. Paul,
Etsi sub ipsius Pauli nomine Evangelium Marcion intulisset, non sufficeret ad
fidem singularitas instrumenti destituta patrocinio Antecessorum. If you cannot
bring testimony from the Fathers and Ancient Records, you must not receive it;
one alone is not to be trusted. He that affirms must prove; to him that denies,
a negative argument is sufficient. For to a man's belief a positive cause is
required, but for his not believing, it is sufficient that he has no cause.
Dial. adv. Luciferianos.
Thus S. Hierome argues well against the rebaptizing of converted Heretics, Ad
eos venio haereticos qui Evangelia laniaverunt....quorum plurimi vivente adhuc
Johanne Apostolo eruperunt, and tamen nullum eroum legimus rebaptizatum. Of all
the Heretics which appeared in S. John's time, we never read of any that was
rebaptiz'd: and therefore it is to be presumed they were not; for a thing so
considerable and so notorious, in all reason would have given some signs, and
left some indications of it. But then it is to be observed,

10. A negative argument must not be (...) a partial or a broken piece of a
medium. 57.
You cannot argue rightly thus, S. John in his Gospel speaks nothing of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, therefore that Sacrament is no part of the
doctrine of salvation. For three Evangelists had done it before him, and
therefore he did not; and a negative argument only from one Gospel cannot
conclude rightly concerning any article of the Religion. And this is very
evident in matters of fact also. For if it be argued thus, We do not find in
Scripture nor in the days of the Apostles any infant baptized; therefore we
conclude there was none. This is (...). It is true, if there were no way else
to find it but the practice of the Apostles, the negative argument had been
very good; but we derive it from the force of Christ's words of institution, and
of his discourse with Nicodemus, and the analogy of Circumcision, and the
practice of the Jews in baptizing their children, and many proprieties of
Scripture, and the effect of the Sacrament, and the necessities of
regeneration. S. Irenaeus his negative argument was good; Lib. 1. c. 1.
Quod neque Prophetae praedicaverunt, neque Dominus docuit, neque Apostoli
tradiderunt, etc. If neither Moses nor the Prophets, Christ nor his Apostles
have taught it, it is not to be received as any part of Christian doctrine. For
this negative is integral and perfect. But S. Cyril of Alexandria disputed also
well with his negative argument from Antiquity, Frima part Council. Ephesians. cap.
25
Etenim nomen hoc (...) nullus unquam Ecclesiasticorum Doctorum repudiavit: qui
autem illo subinde usi sunt, and multi reperiuntur, and maxim celebres. Many
famous Doctors used this word, calling the Virgin Mary the Parent of God; and
none ever refused it; therefore it may safely be used. If the negative argument
from Scripture or Antiquity respectively can run thus, It was not condemned in
Scripture or Antiquity, but it was used, therefore it is good; the argument
concludes rightly in relation to Scripture, and probably in relation to
Antiquity. But if it be said only, the Scripture condemns it not, but neither
does it approve it, then it cannot be concluded to be laudable, but only not
criminal. But if it be said of Antiquity, it was neither condemned nor used, it
cannot be inferred from thence that it is either laudable or innocent. The
reason is, because Scripture is the measure of lawful and unlawful, but the
writings of the Doctors are not; and these may be deficient, though that be
full.

11. In the mysteries of Religion, 58.
and in things concerning God, a negative argument from Scripture ought to
prevail both upon our faith and upon our inquiries, upon our belief and upon
our modesty. For as S. Austin said well, De Deo etiam vera loqui
periculosissimum, It is hard to talk many things of God: we had need have good
warranty for what we say; and therefore it is very fit we speak Scripture in
the discourses of God. And thus S. Austin argued, Lib. 2. de Trinit. cap. 6.
Ideo nusquam scriptum est quod Deus Pater major sit Spiritu Sancto, vel
Spiritus Sanctus sit minor Deo Patre: quia non sic assumpta est Creatura, in
qua appareret Spiritus Sanctus, sicut assumptus est Filius hominis. Since it is
no where written that the Father is greater then the Spirit, we ought not to
say he is. But if it be objected that neither does the Scripture say, that he
is not greater, it does not say that they are equal; and therefore it will be
hard to use a negative argument in such cases; and how shall we know which part
of the negative to follow? I answer, it is very true according to the sixth
proposition number. 52. but then in this case we must inquire for other words of
Scripture by which we may be directed, and proceed accordingly, or inquire into
the analogy of faith, or the measures of piety: but if there be nothing to
determine to any side of the negative, we must say nothing; and if there be,
yet we must say but little, because the notice is not great.

12. Lastly, 59.
In matters of envy and burden, a Negative argument even in matter of fact
ought to prevail, unless the contrary be proved by some other competent Topic.
That the Clergy ought not to marry is no where affirmed in Scripture, and
therefore it is permitted; and because it is agreeable to Nature, and the Laws
of all republics* their marriage is also holy and pleasing to God. A burden
must be directly imposed; a man must not be frighted or scared into it. When
our Blessed Savior reproved the Pharisees for imposing heavy burdens, such
which God imposed not, he taught us the value of this argument; ubi scriptum
est? show us where it is written that this is displeasing to God: if it be no
where forbidden, praesumitur pro liberate; all men are as free as they were
born. How this can be altered by the laws of man will be afterward
considered. In the mean time God has left us under no more restraints then are
described in Scripture. This argument S. Chrysostom urges against the
necessity of corporal afflictions to a contrite weeping penitent. Lacrymas
Petri lego, Satisfactionem non lego. I read that S. Peter wept, I do not read
that he imposed penances on himself. The argument were good from this place, if
the case be not special, or if it be not altered by some other consideration.
This is also to be extended to such negative arguments as are taken from matter
of fact in accusations, and criminal proceedings: not that it can of it self be
great enough to prevail, but that the case is so favorable, that every little
thing ought to be strong enough. Apud Facundum lib. 10. cap. 5
Thus S. Athanasius defended his Decessor Dionysius: Et prius eorum Authorem
Dionysium per hoc voluit esse purgatum, atque ab Arianorum crimine alienum,
quod ipse non sicut Arius cum viveret de impietate fuerat accusatus, aut de
Episcopatu dejectus, neque velut haeresim defendens de Ecclesia, sicut ille,
decesserit, sed in ejus permanserit unitate. Dionysius was not accused while he
was alive, he was not thrown from his Bishopric, he did not depart from the
Church, but remained in her Communion; and therefore he was no Arian. But
arguments of this nature, when the medium is so limited, and the instance so
particular, have their force only by accident. For this and the like Negatives
are good arguments when they are the best light in the question, that is, when
nothing greater can be said against them, or when men are easy and willing to
be persuaded; as in the questions of burden and trouble all men ought.

III. Question.
Whether there may be any new articles of Faith: 60.
or that the Creed of the Church may so increase that what is sufficient to
salvation in one age, cannot serve in another.

If this Question were to be determined by witnesses, 61.
it were very easy to produce many worthy ones. Theodorus the Bp. of Rome in
his Synodical Epistle to Paul the Patriarch of Constantinople thus concludes
against the Monothelites, Sufficit nobis fides quam sancti Apostoli
praedicaverunt, Concilia firmaverunt, and Patres consignaverunt, That faith
which the Apostles preached, which the Councils have confirmed, which the
Fathers have consigned, that faith is sufficient for us: Therefore nothing new
can be superinduced. After the Apostles had done preaching, the Faith was full
and entire. It was so long before they died; but after their death the
instruments were sealed and ratified, and there could be nothing put to them,
but our obedience and consent. And therefore Victor Bp. of Carthage in his
Synodical Epistle to Theodorus gives caution against any thing that is new.
Vestrum est itaque, Frater Sanctissime, Canonica discretione solita contrariis
Catholicae fidei obviare, nec permittere noviter dici quod patrum venerabilium
authoritas omnino non censuit. You must not permit any thing to be newly said,
which the authority of the venerable Fathers did not think fit. If therefore
the Fathers did not say it was necessary to believe any other articles then
what they put into their confessions of Faith; he that says otherwise now is
not to be suffered. Excellent therefore is the Counsel of S. Cyprian, Epist.
74. ad Pompeium.
As it happens when the pipes of an aquaeduct are broken or cut off, the water
cannot run, but mend them and restore the water to it is course, and the whole
city shall be refreshed from the fountains head: Quod and nunc facere oportet
Dei sacerdotes, praecepta Divina servantes, ut si in aliquo nutaverit and
vacillaverit veritas, ad originem Dominicam and Evangelicam and Apostolicam
traditionem revertamur, and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, unde and ordo and
origo surrexit. So must Gods Priests do, keeping the Divine Commandments: if
the truth be weakened or fail in any thing, let a recourse be made to the
Original, to the fountain of Christ and his Apostles, to what has been
delivered in the Gospel; that thither our faith may return from whence it did
arise.

From the simplicity, 62.
truth and ingenuity of this discourse it will plainly follow, that what was
the faith at first, the same it is now and no other, Sicut erat in principio
etc. As it was in the beginning, so it is now, and so it shall be for ever. For
to what purpose can it be advised that in all questions of faith or new springs
of error we should return to the fountains of our Savior and the first
emanations of the Apostles, but because no Divine truth is warrantable but what
they taught, no necessity is to be pretended but what they imposed? If it was
their faith, it is and must be ours; but ours it ought not to be, if it was not
theirs.

Now concerning this, 63.
there are very material considerations. 1. Whatsoever the Apostles taught we
must equally believe, if we equally know it: but yet all that they taught is
not equally necessary to be taught; but only so much as upon the knowledge of
which good life is superstructed and our hopes of heaven depend. Whatsoever is
in the Scripture is alike true, but whatsoever is there is not alike necessary,
nor alike useful, nor alike easy to be understood. But whatsoever by reading or
hearing or any other instrument we come to learn to be the truth of God, that
we must believe: because no man disbelieves any such thing, but he disownes
God. But here the question is not what we must believe when we know it to be
the word of God, for that is every thing; but how much we are bound to know,
what must be taught to all Christians, how much their memory and their hearts
must be charged withal. For the Faith of a Christian is not made up of every
true proposition; but of those things which are the foundation of our obedience
to God in Jesus Christ, and the endearment of our duty, and the stabiliment of
our hope. Faith, Hope, and Charity, are the fundamentum, paries and tectum, the
foundation, the walls and the roof of our building: Now this foundation is
that necessary belief, without which nothing could subsist in our Religion.

2. This foundation was by Christ and his Apostles laid sure, 64.
but at first it was made but of a just latitude and eveness with the intended
building. It was a little enlarged and paraphrased by the Apostles and
Apostolical men in their days; the Faith of Christians was the most easy and
plain, the most simple and wise thing in the world: it was wholly an art of
living well, and believing in God through Jesus Christ. And what Seneca said of
the wisdom of the old men in infant Rome, Senec. ep. 9^.
is very true of the Aborigenes in Christianity, in the first spring of our
Religion; Antiqua sapientia nihil aliud quam facienda and vitanda praecepit:
and tum long meliores erant viri: postquam docti prodierunt, desunt boni. The
Ancient and primitive wisdom did only command virtue, and prohibit vice; and
then men lived good lives: but when they became more learned they became less
virtuous. Simplex erat ex simplici causa valetudo: multos morbos multa fercula
fecerunt. The old world eat a simple and a natural diet, and they had a simple
and a natural religion: but when variety of dishes were set upon the table,
variety of diseases entered together with them. Now in what instance the
simplicity of a Christian was at first exercised we find in S. Irenaeus. Leo.
2. cap. 45.
Melius itaque est nihil omnino scientem quempiam, ne quidem unam causam
cujuslibet eorum quae facta sunt, cur factum, and credere Deo, and perseverare
in ejus dilectione quae hominem vivificat, nec aliud inquirere ad scientiam
nisi Jesum Christum filium Dei qui pro nobis crucifixus est, quam per
quaestionum subtilitates and multiloquium in impietatem cadere. It is therefore
better for a man to know absolutely nothing of the causes of things why any
thing was done, [and to believe in God, and to persevere in his love that makes
a man to live, and to inquire after no knowledge but to know Jesus Christ the
Son of God who was crucified for us] then by subtle questions and multitude of
words to fall into impiety.

3. If we observe the Creeds or Symbols of belief that are in the New
Testament, 65.
Joh. 11. 26, 27.
we shall find them very short. Lord, I believe that thou art the Son of God
who was to come into the world. Ma^h. 16. 16. John 6. 69.
That was Martha's Creed. Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. That was
Peter's Creed. We know and believe that thou art Christ the Son of the living
God. That was the Creed of all the Apostles. Joh. 17. 3
This is life eternal, that they know thee the only true God, and whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ. That was the Creed which our Blessed Lord himself
propounded. And again, I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in
me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live, and he that lives and
believes in me shall not die for ever. That was the Catechism that Christ
made for Martha, and questioned her upon the article, Believe thou this? And
this belief was the end of the Gospel, Joh. 20. 31.
and in sufficient perfect order to eternal life. For so S. John, These things
are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and that believing ye might have life through his Name. For this i^ the word of
Faith which we preach, namely, if you with the mouth confess Jesus to be the
Lord, Romans 10. 8, 9.
and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you shall be
saved. That Is the Christians Creed. For I have resolved to know nothing amongst
you, but Jesus Christ and him crucified; that in us ye may learn not to be wise
above that which is written, 1 Co^. 2. 2.
that ye may not be puffed up one for another, one against another. That was S.
Paul's Creed, and that which he recommends to the Church of Rome, to prevent
factions and Pride and Schism. The same course he takes with the Corinthian
Church; 1 Cor. 15. 1.
I make known unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, which ye have
received, in which ye stand, and by which ye are saved, if ye hold what I
delivered to you, etc. Well; what is that Gospel by which they should be saved?
It was but this, That Christ died for our sins, that he was buried, that he
rose again the third day, etc. So that the sum is this, The Gentiles Creed or
the Creed in the natural law is that which S. Paul sets down in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, Deum esse, and esse Remuneratorem, that God is, and that God is a
rewarder. Add to this the Christian Creed, that Jesus is the Lord, that he is
the Christ of God, that he died for our sins, that he rose again from the dead;
and there is no question but he that believes this heartily, and confesses it
constantly, and lives accordingly, shall be saved: we cannot be deceived; it is
so plainly, so certainly affirmed in Scripture, that there is no place left for
haesitation. 1 J^k. 3. 23.
For this is his praecept, that we believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ,
and that we love one another. So S. John. This is his precept. True, and so
there are many more: but why is this so signally remarked, but because this is
the fundamental precept, that upon which all the rest are superstructed? that
is the foundation of faith and manners, and he that keeps this Commandment
shall never perish, For other foundation can no man lay then this which is
laid, ^ Cor. 3. 11,
which is Jesus Christ. But if any man shall build upon this foundation, 12,
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, Every man's work shall be
made manifest; for that day shall declare it, 13,
because it is revealed in fire; and every ones work the fire shall prove what
it is. If any man's work which he has superstructed shall remain, he shall
receive a reward. 14,
But if any man's work shall be burned, he shall receive loss, yet himself shall
be saved, but so as by fire. Nothing more plain, 15.
then that the believing in Jesus Christ is that fundamental article upon which
every other proposition is but a superstructure, but it self alone with a good
life is sufficient to Salvation. All other things are advantage or disadvantage
according as they happen; but Salvation depends not upon them. For every Spirit
which confesses Jesus Christ to have come in the flesh is of God, 1 John 4. 2.
1 John 5. ^.
and whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him,
and he in God: and, Every one that believes that Jesus is Christ is born of
God: and, who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus
is the Son of God?

In proportion to this measure of faith, 66.
the Apostles preached the doctrine of faith. Act. 2. 24. and 3. 15.
S. Peter's first Sermon was, that Jesus is Christ, that he was crucified, and
rose again from the dead: and they that believed this were presently baptized.
His second Sermon was the same; and then also he baptized Proselytes into that
confession. And when the Eunuch had confessed that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God, Philip presently baptized him. And it is observable, that when the Eunuch
had desired baptism, S. Philip told him, He might if he did believe: and was,
when he made that confession; intimating that this is the Christian Faith, Act.
8. 12, 3^ 38.
which is the foundation of all his hope, and the condition of his baptism,
and therefore sufficient for his Salvation. For indeed that was the sum of
all that Philip preached; for it is said of him, that he preached things
concerning the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ. And this was the
sum of all that S. Paul preached in the Synagogues and assemblies of the
people, this he disputed for, this he proved laboriously; that Jesus is Christ,
that he is the Son of God, that he did, that he ought to suffer, and rise again
the third day: and this was all that new doctrine for which the Athenians and
other Greeks wondered at him, and he seemed to them to be a setter forth of
strange gods, Acts 9. 20 17. 2.
because he preached Jesus and the resurrection. This was it into which the
Jailer and all his house were baptized; this is it which was propounded to him
as the only and sufficient means of Salvation; Believe in the Lord Jesus, and
thou shall be saved and all thine house. Acts 16. 31.
This thing was illustrated sometimes with other glorious things still
promoting the faith and honor of Jesus, as that he ascended into heaven and
shall be the Judge of all the world. But this was the whole faith; (...), the
things which concerned the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, was
the large circumference of the Christian faith. That is, such articles which
represent God to be our Lord, and Jesus Christ to be his Son, the Savior of
the world, that he died for us, and rose again and was glorified and reigns
over all the world, and shall be our Judge, and in the resurrection shall give
us according to our works; that in his name only we shall be saved, that is,
by faith and obedience in him, by the mercies of God revealed to the world in
Jesus Christ: this is all which the Scripture calls necessary: this is that
faith alone into which all the Church was baptized: which faith, when it was
made alive by charity, was and is the faith by which the Just shall live.

This excellent summary of Faith we find also but with a very little Paraphrase
propounded as sufficient by S. Polycarp in that excellent Epistle of his to the
Philippians, 67.
which S. Irenaeus so much commends, Fidei vestrae firmitas a principio usque
nunc permanet, and sanctificatur in Domino Jesu Christo, This is the firmness
of your faith from the beginning, which remains unto this day, and is
sanctified in Jesus Christ. This S. Ignatius calls plenam de Christo
cognitionem, Ad Magnes.
a full knowledge concerning Christ: then he reckons the generation of the Son
from God the Father before all worlds, his being born of the Virgin Mary, his
holy life, his working miracles, his preaching one God even the Father, his
passion and crucifixion, his death and resurrection, his ascension and sitting
at the right hand of God, and that in the end of the world he shall rise again
to judge the quick and the dead, and to give to every one according to their
works. When he has recited this, he adds, Haec qui plane cognorit and
crediderit, beatus est, He that plainly knows these things and believes them,
is blessed. And in another Epistle, Ad Philip.
after the recitation of such another Creed, he adds, He that believes these
things, Coll. cum Tryph.
is blessed that ever he was born. Justin Martyr affirms expressly, that if
any man should even then live according to the law of Moses (I suppose he means
the law of the ten Commandments) so that he believes in Jesus Christ
crucified, and acknowledge him for the Christ of God, to whom is given the
judgment of all the world, he also shall possess the Eternal Kingdom.

The same Creed in more words but no more articles is recited by S. Irenaeus in
his second and third chapters of his first book, 68.
saying that the Church throughout all the world being planted by the Apostles
to the ends of the Earth, and by their Disciples, has received this faith. He
of all the Prelates that is most powerful in speech cannot say any thing else:
for no man is above his Master, and he that is weak in speaking cannot say
less. For since the faith is one and the same, he that speaks much cannot say
more, and he that speaks little must not say less. And afterward speaking of
some barbarous nations that had not the Scriptures, Lib. 3. cap. 4.
yet having this faith, which he there shortly recites, beginning with belief
in God the Father, the maker of the world, and in Jesus Christ, repeating the
usual articles of his being born of the Virgin Mary, his being the Son of God,
his reconciling God and man, his suffering under Pontius Pilate, his rising
again and being received into glory, and his last judgment: he adds, Hanc
fidem qui sine literis crediderunt quantum ad sermonem nostrum Barbari sunt,
quantum autem ad sententiam and consuetudinem and conversationem propter fidem,
sapientissimi sunt and placent Deo, conversantes in omni justitia, castitate
and sapientia, They who believe this faith are most wise in their sentence and
custom and conversation through faith, and they please God, living in all
justice, chastity and wisdom.

Here were almost two Ages spent by this time, in which the most pestilent
Heresies that ever did trouble the Church did arise, 69.
in which some of the Questions were talked of and disputed, and which
afterward by the zeal of some that overvalued their own forms of speaking
passed into a faction; and yet in all this time, and during all that necessity,
there was no more added to the Christian Creed, no more articles for the
condemnation of any new heresy: whatsoever was against this was against the
faith; but any thing else they reproved if it were false, but did not put any
more into their Creed. And indeed they ought not. Regula quidem fidei una
omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis, Credendi scil in Unum Deum, etc.
says Tertullian; De vela^^ Virgin. cap. 1
The Rule of faith is altogether One, and immovable and unalterable. This law
of faith remaining, other things may be enlarged according as the grace of God
multiplies upon us. But for the faith it self here consigned and summed up, the
Epistle of Celestine to Nestorius is very affirmative and clear, (...), The
faith or Creed delivered by the Apostles requires neither addition nor
defalcation. Neque enim ulla extitit haeresis quae non hoc Symbolo damnari
potuit, There was never any heresy but this Creed was sufficient for its
condemnation, said the Catechism of the Archbishop of Triers.

This faith passing into all the world was preserved with great sacredness and
great simplicity, 70.
no Church varying from it at all: some indeed put some great things into it
which were appendages to the former; but the fullest and the most perfect were
the Creeds of Jerusalem and Rome, that is, the same which the Greek and Latin
Church use at this day. The first and the most simple forms were sufficient;
but these fuller forms being compiled by the Apostles themselves or Apostolical
men, and that from the words of Scripture, made no great alteration: the first
were not too little, and these were not too much. The first was the thing it
self, which was of a declared sufficiency; but when the Apostles were to frame
an instrument of Confession, (...) a form of doctrine by way of art and method,
they put in all that they directed by the Holy Spirit of God knew to contain
the whole faith of a Christian. Now of this form so described, so delivered, so
received, the Fathers of the Church affirm that it is entire and sufficient,
and nothing is to be added to it. Ergo and cunctis credentibus quae continentur
in praefato symbolo salus animarum and vita perpetua bonis actibus praeparatur,
said the Author of the Epistle to S. James attributed to S. Clement, To all
that believe those things contained in the foresaid Symbol or Creed, and do
good deeds, salvation of their souls and eternal life is prepared.

And therefore this summary of faith was called, 71.
(...), Regula fidei, depositum, breve Evangelium, The form or exemplar of
doctrine, the Canon, a description of sound words, the proportion or measure of
Faith, the milky way, or the Introduction of Novices, the Elements of the
beginning of the Oracles of God, the Repository of faith, the faith that was
delivered to the Saints, the Rule of Faith, that which was entrusted to the
Church, A short Gospel. These and diverse other appellatives of the Creed were
used by the ancient Doctors, most of them taken out of Scripture. For what the
Scriptures did affirm of the whole Faith, that the Fathers did apply to this
Creed, as believing it to contain all that was necessary. And as a grain of
Mustard Seed in little contains in it many branches, so also this faith in a
few words involves all the knowledge [the necessary knowledge] of the Old and
New Testament, (...).
says S. Cyril; and therefore he calls this Creed, Traditionem Sanctae and
Apostolicae fidei, The Tradition of the Holy and Apostolic Faith. Cordis
signaculum, and nostrae militiae Sacramentum, (...).
so S. Ambrose calls it, The seal of our heart, and the Sacrament of our
Warfare. S. Hierome yet more fully, (...).
The Symbol of our faith and of our hope, which being delivered by the Apostles
is not written with paper and ink, but in the fleshy tables of our hearts,
after the confession of the Trinity and Unity of the Church. Omne Christiani
dogmatis Sacramentum carnis resurrectione concluditur; The whole Sacrament of
the Christian doctrine is concluded with the resurrection of the flesh to
eternal life. (...)
Norma futurae praedicationis; so Ruffinus calls it; the rule of future
preachings appointed by the Apostles; and hanc credentibus esse regulam dandam
statuunt, they appoint this to be given as a Rule to all believers: and again,
This Creed was the token by which he should be known who did preach Christ
truly according to the Rules of the Apostles; the indication of their Faith and
Unanimity. Comprehensio fidei nostrae atque perfectio, so S. Austin calls it.
Virtus est Sacramenti, illuminatio animae, (...) 115. de (...) and ^erm. 131.
plenitudo Credentium, The illumination of the soul, the fullness of believers,
the comprehension and the perfection of our faith. By this the knot of
infidelity is untied, by this the gate of life is opened, by this the glory of
our confession is manifested. It is tessera and signaculum quo inter Fideles
perfidosque secernitur, De (...) ^ymb.
said Maximus Taurinensis. Basis quaedam, and fundamentum immotum and
inconcussum per universum orbem jactum: So S. Cyril of Alexandria. It is a
badge and cognizance to distinguish the faithful from the perfidious; an
immovable foundation laid for all the world; a Divine or Celestial armor, that
all the opinions of Heretics may be cut off with this sword alone; So S. Leo
Bishop of Rome. I could add very many more to this purpose; who please to
require more, may see enough in Lucifer Calaritanus l. 2. ad Constantium,
Paulinus Bishop of Nola ep. 1. ad Afrum, S. Austin his Book de Symbolo ad
Catechumenos l. 1. c. 1. in Ruffinus his excellent exposition of the Creed,
Eucherius Bishop of Lions in his first Homily upon the Creed, Petrus
Chrysologus in his 62 Homily, Isidor of Sivil l. 6. originum c. 9. and in his
Offices Ecclesiastical l. 1. c. 26. de Dominica palmarum, Rabanus Maurus l. 2.
de instit. Clericorum cap. 56. the oration of Bernard Zane in the first Session
of the Council of Lateran, in the discourse of the Greeks at the Council of
Florence, Sess. 10. Cassianus de incarnatione Domini, Eusebius Gallieanus in
his Homilies on the Creed published by Gaigneus Chancellor of Paris, in
Venantius Fortunatus his explication of it; and he may if he please add the
two Homilies which S. Chrysostom made upon the Creed, and the great
Catechetical oration of S. Gregory Nyssen.

Now to what purpose is all this? 72.
The Apostles compiled this form of words, all Churches received them, all
Catechumens were baptized into this faith, in the Roman Church they recited it
publicly before their immersion, to this salvation was promised; this was the
Sacrament of the Christian faith, the fullness of believers; the characteristick
of Christians, the sign of the Orthodox, the sword of all heresies and their
sufficient reproof, the unity of belief, sufficient, full, immovable,
unalterable; and it is that and that alone in which all the Churches of the
world do at this day agree.

It is true, 73.
that the Church of God did explicate two of the articles of this Creed, that
of the second, and that of the third Person of the Holy Trinity; the one at
Nice, the other at Constantinople; one against Arius, the other against
Macedonius; they did explicate, I say, but they added no new matter but what
they supposed contained in the Apostolical Creed. And indeed the thing was very
well done, if it had not been made an ill example; they had reason for what
they did, and were so near the Ages Apostolical that the explication was more
likely to be agreeable to the Sermons Apostolical: But afterward the case was
altered, and that example was made use of to explicate the same Creed, till by
explicating the old they have inserted new Articles.

But all the while, 74.
it is consented to on all hands, that this only faith is sufficient. What can
certainly follow from these infallible Articles is as certainly true as the
Articles themselves, but yet not so to be imposed, because it is not certain
that this or this explication is right, that this consequent is well deduced;
or if it be certain to you, it is not so to me; and besides it is more an
instrument of schism then of peace, it can divide more then it can instruct,
and it is plainly a recession from the simplicity of the Christian faith, by
which simplicity both the learned and the ignorant are the more safe. August.
contra epist. Fundam c. 4.
Turbam non intelligendi vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam facit:
and when once we come to have the pure streams pass through the limbecks of
humane wit, where interest, and fancy, and error, and ignorance, and passion
are intermingled, nothing can be so certain, though some things may be as true;
and therefore here the Church does rest, here she finds peace; her faith is
simple, easy and intelligible, free from temptation, and free from intrigues;
it is warranted by Scripture, composed and delivered by the Apostles,
entertained by all the world: In these they do agree, but in nothing else, but
this and in their fountain, the plain words of Scripture.

For all the rest, 75.
it is abundant to all excellent purposes. It can instruct the wise, and
furnish the Guides of Souls with treasures of knowledge, and employ the tongues
and pens of the learned; it can cause us to wonder at the immensity of the
Divine wisdom, and the abyss of revelation: it is an excellent opportunity for
the exercise of mutual charity in instructing and in forbearing one another,
and of humility and patience and prayer to God to help our infirmities, and to
enlighten us more and more in the knowledge of God. It is the great field of
faith where she can enlarge her self; but this is the house of faith where she
dwells for ever in this world.

So that for any other thing of the Religion it is to be believed so far as
it does appear to be the word of God; 76.
and by accidents and circumstances becomes of the family or retinue of faith:
but it is not necessary to be believed for it self, unless it be for something
else it is not necessary at all. A man may be saved without knowing any thing
else, without hearing of any thing, without inquiring after any thing, without
believing any thing else, provided that in this faith he live a good life. But
because sometimes a man is by the interests of a good life required to know
more, to inquire after more, and to learn more, therefore upon the stock of
obedience more may be necessary; but not upon the account of faith. So that if
some men do not read the Scriptures, and study them, and search into the
hidden things of God, they sin against justice or charity, but not against
faith, if they retain all the articles of the Apostles Creed: and a man may be
extremely to blame if he disbelieve many other things; but it is because upon
some evil account he disbelieves it, and so is guilty of that sin which is his
evil principle, as of pride, ambition, lust, covetousness, idleness, fear or
flattery; but a man is not in any such case guilty of heresy. For heresy being
directly opposed to faith, and faith being completed in the Articles of the
Christian Creed, it cannot be heresy unless it be a contradicting of one of
those Articles in the words or in the sense, in the letter, or in the plain,
visible, certain, and notorious explication of it. In the Apostolical Creed all
the Christian world is competently instructed: in these things there is no
dispute; and if they be simply believed as they are plainly delivered, it is
the better. But in every thing else, every man according to his calling and
abilities is to grow as much as he can in knowledge; that is, in edifying and
practical knowledge: but in all things of speculation, he that believes what he
sees cause for, as well and as wisely, as heartily and as honestly as he can,
may be deceived, but cannot be a Heretic, nor hazard his salvation. Salus
Ecclesiae non vertitur in istis. In simplicitate fides est, Lib. 2. de Trin. in
princ.
in fide justitia: nec Deus nos ad beatam vitam per difficiles quaestiones
vocat: in expedito and facili nobis est aeternitas, said S. Hilary. Faith is in
simplicity, and righteousness in faith; neither does God call us to eternal
life by hard questions. Eternity stands ready and easily prepared.

For I consider, 77.
if any thing else were necessary to be believed unto salvation, this symbol
could absolutely be of no use; but if any thing be added to it and pretended
also to be necessary, it cannot be entertained, unless they that add it and
impose it be infallible in their judgment, and competent in their authority:
they must have authority equal to that of Christ, and wisdom equal to that of
the Apostles. For the Apostles in this summary of faith, declared all that was
at that time necessary; and if any man else makes a new necessity he must claim
Christ's power, for he only is our Lawgiver: and if any declares a new
necessity, that is not sufficient, unless he can also make it so, for declaring
it supposes it to be so already; and if it was so at first, the Apostles were
to blame not to tell us of it; and if it was not so at first, who made it so
afterward?

But it is infinitely necessary that for the matter of faith, 78.
necessary and sufficient faith, we rest here and go not further. For if there
can be any new necessities, then they may for ever increase, and the faith of a
Christian shall be like the Moon, and no man can be sure that his faith shall
not be reproved; and there shall be innumerable questions about the authority
of him that is to add, of his skill, of his proceeding, of the particular
article, of our own duty in inquiring, of our diligence, of our capacity, of
the degrees of our care, of the competency of instruments, of choosing our side,
of judging of questions: and he that cannot inquire diligently, and he that
cannot judge wisely, and he that cannot discern spirits, and he that fears, and
he that fears not shall all be in danger, and doubt, and scruple, and there
shall be neither peace of minds nor Churches, as we see at this day in the sad
divisions of Christendom; and every man almost damnes all but his own sect;
and no man can tell who is in the right. Men dispute well on both sides; and
just and good and wise men are opposed to one another; and every man seems
confident, but few men have reason; and there is no rest, and there can be
none, but in this simplicity of belief which the Apostles recommended to all
the world, and which all the world does still keep in despite of all their
superinduced opinions and factions; for they all retain this Creed, and they
all believe it to be the summary of Faith.

But the Church of Rome pretends to a power of appointing new Articles of
Faith; 79.
and for denying this, Pope Leo the 10th condemned Luther in his Bull added to
the last Council in Lateran. For ad solam authoritatem summi Pontificis
pertinet nova editio Symboli, A new edition of the Creed belongs to the sole
authority of the Pope of Rome. 2. 2^. q. 1. a. 10.
So Aquinas: and Almain most expressly, August. Tri. de Ancona q. 59. art. 1.
Novum Symbolum condere solum ad Papam spectat, quia est caput fidei
Christianae, cujus authoritate omnia quae ad fidem spectant firmantur and
roborantur. Idem art. 2. Sicut potest novum Symbolum condere, ita potest novos
articulos supra alios multiplicare.
The Popes of Rome by defining many things which before lay hid, Symbolum fidei
augere consuevisse, are wont to enlarge the Creed. For Doctrina fidei admittit
additionem in essentialibus, Tom. 13. part. 3. disp. 6. est ergo.
says Salmeron, The doctrine of faith admits addition even in essential
things. And in consequence to these expressions, they did add the article of
the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, in a Synod at Gentilli in
France; and twelve Articles to the Creed in the Council of Trent, with the
preface and postscript of the Athanasian Creed, damning all that do not
equally believe the Creed of Trent as the Creed of the Apostles.

What effect and impress the declaration of any article by the Church 80.
has or is to have upon the Conscience shall be discoursed under the title of
Ecclesiastical laws; but that which is of present inquiry is, whether any
thing can be of Divine faith in one age that was not so in the age of the
Apostles: and concerning this it is that I say, that it is from the premises
evident that nothing can make any thing to be of Divine faith but our Bl. Lord
himself, who is therefore called the Author and Finisher of our Faith; he began
it, and he made an end. The Apostles themselves could not do it, they were
only Stewards and dispensers of the mysteries of God; they did rightly divide
the word of life, separating the necessary from that which was not so: so that
their office in this particular was only to declare what was necessary and
what was not; no man, and no society of men could do this but themselves, for
none but they could tell what value was to be set upon any proposition: they
were to lay the foundation, and they did so, and they built wisely upon it; but
when they commanded that we should keep the foundation, they only could tell
us which was it, and they did so by their Sermons, preaching the same doctrine
to the simple and the crafty, and by immuring the necessary doctrine in a form
of words, and consigning it to all the Churches where they preached the Gospel.

For we see that all the world is not able to tell us how much is necessary, 81.
and how much is not, if they once go beside the Apostles Creed: and yet it
was infinitely necessary that at first this should be told, because there were
so many false Apostles, and every one pretended authority or illumination, and
every one brought a new word and a new doctrine; and the Apostles did not only
foresee that there would be, but did live to see and feel the heresies and the
false doctrines obtruded upon the Church, and did profess it was necessary that
such false doctrines should arise: and against all this that they should not
provide an universal remedy, is at no hand credible, and yet there was none but
the Creed; this all the Church did make use of, and professed it to be that
summary of Faith which was a sufficient declaration of all necessary faith, and
a competent reproof of all heresies that should arise.

But then that after all this any one should obtrude new propositions, 82.
not deducible from the Articles of the Creed, not in the bowels of any
Article, neither actually expressed nor potentially included, and to impose
these under pain of damnation, if this be not (...), which S. Paul said he had
no power to do, 2 Co^ 1. 24.
to have dominion or lordship over the faith, and (...), 1 ^et. 5. 3.
to lord it over Gods heritage, which S. Peter forbad any man to do, I confess
I do not understand the words, nor yet saw or ever read any man that did. I
conclude this with those excellent words of Justinian which are in the Code,
Cod. lib. 1. de span^ Cum ^ecta.
part of the Imperial law by which almost all the world was long governed:
(...), This right and irreprehensible faith (speaking of the Apostolic Creed,
part of which he there recites) which the Holy Catholic and Apostolical Church
of God does preach, can by no means receive any innovation or change.

I conclude therefore this Question; 83.
In our inquiries of faith no man's Conscience can be pressed with any Authority
but of Christ enjoining, and the Apostles declaring what is necessary. I add
also, that the Apostles have declared it in this form of words which they have
often set down in their writings, and which they more largely described in
their Symbol of Faith. For since, as Sixtus Senensis says, Omnes Orthodoxi
Patres affirmant Symbolum ab ipsis Apostolis conditum, ^ib. 2. biblioth. 5.
that all the Orthodox Fathers affirm the Creed to be made by the Apostles, and
they all say this is a sufficient Rule of faith for all Christians; here we
ought to rest our heads and our hearts, and not to intricate our faith by more
questions. For as Tertullian said well, Lib 1. advers. haeret. cap. 13.
Haec Regula a Christo, ut probabitur, instituta nullas habet apud nos
quaestiones nisi quas haereses inferunt, and quae haereticos faciunt; Heretics
make disputes, and disputes make Heretics, but faith makes none. For if upon
the faith of this Creed all the Church of God went to heaven, all I mean that
lived good lives, I am sure Christ only has the keys of hell and heaven; and
no man can open or shut either, but according to his word and his law: so that
to him that will make his way harder by putting more conditions to his
salvation, and more articles to his Creed, I may use the words of S. Gregory
Nazianzen, Tu quid salute majus quaeris? gloriam nempe quae illic est and
splendorem: mihi vero maximum est ut salver, and futura effugiam tormenta. Tu
per viam incedis minime tritam and incessu difficilem: ego vero per regiam, and
quae multos salvavit, What do thou seek greater then salvation? See Liberty
of Prophes. sect. 1.
(meaning by nice inquiries and disputes of articles beyond the simple and
plain faith of the Apostles Creed) It may be thou look for glory and
splendour here. It is enough for me, yea the greatest thing in the world, that I
be saved and escape the torments that shall be hereafter. Thou go a hard and
an untroden path: I go the Kings highway, and that in which many have been
saved.

RULE XV. In the Law of Christ there is no precept that wholly ministers to the
Law of Moses; but for a time only and less principally.
THis Rule I received from S. Irenaeus; 1.
and they are his words as near as I could translate them. In lege Christi non
est ullum praeceptum veteri tantum legi inserviens, nisi ad horam and minus
principaliter. For our Blessed Savior descended like rain upon a fleece of
wool, and made no violent changes, but retained all the morality that he found
amongst his Countrymen; he made use of their propositions, spoke their
proverbs, united their ejaculations into a collect of his own, for almost every
word of the Lords Prayer was taken from the writings of the pious men of their
Nation; he changed their rites into Sacraments, their customs into mysteries,
their washings he made our Baptism, their Paschal supper he converted into the
Holy Eucharist: and still because he would be understood by them, he retained
the Mosaic words when he delivered a Christian precept; for he knew his Father
would send his Holy Spirit to be an infallible interpreter; and when the types
of Moses passed into the substance of Christ, then the typical words also would
be expounded in the senses of Evangelical duties.

For indeed it is not reasonable to suppose that our Bl. Savior, 2.
who came to fulfill the Law in his own person, and to abolish it in his
Disciples, to change the customs of Moses, and to be an eternal lawgiver in
the instances of moral and essential natural rectitudes, would give a new
Commandment to confirm an old precept which himself intended to extinguish. No
man puts a piece of new cloth to an old garment, nor a new injunction to an
abrogated law; that is, no wise Master Builder holds up with one hand what he
intends to pull down with both: it must therefore follow that whatever Christ
did preach and affirm and exhort, was, although expressed in the words of the
Law, yet wholly relative to the duty and signification of the Gospel. For that
which S. Hilary said of all the words of Scripture, is particularly true in the
sense now delivered of the Sermons of Christ: In Psalm. 226.
Sermo enim divinus secundum intelligentiae nostrae consuetudinem naturamque se
temperat, communibus rerum vocabulis ad significationem doctrinae suae and
institutionis aptatis. Nobis n. non sibi loquitur: atque ideo nostris utitur in
loquendo. God speaks to us and not to himself; and therefore he uses words
fitting to our understandings. By common and usual expressions and such as were
understood he expressed precepts and mysteries which otherwise were not to be
understood.

Thus when our Bl. Savior delivers the precept of Charity and forgiveness he
uses this expression, 3.
When thou bring thy gift unto the Altar, and there remembrest that thou
have any thing against thy Brother, leave thy gift at the Altar, go and be
reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift. If Christ had
said, When thou come to the Lords supper and have any thing against thy
Brother, etc. he had not been understood: but because we know this is an
Eternal precept, part of a moral and eternal excellency, a duty of Christianity
and a portion of Christ's institution, and we know that Christ pulled down the
Jewish altars and the sacrifice of beasts by the sacrifice of his Eternal
Priesthood, and we also are sufficiently instructed by what instruments and by
what ministeries the memory of that is conserved and the benefits of it
conveyed; therefore we also are sure that by these words Christ intended to
command us to be at peace with our Brother and with our enemy, when we come to
offer prayers and to celebrate the memorial of his Eternal sacrifice.

So when our Bl. Savior told the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, 4.
and intended to represent unto his Disciples that we are to expect Salvation
by the ordinary ministeries of the Church, and not to expect it by the way of
miracle and extraordinary dispensation; he was pleased to say, They have Moses
and the Prophets, let them hear them. This was all which could be said to them
whose Scriptures were completed in the writings of Moses and the Prophets: but
when our great Master had by his H. Spirit and by his Apostles and Disciples
perfected another instrument of salvation and repository of Divine truths, the
proposition is to be enlarged to these. They have Christ and his Apostles, they
have the Gospels and Epistles, let them hear them; for if they will not hear
and obey them speaking in the Scriptures, neither will they be converted though
one arise from the dead, and appear to them in the terrible dresses of
affrightment.

When Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, 5.
and urged the words of the Prophet, My Fathers house shall be called the house
of prayer to all Nations; but ye have made it a den of thieves: although this
was spoken to the Jews, and of their Temple, yet Christ who knew this Temple
was to be destroyed and not a stone left upon a stone, intended the piety of
his Commandment should last longer then the dying Temple; and therefore it is
to be translated wholly to the Christian sense. And although he would not have
the Temple profaned so long as it was standing and used for prayer and Divine
service, ad horam, as S. Irenaeus his expression is; even for an hour, taking
care of that because it was a holy place: yet the sacredness and holy usage of
the Temple was less principally intended; but principally Christ regarded the
Christian Oratories and separate places of devotion; that where God by public
appointment and the laws was to be worshipped, there the affairs of the world
should not intrude by the interests of a private and a profane Spirit.

RULE XVI. The Laws of Jesus Christ are to be interpreted to the sense of a
present obedience according to their subject matter.
THat which is true to day will be true to morrow; 1.
and that which is in it is own nature good or necessary any day is good or
necessary every day: and therefore there is no essential duty of the Religion
but is to be the work of every day. To confess Gods glory, to be his subject,
to love God, to be ready to do him service, to live according to Nature and to
the Gospel, to be chaste, to be temperate, to be just, these are the employment
of all the periods of a Christians life. For the Moral law of the Religion is
nothing but the moral law of Nature, (as I have already proved 1 (...) book.
De^ll (...) l. 2. (...).
.) Naturaliter lex nostra est lex pietatis, justitiae, fidei, simplicitatis,
charitatis, optimeque instituta, said Cardan: and again, Christiani Jovem
junctam habent cum Sole, illiusque diem colunt Dominicum: Sol a. significat
justitiam and veritatem; Christiana autem lex plus continet veritatis, and
simpliciores reddit homines. The Christian Law is nothing else but a perfect
institution of life and understanding, it makes men wise, and it makes them
good; it teaches wisdom, and it teaches justice; it makes them wise and
simple, that is, prudent and innocent, and there is no time of our life in
which we are permitted to be otherwise. Those who in the primitive Church put
off their Baptism till the time of their death, knew that Baptism was a
profession of holiness, and an undertaking to keep the faith, and live
according to the Commandments of Jesus Christ; and that as soon as ever they
were baptized, that is as soon as ever they had made profession to be Christ's
disciples, they were bound to keep all the Laws of Christ: and therefore that
they deferred their baptism was so egregious a prevarication of their duty,
that as in all reason it might ruin their hopes, so it proclaimed their folly
to all the world. For as soon as ever they were convinced in their
understanding, they were obliged in their consciences. And although baptism
does publish the profession, and is like the forms and solemnities of law; yet
a man is bound to live the life of a Christian, as soon as ever he believes the
doctrine and Commandments of Christianity; for indeed he is obliged as soon as
he can use reason, or hear reason. The first things a man can learn are some
parts of Christianity; not to hurt any one, to do all that he can understand
to be good; that is, as soon as ever he begins to live like a rational
creature, so soon he begins to live as Christ commanded: and since Baptism (as
to this relation and intention of it) is nothing else but the publication of
our undertaking to do that which in our very Nature and by the first and
universal laws of God to mankind we are obliged, to refuse to be baptized, or
to defer it, is nothing but a refusing or deferring to own our natural
obligation, a denying or not accepting the duty of living according to the law
of Nature; which deferring, as it must needs be the argument of an evil man,
and an indication of unwillingness to live worthily, so it can serve really no
prudent ends to which it can fallaciously pretend. For Christianity being in
its moral part nothing but the perfection of the natural law, binds no more
upon us then God did by the very reason of our Nature. By the Natural law we
are bound to live in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, and
so we are by the Christian law; as appears in the song of Zechary and in very
many other places: and therefore although when some of our time is elapsed and
lost in carelessness and folly, the goodness of God will admit us to second
Counsels, and the death of Christ and his intercession will make them
acceptable; yet Christianity obliges us to obedience as soon as the law of
Nature does, and we must profess to live according to Christianity, as soon as
we can live by the measures of the Natural law, and that is even in the very
infancy of our reason; and therefore Baptism is not to be deferred longer: it
may be sooner, because some little images of choice and reason, which must be
conducted by the measures of Nature, appear even in infancy; but it must not be
deferred longer; there is no excuse for that, because there can be no reason
for so doing, unless where there is a necessity, and it can be no otherwise.

The effects of this consideration are these. 2.
1. All the negative precepts of Christ's law are obligatory in all persons, and
all periods, and all instances. Nunquam licuit, nunquam licebit; it was and is
and ever will be Unlawful to do any action which God forbids to be done: and
therefore to say I will be chaste when I am old, I will be temperate when I am
sick, I will be just when I am rich, I will be willing to restore when I die,
is to measure eternity by time, and to number that which is not. In negatives
there is neither number, nor weight, nor measure: and not to kill, not to
blaspheme, not to commit adultery has no time, and has no proportion.

2. This is also true in the positive Commandments of Christ, 3.
in respect of the inward duty; that is never to be deferred. The charity of
alms, the devotion of prayer, piety to our parents, love of God, love of our
neighbor, desires to do justice; these are not limited to times and
opportunities. The habits of them and the dispositions to action, the readiness
and the love must for ever be within; because these are always possible, and
always good, and always necessary, and therefore cannot have accidental
determinations from without, being works of the inward Man, they depend only
upon the grace of God and the will of man; and that never fails, if this does
not, and therefore are always possible unless we will not; but they are
always necessary, whether we will or no.

3. The external actions of duty are determinable from without, 4.
and by things which are not in our power, and by things which will not happen
always and in some instances, by our own will and mere choice. Thus a man is
bound actually to restore but in certain circumstances; but to be ready and to
love to do it, he is always bound. To say our prayers is limited by time and
place, by occasions and emergent necessities, by use and custom, by laws and
examples: but to depend upon God, to expect all good from him, to glorify him,
to worship him with all our heart, is not limited, but may be done in all the
actions of our life, by actual application, or habitual intention, by secret
purpose, or by open profession, by obedience and by love, or by the voice and
hand. For to pray continually] which is the precept of our Bl. Savior, is
obligatory in the very letter, in proportion to the natural possibilities and
measure of a man; that is, in all our actions we must glorify God, which is one
of the parts of prayer, and we must endear his blessing, which is the other.
But to kneel, or to speak, or actually to think a prayer, being the body of
this duty and determinable by something from without, receives it is limit [
according to the subject matter] that is, when we are commanded, and when we
have need, and when we can, and in the proper season of it.

This Rule is also otherwise explicated by distinguishing the affirmative
precepts of Christ, 5.
into universal and particular. Particular precepts are to be acted only in
their proper determinations, in special times, and pertinent occasions, because
they are always relative to time and place, or person; they have a limited
effect, and are but parts of a good life, and therefore cannot alone work out
our salvation, but must give allowance of time and action to others, of the
like particular and limited nature and effect.

But this is otherwise in the universal and diffusive, 6.
or transcendent precepts of the Religion, though they be affirmative. He that
shall say, that because to love God is an affirmative precept, that it is only
obligatory in certain accidents, and times, and cases, and that therefore we
are not always bound to love God, by the impiety of his conclusion reproves the
folly of his proposition. Neither is it sufficient to say that we are indeed
always bound to the habitual love of God, but not always to the actual; not
always to do an act of the love of God. For the love of God does not consist
only in the fancy or the passionate part, neither is it to be measured by the
issues of any one faculty: and though we are not bound to the exercise of an
act of passion, or intuition, or melting affection, that is, we are not always
tied to a limited, particular, single effect of one grace, in all times; yet we
are bound to do an act of love to God, when we are bound to do any act at
all; for all our Religion, and all our obedience, and all our conversation is
wholly to be conducted by the love of God: and although to love God be an
affirmative Commandment, yet because it is a transcendent, or universal
precept, and includes in it all those precepts, which by binding at several
times, fill up all our time, and every of them being an act of obedience, is
consequently an act and instance of our love to God, it follows, that there is
no time in which we are not bound to love God; and to exercise acts of this
grace does not depend upon times and circumstances.

Upon the accounts of this Rule it is very opportune, 7.
and certainly very useful, to inquire concerning the duty of Repentance; for
upon this article the whole question of late or deathbed Repentance will
depend, and consequently the eternal felicity or infelicity of mankind: and
therefore I have reason to reckon this to be the greatest Case of Conscience in
the whole world; and it will appear so both in the event of the discourse, and
in the event of things.

Question.

At what time precisely is every sinner bound to repent of his sins, 8.
so that if he does not repent at that time, he commits a new sin?

To this Question of At what time] the Church of Rome answers, 9.
At what time soever] For Repentance is as the precept of Baptism and Prayers.
Neither this day nor to morrow precisely is it necessary to be baptized, but
sometime or other; and if we pray half an hour hence, it is as much obedience
as if we fall upon our knees at the instant of the proclamation. Add to this,
that since repentance (besides that it is an affirmative Commandment) is also
a punitive duty, it is generally agreed upon Neminem in conscientia donec
condemnetur ad poenam exolvendam teneri, No man is bound to undergo his
punishment, till the instant that the Law determines him: and therefore when he
is required, when the day of humiliation comes, when there is danger that if it
be not now done, it will not be done at all, then let the sinner look to it,
then he must repent, it cannot be any longer put off. This is the doctrine of
the Roman Schools, and of some others, which they have pursued to dangerous and
horrid propositions.

Scotus and his Scholars say a man is bound to repent upon Holidays, 10.
as upon Christmas, Whitsontide, or at Easter to be sure. But Sotus and Medina
very confidently reprove this proposition as too severe, for this reason;
Because the Church having appointed many Holidays, yet when she explicates the
doctrine of Repentance, she did suppose it to be sufficient to compel the
sinner to repent once by the year: and although the end why the Festivals are
ordained is the inward sanctification of the soul, (...)
haec tamen non est id quod per praeceptum de observatione festorum injungitur,
this is not it which was enjoined by the precept concerning festivals, says
Reginaldus. For the Church (says he) commanded only the means to this
interior holiness; so that if you do the outward work, it matters not (as to
the precept of the Church) whether that end be acquired or no: you disobey the
Church if you do not hear Mass; but though you be never the better, so you do
but hear Mass, she does not find her self grieved.

By the way, 11.
it is observable that Scotus and the more severe part of them, which affirm a
man to be bound to repent on every Holiday, do not intend to say that by the
law of God men are so bound, but by the law of the Church only. Medina and the
looser part deny the Church to have determined this affirmative and indefinite
Commandment of Repentance to so much severity. But as to the law of God, they
all pronounce a man to be free to repent once for all; once he must, but when
that once shall be God has not set down: and since God left it at the greatest
liberty, they do not believe that the Church is so severe as some pretend,
neither do they think it fit she should; but if they never repent till the
article of death, they prevaricate no command of God. For [ Vera, atque adeo,
ut expressit Navarrus in Enchir. cap. 1. n. 31. omnium communis sententia est,
tempus in quo peccator conteri tenetur (intellige per se, seu vi specialis
praecepti de contritione a Deo dati) esse imminentem articulum mortis
naturalis, vel violentae] So Reginaldus. L. 5. cap. 2. siect. 4. n. 23.
The true and common opinion of all men is, that the time in which a sinner is
bound to have contrition for his sins (meaning in respect of any Divine
Commandment) is the article of imminent death, whether natural or violent. And
in the mean time [ There is no precept commanding that a sinner should not
persevere in enmity against God: there is no negative precept forbidding such a
perseverance. Nay worse, if worse be possible, [ even to resolve to defer our
repentance [velle poenitentiam differ, Idem sect.3. n. 21.
nolleque nisi ad aliquod tempus poenitere] and to refuse to repent till such a
day, is but a very little sin (says Sotus;) it is none at all (says Medina)
it is neither an act of impenitence, nor at all unlawful.

These are sad stories to be told and maintained by Christian families, 12.
but therefore the more carefully to be looked to, because it is concerning the
sum of affairs, and an error here is worse then an oversight in a day of
battle: for repentance being the remedy for all the evils of our soul, if the
remedy be ordered so as that it come too late, or deferred till the disease
increase to an intolerable and an incurable evil, the state of our soul must
needs be without remedy; and that in our Philosophy is equivalent to
desperation.

But before I reprove these horrid doctrines, 13.
which so entirely and without dispute prevail in some Churches, I am to say
two things. 1. If God has left the time of our repentance and return so wholly
without care and provision, though by the doctrine of some Roman Doctors the
Church has been more careful of it and more severe then God himself, yet
neither the care of the Church, nor the ordinary provisions and arrests made by
God can ever be sufficient to cause men to live well in any tolerable degree.
For if God binds you only to repent in the day of your death, or if he to
hasten it will affright you with a popular judgment upon the neighborhood,
all those that escape the sickness, and all that have but little or no reason
to fear it, and all those that can fly from it shall not repent, and indeed
shall not be tied to it. And if we consider the event and impressions usually
made upon our cities and villages by any popular judgment, we shall find so
very many to be unconcerned, that if this be the time of repentance, the duty
will upon this account go but slowly forward: very many shall have no need to
do it; and none will do it but they that have: and if the fear of imminent
death be the only period, we may easily perceive what ill provisions are made
for repentance, when even dying men will hardly believe that they shall die
yet, but hope for life, till their hopes and powers of working expire together.
But then because it is pretended that the Church has made better provisions,
and tied all men to communicate at Easter, and consequently to repent by way of
preparation to the Holy Communion; I consider that the Church can only tie
them to the outward signification of repentance, as Confession, and the
appendages of that intercourse; and if they omit the inward and more spiritual
and essential part of this great duty, they may for this sin as well as for all
the other repent in the day of death, and that is sufficient for the
performance of the Divine Commandment. And since the Church requires no more
but a periodical and a ritual repentance, the repentance of a Christian will be
like the Persian feast, which they called vitiorum interitum, the destruction
of impiety; upon the anniversary of which feast they killed all the venomous
creatures they could find, but they let them alone to swarm till that day came
again: and that is the event of these ritual and anniversary repentances; at a
set time there is a declamation made against sin, and some significations of
the evil of it expressed, but when the solemnity is over, it returns in all the
material instances; and there is no help for it in this doctrine, nor in the
customs and usages of those Churches that entertain it. So that this doctrine
must be acknowledged as a destroyer of good life: and though I know no
artifices of escape from this, that are made use of, yet if there were, we are
not to consider what is talked amongst Schoolmen to excuse the objection and to
maintain the faction, but what is really and materially the event of it, as it
is every day observed in the manners of men.

The other thing which I was to say is this, 14.
that this doctrine of the Roman Schools, which is the common sentence of them
all, cannot be directly confuted, unless we fall upon this proposition [ that a
man is positively and directly bound to repent of his sin as soon as ever he
has committed it.]

For if there be not something in the nature of sin that must not be retained
at all; 15.
if there be not much in the anger of God that must not be endured at all; if
there be not obligations to the service of God that must not be put off at all;
if there be not great regards concerning the love of God without which we must
not live at all; and lastly, if there be not infinite dangers in our life, and
that every putting our repentance off exposes it to the inexcusable danger of
never having it done at all; then it must follow that repentance obliges no
otherwise then alms, or saying our prayers, it is to be done in its proper
season: and the consequent of that will be, that so it be done at all, we are
safe enough if it be done at any time; and if you can defer it till to
morrow, you may also put it off till the next day, and so until you die. * And
there is no avoiding it, as is evident to all rational and considering persons:
for to morrow and to day are both alike as to the affirmative command; and by
Gods law we are not bound to it till the day of our death, if we be not bound
to it every day. We must therefore choose our proposition. Does God give us
leave, if we have sinned, to dwell in it, to forget our danger, to neglect the
wound that putrifies? Is he pleased that we for whom he has given his Son, we
whom he has adopted into his family and made members of Christ, we to whom he
perpetually gives his grace, whom he invites by his promises, and calls by his
Preachers every day, and affrights by his threatenings every hour, and incites
by his Spirit, and makes restless by the daily emotions of an unquiet
conscience; that we whom he every day obliges, and no day neglects to do
something toward our amendment and salvation; is he (I say) pleased that we
should in despite or contempt of all this abide in his displeasure, and dwell
in that state of evil things, that if on any hour of so many days and weeks and
months and years we chance to die, we die again and die for ever? Is this
likely? Does God so little value the services of our life, the vigor of our
youth, the wisdom of our age, the activity of our health, the employment of
our faculties, the excellency of our dwelling with him? Does he so little
estimate the growth in grace, and the repetition of holy acts, the strength of
our habits, and the firmness of our love, that he will be satisfied with an
accidental repentance, a repentance that comes by chance, and is certain in
nothing but that it certainly comes too late? But if we may not defer our
repentance to the last, then we must not defer it at all, we must not put it
off one day: For if one, then twenty, if twenty, then twenty thousand; there is
no reason against one, but what is against all: but if we may not stay a
thousand days, then not one hour; and that is the thing I shall now contend for.

1. I remember an odd argument used by Reginaldus 16.
Ubi supra sect. 3.
to prove that a man is not bound to be contrite for his sins as soon as he
remembers them; because (says he) if he were, then it were but ill provided by
God and the Church that Preachers should call upon men to confess their sins,
to be sorrowful for them, and utterly to leave them: for there is no question
but such discourses will often remind us of our sins; and if we were then tied
to repent, and did sin by not repenting, then such preachings would be the
occasion of many sins, and the law would be an intolerable Commandment, and
Christ's yoke not to be endured; because men do not find it so easy to repent
upon every notice: so he. But this consideration turned with the right end
forwards is an excellent argument to enforce the duty which I am now pressing
of, a present actual repentance. For does God send Preachers who every day call
upon us to repent, and does not God intend we should repent on that day he
calls to do it? Do the Prophets and Preachers of righteousness bid us repent
next year? Have they Commission to say, It were well and convenient if you
would repent to day; but you do not sin if you stay till next year, or till
you are old, or till you die? To what purpose then do they preach? Does not
God require our obedience? Do we not sin if the Preachers say well and right,
and we do it not? Is there any one minute, any one day in which we may
innocently stay from the service of God? Let us think of that. Every day on
which a sinner deferres his repentance, on that day he refuses to be Gods
servant: and if God does command his service every day, then he every day sins
on which he refuses. For unless God gives him leave to stay away, his very
staying away is as much a sin as his going away, that is, his not repenting is
a new sin.

And if by way of Objection it be inquired, 17.
By what measures or rules of multiplication shall such sins be numbered?
whether by every day, and why not by every night, or why not by every hour, or
every half hour? I answer, that the question is captious and of no real use,
but to serve instead of a temptation. But the answer is this; 1. That the sin
of not repenting increases by intension of degrees, as the perpetuity of an act
of hatred against God. He that continues a whole day in such actual hostility
and defiance increases his sin perpetually, not by the measures of wine and
oil, or the strokes of the clock, but by spiritual and intentional measures;
he still more and more provokes God, and in the eternal scrutiny God will fit
him with numbers and measures of a proportionable judgment. 2. The sin of not
repenting is also multiplied by extension; for every time a man does positively
refuse to repent, every time a man is called upon or thinks of his duty and
will not do it, every such negative is a new sin, and a multiplication of his
scores: and it may happen that every day that may become twenty sins, and in a
short time rise to an intolerable height.

2. He that remembers he has committed a sin, 18.
either remembers it with joy or with displeasure. If with displeasure, it is
an act of repentance; if with joy, it is a new sin; or if it be with neither,
the man does not consider at all. But if it abides there, the sin will be apt
to repeat its own pleasures to the memory, to act them in the fancy, and so
endear them to the heart: and it is certain that all active considerations
declare on one side or other, either for the sin or against it; and the Devil
is not so backward at tempting, and the pleasure of the sin is not so unactive,
but if ever it be thought upon without sorrow, it cannot easily be thought upon
without some actual or potential delight: and therefore he that repents not,
does sin anew. He that has stolen is bound presently to restore if he can, and
when it is in our hand it must also be in our heart to restore, and the evil
must not be suffered so much as for an hour to dwell upon the injured person:
so it is in the restitution of our hearts and our affections to God; there is
an injustice done to God all the way by our detaining of his rights, the injury
is upon him, he complains that we will not come in, and is delighted if we come
speedily. Restitution therefore must be made presently; and for the
satisfaction and amends for the wrong besides, God may longer expect, even till
the day of its proper period.

3. Does not God every day send something of his grace upon us? 19.
Does he not always knock at the door of our hearts, as long as the day of
salvation lasts? Does not he send his Spirit to invite, his arguments to
persuade, and his mercies to endear us? Would he have any thing of this lost?
Is it not a sin once to resist the Holy Spirit? And he that remembers his sin,
and knows it is an offense against God, and yet does not repent at that thought
and that knowledge, does not he resist the Holy Spirit of God, so moving, so
acting, so insinuating? Is not every good Sermon a part of the grace of God?
Qui monet, quasi adjuvat, (...)
says the Comedy, he that counsels you, helps you: and can it be imagined that
he that resists the grace of God twenty years is not a greater villain then he
that stood against it but twenty months, and so on to twenty days, and twenty
hours? Peccatorem tanto sequitur districtior sententia quanto peccanti ei magna
est patientia prorogata: and Divina severitas eo iniquum acrius punit, quo
diutius pertulit, says S. Gregory. The longer God has expected our
repentance, the more angry he is if we do not repent; now Gods anger would not
increase if our sin did not. But I consider, Must not a man repent of his
resisting Gods grace, of his refusing to hear, of his not attending, of his
neglecting the means of salvation? And why all this, but that every delay is a
quenching of the light of Gods Spirit, and every such quenching cannot be
innocent? And what can be expounded to be a contempt of God, if this be not;
that when God by his preventing, his exciting, his encouraging, his assisting
grace invites us to repentance, we nevertheless refuse to mourn for our sins
and to repent? * This is the very argument which the Spirit of God himself
uses, and therefore is not capable of reproof or confutation. Because I have
called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded: Prove.
1. 24.
but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I will
also laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. Is not therefore
every call to be regarded? and consequently is not every refusing criminal? and
does not God call every day? Put these things together, and the natural
consequent of them is this, That he who sins and does not repent speedily, does
at least sin twice, and every day of delay is a further provocation of the
wrath of God. To this purpose are those excellent words of S. Paul, Despisest
thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and long-suffering, Romans 2. 4.
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? That is,
every action of Gods loving kindness and forbearance of thee is an argument
for, and an exhortation to repentance; and the not making use of it is called
by the Apostle, a despising of his goodness; and the not repenting is on every
day of delay a treasuring up of wrath: (...), Men wax old and grow gray in
their iniquity, while they think every day too short for their sin, and too
soon for their repentance. But (if I may have leave to complain) it is a sad
thing to see a man who is well instructed in Religion, able to give counsel to
others, wise enough to conduct the affairs of his family, sober in his
resolution concerning the things of this world, to see such a person come to
Church every Festival, and hear the perpetual Sermons of the Gospel, the
clamors of Gods Holy Spirit, the continual noise of Aarons bells ringing in his
ears, a man that knows the danger of a sinner if he dies without pardon, that
the wrath of God cannot be endured, and yet that without a timely and
sufficient repentance it cannot be avoided; to see such a man day after day sin
against God, enter into all temptations, and fall under every one, and never
think of his repentance, but unalterably resolve to venture for it, and for the
acceptance of it at the last: for it is a venture whether he shall repent; and
if he does, it is yet a greater venture whether that repentance shall be
accepted, because without all peradventure in that case it can never be
perfected. But the evil of this will further appear in the next argument.

4. He that does not repent presently, 20.
as soon as he remembers and considers that he has sinned, does certainly sin
in that very procrastination, because he certainly exposes himself to a certain
and unavoidable danger of committing other and new sins. And therefore I cannot
but wonder at the assertors of the opposite doctrine, who observe this danger,
and signify it publicly, and yet condemn such persons of imprudence only but
not of sin. The words of Reginaldus, and according to the sense of Navarre, are
these, Ad quod tamen tempus poenitentiam differ esse salutem animae in magnum
discrimen adducere patet per illud quod ex D. Augustino L. 5. prax. (...)
poenit. cap. 2. sect. 4. n. 23
refertur in cap siquis: and cap. finali de poeniten. did. 7. dubiam esse
salutem illorum quos non ante sed post aegritudinem poenitet. Ratio vero esse
potest quod in eo cernatur interpretativus contemptus Dei, qui saepius per
gratias praevenientes illos excitat ac movet ad resipiscentiam, agendamque
poenitentiam, conterendumve de suis peccatis: nihilominus non curant atque
negligunt. He that defers his repentance brings his Soul into manifest and
great danger, according to the doctrine of S. Austin; for it is an
interpretative contempt of God, who often excites them by his preventing graces
to repent and to dee penance, and to be contrite for their sins, but they
neglect it and care not. Now since thus much is observed and acknowledged, it
is a strange violence to reason and to religion that it should not also be
confessed to be the design and intention of God, he will and pleasure, the
purpose of his grace and the Economy of Heaven, the work of his Spirit and the
meaning and interpretation of his Commandment, that we should repent
presently. For when the question is concerning the sense and limit of an
indefinite Commandment, what can be a better commentary to the law then the
actions of God himself? for he understands his own meaning best, and certainly
by these things he has very competently and sufficiently declared it.

If it be objected that these actions of the Divine grace are not sufficient to
declare it to be a sin not to do it, 21.
whenever the grace of God prompts us to repent, because we find that the
Spirit of God does use rare arts to invite us forward to such degrees of
perfection and excellency, to which whoever arrives shall be greatly rewarded,
but if a man falls short, he does not sin; I reply, that the case is not the
same in the matter of Counsel, and in the matter of a Commandment: For when
the question is concerning the sense and signification, the definition and
limit of that which is acknowledged to be a Commandment, the actions of the
Divine grace signifying Gods pleasure and meaning, do wholly relate to the
Commandment; when the thing is only matter of Counsel, then the actions of
the Divine grace relate to that, and are to be expounded accordingly. But thus
they are alike; that as God by his arguments and inducements, his assistances
and aides declares that to do the thing he counsels would be very pleasing to
him; so they declare that what he commands is to be done, that he intends the
Commandment then to bind, that whenever the one is good, the other is
necessary. But his pleasure which he signifies concerning a Counsel, does not
mean like his pleasure concerning a Commandment; but every thing according to
the nature of the Subject Matter: for God having left the one under choice, and
bound the other by a law, whatever signification of the mind of God comes after
this must be relative to what he has before established, and does not now
alter, but only expound now what his meaning was before. Since therefore the
question here is to what precise time we are obliged in the precept of
repentance, nothing is more reasonable then to conclude, that then God intended
we should keep the precept, when he enables us, and exhorts and calls upon us
to do it, which because he by his grace and holy Spirit does every day, this
declaration of God is the best Commentary upon his Commandment.

But to return to the first purpose of this argument. 22.
He that knows he has sinned, and will not kill it by repentance, leaves the
affections to sin remaining; an aptness to be tempted, a relation to the Devil,
a captivity to lust, and an impotency under his passion. For if sin be a cursed
Serpent, if it leaves any venom upon the Spirit of the man, if by committing
sin we are more apt to commit it still, he that has sinned, and when he
remembers it does not repent, keeps himself in the dispositions to sin, he
dwells in the Temptation and the Neighborhood: and because every thing that
invites and directly tends to sin is symbolical and of the same Nature, the
retaining of that very aptness by not repenting the old, must needs be a
progression and going on in sin, and therefore a new sin by interpretation.

And if we consider but the sad circumstances of those persons who wax old in
carelessness and contempt of duty, 23.
how dead their Spirit is, how every day they grow more unwilling to repent,
how habitual their persuasions are in the behalf of sin, how accidentally hard
they grow, and by perceiving so long an impunity, and that things remain as
they were 20. years ago, and that though they sinned then, yet they are well
still, and all the affrightments of the Preachers sermons are but loud noises
and harmless thunder, they grow confident and still more careless; we shall
find that their Spirit is in declension, and is continually, and still further
distant from the friendship of God. So sometimes we see a healthful body by the
disorders of one intemperate meeting fallen into the beginnings of a sickness.
The Man it may be does so no more; but feeling his sickness tolerable, and
under the command of reason, he refuses to take physic, and to throw out the
evil principle which begins to ferment in the disordered body: but Nature being
disturbed and lessened in her proper vigor, goes on in her usual methods as
well as she can; she goes forward, but she carries a load, which in a long
progression grows intolerable, not by it is own weight, but by the diminution
of Natures strengths. But when the evil is grown great, the Physician is called
for; who espying the evil state of things is forced to reply, It is now very
late, for nature is weak and the disease is strong. I shall do what art can
minister, but I fear that Nature is incapable of relief. So it is in the Soul;
the very deferring of taking Physic is an increasing of the disease. For every
sin is Ulcus, (...), it is an Ulcer and draws all the humors thither for it is
increase and nourishment: and that which is sore will swell, and all the waters
will run to the hole in the bank, and every finger to the wound that smarts,
and every eye to the thing we fear: and therefore it has been observed by the
wise guides of Souls, that those persons who defer their repentance to their
old age, their repentance comes off the harder, their penitential actions are
the worse, their zeal colder, their care more indifferent, their religion less,
their fears are trifling, their love stark and cold, their confessions formal
and imperfect, every thing amiss, nothing right: but no repentance can be that
which God intends, unless it begins betimes. Vidi ego quod fuerat primo
sanabile vulnus Ovid.

Dilatum longae damna tulisse morae.
Any one disease if let alone, though there be no new sickness supervening,
grows mortal by mere delay, and incurable for want of timely remedy.

5. Let us consider upon what account any man can defer his repentance and yet
be innocent. 24.
It must either be because he loves his sin, or because he loves not God;
because he either despises the Divine justice, or presumes upon his mercy;
because he has evil principles, or because he will not obey those which are
good. It is positive impenitence, or it is privative; it is hardness of heart,
or it is effeminacy of life; it is want of fear, or want of love: and
whatsoever can come from any of these causes or beginnings can never be
innocent. And therefore S. Ambrose his question was a good caution and a severe
reproof. Quid enim est quod differas? an ut plura peccata committas? Why do
you defer your repentance? is it because you would commit more sins? That Is
most likely. Sed quia delectat Veneris decerpere fructus,
Dicimus assidue, Lib. 1. de remed. amoris.
Cras quoque fiet idem.
Interea tacitae serpunt in viscera flammae,
Et mala radices altius arbor agit.
He that says he will not repent of his lust to day, says in effect that he
means to act it again to morrow; for why else should he put his repentance
farther off? Quid juvat in longum causas producere morbi?
Cur dubium expectat cras hodierna salus?
If you really intend your cure, it is better to begin today then to morrow:
and why should any man desire to be sick one day longer? Whatever can be in it,
it is a disease and a very sickness of it self. There can be no good excuse
pretended for it. For if carelessness, if the neglect of holy things can ruin
us (as certainly a man may die with hunger as surely as by gulttony, by not
eating at all as well as by eating too much, by omission as well as by
commission) it will follow that the not repenting is fatal and damnable,
because every delay is a Not-repenting till that delay be gone.

6. The Scripture does every where call upon us for a speedy repentance. 25.
For God that commands us to pray every day, consequently commands us to repent
every day. Apud Reginaid ubi supra.
This argument ought to prevail even upon the adversaries account: For Navarre
confesses, Extra tempus articuli mortis dantur casus in quibus peccator conteri
tenetur per aliud, sive ex vi alicujus praecepti quod peccator ipse
transgreditur, aliquid agens non contritus. When there is any distinct precept
obliging to a duty which cannot be done by him that is not penitent, he that
directly obliges to that other duty, does indirectly and consequently at that
very time oblige to repentance. Thus when the Church obliges a Priest to
consecrate and to communicate, because he who does so without repentance
commits a deadly sin, the Church accidentally ties him at that time to repent.
From these premises I assume, that since God obliges us every day to pray, he
also obliges us to do that without which we cannot pray as God intends we
should* that is, to throw away all our affection to sin, to repent of it and to
forsake it. For the prayer of a wicked man is an abomination to the Lord, said
Solomon; and we know that God hears not sinners, said he in the Gospel, that
is, those who having sinned have not yet repented, -- Infelix infelicior ut
sit, being unhappy in their hasty sin, but more unhappy in their slow
repentance: but it is the prayer of the repenting man which God will hear; and
therefore our Blessed Savior commanding us to pray and teaching us how,
enjoynes us that we every day pray for the forgiveness of our trespasses; as
for our daily bread, so for our daily pardon: Panem nostrum da nobis hodie,
Give us this day our proportion of bread; and therefore also this day give us
pardon; for we must return to day: Hodie for bread, and hodie for forgiveness
and amendment. So the Psalmist, and so the Apostle in his words, To day hear
his voice and harden not your hearts; not only expressly commanding us not to
defer our repentance one day, but plainly enough affirming that every such
delay is an act of hardness of heart and obduration, and therefore a new sin
superadded to the old. For although in Nature and Logic time consignifies,
that is, it does the work of accidents and appendages and circumstances, yet in
Theology it signifies and effects too; time may signify a substantial duty, and
effect a material pardon: but of all the parts of time we are principally
concerned in the present. But it is remarkable, that though [ Hodie, to day]
signifies the present time, yet the repentance which began yesterday, which
took an earlier hodie, is better then that which begins to day: but that which
stays till to morrow is the worst of all. Ille sapit quisquis, Posthume, vixit
Heri. For Heri and Hodie, yesterday and to day, signifies Eternity: so it is
said of Christ, Yesterday and to day, the same for ever. But Hodie and Cras, to
day and to morrow, signifies but a little while. To day and to morrow I work,
said Christ, that is, I work a little while; and the third day, that is, very
shortly or quickly, I shall make an end. That repentance is likely to prevail
to a happy eternity which was yesterday and to day, but if it be deferred till
tomorrow, it begins late and will not last so long. * To this purpose excellent
are those words of Ben-Sirach, Ecclus. 5. 7.
Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shall
be destroyed. Meaning that every day of thy life may be the day of thy death,
therefore take heed, and defer not until death to be justified, for God
oftentimes smites sinners in their confidence; he strikes them in their
security, in their very delay they are surprised, in their procrastination they
shall loose their hopes, and the benefit and usefulness of to morrow. For what
is vain man that he should resolve not to repent till Easter? It may be at that
very time he so resolves there is an impostume in his head or breast, or there
is a popular disease abroad that kills in three days, or to morrows dinner
shall cause a surfeit, or that nights drinking shall inflame his blood into a
fever, or he is to ride a journey the next day and he shall fall from his
horse and die, or a tile in the street shall dash his brains out; and no man
can reckon all the possibilities of his dying suddenly, nor the probabilities
that his life will end very quickly. This question therefore may be determined
without the intrigues of disputation. Let a man but believe that he is mortal,
let him but confess himself to be a man, and subject to chance, and there is no
more required of him in this article, but the consequence of that confession.
Nemo Deo credens non se sub verbis ejus corrigit nisi qui diu se putat esse
victurum, says S. Austin, Whosoever believes in God will presently amend his
life at the command of God, unless he thinks he shall live long. But what if a
man should live long? is it so intolerable a thing to live virtuously when we
are to live long, that the hopes of life shall serve to no other end but that
sin may be continued and repeated, and repentance may be delayed? That Is the
worst conclusion in the world from such premises. But however, he that
considers that so many men and women die young, will have but little reason to
conclude to so evil and dangerous purposes from so weak and contingent
principles. When Theramenes came out from his friends house the roof and walls
immediately fell down. The Athenians espying the circumstances of that safety,
flocked about him, congratulated his escape, and cried him up as a man dear
unto the Gods for his so strange deliverance from the ruin. But he wisely
answered, Nescitis, viri, ad quae tempora and pericula Jupiter me servare
voluerit, Ye know not, O Athenians, to what evils I am reserved. He said true,
for he that had escaped the fall of a house in Athens, was in a little while
condemned by the Ephori of Sparta to drink the cold and deadly hemlock; he
passed but from one opportunity of death unto another. (...) Eu^^.

(...).
No man can tell whether he shall live till to morrow: and to put off our
repentance when it may be there is at the very instant the earnest of death in
thy heart or bowels, a stone ready formed, hardened and ripe in the Kidneies,
and will before to morrow morning drop into the bladder, Mors latet in mediis
abdita visceribus, Death is already placed in the stomach, or is gone into the
belly, then, that is, in any case to defer repentance, is a great folly and a
great uncharitableness, and a contempt of all the Divine revelations concerning
heaven and hell. (...), of all things in the world do not trust to time. --
Obrepit non intellecta senectus; Auson

Nec revocare potes qui periere dies.
In time there is nothing certain, but that a great part of our life slips away
without observation, and that which is gone shall never come again? These
things although they are dressed like the arguments of Orators, yet they do
materially and logically conclude, That if to be uncharitable be a sin, he that
defers his repentance in so uncertain a life and so certaintly approaching
death, must needs be a very great sinner upon that account, because he does not
love himself, and therefore loves no body, but abides without charity. But our
Bl. Savior has drawn this Caution into a direct precept, Agree with thine
adversary (...) quickly: The hope of Eternity which now is in thy hand may else
be lost for ever, and drop through thy fingers before to morrow morning. S.
Greg. Naz. in Sanct. Bapt.
Quanto miser in periculo versaberis, quamque inopinati rerum casus te
abripient! Miserable man, thou art in extreme danger, and unlooked for
accidents may end thy talkings of repentance and make it impossible for ever. A
man is subject to infinite numbers of chances; and therefore that we may not
rely upon the future or make delays, let us make use of this argument,
Whatsoever comes by chance, comes upon the sudden.

But because this discourse is upon the grounds of Scripture, 26.
it is of great force what was by the Spirit of God threatened to the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus; Revt.. 2. 5.
Repent, for I will come unto thee quickly, and remove the Candlestick out of
its place unless thou do repent: that is, unless thou repent quickly, I will
come quickly. Who knows how soon that may be to any man of us all? and
therefore it is great prudence and duty and charity to take care that his
coming to us do not prevent our return to him; which thing can never be
secured but by a present repentance. And if it be considered that many persons
as good as we, as wise, as confident, as full of health, and as likely to live,
have been snatched away when they least did think of it, with a death of
sudden, that the deferring their repentance one day has been their undoing for
ever; that if they had repented heartily, and chosen a good life clearly and
resolvedly upon the day before their sudden arrest, it would have looked like a
design of grace and of election, and have rendered their condition hopeful; we
shall find it very necessary that we do not at all defer our return, for
this reason, because one hours stay may not only by interpretation, but also
in the real event of things, prove to be that which S. Austin called [the sin
against the Holy Ghost] that is, final impenitence. For as he that dies young,
dies as much as he that dies after a life of fourscore years; so is that
impenitence final under which a man is arrested under the infancy of his crime,
as much as if after twenty years grace and expectation, the man be snatched
from hence to die eternally. The evil is not so great, and the judgment is not
so heavy, but as fatal and as irreversible as the decree of damnation upon the
falling Angels.

7. When we see a man do amiss we reprove him presently, 27.
we call him off from it at the very time, and every good man would fain have
his unhappy friend or relative leave in the midst of his sin, and be sorry that
he went so far; and if he have finished his sin, we require of him instantly
to hate it, and ask pardon. This is upon the same account that God does it,
because to continue in it, can be for no good; to return instantly has great
advantages; to abide there is danger, and a state of evil; to choose to abide
there is an act of love to that evil state, and consequently a direct sin; and
not to repent when we are admonished, is a choosing to abide there: and when
ever we remember and know and consider we have sinned, we are admonished by
Gods Spirit and the principles of grace and of a holy Religion. So that from
first to last it follows certainly, that without a new sin, we cannot remember
that we have sinned unless then also we do repent: and our aptness to call
upon others to do so is a great conviction that every man is obliged in his
own particular to do so. (...), Menand.

(...).
Since we are all wise enough to give good counsel, it will reproach us if we
are not conducted by the consequences of our own wise advices. It was long
first, but at last S. Austin fell upon this way; nothing could end his
questions, or give rest unto his conscience, or life to his resolutions, or
satisfaction to his reason, or definition to his uncertain thoughts, or a
conclusion to his sin, but to understand the precept of repentance to oblige in
the very present and at no time else. Differens dicebam modo, ecce modo, sine
paululum: sed modo and modo non habebat modum. He would anon, and he would next
week, and he would against the next Communion; but there was no end of this:
and when he saw it, sub fico stravi me flens, quamdiu, quamdiu cras, and cras?
quare non modo? quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae? I wept and said,
how long shall I say To morrow? Why shall I not now by present repentance put
an end to my crimes? If not now, if not till to morrow, still there is the same
reason for every time of your health, in which you can say to morrow. There is
enough to determine us To day, but nothing that can determine us To morrow. If
it be not necessary now, it is not necessary then, and never can be necessary
till it be likely there will be no morrow-morning to our life. I conclude this
argument in the words of the Latin Anthology, Converti ad rectos mores and
vivere sancte
In Christo meditans, quod cupit acceleret.
He that would live well and be Christ's servant, must make haste, and instantly
act what he knows he ought always to purpose, and more. To which purpose S.
Eucherius gives this advice, which at first will seem strange, Propound to your
self the example of the thief upon the Cross: Do as he did. Yes, we are too
ready to do so, that is, to defer our repentance to the last, being
encouraged by his example and success. No: we do not as he did, that is a
great mistake. It is much to be wished that we would do as he did in his
repentance. How so? S. Eucherius thus resolves the riddle, Ad consequendum
fidem non fuit extrema illa hora, sed prima. He did not defer his repentance
and his faith unto the last; but in the very first hour in which he knew
Christ, in that very instant he did believe and was really converted: he
confessed Christ gloriously, and repented of his sins without hypocrisy: and if
we do so too, this question is at an end, and our repentance shall never be
reproved.

8. He that has sinned, and remembers that he has sinned, 28.
and does not repent, does all that while abide in the wrath of God. God hates
him in every minute of his delay. And can it consist with any Christian grace,
with faith, or hope, or charity, with prudence or piety, with the love of God,
or the love of our selves, to outstand the shock of thunder, to outface the
Canon, to dare the Divine anger, and to be careless and indifferent though he
be hated by the fountain of love and goodness, to stand excommunicate from
Heaven? All this is beside the sin which he committed; all this is the evil of
his not repenting presently. Can a man consider that God hates him; and care
not though he does, and yet be innocent? And if he does care, and yet will not
remedy it, does not he then plainly despair, or despise it presumptuously? and
can he that does so be innocent? When the little boy of Xylander saw a company
of Thieves robbing his Fathers house, and carry away the rich Vessels, and ten
Attick talents, he smiled and whipped his Top. But when a child who was in their
company stole his Top from him, he cried out and raised the neighborhood. Sic
sunt qui rident, nec cessant ludere, saevus
Cum Satanas illis non peritura rapit.
So is he that plays on and is merry when his Soul is in the possession of the
Devil: for so is every Soul that has sinned and has not repented: he would
not be so patient in the loss of his money, he would not trust his gold one
hour in the possession of Thieves, nor venture himself two minutes in a Lions
power; but for his Soul he cares not though it stay months and years in a
danger so great as would distract all the wits of mankind, if they could
understand it perfectly as it is.

9. If there were nothing else, 29.
but that so long as his sin is unrepented of, the man is in an unthriving
condition, he cannot entertain Gods grace, he cannot hope for pardon, he cannot
give God thanks for any spiritual blessing, he cannot love his word, he must
not come to the holy Sacrament; if (I say) there were nothing else in it but
the mere wanting of those excellencies which were provided for him, it were an
intolerable evil, for a man to be so long in the dark without fire and food,
without health or holiness: but when he is all that while the object of the
Divine anger, and the right-aiming thunderbolts are directed against his heart
from the bow in the clouds, what madness and what impiety must it needs be to
abide in this state of evil without fear and without love!

10. 30.
The advice of S. Paul in the instance of anger has something in it very
pertinent to this article, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; that is,
Do not sleep till you have laid aside your evil thoughts: for many have
quietly slept in sin, who with horror and amazement have awaked in hell. But S.
Paul's instance of anger is very material, and has in it this consideration,
That there are some principiant and mother-sins, pregnant with mischief, of a
progressive nature, such sins which if they be let alone, will of themselves
do mischief; if they be not killed they will strike; like as Quicksilver,
unless it be allayed with fasting spittle, or some other excellent art, can
never fix: now of these sins there is no question but a man is bound instantly
to repent; and there is no season for these, but all times are alike, and the
first is duty. Now how many are thus is not easily told; but it is easily told,
that all are so of their own nature, or may be so by the Divine judgment, and
therefore none of them are to be let alone at all.

11. The words of S. Austin which he intended for exhortation, 31.
are also argumentative in this question, Hodiernum habes in quo corrigaris,
You have this day for your repentance. To morrow you have not. For God did not
command him that lived in the time of Samuel to repent in the days of Moses;
that was long before him, and therefore was not his time: Neither did he
command that Manasses should repent in the days of the Asmonaei; they lived
long after him, and therefore that could not be his time, or day of repentance.
Every one has a day of his own. But when we consider that God has commanded
us to repent, and yet has given us no time but the present, we shall perceive
evidently, that there is no time but the present in which he intended we should
obey him. Against this there can be no objection; for it is so in all other
precepts whatsoever, unless there be something in the nature of the action that
is determinable by circumstances and particularities: but in this there is
nothing of relation to time and place; it may be done at any time, and is of an
absolute, irrespective nature, of universal influence, and of absolute
necessity: and God could no more intend to morrow to be the proper season of
repentance, then he could intend the five and twentieth Olympiad to be your day
for it; for the Commandment is present, and to morrow is not present; and
therefore unless we can suppose a Commandment, and no time given us with the
Commandment for the performing it, we must suppose the present only to be it.
If to morrow does come, then when it is present, it is also the time of your
repentance. By which it is infallibly certain, and must be confessed so by all
wise and rational persons that know the consequences of things, and the
persuasion of propositions, that God in every present commands us to repent;
and therefore in every present in which we remember our sin and repent not, we
offend God, we prevaricate his intentions, we sin against his mercies, and
against his judgments, and against his Commandments. I end this with the
plain advice of Alcimus Avitus; Dum patulam Christi cunctis clementia sese
Praebet, praeteritae plangamus crimina vitae,
Poeniteatque olim negligenter temporis acti,
Dum licet, and sano ingenioque animoque valemus.
In which words, besides the good counsel, this argument is insinuated, That
because we must repent even of the days of our negligence, and be sorry for all
our misspent time, and weep for having stayed so long from God, it follows
that the very deferring of our repentance, our very neglecting of it is a
direct sin, and increases the causes of repentance; and therefore makes it the
more necessary to begin the sooner, by how much we have stayed the longer.

Question II.
As an appendage to this great Case of Conscience, 32.
it is an useful inquiry to ask, Whether a man is bound to repent, not only
the first time, but every time that he thinks of his sin.

I answer, 33.
that he is; but to several purposes, and in differing measures and
significations. If he has never repented, then upon the former accounts, every
remembrance of his sin is a specification and limit to the indefinite and
affirmative Commandment; and the second thought of it, because the first not
being attended to has increased the score, and the time being so much the more
spent, has increased the necessity and the haste: and if the second be
neglected, then the third still calls louder; and every succeeding thought does
not only point us out the opportunity, and the still proceeding season of
doing it, but it upbraids every preceding neglect, and presses the duty
stronger by a bigger weight of the same growing arguments. For no man is safe
but he that repents at least to day; but he was wise that repented yesterday.
And as it is in humane intercourse, he that has done wrong, and runs presently
to confess it, and offer amends, shall have easier terms of peace then he that
stands out at law, and comes not in till he be compelled: so it is in our
returns to God; the speedy penitent shall find a ready and a prepared mercy,
but he that stays longer will find it harder, and if he stays to the last, it
may be not at all. * But then if we have repented at the first monition or
memory of sin, we must never any more be at peace with it: it will perpetually
make claim, it will every day solicit, it will break into a flame upon the
breath of every temptation, it will betray thy weakness and abuse thy
credulity, it will please thy fancy and abuse thy understanding, it will make
thee sin again as formerly, or desire to sin, to fall willingly, or very hardly
to stand; and after all, if thou have sinned thou art under a sad sentence, and
can not tell when thou shall have a certain peace. So that whenever thou
think of thy sin thou have reason to be displeased, for thou art always the
worse for it; always in danger, or always uncertain: thou have always something
to do, or something to undo; something to pray for, and many things to pray
against. But the particular causes of a perpetual repentance for our past sins
are reducible to these two.

1. When ever we have sinned, 34.
and fallen into the Divine displeasure, we dwell for ever after in the dark:
we are sure we have sinned, and Gods anger is plainly revealed against sinners:
but we know not how far this anger will extend, nor when it will break out,
nor by what expressions it shall be signified, nor when it will go off, nor at
what degree of sorrow God will be appeased, nor how much industry shall be
accepted, nor how many actions of infirmity shall be allowed; nothing of this
is revealed. But we are commanded to do an indefinite duty, we are to have an
unlimited watchfulness, we are called upon to have a perpetual caution, a duty
that has no limit, but all our time and all our possibilities; and all the
fruit of this is growing in the Paradise of God, and we shall not taste it till
the day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God. In the mean time
we labor and fear, we fear and hope, we hope and are uncertain, we pray and
cannot see what will be the event of things. Sometimes we are confident; but
that pertness comes it may be from the temper of the body, and we cannot easily
be sure that it comes from God: and when we are cast down, it may be it is
nothing but an effect of the spleen, or of some hypochondriacal propositions,
or some peevish company, and all is well with us, better then we think it is;
but we are under the cloud, and, which is worst of all, we have always but too
much reason to fear, and consequently to be grieved for the causes of all this
darkness, and all this fear, and all this danger.

2. Besides all this, 35.
our sin is so long in dying, and we kill it with such lingering circumstances,
and reprieve it so often, and it is often laid only aside until the day of
temptation, and our repentance is so frequently interrupted, or made good for
nothing, and even in our weepings for sin we commit folly, that a man can never
tell when he has done, and when he is to begin again. For these reasons we
find it very necessary to hate our sin perpetually, and for ever to deplore
our calamity in the Divine displeasure, to remember it with sorrow, and to
strive against it with diligence. Our sins having made so great an alteration
in our persons, and in the state of our affairs, we cannot be so little
concerned as to think of them with indifference; a sigh at least, or a tear
will well become every thought; a prayer for pardon, or an act of indignation
against them; a Domine miserere, or a Me miserum peccatorem! Have mercy upon
me, o God, or, Miserable man that I am! something of hope, or something of
fear. Own it but as a cause of sorrow, or an instance of thy danger; let it
make thee more zealous or more patient; troubled at what is past, or cautious
for the time to come: and if at every thought of thy sin it be not easy to do
a positive act of repentance, yet the actions must be so frequent that the
repentance be habitual; ever in preparation, and ever apt for action; seeking
occasions of doing good, and omitting none; praying and watching against all
evil, and committing none. At this rate of repentance a man must always live,
and in Gods time expect a freedom from sin, and a confirmation in grace. But
then as to the main issue of the Question;

It is not intended that a man should every time weep when he thinks of his
sins; 26.
sometimes he must give thanks to God for his escape, and rejoice in the memory
of the divine mercies, and please himself in the promises of pardon, and do
acts of Eucharist and holy festivity. But even these acts of spiritual joy, if
they indear our duty, they destroy our sin; if they make us to love God, they
make us to hate sin; if they be acts of piety, they are acts of repentance. So
that when it is said, at every thought of your sin you must do something of
repentance, if you do any act at all, this is nothing else but a calling upon
us for the particulars, and to pursue the methods of a good life. For
repentance is the conversion of the whole man, an entire aversation from evil,
and a full return to God; and every action of amendment, every prayer for
pardon, and every mortification of our desires, every observation and caution
against danger, all actions of a holy fear, Dan. ^
and every act of hope, even our alms and mercy to the poor, is a breaking off
our sins, and therefore an action of repentance. So that if there can be any
time of our life in which a sinner may not serve God and yet be innocent, then
it may be allowed at some time to think of our sin and consider it, and yet not
to do an act of repentance; but in no case else can it be allowed.

So that by this discourse we have obtained all the significations of Hodie to
day, 37.
and they all relate to repentance. For though it signifies the present time as
to the beginning of this duty, yet it signifies our whole life after that
beginning, that is our Hodie, to day, we must begin now and continue to do the
same work all our days. Our repentance must begin this day by the computations
of time, and it must not be put off one day, yet it must go on by the measures
of Eternity. As soon as ever and as long as ever we can say Hodie, it is to
day, so soon and so long we must repent. This is as certain in Divinity as a
demonstration in the Mathematics.

The sum is this; 38.
If by repentance we mean nothing but sorrow, then it has it is season, and
does not bind always to all times. But if by repentance we understand a change
of life, to which sorrow is only instrumental and preparatory, then it is our
duty always to repent. That is, if you do any thing at all, it must be good:
even to abide in goodness, to resolve not to sin, to love not to sin, to
proceed or to abide in innocence by choice and by delight, by custom and
resolution, are actions of an habitual repentance; but repentance is never safe
till it be habitual, but then also it is so much the more perfect, by how much
it is the more actual.

To conclude this inquiry, 39.
we must pray often, but we must repent always: and it is in these affirmative
precepts as it is in the matter of life and eating; we must eat at certain
times and definite seasons, but we must live continually. Repentance is the new
life of a Christian; and therefore we must no more ask when we are bound to
repent, then when we are by nature required to breath. The motion must return
speedily, or we die with strangling.

RULE XVII. Because the Laws of Jesus Christ were delivered in Sermons to a
single person, or a definite number of hearers, we are curiously to inquire and
wisely to understand, when those persons were only personally concerned, and
when they were Representatives of the whole Church.
THis Rule I learn from S. Austin, 1.
Erit igitur hoc in observationibus intelligendarum Scripturarum, (...) c. 17.
ut sciamus alia omnibus communiter praecipi, alia singulis quibusque generibus
personarum: ut non solum ad universum statum valetudinis, sed etiam ad suam
cujusque membri propriam infirmitatem medicina pertineat. Some things are given
to all; others but to a few; and some commands were to single persons and
single states: God having regard to the well-being of societies, and to the
health even of every single Christian. That there is a necessity of making a
distinction is certain, but how this distinction is to be made is very
uncertain, and no measures have yet been described, and we are very much to
seek for a certain path in this intricacy. If we do not distinguish precept
from precept, and persons from states of life, and states of life from
communities of men, it will be very easy for witty men to bind burdens upon
other men's shoulders with which they ought not to be pressed; and it will be
very ready for scrupulous persons to take loads upon themselves which appertain
not to them; and very many will dispute themselves out of their duty, and say,
quid ad me? I am not concerned here; and the Conscience shall be unguided and
undetermined while the laws of order shall themselves lie undistinguished and
undiscerned in confusion and indiscrimination. There must be care taken of
this, or else cases of Conscience will extremely multiply to no purposes but
those of danger and restless scruple. The best measures that I know are these;

1. 2.
There are some precepts which are by all men confessed to be General, and some
are every where known to be merely Personal; and by proportion to these we can
be helped to take account of others. When Abraham as a trial of his obedience
was commanded to sacrifice his Son, this was alone a Commandment given to that
man concerning that child, at that time, and to that purpose. So when he was
commanded to forsake his Country and go to Canaan, this was personal, and
could not be drawn into example: and no man could think that if he should kill
his Son, or leave his country, he should be rewarded for his obedience. For the
Commandments given to persons are individuated as the persons themselves are,
by time and place and circumstances, and a singular nature, a particular Soul:
So is the Commandment also; it is made circumstantiate by all that is in and
about it: and the reason of a man and his observation is the competent and
final judge of these things; and no man is further required to look after
significations of that which is notorious. Others also are as certainly and
confessedly general; such as were the ten Commandments to the Children of
Israel; they were given to all the people, proclaimed to the whole nation,
expressly spoken to them all, exacted of them all, and under the same reason,
and upon the same conditions. Now here are some proportions by which we may
guess at others.

2. For whatsoever related wholly to a person, 3.
or was determined by a circumstance, or was the relative of time, that passes
no obligation beyond the limits and definitions of those circumstances. Upon
this account all the Ceremonial and Judicial law of the Jews have lost their
obligation. The service that related to a Temple that is now destroyed, and was
to be performed by a Priesthood that is expired, can no longer be a law of
conscience. Thus the command which Christ gave that his Brethren should follow
him into Galilee after the resurrection was wholly personal. The Apostles were
commanded to untie another man's Ass, and without asking leave to bring him to
Christ; the command was wholly relating to that occasion, and gives no man
warrant to take another man's goods for pious uses without his leave.
Circumstances are to actions like hedges to the grounds, they divide and
defend, and assign every man's portion. And in these cases ordinary prudence is
a sufficient guide.

3. Whatsoever precept was given to many, 4.
if it was succeeded to by another that is inconsistent, or of a quite
differing nature and circumstance, the former is by the latter declared to have
been personal, relative, temporary and expired; and nothing of it can be drawn
into direct obligation. When our Blessed Savior sent out the 72. Disciples by
two and two, he commanded them to go without sword or shoes or bag, and that
they should not go into the way of the Gentiles. That these Commandments were
temporary and relative to that mission appears by the following mission after
Christ's resurrection; by which they received command that they should go into
the way of the Gentiles, that they should teach all Nations. Therefore besides
the special and named permissions in this second legation, as that they might
now wear a sword, that they might converse with Heathens, it is certain that
those other clauses of command which were not expressly revoked, are not
obligatory by virtue of the first sanction and Commandment. And therefore if
any man shall argue, Christ when he sent forth his Disciples to preach,
commanded that they should not go from house to house, but where they did
first enter there to abide till the time of their permitted departure,
therefore it is not lawful to change from one Church to another, from a less to
a greater, from a poorer to a richer, will argue very incompetently and
inartificially; for all the Commandments then given were relative to that
mission: and if any thing were inserted of an universal or perpetual
obligation, it is to be attended to upon some other account, not upon the stock
of this mission and it is relative precepts.

4. 5.
It is not enough to prove a precepts to be perpetual and general, that it is
joined with a body of precepts that are so, though there be no external mark of
difference. Thus we find in the ten words of Moses one Commandment for resting
upon the seventh day from the Creation; it is there equally prescribed, but
fortified with reasons and authority, more laboriously pressed, and without all
external sign of difference to distinguish the temporary obligation of this
from the perpetuity of the other; and yet all the Christian Church esteem
themselves bound by the other, but at liberty for this day. But then we
understand our liberty by no external mark appendent to the Sanction, but by
the natural signature of the thing. The nature of the precept was ceremonial
and typical; and though to serve God be moral and an Eternal duty, yet to serve
him by resting upon that day, or upon any day, is not moral; and it was not
enjoined in that Commandment at all that we should spend that day in the
immediate service of God and offices of religion; and it was declared by S.
Paul to be a shadow of good things to come, and by our Bl. Lord it was declared
to be of a yielding nature, and intended to give place to charity and other
moral duties, even to religion it self, or the immediate service of God: for
though the Commandment was a precept merely of rest, and doing no labor was
the sanctification of the day; yet that the Priests in the Temple might worship
God according to the rites of their religion, they were permitted to work, viz.
to kill the beasts of sacrifice, which Christ called profaning of the Sabbath,
and in so doing he affirms them to have been blameless. From hence, that is,
from the natural signature of the thing commanded, and from other collateral
notices, we come to understand that in the heap of moral and Eternal precepts,
a temporary, transient and relative did lie: and the reason why there was no
difference made, or distinctive mark given in the Decalogue, is because there
was no difference to be made by that Nation to whom they were given; but as
soon as that dispensation and period was to determine, then God gave us those
marks and notes of distinction which I have enumerated, and which were
sufficient to give us witness. So that if a whole body of Commandments be
published, and it be apparent that most of them are general and eternal, we
must conclude all to be so, until we have a mark of difference, directly or
collaterally, in the nature of the thing, or in our notices from God: but when
we have any such sign, we are to follow it; and the placing of the precept in
other company is not a sufficient mark to conclude them all alike. Thus it was
also in the first mission of the Disciples (above spoken of) in which the body
of precepts was temporary and relative; but yet when our Blessed Lord had
inserted that clause [ freely ye have received, freely give] we are not to
conclude it to be temporary and only relating to that mission, because it is
placed in a body of relative Commandments: for there is in it something that
is Spiritual, and of an eternal decency, rectitude and proportion; and we are
taught to separate this from the other by the reproof which fell upon Simon
Magus, by the separate nature of Spiritual things, by the analogy of the
Gospel, by the provisions which upon other accounts are made for the Clergy and
the whole state Ecclesiastical, upon the stock of such propositions which
provide so fully, that they cannot be tempted by necessity to suppose God left
them to be supplied by Simoniacal entercourses. If there be nothing in the
sanction of the Commandments or any where else that can distinguish them, we
must conclude them alike; but if there be any thing there or any where else
that makes an indubitable or sufficient separation, the unity of place does not
make an equal obligation.

5. When any thing is spoken by Christ to a single person, 6.
or a definite number of persons, which concerns a moral duty, or a perpetual
rite of universal concernment, that single person, or that little congregation,
are the representatives of the whole Church. Of this there can be no question;
1. Because as to all moral precepts they are agreeing to the nature of man, and
perfective of him in all his capacities; and therefore such precepts must needs
be as universal as the nature, and therefore to be extended beyond the persons
of those few men. Now if it be inquired how we shall discern what is moral in
the laws of God from what is not moral, we may be assisted in the inquiry by
the proper measures of it which I have already described Lib. 2. Chapter ^. Rule 6.
Nu. 65.
. Those concern the matter of the Commandment; here we inquire concerning the
different relation of the Commandment when the sanction is the same with these
which are of particular concernment; that is, here we inquire by what other
distinction besides the matter and nature of the thing we are to separate
general precepts from personal, perpetual from temporal, moral from relative.
And thus to inquire, is necessary in the interpretation of the laws of Jesus
Christ; because there are some precepts moral and eternal, which nevertheless
are relative to particular states under the Gospel.

But secondly, there are some precepts which are not moral, but yet they are
perpetual and eternal, and concern every man and woman in the Christian Pale
according to their proportion; I mean the precepts concerning the Sacraments
and other rituals of Christianity. In order therefore to these Evangelical
concerns it is to be noted, That whatsoever concerns every one by the nature of
the thing, though it was at first directed personally, yet it is of universal
obligation. Thus we understand all Christians that have the use of reason, that
is, which are capable of laws, and have capacities to do an act of memory, and
symbolical representment, to be obliged to receive the Holy Communion: because
although the precept of [ Do this, and Drink this] was personally directed to
the Apostles, yet there is nothing in the nature of the Communion that
appropriates the rite to Ecclesiastics; but the Apostle explicates it as
obliging all Christians, and it was ever so understood, and practiced
accordingly: all are equally concerned in the death of Christ, and therefore in
the commemoration of it, and thanksgiving for it. Now thus far is easy. But
there are some interests that pretend some of the words to be proper to
Ecclesiastics, others common to the whole Church. I have already given account
of the unreasonableness of the pretension in this Chapter Rule 9. number. 7, 8, 9.
. But for the present I shall observe, that there being in this whole
institution the greatest simplicity and unity of design that can be, the same
form of words, a single Sacrament, the same address, no difference in the
sanction, no variety or signs of variety in the appendages, in the parallel
places, or in any discourse concerning it, to suppose here a difference, will
so intricate this whole affair, that either men may imagine and dream of
varieties when they please, and be or not be obliged as they list; or else if
there be a difference intended in it by our Lawgiver, it will be as good as
none at all, he having left no mark of the distinction, no shadow of different
Commandments, under several representations. If the Apostles were only
representatives of the Ecclesiastical state when Christ said, [ Drink ye all of
this] then so they were when Christ said, [ This do in remembrance of me:] the
consequent is this, that either all are bound to receive the Chalice, or none
but the Clergy are tied to eat the holy bread; for there is no difference in
the manner of the Commandment; and the precept has not the head of a man, and
the arm of a tree, and the foot of a mountain, but it is univocal, and simple,
and proper, and if there be any difference, it must be discovered by some clear
light from without: for there is nothing within of difference, and yet without
we have nothing but a bold affirmative.

6. When the universal Church does suppose her self bound by any preceptive
words, 7.
though they were directed to particular persons, yet they are to be understood
to be of universal concernment. Now this relies not only upon the stock of
proper probability, viz. that such a multitude is the most competent
interpreter of the difficulties in every Commandment; but there is in the
Church a public and a holy Spirit, assisting her to guide, and warranting us
to follow the measures of holiness by which she finds her self obliged. For
besides that the questions of general practice are sooner understood, as being
like corn sown upon the furrow, whereas questions of speculation are like
metals in the heart of the earth, hard to be found out, and harder to be drawn
forth; besides this, no interest but that of heaven and the love of God can
incline the Catholic Church to take upon her self the burden of a
Commandment. If it were to decline a burden, there might be the more
suspicion, though the weight of so great authority were sufficient to outweight
any contrary probability; but when she takes upon her the burden, and esteems
her self obliged by a Commandment given to the Apostles or to the Pharisees,
or to any single person among them, it is great necessity that enforces her, or
great charity that invites her, or great prudence and caution for security that
determines her, and therefore she is certainly to be followed. Upon this
account we are determined in the foregoing instance: and because the Primitive
Catholic Church did suppose her self bound by the words of institution of the
Chalice in the Blessed Sacrament, therefore we can safely conclude the Apostles
to be representatives of the whole Church. In Levit. qu. 57.
Ad bibendum omnes exhortantur qui volunt habere vitam, says S. Austin, All
are called upon to drink of the Chalice, if they mean to have life eternal. For
indignum dicit esse Domino qui aliter mysterium celebrat quam ab eo traditum
est, In 1 Cor. 11.
says S. Ambrose; as Christ delivered it to the Apostles, so it must be
observed by all: Rationale Divin. lib. 4. cap. 1.
and therefore Durandus affirms that all who were present did every day
communicate of the cup because all the Apostles did so, our Lord saying, Drink
ye all of this. For the Apostles were representatives, not of the Clergy
consecrating (for they then did not consecrate but communicate) but of all that
should be present. Nam quae Domini sunt non sunt hujus servi, In 1 Cor. 11.
homil. 24.
non alterius, sed omnibus communia, says S. Chrysostom, The precept of our
Lord belonged not to this servant, nor to another, but to all. Now things that
are of this nature, and thus represented, and thus accepted, become laws even
by the very acceptance: and as S. Paul said of the Gentiles, that they having
not the law become a law unto themselves; and our conscience is sometimes by
mere opinion a strict and a severe lawgiver: when the Church accepts any
precept as intended to her, (if not directly, yet) collaterally and by
reflection it passes an obligation; and then it will be scandalous to disagree
in manners from the custom and severe sentence of the Christians, and to
dissent will be of evil report, and therefore at no hand to be done.

7. When a precept is addressed to particular persons, 8.
and yet has a more full, useful, and illustrious understanding, if extended
to the whole Church, there it is to be presumed it was so intended; and those
particular persons are representatives of the Church. S. Austin extends this
Rule beyond precepts, even to privileges and favors; Quaedam dicuntur quae ad
Apostolum Petrum proprie pertinere videantur, nec tamen habent illustrem
intellectum nisi cum referuntur ad Ecclesiam, cujus ille agnoscitur in figura
gestasse personam, propter primatum quem in discipulis habuit. Some things are
spoken which seem to relate particularly to the Apostle Peter, but yet they are
better understood when they are applied to the whole Church. But this must
needs be true in Commandments; for where nothing hinders it, the Commandment
is supposed to be incumbent upon us; and therefore when the Commandment is
better understood, and has a more noble and illustrious sense, that is,
promotes the interest of any grace remarkably, there the particular address
must mean a general obligation.

8. When any Commandment is personally addressed, 9.
and yet is enforced with the threatening of death eternal, that Commandment is
of universal obligation. The reason is, because the Covenant of life and death
is the same with all men; and God is no respecter of persons, and therefore
deals alike with all: and upon this account, the words which our Blessed
Savior spoke to some few of the Jews upon occasion of the Galilean Massacre,
and the ruin of the Tower of Siloam, had been a sufficient warning and
Commandment to all men, though besides those words there had been in all the
Scriptures of the New Testament no Commandment of repentance. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish] does mean that all the world should
repent for the avoiding of the final and severest ^^dgements of God.

But this Rule is to be understood only in Commandments that are not relative
to the differing states of men, 10.
but are of an absolute and indefinite nature. For where the Commandment is
relative, and yet personally addressed or represented, there that person is the
representative, not of all mankind, but of that whole state and order. Thus
when S. Paul said, There is a necessity laid upon me, and woe is unto me, if I
do not preach the Gospel, he was a representative of the whole order of the
Cura^es of Souls. But when he said, I press forward to the mark of the price of
the high calling, and if by any means I may comprehend, here he spoke of his
own person what is the duty incumbent upon all Christians, and he was a
representative of the whole Church.

9. When any good action is personally recommended upon the proposition of
reward, 11.
it does not always signify an universal Commandment; but according as it was
intended personally, so it signifies universally: that is, if it was a counsel
to the person in the first address, it is a counsel to all men in the same
circumstances; if it was a Commandment to one, it was a Commandment to all.
Thus when Christ said to the young man in the Gospel, Go and sell what thou
have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; here the
precept or the counsel is propounded under a promise: but because there is no
threatening so much as implied, whether it be a command or no cannot be known
from these words, nor from the appendant condition; because that which is not
under command may be excellently good, and therefore fit to be encouraged and
invited forward. But whether it was a precept or a counsel, that young man,
though alone spoken to, was not alone intended; because the thing to which he
was invited is an excellency and a spiritual worthiness in all men for ever
that can and will receive it.

RULE XVIII. Evangelical Laws given to one concerning the duty of another do
in that very relation concern them both; but in differing degrees.
1. THis Rule I learn from S. Paul, and it is of good use in cases of
Conscience relating to some Evangelical laws. [ Obey them that have the rule
over you, (...)
and be subject; for they watch for your Souls, as they which must give an
account: that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is
unprofitable for you.] Thus a Prelate or Curate of Souls is to take care that
his Cure be chaste and charitable, just and temperate, religious and orderly. He
is bound that they be so, and they are more bound; but each of them for their
proportion: and the people are not only bound to God to be so, but they are
bound to their Bishop and Priest that they be so; and not only God will exact
it of them, but their Prelate must, and they must give accounts of it to their
superior, because he must to his supreme; and if the people will not, they are
not only unchaste or intemperate before God and their Bishop, but they are
disobedient also. It is necessary that infants be baptized; this I shall
suppose here, because I have in Great Exemp. Disc. of Bapt. of Infants: Liberty
of Proph. Sect. 18. edit. in folio.
other places sufficiently (as I suppose) proved it. Upon this supposition, if
the inquiry be upon whom the necessity is incumbent, it will be hard to say,
upon Infants, because they are not capable of a law, nor of obedience; and yet
it is said to be necessary for them. If upon their parents, then certainly it
is not necessary to the Infants; because if what is necessary be wanting, they
for whom it is necessary shall suffer: and therefore it will be impossible that
the precept should belong to others, and the punishment or evil in not obeying
belong to the children; that is, that the salvation of infants should depend
upon the good will or the diligence of any man whatsoever. Therefore if others
be bound, it is necessary that they bring them, but it will not be necessary
that they be brought; that is, they who do not bring them, but not they who
are not brought shall suffer punishment. But therefore to answer this case,
this rule is useful: It is necessary that the Parents or the Church should
bring them to baptism, and it is necessary that they be baptized; and
therefore both are bound, and the thing must not be omitted. The Parents are
bound at first, and the Children as soon as they can be bound; so that the
precept leans upon two shoulders: if the first omit their share in their time,
there is no evil consequent but what is upon themselves; but when the children
can choose, and can come, they must supply their parents omission and provide
for their own proper necessity. It is in this as in provisions; at first they
must be fed by the hand and care of others, and afterward by their own labor
and provisions; but all the way they are under a necessity and a natural law of
being provided for. * When S. Paul wrote to Timothy concerning the dispositions
required in those persons who were to be Bishops, it will not be very easy to
say, of whom the defect of some of those conditions shall be required. A Bishop
must be the husband of one wife, that is, he must not marry while his first
wife lives, though she be civilly dead, that is, whether divorced, or banished,
or otherwise in separation. But what if he be married to two wives at once?
Many Christians were so at first; many, I say, who were converted from Judaisme
or Gentilisme, and yet were not compelled to put away either. If a Bishop be
chosen that is a Polygamist, who sins? that is, who is obliged by this precept?
Is the Bishop that ordains him, or the Prince or people that chooses him, or the
Ecclesiastic himself that is so chosen? The answer to this inquiry is by
considering the nature of such a law, which the Italians call il mandato
volante, a flying or ambulatory Commandment, in which the duty is divided, and
several persons have several parts of the precept incumbent on them. He that
chooses and he that ordains him are bound for their share, to take care that he
be canonically capable; but he that is so chosen is not bound to any thing but
what is in his power; that is, he is not obliged to put away her whom he has
legally married, and her whom without sin he can lawfully retain: but because
that which is without sin, is not always without reproach and obloquy, and
that which may be innocent may sometimes not be laudable, and of a Clergyman
more may be required then of another that is not so; they who call him to the
office are to take care of that, and he which is called is not charged with
that. But then though he be not burdened with that which is innocent and at
present out of his power, and such a person may be innocently chosen, when they
who choose him are not innocent; yet when any thing of the will is ingredient on
his part, he must take care of that himself. He may be chosen, but he must not
ambire, not sue for it, nor thrust himself upon it; for here begins his
obligation: there can be no duty, but what is voluntary and can be chosen; but
when a man can choose he can be obliged. I do not here dispute how far and in
what cases this law does oblige; for of that I am to give account in the
chapter of Ecclesiastical Laws: but the present inquiry is, who are the
persons concerned in the obligation. It was also taken care that a Bishop
should not be a Novice: and yet S. Timothy was chosen a Bishop at the age of
five and twenty years, and he was innocent, because it was the act of others,
who came off from their obligation upon another account. But if he had desired
it, or by power or fraction thrust himself upon the Church with that Canonical
insufficiency, he had prevaricated the Canon Apostolical: for to so much of it
he was bound; but in what he was passive, he was not concerned, but others were.

But this is to be limited in two particulars. 2.
1. In what the Clerk is passive he is not obliged; that is, in such matters
and circumstances as are extrinsecal to his office, and matter of ornament and
decency. Thus if he have been married to an infamous woman which he cannot now
help; if he be young, which he cannot at all help, but it will help it self in
time; if he have an evil and an unpleasant countenance, if he be deformed; for
these things and things of like nature, the chusers and ordainers are
concerned; but the Clerk may suffer himself to be chosen, the law
notwithstanding. But if the Canonical impediment be such as hinders him from
doing of his future duty, there he may not suffer himself to be chosen; and if
he be, he must refuse it. The reason of the difference is plain: because the
Electors and Ordainers are concerned but till the Election is past; but the
Elected is concerned for ever after: therefore although there may be many
worthinesses in the person to be chosen to outweigh the external insufficiency
and incapacity, and if there be not, the Electors are concerned, because it is
their office and their act, and they can hinder it, and therefore they only
are charged there; yet for ever after the Elected is burdened, and if he cannot
do this duty, he is a sinner all the way; he is a Wolf to the Revenue and a
Butcher to the Flock.

2. Though in matters of decency and ornament the person to be chosen is not so
obliged but that he may suffer himself to be chosen if he be otherwise capable,
3.
because those things which are not in his power are not in his duty, yet even
for these things he also is obliged afterward; and he is bound not to do that
afterward, which if it was done before, others were obliged not to choose him.
If a person was divorced before and married again, he may accept of a
Bishopric; but if he do so afterward, he is guilty of the breach of the
Commandment: for he must not go back to that door where he might not enter,
but then he is wholly obliged; he alone, because then it is his own act, and he
alone can hinder it. I say he must not go back.

But if he be thrust back to that door, 4.
where if he had stood at first he ought not to have been let in; he is no more
obliged at last then at first: he that does not govern his house well, and has
not his children in subjection, may not (by the Apostles rule) be chosen; but
when he is a Bishop, and falls into the calamity of having evil and rebellious
children, this is no impediment to his office directly, and does not so much as
indirectly pass upon him any irregularity.

But then as to the rule it self, 5.
this instance is fit to explicate it. For Parents are tied to rule their
Children, Masters to govern their Servants; but Children are also obliged to be
governable, and Servants must be obedient. For in relative duties every man
must bear his own burden, and observe his own share of the Commandment.

RULE XIX. Custom is no sufficient interpreter of the Laws of Jesus Christ.
TRuth and the Divine Commandments need no prescription, 1.
but have an intrinsic warrant, and a perpetual abode; but that which is
warranted by Custom, has but an accidental obligation, and is of humane
authority. The Laws of Christ are wrought to be the parents of Custom; but
Custom cannot introduce a divine law or obligation: our Customs ought to be
according to Christ's Commandment; but from our Customs we cannot conclude or
infer that this is the will or Commandment of Christ. This Rule is
Tertullians. De Virgin. veland.
Veritati nemo praescribere potest, non spatium temporum, non patrocinia
personarum, non privilegium regionum. Ex his enim fere conesutudo initium ab
aliqua ignorantia vel simplicitate sortita, in usum per successionem
corroborata; and ita adversus veritatem vindicatur. Sed Dominus noster Christus
Veritatem se, non Consuetudinem, cognominavit. Quodcunque adversus veritatem
sapit hoc erit haresis, etiam vetus consuetudo. No man can prescribe to truth,
that is, to any proposition or Commandment Evangelical. For Customs most
commonly begin from ignorance or weakness, and in time get strength by use,
till it prevail against right. But our Lord Christ does not call himself
Custom, but Truth. Whatsoever is against Truth, though it be an old Custom,
is Heresy, notwithstanding its long continuance.

The purpose of this Rule is not to bar Custom from being of use in the
exposition of the sense of a law or doctrine. 2.
For when it is certain that Christ gave the law, and it is uncertain what
sense was intended to the law, Custom is very useful in the interpretation;
that is, the Customs of the first and best Ages of the Church: and then the
longer the Custom did descend, still we have the more confidence, because we
have all the wise and good men of so many Ages concurring in the interpretation
and understanding of the law. Thus the Apostle gave the Church a Canon, that we
should in all things give thanks: the Custom of the Ancient Church did in
pursuance of this rule say a short prayer, and give thanks at the lighting up
of Candles. The history of it I have from S. Basil. Visum est patribus nostris
beneficium vespertini luminis non silentio suscipere, Cap. 29. de Spii. 9.
sed statim ut apparuit gratias agere, They said grace for their light as well
as for their meat. This Custom was good; for it was but the particular
instance of a general duty.

But then Custom is to be allowed but as one Topic, 3.
n^^ as all: it is the best argument when we have no better; but it is the most
unartificial of all arguments; and a competent reason to the contrary is much
to be preferred before a great and long prescribing Custom. Both these
propositions are severally affirmed by the Fathers of the Church. The first by
S. Austin in his Epistle to Casulanus, In his rebus de quibus nihil certi
statuit Divina Scriptura, nobis populi Dei and olim justi, statuta Majorum pro
lege tenenda sunt: and sicut praevaricatores legum Divinarum, it a contemptores
consuetudinum Ecclesiasticarum coercendi sunt. The holy Catholic Church is
certainly guided by the Spirit of God, and therefore where the question is
concerning any thing that is not clear in Scripture, the Customs of the
Catholic Church are not to be despised; for it is to be presumed (where the
contrary is not proved) that she piously endeavors, and therefore is
graciously assisted in the understanding of the will and Commandments of her
Lord: and in this sense, Custom is the best interpreter, because there is no
better, and no clearer light shining from any Angle.

Custom can thus in cases of destitution of other Topics declare the meaning
of a law; 4.
but Custom of it self cannot be the interpreter of the will of Christ, or a
sufficient warrant of a law, or immediately bind the Conscience as if it were a
signification of the Divine pleasure: much less ought it to be opposed to any
words of Scripture or right reason and proper arguments derived from thence.
And that is the other thing which I also said is taught us by the Fathers of
the Church. Ad Juba^^.
So S. Cyprian, Frustra quidam qui ratione vincuntur consuetudinem nobis
opponunt, quasi consuetudo major sit veritate, aut non fuerit in Spiritualibus
sequendum si melius fuerit a S. Spiritu revelatum, In vain is custom opposed
to reason, as if it were greater then truth: Not Custom, but that which is
best, is to be followed by Spiritual persons, if any thing better then Custom
be revealed by the Spirit of God.

All good Customs are good warranties and encouragements; 5.
but whether they be good or no is to be examined and proved by the Rule and by
the Commandment: and therefore the custom it self is but an ill indication of
the Commandment; from whence it self is marked for good, or else is to be
rejected as reprobate and good for nothing. Consuetudo authoritati cedat: (...)
pravum usum lex and ratio vincat: cum vero nec sacris canonibus nec humanis
legibus consuetudo obviare monstratur, inconcussa servanda est, said Isidore,
Let custom yield to authority, to law and to reason; but when it agrees with
the laws of God and of man, let it be kept inviolate.

When Custom is consonant to some other instrument of probation, 6.
when it is apparently pious, and reasonable, and of the analogy of faith, it
is an excellent corroborative and defensative of truth, and warrant to the
conscience; but when it stands alone, or has an ill aspect upon other more
reasonable and effective ways of persuasion, it is very suspicious and very
dangerous, and is commonly a very ill sign of an ill cause, or of corrupted
manners. Hist. compend. fere in initio, page 25.
Cedrenus tells that the Patriarch Abraham was wont to say that there is great
difference between truth and custom; that being very hard to be found, this,
whether good or bad, being obvious to every eye: and which is worse, by
following custom a man gets no comfort if it be in the right, and no great
shame if it be in the wrong, because he relies not upon his own reason, but the
judgment of old men that lived long ago, who whether they judged wisely or
foolishly must appear by some other way: but this he will find, that it will
be very hard to leave it, though it be never so foolish and ridiculous.

Of what obligation in matters of practice, 7.
and of what persuasion in the inquiries of truth Ecclesiastical Customs are
to be esteemed, I shall afterward discourse when I treat of Ecclesiastical
Laws: but that which I would persuade for the present is, that the Customs and
usages of the world are but an ill Commentary on the Commandments of our
Blessed Lord.

1. Because evil is crept into most of the manners of men; 8.
and then a custom is most likely to transmit her authority to that which
ought to be destroyed. Inter causas malorum nostrorum, quod vivimus ad exempla,
nec ratione componimur, sed consuetudine abducimur. Quod si pauci facerent,
nolumus imitari: quum plures facere coeperunt, quasi honestius sit quia
frequentius, sequimur, and recti apud nos locum tenet error, ubi publicus
factus est. So Seneca complained. Epist. 58.
It is one great cause of our mischiefs, that we are not led by truth, but led
away by custom; as if a thing were the honester because it is frequent; and
error becomes truth when it is common and public. Excellent therefore was that
saying of Pope Nicolas the first, Parvus numerus non obest ubi pietas abundat:
magnus non prodest ubi impietas regnat, If right and Religion be on our side,
the smalness of our company is nothing: but a multitude cannot justify impiety.

2. Custom in moral practices becomes law to men by pressing upon their
modesty, 9.
and by outfacing truth and piety; so that unless the custom have warranty
from the law, it has the same effect against a law as for it; and therefore in
such cases is at no hand to be trusted, but at every hand to be suspected, lest
it make it necessary that men become vicious. The customs of the German and
neighbor Nations so expound the laws of Christ concerning temperance, that if
by their measures it be defined, it looks so like intemperance, as milk to
milk; and the common customs of the world expound all the laws of the Blessed
Jesus so as to be truly obligatory at no time but in the danger, or in the
article of death: but certainly it is but an ill gloss that evacuates all the
holy purposes of the Commandment; and at the day of Judgment, when we shall
see numberless numbers of the damned hurried to their sad sufferings, it will
be but an ill apology to say, I did as all the world almost besides me, by
whose customs I understood the laws of the Gospel to a sense of ease and
gentleness, and not by the severity of a few morose Preachers. Poggius tells of
a Neapolitan Shepherd, that against Easter going to Confession, he told his
Confessor with a tender conscience and great sorrow of heart that he had broken
the holy Fast of Lent, by chance indeed, but yet with some little pleasure; for
when he was pressing of a new Cheese, some of the whey start from the vessel
and leaped into his mouth, and so went into his stomach. The Priest smiling a
little at the fantastic conscience of the man, asked him if he was guilty of
nothing else. The Shepherd saying, he knew of nothing else that did or ought to
trouble him; his Confessor knowing the customs of those people upon the
Mountains of Naples, asked him if he had never robbed or killed any strangers
passengers. O yes, replied the Shepherd, I have often been at that imploiment;
but that we do every day, and always did so, and I hope that is no sin: but
the cheese, the forbidden cheese stuck in his stomach, because every one did
abominate such meat upon fasting-days: only the custom of killing and
stealing had hardened his heart and forehead till it was not perceived. -- dedit
haec contagio labem, Juven. Sat. 2.

Et dabit in plures: sicut grex totus in agris
Unius scabie cadit, and porrigine porci,
Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva.


Evil manners begin from one evil man, 10.
or from one weak or vicious principle, and pass on to custom, and then to be
virtuous is singularity, and it is full of envy; and concerning the customs of
the world it is ten to one if there be not some foulness in them. The advice
therefore of S. Cyprian is a good compendium of this enquiry. Ad Pomp^^,
Consuetudo quae apud quosdam irrepserat, impedire non debet quo minus veritas
praevaleat and vineat; nam consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est:
propter quod relicto errore sequamur veritatem; scientes quod veritas vincit,
veritas valet and invalescit in aeternum, and vivit and obtinet in secula
seculorum. Custom ought not to prevail against any truth; but Truth which is
eternal will live and prevail for ever and ever. Custom without truth is but a
prescription of falsehood and irregularity.

Question.

Upon occasion of this argument it is seasonable, 11.
and of it self a very useful inquiry, Whether the Customs of Jews and
Gentiles, or indefinitely of many Nations, be a just presumption that the thing
so practiced is agreeable to the law of Nature, or is any ways to be supposed
to be consonant to the will of God.

Answer.

12. To this, 12.
some of eminence in the Church of Rome answer affirmatively; and are so far
from blushing, that many of their rites are derived from the customs of
Heathens, that they own it as a thing reasonable, and prudent, and pious,
according to the doctrine and practice of Gregory surnamed Thaumaturgus, Orat.
de vita S. Gregor. Thaum.
who (as S. Gregory Nyssen reports) that he might allure the common people to
the love of Christianity, gave way that those dances and solemn sports which
they celebrated to the honor of their idols should be still retained, Annal.
A. D. 44. 88. and A. D. 58.. 76, 77. and in Martyrol. ^ebr. 2.
but diverted to the honor of the Saints departed: and Baronius supposes it to
be no other then as the Israelites taking of the silver and brass from the
Egyptians, and employing it in the service of the Tabernacle. And in
particular, the custom of burning candles to the honor of the Virgin Mary he
imputes to the same principle, and owns it to be of Heathenish extraction. The
same also is in diverse other instances avowed by De inventor. rerum lib. 5.
cap. 2.
Polydore Virgil; by Fauchet Lib. 2. cap. 9. and lib. 5. de origin. dignit.
Gall. cap. 17.
in his Books of the Antiquities of France; by du Choul, Lib. de religione
Romanorum in fine.
Blondus In lib. 1. and 2. de Roma triumphante.
and Bellarmine, Lib. 1. de purgatorio cap. 7.. Tertia ratio.
who brings this as an argument for the doctrine of Purgatory, because the
Jews, the Turks, and the Heathens did believe something of it; it being very
likely, that what almost all Nations consent in, derives from the natural light
of reason which is common to all men: and upon this very thing Cardinal Perron
Adv. Regem Jacobum in prima instantia cap. 1.
boasts in the behalf of the Service in an unknown tongue; that not only the
Greeks, and many other Christian Churches, but even all Religions, the Persians
and the Turks use it.

This pretense therefore is fit to be considered.

1. Therefore I answer, That it is true that the Primitive Church did sometimes
retain some ceremonies which the Heathens used; but they were such ceremonies
which had no relation to doctrine, 13.
but might be made apt for order and decent ministeries external. Such were the
garments of the Priests, lights, girdles, fasts, vigils, processions, postures,
festivals and the like: and they did it for good reason and with good effect;
that the people who were most of all amused with exterior usages, finding many
of their own customs adopted into Christianity, might with less prejudice
attend to the doctrines of that persuasion which so readily complied in their
common ceremonies. This did well enough at first, and was a prudent imitation
of the practice of our great Master, who that the Jews might the easier pass
under his discipline and institution, made the passage as short, and the
difference as little as could be; for since he would retain but two external
ministeries in his whole institution, he took those rites to which the Jews had
been accustomed; only he made their Baptisms Sacramental and effective of
great purposes, and some of the Paschal rites he consecrated into highest
mystery; retaining apparent footsteps, or rather bodies of their Government and
Discipline Ecclesiastical. And this proceeding we find owned and justified by
S. Austin against Faustus the Manichee, and S. Hierome against Vigilantius, and
Ephraim Syrus of old; and of later times by De divinis Offic.
Alcuinus, De offic. Eccles.
Amalarius, and by De consecrat.
Gratian; and who please to see it more largely pleaded for may read Mutius
Pansa his Osculum Christianae and Ethnicae philosophiae, and Nicolaus
Mont-Georgius de Mosaico jure enucleando: and that it may be reasonable from
the services of such men from whom we justly abhor to borrow some usages, is
excellently discoursed of by Mr. Hooker in his fourth Book of Ecclesiastical
Polity.

But however this might fit the necessities and circumstances of the infant
ages of the Church, 14.
yet they ought not to be done easily, but ever with very great caution. For
though it served a present turn, yet it made Christian Religion less simple and
less pure; but by becoming a miscellany it became worse and worse. It was or
might be at the first a complying with the infirmities of the weak, a pursuance
of S. Paul's advice so to do; but when these weak persons are sufficiently
instructed in the Religion, and that to dissent is not infirmity, but
peevishness and pride, or wilfulness, all compliance and condescension is no
longer charity, but gives confidence to their error. For when the reasonable
discourses of the Religion will not satisfy the supposed weak brother, he that
complies with him confesses his the better way; and when learned men follow the
ignorant to superstition, they will no longer call it compliance and
condescension, but duty, and necessity, and approbation. A good man will go a
little out of his road to reduce the wandering traveller; but if he will not
return, it will be an unreasonable compliance to go along with him to the end
of his wandering. And where there is any such danger (as in most cases it is) we
have the example of God himself and his Commandment expressly given to the
children of Israel, that they should abstain from all communion with the
Gentiles their neighbors even in things indifferent; Deuter. 7. 5. and 12. 4
and that they should destroy the very monuments and rituals, and the very
materials of their Religion, lest by such a little compliance they be too far
tempted. And thus also they did sometime in the Primitive Church; for
Tertullian, because the Gentiles used in the services of their idols to sit
down immediately after they had prayed, De orat. cap. 12
would not have the Christians do so, though the ceremony of it self was
wholly indifferent. And when many Christian Churches had taken some Gentile
ceremonies into their Christmas solemnity, being occasioned by the Circumcision
of Christ falling on the Calends of January, or New Years day, they were not
only forbidden in the Council of Auxerre, Council. Antisodor. c. 1.
but the Church did particularly appoint private Letanies, processions, and
austerities to be used for three days within the twelve of Christmas, ad
calcandam Gentilium consuetudinem, to destroy and countermine the superstitious
customs of the Heathen, which by the compliance and fondness of some
Christians had dishonored the excellency and innocence of the Christmas
festivity; as we find noted by the Fathers of the Synod of Turi. Council.
Turon. 2. Can. 13.
Sometimes there had been reason to retain these things: but when in the days
of Persecution some weak-hearted Christians did shelter themselves under the
cover of such symbolical ceremonies, and escaped the confession of Christianity
by doing some things of like custom, or when the folly and levity of
Christians by these instruments passed on to vanity or superstition, then the
Church with care did forbid the retaining of Heathenish customs, which had
been innocent but for such accidents. In these things the Church may use her
liberty, so that all things be done to edification.

2. But if the customs and rites be such as are founded upon any point of
doctrine, 15.
whatsoever it be that derives from Pagan customs must also be imputed to
their doctrines; and then to follow their customs, will be also to mingle the
Religions, to blend light and darkness, and to join Christ with Belial. It had
been a material objection which Faustus the Manichee made against the
Catholics, that they did remove the worship from idols, and give it to Saints
and Martyrs. S. Austin, who was to answer the Objection, could not justify, but
did deny the fact, as to that instance and some few others: for the custom of
the Nations in such cases was no argument, but an objection. From these
premises it will appear to be but a weak pretense to say, that if many Nations
and Religions agree in such a ceremony, or such an opinion, it will be supposed
to come from the light of Nature. For there are not many propositions in all
which Nature can teach; and we should know but a very few things, if we did not
go to School to God, to Tutors, to experience, and to necessity. This pretense
would not only establish Purgatory, but the worship of Images, and the
multitude of gods, and idololatrical services, and very many superstitions, and
trifling observances, and confidences in dreams, and the sacrifice of beasts,
and many things more then can well become or combine with Christianity. When
not only some Nations but all agree in a proposition, it is a good
corroborative, a good second to our persuasions, but not a principal; it gives
advantage, but not establishment, ornament, but not foundation to a truth:
which thing if it had been better observed by the Christians who from the
Schools of Plato, Chrysippus, Aristotle and Epicurus came into the Schools of
Christ, or from the Temples of Jupiter and Apollo into the services of the
Church, Christianity had been more pure and unmingled then at this day we find
it. The ceremony of sprinkling Holy Water was a Heathenish rite, used in the
sanctifications and lustrations of the Capitol, as Alexander ab Alexandro
relates: but because this is not a ceremony of order or circumstance, but
pretends to some real effect, and derives not from Christ or his Apostles, but
from the Gentiles, and relies upon the doctrine of the effect of such
ceremonies, it is not justifiable. Burning candles by dead bodies was innocent
and useful to them that attended in the Vigils before interrement; but when
they took this from the custom of the Heathens, who thought those lights
useful to the departed souls, they gave a demonstration by the event of things
that they did not do well: for the Christians also derived a superstitious
opinion along with the ceremony, and began to think that those lights did
entertain the souls in those cemeteries; and this produced the decree of the
Council of Eliberis, that wax candles should not be burnt in the day time, Can.
34.
lest the spirits of the dead be disturbed. Now when any false principle is in
the entry of the ceremony, or attends upon it, or any superstition be in the
progress or in the end of it, any scandal, or any danger, such customs are not
at all to be followed, such rituals are not to be imitated or transcribed: that
is, No Custom is a warranty for any evil.

RULE XX. The measure of perfection and obedience expected of Christians, is
greater then that of the Jews, even in moral duties common to them and us.
IT matters not whether Christ's law have in it more precepts then were in the
law of Moses: 1.
our work is set before us, and we are not concerned how much they had to do;
and in most of the instances which are, or are said to be new Commandments, it
may also be said of them as it was by the Apostle concerning Charity, This is a
new Commandment, and this is an old Commandment; there being, at least in
most instances, an obligation upon them to do what was of it self good and
perfective of humane nature, and an imitation of the Eternal law of God, a
conformity to the Divine perfections. This is true as to the material part: but
then because that which was an old Commandment is also made a new
Commandment, and established upon better promises, and endeared by new
instances of an infinite love, and we our selves are enabled by many more
excellent Graces, and the promise of the Holy Spirit is made to all that ask
him; it is infinitely reasonable to think, that because this new Commandment
superadds nothing new in the matter, it must introduce something new at least
in the manner, or measure of our obedience.

They and we are both of us to pray; 2.
but we are commanded to pray fervently, frequently, continually. They were to
be charitable, and so are we: but they were tied to be so to their friends and
to their neighbors, but we to our enemies; and though in some instances they
were tied to be so, yet we are bound in more; more men are our Neighbors, and
more are our Brethren, and more is our duty. They were to do them no hurt; but
we must do them good. They were to forgive upon submission and repentance; but
we must invite them to repentance, and we must offer pardon. They were to give
bread to their needy Brother; but we are in some cases to give him our lives.
They were to love God with all their Souls, and with all their strength: and
though we cannot do more then this, yet we can do more then they did; for our
strengths are more, our understandings are better instructed, our shield is
stronger, and our breast plate broader, and our armor of righteousness is of
more proof then theirs was. Dares and Entellus did both contend with all their
strength; but because Entellus had much more then the other, he was the better
champion.

1. This Rule does principally concern Christian Churches and Communities of
men; 3.
that their laws be more holy, that the condition of the Subjects be more
tolerable, that wars be not so easily commenced, that they be with more
gentleness acted, that the laws of Christ be enforced, that malefactors be not
permitted, that vice be more discouraged, that nothing dishonorable to
Religion be permitted, that the Kingdom of Christ in all capacities be
advanced, that his Ministers be honored and maintained according to the
excellency of the present Ministry and the relation to Christ's Priesthood,
that the public and honorary Monuments of it be preserved, and virtue properly
encouraged, and great public care taken for the advantageous Ministry of
Souls, which are the proper purchase of our Redeemer, that in all things Christ
may be honored by us more then Moses was by them, and that God through Jesus
Christ be more glorified then he was in the Levitical government.

2. This also concerns single persons; 4.
that they certainly abstain from all those imperfections of duty which were
either permitted in the Law, or introduced by the commentaries of their
Doctors, or inferred by the general declination of their first piety, and the
corruption of manners. The Jews would not take usury of a needy Jew, but of a
needy stranger they would: but we must consider them with a more equal eye; we
must be charitable to all; for to a Christian no man that needs and asks him is
a stranger, The Jews had great liberty of divorces indulged to them; a
Christian has not the same: but in that in which he is permitted, he is not to
be too forward.

3. In matters of duty a Christian is to expound his obligation to the
advantage of piety, 5.
to security of obedience, to the ease of his Brother, and the pressing upon
himself; that whatever be the event of his temporal affairs, he secure his
Spiritual interest, and secure justice though to the loss of his money, and in
all doubts determine for duty rather then for interest: the Jews went not
beyond the letter of the Commandment.

4. In the interior acts of virtue a Christian is to be more zealous, 6.
forward, operative and busy, frequent and fervent; he must converse with God
by a more renewed intercourse, give himself no limits, always striving to go
forward, designing to himself no measure but infinite in the imitation of the
perfections of God, and the excellencies of his most Holy Son.

5. In the exterior acts of virtue Christians must according to their
proportion be ashamed to be outdone by Jews, 7.
not only in what they did in obedience, but also in what they in good and
prudent zeal for the law of Moses did expend or act. I say, what they did act
in good and prudent zeal for their Law. Thus they adorned their Temple, freely
gave contributions for it is support and ornament, loved all of their
persuasion, endeavored to get proselytes; and therefore are in these things
not only to be imitated, but to be outdone, because all this was a prudent and
zealous prosecution of their duty. But when in zeal they did not only love
their own Sect, but hate and persecute and were uncivil to all of another
persuasion, this was Zeal indeed; but it was folly too and a work of the flesh,
and therefore not to be imitated by Christians who are the servants of the
Spirit.

6. Where Christians are left to their liberty in those instances in which the
Jews were bound, 8.
Christians ought freely to do as much as they did by constraint and by
necessity: for then properly we do more then they, when we voluntarily choose
what was imposed on them: it is not more work, but it is more love. Thus the
Jews were bound to pay tiths to the Levites; we are commanded to maintain them
honorably: but because tiths is not in the Commandment to us, we ought to
supply the want of a Command by the abundance of love, and in this there is no
abatement to be made but by what did concern the nation in some special
relation, necessity or propriety. God was pleased to make the more ample
provision for the tribe of Levi, because they had no inheritance amongst their
brethren; they had no portion in the division of the land. Now because the
Christian Clergy have a capacity of lands and other provisions, there is not
all the same reason in the quantity of their appartiment as was in the
assignation of the Levitical portion. Now when any such thing can intervene and
enter into consideration, it must be allowed for in the proportions of increase
which are demanded of the Christian. The Jews gave great contribution to the
Temple; but it was but one, and therefore it is not to be expected that every
Christian Church in such a multitude should be adorned and rich like the Temple
of Jerusalem.

7. Where Jews and Christians are equally left to their liberty, 9.
it is infinitely reasonable and agreeable to the excellency of the Religion,
that Christians should exceed the Jews. Thus we find that at the erecting of
the Tabernacle the Jews brought silver and gold and other materials till they
had too much, and the people were commanded to cease and bring no more. Now
when an occasion as great in it self and more proportionable to the religion
calls upon us for an offering and voluntary contribution, if the instance be in
a matter as proportionable to the Gospel as that was to the law of Moses, the
excellency of the religion and the dignity of the work and the degree of our
grace and love require of us to be more ready and more liberal in equal
proportions.

8. In those graces which are proper to the Gospel, 10.
that is, such which are the peculiar of Christians, literally and plainly
exacted of us, and but obscurely insinuated, or collaterally and by the
consequence of something else required of them, it cannot be but that the
obedience which we owe should be more ready, the actions more frequent, the
degrees more intense; because every advantage in the Commandment has no other
end but to be an advance of our duty; and what was obscurely commanded can be
but dully paid; while the Christians duty must be brisk and potent and
voluntary and early and forward and intense, in proportion to greater mercies
received, to a better law, to a more determined conscience to a clearer
revelation, to more terrible threatenings, and to the better promises of the
Gospel: all which are so many conjugations of aid, and instances of a mighty
grace. And therefore Christians are to be more humble, more patient, more
charitable, more bountiful, greater despisers of the world, greater Lords over
all their passions, then the Jews were obliged to be by the consequences of
their law.

9. When this comes to be reduced to practice in any particular inquiry of
Conscience, 11.
every Christian is not to measure his actions by proportion to the best, and
the rare persons under the Mosaic law, in their best and heroic actions. For
who can do more then David did after he had procured the waters of Bethlehem
to cool his intolerable thirst, but to deny his appetite, and refuse to drink
the price of blood? who can do more then he did and would have done toward the
building of the Temple? who can give better testimony of duty to his Prince
then he did to Saul? who can with more valor and confidence fight the battles
of the Lord? who can with more care provide for the service of God, and the
beauty and orderly ministeries of the Tabernacle? who can with more devotion
compose and sing hymns to the honor of God? In these and such as these David
was exemplary; and so was Moses for meekness, and Job for patience, and
Manasses for repentance, and Abraham for faith, and Jacob for simplicity and
ingenuity, and Enoch for devotion: these in their several periods before and
under the Law were the great lights of their Ages, and set in eminent places to
invite, forward the remiss piety of others, alluring them by the beauty of
their flames to walk in their light and by their example. And it is well if
Christians would do as well as these rare personages in their several
instances. But as some women are wiser then some men; and yet men are the more
understanding Sex, and have the prerogative of reason and of government: so
though some persons of the old religions were better then many of the new (of
the religion of Jesus Christ) yet the advantage and the increase must be in the
Christian Church, which must produce some persons as exemplary in many graces
as any of these has been in any one.

10. But then as to single persons; 12.
1. Every man must observe those increases of duty which our Blessed Savior
either by way of new Sanction, or new interpretation, superadded to the old, in
the Sermon upon the Mount.

2. Every man must do in proportion to all the aides of the Spirit which the
Gospel ministers, all that he can do: which proportion if he observes, it will
of it self amount to more then the usual rate of Moses law, because he has
more aides.

3. He must be infinitely removed from those sins to which they were propense,
and which made God to remove them out of his sight; such as were idolatry, the
admitting of strange Gods, infidelity, obstinacy, hypocrisy, and sensual low
appetites: because these were the crimes of an ignorant uninstructed people in
respect of what the Christian is; and for a Christian to be an idolater, or
easily divorced, or incredulous, as they were, is therefore the more
intolerable, because it is almost removed from his possibilities; he can scarce
be tempted to such things who knows any thing of the doctrine of the Gospel.

4. There is no other positive measures of his duty, but that which can have no
measure it self, and that is love; and a Christian must therefore exceed the
righteousness of the Subjects of Moses law, because they must do all their
works in faith and love: in faith, to make them accepted, though they be
imperfect; in love, to make them as perfect as they can be. Now he that loves
will think every thing too little; and he that thinks so will endeavor to do
more, and to do it better: and Christians that have greater experience of God,
and understand the nature of Charity, and do all of them explicitly and
articulately long after the glories of an Eternal love, and know that all
increase of grace is a proceeding toward glory, need no other argument to
enforce the duty, and no other measure to describe the duty of this Rule, but
to reflect upon the state of his religion, the Commandments, the endearments,
the aids, the example, the means: all which are well summed up by S. John, 1 John 3. 2, 3.
Beloved, we are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be;
but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see
him as he is: And every man that has this hope, purifieth himself as God is
pure. That is, we are for the present children of God by adoption, sealed with
his Spirit, renewed by regeneration, justified by his grace, and invited
forward by most glorious promises, greater then we can understand. Now he that
considers this state of things, and hopes for that state of blessings, will
proceed in duty and love toward the perfections of God, never giving over till
he partake of the purities of God and his utmost glories.

I add no more but this, That in the measures of the practice of this Rule
there is no difficulty, but what is made by the careless lives of Christians
and their lazy and unholy principles. At the rate as Christians usually do
live, it is hard to know how and in what instances and in what degrees our
obedience ought to be more humble and more diligent then that of Moses
disciples. But they that love, will do the thing, and so understand the Rule.
Obedite, and intelligetis, Obey, and ye shall understand.

Concerning the interpretation of the Laws of the most Holy Jesus, I know of no
other material consideration here to be inserted. Only there are several
pretenses of exterior and accidental means of understanding the Laws of Christ,
which because they are derived from the authority or from the discourses of
men, they are more properly to be considered in the Rules concerning Humane
Laws, which is the subject of the next Book, where the Reader may expect them.

The end of the Second Book.
DVCTOR DVBITANTIVM, OR The Rule of Conscience In all her general measures;
Serving as a great Instrument for the determination of CASES of CONSCIENCE.

The Second Volume, By JEREMY TAILOR, D. D.

Romans 13. 5. (...)

Ecce agnus Dei gui tollit peccata Mundi

LONDON, printed for R Roiston at Ye Angel in Iuy Jane. 1660.

OF HUMANE LAWS, THEIR OBLIGATION, AND RELAXATION: AND OF The collateral,
indirect, and accidental Bands of CONSCIENCE.

The Third BOOK.

LONDON; Printed by J. Flesher for R. Royston. 1660.

CHAP. I. Of Humane Laws in general; and what Obligation they pass upon the
Conscience.
RULE I. The Conscience is properly and directly, actively and passively, under
pains of sin and punishment, obliged to obey the Laws of men.
THAT the Laws of God and Man are the great measures of right and wrong, 1.
of good and evil, of that which is to be followed and what is to be avoided in
manners of men, and the entercourses of societies, is infinitely certain and
universally confessed. Since therefore Humane Laws are one moiety of the Rule
and measure of Conscience, and that we are bound to obey our lawful Superiors
in what they command, it is naturally consequent to this, that we acknowledge
the conscience boun^, and that in Humane Laws as well as in Divine, though
according to their several proportions, the conscience ought to be instructed.
And indeed there is more need of Preachers in the matter of Divine Laws, and
more need of wise and prudent Guides in the matter of Humane Laws. For the Laws
of God are wiser and plainer, few and lasting, general and natural, perceived
by necessity, and understood by the easiest notices of things; and therefore
men have more need to be called upon to obey, then taught how; and therefore
here the Preachers office is most necessary and most required. But Humane Laws
are sometime intricate by weakness, sometimes by design, sometimes by an
unavoidable necessity; they are contingent, and removed far from the
experiences of most men; they are many and particular, difficult and transient,
various in their provisions, and alterable by many parts and many ways: and yet
because the conscience is all the way obliged, she has greater need of being
conducted then in the other, where every wise man can better be a guide in the
little intrigues, and every child can walk in the plain way.

But our first inquiry is, 2.
Whether the conscience be obliged or no. For if Conscience be not, then
nothing is concerned but Prudence, and care that a man be safe from the rods
and axes: but then the world would quickly find that fear would be but a weak
defense to her Laws; which force, or wit, or custom, or riches would so much
enervate, or so often evacuate. And therefore the greatest Case of Conscience
in this whole matter is, Whether it be a matter of Conscience as well as of
Prudence and security to obey the Laws of Man. And this question is so dubious
and unresolved, that Cajetan and Henricus de Gandavs did suppose it fit to be
determined by the Pope in Cathedra, as thinking it otherwise to be
indeterminable. The reasons of doubting are these;

1. Because God only is Lord of Consciences, 3.
he only can discern the secret that is there, and he only can punish there;
and therefore to suppose any band upon conscience from Humane Laws, would be to
divest God of his royalty: none but he who is (...) the searcher of the heart
and mind of man can give laws to it; for none else can take cognizance, or give
a compulsory.

2. The Conscience is seated in the understanding (as I have already 4.
proved,) Lib. 1. Rule. 1.
but that is an imperious faculty that acknowledges no superior but God;
because he only being infallible, he only can instruct and inform it rightly,
none else can have power over it. For the understanding has a proper way of
being ruled. The will is ruled by Empire, but the understanding by doctrine;
that is governed by command, this by argument; the will by power, the
understanding by truth: now because God only is truth, and every man a liar,
God only can rule the understanding, which is the Court of Conscience.

3. To submit the conscience to any law or power of man, 5.
is to betray our Christian liberty: For Christ having set us free from all the
bondage even of that Law which God himself made and gave to Moses, he having
alleviated the burden of rites and ceremonies, and left the Jews at liberty to
be governed as they pleased themselves, would not take off the laws of God to
impose upon us the laws of Men; and there is no such thing as Christian liberty
but a freedom from the law of Moses, and the law of carnal ordinances, and the
laws of men; for that which the Preachers speak of, a liberty from sin, and
from hell, and the grave, 1. This is rather a deliverance then a liberty, a
rescue from an evil of another nature, not a state of freedom and ease. 2. As
many men have ordered their Theology, we are so far from having a liberty
from sin, that they have left us nothing else but a liberty to sin: and indeed
we have no liberty or freedom from sin as long as we are alive, but we are
always in war and contention, which is worse then death; and so many men are
always captive under sin, and all men do so often obey it, (and his servants
we are to whom we do obey) that we have little reason to boast of Christian
liberty in that sense. 3. S. Paul using the word liberty, and speaking of the
advantages of Christians in this, instances it only in being freed from those
ordinances of Moses, and the impositions which some Philosophers or some sects
of men would bring upon the conscience. 4. Liberty from sin, or Christian
liberty in this sense is nothing but a tropical expression, a metaphor and
similitude, and therefore is not that real privilege by which we were
materially advantaged upon the publication of the Gospel of Christ. The result
of which considerations is, That all Christians are free men, servants of
Christ, and of none else, it being an express Commandment, and that
strengthened with a reason, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men; which at least must
be understood of Conscience, and the mind of men.

4. For granting it to be lawful for men to make Laws, 6.
yet that these Laws cannot bind the conscience it appears plainly in this;
that whatever Laws of the Church are made concerning any rite or ceremony, let
it be never so necessary or fitting that they be obeyed, yet the things do not
become intrinsecally necessary, and therefore are not to be thought so, lest,
expressly against the Commandment of our Blessed Savior, we teach for
doctrines the commandments of men. To keep Holidays may be very good, so that
we observe them to the Lord; but he that thinks it necessary and a direct duty,
wrongs his own conscience: which demonstrates that Conscience is free when
every thing else is bound. You may fast when you are commanded by your
Superior, but you must not think that fasting is a part of the Divine Service;
that is, though man commands fasting, yet God does not: and then if man of
himself does bind the conscience, he has a power equal to God, and can make
Divine Commandments: but if man cannot do so, then the conscience is free,
and not tied by humane Laws.

5. If humane Laws do bind the conscience, 7.
then it is put into the power of man to save or damn his brother; not
directly, but upon the consequence of his obedience or disobedience, which is
all that is done by the Laws of God; and men shall have power to make more ways
to the Devil, to make the strait way to heaven yet straiter, and the way to
hell, which is already broad enough, yet wider and more receptive of miserable
and perishing souls.

6. Christ is the Author and finisher of our faith, 8.
and so of every grace: that is, he only can give it, and he only can take it
away. Since therefore that which makes a sin, destroys the grace, no humane
authority can make an action to be a sin; because no humane power can dispose
of grace or take it away.

7. In the instance of civil power and civil Laws the case is more certain, 9.
for this reason; because the civil power cannot remit sins, therefore neither
can they bind to sin: and from hence it will follow, that supposing
Ecclesiastical Laws do bind the conscience, yet the civil cannot. But then as
for the Ecclesiastical power and Laws, they also are as invalid upon another
account, because the Church having no external compulsory, can only bind in
those things where God has already bound; and therefore can make no Laws of
her own, but what are already made by a higher power, and consequently cannot
bind to sin, but there where the conscience is already bound by God. And if the
Church should inflict her censures for any thing that were not of it self a sin
against God, as for not paying the fees of the Spiritual Court, for a poor man's
working for his living upon a Holiday, the world would cry out of her; which
shows, that where God has not bound the conscience, neither the Ecclesiastical
nor the civil power can.

8. If humane Laws do directly bind the conscience, then it is as great a sin
to transgress a law of man, as to break a law of God; with our bare foot to
touch the ground within the Octaves of Easter, as to call our brother fool; to
eat flesh on Friday as great as to commit fornication: which consequent because
it is intolerable, so also is the opinion that inferres it. The conclusion is,
In Christ Jesus there is neither high nor low; that is, Christian Religion has
no hand in this Heraldry of Secundum, sub, and supra; but whatsoever difference
of person, of order, and of Government is amongst us, is by agreement: it is,
as S. Peter calls it, (...), the ordinance of man; and for man's sake it is to
be obeyed: but the conscience is still at liberty where only the commandment
of man does intervene.

This opinion is taught by Fernandus Vasquius a Spaniard, 10.
and he affirms that all the Gentlemen and common people of Spain (the Scholars
only excepted) are of this opinion: it was also taught by some of the Scholars
of Calvin, and some Lutherans, by all the Anabaptists of Germany of late; and
that upon the strength of the first, the third and fourth argument; and
formerly by Jacobus Almain, and John Gerson, by Felinus, Cajetan, and Navarre,
but they mean only the civil Laws of Princes, upon the confidence of the sixth
and something of the seventh argument; all which I have thrust forward as far
as the nature of the question would bear, and added some more: which I have
done, not that these arguments ought to prevail, but that by the examination of
them this great question may have right done it, by being rightly stated, and
fully cleared.

First therefore to the main inquiry; 11.
it is certain as an article of faith, as necessary as any other rule of
manners, that every Subject is bound to obey the just Laws of his lawful
Superior, not only under fear of punishment from man, but under pain of the
Divine displeasure. 1. Because the power by which men make Laws is the power of
God: Prove. 8. 15.
By me Kings reign, and the Lawgivers decree justice, says the Wisdom of God;
that is, the Son of God, the Wisdom of the Father, to whom he has given all
power in heaven and earth, he it is by whom, that is, by whose power and
wisdom, Kings reign. For this is the wisdom, (...), which God possessed from
the beginning. The Lxx reads it (...), creavit, which God created from the
beginning; and this word the Arrians make use of to their evil purposes, but
very weakly and against the faith of the original, where it is (...) Kanan
possedit. This eternal Son of God, and the Wisdom of the Father, the King of
Kings and the Lord of lords, is the original of all humane power, and this is
nothing but a derivative from him. For power is given you of the Lord, Wisdom
6. 3, 4.
and Sovereignty from the Highest; and ye are ministers of his Kingdom. Romans
13. 1, 2.
And S. Paul expressly and dogmatically affirms, There is no power but from God:
the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God. So that the Legislative or supreme power
is not the servant of the people, but the Minister, the Trustee and
Representative of God. 2. The power of the Sword is only from God; for since
no man is Lord of his own life, no man has power to kill himself, neither has
he power to warrant any man else to do it; for what he may not do himself, he
cannot commission and empower any one else to do. Vindicta mea, says God,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay: and it is Gods sword with which the Magistrate
strikes; and therefore Kings and Potentates are (...), and (...), Gods deputies
and ministering officials, in his name to be the avengers of his wrath: John 19.
11.
and as Christ said to Pilate, Thou could have no power unless it were given
thee from above, may be said to all just humanes Powers, It is given them from
above, not from beneath, from God, not from the people. The consequent of which
is this, If it be God that strikes and pays vengeance by the hand of the
Magistrate, then it is God who is offended when the law of the Magistrate is
violated; for whoever strikes is the party injured; and the Magistrate being
Gods Minister, as he is the less principal in the justice done, so also in the
injustice suffered. Dixit Deus quia Dii estis, It is God who has said to the
Magistrates that they are Gods; that is, in the place of God: by his authority
they strike, and he is the injured person: and therefore he who is so smitten
by the sword of God, is a sinner against God, for he punishes none else. Patet
culpa, ubi non latet poena. If God punishes, it is certain man has sinned,
said S. L. 2. retract. c. 9. and ep. 105. ad Sixtum.
Austin, and S. Cap. 20. lib. contr. collatorem.
Prosper. The one is the indication of the other.

But the thing is expressly affirmed by the Scripture; 12.
for having dogmatically and fully signified that all humane just power is
(...), they being the several expressions of Solomon according to the Lxx, and
of S. Paul in his own words, it is not content to leave us to find out the
consequence of these, but literally affirms the main articles. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
So S. Peter, Be ye subject to every ordinance of man, Romans 13. 5.
(...) for the Lords sake; which S. Paul speaks yet more explicitly, Wherefore
it is necessary that ye be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. Sicut Christo, as to Christ, so be obedient to your Masters,
or temporal Lords; so the same Apostle: that is, by the same necessity, for the
same reason, to avoid the same punishment, to have the same reward, and by the
force of the same Religion, and that you may not prevaricate the laws of God,
or do violence to your conscience. Nothing can add light to these so clear
words, they are bright as the Sun, certain as an article of faith, clear, easy
and intelligible, according to the nature of universal Divine Commandments. S.
In Romans 13.
Chrysostom and In Romans 13.
Theodoret urging these precepts, say, that we are not to obey out of courtesy,
but of duty; not out of liberality, but necessity; that is, according to S. In
Romans 13.
Ambrose and S. Austin, the fearful pains of hell and eternal damnation attend
them that disobey. Ep. 54. ad Maced. Vide etiam S. Hieron. in c. 3. ad Titum.


And this whole matter is infinitely demonstrated in this one consideration:
The Laws of man do so certainly bind the conscience, that they have a power of
limiting and declaring, and making the particulars to become the Laws of God.
For though the Divine Law forbids murder, yet the Law of man declares
concerning the particular, that it is, or it is not murder, and by such
declaration, by such leave or prohibition respectively makes it so. In Spain if
a wronged husband or father kill the deprehended adulteress, it is no murder;
in England it is. For in Spain the husband or father is permitted to be
Executioner, where notoreity is declared to be sufficient conviction: here they
are not trusted with it; and the Judge and the Executioner are persons vastly
removed. If a Law Cap. placuit 16. q. 6. and in l. extat. ff. quod metus causa.
forbids me to take my own goods from a Thief, it is theft to do it, but it is
no theft if the Law permits Gl. in cap. Jus gentium did. 2. verbo Sedium.
Capp. 1, 2, 23. q. 2. l. ait praetor.. si debitorem. ff. de his quae in fraud,
Creditorum.
. It is incest for the Uncle to marry with his Niece: it is so where the Laws
have made it so, but it is not so of it self, for it was not so always. Since
therefore humane Laws can constitute an action in the habitude of a Divine Law,
it is beyond all question, it does oblige the conscience.

2. This obligation is passed upon the conscience, 13.
and there is this necessity of obeying: not only in case humane Laws be first
given by God in thesi, or in hypothesi, that is, in words or in sense, in
direct affirmation or just consequence, in substance or in analogy; but though
the matter of the Law be in its own nature wholly indifferent before the
sanction and constitution. The first conclusion I intended against the
Anabaptist, and this second against Gerson, Almain, and the dissenting
Sectaries: and of the truth of it we have an instance in the person of S. Paul,
who by his Apostolical authority gave an injunction which has ever since been
an Ecclesiastical Canon; and yet he alone and not the Lord gave the word, That
a believing wife or husband should not depart from their unbelieving
correlative, 1 Cor. 7. 12.
if he or she respectively desired to stay. It was a matter in which Christ had
not at all interposed, but S. Paul made it a law to the Christian Churches; and
whoever shall prevaricate it shall bear his burden. And indeed it were a vain
thing to suppose that all humane Laws were derived from the law of Nature, or
the Divine positive; or that those which were not so derived could not be good
and reasonable, and that the authority binding them were incompetent. For
whatsoever is derived from the law of God cannot by men admit variety, nor
suffer diminution, or go into desuetude, or be extinguished by abrogation: and
then it would follow that no King could command any thing but what was
necessary before he commanded it; and nothing could be a law to the Persians,
but what also did oblige the Greeks; and nothing could bind in the 125
Olympiad, but what was decreed before the days of Semiramis; and there were no
law but those of the Medes and Persians; and there could be no provisions made
for new necessities, and the Government of Commonwealths could never be
improved by experience, and all Lawgivers were as wise at first as ever they
could be. All which are such foolish consequences, that it must be granted,
that whatever humane Power can justly ordain, or prudently, or necessarily, or
probably, all that is bound upon the conscience of the Subject certainly and to
all events as the Laws of God himself. And therefore Plato said well, That
before the Law is made, men may judge of it, but after the sanction, not at
all: that is, it is so indifferent in its nature, that it is fit to be
considered and disputed; but when it is made a Law, there remains nothing but a
necessary obedience. And to the same purpose Aristotle largely discourses; Lib.
5. Ethic. cap. 7.
for when he had divided the civil Law, (...), into (...), the natural and the
constituted, he says, (...), The Law that is not natural, but decreed by man,
in the beginning it matters not whether it be made or no; but after it is made,
it is a great matter whether it be kept or no. But this whole affair is put
beyond all scruple by the words of the Apostle, Obey your Masters, not only
the good and gentle, but the morose and harsh; that is, not only if what he
commands be in it self good and fitting, but if it be troublesome, and uneasy,
and unnecessary; any thing, so it be not unlawful: for every thing that God
has not forbidden, can be bound upon conscience by a lawful Superior. Either
therefore all humane Laws are nothing else but commentaries on Scripture or the
natural Law, or else are wholly unnecessary, as being nothing but repetitions
of the Divine laws: and there can be no new law made; or if there can, it must
bind the conscience: for all other things bind the conscience by themselves,
and without humane constitution. If therefore any humane constitution, as such,
can bind the conscience, it must be of such instances which either are
derivatives from the law of Nature, or of things which before the law did not
bind at all, that is, of things which in their own nature are indifferent.

3. 14.
That humane Laws bind the conscience does not depend upon the intention of the
lawgiver; for when the arrow is shot out of the bow, it will hit or miss by
its own force and order, not by the intention of the Archer: and no lawgiver
can make a law with a purpose not to oblige the conscience. In the reign of
Queen Elizabeth this question was much talked of, and little understood; and
some discontented Recusants under the Government of the Church of England had
so talked the laws themselves out of countenance, that the legislative power
durst scarce own the proper obligation of an Ecclesiastical, or of a law
relating to any thing of religion; insomuch that when the wisdom of the state
thought fit to confirm the ancient laws of Ecclesiastical fasts, they
superadded this proviso, That if any one should affirm that these laws were
intended to bind the Conscience, he should be punished like the spreaders of
false news: and the jejunium Cecilianum, the Wednesday fast, was made without
such obligation. Now this is plainly to them that understand it, a direct
artifice to evacuate the whole law: for a law that is made without intention to
bind the conscience is no law at all; for besides that it is a plain giving
leave to any man to break it that can do it without observation, or can bribe
the officers, or is bigger then the informers, or not easy to be punished, or
that dwells alone, or that is himself a Minister of the law, besides this, I
say, it is directly no law at all. For all humane power being derived from God,
and bound upon our consciences by his power, not by man, he that says it shall
not bind the Conscience, says it shall be no law, it shall have no authority
from God; and then it has none at all: and if it be not tied upon the
Conscience, then to break it is no sin, and then to keep it is no duty: so that
a law without such an intention is a contradiction; it is a law which binds
only if we please, and we may obey when we have a mind to it; and to so much
we were tied before the constitution. ** But then if by such a declaration it
was meant that to keep such fasting-daies was no part of a direct Commandment
of God, that is, God had not required them by himself immediately, and so it
was (abstracting from that law) no duty Evangelical, it had been below the
wisdom of the contrivers of it; for no man pretends it, no man says it, no
man thinks it: and they might as well have declared that that law was none of
the ten Commandments.

4. Though Humane laws do not bind the Conscience by the intention of the
lawgiver, 15.
but by the command of God, yet God does bind the law upon the Conscience
according to the intention of the power that decrees it. For though a Father
cannot command his Son to do a lawful and fitting service, and by his
intention make that the disobedient Son shall not sin against God, because he
cannot make disobedience to be no sin* yet by intending less obligation in the
law, he makes the crime imputable in a less degree; that is, the authority is
the less despised, there is less evil consequent, the mischief is small, the
inconvenience little. * And therefore the Doctors of the Canon law do to very
little purpose trouble this question with inquiries after signs, when the
intention of the Lawgiver is to bind to Mortal, when to Venial sins. For
besides that the distinction it self is trifling according to their
understanding of it (of which I have given a large account in a Discourse on
purpose) and besides that the commands of Heathen Parents, Unum necessarium
Chap. 3. p. 101.
and Masters, and Princes who knew nothing of that distinction (if it had been
right) did nevertheless bind their Subjects to obedience under pain of sin;
besides these, I say, the lawgiver does not at all make it a sin, or no sin:
he only intends it should be kept, and to that purpose binds it with
penalties, and consequently and indirectly binds the Conscience: but God binds
the Conscience properly and directly; for the law is Divine in respect of the
power and authority, but Humane in respect of the matter and the instance: and
that is the meaning of these words put into the Rule. The conscience of man is
by Gods law properly and directly bound to obey the laws of Men; not
indirectly and by the consequence of some other duty, but by a Commandment and
the purposed solemn declaration of his will in this affair. But this I shall
more fully explicate in my answer to the opposite arguments. Now because
although the lawgivers intention does not directly make the disobedience to be
sin or no sin, yet because indirectly it has influence upon the action and the
conscience of the subject, it is useful that I set down the Rules and Measures
of the difference; and how we may guess (for it can be no more) at the distinct
obligations which from the diversities of humane laws are passed upon the
Conscience.

Rules of distinction, or the measures by which we shall prudently conjecture
at the gravity or lessening of the sin of disobedience to Humane Laws.

1. He that breaks a law which is established upon great penalties, 16.
commits a great sin. Because it is regularly to be presumed that the supreme
power puts much upon it, when he is so earnest for its observation. Rem quae
culpa caret, in damnum vocari non convenit, says the Law, Cap. 2. de constit.
If there be no fault there ought to be no punishment; they are relatives, and
correspond also in their very degree. Lib. 2. de Baptis. c. 6.
Quis dubitaverit hoc esse sceleratius commissum quod est gravius vindicatum?
says S. Austin, If the punishment was more grievous, the wickedness also was
the more intolerable: ut juxta mensuram delicti sit and plagarum modus: that is
the measure of punitive justice, that the number of the stripes be according to
the measure of the iniquity. And concerning those things where there is any
doubt, the Subject is not to judge whether the law be very necessary or no; but
to judge concerning the intention and mind of the Superior, and whether he
thinks it very necessary: For he knows best, and by his knowledge and his
authority is the most competent Judge. This Rule has no exception, unless it
be evident that the punishment is imposed for terror, and to affright men from
doing that for which it is not very fit they should be severely punished: as if
a Prince should under pain of death forbid the hunting of a hare; the greatness
of the punishment neither makes nor declares the fact more criminal then it is
in its own nature under a law that forbids it under a smaller punishment. But
if the case be doubtful, whether the law be of great purposes and design, the
greatness of the punishment in a prudent and temperate government is the best
exterior indication. But if the punishment be light and trifling, the offense
is so too; for the legislative power can put no more weight upon it then it
declares by punishment, but so much it does: and the Rule of Alfonsus a Castro
is very useful here and in some other articles, Humana lex non magis gravat
conscientias quam corpora. For Gods Law adding energy and Sanction to the
constitutions of man, binds so far as the Prince or as the Prelate binds: and
this is fully signified in the words and commission of Christ to his Church,
Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, John 20.
shall be bound in Heaven; for there our Blessed Lord constituting a Government
in his Church, as already there was in the world, though of another nature, and
by compulsories external, and a proper jurisdiction (from which the Spiritual
differs, as I shall explicate in the fourth chapter of this book) did promise
to do to them as to the Princes of the World; that is, verify their ministry
of Laws and Judgments. He indeed appointed other manners of coercion, and a
distinct administration; but the power of giving laws and judgments he gave
then; and he gave it as firmly as to the greatest Kings: that is, as he
commands Subjects to obey their Princes, so also to obey their Spiritual
Superiors; as he will punish the rebellious and disobedient to Kings, so the
disobedient to Bishops, and to Apostolical Prelates; that is, according as
every Superior can and intends to bind by his temporal or spiritual penalty,
God will verify it and condemn the same person with an eternal. Since therefore
Gods verification of humane laws and judgments is after the Sanction and for
it wholly, it must also be according to it. He that binds what man binds, binds
so much and no more; as therefore man intends the obligation, so God obliges
the Conscience.

2. If the matter of humane laws be great in it self, 17.
to prevaricate those laws gives a proportion of greatness to the crime. 1.
But this seldom happens but when a Divine law is complicated with the Civil;
such as the prohibition of public stews, the laws for keeping days of
religion, the Lords day, Christmas, Ascension, and the Incarnation, the
preserving the persons of them who minister to Religion sacred, the immunity
and intemeration of Holy things as well as holy persons, the matters of
Sacrilege, Simony, keeping of vows, together with all specifications and
humane instances of Divine Commandments, as that Children should not marry
without their Parents consent, that marriages should not be co^summate before
they be published. 2. To these also are to be added such laws which in their
own nature contribute much to the public security or advantage: as that men
should not in a City fire their own houses, nor cut the damme of the Sea upon
their own ground, that they should not in times of peace fire a Beacon, nor
tell false and disheartning news to an army ready to join battle, nor make
false Musters when the Enemy is near.

3. Though the matter of the laws be in it self light and trifling, 18.
yet if by reason of some present appendages, and visible or probable
consequences it be great, the conscience is tied to obedience under a great
crime. For a single soldier to fly from a battle is of it self no great
matter, were it not for the evil example; but because it may affright the next
man and that may scare the rank, and the rank may disorder the company, and so
proceed to an intolerable mischief, therefore the sin is great by the
proportion to the evil it is likely and apt to produce. To carry corn abroad is
no great matter of it self; but when the price is great and the plenty is
little, the mischief it does by accident is the measure of the sin.

2. * Of the same consideration it is, when an action of it self light and
impertinent is made the matter of a great scandal. To kneel or to stand at the
Holy Communion has been severally used in diverse Churches Ancient and Modern;
but when a law is made that we shall kneel, and if I do not kneel he that
observes will think I do no reverence to Christ's body and blood, and by my
example will learn to despise it, the Conscience is burdened with the sin of
irreverence something, but very greatly with the sin of scandal.

3. When the thing of it self is indifferent, and yet the Custom of it is
passed into superstition, or causes horror, or some notorious evil effect, the
laws that prohibit any such thing do bind the conscience to obey under the
pain of being guilty of the great evil that is introduced by it. To light up
candles by dead bodies is as harmless as any thing; but if it be prohibited for
the avoiding of superstition to which it ministers in some weak persons, the
disobedience has its value not according to the action, but the evil intention
to which it is supposed to contribute. Thus we find a title in the Canon law,
de cadaveribus non exenterandis and in frusta concidendis ut ad alia loca
transferantur: De Sepultur. cap. corripiantur. c. 25. q. 3. gl. ad verbum
[Major.]
and it is forbidden under the pain of the greater excommunication, that bodies
should be imbalmed, that is, unbowell'd and cut in pieces to be carried to
other places of Sepulture remote from where they died. The thing in it self was
innocent and warranted by the practice of whole nations, and had countenance
from the examples of Jacob and Joseph; but it did light into the observation of
people that thought it cruel, unnatural and inhumane, and there that opinion,
not the nature of the action, gave the weight and value to the disobedience.

4. When an action in it self indifferent is by the law expounded to signify a
sin, though in it self it do not, nor in the heart of him that does it, the
disobedience to that law is an act of that sin, or at least of a scandal
relative to it. Thus if a civil law, were made to forbid women to go in men's
cloths, as presuming them that did so were incontinent and wanton, she that
disobeyed that law was really to be judged wanton, because she would do that
which the law so expounded; and her crime was great, not according to the thing
it self, but to the sense of the law; she despises her own reputation, does
that thing which the law, by which the best judgments are made, judges to be
incontinence, and therefore she is justly to be condemned as an incontinent:
and upon this account there was a law made; and it is recited cap. si qua
mulier, did. 30. where women under pain of anathema are forbidden to appear in
a man's habit; where the gloss adds, scil. ob malum finem, if it be for an evil
end, it is a sin proportionate to that evil end: and therefore when the law
declares beforehand, that it shall be judged to be a Ministry to that evil
end, the action is that sin which is so adjudged, and the conscience bound
accordingly. But this caution has one limitation, viz. though the law expounds
such an action to be incontinence, and therefore ordinarily it is to be judged;
yet if it really be not so, but be done upon some great necessity or for some
very good end, though till the publication and approbation of the cause, it be
externally and legally dishonest, yet the conscience is clear: because in an
action that is indifferent, and condemned only for a presumptive end, when
that presumption fails in the particular, and the indifferent action serves
really to a pious, a charitable, or a necessary end, the action is made good,
and therefore the Conscience is disobliged. For that which is really so,
prevails over that which is but presumed so. Thus we find that S. Euphrosyna
lived long in a Monastery of men; and the Church which took cognizance of it,
did, upon evidence of her piety and purity, after death declare her a Saint:
and that S. Eugenia went in a man's habit [to avoid the persecutors of
Christianity for a while] is told in the Menologion of the Greeks; and her
memory as of a Virgin and Martyr is celebrated in the Greek Church upon
Christmas eve. And when Nonnus the Bishop of Edessa had converted S. Pelagia,
who from a common curtezan became a glorious Saint, after the suffering of most
severe penances in the mount Olivet, she estranged her self from all
probabilities of temptation from vain men by living in a man's habit concealed
all her lifetime; and the Church keeps her memorial in honor upon the 8th of
October.

5. If the matter of humane Laws be in it self trifling and inconsiderable, yet
if it meets with a people where it is esteemed a crime, and the laws forbid it
upon that account of a public dis-estimation, it is to be presumed that the
laws do condemn it equally to the public fame; and therefore that the
conscience is bound accordingly. Thus in the days of Clemens Alexandrinus the
Christians thought it a very horrid thing to wear false hair; and Calvo turpius
est nihil comato, Lib. 10. ep. 83.
said Martial to Marinus, nothing is more deformed, nothing more unhandsome.
Now though it be not so in it self, yet when the hearts of men are generally
against it, as it was then (though it be not so now) if any law had prohibited
the wearing of Perrukes, the conscience had been greatly obliged, for the law
did lay much upon it, even as much as all the evil of the public infamy did
amount to. Thus to break a fasting-day which by custom has been observed in a
Church, is a matter of small account; but if a law have forbidden it, and
forbids it there where it is commonly accounted a very high impiety, though of
it self it be not so, yet under such a law in such circumstances it becomes so,
and is to be valued accordingly. And upon this account are those words of S.
Chrysostom to be understood, Adveniente tempore jejunii, etiamsi quis millies
urgeat, and infinita cruciet; and cogat vinum delibare, aut aliquid aliud quod
jejunii lege non est licitum gustare, patiendum potius esse, quam prohibitum
tangere nutrimentum. It was accounted a great matter then to break an
Ecclesiastical fast: and therefore when a law is supported by such an estimate,
that law binds heavily; and it will be a great sin to break it, unless there be
a great cause to legitimate or excuse it. In such cases we must endure a great
inconvenience rather then disobey.

6. Though the matter be little, yet if the Legislative power has a particular
eye and value upon it, however it be expressed, if such a value be known or
observed, the smalness of the matter is no argument of the smalness of the sin.
Thus also in the foregoing instance of Ecclesiastical Fasts are those words of
S. Basil to be understood, saying, Non minus crimen esse violare jejunium
Ecclesiasticum, quam militi abjicere scutum in bello, aut stationem deserere.
Ecclesiastical Fasts in his time were the cognizance of a Christian, his
defense and guard; and therefore not to keep them was as if a Soldier did
throw away his shield in a day of battle, or desert his station. So the
Prelates of the Church did then understand it, so they intended it. When a
trifle is made a mark of union, as to wear a branch in war, when the
Superior sets his heart upon it; in this case the mind of the supreme becomes
a law to his Subjects, in the former they become a law unto themselves.
Sometimes a small instance is made the trial of obedience; and the Superior
has a great authority, but a little diocese, or a few Subjects, or small
occasions to rule in; in these and the like cases, the smalness of the matter
is not only to be considered, but the interpretation and effort which the
Superior puts upon it. If he calls every such disobedience a contempt of his
authority, and accounts it a dissolution of that community where he governs, or
a great violence of order; it is so in conscience, that is, to be valued beyond
the matter. For he that takes a little piece of iron from an iron forge does no
great harm; but if he takes it from a lock or a chain, he disorders the whole
contexture.

4. When an Ecclesiastical punishment is superadded to a civil law, 19.
or a civil punishment to an Ecclesiastical law, it is to be presumed that the
lawgiver puts much upon it, and therefore the conscience is obliged to
obedience under a great sin. The reason is plain, because he can by no means
better and more earnestly signify his purpose of obliging strongly then by
using both the swords: he binds more strongly then all the terror of the civil
punishment, who besides that, calls in the aids of Religion; and that Prelate
is passionately desirous to secure obedience to his laws, when besides the
bands of God, he calls in to his help the cords of a man, and so secures it by
all means. And therefore whatsoever is decreed under pain of solemn
excommunication is therefore ordinarily presumed to be of great band unto the
conscience, not only by force of the first Rule Numb. 16.
, because it is a great punishment; but also because the civil power does
verify that sentence, and inflicts some great temporal evil upon them that
abide in contempt or disobedience to the orders and censures of the Church.

5. The preceptive or prohibitive words in humane Laws ordinarily are no sign
of a greater obligation of the conscience; 20.
that is, when the words of strict command are the usual style of the Court, as
it is both in Civil and Ecclesiastic Courts. * 1. But if some laws are
published with severe clauses of command, and others on purpose and by design
with lesser and the more gentle, then the case is evident that there is a
difference to be made also by the conscience. And this is in particular made
use of by the Franciscans in the observation of the Rule of their Order. For,
in Clementina, Exivi de paradiso, Cum autem, De verborum significatione, it is
determined that that part of the Rule of S. Francis which is established by
preceptive or prohibitive words shall oblige the Friars Minors under a great
sin, the rest not; and this wholly upon the account of the different clauses of
sanction and establishment. * 2. Another exception there is to this Rule, for
when the preceptive or prohibitive clauses are reduplicated directly or by some
solemn appendage, it is presumed that the conscience is highly bound. Such as
are [ We strictly charge and command, we command in the virtue of obedience,
upon your duty and allegiance, upon my blessing, as you will answer it at the
dreadful day of Judgment, upon your oath, and such like] And here the reason
is plain, because the Superior calls in to his aid the interest of some other
virtue besides the obedience; as justice or veracity, hope or fear, the helps
of God immediately, or a proper appeal to some other great tie of conscience.

6. However the laws were established, 21.
yet according as they go off, or go less, or fall into desuetude or
disobligation, so the band of conscience grows less, till it be quite eased by
abrogation; for the law binding by its establishment, and the conscience being
bound by the life of the law, as the law dies the conscience is at ease: and by
this Rule S. Paul largely proves the Christian Churches not to be obliged in
conscience to observe the law of Moses, in the seventh Chapter to the Romans.

7. The contempt of any law, 22.
be the matter never so trifling, be the Lawgiver never so unconcerned, be the
public interest never so little, yet if it be law, and still in force, is a
great sin, and lays a great load upon the conscience. Lib. 1. de praecept. and
dispens. c. 11.
Contemptus in omni specie mandatorum pari pondere gravis, and communiter
damnabilis, says S. Bernard, All contempt of laws, be the matter little or
great, is highly damnable; Cap. 12.
and the reason he subjoyns a while after, Convertit in crimen gravis
rebellionis culpam levis transgressionis, Contempt makes the smallest
transgression become a great rebellion. Because here it is not the violation of
the law, but of the authority; not the decree, but the power is undervalued,
and ever accuses the Lawgiver of want of wisdom, or supposes him to have no
power. This is that which in Leviticus is expressed by [ Si spreveritis mandata
mea, Lev. 26. 15.
and anima vestra fastidierit judicia mea] a contemning the commandment, and
that your soul hate and loath the judgments. Such a thing as this, is a
deletery to the whole Law, and tears the knot that ties the mantle upon the
Princes shoulders: and this is acknowledged even by them who believe that
humane Laws do not oblige the conscience; for they confess that the conscience
is at least bound so far that the law be not despised. Now then besides that
this Rule is established not only by its own reason but by concession, there
is this advantage to be made of it; That if the conscience be bound so far
that the law be not despised, then the conscience is bound so far that the
law be obeyed if it can; that is, that it be always obeyed, unless there be a
competent and sufficient or probable reason to the contrary. And therefore it
is remarkable that God calls the not obeying of his laws, a despising and
loathing them in their hearts: Lev. 26. 15.
Si judicia mea exhorruerit anima vestra, ita ut non faciatis, If your soul so
hate my judgments that ye do them not; that is properly to despise them: and
so it is in humane Laws; he that breaks them without cause despises them, for
nothing else does make him not to obey. Gloss. in cap. Metropolitanum 2.
quaest. 7.
For this is a certain rule, Causlesly and contemptuously are all one. If
therefore the adversaries in this Rule do affirm that the conscience is bound
to obey, unless there be reason to the contrary, then we agree together, and
both with truth; and if there be any difference afterward, it is only in
assigning what reasons and what causes are sufficient. But if they mean that
the conscience is only bound not to despise the law, but may break the law
when there is no reason for it, and if she does, commits no sin against God;
then by despising the law they must mean something that no Grammar and no
Lexicon ever understood, and that none despises the law but he that rails upon
it, and reviles it, or reproaches the authority directly; for indirectly he
reproaches the authority that despises the law, and he directly despises, that
for no reason disobeys it: for if for no reason, then it is contempt, for else
there can be no account given of the omission; and nothing is a greater
contempt then to esteem the law so inconsiderable as to be less then nothing.
He that thinks it unlawful has a reason, real or imaginary: but he that thinks
it lawful, and yet will not obey, and has no reason why he will not, does
despise it infinitely. Some suppose that to break a law frequently or
customarily is contempt: But to this I assent not, because there may be a
lasting reason why the law is by custom broken: indeed, if there be no reason,
then the greater the custom is, the greater is the contempt; but if there be a
reason, neither one omission nor twenty can be criminal. But in this particular
I like well what is said by the Lawyers, Ex consuetudine indici prasumptionem
contemptus, licet ipsa contemptus non sit. It is a very great presumption that
whoever frequently breaks the law does despise it: and upon him that does so,
the burden of proving that he does not, by proving his reason, is incumbent.

These are the measures by which we shall account concerning the degrees of
obligation of conscience to obey humane Laws. 23.
The use of them is this, That besides they are helps to alleviate the scruples
or the doubts of conscience concerning the greatness of a sin in this instance,
and in proportioning our repentance and amends; they are also of great use both
in the judging concerning the reasons of disobeying, that is, whether the
reason be weighty enough to outweigh the impress and intention of the law, and
also of judging what inconvenience is to be suffered to preserve our obedience
respectively to any law.

It now remains that for the confirmation of the truth and explication of the
sense of this rule, 24.
the objections made be considered.

To the first I answer, 25.
That to suppose humane laws to bind the Conscience is so far from devesting
God of his royalty, that it does very much establish it; for it is a part of
his Royalty to bind the Conscience, and therefore he that says, that God does
bind the Conscience to obey humane laws, makes no intrenchment upon that. For
although humane laws do bind the Conscience, yet it is not by virtue or formal
energy of the civil power, but by the authority and power of God; the King and
the Bishop are but Christ's deputies, and his power they exercise, by his power
they rule, and to his Kingdom they minister. And therefore the civil power
does not take cognizance of the Conscience, nor pretend a compulsory over it;
but God does, and does exercise it when he punishes the Soul eternally for
contempt and rebellion against the Princes of the people.

To the second, 26.
We are to consider, that when it is said that Humane laws bind the
Conscience, the meaning is, it ties us to duty, and we are guilty before God if
we do not obey man: and Conscience is not here taken in the physical or
natural sense, for a practical understanding alone, but for the whole mind of
man informed and commanded by God; in which mind one of the Principles or laws
of God written there is, that we should obey them that have the Rule over us:
but besides this, this whole argument is a plain paralogisme; for it supposes
that because Humane laws are tied upon the Conscience, that they are tied by
man, not by God; which is against the true state of the Question: therefore if
Conscience were wholly a habit or an act, or the faculty of understanding, and
consequently in this last case subject to God alone who is truth, yet the truth
remains unharm'd, for it is not man that rules in the Conscience, but God who
commands it to obey man, for fear of Gods displeasure. Humane laws are but the
material part in this obligation; the authoritity and command of God give it
life and force upon the Conscience: it is like the body prepared by the Father
of the Country, into which God inspires a living and an operative principle.

To the third the answer is easy and short: 27.
for granting all that is said, it not being material to the present inquiry
whether it be true or no; it is a part of Christian liberty that the Conscience
be servant to none but Christ, and whatever be the matter of humane laws, if it
be not also the matter of a Divine law, the Conscience is free from that matter
of it self, because God being only the Lord of Conscience, and he not having
by his law established that matter, the Conscience is free as to that matter.
But then when a just authority supervening has made a law in that matter,
though the Conscience was free from that matter, yet it is not free from that
authority: not that the Conscience is a subject of that authority immediately
and ultimately, but because God has subjected it, and commanded it to obey.

Of Christian Liberty.
But for the fuller satisfaction of Conscience in this great article, 28.
it will not be amiss to give a full, but short account of the nature and
pretenses of Christian liberty. In order to which S. Peter explicates this
article most excellently, saying, Be subject to every ordinance of man (...),
for the Lord, that is, for his Commandment, and for the interest of his
Kingdom, * and his power and his glory: Isai. 33.
for it is a portion of his kingdom, Luc. 1.
it is the deputation of his power; Apoc. 1. and cap. 19.
and he is glorified by our obedience, when the princes of the world by seeing
our ready subjection have no cause to speak evil of us; which was the very
argument which the 1 Pet. 2. 15.
Apostle uses in this question. And therefore S. Peter; who in this inquiry
takes notice of our liberty, gives express caution, that though we be free from
many fetters and hard services, yet we should not pretend Christian liberty as
a cover for sedition and rebellion and disobedience, which he signally calls
(...), we render it maliciousness: and if it be used to express the effects and
evil consequents, it is very well; but it relating here to the principle of the
mischief, it is better rendered, See the Doct. and Pract. of Repent. chap. 4 p.
173.
Craftiness, (...), not making this Christian liberty a pretense and cover for
your Craftiness: for they well knew the artifices of the Devil, and that he
would endeavor to aliene the hearts of subjects from their Princes upon
pretense of Christian liberty, and of heathen Princes from Christianity upon
supposition it was no friend to government; and so it fell out in the Gnostics
and Valentinians: but against these evils the Apostles by the Spirit of God and
the doctrine of the Gospel made excellent provisions. For as S. Peter so also
S. Paul used the same caution in this article: for having pressed upon the
Galatians to insist upon their Christian liberty, and not to be brought under
the yoke of Moses, lest they should stumble at the name of liberty, he charges
them not to abuse it, not to extend it beyond its proper limit, not to use it
as an occasion to the flesh; and that it may be manifest where it was he
intended to fix his rule, he instances in the matter of government, adding by
way of explication, By love serve one another: Galat. 5. 13.
that is, though you Christians be all free, yet there is a bond of charity, by
which you are tied to the rules of government and service and subordination; in
these things if you pretend your liberty, it will be but an occasion to the
flesh, and a dishonor to the Spirit. For our liberty is not a Carnal liberty,
1 Cor. 7. 20. 21, 24.
but it is a spiritual. If a slave be called to Christianity, he is the Lords
freed-man, but not Man's, he is still a servant and commanded to abide in it, if
in that state he be called. And it is an excellent Rule which is given by
Calvin in this particular, Lib. 3. instir. cap. 19. 10.
We ought to account that by Christian liberty there is nothing gotten to us
before men, but only before God. And it is a horrible folly which abuses some
men, they think that they loose their liberty unless they get possession of it
by doing against that part which is forbidden: not considering that if the
matter be indifferent, then they may as well do that which is by man
commanded, as do the contrary, they are as free to one as to the other; and
therefore for civility, and for government, and for order, and for humanity
sake, since they must use their liberty one way, let them do it that way which
will at least please God as well, and Man better. And for their Christian
liberty, that is in the Spirit, and they need no other testimony but the
Conscience it self: for the Conscience in this also is a thousand witnesses.
And therefore truly and plainly the liberty that the Apostles speak of is but a
freedom from the dominion of sin, and a freedom from the terrors and
obligation of the Law: the first is a freedom of duty, the second a freedom
of privilege; the first is a Commandment, the second a state of advantage;
that is but a working, this is completed; that is designed by Christ, this
already wrought, and is the effect of Christ's death, while the other is the
product of his Spirit, and the business of the Kingdom of Grace. But let us
see what is the proper and explicit effect of all this.

1. It is true that we are freed from sin, that is, we are asserted into the
liberty of grace and pardon; the band of sin is broken, and we may be rescued
from the power and from the punishment of it: and what then? S. James answers
this inquiry, James 1. 25.
Whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, must be a doer of the work,
that is, of the righteousness evangelical; and this man shall be blessed in his
deed. For it is Christ who has set us free; but yet be servants of Christ: his
Spirit has made us free, and asserted us into the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God; Romans 8. 12.
therefore we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, but we
must live a spiritual life, for to do so is to persist in our liberty; it is
entering upon that possession which God has given us: but this is like the gift
given to the sons of Israel; all the land of Canaan was their portion, but they
were to fight for it, and win it by degrees; but it was long before they were
in quiet possession, and so shall we when we are in the land of promise.

2. It is also true that we are freed from the curse of the law and the Spirit
of bondage or servile fear, which was produced by the curses threatened to every
transgressor without the abatements of infirmity and the allowances of
repentance; and we are adopted into a liberty of the sons of God, we can cry
Abba Father, and God will use us not with the severe rights of a Lord, but with
the sweetest measures of a Fathers government. And what then? what is the
effect of this liberty? By the Spirit of God we cry Abba Father, by him we have
this liberty, therefore we must live in the Spirit: for though we be not under
fear, yet we are under love; we are not under the curse of the Law, yet we are
under the duty; not under the coercive power of the first covenant, yet under
the directive power of the Eternal Commandment. For the Spirit of God makes us
sons, yet none are sons but such as are led by the Spirit; and we are freed
from the curse and condemnation of the law, Romans 8. 1, and 14.
but not unless we walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.

3. It is also true that we are freed from the ceremonial law, the law of
circumcision, 1 Cor. 8. 9.
of meats and drinks and carnal ordinances. And what then? use it charitably,
and take heed lest this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that
are weak. Some there are that extend this to a liberty from all things that are
indifferent, as meats and garments, and days, and ceremonies and the like. Now
if they mean that we are not bound to these things by any law of God under the
Gospel, it is very true; that is, Christ gave us no Commandment concerning
them. But if it be meant that these things are left so free that there can be
no accidental and temporary obligation, rule or limit made concerning them,
this is that I am now disputing against. But that this is no part of Christian
liberty purchased by the blood of Christ, is evident, because things in their
nature indifferent, that is, concerning which there was no Commandment given,
were always free, and to say otherwise were a contradiction in the terms; and
no drop of Christ's blood could so vainly fall as to purchase for us what was
done already by the nature of the thing. He only rescinded the Laws of Moses
concerning the instances commanded there; that is, those which were not
indifferent, as being positively commanded, he returned to their own nature, to
be used in another dispensation, to be disposed of in another government, in a
distinct manner, to other purposes, or (as occasion should serve) to be wholly
let alone. But although Christ broke the yoke of Moses, and so left the
instances and matters there used to their own indifference; yet he left it as
indifferent to the Lawgivers to make laws concerning them; for he gave no
commandment that they should always be left indifferent as to external usages.
Under Moses they were tied upon the conscience by God himself, and therefore
unchangeably during that whole period; but now they are left to a temporary
transient use and ministry, to do good, or to promote order, or to combine
government: and if Governors had not a freedom to use them in government, as
well as private persons to use them if they would in their own persons,
Christian liberty had been made for Subjects, and denied to Christian Princes
and Christian Priests.

4. There is yet another liberty called the liberty of glory, Romans 8. 22.
or the glorious liberty of the children of God; that is, the Redemption of our
bodies from disease and pain, from death and corruption: but for this we must
stay till the last adoption: For what Christ is by generation and proper
inheritance, that we shall be by adoption if we belong to him. Now of Christ in
his Resurrection it was said, Acts 13. 33.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. That was the last generation
or right of Sonship, to which when we are adopted we shall be partakers of the
glory; but that was at Christ's Resurrection, and this shall be in ours.

5. Now here being in the days of the Apostles so much talk of liberty, and
that in so many instances, and (without question) made the subject of many
Sermons, and much Table-talk, and many disputes, and used as an argument to
persuade strangers, and to comfort the faithful, and the Devil being so ready
to make use of any prepared lust, or mistake, or ignorance, or fancy; it could
not be but many weak and many false persons did instantly dream of a temporal
liberty, that Sons were free from the laws of Parents, Wives of Husbands,
Servants of Masters, Subjects of Princes: the Apostles knowing how great a
confusion this would be to all relations and states of men, and what an
infinite reproach it would be to the Religion, stopped this avenue of mischief,
and not only dogmatically described the duties of all inferiors, but took
care also to do it in those places where they had occasion to speak of
Christian liberty, that there might be no pretense to do evil. For
Christianity neither could nor ought to have been received, if the Preachers of
it had destroyed Governments. The effect of this discourse is plainly this,
That Christian liberty does not warrant disobedience to humane Laws, 1 Cor. 7.
23.
or liberty from their obligation. Whereas therefore the Apostle says, Ye are
bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men; it is not to be understood
of the conscience or mind of men, as the objection affirms, but only is an
advice of prudence, to the purpose of the preceding words in the 21. verse, If
thou may be made free, use it rather: that is, since it is more convenient
for the advantages of Religion, and the service of Christ, by the price of
whose blood you are redeemed that ye may serve him all your days, therefore you
who are free, be not easy to give or part with your liberty, but use your state
of liberty for the advantage of the service of Christ; for that nothing else is
meant, appears in the words he immediately subjoyns, Brethren, let every man
wherein he is called, Verse 24.
therein abide with God: that is, your being the servants of men is not
inconsistent with your service of God, nor that servitude incompossible with
Christian liberty. But yet suppose that the interpretation used in the
objection be right, and that, Be not ye the servants of men, is to be
understood of the conscience or mind of man; yet, save only that it was not so
intended by the Apostle, it can do no harm to this Question: for the
understanding and the mind may be free, when the hands are tied, and a man may
have the liberty of opining and judging, when he may not have the liberty of
acting, which is all is pretended to by the Empire of humane Laws. For as
Origin excellently, This is nothing but an intellectual liberty, concerning
which let a man contend in an intellectual and Evangelical manner, that is, by
good arguments and the spirit of meekness, and there is no harm done. This is
the whole sum of the doctrine of Christian liberty. Vide etiam Francisci de
Silvestris opusculum de Evangelica liberate.
Concerning which if any man desire to read more words, and longer discourses,
and some intrigues, he may please to see them in Driedo, who has written three
Books, and Belliolanus, who has written twenty Books of Christian liberty.

To the fourth I have already answered both in the beginning and end of the
answer to the former, 29.
and it proves nothing but what is granted. For to use the same instance; You
may fast when you are commanded by your Superior, If a man have but a right
understanding that it is all one before God to eat flesh o^ eggs, milk or
fish; that to him it matters not whether you wear a red or a white garment in
your times of solemn prayer; this is enough, says Calvin [lib. 3. cap. 19.. 10.
instit.] he need not tie himself to either, but if he does, his conscience is
still free, though his action or choice be determined. And so it is though the
law of his Superior determines him.
but you must not think that fasting is a part of the Divine Service. It is
true, it is no part of Divine Service, the fasting of it self is not, but the
fasting in obedience is. For though man commands fasting now, or so, and God
does not, yet God commands that we should obey those commands of men; 1 Pet. 2.
19.
and then the conscience is (...), the conscience of God, or toward God, it is
his subject and servant, and his liegeman: and yet at the same time the law of
man pretends not to rule the conscience immediately, and therefore the
conscience is free, and may judge the thing of it self to be no Divine
Commandment; but the will is not free, and the duty is bound upon that, De
benefic. 3. 2. 2 ae q. 104. art. 5.
when the understanding is at liberty. Errat enim si quis putat servitutem in
totum hominem descendere; pars enim melior excepta est. Corpora obnoxia sunt,
and adscripta Dominis, men's sui juris est, said Seneca, and from him Aquinas.
The whole man is not in subjection; the body indeed is under Lords and Laws,
but the mind is free as air.

To the fifth I answer, 30.
by denying the consequence of the argument. For though humane Laws do bind
the conscience, yet it follows not that it is put into the power of man to save
or damn his brother; because humane Laws bind the conscience, but not by force
of humane authority precisely, or in it self, but by virtue of the Divine
Commandment: and therefore a Prince cannot make a law and threaten damnation
to the breakers of it, because he cannot inflict it; but he may say, that he
that breaks it will sin against God, and God will inflict damnation upon the
rebellious and disobedient. But then whereas it is objected that this makes the
broad way to hell broader, it is a mere scar-crow; for God only can enlarge or
streighten this way efficiently and formally; but objective and occasionaliter,
by way of instance and occasion, by giving new laws to endear obedience in new
instances when it is for the public good, has in it no inconvenience: every
Minister of the Word and Sacraments* by every invitation of his people to a
more strict Religion, does make the damnation of the disobedient greater, and
by every check of conscience, and by every opinion of our own we become a law
unto our selves, and make the way of our conversation narrower; and every offer
of grace, and every call of the Spirit does add moments to the eternal misery
of them that do resist; and yet it were not well to be without them, for fear
of that accidental evil. For it is to be considered that these aids, and all
good Laws are intended for good to us, and will bring good to us if we obey;
but the very reward it self being offered, makes also our punishment just and
reasonable if we refuse. Ex te tua perditio. The Law is not in fault, but the
rebellious man ruins himself, who by occasion of the Law might have received
an increase of glory if he had pleased.

To the sixth the answer is given in the premises: 31.
Humane authority does not make the action of disobedience to be a sin. It
makes that the not compliance of the Subject is disobedience; but it is the
authority of God who makes disobedience to be a sin: and though no humane power
can give or take grace away; yet we may remember that we our selves throw away
Gods grace, or abuse it, or neglect it, when we will not make use of it to the
purposes of humility, charity and obedience, all which are concerned in our
subordination to the Laws.

The seventh objection has two parts; 32.
the one concerns the civil power, the other the power Ecclesiastical.
Concerning the civil, it is affirmed to be unreasonable that the power which
cannot remit sins should bind to sin; and therefore the civil power cannot bind
the conscience, because it cannot remit the sin to which it binds. In which
argument there are four terms, and therefore it is a perfect fallacy. For it is
true that it is reasonable that the power which binds should als^ loose: but
that the civil power cannot loose in the same sense in which it can bind is
false; for the civil power can untie that which it has tied, unless by tying
be meant tying to one thing, and loosing be meant of another. The civil power
binds to obey; the same power can untie this band, by dispensing with the
person or abrogating the Law. But when it is said, the civil power cannot remit
the sin, therefore not bind to sin, it is a Sophism, because binding and
loosing do not signify in the same manner. For it does but accidentally bind
to sin, and in the same manner it does also ease the conscience: it makes the
Law to which God binds the conscience; it takes off the Law, and from the
conscience God takes off the obligation. But because it does not by it self
bind the conscience, but occasions the conscience to be bound by God, therefore
it has nothing to do to remit the sin, for that must be the act of God; but
the Law can loose what it bound, and where it bound, and as it bound, that is,
not the sin, but the subject matter, the instance and the occasion. *** But now
concerning the Ecclesiastical power, the objection says that it has no power
to make Laws, but such as are in the matter already decreed by God; and
therefore it does not bind but what God has bound already; and consequently
has of it self no power to bind the conscience. To this I answer, 1. that it
is true, neither the Ecclesiastical nor the Civil power does by its innate
authority oblige the conscience; but both powers can make Laws, to the
observation of which God does oblige conscience. 2. It is an error to say that
the Ecclesiastic power cannot make laws in things not decreed by God. For the
supreme Civil power is also Ecclesiastical if it be Christian, and has a power
in the external regiment of the Church; and therefore to make Laws in such
parts and accidents of Government in which God has left no special direction:
and for the proper power of the Ecclesiastics, that also extends beyond the
giving commandments in matters of express duty commanded by God; as I shall
make appear in its own place. 3. If it were granted that the Church could not
make Laws in things not decreed by God, yet when God has decreed the thing,
the Church can make Laws concerning the order of the things, the measure and
the manner, the number and the weight, the adjuncts and the circumstances; and
that is a field large enough for her to make Laws to oblige the conscience. And
therefore although it were ridiculous and contemptible, injurious and
uncharitable for the Church to pass her greatest censures upon persons that
transgress bono animo, or through unavoidable infirmity, in small
inconsiderable instances, circumstances and unconcerning forms of law and
unconsider'd ceremonies; yet the smallest thing may be placed so as to be of
great concernment; and when these things accidentally become great, the
censures of the Church may be prudently and charitably inflicted. But what
power the Church has in making Laws will afterward be considered in its
place; thus much was of present necessity for the answer of the objection.

To the last there might be many answers given. 33.
It may suffice that the argument is expressly false; for supposing that humane
Laws do directly bind the conscience, it does not follow that it is as great a
sin to break the Laws of Man, as to violate the Laws of God: that it is a sin
it does follow, but not that it is so great. For the law of God against idle
words does oblige the conscience, but it does not therefore follow that it is
as great a sin to talk idly as to kill a man. But this Sophism relies upon this
false supposition, Th^^ all things that bind the conscience do bind in the
same degree, to the same measures of iniquity. For if they do not, then humane
Laws may bind the conscience, and yet they may be broken at an easier rate
then the Commandments of God. 2. But then I add, that this is according to
the subject matter, and the evil consequent of the action. For suppose a Prince
oppressed by a Rebel party, as Pompey was by Caesar; Photinus that told the
King of Egypt where he lay hid did a greater fault then if he had railed upon
Pompey, expressly against the Commandment, thou shall not speak evil of the
Ruler of the people. To open the secrets of a King may be a greater sin, and
do more mischief, and proceed from greater malice then to call my brother
Fool. For a Soldier to desert his station may be a greater crime then to steal
a shilling. 3. And yet it cannot be denied, but that there is great difference
between the Laws of God and the Laws of Man in their obligation. Concerning
which, in order to many cases of conscience, it is fit that I give account.

The difference of Divine and Humane laws in their obligation.
1. The law of God binds the Conscience immediately, 34.
and by the right of God; the law of man binds the Conscience mediately, and by
the interposition of the Divine authority: so that we must obey Man for Gods
sake, and God for his own.

2. The laws of God bind the will and the understanding; 35.
that is, we are bound to obey, and bound to think them good. But humane laws
meddle not with the understanding; for that is a Prince, and can be governed as
he can be persuaded, but subject to the empire of none but God: but the will is
the subject of humane laws; not only that the will be bound to command the
inferior faculties and members to obey and do the work of the law, but of it
self precisely it is bound: for it is not enough that we do the outward works,
but the will must be of it self obedient. Whatsoever ye do, Col. 3. 23.
do it heartily, (...), do it from your very Soul; that is, cheerfully,
willingly, without murmuring: (...), for ye do it not to men, but to the Lord.

3. The Divine laws are lasting and perpetual; 36.
but humane laws cease to bind the conscience, by desuetude, by contraition, by
contrary reason, by intolerable inconvenience, by dispensation, and lastly by
abrogation.

4. Divine laws oblige the Conscience not only to an active obedience, 37.
but to activity and earnestness to do them, to seek opportunities, to omit
none to do them presently. Humane laws oblige to an active obedience, but not
to a spontaneous offer, and ultroneous seeking of opportunities. It may be a
sin, it is always an infirmity, to seek for excuses and dispensations in
Divine laws; but it is lawful by all fair means to seek to be freed from the
band of any humane law that is not of public concernment, and is of private
incommodity. A man may decline a burden of the law, or seek a privilege and
exemption. The Citizens of Rome were tied to keep guards in course, and do
other duties; but he that had three children, had a right of exemption; and he
that has none may lawfully desire and petition for the privilege. The burden
of a humane law may be thrust upon another, if it be done by just and
charitable means; but in the laws of God every man must bear his own burden
chusingly and delightfully.

5. Humane laws only consider the outward action, 38.
not the secret opinion; you must obey Man, when at the same time without sin
you may believe the law to be imprudent, or imperfect, or fit to be annulled.
But in the laws of God we must submit our most secret thoughts, and we must be
sure so to obey humane laws, as we keep for God the prerogative of his: but
though to God we must give account of our thoughts, yet humane laws meddle not
with them at all. Cogitationis poenam nemo meretur, says the law, ff. de
poenis.

6. Humane laws oblige only that they be not despised, 39.
that is, that they be not transgressed without a reasonable cause: but the
laws of God must be obeyed in all cases; and there is no cause to break them,
and there can be no necessity upon us to commit a sin. In the obedience to
humane laws we may suppose there was a weakness in the Sanction, they could not
foresee the evil that was future, the inconveniences upon some men, the
impossibilities of many, the intolerable burden upon others: and therefore
although a reason is always to be had when we do not obey, and that a good
one; yet the reason and the goodness of it is not to be the greatest and the
best, or to be exacted according to the strictest measures of necessity alone.
For though the laws of God bind to obedience without dispute, without
diminution, without excuse, and in all necessities and accidents that can
supervene; yet beyond that which is good, that which is equal and probable and
profitable, humane laws do not bind: but of this in the sequel.

7. He that despises the law of God, 40.
dies for it; and he that neglects it is accounted to despise it: the not doing
it is by interpretation a contempt of Gods law. He that despises humane laws,
is also guilty before God: but he only is accounted to despise it, that
voluntarily and without reason disobeys. But he that out of the multitude of
other affairs, or an incuriousness of Spirit, unknowingly or ignorantly
neglects it by not thinking of it, is in most cases innocent before God; but is
tied to submit to the punishment if he be required and deprehended. This only
is to be added, that a geat and a dissolute negligence even in humane laws is
so far from excusing the breach of the law, that it doubles the guilt:
Dissoluta negligentia prope dolum est, says the law, ff. mandati, l.
fidejussor, and ff. de action. and obligat. l. 1.. Is quoque. A great
negligence is accounted malice.

8. Ignorance of the laws of God excuses no man, 41.
because it is sufficiently revealed to every man; and he is not only bound to
inquire much if there should be need, but there is also so clear a
communication of them, that a little inquiry will serve the turn, and therefore
no man is here excused by ignorance. But in the laws of man ignorance is easier
pleaded, and does more excuse, and does unavoidably happen to many men in very
many cases; and they are less bound to inquire, and a less matter makes the
ignorance probable and quit from malice: of all which a prudent and a good man
is to be the Judge.

9. When Divine and humane laws are opposed, 42.
these must always yield to those; and without dispute God is to be obeyed
rather then Man; and although we must obey Man for God, we must never obey Man
against God: and therefore it was excellently counseled by Ben-Sirach, Let not
the reverence of any man cause thee to sin.

10. As a consequent to the former, 43.
all the Ministers of Justice are bound to be more severe in exacting obedience
to Gods laws then to their own in an equal or like matter; they must be easy in
the matter of their own laws, and zealous for God: and this also does prove
that where the effect, and the appendages and circumstances do not alter it,
it is in the whole a less sin to break a humane law then to break a Divine;
that is, although both are sins, yet in the nature of the action it is of a
less degree of crime to break the law of our superior then of our supreme, of
Man then of God.

11. Divine laws are imposed upon the people; 44.
but humane laws are imposed indeed, but commonly by their consent, explicit
or implicit, formal or interpretative, and without acceptance in a sweet
regiment may indeed, Vide Rule 6. of this chapter.
but are not usually passed into the sanction and sacredness of laws. For the
civil government is not absolute, and mere and supreme; but in some sense, and
to some purposes, and in some degrees, limited, conditional, precarious and
mixed, full of need, and supported by them who are to be ruled, who therefore
are to be regarded.

12. Some add this; the Divine laws bind both in public and in private, the
humane in public only: that is, because humane laws take no cognizance of
what is secret, therefore neither do they of themselves bind in secret. But
this although in speculation it has some truth, yet when it is reduced to
practice, the consideration is different. For though Man's laws know not what is
in secret, and therefore cannot judge; yet God, that binds humane laws upon our
consciences, knows the most secret breach of laws, and he judges and discerns.
But this has some difficulties in it, and many very material considerations,
Rule 4. of this chapter.
and therefore is to be distinctly handled in some of the following pages. This
only for the present. When in private we can be excused or innocent before
God; in that private, and in those circumstances humane laws oblige not. But
Gods laws equally oblige both in public and private, respectively to the
subject matter. Of themselves humane laws have nothing to do with private
actions; that is, neither with the obligation, nor the notice.

There are many other material differences between the laws of God and man, 45.
as to their obligation upon Conscience; which I shall afterward explicate
upon the occasion of particular rules. The great sum of all is this, so far
as relates to Conscience; the law of God binds stronger, and in more cases then
humane laws. A breach of a humane law is not so great a sin, nor is it so often
a sin, as a breach of the Divine; the advantage ^oth in the extension and the
intension being (as there is all reason it should) on the part of God; that God
who is in all, may be above all.

Thus they differ, 46.
but in order to the verification of the Rule, it is to be remembered that in
the main obligation of Conscience they do agree. The Divine law places things
in the order of virtue and vice; and the Sacraments are therefore good because
they are appointed by Christ, our great Lawgiver, and in the old law the
eating of swines flesh was therefore evil because it was forbidden by the law
of God. For all the goodness of Man's will consists in a conformity to the will
of God, which is the great rule and measure of humane actions. And just so it
is in humane laws according to their proportion and degree: when the law of the
Church commands fasting, to do so then is an act of temperance as well as o^
obedience, and to disobey is gluttony; and to wear cloth of gold is luxury when
the law commands us to wear plain broad cloth. To give great gifts at marriages
and feasts may be magnificence; but if the law limits to a certain sum, to
go beyond is pride and prodigality. This is the work of God, though by the
hands of Moses and Aaron: for it matters not by what means he effects his own
purposes; by himself, or by his power administered by second causes. Orat. 17.
The sum is this, which I represent in the words of S. Gregory Nazianzen,
Submittamus nos tum Deo, tum aliis, tum iis qui Imperium in terra gerunt: Deo
quidem omnibus de causis; alii autem aliis propter charitatis foedus,
principibus denique propter ordinem; publicaeque disciplinae rationem. Let us
submit our selves to God, to one another, and to Princes: to God for all the
reason in the world; to one another for charity's sake; to Princes for order's
sake, and the account of public Government. But if we refuse to obey Man, God
will punish us; and if we refuse to obey God, even the Prince ought to punish
us; and both promote the interests of the same Kingdom. (...), says Justin
Martyr, Apolog. 2. pro Christ.
We pray you, O Kings and Princes, to punish them who are Christians only in
name, and do not live according to the decrees of our Great Master: and then
for their own interest this is his account, (...) We worship God alone, but in
other things we gladly serve and obey you, Lib. 1. de praecept. and dispens. c.
11, 12.
confessing you to be the Kings and Princes of the people. I conclude this in
the words of S. Bernard, Sive Deus, sive homo mandatum quodcunque tradiderit,
pari profecto obsequendum est cura, pari reverentia deferendum, A law, whether
given by God or by man, is to be observed by a like care and a like reverence;
alike in the kind, but not in the degree. Videat lector Latomi librum [de
Ecclesia and legis humanae obligatione] and Claudium Carninum [de vi and
potestate legum humanarum] Cajetanum verb* praeceptum, Navarrum, Card. Toletum
de hac materia in libello de 7. peccatis mortal.


RULE II. Humane laws do not oblige the Conscience to an active obedience,
when there is an imminent danger of death, or an intolerable, or very grievous
evil in the obedience.
THis Rule is to be understood to be true regularly and ordinarily, 1.
and in laws purely humane; that is, such which are not commentaries or
defensatives of a natural and a Divine law. For if the forbidden action have in
it any thing that is intrinsecally evil, then the action must not be done,
though to save our lives: for no sin ought to be the price of our life, and we
ought not to exchange an eternal life for a temporal. Here our Blessed
Savior's words are plain, Fear not them which can kill the body; and what
profit have you, if you gain the whole world and loose your own soul? and it
is better to go into life maimed and blind, then having two feet or two eyes
to go into hell fire; and God is to be obeyed rather then man; and he that
would save his life shall loose it; and diverse others to the same purpose. Now
when any thing of this nature is the subject matter of a humane law directly,
or if the violation of any thing of a Divine Commandment be the consequent of
the breach of a humane law, then the humane law binds to its observation though
with the loss of our lives.

But the question here is concerning mere humane laws established in an
indifferent matter; 2.
and in this it is that the Rule affirms that humane laws do not bind to their
observation with the danger of life. The reasons are these*

1. 3.
Because the end of such laws is only the good and convenience of the lives of
the Citizens. Omnibus a natura been informatis insitum esse ut nemini parere
velint, Lib. 1. Offic.
nisi utilitatis causa and legitime imperanti, said Cicero, Nature her self
teaches all wise men to obey Princes that govern by laws, and for the good of
their Subjects. They therefore being wholly made to minister to the
circumstances of life, must not by our lives be ministered unto; nothing being
more unnatural and unreasonable then that a man should be tied to part with his
life for his convenience only. It is not worth it, it is like burning a man's
house to roast his eggs.

2. Eye for eye, 4.
and tooth for tooth, and all that a man has he will give for his life: it is
indeed the voice of nature and of this world, there is no capacity to receive
any good when our life is gone; and therefore nothing of this world can make a
man recompense for his life. That Law therefore that pretends to do advantages
to our life, if it shall also require our life for the securing such
advantages, takes away more good then it pretends to give, and makes the
substance less principal then the accessory.

3. 5.
If humane Laws do admit of equity (as it is confessed by all men) there is no
case so favorable as that of saving of our life: either then we are to suppose
the Laws to be made of a rock, and to yield to nothing, but for ever to be a
killing letter, and an instrument of the hardest bondage; or else at least to
be so compliant as to yield to her Citizens in the case of life and death.

4. All humane power is given to man for his good, 6.
not for his hurt; for edification, not for destruction. But it very often
happens, and it is so in most laws that are merely humane, that the good of the
particular law is not so great as the saving the life of one man; and if such
laws should not yield to the perservation of so precious a life, it were a law
made for evil and not for good, a snare and no defense, an enemy and no
guardian or friend.

5. Necessity is the band, 7.
and necessity is the solution of a law. Necessitas facit licitum quod alias
licitum non est, says Alexander ad l. si ex toto, ff. de legibus. To the same
purpose is that of Seneca, Necessitas, magnum humanae imbecillitatis
patrocinium, quicquid cogit, excusat, Necessity makes every thing lawful to
which it does compel. But of all necessities that is the greatest which is the
safety of our lives, and a rescue from death: this case therefore is greater
then the band of humane Laws.

6. 8.
The laws of God in precepts purely affirmative do not oblige to an actual
obedience in the danger of death. That is, in such positive laws of God which
do not involve a negative, of an intrinsic malice against a law of nature or
of prime rectitude, the laws of God intend not to oblige, when death shall be
the reward of him that does obey. Thus the Maccabees brake the rest of the
Sabbath to defend themselves against their enemies; and the Priests for the
uses of Religion, and the Disciples of Christ to satisfy their hunger; and
Christ was their Advocate. Thus David and his followers did eat the Shewbread
expressly against the commandment, but it was in his great need; and Christ
also was his Advocate and defended the fact: and if a probable necessity, that
is a great charity and relief, which is but the avenue and the address of an
extreme necessity, be a sufficient excuse from the actual observation of a law
of God, positive and affirmative, much more shall an extreme necessity excuse
from such a law, and therefore yet more strongly does it conclude against the
pressure of a humane law in such cases. And therefore the Church has declared
that the Ecclesiastical laws of fasting do not oblige in case of sickness or
old age, or journey and great lassitude, cap. consilium de observatione
jejunii: and thus also no man is bound to go to Church on a festival to hear
Divine Service when an enemy lies in wait to kill him: that is, the laws of the
Church were intended for the good of the soul, and therefore not suffered to
do hurt to the body; and as God affirms he will have mercy and not sacrifice,
and therefore himself makes his own laws, that can yield at all, to yield to
the occasions and calls of mercy: so does the Church in the imitation of God,
whose laws and gentleness is our best measure; not that every little excuse and
trifling pretense can excuse, but the danger of death, or sickness, or some
very great evil reasonably feared; of which I shall by and by give an account.

Although the Rule thus understood be certain and evident for these reasons, 9.
yet there are some adversaria or seeming oppositions very fit to be
considered; because although they do not evacuate the intent of the Rule, yet
they give limit and further explication to it.

1. 10.
Cajetan affirms every law that binds under pain of mortal sin, does also bind
to obedience though death attend it; and his reason is, because we must rather
die then commit a sin: and therefore let the instance be what it will, if it
ties to obedience by obliging the conscience, it is a sin to disobey, and
rather then sin we must choose to die. 2. * And that no man should question the
power of the Superior in obliging to suffer death, we find by the practice and
consent of all the world that Princes can call their Subjects to battle, and
command their Officers upon dangerous services, and the Soldiers are bound not
to desert their station; and the Master of the Ship was obliged to put to Sea
in a storm when Caesar bade him. 3. * For since the law is intended for a
public good, the private interest (be it never so great) is not to be put in
balance against it. And therefore as it is in the Laws of God, and in the
confession of faith, the brave sons of Eleazar did suffer death with torments
rather then eat swines flesh, and the Martyrs gave their lives in a willing
sacrifice rather then deny their faith: so in their proportion it must be in
the laws of men, they must be kept up though we die for it. Melius est ut unus
quam Unitas, It is expedient that one man die for the people, one member for
the whole body, rather one then the unity be dissolved, and the community
ruined.

To these things I answer, 11.
first, that the proposition of Cajetan is not true in its latitude. For
whatever binds to obedience under pain of sin, does not intend to bind to
obedience with the loss of our life under sin. It is true that we must rather
die then sin; but we do not sin in not obeying, when he that obeys shall die
for it; and that being the question ought not to be presumed by any opponent in
prejudice of truth or probabilty. Humane laws bind to obedience, and Gods law
annexes the penalty of sin; but then Gods law coming in to second man's law,
seconds it but in what it would oblige. But humane Laws do not intend,
regularly and in all cases to be obeyed with the loss of life or limb; and when
the Law does not sufficiently express such intention, we are to presume for
liberty and mercy. * Now that which follows is true in some sense; the public
is to be preferred before the private, and the supreme power can oblige the
Subjects to suffer death or to venture their lives: but this cannot be in all
cases. For if in all, then is the Magistrate the Lord of life and death, which
is Gods peculiar; but if he could in no case, then he were not the minister of
life and death, which is communicated to the Magistrate. The inquiry therefore
now is, since regularly he cannot, and yet extraordinarily the supreme power
can tie on his laws upon our shoulders with the cords of death, in what cases
this is true, and in what it fails.

1. 12.
When a Law is decreed by man with the appendage of a penalty of death for its
sanction, it can bind to obedience though death be in it. For since the matter
of the law is by the Legislative power valued at the price of our lives, and by
accident the very keeping of it as well as the breaking is set at no less
price, the evils of either side being equal, the presumption and advantage must
be on the part of justice and the law, not for injustice, tyranny and
disobedience. And so much the rather, because that the obedience should cause
death is but rare and accidental, not foreseen, but seldom happening; but the
law threatening death to the disobedient is a regular, constant, observed, and
declared provision: and therefore that which is for good, and regularly is
established by the fear of death, is not to be put out of countenance by a
contingent, rare and extraordinary fear, and which also is intended for evil;
for which in this case there could be no provision, and therefore there ought
to be no regard. But this holds only in case that death on either side be
equally certain; for if it be certain the obedient man shall die by the hand of
a Tyrant, or an accident that is prepared, and it be likely he may escape from
the hands of the law by concealment, or by the relief of equity or charity,
then the natural right of self-preservation will be his apology; this man
despises not the law, but extricates himself as well as he can, and for a
reason, which of all considerations merely humane is the greatest.

2. 13.
When the Tyrant power threatens death to obedient Subjects, for no other end
but that the Subject should contemn the law, then the Superior can oblige us
to obedience though we die for it. For it is in this as in those positive and
affirmative laws of God, which although they yield to save the Subjects life,
yet they will never yield in the corruption of the Subjects manners: that is,
they yield in charity, but not to serve a Tyrants lust. And thus we understand
the reason of the difference between the cession of the law of the Sabbath in
the case of the Maccabees, and the not cession of the prohibition of
swines-flesh in the case of the Jewish subjects. For the fear of death was
equal to them both: if the Princes did not fight upon the Sabbath, they should
be cut in pieces; and if the Subjects did not eat swines-flesh, they should die
with torments. But they preserved themselves, and these did not, and both were
innocent. The reason of the difference is plainly this; They that offered
swines-flesh to these did it as enemies of the Religion; they that fought with
those upon the Sabbath did it as enemies of the Nation, only they would take
advantage by the prohibitions of the Religion. Now when death is threatened by
the enemies of the Religion, it is with purpose to affront it, or destroy it;
and therefore if the Mother and her seven sons had complied, it had been a
renouncing of their faith and their religion, and a contempt of their law;
which could not be supposed in the other case of the Princes, not only because
both the Princes and the Army could not be supposed to be despisers of the law,
but also because that very breaking of the law, was with fighting in the
defense of the law and the whole Nation. And so it is in humane Laws: The
sacredness of the Authority may be established with our life; and because to
contemn them is always a sin, we must rather die then do it, though the matter
of it self be less and do not require it. But this is also to be limited. For
it is true that we must rather die then contemn the laws, but yet he that
breaks them for no other reason then to save his life, is not a contemner of
the law, for he has great reason, and a great necessity; and therefore it is
not contempt, but is to be presumed the contrary, therefore this is to be
understood, when

1. Either the law expressly commands we should die rather then break it. Or

2. Has declared that in such circumstances to comply shall be a contempt by
interpretation. Or

3. When it is notorious that it is so intended by the Tyrant power: and

4. The Lawgiver expressly requires our fortitude and resistance; for unless it
be in such cases, though the law can bind, yet it does not. The sum is this;
when death is likely to be the consequent of obedience by accident and the
chance of things or the providence of God abstractly, then it is not to be
expounded to be contempt. Because in such cases God tempts not. But when an
enemy or a Tyrant power tempts with the fear of death, he does it in defiance
of the law or the authority, and therefore here we must obey and die. And this
distinction is very much to be regarded. For if a Prince or an Ecclesiastic
Superior make a Law, it is to be presumed that they do it not (for they have
no interest to do it) in despite of chance to bind to obedience in the danger
of death: and therefore it is a rack of their power to extend it to such a
case. But they may have interest and public necessity to exact this obedience
when an opposite power threatens death, that they may destroy the Law.

3. The same also is the case of 1 Scandal, 14.
or 2 injury to Religion, or 3 the Confession of our faith, in all which cases
we are obliged to die rather then break a positive law of God or Man. And this
is that which S. Austin said, Satius est fame mori quam idolothytis vesci, It
is better to di^ with hunger, Lib. de bono conjug. cap. 16.
then to save our lives by eating things sacrificed to idols. That is, when the
so doing is an interpretative renunciation of our religion, or the laws of our
Superior forbidding it, or is a scandal to a weak brother. And this is it that
S. Paul said, I will eat no flesh as long as the world stands rather then cause
my brother to offend. But in this there is no difficulty.

4. Humane Laws bind to their observation though with the danger of death, 15.
when that danger is either expressly in the law, or in the matter and instance
of it annexed to the obedience. Thus the supreme Power can command the Curates
of souls to attend a Cure in the time of the Plague, ^o go to Sea in a storm,
to stand in a breach for the defense of the Army. For in these cases he that
has power to do it, has expressly commanded it; and to undergo the danger of
death is of the substance of the action and obedience, and is neither besides
the intention nor the knowledge of the Lawgiver: and therefore if the Law did
not bind to obedience notwithstanding the danger of death, it were no law at
all. For to a Prince commanding to go to Sea in a storm, it is in vain to say
it is a storm; and that Soldier is a fool that tells his General he is afraid
to die, when he sends him upon an honorable service.

5. But all these cases are to be provided so that they be in gravi materia, 16.
that the cause be great, and the necessity urgent, and the public good
concerned, for men's lives are not to be jested away: and though Scipio Major
had power to carry his three hundred brave fellows (that he so boasted of in
Sicily) to the African war, yet he had no power to command them to run up the
neighboring Tower and leap headlong into the Sea for bravery and to show his
power.

6. One thing more is to be added. 17.
In those cases in which humane Laws do oblige even in the danger of death,
they do not oblige but for their whole portion; that is, when the whole end of
the law is not destroyed or hazarded by the disobedience, but that the caution
and end of the law may be secured and observed in all or in the greatest part;
a man may then by not observing the law, save his own life and be innocent. And
this is the rule of Aquinas, and it is very reasonable, Quando est causa
rationabilis, and non impeditur finis legis, not peccat mortaliter qui non
observat legem, Upon a just cause a man may without a crime break a law, when
by such transgression the end of the law is not hindered. As if a law be made
that corn shall not be transported, because of an imminent famine, and for the
preservation of the Citizens, if any man to save his life shall comply with an
inevitable accident and necessity, and carry some abroad, his necessity is a
just excuse, because he has not destroyed the end of the law, since his
proportion and lading causes no sensible detriment to the public: and though
every single man must not pretend that his single proportion will be no great
matter (because that is not sufficient unless there be a great necessity to do
it;) yet when there is such a necessity, it will suffice that he did it not but
upon a violent need, and what he did was not a destruction to the end of the
law; and his example cannot have any evil effect of it self; for other men
cannot say, Why may not I as well as he? Unless the necessity be as exemplary
as the action, and unless they be in the like evident danger of death, they
cannot pretend to the like impunity. They that are in no danger may not, but he
that is may, when the Subjects safety can stand with the safety of the public.
For although the head may expose one member to loss and amputation to preserve
the whole, yet when the whole can be safe without it, the member may preserve
it self and refuse to be cut off: and nothing is greater then the safety of a
part, but the safety of the whole.

But the Rule affirms that not only danger of death, 18.
but the avoiding of a very grievous and intolerable evil is sufficient to
excuse disobedience to humane Laws from being a sin. But this is particularly
to be considered in the following Rules.

RULE III. The Laws of our Superior that are not just and good, do not oblige
the Conscience.
1. LAws are public mischiefs if they bind to injustice; and therefore to
establish any thing that is unjust or evil is against the nature of Laws, and
the power of the Superior, and the intendment of the Supreme. For God gives to
no man power above or against himself.

Now a Law is unjust upon many defects.

1. If it be made by an incompetent person, 2.
that is, one who has no authority. Cajus and Sejus were fellow servants to
Ruricanus. Cajus commands Sejus to go to plough. Sejus demands, quo jure? And
he was in the right. Cajus was the wiser man, and he was the older, and better
employed, but he was not his Lord. Clement. Exivi de Paradiso, de verb. signif.
Par in parem imperium non habet, says the Law.

2. If it be made in an incompetent and undue matter. 3.
When Saul commanded the man of Amalek, Sta super me, and interfice me, Fall
upon me and kill me; he was indeed a Prince, but in that matter he could make
no law, and therefore was not to be obeyed. And the Ancients tell that when
Mercury was accused for the murder of Argus, though he pleaded that he did it
by the command of Jupiter, yet the Gods did not acquit him: and though Marc
Anthony did worse for his own revenge to kill Cicero, yet Pothinus did ill too
when he killed the brave Pompey, though at the command of his Master Ptolemy.
Antoni tamen est pejor quam causa Pothini;
Hic facinus Domino praestitit, ille sibi.


Anthony was infinitely to be condemned, and Pothinus not to be justified. And
upon this account, every law made against Religion, or any thing of Divine
sanction and commandment, is void, and cannot oblige the conscience. To which
purpose who please, may read an excellent discourse of S. Bernard in his
seventh Epistle which is to Adam the Monk. Upon this account a Thief cannot
begin a prescription against the right of the just owner, because his theft
being against the law of God, cannot begin a just title by the laws of men.
Thus although the laws L. in causae. * idem ^omponius. ff. de minoribus. and l.
item si precio.. quemadmodum. ff. locati and conducti.
permit a man to possess what by an unjust price or bargain he has acquired,
yet because this is unjust and uncharitable to deceive his neighbor, the
injurious person is bound to restore, and is not indemnified before God by any
warranty from the contrary civil law: Ye shall not lie, says our Lord God, nor
deceive every one his neighbor: Levit. 19.
and let no man defraud or circumvent his neighbor in bargaining, 1 These. 4.
says S. Paul. (...), said the old Attick law, from the voice of nature; which
Cicero well renders, tollendum esse ex rebus contrahendis omne mendacium, no
lie must at all^be used in bargaining: and therefore the law of man to the
contrary is invalid; though I suppose the civil Law intends only to bar an
action in the outward Court, but not to give warrant to the conscience.

3. Humane laws may be unjust when a just power in a competent matter passes on
to excess, 4.
and goes beyond it is bounds. He that excommunicates one that is not of his
Diocese does not oblige the excommunicate person by the sentence: and Pilate
had nothing to do with the Holy Jesus till Herod had sent him back to him; for
to his jurisdiction he did belong. Thus if a Priest or a Bishop absolves a
guilty person* he binds himself, but looses not the other. For no excess of
power produces any effect of law, or tie upon the Conscience. And to this
purpose is that Rule of the law, Cap. at si Clerici. in princip. de Judi*
Sententia non a suo Judice lata, nulla est: which is excellently rendered by S.
Paul, What art thou, O man, who judge another man's servant? Upon this
account, Romans 14.
all humane laws prescribing to the Conscience, or giving bounds to the
thoughts, are null. For in these things God only is Judge, and all other
Judicatories are incompetent: I say all other judicatories; for as for
sentences declaratory of a Divine law, that is not under this restraint. But of
that in it is own place.

4. Humane laws may be unjust, 5.
by a defect of the just and due end; that is, when the law does not contribute
to the public advantage, but wholly to his private who made the law. If the
law be apt to minister to the public good, whatever the private interest and
design of the Prince be, it may spoil the man but not the law. If a Prince
espying the luxury of feasts and garments make sumptuary laws, and impose fines
upon the transgressors, and does this only to get the money, indeed he is not
a good man; but so long as the law is good, it does oblige the Conscience. The
enemies of the memory of K. Henry 8. of England pretend that he annulled the
Popes authority in England only upon designs of lust and revenge. Suppose this
true; yet as long as he did good, though for evil ends, it is the worse for
him, but not for us; but if the Prince does not, yet the law must intend the
public benefit: and that also is the duty of the Prince. Non prospectantes
proprii jura commodi, Cap. 10.
sed consulentes patriae atque genti, said the Fathers of the eighth Council of
Toledo. Kings must not look after their own profit, but make provisions for
their country and their people. Officium est imperare, non regnum, Epist. 91.
To rule is not empire, but office, said Seneca; and therefore the Greeks call
Kings (...), says Plutarch, that signifies persons appointed to take care and
to defend the people. Tu civem patremque geras, Claudian. ad Honor.
tu consule cunctis,
Non tibi, nec tua te moveant sed publica damna.


Take care of the public, not of thy particular, and let the common calamity
move thee most: and since the power it self is designed for the public good,
L. 1. ff. de legibus.
the laws must be so too. And therefore when the law says that a law ought to
be a common precept; that is, pro communi utilitate statutum, says the gloss,
that is, it must be for the common good. Conditur utilitatis gratia lex, says
Plato, every just law is made for the good of the people: and from him
Marsilius Ficinus defines a law to be, In Hippia.
a true manner of governing, which by profitable ways tends to the best end,
that is, the public good; and Isidore says, Lex erit omne quod ratione
constiterit, duntaxat quod religioni congruat, quod disciplinae conveniat, quod
saluti proficiat, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
A law is that which agrees with reason, that is consonant to religion, and
accords with discipline, and is profitable and does good. And therefore if a
Prince make a law which is for his own profit, and not for the public good, he
is a Tyrant; and his laws have no sanction but fear, and noe tie at all upon
the Conscience. And this is the doctrine of Aristotle, (...) A King and a
Tyrant differ very much: Ethic. lib. 8. c. 10.
A Tyrant considers his own profit; a King the profit of his people: and under
this consideration comes that Prince that lays grievous burdens upon his
people. (...) Those that take great sums from them they ought not, Lib. 4.
Eth. cap. 1.
and those which they ought not, as Tyrants, destroyers of Cities and robbers
of Temples, we do not call them Covetous, but wicked, and impious, and unjust.
And therefore they who do such things by laws made on purpose, do it by
tyranny, and therefore not by law, or just authority, and consequently by none.
In such cases we must suffer as it happens: but we may avoid the burden of the
law, where we can peaceably and privately. For all such things as are against
the good of the subjects, the law it self declares to be no law; that is, to be
more then the superior has right or leave to do. Nulla juris actio aut
benignitas patitur ut quae salubriter pro hominum utilitate introducuntur, ea
nos duriore interpretatione contra ipsorum commodum producamus ad severitatem,
says the law, l. nulla, ff. de legibus: No law, no charity suffers us to make
that by interpretation hard and against their profit, for whose profit it was
first decreed by a salutary sanction. And therefore it is observable that all
laws do infinitely decline all harsh senses, and are ambitious of gentle and
benign interpretations; which is in the whole world the greatest declaration
that lawgivers as they ought not, so they profess they do not intend to
grieve the subject by an unequal burden. It was a Princely saying of Trajan,
when he put a sword upon the thigh of the Prefect of the Praetorian bands, Cape
hunc, and si quidem recte and ex utilitate omnium imperavero, pro me, sin
aliter, contra me utere, Use this sword on my behalf if I govern rightly and to
the public benefit; if not, use it against me. That was too much, but his
purpose was excellent; he knew it was his duty to rule by that measure only;
beyond that his power was incompetent. (...), He that does not so, is a King by
fortune, Ubi supra.
but indeed a Tyrant, and any thing rather then a King. (...), says Aristotle,
For he pursues his own, not his peoples good: and that is (...), the stain of
Monarchy, that is, plainly Tyranny. Tiberius said well, Dixi and nunc and saepe
alias, P. C. bonum and salutarem principem, quem vos tanta and tam libera
potestate instruxistis, Senatui servire debere, and universis civibus; saepe ac
plerumque etiam singulis, neque id dixisse me poenitet. A good and a gentle
Prince ought to serve the profit of his Nobility, his Senate and Citizens; not
only all but each single Citizen, as there is occasion: and therefore
Rudolphus of Austria was very angry with his Guards for hindering petitioners to
come to him; Let them come, says he, for I was not made an Emperor to be shut
up in a box. Sinite parv^los ad me venire says our Bl. Lord, the King of
Kings, and the Lord of Lords, Suffer my little ones to come unto me. But the
reason and demonstration of all is contained in those words of Seneca, saying a
Prince should think with himself, De Clemen^. 1.
Ego ex omnibus mortalibus placui electusque sum qui Deorum vice in terris
fungerer, I am chosen from the heap of mortals to stand in the place of God, to
do as he does; that is, to do all things justly, and to do all things for
the benefit of the people: now since the Prince has his power from God, he can
have no power to do otherwise then God does. Admittere in animum totius reip.
curam and populi fata suscipere, and oblitum quodammodo sui, gentibus vivere;
noctes omnes diesque perpeti solicitudinem, pro salute omnium cogitare. So
Pliny describes the office of a Prince, to take care of the whole republic, to
live to them not to himself; days and nights to suffer anxiety in thinking for
the profit and welfare of all. This is the limit of a Princes power so far as
he relates to Conscience. For beyond this the Conscience is not bound. The body
is, and we must suffer patiently the evil which we cannot deprecate; but laws
that are made to purposes beyond these measures do no ways oblige the
Conscience. He is the Minister of God for thy good, says S. Paul; otherwise he
is not Gods Minister, and has to other purposes none of Gods authority, and
therefore cannot oblige the Conscience to an active obedience in such where his
power is incompetent to command.

5. Thus, 6.
when a law by the change of things or cases is become an enemy to the common
good, it is not to be observed, says Aquinas; and he gives this instance: A
law is made that in the time of sieges the gates of a City be always kept
shut; but the guards are not tied to obey this law, when the citizens fly
thither from the danger of the enemy: and so in all equal cases, concerning
which this is the Rule.

The Prince is to be presumed good and gentle; 7.
and if he be not so, he is to be supposed so, and made so at least by fiction
of law: whatsoever therefore case does happen in which the Citizens are
grieved, it is to be supposed that it is besides the intention of the law, and
was not in the prevision of the Prince; but we are to rely upon this, That he
who is good and gentle, and a Father of his Country, would, if he were here and
observed this evil, untie the law, that he might not tie us to the evil: and
because he is not here, but his will is here, the law with so much evil to us
is not to be observed; for his leave to break it is to be presumed.

6. Hither is to be reduced the injustice of unequal distributions; 8.
such as is, a law forbidding beggars to go from place to place to seek
relief, when there is no relief at home; the law of commanding every village or
parish to provide for their poor, which indeed is piously and charitably
intended, but because when it is reduced to practice it falls heavily upon
some, and others touch it not with the top of their fingers, the law which was
good in thesi, proves unjust in hypothesi, and therefore does not oblige the
Conscience; but they who are under it, may not only seek relief by petition,
but by avoiding it where they can piously and charitably, according to the
measures by and by to be described. For it is the voice of natural justice and
reason, which S. Paul urges to his charges, not that there should be ease to
one and burden to another: this is against equity, as having in it so great
disproportionate inequality.

7. Lastly, 9.
of the same consideration it is, that in the making laws of burden, there be
equality and proportion between the burden and the cause of the imposition;
that the burden be not greater then the evil it intends to remedy, nor the
remedy greater then the disease needs, nor yet greater then men can bare. For
what is excessive in these case, is against the charity and justice of the
Prince, and is matter of rapine and impiety, not of subsidy and prudent
provisions: and therefore though it may oppress the subject, who has no remedy
but prayers and tears; yet the Conscience is at liberty, and may procure
remissions by any ways of peace and piety.

But in the reducing of this to practice, 10.
these cautions are to be observed.

1. That though the conscience be free from all laws which are unjust upon any
of these accounts, yet that the law be not disobeyed with the scandal and
offense of others, it must be so done that none be taught to rebel, or evacuate
the law upon pretenses and little regards, nor that our duty and religion be
evil spoken of, nor that the Superior be made jealous and suspicious. When our
Blessed Savior had proved himself free from tribute, and that in conscience he
was not bound to pay it, yet that he might not give offense, he submitted to
the imposition. And this caution is given by all the Doctors, who follow
Bartholus in it, capite 1. de constitutionibus.

2. The inconvenience of the republic must not be trifling and contemptible,
11.
but so great as must in the judgment of good and prudent men be a sufficient
cause of annulling the law, so great as must reasonably outweigh the evil of
material disobedience. And therefore in the injustice of unequal distributions,
and imposition of taxes, we are not to complain for every little pressure, nor
yet to weigh the proportions in gold-scales; for it is a greater duty of
charity that the Subject quietly bear a little load for peace sake and example
and compliance, then it can be of duty in the Prince to make such exact,
curious and Mathematical proportions.

3. The inconvenience and injutice must be certain, 12.
notorious, and relied upon, before it can be made use of to the breach of a
law. For it is no warranty to disobey, that I fancy the law to be unjust: and
therefore in this case the best security we can have is, that either it be so
declared by the voice of all men, or the more sober accents of the wise men, or
be evident in it self according to the strictest measures; for where there is a
doubtful case, the presumption always is for obedience, not against it: for
although usually in doubts, the presumption is for liberty, yet that is either
between private persons, or when the Superior makes a doubt concerning his own
laws, then he is to judge for liberty and ease; but in our own cases, and in
dispute with a law, the presumption is on behalf of the law, because ordinarily
that is the greates interest, and the greatest reason.

4. When there is a favorable case for breaking a law, 13.
if we have time and opportunity we must ask leave of the Superior. Because as
that does honor to the Superior, and gives value to the law; so it is the
greatest course of security, because it makes him Judge who only can complain.
But to this we are not obliged if the case be evident, or if the danger of evil
be imminent and sudden, and there be no time or opportunity to require it: In
these cases a leave is to be presumed, or else it need not, for the law does
not oblige.

5. This is to be practiced only when the law is against the public good. 14.
For if it be still consistent with the public interest, though it be against
the good of a particular person, the law has left a power of dispensation in
the appointed Ministers; but a private person may not so easily break the law,
at least he is tied to other conditions, and more caution, and a severer
conduct; of which I am to give account in the Chapter of the Diminution of
Laws. But for the present, the difference is only in speculation: for
notwithstanding the personal inconvenience, the law does still bind the
conscience of the Subjects in general; but if it be against the public
emolument, then the law ceases, and it does not oblige. In the first case the
particular is to be relieved by a way of his own; of which I am afterward to
speak: but in this case the conscience is at liberty. Thus when the Church
makes a law that upon a certain day the people shall meet in public, and spend
their day in fasting and prayer; it is a good law, and may be for the public
good, though Petronia and Abbatilla be with child and cannot fast: All are
bound, but from these the yoke may be lifted up for the present. But if a
Church make a law that all the Clergy shall lose their livings and their office
if they marry; here there is a mischief to the public, to a whole order of
men; and the law cannot do so much good accidentally, as it directly does
mischief. And the confession of Suarez upon another occasion, but in this very
instance, is remarkable, Custodiam virginitatis esse opus supererogationis,
quod necessariam non habet conjunctionem cum fine publici commodi; Lib. 3. de
legib. cap. 30. ^. 11.
and ergo non posse praecipi lege humana, That virginity should be kept is a
work of supererogation, that has no necessary conjunction with the end of any
public good; and therefore cannot be enjoined by a humane law. Either then the
law of the Church of Rome forbidding the Clergy to marry, does not tie them to
be Virgins, but gives them leave to fornicate; or if it does tie them to a
Virgins state, she makes a law which is not for the public good, and therefore
in which she has no competent authority. This therefore is an unjust law, and
does not oblige the conscience. (...), said Polycarpus; We are taught to give
to Princes and the powers set over us by God such honor and obedience as may
not hurt us.

RULE IV. A law that is founded upon a false presumption, does not oblige the
Conscience.
THE case is this; 1.
Francisco Biretti a Venetian Gentleman, full of amors, and used to vain and
wanton addresses, courts Julia a Senators daughter, but with secret intent to
abuse her and so to leave her. Marco Medici the Father of Julia by threats and
harsh usages forces his daughter Julia to consent to a contract with Francisco:
who perceiving himself surprised, and that the matter was passed further then
he intended it, resolved to make the best of it, to make a contract, to lie
with her, and so to leave her. He does so, surprises her in the careless hours
of the day, and the nakedness of her soul, and with flatteries mingled with the
affrighting name of her harsh Father, acts his intention, and then pursues it
till he was weary of her, and then forsakes her. She complains, and desires
remedy. The law declares their congress to be a marriage. But in the mean time
Francisco passed into Sicily, and there married Antonia Peronetta a Sicilian
Lady; her he loved, intended to make her his wife, and did so. Now the law
presumes that after contract, their congress did declare a marriage, cap. Is
qui fidem, and cap. Tua nos, de sponsal. for it supposes and presumes a
consent, and yet withal says if there was no consent, it was no marriage. Here
Francisco is condemned by the presumption, and relieved in conscience. For if
he did not lie with her affectu maritali, but only intended to abuse her, he
was indeed extremely impious and unjust; but he made no marriage, for without
mutual consent marriages are not made. Yet because of this, the law could no
way judge but by outward significations, and ut plurimum, for the most part it
is so that contract and congress do effect as well as signify a marriage, the
law did well to declare in the behalf of Juliae: but Francisco, who knew that
which the law could not know, was bound to make amends to Julia as well as he
could, but to pursue the marriage of Anthonia and dwell with her. For the
presumption upon which this law was founded was false; the congress did not
prove a marriage, for it was never intended: the presumption was probable, but
failed in this instance, and therefore in this case did not oblige the
conscience. Conscience is to be guided by presumptions when it has no better
guide; but when it has a certain truth to guide it, it is better then the best
presumption or probability. * Besides this, when a law is made upon a
supposition, and relies upon that alone, in case that should fail, it is to be
presumed that the Lawgiver does not intend to bind. When the men of Aegina
were at war with the Athenians, they made it death by their law for any
Athenian to be seen in their Country. But when Plato was made a slave and was
carried thither by a storm, one of the Citizens saved his life by an artifice,
and did it according to the intention of the law. For the law being founded
upon a presumption that if an Athenian came thither, it was for evil to their
Town, they could not suspect that Plato had such an evil intention, when they
knew his case and his sad story; and therefore ought to judge him quit from the
burden of that law. Dom. Joseph of Carreras a Spaniard walking one night in
Sivil, was taken by the Alcalde, and found to have arms about him, against the
Law; but carrying of him to prison they found at the end of that street a man
newly murdered: the law presumed him to be the murderer, as it does aptly
suspect such persons who at unseasonable times walk armed: he was accused, but
finding friends was acquitted for his life, but sentenced to maintain the widow
and children of the dead man. He knew himself innocent, and therefore was not
bound in conscience to maintain her, because the law relying upon a false
presumption, was a dead letter, and could not bind.

But that there be no error in the practice of this, 2.
we must distinguish of presumptions. One sort is in matter of fact, the other
is upon presupposition of dangers usually arising: that is of justice, this of
caution. The examples which I have already brought are all mere and unmixt
presumptions of fact; in which cases the rule does hold without exception. But
in presumptions of caution it is otherwise. The law does irritate and evacuate
the contracts of minors, because they being weak and indiscreet, it is presumed
that they do it foolishly whatever they do; and it is fit that the laws
should be their defensatives against the evils of their ignorance. But now some
minors under sixteen years of age are of a ripe wit, and competent judgment,
and have craft enough to make a bargain, to consider what they promise, and to
beware of the artifices of evil men. But yet although the presumption of the
law fails as to their particulars, yet their parents may annul their promises,
their vows, and their professions, though the presumption of the law in their
case do fail. The reason of the difference is this: In presumptions of fact,
if the truth of the fact fails, the whole foundation of the law does fail; for
the foundation is indivisible, and the law had no other support; if any thing
of it fails, it all fails. But in presumptions of caution, or of presupposition
of danger which does usually happen, it is wholly otherwise; for though it does
fail in some instances, yet it is true in most, and that is sufficient to
support a law, which looks after that which is most common, not after rare
emergencies. And therefore the law in this case does not in proper speaking
rely upon a presumption, but a certain judgment; for it is certainly true that
it is so most commonly; and it is presumed so of every particular: at least the
law knows not how to distinguish them, and therefore is a just and a wise law,
conducing to the public benefit, and consequently is a good measure to the
conscience.

Only this caution is to be inserted, 3.
That if a minor make a contract, as if a young man under 16, or a maiden under
14 make a contract of marriage, although this is not valid in law till their
years of consent be completed; yet if they have a mature judgment otherwise
then the law did presume them to have, they are tied in conscience to verify
this contract, if all those conditions were observed which could make the act
valid ^n the law of nature, because no civil law can evacuate a natural; and
where they are naturally able, they are by their own act under that law
naturally obliged: but this, although it be an essential consideration as to
conscience, yet it is wholly extrinsecal to this Rule.

But there is one distinction more of use to the explication of this Rule. 4.
Laws founded upon presumption are either laws of favor or laws of duty. Those
that are made in favor may be made use of only when that supposition upon
which it is founded is really true, but must not be used to the prejudice of
any, whether it be true or false. And of this nature, or reducible to it, is
the case that Cicero de Oratore speaks of. A Roman Citizen supposing his only
son to be dead, declares a kinsman to be his heir. The son afterward appears;
and by a true presumption that if his Father had supposed him living, he would
not have disinherited him, is relieved against a false presumption which
supposed him dead. And it has left a stain upon the honor of David's justice
and friendship with Jonathan, that when he had listened to the false information
of Ziba against his friends son Mephibosheth; and gave the land to the
informer; he yet upon a right notice of the cause restored but half. For this
cause, say the Doctors of the Jews, God divided his Kingdom, and gave the
bigger half from his Grandchild Rehoboam to his servant. But if the laws be
matter of duty, and enjoin something that is good or useful to the public,
whether the presumption be right or wrong, they do oblige: and the reason is,
because the presumption, whether it was in fact or in caution, yet it was not
the whole foundation of the law; or if it was alone built upon it at first, yet
it is supported by other arguments strong enough to affirm the law. If a law
were made in England, that whoever comes not to Divine Service in public
Churches should be punished by a mulct of 20 li. a month, the fine of
Recusancy, upon a presumption that he that is absent is so indeed, this law
were as much incumbent upon them that are not Recusants: for although the law
was at first made upon that presumption, yet because otherwise it commands a
very good act, which alone and without the presumption were a sufficient
inducement to the law, the Conscience of those who are, and those who are not
in the first presumption are equally obliged.

RULE V. Humane laws do bind the Conscience to or from an act in secret, as
well as in pubick.
SOme things are secret or private in their own nature, 1.
such as are only the prerogative of God to judge of; as the word of the mind,
the thoughts of the heart, the desires and repudiations of the affections, the
inclinations and tendencies to an object, love and hatred, the pleasures or
displeasures of the fancy, acts of judgment and understanding. These God only
knows, and he only punishes. * Others are secret, but yet they are such only
by accident, and for want of proof: and these also are more or less; for some
are seen by one witness, and some by more; and they that are seen, either are
brought to judgment, or not. Now according to the parts of these distinctions,
this Rule is in several manners to be verified.

1. Those actions which were done in secret, 2.
but under the observation of a few, when they are brought to judgment change
their nature, and become public, and therefore are equally under the power of
the Law, as if they were done in the Market. For in the Law, that is called
Notorious which is either declared in judgment, or proved by witnesses, or
evident by the intuition of the fact. And that actions, in this sense at first
secret, are subjicible to laws, is clear by the very examination of witnesses
and the whole process of law. For the Judge takes notice of no other notoreity:
if a Judge sees a thing done, he cannot punish it; he must witness it, and
another punish it. All that is notorious to the Judge must first be secret, and
then public; that is made manifest or notorious by witnesses and sentences of
Judges.

2. Some actions are secret, 3.
because they can be proved only by one witness. Now it is true that in some
cases one witness is sufficient, as in the case of treason; or in case of
confession, for his own witness against himself is as good as ten thousand:
when it is so, it is manifestum as before, and therefore the same thing is to
be affirmed of it. But if it be secret, so that it cannot be competently
proved, it is true that the law does not punish it, but it fain would; and
therefore declares that the private action is a disobedience and transgression.

3. If the action be done wholly in secret, 4.
then indeed the criminal Judge takes no notice of it any more then a man
abiding in the city does of his country house on fire before he knows of it;
but as one is an unknown calamity to the man, so the other is an unknown
transgression of the law. For that the thing is known or unknown it alters the
case as to the punishment, yet nothing at all as to the offense, the scandal
only excepted and the example. Now that the law does intend to forbid such
actions, it appears by the acts of scrutiny, and the proceedings against such
as come accidentally to be discovered. If a suspicion do arise or any
probability, any fame or rumor, the law begins her process, somewhere by
torture, somewhere by examination upon oath, and sometimes gives sentence upon
conjectures. Now if to this it be replied, that this is the beginning of
publication, and the law proceeds only in proportion to its being public; I
answer, that it is true, she can proceed no otherwise: and therefore if the
question here had been whether secret actions were punishable by humane laws, I
should have answered otherwise, and so the lawyers dispute it: but here the
inquiry being whether the Conscience be obliged, I am to say that the
publication of it does not make it to be a sin; this reveals the action, and
the law declares or makes it to be a sin; for a man is not hanged for theft
unless he be discovered, but if he be, then it is for his theft he is punished,
not for his discovery. The consequent of which is this; that if the action be
against the law, be it never so secret, it is a sin: and here is the advantage
of the wisdom and Economy of God in the verification of humane laws; he
confirms the laws of men, and he binds in heaven what they bind on earth, and
he also knows in earth what is done in the most secret corner, and judges
accordingly.

4. But as for those things which are secret in their own nature, 5.
such which are not only not known, but not cognoscible by humane laws and
judicatories, the case is much more difficult, it being generally taught by
Divines that no humane laws have power to prescribe internal acts; and
consequently that whatever we think or wish, so we do the thing that is
commanded, the law of man is satisfied.

Question.

Whether humane laws can command or forbid inward acts.

But having as well as I could considered the secret of this thing, 6.
I rest finally upon this account. It being certain and confessed that the laws
of Man have power to constitute actions of themselves indifferent, into the
order of virtue and vice, making that to be incest which before the law was
not, and that to be theft which in other countries is lawful, and so in other
instances; if the law does change the action only so as to make it merely to
be an instance of obedience or disobedience, then the law has no power over
internal actions: for man is not the Lord of Consciences and minds, and we are
not tied to obey any man commanding an internal act; his judicatory here is not
competent, his authority is not sufficient. For it serves no end of the
public, and it has no judicatory, no cognizance, and no interest: and it were
as foolish as for a King to sit upon the strand and command the waters not to
flow to his feet. * But if the law of man have changed an action not only to
an instance of obedience or disobedience, but placed it also in the order of
some other virtue or vice, as by changing it to incest, or adultery, or
chastity, or temperance respectively, then the law of man has power over the
Conscience even in the most secret act; not directly, and by the energy of its
own power, but indirectly, collaterally, and by accident, by reason of the laws
of God. The reason is plain: because it is not lawful to commit adultery, or
murder, or incest in our heart; the law therefore that constitutes this action
and makes it to be murder, does consequently oblige the Conscience not so much
as to desire it. Voluntus facti origo est, quae ne tunc quidem liberatur quum
aliquae difficultas perpetrationem intercepit. Ipsa enim sibi imputatur, nec
excusari poterit per illam perficiendi infelicitatem operata quod suum fuerat:
De Poenit.
so Tertullian: The will is the original of action; and is not freed when she
is hindered from doing what she would. Her own act is imputed to her; for though
no event succeeded, yet she did all her part. Thus in the Canon law Clementi^.
1. verum de haereticis, the inquisitor of heretical pravity is excommunicate if
either out of hatred or hope of gain he condemn the innocent, or for love and
favor absolve the criminal: upon which the Gloss observes that the Superior
can punish the sin of the heart, though it never proceed to action; and to this
Gloss Panormitan and Adrianus do consent. Now if it be objected that here is
an action external complicated with the internal, and that the law proceeds
against that, not against this; I answer, that it is certain the law cannot
proceed to sentence against the internal, unless it be some way or in some
degree public: but that which I affirm is, that the law forbids the internal,
or commands it, and that, in case the action be placed in the rank of virtue or
vice distinct from the mere obedience or disobedience, and this is a pregnant
instance of it; for the condemning the innocent is therefore the more forbidden
and the more condemned because it is presumed to proceed from hatred. And
therefore Cato argued well in behalf of the Rhodians, against whom it was moved
in the Senate that a war should be made, because they had some little light
conjectures that they were not well affected to them; and because some of the
Rhodians had moved that they might help Perseus the King of Macedonia, in case
peace could not be obtained for him: Cato made an oration in their behalf,
affirming it to be unreasonable to punish them because they had a mind once to
have made a war. But this was therefore well said of Cato, because there was
no proof that the Rhodians did intend it, and secretly or openly decree it. If
they had intended it, it was penal, and when the intention had been proved, it
might have been more reasonable to proceed to punish their breach of
friendship. And this the Rhodians themselves confessed, that the Romans warred
justly with Perseus for intending a war against them; but he so intended it,
that he did something toward it; but no City, no nation would destroy them who
did nothing toward the evil which they secretly intended. Quis hoc statuit
unquam, aut cui concedi sine summo omnium periculo potest, ut eum jure poterit
occidere a quo metuisse se dicat ne ipse posterius occideretur? said Cicero; He
indulges too much to his fear, and destroies the public, that will kill any
man whom he is pleased to fear, or say that he would first kill him. And the
reason of that is, because there can be no sufficient proof of the secret
thought, without it break forth at least into words and decrees and
preparations. But Injuriam facit, qui facturus est, said Seneca. If it appears
he was about to do a mischief, he is guilty; his secret was criminal: and that
is it which is punished as often as it can.

And this is more evident in the civil Law, 7.
l. si quis non dicam rapere, C. de Episcopis and Clericis. Where the very
thought of ravishing a Virgin is punished. It is true, this thought was
declared by the attempt or address to it: but because it was not consummate, it
is evident that humane Laws bind to more then to or from the external action.
The law that punishes the criminal before he has acted the evil, punishes the
internal principally: for in the address and first preparations nothing is done
but the discovery of the thought; but when the thought is so discovered, and
the action is not done, if the man be punished, it is not for the action, but
for the thought. And to this purpose is that of Cicero in his Oration pro T.
Annio Milone, Nisi forte quia perfecta res non est, non fuit punienda: perinde
quasi exitus rerum, non hominum consilia, legibus vindicentur. Minus dolendum
fuit, re non perfecta, sed puniendum certe nihilo minus. Not to punish the
fault because the mischief was not done is as much as to say, that the laws are
not avengers of evil purposes, but of evil events only. Indeed if the mischief
be not done, we grieve the less; but if it was but intended, we punish it never
the less. And to this Seneca in his controversies gives testimony, Scelera
quoque, quamvis citra exitum subsederunt, puniuntur. The same with that of
Periand^r, (...), not only those that do, but those that would sin are to be
punished. And to this sense all those laws which punish the affection, though
the effect follows not, are to be understood, as Cap. pro humani,. Sacri, de
homicidio l. 6. and l. quisquis, C. ad legem Juliam majestatis; and cap. 1. de
schismaticis,. omnem, l 6. and l. Fugitivus, ff. de verborum signif. l. Divus,
ff. ad leg. Cornel. de Sicariis.

But this is also further manifest in the differences of chance-medly, 8.
manslaughter, and wilful murder; where the action being wholly differenced by
the thought of the heart, proves plainly that the thougts also are punished by
humane Laws ever when they are manifest. And if the Divines and Lawyers would
distinguish in this question the punishment from the crime, the Court external
from the Court of Conscience, they would not err in this article. For although
a man's thoughts without some external action are not punished, because they are
not known; yet they could not be punished when they are known, if they were not
punishable and criminal in themselves even against the laws of man. And
therefore when Ulpian had said, L. 18. ff. de poenis. l. fugitivus. ff. de
verbor. signific.
Cogitationis poenam nemo patitur: Accursius adds, Si statum in finibus
cogitationis est. No man can be punished for his thought; that is, if it
proceeds no further; for then it is known to none but God.

Upon this account we find sometimes in Laws, 9.
commands expressly enjoining the internal action. Thus when the Council of
Lateran had complained of some Clerks and Prelates that either wholly omitted
their office, or said it negligently, it adds, Haec and similia sub poena
suspensionis penitus inhibemus, districte praecipientes in virtute obedientiae
ut Divinum officium nocturnum pariter and diurnum, quantum eis dederit Deus,
studiose celebrent pariter and devote: viz. that they say their office
diligently and devoutly; which because it is an act of the heart as well as of
the outward man, Novel. 135.
it gives a clear evidence in this inquiry. But above all is that Novel of
Justinian, which the late Greek Books have brought to light, it never having
been noted by the Latin interpreters, in which the Emperor commanded that
insolvent debtors who by misfortune, not by their crimes, were made poor, if
they swore their insufficiency, were to be freed from all further trouble; and
the Creditors that refused to obey the edict should pay ten pound of gold; and
(...), for their mere thought of doing otherwise should be put to death. I end
this with the saying of the Jewish Doctors, Quicquid sapientes vetant palam
fieri, id etiam in penetralibus vetitum est, Whatever the wise men forbid to be
done in public, the same must be understood to be forbidden in your closet. It
was the saying of Rabbi Bachai.

RULE VI. Humane Laws, before sufficient promulgation, do not oblige the
Conscience.
AS the faults of Subjects are not cognoscible without publication: 1.
so neither are the wills of Princes. Vide etiam Authent. ut factae novae
constit.
Leges sacratissimae quae constringunt hominum vitas intelligi ab hominibus
debent, says the Law, l. leges, C. de legib. and constit. But in this there is
no difficulty: all that is made is in the assignation of the sufficiency of the
promulgation. A Spanish Lawyer, Selva, De benefic. q. 22. n. 14.
and he alone, so far as I have heard or read, affirms the very solemn
edition of it and declaration in the Court or Council to be sufficient. But as
he speaks it wholly without reason, so he is to be rejected without farther
trouble. Others require one proclamation in one or more places, according to
the greatness of the Province or Jurisdiction; but it can never be agreed
positively how much is enough. Therefore so far as our consciences can be
concerned in it, these following propositions are certain, and they are
sufficient.

1. It is not necessary that laws in their promulgation be so divulged, 2.
as that the notice of them reach every single subject. Not only because in
most laws all persons are not concerned, but also because it is morally
impossible; I mean in a great Province, where the laws are commonly of greatest
concern, and the promulgation more to be regarded and more diligently
endeavored. For laws of men are not like the Sun, searching into all corners;
but as the law it self is such as regards that thing which happens most
commonly, so the promulgation is of a symbolical nature, and can arrive but to
most persons.

2. In all Princely and sweet Governments there must be such a publication of
laws as must be fit to minister to the public necessity and the public duty,
3.
that laws be no snares, but piously intended, prudently conducted,
sufficiently communicated, and reasonably exacted with abatement of all those
deficiencies which are incident and unavoidable to mankind; so that if what be
in Council judged sufficient for promulgation, do not prove so in the event of
things, and in the Province, the defect be put upon the insufficient
publication, not upon the account of disobedience.

3. Be the publication legally sufficient, or not sufficient, 4.
it is certain that the conscience is not tied by the law, till it be known. I
do not say but that the prevarication may be justly punished, because the law
may be published as well as is morally possible, or prudently and civilly is
required, and yet some may inculpably be ignorant of it. But be it so or
otherwise, it is impossible that they who know not of it can obey; and if they
cannot, they cannot be obliged: for that is no law, but madness, which obliges
a man to that which is impossible.

4. The care and sufficiency of publication is wholly incumbent upon the
Lawgiver, 5.
not at all upon the Subject; that is, the Subject is not bound to seek after
the law, but only to see that he do not turn his ear from it, or studiously
decline it, or endeavor to be ignorant. For a law, though it be for good to
the public, yet to the particular being a restraint upon our natural or
political liberty respectively, no man is bound to seek his own fetters, or put
the burden upon his own neck, but to wear it well when it is imposed: but to
refuse to hear is the first act of disobedience; but to hear is the first
instance of obeying; therefore till he has heard, he is obliged to nothing.
This has no limitation or exception but this. If the Subject has heard there
is a law, he is bound to inquire after it, for then it is sufficiently
published: the Lawgiver has done his duty. But before he has heard, it is to
him as if it were not; and that which is not cannot be numbered, cannot be
accounted for. The first is sufficient to oblige him, he is bound because he
knows, the will of the Lawgiver has bound him; but then he must inquire for
his own sake, for otherwise he cannot perform his obligation.

5. Although as to conscience the former measures are certain, 6.
yet the Legislator has power to declare when the promulgation is sufficient
for the nullifying of all contracts intervening, or evacuating privileges, and
changing all exterior events of law; because the being of all these depends
upon the will of the Prince and of his law. Only when this is reduced to
practice, in the matter of contracts, if they were valid by the law of nature,
he that did contract is obliged to stand to it, if the other requires it; but
if it be his own advantage, he is bound to quit it, if the other recedes and
makes use of his advantage. For the law can tie him to suffer inconvenience for
the public interest, but not to do any evil. Thus if Titius contract with
Mavius to carry twenty Tun of wheat from Sicily to Rome, and before the
contract a prohibition of such contracts was legally published, and yet he
heard not of it; he is bound to obey it: but if Mavius, who is like to be the
gainer, stand upon his right of justice and natural consent, Titius must make
him amends, but he must not transport the corn. But this is in case they be not
both Subjects of the same Prince. And the reason of this is plain, because the
stranger has a natural right by justice and stipulation, but the Subject has
a law upon him; therefore the other is not tied to quit that, but the Subject
must obey this: not to do an injury, for no law can oblige him to that; but to
suffer one that is tolerable and is outweighed by the public advantage. But if
they be both the Subjects of the same law, the law that forbids one to make the
contract, does also by implication forbid the other to exact that which is
illegal. So that although the law cannot disoblige Titius from verifying a
contract that is valid in the law of nature; yet Mavins can remit his right,
and the law can tie him to that.

This holds in all things where the parties can give consent to the
invalidating of the contract. 7.
But sometimes they cannot, and then the rule of conscience is, standum est
juri naturali, whatever was ratified by nature and religion must remain for
ever. The Council of Trent makes a saw that all clandestine marriages shall be
null: she publishes the law, and declares it from a certain time to be valid. A
poor Vine-dresser in the Valtoline hears nothing of it, but gets the daughter
of his Master the Farmer with child after contract per verba de praesenti. The
law is urged upon him; the parties are both threatened, and are in that fright
willing to recede. But they were told by a prudent Confessor, that they could
not consent to any such separation: and he told them truly. For in marriage
there is a necessitude contracted by a law of nature, and not only a mutual
right transmitted to each other, but there is a band of Religion, a Sacramental
tie, or relation that God has joined, and no man can put asunder. But until
the contract is passed so far as that it is become a marriage in the law and
state of nature, the prohibition ought to prevail upon them.

Lastly, 8.
in privileges there is no difficulty, because the law is not bound to give
any at all; and therefore many restrain them at any time, without giving a
reason. Thus if a law were made that all illegitimate children that were born
after the death of the Emperor Maximilian should be incapable of a Prebend or
benefice in a Church; he that heard not of the law might justly be put out
after solemn investiture. For no man is injured, because he has not a favor
done him.

RULE VII. That a law should oblige the Conscience, does not depend upon the
acceptance of the Law by the people.
THis Rule has suffered great prejudice, 1.
not only by the contrary opinion of the Civilians and Canonists, who in very
great numbers oppose it, but by all persons almost who live under Governments
Democratical, or do not well consider the powers and consequents of
government. But the case in short is this;

All Governments in the world did either begin right or wrong. 2.
If right, it was by Divine appointment, or by the multiplication of the
posterity of a Patriarch, and the (...) increase of Paternal Government. This
is the natural way, and this is founded upon natural reason, and a Divine
Commandment. This has in it no evil, and no question, and it is the just
beginning of Monarchy, it produces no other Government.

But if the Government comes not this way, 3.
it comes in wrong. Either from tumults, by necessity and evil experience being
forced to permit and establish an order and government; or directly by war
and violence; or else in the destitution of a Governor when all are left to
themselves, and none has power over them, they may do what they list, and
order things as they please, and part with as much power as they think fit, and
keep some to themselves, and confound all politic principles, and divide
power, as two earnest disputants do divide the truth when they have torn her
in pieces, each part running away with that share that comes next his hand.

Now from these beginnings of Governments several Republics and Principalities
have been established; 4.
and when it happened that any famous government entered the wrong way, they
became exemplary to others in their policy and in their principles, and made
their actions become rules to others. Thus it was that the Roman people,
keeping the legislative power in their own hands, made Kings and Consuls and
officers at their pleasure, but their consent was always demanded when a law
was to be made, as is affirmed by Asconius Pedianus in orationem pro C.
Cornelio, and by Budaeus and Zasius in l. 2. ff. de origin juris. These laws
were made in a convocation of the people in thirty Courts, and were called
Curiatae, as is affirmed by Suetonius in Augusto, and in Cicero in his epistles
to Lentulus: they were also called Populares by Cicero in his orations. Now
this people so largely reigning over the world, and being exemplary by their
wisdom and their laws, did easily transmit this license unto the people of
most Nations, who needed but little teaching to bridle the power of their
Princes, to which they were but too much tempted by that libido regnandi, that
lust of empire which possesses the greatest part of the world; and by their own
strength, which they often made their Kings to feel, and would not lend to them
in their needs but upon hard conditions. * Add to all this, that many princes
have been gentle and kind, and many wise, and would not put a bridle upon such
an untamed beast without their own consent; not only that they might obey more
willingly, but lest they should not obey at all, as knowing it to be better
that they should be ruled as they please, then not at all. -- Libertatis
servaveris umbram
Si quicquid jubeare velis --
This fantastic liberty the people would seldom be without; and they must
have what they were resolved on; for when they please, they are all Kings.

Upon the account of these and some other causes it is come to pass that in
many places laws have their binding power only by the consent of the people; 5.
in their tribes and Courts, or by their representatives, or by their manners
and customs: and from hence from these sayings of some very wise men; Lex
nullam vim obligandi habet nisi ex more; Lib. 2. Polit. c. 6. leges did. 4. l.
dequibus ff. de legibus.
so Aristotle: and, Leges promulgatione constitui, firmari autem usu, says
Gratian: and the civil law most expressly, Ipsae leges nulla alia causa nos
tenent quam quod judicio populi receptae sunt, The reception and approbation of
the people is the only firmament and Sanction of the law. Now that the civil
law says it, it was ex more Romanorum; among the old Romans it always was so:
and Aristotle speaks at the rate of him who had been bred under the popular
government of the Greeks, and therefore it is no wonder that any of them speaks
so: but as for the words of Gratian, Laurentius and the Archdeacon expound
them to mean that the laws receive from the use of the people firmitatem
stabilitatis, non authoritatis; that is, de facto they are made more firm and
lasting by the consent and manners of the people, but not de jure more
obliging; Apolog. c. 4.
according of that of Tertullian, Neque civis fideliter legi obsequitur
ignorans quale sit quod ulciscitur lex. Nulla lex sibi soli conscientiam
justitiae suae debet, sed eis a quibus obsequium expectat: caeterum suspecta
lex est quae probari se non vult; improba autem si non probata dominetur. A
Citizen does not faithfully obey that law (meaning of going to war) who knows
not what that is which is to be punished. For that a law is just is owing in
part to him that is to obey it. That law is to be suspected which will not
endure a trial; but if being tried it be rejected, it cannot prevail without
injustice.

Having now by this narrative laid open the secret and foundation of this
opinion, 6.
and prevented the objections that can be made, the Rule is certain and easy.
The consent of the people gives no authority to the law; and therefore is no
way necessary to the Sanction and constitution, save only to prevent violence,
rebellion and disobedience. But because I am not writing rules of policy, but
rules of conscience, I am to say, that if the legislative power be in the
Prince, that is, if he be supreme, he is to decree the law; but wherever the
authority be, that authority is derived from God, and is only less then him:
and although a horse sometime cannot be ruled without stroakings and meat and
gentle usages, yet for all that his rider in his Master: and he that said, obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as to the supreme, etc. did not
appoint the supreme to rule by a precarious power; and if he who has authority
makes a just law, either the people are bound to accept the law, or they
despise the authority. And indeed it is a contradiction in the terms, that a
law be imposed, and yet that it be no law of it self; that is, that the effect
of the cause should be a necessary condition in the cause it self; and that
it is own work is nothing, unless what it does work give it force. It must be a
law before they accept it, and if it be a law they are bound to accept it; and
therefore their accepting cannot make it a law.

In popular governments the people have their suffrages in the legislative; 7.
but then it is because they govern: but when they have not the legislative, he
that has it must not ask them leave to use it, when God has given him power.
They indeed who suppose Kings to be trustees and ministers of the people have
some pretense (if they supposed true) to affirm the acceptance of the people
to be necessary. But yet if they did suppose true, it were indeed a pretense
but no more. For when the King is chosen, and is by the people (that I may use
the expression of Tiberius) tanta temque libera potestate instructus, invested
with a Princely power, and the legislative; he, by himself or by his Senate,
according to the constitution of the province, is to make the law, and to
punish them that break it, and not to ask them if they will please to obey it.
Lex institutir cum promulgatur, says the Authentic: and therefore whosoever
does not obey, whether it be a single person or a multitude, they sin against
God; it is disobedience in a single person, and rebellion in the multitude. All
which is true with the provisos of the former rules, that the laws be upon all
their just accounts in all other things obligatory.

This Rule does also fail in all arbitrary conventions and precarious
governments; 8.
in such which have no coercitive power but what is by voluntary concession;
such which can convene and dissolve at pleasure, as Colleges and Fraternities.
For as they meet at pleasure, so they must be governed as they please; their
power comes not from God, but from man; and their authority is equivocal.

Some insert one case here, 9.
saying that if a law be refused by the greater part of the people, then single
^^sons are excused, because it is to be supposed that the Prince cares not
(...) single persons observe the law, since so little will serve no interest.
But if this were true, yet there is in it so much caution to be used, so many
provisos, and so much probability to the contrary, that it were as good that it
were not true; for it cannot give rest or peace to the Conscience. For 1.
whether the Prince do secretly give leave or no, is a presumption of infinite
uncertainty. 2. The contrary may very well be supposed; for he that is troubled
at the rebellion of many will not give leave to one to disobey. 3. If these few
single persons do submit, they become good examples, and are confessors for
the reputation of the Kings wisdom and authority. 4. What is evil in the whole
is so in every particular; because the people is but an aggregate body of
single persons. 5. We must not follow a multitude to do evil: and all
rebellion is of that nature, that it is as the sin of witchcraft; and who would
be a witch because all the Country is so? 6. He that partakes of other men's
sins shall also partake of their punishment. Upon these accounts, I judge it
very unsafe for any single person to resist a just law of a just superior, upon
hope of escaping in the Crowd. Rule 3.
But this Rule is only true when the law is just and good for public profit
and usefulness of the people. For if it be an unreasonable law, it binds not as
a law, but as by promise and contract; that is, it does not bind by the
sanction of the law, but the acceptance of the people. And so the ancient
lawyers are to be understood; Lex praecepti tollitur, Panormit. c. cum olim. de
cleric. conjug.
si moribus utentium non recipitur, The obligation of the law is taken off,
unless it be received into the manners of the Subjects. But the instance tells
in what sense this is true. The Pope and Council cannot command continence to a
certain sort of persons after promotion against their wills; quia continentia
est res quae potest persuaderi, imperari autem non, Because continence is a
thing that may be persuaded, but not commanded. The matter of the law is to be
ordered according to the measures of the third Rule; but supposing that, this
Rule is certain.

RULE VIII. Humane laws of indifferent matter do not oblige the Conscience of
the Subjects out of the dominions of the Superior.
EXtra territorium jus dicenti, 1.
non paretur, impune, is a famous saying in the Canon law, Cap. 2. de
constitut. n. 6.
A man may safely disobey the law of his Prelate if he be out of the Diocese.
And the reason is, because beyond his Diocese he has no jurisdiction; L. omnes
populi de justitia and jure.
and beyond his jurisdiction a Prince has no power. Lex est jus proprium
civitatis, says the law; The law has no power beyond it is own city. Thus
anciently, in the Province of Canterbury the people did not fast upon S. Marks
day; but if they were within the Province of York they were tied to the common
law, or custom of the Church besides. Thus also it is in maritime places,
especially in places of public Trade and Merchandise: if the several Subjects
should keep the several Laws of their own Princes, it would cause great
confusion and disorder upon the place of Trade; and since it is certain that
strangers must live by the laws of the Country where they sojourn, it is
certain they are not tied to the laws of their own, because they may be
contrary.

1. But this has diverse limitations. 2.
For 1. It does not hold in the substantial matters of religion, where the
religions of the Country differ. It is not lawful for a Subject of England to
go to Mass in a foreign Country; not only upon supposition that the office is
suspicious or to be blamed by the measures of the Divine Law, but if the laws
of our Country have upon other prudent and just considerations forbidden it.
The sons of the Church of England professing under the government Episcopal may
not lawfully communicate in the Huguenot Churches with them that believe
Episcopacy to be Antichristian or unlawful, because this does relate to the
evil and detriment of those laws and that government and that authority under
which we still are tied. But in the ceremonial and ritual part of religion,
where the religion is the same, we are not tied abroad to our Country customs.
A Subject of the Church of England may stand at the Holy Communion, or eat it
in leavened bread, if he come into Protestant Countries that have any such
custom: and the reason of this is, because the contrary would give scandal, to
which our own laws neither do nor can oblige abroad; and if any be offended at
our different ceremonies at home, he must look to it, we are not concerned in
any thing, but to obey our Superior, and quietly to render a reason to our
brethren.

2. This Rule does not hold in such laws which are the specification of the
Divine laws. 3.
Thus if a Subject of England should be in Spain, and there see his Daughter
dishonored, or his Wife consent to her shame, and take her in Adultery; he may
not kill her, though in Spain it be lawful for them to do it. The reason is,
because she is not a Subject of Spain, but has an habitual relation to
England, and therefore it is Murder if it be done by an English Subject.
Concerning all his own Subjects, the Prince of the Country and the Legislative
is to give limits to the indefinite laws of God; and the reason is that which
S. Paul gives, because he who has the rule over them is to give an account of
their Souls. Every law therefore is to acquit or condemn herown Subjects: and
therefore if a Spaniard does dishonor the bed of an English Subject in Spain,
it is lawful there to kill him; because his own Princes law condemns him, and
gives leave to the injured person to be Executioner. All these particulars rely
upon the same reason.

3. This Rule does not hold, 4.
when though the Subject be abroad, yet the action does relate to his own
Country. Thus it is not lawful abroad to coin or counterfeit the money of his
Country, to rail upon his Prince, to prejudice his Subjects, to violate his
honor, to disgrace his Nation, to betray the secrets and discover the Counsels
of his Prince. Because the evil done out of the territory being an injury to
them within, is as if it were done within. When the dispute was between the
Athenians and Thebans about their confines, and the parties stood at a little
distance, disputing and wrangling about the breadth of an acre of ground,
Timotheus shoots an arrow and kills a young Theban Gentleman. The Thebans
demand that Timotheus be put to death by the laws of Athens, as being their
Subject: they refuse to do so, but deliver Timotheus to the Thebans, giving
this reason, He shot the arrow within the Athenian limit, but it did the
mischief within the territory of Thebes; and where the evil is done, there and
by them let the criminal be punished. Being abroad is no cuse in this case. If
a Subject shoots an arrow into his own Country, though he bent his bow abroad,
at home he shall find the string.

4. If the action be something to be done at home, 5.
the Subject abroad is bound to obey the summons of the law. When Henry the
second of England commanded all Prelates and Curates to reside upon their
Dioceses and charges, Thomas Becket of Canterbury was bound in conscience,
though he was in France, to repair to his Province at home. The sum of all is
this, A law does not oblige beyond the proper territory, unless it relate to
the good or evil of it. For then it is done at home to all real events of
nature, and to all intents and purposes of law. For if the law be affirmative,
commanding something to be done at home, at home this omission is a sin: Qui
non facit quod facere debet, videtur facere adversus ea quae non facit, L. Qui
non facit ff. de regulis juris.
says the Law, The omission is a sin there where the action ought to have been
done. But if the Law be nagative, Qui facit quod facere non debet, non videtur
facere id quod facere jussus est. He that does what he is forbidden to do is
answerable to him who has power to command him to do it.

This Rule thus explicated is firm; 6.
and is to be extended to exempt or privileged places, according to that
saying of the Lawyers, Locus exemptus habetur pro extraneo, He that lives in an
exempt place, lives abroad.

By the proportions of this Rule it is easy to answer concerning strangers, 7.
whether they be bound by the Laws of the Nation where they pass or traffic.
For in all things where they are not obliged by their own Prince, they are by
the stranger, and that upon the same account; for if they who are abroad are
not ordinarily bound by the Laws of their Country (except in the cases limited)
it is because the jurisdiction and dominion of their Prince goes not beyond his
own land; and in such cases the place is more then the person: but therefore it
must go so far, and be the person what he will, yet in the territory he is
under the law of that Prince. He is made so by that place. It is Lex terrae,
the Law of the land in which he is: and in the peace of that he shall have
peace, as God said to the Jews concerning the land of their Captivity.

RULE IX. Obedience to Laws is to be paid according to what is commanded, not
according to what is best.
WHen Lacon was fighting prosperously, 1.
and had prevailed very far upon his enemies, Vide A. Gellium lib. 1. cap. 13.
it happened that a retreat was sounded just as he was lifting up his hand to
smite a considerable person; he turned his blow aside and went away, giving
this reason to him that asked him why, It is better to obey then to kill an
enemy. But when Crassus the Roman General sent to Athens to an Engineer a
command to send him such a piece of timber toward the making of a battery, he
sent him one which he supposed was better; but his General caused him to be
scourged for his diligence: and Torquatus Manlius being Consul commanded his
son not to fight that day with the Enemy, but he espying a great advantage
fought and beat him and won a glorious victory, for which he was crowned with a
triumphant laurel, but for his disobedience lost his head. It is not good to be
wiser then the laws; and sometimes we understand not the secret reason of the
Princes command, or the obedience may be better then a good turn, or a better
counsel; which is very often ill taken, unless it be required. Corrumpi atque
dissolvi officium omne imperantis ratus si quis ad id quod facere jussus est,
non obsequio debito, sed consilio non desiderato respondeat, said Crassus in A.
Gellius.

Thus also it is in the observation of the Divine Commandments: 2.
when God has declared his will, and limited our duty to circumstances and
particulars, he will not be answered by doing that which we suppose is better.
We must not be running after Sermons, when we should be laboring to provide
meat for our family: for besides that it is direct disobedience in the case now
put, there is also an error in the whole affair; for that which we think is
better then the Commandment, is not better: and this God declared in the case
of Saul, Obedience is better then sacrifice. No work is better then that which
God appoints.

3. This is to be understood so that it is not only left to our liberty, 3.
but it is also rewardable, for the Subject to prevent a Commandment, and to
excel the measures of the Law in the matter of a Commandment, when to do so
we know will be accepted, and is to the pleasure and use of the Prince. Thus
Astyages preferred Chrysantas before Hystaspes, because he did not only obey
as Hystaspes did, but understood the mind of the Prince, and when he knew what
would please him, did it of his own accord. But then this is upon the same
account, it is obedience, only it is early and it is forward.

This also is to be added, 4.
that if the choice of the Subject differing from the command of the Prince be
very prosperous and of great benefit, the Prince does commonly ex post facto
allow the deed; that is, he does not punish it. P. Crassus Mutius and T.
Manlius did otherwise; but they were severe and great examples. But when it is
not punished, it is not because it does not deserve it, but because it is
pardoned: for if it should miscarry, it would not escape vengeance: and
therefore though the prosperous event be loved, yet it came in at a wrong door,
and the disobedience was criminal. (...), Masters are to command, but the
province of servants is to obey, says S. Chrysostom.

This Rule is to be understood according to the intention, 5.
not according to the letter of the law; for if the intention of it be that
which is better, it is evident that is to be done which is better in the
intention, not that which is commanded in the letter. But of this in the
Chapter of interpretation of Laws.

CHAP. II. Of Laws Penal and Tributary.
RULE. I. It is lawful for Christian Magistrates to make penal Laws, not only
pecuniary and of restraint, but of loss of member and life it self.
WHatsoever is neccessary is just; 1.
that is, that must be done which cannot be avoided: and therefore the power of
the Magistrate in punishing the transgressors of their laws of peace, and
order, and interest, is infinitely just Nemo sibi putabit turpe quod aliis fuit
fructu^sum. Patercul. lib. 2. in princ.
; for without a coercitive power there can be no government, and without
government there can be no communities of men; a herd of wolves is quieter and
more at one then so many men, unless they all had one reason in them, or have
one power over them. Ancus Rex primus Carcerem in Romano foro aedificavit, ad
terrorem increscentis audaciae, says Livy. King Ancus seeing impiety grow bold,
did erect a prison in the public markets. When iniquity was like to grow
great, then that was grown necessary. And it is observed that the Macedonians
call Death (...) from the Hebrew word DAN, which signifies a Judge, as
intimating that Judges are appointed to give sentences upon criminals in life
and death. 1 Chronicles. 29. 12.
And therefore God takes upon himself the title of a King and a Judge, 1 Timothy
6. 15. Psalm. 82. 6.
of a Lord and Governor; and gives to Kings and Judges the title of Gods, and
to Bishops and Priests the style of Angels.

But here I will suppose that Magistracy is an ordinance of God, 2.
having so many plain Scriptures for it; and it being by S. Paul affirmed, that
he bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.
and that they who have done evil ought to fear; and of himself he professed
that if he had done ought worthy of death he did not refuse to die; and a
caution given by S. Peter, that Christians should take care that they do not
suffer as malefactors: and it being made a note of heretics that they are
Traitors, that they are murmurers, that they despise dominion, that they speak
evil of dignities; and that we are commanded to pray for Kings and all that are
in authority, for this reason, because they are the appointed means that men
should live a peaceable and a godly life; for piety, and peace, and plenty too
depend upon good Governments: and therefore Apollo Pythius told the
Lacedemonian Ambassadors that if they would not call home Plistonax their King
from banishment and restore him to his right, they should be forced to till
their ground with a silver Plough; that is, they should have scarcity of corn
in their own Cities, and be forced to buy their grain to relieve the famine of
their Country: for so the event did expound the Oracle; they grew poor and
starved because they unjustly suffered their King to live in exile. Add to
these, that we are often commanded to obey them that have the rule over us; to
be subject to every ordinance of man; that Rulers are not a terror to good
works but to the evil, and many more to equal purposes.

Neither ought the precept of charity and forgiveness, 3.
which Christ so often, so earnestly, so severely presses, evacuate the power
of Princes. For the precept of forgiving offenders does not hinder parents from
correcting their offending children; nor Masters from chastising their
rebellious servants; nor the Church from excommunicating them that walk
disorderly: these things rely upon plain Scriptures, and upon necessity, and
experience; and they do evince thus much without any further dispute, that
some punishment may stand with the precept of forgiveness; or at least, if he
who is injured may not punish without breach of charity, yet some one else may.
And if it be permitted to the power of man to punish a criminal without breach
of charity; the power of the Magistrate must be without all question; and that
such a power can consist with charity there is no doubt, when we remember that
the Apostles themselves and the primitive Churches did deliver great Criminals
over to the power of Satan to be buffeted, even to the destruction of the
flesh, that their Souls might be saved in the day of the Lord. S Paul delivered
Elymas to blindness, and S. Peter gave Ananias and Saphira to a corporal death.

But the great Case of Conscience is this. 4.
Although all punishments less then death may like paternal corrections consist
with charity (for they may be disciplines and emendations) yet in death there
is no amendment; and therefore to put a man to death flagrante crimine, before
he has mortified his sin, or made amends for it; that is, before it is
pardoned, and consequently to send him to hell, is the most against charity in
the world, and therefore no man has power to do it: for God never gave to any
man a power to dispense justice to the breach of charity; and that dispensation
which sends a man to Hell, is not for edification, but for destruction.

To this I answer, 5.
1. That it is true that whatsoever is against charity is not the effect of
justice; for both of them are but imitations and transcripts of the Divine
attributes and perfections, which cannot be contrary to each other. But when
the faults and disorders of mankind have entangled their own and the public
affairs, they may make that necessary to them, which in the first order and
intention of things was not to be endured. Thus we cut off a leg and an arm to
save the whole body; and the public magistrate, who is appointed to defend
every man's rights, must pull an honest man's house to the ground to save a town
or a street: and peace is so dear, so good, that for the confirming and
perpetuity of it, he may commence a war which were otherwise intolerable. If
therefore any evil comes by such ministeries of justice, they who introduced
the necessity must thank themselves. For it is necessary it should be so;
though it be but a suppositive and introduced necessity; only he that
introduced it, is the cause of the evil; not he that is to give the best remedy
that he has.

2. No man is to answer for an accidental effect that is consequent to 6.
his duty. In omni dispositione attenditur quod principaliter agitur, says the
law, l. si quis nec causam, ff. si certum petatur. I am to look to what is
principally designed, not what accidentally can happen. If I obey God, it is no
matter who is offended. If I see that my neighbor will envy me for doing good,
and his eye will be evil because I am good, I am not to omit the good, for fear
his Soul perish; when my good is rather apt to do him good then evil: he is
to answer for it, not I, for nothing that I do makes him evil, he makes
himself so by his own choice. There are many men that turn the grace of God
into wantonness; and abuse the long suffering and patience of God, and turn
that into occasions of sin which God meant for the opportunities and
endearments of repentance; but if God should leave to be gracious to mankind in
the same method, out of charity and compliance with the interest of the Souls
of such miserable persons, as they would be never the better, so the other
parts of mankind would be infinitely the worse.

3. It is true that Charity is the duty of every Christian; 7.
but as all Christians are not to express it in the same manner, so there are
some expressions of charity which may become some persons, and yet be the
breach of another duty: and some may become our wishes which can never be
reduced to act; and because that is all we can do, it is all we are obliged to
do. When Vertagus was condemned to die for killing the brother of Aruntius
Priscus; the poor Father of the condemned man came and begged for the life of
his miserable son; but Priscus out of the love of his murdered brother begged
with the same importunity that he might not escape; and both their effects were
the effects of charity. The charity of a Prelate and a Minister of religion is
another thing then the charity of a Prince. A Mother signifies her love one way
and a Father another; she by fondness and tender usages, he by severe counsels
and wise education; and when the Minister of religion takes care concerning the
Soul of the poor condemned man, the Prince takes care that he shall do no more
mischief, and increase his sad account with God. The Prince and the Prelate are
both of them Curates of Souls and Ministers of Godliness; but the Prince
ministers by punishing the evil doer and rewarding the virtuous, and the
Prelate by exhortation and doctrine, by reproof and by prayer, by Sacraments
and discipline, by the key of power and the key of knowledge. The effect of this
consideration is this; that the magistrate by doing justice in the present case
does not do against charity; because he does minister to charity in the
capacity and proper obligation of a Magistrate, when he does his own work,
which being ordained for good and not for evil, the office is then most
charitable and most proper for him, when he ministers to charity in his own way
that God has appointed him. By his justice he ministers to the public Good,
and that is his office of charity. That is his work; let others look to their
share.

4. The cutting off of a Malefactor is some charity to his person, 8.
though a sad one; for besides that it prevents many evils, and forces him to a
speedy recollection, and a summary repentance, and intense acts of virtue by
doubling his necessity; it does also cause him to make amends to the law; and
that oftentimes stands him in great stead before the Tribunal of Gods justice;
paullum supplicii satis est Patri; God is sometimes pleased to accept of a
small punishment for a great offense; and his anger many times goes not beyond
a temporal death, and the cutting off some years of his life.

5. That which concerns the Magistrate is, 9.
that he be just and charitable too. Justice of it self is never against
charity; but some actions of supposed charity may be against justice. Therefore
the Magistrate in that capacity is tied to no charity but the charity of
justice, the mercies of the law; that is, that he abate of the rigor as much as
he can, that he make provisions for the Soul of the criminal such as are fit
for his need, that if he can delay, he do not precipitate executions. In what
is more, the supreme, the lawgiver is to take care, and to give as much leave
to the ministers of justice as can consist with the public interest. For here
it is that there is use of that proposition, that all men are not tied to all
the exterior kinds and expressions of charity, but as they are determined
accidentally. It will not be supposed that the Judge is uncharitable if he do
not preach to the condemned criminal; or if he do not give him money after
sentence, or visit him in prison, or go to pray with him at the block; these
are not the portions of his duty: but as his justice requires him to condemn
him; so his charity exacts of him as Judge nothing but the mercies of the law.

6. That which is necessary to be done, 10.
is not against any man's duty, or any precept of Christianity. Now that some
sorts of persons should be put to death is so necessary, that if it were not
done it would be certainly, directly and immediately a very great
uncharitableness; and the Magistrate should even in this instance be more
uncharitable then he can be supposed to be in putting the criminal to death.
For a highway thief and murderer if he be permitted does cut off many persons
who little think of death; and such as are innocent as to the Commonwealth,
are yet very guilty before God: for whose Souls and the space of whose
repentance there is but very ill provision made, if they may live who shall
send many Souls to hell, by murdering such persons who did not watch and stand
in readiness against the sad day of their sudden arrest. If all such persons
were to be free from afflictive punishments, the commonwealth would be no
society of peace, but a direct state of war, a state most contrary to
governments; but if there were any other less then death, the galleys and the
Mines, and the prisons would be nothing but nurseries of villains, which by
their numbers would grow as dangerous as a herd of Wolves and Lions: and if
ever they should break into a war, like Spartacus and his rabble, who knows
how many Souls should be sent to Hell for want of time to finish their
repentance?

7. If the condemned Criminal had never any time to repent, 11.
if he had never thrown away any opportunities of salvation, he had never come
to that pass; and if he have, who is bound to give him as much as he will need?
And if it be unlawful for a magistrate to put a criminal to death that has not
sufficiently repented, then no villain shall ever die by the public hand of
justice; and the worse the man is, the longer he shall live, and the better he
shall escape: for in this case, if he resolves privately that he never will
repent, he has blunted the edge of the sword, and weakened the arm of justice
for ever that she shall never strike.

8. God has given a commission to Magistrates which they must not prevaricate:
12.
if therefore a Criminal falls under the rods and axes of the Consuls who are
Gods Ministers for good to them that do well, and for evil to them that do
evil; it is not the Magistrate who is to be blamed, but the hand of God that is
to be revered, who by this hand cuts him off, and it may be therefore thus cuts
him off because he will give him no longer time. However the Magistrate is to
look to his rule, not to rare, and accidental events; which are only in the
power of the Divine providence and in the will of the Man to prevent.

9. No man can say that a condemned Criminal that makes the best use of his
time after sentence, 13.
or after his just fears of it, or after the apprehension of the probabilities
of it, shall certainly be damned for want of more time. For as no man knows
just how much time is necessary; so neither can he tell how deep the repentance
of the Man is, nor yet how soon God will return to mercy. Therefore upon so
great uncertainties, and the presumption and confidences relying upon such a
secret, to omit a certain duty is no way allowable. It is true there are
amongst some wise and pious persons great fears in this case; but fear is very
good when it is made use of to good purposes, to obstruct the course of sin,
but not the course of justice. And some men fear in other cases very bad; which
yet ought not to be made use of to preserve the lives of Murderers. Some fear
that all Papists shall be damned, and some say that all Protestants are in as
bad condition; and yet he that thinks so, would suppose the case too far
extended if it might not be consistent, with charity to put (for examples sake)
the gunpowder Traitors to death, till they had changed their religion.
Whatsoever we fear, we are to give our brethren warning of it while it is time
for them to consider; but these doubtful disputes must not be used as artifices
to evacuate the purposes and defensatives of laws. And since the Magistrates
cannot know what the sentence of God concerning such persons shall be, they may
hope well as readily as ill, and then there is no pretense to arrest the
sentence beyond the prudent and charitable periods of the law.

10. No change in government, 14.
no alteration of laws, no public sentences are to be made or altered upon the
account of any secret Counsel of God; but they are to proceed to issue upon the
account of rules, and measures of choice, and upon that which is visible, or
proved, that which is seen and heard, that which God commands and public
necessities require; for otherwise there can be no rule, no orderly
proceedings, no use of wise discourses, but chance and fear and irregular
contingencies must overrule all things.

11. The Magistrate gives sentence against Criminals for single acts, 15.
not for vicious habits; for concerning these he has nothing to do, and if
the Criminal perish for these, it is only chargeable upon his own account. But
if by the hand of justice he dies for a single act; the shorter time that is
usually allowed to those that are appointed to die may be so sufficient that if
the Criminal make full use of it, his case is not so desperate, as that the
objection can prevail: for if there be nothing else to hinder him, it may be
very well; but if there be any thing else, that he and not the Magistrate was
first to have considered; for himself knew of it, the Magistrate did not.

12. Every man that lives under government knows the conditions of it, 16.
those public laws, and the manners of execution; and that he who is surprised
in his sin by the Magistrate, shall be cut off like him who by a sudden
sickness falls into the hands of God. It is a sudden death, which every man
ought to have provided for; only in this case it is more certain, and to be
expected: and he that knows this to be his condition, if he will despise the
danger, See the Doctr. and Practice of Repentance, chap. 5. sect. 5. p. 280.
when he falls into it, cannot complain of the justice of the law, but of his
own folly which neglected life, and chose death and swift destruction.

Though from these considerations it appears that the pretense of charity
cannot evacuate that justice which has given commission to all lawful
Magistrates, 17.
and warrant to all capital sentences, and authority to all just wars, in
which it is more then probable many will be killed that are not very well
prepared: yet this power of inflicting capital punishments must not be reduced
to act in trifling instances, for the loss of a few shillings or for every
disobedience to command; it must not be done, but in the great and unavoidable
necessities of the Commonwealth. For every Magistrate is also a Man; and as he
must not neglect the care and provisions of that, so neither the kindnesses and
compassion of this. Nothing can make recompense for the life of a man, but the
life of a better, or the lives of many, or a great good of the whole community.
But when any of these is at stake, it is fit the innocent be secured by the
condemnation of the Criminal. And this was excellently disputed by Cicero in
his argument against Calenus upon this very question. ^hilippi^. 8.
Hoc interest inter meam sententiam and tuam: ego nolo quenquam civem
committere ut morte multandus sit; tu etiamsi commiserit, etiam conservandum
putas. In corpore si quid ejusmodi est quod reliquo corpori noceat, uri
secarique patiamur, ut membrorum aliquod potius quam totum corpus intereat. Sic
in Reip. corpore ut totum salvum sit, quicquid est pestiferum amputetur. Dura
vox; multo illa durior: salvi sint improbi, deleantur innocents, honesti,
boni, tota Respublica. Cicero would have no Citizen deserve to die; but Calenus
would have none die though he did deserve it. But Cicero though it reason that
as in the body natural we cut off an arm to save the whole, so in the body
politic we do the same, that nothing remain alive that will make the other
die. It is a hard sentence: it is true, but this is a harder. Let the wicked be
safe; and let the innocent, the good, the just men, the whole commonwealth be
destroyed.

This we see is natural reason, 18.
but it is more then so; it is also a natural law, Genesis 9. 6.
expressed and established by God himself. He that sheddeth man's blood, in man,
or by man, shall his blood be shed: which words are further explicated by the
Chaldee Paraphrast, Qui effuderit sanguinem hominis cum testibus, juxta
sententiam Judicum sanguis ejus fundetur, He that sheds the blood of man with
witnesses, his blood shall be shed by the sentence of the Judge. For the
Majesty of the supreme Prince or Judge. -- justi
Vim terroris habet, procul an prope, praesto vel absens:
Semper terribilis, semper metuenda, suoque
Plena vigore manet, Lib. 4
nullique impune premenda
Creditur, and semper cunctis, and ubique timetur.
said Guntherus with greater truth then elegance: he has the force of a just
terror in all places, at all times, and upon all persons. And in pursuance of
this law all communities of men have comported themselves, as knowing
themselves but Ministers of the Divine sentence; and that which is the voice of
all the world is the voice of nature, and the voice of God. The sum of these
things I give in the words of S. Austin. Non ipse occidit qui ministerium debet
jubenti, sicut adminiculum gladius est utenti. Ideo nequaquam contra hoc
praeceptum fecerunt, quo dictum est, Non occides, qui Deo authore bella
gesserunt, aut personam gerentes publicae potestatis, secundum ejus leges, hoc
est, justissimae rationis imperium, sceleratos morte puniverunt. They who make
just wars, and those public persons who according to the laws put malefactors
to death, do not break the Commandment which says, Thou shall not kill. For
as the sword is not guilty of murder which is the instrument of just
executions, so neither is the man that is the Minister of the Judge, nor the
Judge who is the Minister of God; (...), God Minister of revenge and anger: and
by fear to restrain the malice of evil men, and to prevent mischief to the
good, is the purpose of authority and the end of laws. Lib. 4. Etymol. c. 21.
and habetur. did. 4. can. factae sunt leges
So Isidore, Factae sunt leges ut earum metu humana coerceatur audacia, tutaque
esset inter improbos innocentia, and in ipsis improbis formidato suplicio
refraenaretur nocendi facultas. Fear is the beginning of wisdom, and fear is
the extinction and remedy of folly; and therefore the laws take care by the
greatest fear, the fear of death, to prevent or suppress the greatest
wickedness.

RULE II. Penal laws do sometimes oblige the guilty person to the suffering
the punishment, even before the sentence and declaration of the Judge.
THat this is true concerning Divine Laws is without peradventure: 1.
not only because the power of God is supreme, mere, absolute, and eternal,
and consequently can oblige to what, and by what measure, and in what manner,
and to what purposes he please; but also because we see it actually done in the
laws and constitutions both Mosaical and Evangelical.

He that struck out an eye or tooth from a servant was bound to give him his
liberty: 2.
that is, Exodus 21. 25, 26.
as his servant was a loser, so must he that caused it; the man lost his tooth,
and the Master lost the man; he gains his liberty that lost an eye. Now that
this was to be done by the Master himself without compulsion from the Judge, is
therefore more then probable, because God who intended remedy to the injured
servant had not provided it, if he left the matter to the Judge, to whom the
servant could have no recourse without his Master please; and if he give him
leave to go, it is all one as doing of it himself, for he that gives leave
that himself be compelled, first chooses the things, and call is in aid from
abroad to secure the thing at home. But therefore God bound the conscience of
the man, tying him under pain of his own displeasure that the remedy be given,
and the penalty suffered and pai'd under the proper sentence of the obliged
criminal.

To the same purpose was that law made for him that lies with a woman in the
days of her separation, 3.
he shall be unclean until the evening; Now that this was not to be inflicted
by the Judge, but that the guilty person should himself be the executioner of
the penalty, is therefore certain, because by another law concerning the same
legal uncleanness it was decreed, that the fact shall be capital, Lib. 2. chap.
2. Rule 3. n. 8.
that is, if it come before the Judge: of which I have already given account.

Thus also God imposed upon him that eat of the holy things unwittingly, 4.
the burden of paying the like, and a fifth part besides for punishment of his
negligence and want of caution. Levit. 22. 14.
This himself was to bring, together with the price of redemption or expiation.
Now this being done against his will, might also be done without the
observation of any other; and yet upon the discovery he was thus to act his own
amends and penalty.

And indeed the very expense of Sacrifices, 5.
to the bringing of which the criminals were sentenced by the law, is
sufficient demonstration of this inquiry; for it was no small burden to them,
and diminution of their estates, to take long journeys, and bring fat beasts
and burn them to the Lord; but to this they themselves were tied, without
injunction from the Priest, or sentence from the Judge. And this appears,
because they were tied to a distinct punishment if the matter fell into the
Judges hand: they were in case of theft to restore fourfold: Number. 5. 6.
But if they had sinned in this instance or in any other that men commit, they
were bound to come and confess it, and shall recompense the trespass with the
principal thereof, and add a fifth part to him against whom they have
trespassed. This the Jews call confessionem super peccato singulari, (...)
a special confession of a sin; to which because the sinner was sentenced by
the law, and had a lighter amends appointed him if he did it voluntary, but a
much heavier if he came before the criminal Judge; it follows plainly that God
tied these delinquents to a voluntary or spontaneous susception of their
punishment. It was indeed an alleviation of their punishment; for the criminal
was bound to confess (say the Jewish Doctors) and say when the beast goes to
sacrifice, thinking as if he were going as the beast is, O Domine, ego reus sum
mortis, ego commeruissem lapidari propter hoc peccatum, vel strangulari propter
hanc praevaricationem, vel comburi propter hoc crimen, O Lord, I am guilty of
death, I have deserved to be stoned, or strangled, or burnt alive for this
crime, according as the sin was: but his being the executioner of the Divine
sentence in the lesser instance did prevent the more severe and intolerable
condemnation.

For indeed such is the mercy and dispensation of God: 6.
Gods law decrees evil to him that does evil: if we become executioners of the
law of God and of his angry sentence, we prevent the greater anger of God;
according to that of S. Paul, judge your selves, brethren, that ye be not
judged of the Lord. If we humble our selves, God will exalt us; if we smite, he
will spare; 1 Cor. 11.
if we repent, he will repent: but therefore in these cases between God and us
it is so far from being a grievance, that we become executioners of the
sentence decreed by law against us, that though it be an act of justice in God
to oblige us to it, yet it is also a very great mercy. For as in the law of
Moses, the spontaneous susception of the punishment did prevent the heavier
hand of the Judge from falling on him; so in the Evangelical law, it prevents
the intolerable hand of God. So that in relation to the law of God it is an
action of repentance; and repentance being a penal or punitive duty, he that
was tied to bring in his own oblation, to make his own amends, to confess
willingly his sin, was in effect tied to nothing but to a voluntary repentance.

And thus it is also in some proportion in humane laws. 7.
For by these premises thus much is gained, that to oblige the criminal to a
spontaneous suffering of the punishment appointed by the laws of a just
superior is not naturally unjust, and it is not always intolerable, and it may
be very reasonable, and it may be a design of mercy, or at least a very apt
ministry of justice: and therefore there can be no reasonable objection
against it, but that upon just account, and in just measures, and for great
reason, and by the proportions of equity it may be done in humane laws.

For 1. 8.
Whatsoever is not against the law of Nature, nor the law of God, may be done
or enjoined to be done by the laws of Man; for the power of Magistrates is the
next great thing to God and Nature. Now concerning this, we have security not
only from the foregoing instances, but from the law of Christ concerning
divorce upon the instance of adultery: the offending party looses his or her
right respectively over the body of the other, and cannot lawfully demand
conjugal rights. The injurious person may beg for pardon and restitution; but
is unjust if he require any thing as duty. The woman looses her rights of
society, and the Man of superiority, in case they be adulterous; and if they
do not quit their former rights, and sit down under their own burden, and
minister the sentence of God by their own hands, they sin anew: every such
demand or act of dominion is iniquity and injustice, it is an act of an
incompetent power, and therefore, under pain of a new sin, they must not act
under it.

2. A man can inflict punishment upon himself. 9.
Thus Zacheus in expiation of his sins offered half his goods to the poor, and
restitution fourfold; which was more then he did need; for if his confession
and restitution were spontaneous, he was tied only to the principal, and the
superaddition of a fifth part, as appears above. But he chose the punishment,
even so much as the Judge himself could have inflicted. Thus we read of a
Bishop in the primitive ages of the Church who, quia semel tactu foemineo
sorduerat, because he had once fallen into uncleanness, shut himself up in a
voluntary prison for nine years together: and many we read of who out of the
Spirit of penance lived lives of great austerity, using rudenesses to their
bodies; by the pain of their bodies to expiate the sin of their Souls. Now
whatsoever any man has power to do to himself; that the law has power to
command him; supposing a reason or a necessity in the law proportionably great
to the injunction, and to be of it self a sufficient cause of the suffering. It
is true a man may do it to himself to please his humor, or for vainglory, or
out of melancholy. I do not say he does well in so doing; but that he has
power to do it, without doing injury to any one: and if he does it to himself
without cause, or without sufficient cause, he does no man wrong; he does no
more then he has power to do, always provided he keeps within the limits of
the sixth Commandment. Now although the law pretends not to this power of
doing it without reason, because all the power of the law is (...) in relation
to others, in commutative and distributive justice, and public and private
charities; yet the same authority which any man has over himself in order to
private ends, the law has over him in order to the public; because he is a
part of the public, and his own power over himself is in the public, as every
particular is in the universal. Nay the law has a greater power then the man;
for a man has not power over his own life, which the law has; so that
whatever a man alone can do, that the law can command him to do: (except it
be in such things which are wholly by God left in a man's power, and are
subjected to no laws of man, and commanded by no law of God; as in the matter
of single life, and other counsels Evangelical) the same things (I say) though
not for the same reasons. If therefore the man can upon himself inflict an evil
which he has deserved, the law can compel him, that is, she has competent
authority to do it: and then he is bound in Conscience.

3. In matters favorable, 10.
and yet of great interest, we find that there are many events by the sentence
of the law without the sentence of a Judge. Thus the right of Primogeniture is
sufficient ordinarily to enter upon the inheritance without a solemn decree of
Court; and if we consider the reason of this, it will be of equal force in the
present inquiry. For when matters are notorious, and the people willing, and it
is every man's case, and there is a great necessity, and public utility, it is
sufficient when the rule is set; every man knows his part, and his way, and
Judges are not necessary. But when men are to blame, and there are intrigues in
causes, and men will snatch at what is none of their own, and they will not
understand their duty, nor judge righteous judgments in things concerning
themselves and their neighbors; it is necessary that there be Judges and
Advocates and all the inferior Ministers of laws, that where the law is
intricate, and men cannot judge and discern aright, or when they are interested
and will not, the law may be interpreted, and their duty explained, and every
man righted that otherwise would be wronged. The sentence of the Judge is but
accidentally necessary: for the law saying that the eldest Son is heir to an
intestate Father, the case is plain, and who is the eldest Son is notorious,
and he is willing enough to enter upon the inheritance; and therefore besides
the law in this case there needs no sentence of the Judge. Now the law is as
plain in the condemnation of some crimes, and the assignation of some
punishments. But because men are not willing to enter into punishment, and they
are not tied publicly to accuse themselves, therefore there are Judges to give
sentence, and executioners appointed. And this is well enough in some cases:
but because there are some cases in which it is necessary that the laws be
obeyed in private as well as in public, and yet without penalties a law is but
a dead hand and a broken cord; the law annexes punishments, but is forced to
trust the sinning hand to be the smiter, because the private action cannot be
publicly punished, because not brought before the Judge.

4. Besides this, 11.
there are some actions of so evil effect as to the public, that for
detestations sake they are to be condemned as soon as done, hated as soon as
named, strangled as soon as born; and when by such a sentence the act is
represented so foul, the man stands more ready for repentance, and himself is
made the instrument. It is like a plain case in which any man may be allowed to
be a Judge: for modesty's sake and for humanity every man will condemn some
sins; even though themselves be the guilty persons. However the law takes the
wisest course to give an universal sentence, that as the man is (...), so he
may be (...), self-accus'd, and self-condemned; and not to expect the
contingent discovery, and the long deferred solemnities of law. Some sins go
before unto judgment, says the Apostle, and some follow after: that is, some
are condemned ipso jure by the law, and the man does ipso facto incur the
penalty; others stay for the sentence of the Judge.

5. In the Court of Conscience every man is his own accuser, 12.
and his own executioner; and every penitent man is a Judge upon himself: God
trusts man with the infliction of punishments and hard sentences upon himself
for sin; only if man fails, God will judge him to worse purposes; and so does
the law. And as the impenitent people favor themselves to their own harm, for
they sin against God even in their very forbearing to punish and to kill the
sin: so do the impenitent disobey the law by not being their own executioners
of wrath: but in both cases the Conscience is obliged,

The thing therefore is just, and reasonable, and useful.

Now for the reducing of this to practice, 13.
and stating the cases of Conscience for the subject, as I have already done
for the lawgiver, I am to show,

1. In what cases the Conscience of the subjects can be bound to inflict
penalties upon themselves without the sentence of the Judge.

2. By what signs we shall know when the law does intend so to bind; that is,
when the sentence is given by the law, so that the sinner is ipso facto liable
to punishment, and must voluntarily undergo it.

In what cases the Criminal is to be his own executioner.
1. When to the execution of the punishment appointed by the law there is no
action required on the part of the guilty person, 14.
the conscience is bound to submit to that sentence, and by a voluntary or
willing submission verify the sentence, such as are excommunication,
suspension, irregularity and the like. Thus if irregularity be ipso facto
incurred, the offending person is bound in Conscience not to accept a benefice
or execute an office to which by that censure he is made unhabile and unapt. If
a law be made that whoever is a common swearer shall be ipso facto infamous, he
that is guilty is bound in Conscience not to offer testimony in a cause of law;
but to be his own Judge and executioner of that sentence. But this is not true
in all cases, but with the provision of the following measures.

2. If the law imposes a penalty to be incurred ipso facto, 15.
yet if the penalty be moderate, equal and tolerable, the Conscience is obliged
to a voluntary susception of it, before the sentence of the Judge, although the
sentence be not privative, but executive; that is, though there be something to
be acted by the guilty person upon himself. Thus if excommunication be incurred
ipso facto, he that is guilty of the fact deserving it, and is fallen into the
sentence, is not only bound to submit to those estrangements and separations,
those alienations of society and avoidings which he finds from the duty of
others, but if by chance he be in a stranger place where they know not of it,
and begin Divine service, he is bound in Conscience to go away, to resign an
Ecclesiastical benefice if he be possessed of one, and other things of the same
necessity for the verification of the sentence: and the reason is, because
every act of Communion or office is in his case a rebelling against the
sentence of the law, the verification of which depends upon himself as much as
upon others: for every such person is like a man that has the plague, all men
that know it avoid him; but because all men do not know it, he is bound in
Conscience to avoid them, and in no case to run into their company, whether
they know him, or know him not. Now because this does not oblige to all sorts
of active executions of the sentence, the following measures are the limit of
it.

3. The law does not oblige the guilty person to such active executions of the
sentence which are merely and entirely active; 16.
that is, which do not include a negative, or something contrary to the
passive obedience. Thus if a Traitor be sentenced to a confiscation of goods,
and this be ipso jure incurred; the guilty person is not tied to carry all his
goods to the public treasure, but he is tied not to change, not to diminish,
not to aliene, not to use them otherwise then the law permits; because if he
do any thing of these he does something against the sentence of the law, which
in his case is rebellion and disobedience. He may be truly passive and
perfectly obedient to the sentence of the law without hiring porters or wagons
to carry his goods away; and the custom of the law requires it not: but if he
does aliene his goods he has not so much as the passive obedience.

4. In punishments corporal the laws do not proceed without the sentence of
the Judge; 17.
except it be in the court of Conscience, which is voluntary and by choice.
Thus no man is ipso jure condemned to be hanged, or to be whipped, and no man
is by any law bound to inflict such punishments on himself; because there is a
natural abhorrency in such actions, and it is that odious part of the law which
is so much against nature and natural affection that none but the vilest part
of mankind are put to do it unto others: and therefore because the laws do
enjoin no such thing, the inquiry is needless, whether in such cases the
Conscience be obliged. But this is wholly depending upon the manners of men,
and the present humors of the world. Amongst some nations it was otherwise; and
no question but it might be so, if by circumstances and the accidents of
opinion and the conversation of the world the thing were not made intolerable.
Plutarch tells of Teribasus, De superstitione.
that being arrested by the officers of death he resisted with such a bravery
as he used against the Kings enemies; but being told that they were sent by the
King, he presently reached forth his hands and offered them to the Lictors to
be bound. But this was no great matter, it was necessary, and he that is
condemned to die by a just authority, ows to it at least so much that he resist
not, that he go to death when he is called, that he lie down under the axe
when he is commanded: So did Stilico at the command of his son in law, Honorius
the Emperor. It was more which was done by the Lithuanians under Vitoldus
their King, who was brother to that Vladislaus famous for a memorable battle
against the Turks; he commanded many to death, and they died without the
Hang-man's hand, being the executioners of their King's laws upon themselves.
And Sabellicus tells, Lib. 2. Ennead. 1.
that the Ethiopians, when their King sent a Messenger with the Ensigns of
Death, they presently went home and died by their own hands. And this was
accounted among them so sacred an obligation, that when a young timorous person
thought to have fled, his mother took her girdle and strangled him, lest he
should dishonor his family by disobeying the law out of fear of death. This
was brave; but some men cannot be willing to dye, and few can well suffer it:
but therefore it is hard that any one should be compelled to do it to himself.
Therefore the laws of Christendom are wise and gentle; and excepting that of
the Lithuanian Prince, who is reported to have been a Tyrant, it is not
enjoined by any Prince or any law amongst us, that I know of. But this is not
only true in active executions, but in the passive penalties, which are very
violent and extreme. Thus if a man were justly condemned to be immured and
starved to death, he is tied to submit to it, as not to rebel, and by violence
quit himself: but he is not tied so much as to the privative execution; that
is, he is not bound to abstain from meat, if it be brought to him. Thus we find
in story, of the pious Persian Lady, who to her Father condemned to death by
starving gave her breasts to suck, and preserved his life; and he not at all
made infamous by not dying; but had his life given as the reward of his
Daughters piety.

5. Condemned persons are not tied to put themselves to death, 18.
or cut off a member with their own hands, or do execution, by doing any
action, or abstaining from doing any thing, when such doing or abstaining is
the sufficient, or the principal, or the immediate killing or dismembring. But
to the under-ministeries they are ti'de, which cannot be done without them;
that is, they are tied so far to act, as without which they cannot suffer: and
this is to be extended even to the principal and immediate act of killing, if
they only ordinarily can do it. Thus a condemned Criminal is bound to go to
execution, or suffer himself quietly to be carried; to lie down under the
Hangman's Axe, to ascend the Ladder: and it is a great undecency of dying, and
directly criminal, which is frequent enough in France, and is reported of
Marshal Biron, to fight with the Executioner, to snatch the Weapons from the
Soldiers, to force the Officers to kill him, as a wild Bull or Lion is killed.
* But a condemned man is also tied to drink his poison, if that be appointed
him by law; for though this be the immediate act of killing, to which
ordinarily condemned persons are not obliged, yet because it cannot well be
done by an Executioner without his consent, or extreme violence, the guilty
person is bound to drink it: the reason is, because the law must be obeyed, and
at least a passive obedience is to be given to the severest of her sentences;
and the passiveness of a man is to be distinguished from the passiveness of a
beast; that which cannot be avoided, must be born well: and therefore if a man
be banished, he must go away, and not be dragged; and he that so resists the
laws, that he forces her Ministers to hale the Criminal to death like an
unwilling Swine, deserves the burial of an Ass or Dog. But this always must
suppose the laws to be just, and the power competent; for else the suffering
person may consider, whether the quiet submission to it be not a verification
of the sentence, or of the authority, though even in such cases it is not the
Hangman that is unjust, or to be resisted, but the Judge or the laws; and
therefore they are to be protested or declared against; for that is all which
is left to be done by the oppressed person.

6. When the punishments are principally or merely medicinal, 19.
the Conscience is bound to a voluntary execution of the sentence, if the law
requires it. For then the laws are precepts of institution and discipline; and
they are intended as mercies to the man, as well as to the public; and of
mercy every man may very well be Minister. It has in it no undecency for a man
to mingle his own severe potion, or let himself blood, or lance an Ulcer; and
there is no more in the medicinal punishments of the law. Thus the laws can
command us to fast, to wear sackcloth upon the bare skin, to go barefoot, to
watch all night upon a solemnity of expiation, to inflict disciplines, and the
like; and for these we are to expect no other process but the sentence of the
law, no Judge but our Consciences, no Executioners but our selves. This relies
upon the former reasons, and the mere authority of the law, and the nature of
the thing free from all objections.

7. All sentences of law which declare a fact to be void, 20.
or a charge and expenses to be lost, or a privilege to cease, are presently
obligatory to the Conscience. Irrita prorsus ex nunc, and vacua nunciamus, is
usual in the style of laws: and sit ipso jure irritum and inane; and careat
omni robore firmitatis, non obtineat vires; let it be of no force, let it not
prevail, let it be void, let him want all privilege, all honor, dominion,
action, or profit. For these and the like words, say the Logicians, have the
force of an universal sign, and do distribute the Noun that is governed by the
Verb; so they speak; that is, it signifies and has force in every particular,
and in every period of time; let it want force, that is, let it want all force,
that is, be of no use at all; careat is as much as omnino, penitus, prorsus
careat.

8. But these particulars suffer one limitation. 21.
A man is not bound to suffer the penalty of the law before the sentence of the
Judge, though the fact be sentenced and condemned ipso jure, if the fact be
made public, and brought before the Judge: Because he taking it into his
cognizance, revokes the former obligation, by imposing a new; by changing the
method of the law, and lessening the expectation. Thus by the laws
Ecclesiastical, which were anciently of force in England, and are not yet
repealed, Not^rius percussor Clerici, he that openly or manifestly strikes a
Bishop or Priest, is ipso jure excommunicate; and to this sentence the guilty
person is bound to submit: but in case he be brought before the Criminal Judge,
and there be solemn process formed, he may suspend his obedience to the law,
because the Judge calls him to attend to the sentence of a man.

9. But yet this is also so to be understood to be true in all exceptis
sententiis irritantibus, 22.
excepting sentences of the declaring actions to be null, or privileges void.
For in these cases, though the Judge do take into his cognizance the
particular fault, and give a declarative sentence of such a nullity and
evacuation, yet the action does not begin to be null, or the privilege to
cease from the sentence of the Judge, but from the doing of the fault, and the
sentence of the law: and therefore if a question arises, and the Judge declare
in it, the nullity is only confirmed by the Judge, but it was so by the
sentence of the law. Now the reason of the difference in the case of nullities
and evacuations from other cases, is, because that which is not, has no
effect, and can produce no action; and as a Citisen told the people of Athens,
who upon the first news of Alexander's death would have rebelled, Stay (says
he) make no have; for if he be dead to day, he will be dead to marrow: So if
the Judge declare that such an action was null, it was null all the way; if he
says it be dead now as a punishment of the fault, it was dead as soon as the
fault was done; for it died by the hand of the law, not by the hand of the
Judge. In other things the limitation is to be observed.

10. And this also holds, 23.
in case that it be upon any account necessary that the Judge give a
declarative sentence: for sometimes in regard of others, the Judge must declare
such a person excommunicate, or deprived, or silenced, or infamous, that they
also may avoid him, or do their respective duties. But although the guilty
person be in conscience regularly obliged before that declarative sentence, it
being nothing but a publication of what was in being before; yet it being a
favorable case, and the law not loving extremities and rigours of
animadversion, it is to be presumed that the law gives leave to the guilty
person to stay execution till publication. Because no man is bound directly to
defame himself; which he will hazard to do, if he executes the sentence upon
himself before the Judge calls others into testimony and observation of the
sentence. But though the sentence may upon favorable conditions be retarded,
it must at no hand be evacuated. Therefore if the Judge meddle not, the man is
left to the sentence of the law. And it is in all these particulars to be
remembered, that the law is a mute Judge, and the Judge is a speaking law. It is
the saying of Cicero; Lib. 1. Offic.
and from thence is to be concluded, that when the Judge has spoken, he has
said no new thing, and he has no new authority; and therefore if the law has
clearly spoken before, she has as much authority to bind where she intends to
bind, as if she speaks by her Judges.

These considerations and this whole question is of great use in order to some
parts of repentance, 24.
and particularly of restitution. For if a law be made, that if a Clerk within
twelve months after the collation of a Parish Church be not ordained a Priest,
he shall ipso jure forfeit his Ecclesiastical Benefice; if he does not submit
to the sentence, and recede from his Parish, he is tied in Conscience to make
restitution of all the after profits which he receives or consumes. So that it
has real effect upon Consciences, and the material occurrences of men.

But then for the reducing of it to practice, 25.
I am next to account by what signs we shall know when it is sententia lata a
jure, when it is lata ab homine; when it is lata, and when ferenda; that is,
when the Criminal is to attend the sentence of the Judge, and the solennities
of law and execution by the appointed Officer; and when he is to do it
himself, by his own act or positive submission upon the sentence of the law.

Signs by which we may judge when the Criminal is condemned ipso facto.
The surest measures are these. 26.
Those laws contain sententiam latam, and oblige the Criminal to a spontaneous
susception of the punishment, when 1. the law expressly affirms, that the guilty
person does ipso facto incur the sentence without further process, or
sentence of the Judge.

2. When the law says, 26.
that the Transgressor shall be bound in conscience to pay the fine, or suffer
the punishment contained in the Sanction of the law: which thing because it is
not usual in laws, lest I should seem to speak this to no purpose, I give an
example out of the Spanish laws: for I find in the laws of the Kingdom of
Castile diverse instances to this purpose; Lib. 2. ordinat. Regal. tit. 9. l. 1.
particularly, after the assignation of the Secretaries fee, appointing how
much he may receive for the instruments of grace which he makes, it is added,
Jurent quod observabunt eaquae in pracedenti capitulo ordinata sunt, and quod
non accipient munera, and quod solvent poenas si in eas inciderint, ad quas ex
nunc eos condemnamus, ita ut sint obligati in foro conscientiae ad solvendum
eas, absque hoc quod sint ad illas condemnati. And the same also is a little
after decreed concerning Judges and public Notaries, Ibid. tit. 15.
that they take nothing beyond their allowed fees and salaries; and if they
do, they are to pay a certain fine. They are also to swear to observe that
ordinance; and in case they do not, that they will pay the fines to which the
law does then sentence them, that they be bound in Conscience to do it without
any further condemnation by the sentence of any man. Now the reason of this is,
because the Conscience being entrusted and charged with the penalty, must
suppose only the duty and obligation of the man whose Conscience is charged.
It were foolish to charge the Conscience, if the Conscience were not then
intended to be bound to see to the execution: but that could not be, if the
sentence of the Judge were to be expected; for that is a work of time, and will
be done without troubling the Conscience. Therefore the Conscience being made
the Sheriff or the Witness with the charge of execution, supposes the whole
affair to be his own private duty.

3. In censures Ecclesiastical it has sometimes been the usage of the
Legislator to impose a penalty, 27.
adding, that donec satisfecerit, until such or such a thing be done, the
Criminal shall not be absolved: and this also is an indication that the
sentence is made by the law, and is ipso facto incurred by the Delinquent,
because it leaves a secret tie upon his Conscience obliging him to do it;
which were needless, if the Criminal Judge were to be entrusted with it, for he
is otherwise sufficiently entrusted with compulsories to secure the executions.
Of this nature is that Constitution of Innocentius 4. cap. Romana,.
procurationes, de censibus, lib. 6. describing the order for an Archbishop's
visitation of his own, and the Dioceses of his Suffragan Bishops; forbidding
severely him or any of his followers to receive a fee, bribe, reward, or
present, qualitercunque offeratur, under what pretense soever it be offered,
lest he be found to seek that which is his own, not that which is of Jesus
Christ; adding, Quod si fuerit contra praesumptum, recipiens maledictionem
incurrat, a qua nunquam nisi duplum restituat liberetur, He that shall presume
to do otherwise, and receive any thing, shall incur a curse, from which he
shall never be absolved till he have restored it twofold. This relies upon the
former reason.

4. Panormitan gives this rule, 28.
That when a sentence is set down in the law in words of the present or preter
tense, Cap. Caeterum, and cap. Nonnulli de rescriptis. cap. Novit. in fine de
his quae fiunt a praelato.
it concludes the sentence to be ipso facto incurred; for whatsoever is ipso
jure decreed, is ipso facto incurred: and of this decree, the present and past
tenses (says the Abbat) are sufficient indication. That is, if the words be
damnatory; [as excommunicamus, anathemate innodamus, we do deprive him of all
rights and offices, etc.] for if the Judge using the like words passes a
sentence by virtue of those words, so does the law, there being the same
reason, the same aurhority, the same purpose signified by the same form of
words. But if the words be of the present or past time, and yet not immediately
damnatory, they do imply the sentence to be made afterward; as decernimus,
definivimus, declaramus, and the like. But if these words signify only
ministerially, and not principally, that is, if they be joined with other words
in the present or past tense, then they declare the sentence past and ipso
facto to be incurred; as declaramus eum privatum dominio bonorum; then the case
is evident.

5. Of the same consideration it is when the sentence of the law is set down
with the verb substantive Sum, 29.
of what tense soever, unless by a future participle his nature be altered.
Thus if a law says, he that is absent from his parish, without just cause to
be approved by his Bishop, above six months, est, or erit infamis, is or shall
be infamous; the sentence is ipso jure lata, inferred by law, and ipso facto
incurred; because the verb annexes the punishment to the fact without further
process. But if the verb be annexed to a future participle the case is altered;
the sentence is not to be undergone till the Judge have declared it. Now this
relies upon the force of the words and the proper grammatical way of speaking,
which is the best way of declaring the mind of a man, or the mind of the law;
unless where it is confessed that the lawgiver did not intend, or use to speak
properly or by grammar, Lib. 17. cap. 7. Noct. Attic.
but by rude custom. This note I have in A. Gellius, Verbum esse and erit,
quando per se ponuntur, habent atque retinent tempus suum; cum vero praeterito
junguntur, vim temporis sui amittunt, and in praeteritum contendunt. If these
words be not altered, they signify just by themselves; est or erit
excommunicatus, or infamis, signifies the punishment to begin as soon as the
fact is done: but est excommunicandus, that is a future that relates to another
time, and stays for the sentence of the Judge. But there must be something
more to clear this. For if erit be the future tense, why shall it not as well
signify sententiam ferendam, as est excommunicandus; since the verb is to be
left to his own time, as well as the present tense brought thither by a future
participle? Therefore to this I add, that when the verb or participle does
signify the action or ministry of some other person besides the law and the
Criminal, then it shows that the declaration of the Judge is to be expected; as
in [ est excommunicandus] that is, he is to be excommunicated, viz. by the
sentence of his ordinary judge: but erit infamis, or erit excommunicatus,
implies no man's action at all, but supposes the thing finished without any more
to do; and then comes in the rule of Nigidius in A. Gellius before spoken of.
Infamis signifies presently, that is, he shall be so from the doing of the
crime; and excommunicatus signifies present or past, and therefore by it the
future tense shall be altered, and therefore the sentence presently incurred.
But concerning this particular, who pleases to be Critical and curious in
minutes may delight himself by seeing seventy five fallencies, and alterations
of cases by the variety of tenses expressed in words of law, in Tiraquel in his
excellent and large commentaries in L. Si unquam, C. De revocandis
donationibus, in the interpretation of the word Revertatur. For my own part, I
am content to assign such measures as are sure, plain, easy and intelligible.
Nobis non licet esse tam disertis.

6. The sentence of the law does presently oblige the Conscience if it be
expressed in adverbs of hasty or present time; 30.
such as are confestim, illico, extunc, extemplo, presently, forthwith, from
thence forward, and the like: for those who appoint the punishment to be
incurred without any interval of time, in effect say that we are not to expect
the dull and long protracted methods of Courts, and Judges, and commissions,
and citations, and witnesses, and adjournments. Protinus, i. e. non expectato
judiciorum ordine, say the Lawyers.

Protinus ad regem cursum detorquet Hiarbas.

Forthwith, Virgil. lib. 4. Aeneid. and lib. 4. Geor.
that is, without the longer methods of the Court.

Nec mora, continuo matris praecepta facessit.

These words and their like have a present effect; and therefore do signify a
present obligation of Conscience. Concerning the signification of which and the
like words it is hard to say whether we are to be guided by the Lawyers or by
the Grammarians. The Lawyers are the best witnesses of sentences, and
precedents, and the usages and customs of laws; and therefore can best tell
how the laws are said to bind, and what sentences they are said to contain: and
because by them we are to be judged in public if questions do arise, from
them also we may take our rule in private. This seems reasonable: but on the
other side, I find that Lawyers themselves say otherwise; and I have seen
Tiraquel much blamed for quoting Bartholus, Baldus, Alph. a Castro lib. 2. de
leg. poen. cap. 7.
and Salicetus for the signification of the word [ Mox, by and by] which is of
use in this present rule: because though they were great Lawyers, yet they were
no good Grammarians; and therefore that in these cases, Erasmus and Calepine,
Valla and Linacre, Cicero and Terence, Priscian and Donatus, were the most
competent Judges. There is something on both sides which is to weigh down each
other according as some other cosideration shall determine. But therefore as to
the case of Conscience, I shall give a better and surer rule then either one or
other, or both: and that is,

7. This being in matters of load and burden, 31.
by the consent of all men, the Conscience and the guilty person is to be
favored as much as there can be cause for. Therefore whenever there is a
dispute whether the sentence of the law must be incurred presently, or that the
sentence of the Judge is to be expected; the presumption is always to be for
ease, and for liberty, and favorable senses. Burdens are not to be imposed
upon Consciences without great evidence, and great necessity. If the Lawyers
differ in their opinions concerning the sentence, whether it be already made,
or is to be made by the Judge, let them first agree, and then let the
Conscience do as she sees reason. Thus if the word [ Mox, by and by] be used
in a sentence of law, because we find that in some very good Authors it
signifies with some interval of time, Lib. 1. de Divinat.
(as in Cicero, Discedo parumper a somniis, ad quae mox revertor; Epist. ad
Attic.
and, praeteriit villam meam Curio, jussitque mihi nunciari se mox venturum;)
therefore we may make use of it to our advantage, and suppose the Conscience of
a delinquent at liberty from a spontaneous execution of a sentence of law, if
for that sentence he have no other sign, but that the word Mox is used in the
law. Cap. in poenis de reg. ju^. lib. 6.
In poenis benignior est interpretatio facienda, In matters of punishment we
are to take the easier part; and that is, to stay from being punished as long
as we can: and in proportion to this Panormitan gives this rule, When the words
of the law signifiy the time past, or the time to come, we are to understand it
in the more favorable sense; and that it includes the sentence of the Judge,
before which the Criminal is not obliged. And to this very purpose the words of
infinite and indefinite signification are to be expounded: and this answers
many cases of Conscience, and brings peace in more; and the thing being
reasonable, peaceful, and consonant to the common opinion of the Lawyers, ought
to pass for a just conclusion and determination of Conscience.

8. After all, 32.
as there is ease to the Criminal, so there must be care of the law; and
therefore when a law imposes a punishment which would prove invalid, to no
purpose and of no effect, unless it be of present force upon the committing of
the fact, it is to be concluded, the law intends it for a sententia lata a
jure, that it presently obliges the Conscience of the guilty person. The reason
is, because it cannot be supposed that the law should do a thing to no
purpose, and therefore must intend so to oblige as that the sin be punished. If
therefore to expect the sentence of the Judge would wholly evacuate the
penalty, or make it insufficient to do the purpose and intention of the law;
the sentence of the law must be suffered by the guilty person without the
Judge. And this is true, however the words of law be used, whether in the past,
present, or future time, whether simply or by reduplication, whether
imperatively or infinitely: such are the penalties of infamy, irregularity,
nullity of actions or contracts, especially if they be of such contracts which
if they once prove valid, are so for ever, as in the contract of marriage. And
therefore if a law be made that a man shall not marry her whom in her husbands
lifetime he had polluted; this must be supposed to be meant of nullifying the
contract before it is consummate; that is, it is a sentence which the criminal
must execute upon himself: for if he does not, but de facto marries the
adulteress, and consummates the marriage, it will be too late to complain to
the Judge; for he cannot annul the contract afterward.

RULE III. Penalties imposed by the Judge must be suffered and submitted to,
but may not after such sentence be inflicted by the hands of the condemned.
THE first part of this Rule has in it but little difficulty: 1.
for there is only in it this variety; In all punishments that are tolerable,
that is, all but death, dismembring, or intolerable and extremely disgraceful
scourgings, and grievous and sickly imprisonments, we owe not only obedience
to the laws, but reverence and honor; because whatsoever is less then these,
may without sin, and without indecency, and without great violations of our
Natural love and rights be inflicted and suffered.

But the other evils are such as are intolerable in civil and natural account;
2.
and every Creature declines death, and the addresses and preparations to it
with so much earnestness, that it would be very unnatural and inhumane not to
allow to condemned persons a civil and moral power of hating and declining
death, and avoiding it in all means of natural capacity and opportunity. A man
may, if he can, redeem his life with money, but he must not corrupt justice; a
man may run from Prison if he can, but to do it he must not kill the Jailer;
he may escape death, but he must not fight with the Ministers of justice; he
may run away, but he must not break his word; that is, he may do what is in
his natural capacity to avoid these violences and extremities of nature, but
nothing that is against a moral duty. Lib. de mendac. c. 13.
Non peccat quisquam cum evitat supplicium, sed cum facit aliquid dignum
supplicio; He that avoids his punishment sins not, provided that in so doing he
act nothing else worthy of punishment. So S. Austin.

This relies also upon a tacit or implicit permission of law; 3.
for in sentences given by Judges, and to be executed by the Ministers of law,
the condemned person is not commanded, nor yet trusted with the execution, and
it is wholly committed to Ministers of purpose: and therefore the law supposes
the condemned person infinitely unwilling, and lays bars, restraints, guards
and observators upon him; from all which if he can escape, he has done no more
then what the lawgiver supposed he was willing to do, and from which he did
not restrain him by laws, but by force. But if to fly from prison, or to
decline any other sentence be expressly forbidden in the law, or if it be
against his promise, or if a distinct penalty be annexed to such escapings,
then it is plain that the law intends to oblige the Conscience, for the law
cannot punish what is no sin; it is in this case a transgression of the law,
and therefore not lawful. But because greater then death the law has no
punishment, it cannot but be lawful for a condemned man to escape from prison
if he can, because the law has no punishment to establish a law against flying
from prison after the sentence of death. And if it be said, that if a prisoner
who flies be taken, he has more irons and more guards upon him, and worse
usage in the prison, that is matter of caution, not punishment, at least not of
law: for as for the Gaoler's spite and anger, his cruelty and revenge, himself
alone is to give accounts.

But now for the other part of the Rule there is some more difficulty; 4.
which is caused by the great example of some great and little persons, Vide
Diogen. Laert. in Zenon.
who to prevent a death by the hand of their Enemies, with the additions of
shame and torment, Alexander Aphrodisaeus in 2. de anima. Lucian. in Macrob.
have laid violent hands upon themselves. So did Zeno and Chrysippus, Cleanthes
and Empedocles, Euphrates the Philosopher and Demosthenes, Cato Uticensis and
Porcius Latro, Aristarchus and Anaxagoras, Cornelius Rufus and Silius Italicus.
The Indians esteemed it the most glorious way of dying, Galen. 5. de loc.
affect. Plutarch. in Pericle. Suidas. ^lin. l. 1. ep. 12.
as we find in Lib. 15.
Strabo, In Phaedon. Platon.
Olympiodorus, and (...). 4.
Porphyry: and Eusebius tells, that most of the Germans did use to hang
themselves. And amongst the Romans they that, out of shame of being in debt, or
impatience of grief, killed themselves, might make their Wills, and after death
they stood; manebant testamenta, pretium festinandi, says Annal. 6.
Tacitus, that was the price of their making have. Plato discoursing of this
question, said, (...), Peradventure a man must not do violence to himself, for
they say it is not lawful. Upon this, Olympiodorus discoursing on these words,
reckons five cases in which the Stoics held it lawful to kill themselves. 1.
For public good. 2. For private necessity, to avoid a Tyrant's snare. 3. In
cases of natural madness. 4. When the body is intolerably afflicted. 5. and
lastly. In extreme poverty. And the Greeks commended a Pythagorean woman, who
being asked why she and her Sect did not eat beans, she said, she would rather
eat them then tell: but being commanded by a Tyrant to eat them, she said, she
would rather tell then eat them: but in fine she cut out her tongue, because
she would neither taste nor tell. Thus Seneca tells of a Prisoner, that being to
be exposed to Beasts in the Theater, he broke his neck in the spondels of the
wheel upon which he was drawn to the spectacles; and of another that dyed by a
pertinacious holding of his breath. But that of Sampson, and Saul, and Razis,
are also brought into example; and are alleged to prove, that a man may a few
hours or days hasten his death, if by so doing he takes the lighter part. S.
Chrysostom tells of S. Pelagia; Pelagia virgo quindecim annos nata sponte sibi
necem maturavit. Parata quidem erat ad cruciatus tormentaque and omne
suppliciorum genus perferendum: sed metuebat tamen ne virginitatis coronam
perderet: Being a Virgin of fifteen years of age, of her own accord she hastened
death unto her self: she was indeed ready to have suffered all sorts of most
exquisit torments, but she was not willing to lose the Crown of her Virginity.
Upon which fact of hers he thus discourses, Hence you may perceive, Vide Front.
Ducaeum Tom. 1. S. Chrysostom. n. 628.
that the lust of the wicked Hang-men struck fear into Pelagia, and therefore
from their injurious lust the Maiden removed and snatched her self: for if she
might have kept the Crown of her Virginity, and receive the Crown of Martyrdom
besides, she would not have refused the Judgment Seat; but because it was
altogether necessary to lose the one of them, she had a just cause by her own
voluntary death to prevent so great an injury. Lib. 3. de Virgin.
And S. Ambrose writing to his Sister Marcellina, expressly commends those
Virgin-Martyrs, who, to prevent their ravishments, did hasten their death by
voluntary precipices, or drowning; and particularly allows the fact of Pelagia.
In cap. 1. Jonae, in haec verba, Mittite me in mare.
To which I add also S. Hierome, who though he gives express testimony to the
Rule, yet he excepts the case of Chastity; Non est nostrum mortem arripere, sed
illatam ab aliis libenter excipere: unde and in persecutionibus non licet
propria perire manu, absque eo ubi castitas periclitatur, sed percutienti colla
submittere, We must not snatch death with our own hands, but willingly receive
it when it is imposed by others: and therefore in persecutions we must not dye
by our own hands, unless it be when our Chastity is in danger, -- heu quanto
melius vel cade peracta
Parcere Romano potnit fortuna pudori?
in other cases we must lay down our necks under him that strikes. And this
seems reasonable,. quod si ff. quod metus causa.
because as the Emperor said, Viris bonis metum istum [pudicitiae amittendae]
majorem esse debere quam ipsius mortis, He that fears to lose his Chastity,
fears more justly then he that fears to lose his Life.

To this I answer, 5.
that the case is indeed very hard; and every one in this is apt not only to
excuse, but to magnify the great and glorious minds of those who to preserve
their honor despised their life. And therefore when the Moscovites broke into
Livonia, and in their sacking of the City Wenden used all manner of cruelties
and barbarous immanities to men and women, filling all the streets and houses
with blood and lust; a great many of the Citizens running to the Castle, blew
up themselves with their Wives and Children, to prevent those horrors and
shames of lust which they abhorred more then death. Hii^or. Sep^entr.
Now Laurentius Muller, who tells the story, says, that although the Preachers
of Riga did in their Pulpits condemn this act of the Women and Maidens: yet the
other Livonians and the Moscovites themselves did not only account it sad and
pitiable, but excellent and admirable. And so the Author of the Books of
Maccabees commends the fact of Razias as glorious and great: but yet this does
not conclude it lawful; for it is upon no account lawful for a man of his own
accord to kill himself.

S. Austin denies to him the praise of magnanimity; Magis enim men's infirma
deprehenditur, Exposit. in Johan. tract. 52.
quae far non potest duram corporis sui sanitatem, vel stultam vulgi
opinionem, It is not greatness, but littleness of spirit, it is either
impatience or pride, Et lib. 19. de Civit. Dei.
that makes a man kill himself to avoid trouble to his body, or dishonor to
his name amongst fools. I suppose he had it from Josephus, Bell. Judaic. l. 3.
c. 25.
who excellently and earnestly proves it to be cowardice to lay violent hands
upon our selves; and both of them might have it from Aristotle, who will not
allow it so much as to be brave and magnanimous for a man to kill himself for
the avoiding of any evil, Lib. 3. Ethic. cap. 7. and lib. 5. cap. ult.
(...), To dye that we may avoid poverty, the torments of love, or any evil
affliction whatsoever, is not the part of a valiant man, but of a coward.
Hostem cum fugeret, se Fannius ipse peremit.
Hic rogo, non furor est, ne moriare mori?
Fannius being pursued by the Enemy, killed himself for fear. It may be
cowardice to dye in some cases; and to dye to preserve our Chastity, is to sin
to avoid a sin, Metamorph l. 7. fab. 25.
like Fannius his case of fear, -- mortisque timorem
Morte fugant, ultroque vocant venientia fata:
or as S. Chrysostom's expression is, (...), To dye before the wound is given,
and to leap into the sea for fear of shipwreck: It is to do violence to our
body to preserve it chaste, to burn a Temple to prevent its being profaned. And
therefore it is no just excuse to say the Virgin-Martyrs did it lest they
should lose their Crown of Virginity: for though I shall not urge the example
of Abraham, who rather ventured his Wives Chastity then his own life; yet this
I say, that she that loses it by violence is never the less a Virgin before
God, but much more a Martyr. But then if any one can suppose it fit to be
objected, that if they lost their Material Virginity, there was danger, lest
while they were abused, they should also be tempted, and consent: I suppose it
will be sufficient to answer, that a certain sin is not to be done to avoid an
uncertain; and yet further, that this could not be considerable in the case of
the Martyrs: for besides that it is supposed that they were infinitely
fortified by the grace of God, their austere ^^ves, and holy Habits, the rare
discourses of their spiritual Guides, their expectations of particular Crowns,
the great reputation and honor of Virgins, and the spirit of Chastity, which
then very much prevailed; besides all this, I say, they had then (particularly
S. Pelagia, and the Virgins which S. Ambrose speaks of, had then) the sentence
of death not only within them, but upon them; and the immediate torments which
they expected after ravishments, were a very competent mortification for any
such fears. And therefore as we should call it cowardice or impatience for a
man to kill himself that he may dye an easy death, and prevent the Hangman's
more cruel hands; so it is a foolish and unreasonable caution, and a distrust
of the sufficiency of the Divine grace, to rush violently to death* lest we
should be dishonored or tempted in another instance: and it is not bravery,
but want of courage; (...), Ubi supra.
It is softness and effeminacy by death to fly the labors of a sadder
accident, says Aristotle. But be it this or not this, it is certain it is
something as bad.

1. It is directly against the Commandment: 7.
and it is not for nothing that in all the Canonical books we find no precept,
no permission from God, says S. Lib. 1. cap. 20. de Civit. Dei.
Austin, ut vel adipiscendae ipsius immortalitatis, vel ullius carendi,
cavendique mali causa nobismet ipsis necem inferamus. Nam and prohibitos nos
esse intelligendum est, ubi Lex ait, Non occides: That either for the gaining
of immortality it self, or for the avoiding of any evil we should kill our
selves. Eth. Nic. li. ^. cap. 11.
It is something like this which Aristotle says, (...). Those things which the
decrees have appointed agreeable to virtue those are to go for laws; as for
example, The Law does not command any man to kill himself, and because the law
does not command, therefore it does forbid: that is, because the law commands
no man (though he be condemned) to kill himself, therefore the law forbids him
to do it to himself; the law will not make a man executioner even of her
sentence, therefore she permits him not to execute his own. But S. Austin adds
beyond this, For then we were forbidden to do it, when God said, Thou shall
do no Murder. And therefore it is observable that although God said, Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor; yet he did not in this
Commandment add that clause of [ contra proximum] nor in that of adultery;
intimating that we must neither pollute nor destroy our own bodies any more
then the body of our neighbor.

2. To prevent the hand of justice or of Tyranny in striking, 8.
is sometimes to prevent the hand of God in saving, and is an act of
desperation against the hopes of a good man, and the goodness of God: for help
may come in the interval. Caius the Emperor commanded some to be put to death,
whom he presently after infinitely wished to have been alive; the have of the
Executioners destroyed the men, more then the rage of the Prince: and it is all
one if the man himself be hasty. And Pontanus tells that when Angelus Ronconius
was accused to Pope Nicolas the fifth that he had given way to Aversus whom the
Popes forces had enclosed, and gave leave to him to pass over Tiber, the Pope
commanded him to be proceeded against according to law; but when he rose in the
morning, and told his Ministers he would more maturely consider the cause of
Ronconius, they told him he was that very night put to death, which caused
extreme grief to the Pope. Concerning a man's life all delay is little enough:
and therefore for himself to hasten it is against prudence, and hope, and
charity.

3. The argument of Lactantius is very good; 9.
Si homicida nefarius est qui hominis extinctor est, eidem sceleri obstrictus
est qui se necat, Lib. 3. Instit. cap. 18.
If he that kills another is a wicked homicide, so also is he that kills
himself. Nay he is worse, said S. Chrysostom. And this besides that it relies
upon the unlimited, indefinite Commandment, which must be understood
universally but where God has expressly set it limits; and though he has given
leave to public Magistrates to do it, who therefore are not under that
Commandment, yet because he has not given leave to our selves to do it to
our selves, therefore we are under the Commandment: besides this, I say, it
relies also upon this reason, that our love to our selves is the measure of
charity to our neighbors; and if we must not kill our neighbor because we
must love him as our self, therefore neither must we kill our selves, for then
we might also kill our neighbor, the reason and the measure, the standard and
the proportion being taken away.

4. To put our selves to death without the Command of God or his lieutenant is
impiety and rebellion against God; 10.
it is a desertion of our military station, and a violation of the proprieties
and peculiar rights of God, who only has power over our lives, and gives it to
whom he pleases: and to this purpose Cicero commends that saying of Pythagoras,
Lib. de Senect.
nequis injussu Imperatoris, id est, Dei, de praesidio and statione vitae
discedat; God is our General, and he has commanded to us our abode and
station, which till he call us off must not be deserted: and the same doctrine
he recites out of Plato, Somn. Scip. Vide Platonem in Phaedone.
Piis omnibus retinendum esse animum in custodia corporis, nec injussu ejus a
quo ille est datus ex hominum vita migrandum esse, ne munus humanum assignatum
a Deo defugisse videamur. The reason is very good: God gave us our soul and
fixed it in the prison of the body, tying it there to a certain portion of work,
and therefore we must not without his leave go forth, lest we run from our
work that God has commanded us. Josephus says it is like a servants running
away from his Masters service: Et serv^s quidem fugientes ulcisci justum
creditur, quamvis nequam Dominos fugerint; ipsi vero fugimus Deum and optimum
Deum, impie facere non videbimur? If servants fly from their cruel Masters
they are justly punished; shall it not be accounted impiety to fly from our
good God, our most gracious Master? And therefore Brutus condemned the fact of
Cato his Father-in-law, (...), It was neither manly nor pious to sink under his
fortune, and to fly away from those evils which he ought to have born nobly.
And therefore the Hebrews called dying, (...), a dismission: Lord, now let
thou thy servant depart in peace, said old Simeon; Nunc dimittis. When God
gives us our pass, then we must go, but we must not offer it an hour before:
he that does otherwise is, 1. ungrateful to God, by destroying the noblest of
his works below; 2. impious, by running from his service; Lib. 1. Tuscul.
and 3. distrustful of his providence. Nisi Deus is, cujus hoc Templum est omne
quod conspicis, istis te corporis custodiis liberaverit, in coelum aditus tibi
patere non potest, said Cicero, Unless God open the gate for you, you can
never pass from the prison of the body, and enter into Heaven. And the same is
affirmed by Hierocles, Ad Carm. aur. Pyth.
which I tell for the strangeness of it; for he was a Stoic, yet against the
opinion of his Sect, he spoke on the behalf of reason and religion: And this is
the Christian sense, (...), Jamb. 18.
Said S. Gregory Nyssen, We must stand bound, till God untie us.

5. For a man to kill himself is against the law, 11.
and the voice, and the very prime inclination of Nature. Every thing will
preserve it self: No man hates his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes
it, says the Apostle: and therefore generally all Nations, as taught by the
voice of Nature, by the very first accents which she utters to all men, did
abhor the laying violent hands upon our selves. When some of the old Romans
hanged themselves to avoid the slavery that Tarquinius Superbus imposed upon
them of making public draught-houses; he commanded the dead bodies to be
crucified, says Servius. In 12. Aeneid.
So did Ptolemy to the body of Cleomenes who had killed himself; and Aristotle
says it was every where received, that the dead bodies of self-murderers
should be disgraced some way or other; (...), by denying them burial: that was
the usual way. So did the Milesians to their maidens who hanged themselves,
they exposed their bodies to a public spectacle: and Strabo tells that the
Indian Priests and wise men blamed the fact of Calanus, and that they hated
those hasty deaths of impatient or proud persons. Alieno scelere quam meo mori
malo, said King Darius, I had rather die by the wickedness of another, then by
my own.

6. 12.
Aristotle says that they who kill themselves [hastening their own death
before God or the public commands them] are injurious to the Commonwealth;
from whose service and profit they subtract themselves if they be innocent, and
if they be criminal, they withdraw themselves from her justice: Lib. 5. c. 11.
Eth.
(...), He that kills himself does wrong to the city; and is after death
disgraced as an unjust person to the public.

Now then to the examples and great precedents above mentioned I shall give
this answer. 13.
1. That Sampson is by all means to be excused, because S. Paul accounts him in
the Catalogue of Saints who died in faith; and therefore S. Austin says he did
it by a peculiar instinct and inspiration of the Spirit of God. But no man can
tell whether he did or no: and therefore I like that better which Peter Martyr
says in this inquiry; He did primarily and directly intend only to kill the
enemies of God, which was properly his work to which he was in his whole
calling designed by the Spirit of God; but that he died himself in the ruin
was his suffering, but not his design; but like a Soldier fighting against his
enemies at the command of his General undertakes the service though he knows he
shall die for it. Thus do the Mariners blow up themselves in a sea fight when
they can no otherwise destroy the enemy; they do it as Ministers of justi^e,
and by command; else they are not to be excused: and he that gives it must take
care it be just and reasonable. 1 Macc. 6. 43.
Thus did the brave Eleazar Habaran the brother of Judas Maccabaeus: he
supposing their grand enemy Antiochus to be upon a tower'd Elephant goes under
the beast and kills him, who with his fall crushed the brave Prince to death;
he intended not to kill himself, but to kill Antiochus he would venture himself
or suffer death.

2. The fact of Saul is no just precedent, 14.
it looks like despair: but the Hebrews say that it is not lawful for any man
to die by his own hands, unless the prolongation of his life be a dishonor to
God, and to a cause of religion; and upon this account they excuse both Saul
and Sampson, for they knew that if they should fall or abide respectively in
the hands of scorners, the dishonor of their persons would disparage the
religion, and reach to God. So they. But this is not right: for we only are to
take care of the laws of God, and of his glory in the ways of his own
appointment; for extraordinaries and rare contingencies, let him alone, he will
secure his own glory.

3. For Razias, Lipsius says it is a question whether it was well or ill done;
15.
and who please to see it disputed may read Lucas Brugensis on one side and
Nicolaus de Lyra upon the other. For my own part I at no hand believe it fit to
be imitated; but concerning what brave and glorious persons do, and by what
Spirit they acted, I am not willing to give hasty sentence: for there are many
secrets which we know not; but we are to follow our Rule, and not to trust any
Spirit of which we are not sure it is from God.

4. But of that which is most difficult I have already spoken something; 16.
but shall add more: for it is a pitiable case that virtuous women, highly
sensible of their honor, zealous for chastity, despisers of life, should not
as well receive the reward of their suffering to preserve the interest of
chastity, as of any other grace; especially since they choose death rather then
shame, and would not willingly choose either, but being forced, run to death for
sanctuary. It is true, it is much to be pitied; but that is all: ac per hoc and
quae se occiderunt, ne quicquam hujusmodi paterentur, quis humanus affectus eis
nollet ignosci? Every man (says S. Austin) will pity, and be ready to excuse,
or to wish pardon to such women who killed themselves to preserve their honor.
Orat. de Provinciis consularibus. Adv. Jovinian.
Cicero tells of certain noble Virgins that threw themselves into pits to avoid
the shame of their enemies lust: and S. Hierom tells of seven Milesian Virgins,
who, to prevent the rudeness of the Gauls that destroyed all Asia, laid
violent hands upon themselves. The Greek Epigram mentions them with honor, but
tells but of three: (...) Lib. 3. (...)

(...).
(...)
(...).
They chose a sad death before a mixture with the lustful blood of the
Galatians. And the Jews tell of a captive woman of their nation, who being in a
ship and designed to ravishment, asked her Husband if the bodies of them them
that were drowned in the sea should rise again: and when he had said they
should, she leaped into the Sea. And among the Christians that did so, there
were many examples. Diverse women of Antioch under Diocletian; more under
Chosroes the Persian; Sophronia under Maxentius; S. Pelagia before mentioned;
and diverse others. These persons had great Advocates; but I suppose it was upon
the stock of pity and compassion that so much bravery should be thrown away
upon a mistake: and therefore I find that S. Chrysostom, who commended this
manner of death upon the account of chastity, yet is not constant to it, but
blames it in his commentaries upon the Galatians: Gal. 1. 4.
and the third Council of Orleans commanded that the oblations of them that
died by the hands of justice should be received, Si tamen non ipsi sibi mortem
probentur propriis manibus intulisse, always provided that they did not
prevent the hand of justice, that they did not lay violent hands upon
themselves. I end this with the saying of Procopius, Gothicor. 4.
which is a just determination of the case in it self. (...), A violent death,
or a death hastened by our own hands, is a thing unprofitable, and full of
foolish violence; and since it wants prudent counsel, it is by wise men judged
to be but the image and hypocrisy of valor and magnanimity. To which he
adds, (...), This also ought to be considered, that no man ought to be impious
or ungrateful toward God. This is the definition of the case. But then as to
the persons of them that did so, I have nothing to say but this, that they
ought not to be drawn into example: but for the whole, it was modest and
charitable which was decreed by the French Capitulars, Lib. 6. c. 70.
Concerning him who has killed himself, it is considered, that if any one out
of pity or compassion will give alms for their souls (so was the custom of
those times) let him give, and say prayers and psalms, but not celebrate the
solemn sacrifice for them; quia incomprehensibilia sunt judicia Dei, and
profunditatem consilii ejus nemo potest investigare, Because the judgments of
God are incomprehensible, and the depth of his counsels no man can fathom. This
was more gentle then that of Virgil, Aeneid 6.
Proxima deinde tenent moesti loca qui sibi lethum
Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi
Projecere animas, quam vellent aethere in alto
Nunc and pauperiem, and duros perferre labores.
He appointed a sad place in Hell for them that so cheaply out of impatience,
or to avoid a great trouble, threw away their souls. Fain would they now return
to light, and joyfully would change their present state with all the labors
and shames which they with hasty death so earnestly declined. But he knew
nothing of it, neither do I, only that it is not lawful. But how they shall
fare in the other World who upon such great accounts are tempted, is one of
God's secrets, which the Great Day will manifest. If any man will be pleased to
see more against it, he may find it in Lib. 1. de civit. Dei, c. 20. 21, 26.
ep. 61. ad Dulcit. and l. 11. contra 2. ep. Gaudent. c. 23.
S. Austin, Excid. Hieros. 3. c. 17.
Hegesippus, Epitom. log. c. 4.
Nicephorus Blennidas, Aethiop. 2.
Heliodorus, and diverse others, well collected by Fabrot in his 5th
Exercitation.

RULE IV. He that has suffered the punishment is not discharged in Conscience,
unless he also repent of the disobedience.
THis Rule is in effect the same with the first Rule of the first Chapter of
this Book: 1.
but because it is usually discoursed of also under the head of Penal Laws, and
there are many persons who, when they have broken the law, and have suffered
punishment, think themselves discharged, and because it ministers some
particularities of its own, I have therefore chosen distinctly to consider it.

In this inquiry penal laws usually are distinguished into laws purely penal, 2.
and mixed. 1. Laws purely penal are such which neither directly command, nor
forbid, but impose a penalty upon him that does or omits an action
respectively. Exodus: 22. 1.
So Moses to the Children of Israelxf, If a man shall steal an ox or a sheep,
and kill it or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for one ox, and four sheep
for one. 2. A mixed penal law is when with the precept or prohibition the
penalty is adjoined: so said God, Ye shall not hurt the widow or the
fatherless; Ibid.
if ye hurt them, they shall cry unto me, and I will hear their cry, and my
fury shall be kindled, and I will strike you with the sword, and your wives
shall be widows, and your children fatherless. And of the same nature is that
Canon of the Council of Agatho, Can. Miss. de consecrat. did. 1.
We do by a special order command all secular persons to hear the whole Divine
Service upon the Lord's Day, so that the people presume not to go forth before
the blessing of the Priest: but if any man shall presume to do so, let him be
publicly punished by the Bishop. 3. Other laws are purely moral, that is,
preceptive without any penalty. This distinction Silvester derides as childish,
and of no use; but others deride him: but whatever use it can be of to other
purposes, it is of little in this. For whether the penalty be annexed or no, it
obliges to penalty Tacit per^issum est quod sine ultione prohibetur. Tertull.
1. adv. Marc.
; and therefore whether it be preceptive or no, it also obliges to duty: and we
see it in ocular demonstration in diverse of the Levitical and moral laws of
God, which sometimes are set down in the style of laws purely penal, and the
same laws in other places are penal and prohibitive.

1. But why are punishments decreed in laws? 3.
are they for the obedient, or for the disobedient? for good men, or for bad?
Certainly, for them that do not obey. Now they that obey not, do well or ill,
or it is indifferent whether they do or no: if they do well, they are to be
rewarded, and not punished; if the thing after the sanction be still
indifferent, why shall he suffer evil that does none? But the case is plain,
that in all just Governments the punishment is decreed in the laws, that the
law may be obeyed; and unless it be equally good to the Prince that his
Subjects obey or be punished, that is, unless it be all one to him whether they
be happy and advantaged, or miserable and punished, and that he cares not
whether the subject receives the good or the evil of the law, it cannot be
supposed that when the subject is punished, the law is satisfied in its first
intention.

2. Add to this, 4.
If suffering the punishment does satisfy the law, then the Subject is not
tied to obey for Conscience sake, but only for wrath, expressly against the
Apostle; and then laws would quickly grow contemptible: for the great Flies
that break through the Cobweb-lawns of penal laws, would be both innocent and
unconcerned; innocent, as not being tied in Conscience, and unconcerned, as
having many defensatives against the fine.

3. The saying therefore of S. Austin has justly prevailed, 5.
Omnis poena si justa est, Lib. 1. Retract. c. 9.
peccati poena est, and supplicium nominatur, Every penalty is relative to an
offense, and is called punishment. And there can be no reason given why in laws
there are differing punishments assigned, but that they be proportionable to
the greatness of the fault. It follows therefore, that whoever is obliged to
suffer the punishment of the law, do ask God's pardon and the King's, for
having done a sin by which only he could be obliged to punishment. Reatus or
guilt, both in Divine laws and in humane, is an obligation to punishment: for
reatus poenae and reatus culpae differ but as the right and left hand of a
pillar; it is the same thing in several aspects and situations. A. Gellius,
lib. 20. cap. 1.
And Lucius Neratius was a fool, and a vile person; and having an absurd humor
of giving every man he met a box on the ear, he caused a servant to follow him
with a bag of money, and caused him to pay him whom he had smitten XXV Asses, a
certain sum which was by the law of the XII Tables imposed upon him that did
an injury: but considered not that (...) that while he was a base and a
trifling fool for doing injury to the Citizens.

This Rule hold* in all without exception: 6.
it seems indeed to fail in two cases, but it does not; only the account of
them will explicate and confirm the Rule.

1. In actions which are not sins, but undecencies, 7.
or unaptnesses to a state or office and action, the evils that are appendant
to them are also but quasi poenae, half punishments: such as is the
irregularity that is incurred by a Judge that gives sentence in a cause of
Blood; he is incapable of entering into Holy Orders by the ancient laws of the
Church. A Butcher is made incapable of being of the Inquest of Life and Death:
which incapacity is not directly a punishment, any more then it is a sin to be
a Butcher; but certain persons are without their fault declared unfit for
certain states o^ employments. Now this confirms the Rule, for still the
proportion is kept; and if it be but like a fault, the consequent of it is but
like a punishment. And if at any time these appendages are called punishments,
it is by a Catachresis or an abuse of the word, and because of the similitude
in the matter of it. So we say, the righteous are punished, that is, they
suffer evil, for their own trial, or for the glory of God: and so it is in the
Law, Sine culpa, nisi subsit causa, non est aliquis puniendus, No man is to be
punished without his fault, unless there be cause for it: that is, no man is to
suffer that evil, which in other cases is really a punishment, and in all cases
looks like one. And from hence comes that known Rule, and by the same measure
is to be understood, Etsi sine causa non potest infligi poena, potest tamen
sine culpa. The word poena is taken improperly for any evil consequent or
adjunct.

2. This seems to fail in laws that are conditional or conventional; 8.
such as are when the Prince has no intention to forbid or command any thing,
but gives leave to do it, but not unless you pay a fine. Thus if a Prince
commands that none shall wear Spanish cloth, or ride upon a Mule, or go with a
Coach and six Horses, under the forfeiture of a certain sum; this sum is a
punishment, and the action is a fault: but if the subjects shall ask leave to
do it, paying the sum, then it is a conditional or conventional law, and
obliges not to obedience, but to pay the fine. For these laws are not
prohibitive, but concessory; and there is no sign to distinguish them from
others, but the words of the law, the interpretation of the Judges, and the
allowed practice of the subjects.

Of the same consideration are all promises and vows and contracts 9.
which are made with a penalty annexed to the breakers. The interested person
is first tied to keep his word: if he does not, he sins. But if he does sin he
must therefore pay the penalty; and if he does not, he sins twice. Haud scio
(says Cicero) an satis sit eum qui lacesserit, injuriae suae poenitere. Lib.
1. Offic.
It is not enough for him to repent of the injustice, but he must also pay his
fine; and yet that does not acquit him from the first fault, but prevents a
second. He that so contracts is twice obliged, and the later fault is paid by
the penalty, and the first fault by repentance and that together.

RULE V. It is not lawful for a guilty person to defend himself by calumny, or
a lie, from the penalty of the law, though it be the sentence of death.
ALL the wisdom of Mankind has ever been busy in finding out and adorning
Truth, 1.
as being that in which we are to endeavor to be like God, Lib. 12. variar.
hist.
who is Truth essentially: and therefore Pythagoras in Aelian did say, that the
two greatest and most excellent works that God gave to Mankind to do, are the
pursuits of Truth and Charity; for these are excellencies for which God himself
is glorious before Men and Angels. The Persian Magi say, that Oromagdes (so
they called the greatest of their Gods) was in his body like light, and his
soul was like truth; and that therefore by truth we are like to God, but by a
lie we are made mortal (says Plato.) Lib. 6. de Rep.
Veritas, quomodo Sol illuminans colores, and album and nigrum ostendit, qualis
sit unusquisque eorum, sic ipsa quoque refellit omnem sermonis probabilitatem;
Clem. Alex. lib. 6. cap. 4.
merto a Graecis quoque acclamatum est, Principium magnae virtutis est Regina
veritas, As the Sun gives light to us, and distinction to black and white, so
does truth to speech; and therefore the Greeks did rightly affirm, that Truth
is the beginning of the great Virtue, that is, of perfection, or virtue
Heroical, said S. Clement.

This is true in all regards: but the question is, 2.
whether Truth can be practiced at all times. For God speaks Truth because it
is his nature, and he fears no man, and has power directly to bring all his
purposes to pass: but the affairs of men are full of intrigues, and their
persons of infirmity, and their understandings of deception, and they have ends
to serve which are just, and good, and necessary; and yet they cannot be served
by truth, but sometimes by error and deception. And therefore the Ancients
described Pan, who was the son of Mercury, their God of speech, with the upper
part like a man, and the lower part like a beast, rough, hairy and deformed;
not only to signify truth and falsehood, and that truth is smooth, even and
beauteous, and a lie is rough, ugly, deformed, and cloven-footed, ( quia
mendacii multiplex divortium, says one) but to represent, that in our
superior faculties, and our intercourse with the power above us, we must speak
truth, but that in our conversation with men below it is necessary sometimes by
a lie to advantage charity, by losing of a truth to save a life. Here then is
the inquiry,

1. Whether it can in any case be lawful to tell a lie.

2. Whether it be lawful to use restrictions and mental reservations, so that
what we speak, of it self is false, but joined to something within is truth.

3. Whether and in what cases it is lawful to equivocate, or use words of
doubtful signification with a purpose to deceive, or knowing that they will
deceive.

4. Whether it be lawful by actions and pretenses of actions to deceive others
for any end; and in what cases it is so.

Question I. Whether it can in any case be lawful to tell a lie.
To this I answer, 3.
that the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament do indefinitely and
severely forbid lying. Prove. 13. 5. 30. 8. Psalm. 5. 7.
A righteous man hates lying, says Solomon; and Agur's prayer was, Remove
from me vanity and lies. For the Lord will destroy them that speak lies. And
our Blessed Savior condemns it infinitely by declaring every lie to be of the
Devil. When he speaks a lie he speaks of his own, for he is a lier and the
Father of it. Lie not therefore one to another, Col. 3. 9. Revel. 21. 8, 27.
says S. Paul: For all liers shall have their part in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone. Beyond these things nothing can be said for the
condemnation of lying.

But then lying is to be understood to be something said or written to the hurt
of our neighbor, 4.
which cannot be understood otherwise then to differ from the mind of him that
speaks. Mendacium esse petulanter, aut cupiditate nocendi aliud loqui, seu
gestu significare, and aliud sentire: so Melanchthon: To lie is to deceive our
neighbor to his hurt. For in this sense a lie is naturally and intrinsecally
evil; that is, to speak a lie to our neighbor is naturally evil. Not because
it is different from an eternal truth, for every thing that differs from the
Eternal truth is not therefore criminal for being spoken, that is, is not an
evil lie: and a man may be a lier though he speaks that which does not differ
from the Eternal truth; for sometimes a man may speak that which is truth, and
yet be a lier at the same time in the same thing. For he does not speak truly
because the thing is true; but he is a lier because he speaks it when he thinks
it is false. That therefore is not the essence or formality of a lie.
Vehementer errant qui tradunt orationis esse proprium significare verum
necessarium, said Scaliger: A man may be a true man though he do not always
speak truth. If he intends to profit and to instruct, to speak probably and
usefully, to speak with a purpose to do good and to do no evil, though the
words have not in them any necessary truth, yet they may be good words.
Simonides and Plato say it is injustice and therefore evil: so does Cicero, and
indeed so does the Holy Scripture, by including our neighbors right in our
speaking truth; it is contra proximum, it is against our neighbor; for to
himself no man can lie, and to God no man can lie, unless he be also an
Atheistical person, and believes that God knows nothing that is hidden, and so
is impious when he says a lie. But a lie is an injury to our neighbor; who
because he knows not the secret, is to be told that in which he is concerned,
and he that deceives him abuses him.

For there is in mankind an universal contract implied in all their
entercourses, 5.
and words being instituted to declare the mind, and for no other end, he that
hears me speak has a right in justice to be done him, that as far as I can
what I speak be true; for else he by words does not know your mind, S. Gregor.
lib. 26. Moral. cap. 7.
and then as good and better not speak at all. Humanae aures verba nostra talia
judicant, qualia foris sonant. Divina vero judicia talia esse audiunt, qualia
ex intimis proferuntur. Though God judges of our words by the heart, yet Man
judges of the heart by the words; and therefore in justice we are bound to
speak so as that our neighbor do not loose his right which by our speaking we
give him to the truth that is in our heart. And of a lie thus defined, which is
injurious to our neighbor so long as his right to truth remains, Epist 8. ad
Hieron.
it is that S. Austin affirms it to be simply unlawful, and that it can in no
case be permitted, Nisi forte regulas quasdam daturus es quibus noverimus ubi
oporteat mentiri, ubi non oporteat; by way of confidence and irony: he condemus
it all, unless peradventure (says he) you are able to give us rules when a man
may lie, Eurip. in Phoeniss. Lactant. 6. instit. 16.
and when he may not. Quod non est bonum, nunquam erit bonum, that which is not
innocent in it self, can never be made so. But vitia non sunt quibus recte uti
licet; if it can in any case become good, it is not of its own nature evil: so
that if a lie be unjust, it can never become lawful; but if it can be separate
from injustice, then it may be innocent. Here then I consider,

This right though it be regularly and commonly belonging to all men, 6.
yet it may be taken away by a Superior right supervening; or it may be lost,
or it may be hindered, or it may cease upon a greater reason.

1. Therefore upon this account it was lawful for the Children of Israel to
borrow Jewels of the Egyptians, 7.
which supposes a promise of restitution, though they intended not to pay them
back again: God gave them commandment so to spoil them, and the Egyptians were
divested of their rights, and were to be used like enemies.

2. It is lawful to tell a lie to children or to madmen, 8.
because they having no powers of judging, have no right to truth: but then the
lie must be charitable and useful; because they are defended by the laws from
injury, and therefore must not have a lie told them that can do them mischief.
So that if a lie be told it must be such as is for their good; for though they
have no right to truth, yet they have right to defense and immunity: and an
injurious lie told to a child or madman is a sin, not because it deceives him,
but because it deceives him to his prejudice. Quintilian the great Master of
children says, Utilitatis eorum gratia multa fingimus, We feign many things to
affright or allure Children to good, and from evil respectively. And so do
Physicians to their Patients, abusing the fancies of hypochondriacal and
disordered persons into a will of being cured. Some will do nothing without a
warrant; others are impatient of your converse unless you seem to believe them:
and Physicians can never apply their remedies, unless they pretend warrants, or
compliances, and use little arts of wit and cosenage. This and the like were so
usual, so permitted to Physicians, that it grew to a Proverb, Mentiris ut
medicus; which yet was always to be understood in the way of charity, and with
honor to the profession. But this any Physician may not do, that is, not to
every Patient: for if the man be wise and can choose and can consider, he may
not be cosen'd into his cure by the telling of a lie, because he is capable of
reason, and therefore may choose what he has a mind to, and therefore to cosen
him is to injure him; and no man must commit a sin to do a good turn to a man
against his will. * And thus also in the case of Children: their Tutors or
Parents may not tell them every lie; they may not teach them lies and make them
confident in vanities; Luc^^.
but for their good, govern them as they can be governed. Ut puerorum aetas
improvida ludificetur, all the world consents, when it is for their
improvement. And to this is reduced the permission of inventing a witty fable,
or telling a false story, to gain ground upon him that believes a false
opinion, and cannot any other way so easily be confuted. Niceph. 16. c. 35.
Thus when two Eutychian Bishops, who believing that the two natures of Christ
made but one, did consequently believe that the Divinity did die as well as the
Humanity in the death of Christ, came to the Court of a Saracen Prince, he
pretended great sorrow and conste^nation of mind at the receipt of some
letters; into the contents whereof when they with some curiosity inquired, the
Prince with a seeming great sorrow told them he had received certain
intelligence that the Archangel Gabriel was dead. They to comfort him told him
certainly it could not be true; and for their parts they did believe it to be
impossible. O Fathers, said the Prince, you do not believe it to be impossible
that an Archangel should, when you affirm that the Divinity did die. Such a
fiction as this no wise man reproves; it is but like the supposing a false
Proposition in disputation, that upon that false supposition a true Conclusion
may be erected.

3. It is lawful to tell a lie to our neighbor by consent, 9.
provided the end be innocent or pious. Thus S. Chrysostom and S. Hierom say
that S. Peter suffered himself to be reproved by S. Paul before the Gentiles
for too much compliance with the Jews: not that he did it seriously, but (...),
he acted a part by consent to establish Christian liberty amongst the Gentiles.
I do not consent to the instance, because S. Paul tells it to the Galatians as
a solemn story and a direct narrative, adding withal dogmatically, that S.
Peter was to be blamed: but the instance will serve rightly to illustrate this
limitation of the Rule. But thus the parties in a war may write exactly
contrary to the truth; when they are understood to what purpose, and when it is
by consent. Because he who has the right to truth has quitted it, and his
communication does serve the ends of society well enough, and his words, though
they are not agreeable to his ordinary mind, yet they are made to be so by
particular institution and design. Thus in besieged places they write letters
of confidence and great ostentation of the strengths which they have not; when
their parties have consented that they should do so for their just advantages.

4. To tell a lie for charity, 10.
to save a man's life, the life of a friend, of a husband, of a Prince, of an
useful and a public person, has not only been done in all times, but
commended by great and wise and good men. (...), To tell a lie to save a life
is no harm, said old Pisander. Thus the Egyptian midwives are commended because
by their lie they saved the Israelitish infants. O magnum humanitatis ingenium!
O pium pro salute mendacium! says S. Austin of them: it was an excellent
invention of kindness, and a pious lie for the safety of the innocents: and S.
Ambrose and S. Jerome commend them so, that they supposed them to receive
eternal rewards. The same was the case of Rahab; to whom it should seem that
Phinehas, who was one of the spies, had given instruction and made in her fair
dispositions to tell a lie for their concealment. For when she had hidden
Caleb, Phinehas said to her, Ego sum Sacerdos, Sacerdotes vero, quippe
Angelorum similes, si volunt, aspectabiles sunt; si nolunt, non cernuntur. But
she made no use of that, but said directly they were gone away. Concerning
which lie of hers S. Chrysostom cries out, (...), Homil. 5. de poenitent.
O excellent lie! O worthy deceit of her that did not betray the Divine
persons, but did retain piety! Thus we find S. Felix telling a lie to save his
life from the Heathen Inquisitors. Felicem sitit impietas --
Felicemque rogant, Felix ubi cernitur: and non
Cernitur ipse, Natali 5. S. Felicis.
nec ipse vir est, cum sit prope, long est.
-- persensit and ipse faventis
Consilium Christi, ridensque rogantibus infit,
Nescio Felicem quem quaeritis: ilicet illi
Praetereunt ipsum; discedit at ille platea,
Illudente canes Domino frustratus hiantes.
They asked where Felix was; himself answered, that he knew not Felix whom they
looked for: and yet no man finds fault with this escape. Deceptio and mendacium
semper alias mala res, tunc tantum sunt usui quando pro remedio sunt amicis
curandis, aut ad vitandum apud hosts periculum; they are the words of Celsus
in Origin. A lie is otherwise evil, only it is then useful when it is for
remedy to cure the evils of our friends, or to avoid the evils from our
enemies. The same almost with the expression of Clemens Alexandrinus, who
allows (...), to lie when it is a remedy. In Philopseu.
So Lucian amongst the Heathens, Qui cum usus postulat mentiuntur, venia
nimirum hi, imo laud plerique eorum digni sunt; quicunque vel hosts
fefellerunt, vel ad salutem tali quopiam pharmaco usi sunt in necessitatibus:
They are not only to be excused or pardoned, but to be commended, that lie,
when they use it as a remedy or a medicine in the danger or necessities of our
friends; where also the Scholiast does allows an officious lie. Lib. 5.
Constit. cap. 37.
So we must use a lie, says Cassian, quasi naturae ei insit hellebori, as a
man uses hellebore: and he commends Archebius for deceiving some persons with a
charitable lie. It is therefore no wonder if Pliny commends Arria the wife of
Caecinna Paetus for so often lying to her sick husband in the concealment of
the death of their beloved boy; Lib. 3. Epist. 16.
which she therefore hid lest the grief should extinguish her Husband. In
short, S. Austin says that all the Philosophers, Quaest. 68. in Levit.
as Plato, Xenophon, Lucian, the Lawyers, the Physicians, the Rhetoricians and
Theologues did affirm that it was sometimes lawful to tell a lie; that is, when
it did good and no evil: (...), said Proclus, For Charity is better then truth,
and to save a man's life is better then a true story. The Archbishop of Tire (as
I remember) tells a story, that a malicious Saracen had secretly defiled one of
the Mosques or places of worship which the Turks have in Jerusalem. The fact
was imputed to the Christians, who generally denying it, but having no credit
with their enemies, were all presently dragged to the place of execution.
Amongst them there was young man pious and noble, who seeing all his brethren
in a sad condition and himself equally involved, by an officious and a
charitable lie took the fact upon himself, and confessed himself alone to be
the doer of it, and that the rest knew nothing of it. Himself indeed was put to
death with exquisite torments, but he saved the lives of all the rest; who, I
doubt not, believed that young man to have in heaven a great reward for his
piety, and no reproof for his innocent and pious lie: for in memory of this
noble act the Christians in Jerusalem once a year marched with palms in their
hands into the City to perpetuate the memory of that deliverance.

5. Now this may be better admitted in case the charitable lie be told to him
to whom the good accrues; 11.
for then there is a leave justly presumed, and he that receives the good is
willing to receive it with the loss of an useless or hurtful truth, and
therefore there is no injustice done: as he that takes his neighbor's goods,
for which he has reason to believe his neighbor willing, is no thief, nor the
other a deceiver. (...), says Andronicus Rhodius, He does indeed deceive, but
he is no deceiver; because not the cosening but the curing of his friend is the
purpose of his false affirmative. And to this we suppose that every man is
willing enough, and therefore not at all injured. And this reason was good in
such charitable deceptions which are by implicit consent or leave justly
presumed: so Darius Hystaspes in Herodotus, Ubi expedit mendacium dicere,
dicatur; nam idem optamus, and qui mendacium dicimus, and qui veritatem. Every
man is willing enough to be deceived into his own advantage; and therefore when
it is so, in such things where the man is willing to receive advantage, there
is no harm done, if he be deceived that he may not be undone. He that is in
danger of drowning is willing enough to be pulled out of the water, though by
the ears, or the hair of his head; and we have reason to believe so in the
present affair. Mendacium nemini noxium, sed alicui commodum, honestum esse,
said Bishop Heliodorus in his Fair Ethiopian. He was indeed then writing a
Romance, by which he intended to do good and no harm, and therefore believed
himself innocent. Upon this account the Apologues or Fables of Aesop, the
Parables of wise men, and their dark sayings, the cases which Lawyers put, and
the fictions of law, have their justification, Et prodesse solent, and
delectare -- They hurt no man, and do good to every man; they do him profit,
and they do him pleasure. Exit in immensum foecunda licentia vatum,
Obligat historica nec sua verba fide. Ovid. 3. (...).

Poets do intend to teach, not to deceive, in their fictions, and therefore
are allowed.

6. But if the lie be told to another for the preservation not of himself, 12.
but of a third person, then the case is more difficult, for here is no
presumptive leave, but it is against the mind of the inquirer. Now concerning
this, though it be allowed by very many of the ancient Doctors of the Church,
and by the wisest amongst the Heathens, and has in it a very great charity;
yet I cannot see sufficient cause to allow it. (...)
(...), Sophocl. in Creusa.

(...).
It is at no hand good to tell a lie: but when a truth brings an intolerable
evil, it is pardonable, but not commendable; so the Greek Tragedy: because it
is of it self evil to lie to our neighbor. Not that every false proposition
spoken knowingly is a sin; but if it be spoken to deceive, and not to profit,
it is spoken to the injury of him that hears, and is a sin because it is
unjust, and therefore not to be done for any good; and it is in this very
instance in which S. Paul was angry at them who intimated that he told a lie
for a good end: it may not be done, when to do it is unjust or injurious.
Cause. 22. qu. 2. c. Nequis.
I approve therefore the opinion of S. Austin, I am sure it was one of his
opinions, for in this question he had more then one; Duo sunt genera
mendaciorum in quibus non est magna culpa, sed tamen non sunt sine culpa, There
are two sorts of lies which have in them no great fault, but yet they are not
innocent: the one is to lie in jest; which is therefore not pernicious, because
it does not deceive, for it is taken but for a jest: the other is to lie for
the good of our neighbor; which therefore is the less, because it has
something in it of good will. Lib. de pudicit.
And Tertullian is of the same opinion, who reckons this of necessitate
mentiri, to lie in the time of need, amongst the sins of daily incursion, or of
an unavoidable infirmity. And S. Austin discourses it very well; De mendacio,
ad Consentium.
When it is asked whether a good man may lie or no, we ask not after him that
belongs to Egypt, to Jericho, or to Babylon, or to the earthly Jerusalem which
is in bondage with her children: but what is his office that belongs to the
Mother of us all, that City that is from above? and then we answer, that no lie
is of the truth: but concerning the Citizens of this City it is written, that a
lie was not found in their mouths. So that upon this account all those examples
recorded in Scripture of great persons telling a lie in the time of the danger
of themselves or others is no warrant, no argument of the lawfulness of it; for
they were under a looser law, but we under a more perfect and more excellent:
and yet they did not do well, and if we imitate them we do worse.

And therefore we find great examples of Christians and of Heathens, 13.
whose Charity was not cold, but their love of truth and righteousness was much
warmer then in the former examples. Lib. de mendac. cap. 13.
S. Austin tells of Firmus Bishop of Tagasta, that when one who by evil chance
had killed a man fled to him to be concealed from the avengers of blood; to the
inquirers he answered, Nec mentiri se posse, nec hominem prodere, He could
neither lie, nor yet betray the man. For which answer and refusal the Bishop
being brought before the Emperor, as a reward both of his charity and his
truth, he obtained pardon for the man. And it was a great thing which Probus
tells of Epaminondas, and Plutarch of Aristides, that they were so great and
severe lovers of truth, that they would not lie so much as in jest. Indeed that
was very well: and it is of greater obligation to Christians, to whom not only
purity and simplicity, ingenuity and sincerity is commanded, but all vain
talking is forbidden. But the case is not so clear in the matter of difference,
when it happens between a great charity and an unconcerning truth. For who
would not save his Father's life, or the life of his King, or of a good Bishop
and a Guide of Souls, at the charge of a harmless lie, from the rage of
Persecutors and Tyrants? God indeed in his providence has so ordered the
affairs of the world, that these cases seldom happen: but when any man is
surprised or tried, unless he be sure that it is in that case a sin to tell a
lie, he may be sure it is a very great sin to betray his Prince or Prelate, his
Father or his Friend. Every man in that case would dispute hardly, rather then
give up a good man to death. And if it be come to a dispute, and that it be
doubtful on either hand whether the lie in that case, or whether the betraying
the man to death, be the sin, it is the safer way to determine for the charity
then for the veracity; because in case it be a sin to give him up, it is much a
greater sin then to tell such a lie: and then comes in the rule, Caret peccato
quod ex duobus minus est. The lie is the less evil, and therefore it is no sin
when it is chosen to avoid that which for ought we know is the greater. But
this is upon supposition that the case is doubtful. * To which also must be
added, that it must also suppose that it is just to save the man, or that we
think it so: for to rescue a Malefactor, a Bandito, a Fugitive of law, has in
it no such obligation. But if it be just that the man be saved, that is a
higher justice then the obligation of telling truth to the Persecutor; to whom
it is as great charity, if from him we take the power of doing evil, as it is
justice to rescue the innocent. Now this, and the opinion of so many great men
that allow it, and the favorable nature of the case, is enough at least to
make this matter probable; and if there be a doubt, it is enough to establish
it: the question being uncertain, is enough to make the practice certain.

And indeed if we consider things without the prejudice of easy and popular
opinions, though it be said, that to tell truth is an act of justice; yet this
is not true in all propositions, but in such truths only which concern a man
for some real good to him, or for some imaginary good which has no real evil.
But when the telling of a truth will certainly be the cause of evil to a man,
though he have right to truth, yet it must not be given to him to his harm: it
is like the giving to a madman his own sword; you had better give him a wooden
dagger, though the other be his own. But in an unconcerning truth what interest
can any man have that is worth preserving? What wrong is done to me if I be
told that Alexander dyed upon the floor, and not upon a feather-bed? or that
Pittacus his wife hurt her fingers when she threw down the table of meat before
her husband's friends? Truth is justice when it does good, when it serves the
end of wisdom, or advantage, or real pleasure, or something that ought or may
be desired; and every truth is no more justice, then every restitution of a
straw to the right owner is a duty. Be not over-righteous, says Solomon. In
these things there is no question but the pretenses of little justice ought to
serve the great end of charity; and much rather if the truth will do no good,
and will do hurt to him that inquires, and more to him who is inquired after.
The Persecutor has a right to truth, but no right to be undone; and therefore
he is not wronged by that lie that saves him harmless in some measure, and his
brother in more; and if he be not wronged, then no man is: and then the lie
that so well serves Charity, is not against Justice; and unless every lie be
intrinsecally evil and malicious, it has in such cases no irregularity. And if
it be objected, that we must not tell a lie for God, therefore much less for
our Brother; I answer, that it does not follow: for God needs not a lie, but
our Brother does: and besides this, there can no service be pretended to be
done to God by a lie, but it must be in the matter of justice or religion, in
both which cases a lie is neither to be told for God nor our Brother; but a
real service may be done for our Brother by such a lie as sins neither against
justice nor religion; in which case only I say it may seem to be allowable.

But then from these premises the truth in the instance of the Rule is
established; 14.
for it is not lawful for a guilty prisoner to say Not guilty, when he is
justly interrogated. Christianum non mentiri etiamsi moriatur ex tormentis,
said Clemens Alexandrinus, A Christian will not lie, though to escape death
with torments: Number. 16.
For the law says, Thou shall not kill; and the law says, Thou shall not lie:
but the law it self does sometimes kill, but the law does never lie. For
although it be said, that no man is bound to accuse himself, and indeed the
laws of man do not tie him to do it: yet this hinders not the conclusion in
this case; for in the present case the man is accused already, and he is not
called to be his own accuser, but to confess the fact if he be justly accused
by the law: for why does the Judge ask, but to be answered truly? For there
being three ways in law of proceeding to definitive sentence, 1. the notoreity
of the fact, 2. the conviction by witnesses, and 3. the confession of the
party; in the destitution of the first, to prevent the trouble of the second,
the law interrogates concerning the third; and it is as in the case of Joshuah
and Achan, My son, give glory unto the Lord, and confess thy fault. It is true,
it is a favorable case; and when a man's life is at stake, he has brought
himself into an evil necessity: but there is no excusing of a false denial, but
it is certainly Criminal, and nothing can excuse it, unless the law should give
leave to such persons to say what they would, which cannot be supposed in any
good Government; for then trials of Criminal causes between the Judge and the
Thief would be like a match at fencing, and it is infinitely confuted by those
laws which use to examine by scourgings or torture; which whether it be lawful
or unlawful, I do not here determine, but I affirm to be a great testimony,
that laws do not love to be played withal, but when they ask soberly, intend
to be answered truly.

This is also to be extended to the case of Advocates, who in a good cause must
not use evil arts. For we must not tell a lie for God, and therefore not for
the interest of any moral virtue, nor for the defense of righteousness; for a
cavil or an injurious lie is out of the way to justice, and she must not be
directly wronged that she may be indirectly righted. In the civil law it is
permitted, that to avoid abuses and the injurious craft of the opposite party,
the advocate of the right may use all arts that are not lies and falsity; Nec
videtur dolo fecisse qui fraudem excluserit, says the law, l. Compater, Titio,
ff. de legate. secundo. He may be overthrown by art, so he be not by that which
is false: sic ars deluditur art. But in the case which the lawyers out of
Baldus put, the question is evident. Agricola borrows of Sempronius five
hundred pounds, and pays him at the day, but without witness: Sempronius sues
him for the money: Agricola owes him none, but cannot prove the payment; but
yet may not when he is particularly interrogated, to save himself from injury,
deny that ever the received any. He must confess the truth, though he pay the
money again. Covaruvias affirms that he may in this case lawfully deny that
ever he received any; because he is not indebted, he received none that remains
in his hand: and to other purposes the Judge cannot question him; and if he
does he is unjust, and therefore Agricola is not tied to answer rightly. But
this is not well said nor well considered. For the Judge being competent may
require him to answer; and the intention of the question is not to know whether
Agricola have paid the money yea or no; but whether he borrowed it. For if he
did, the Judge is afterward to inquire concerning the payment: and as
Sempronius was tied to prove that, so is Agricola tied to prove this; and a lie
is not to be confuted by a lie, nor the error of Agricola in not taking
witnesses or an acquittance to be supplied by a direct denial of a truth. * But
if Sempronius have lent Agricola 500 li. whereof he has received 200 li. if
the Judge ask whether he ows him that sum which Sempronius demands, he may
indefinitely and without more punctuality deny the debt, that is, of 500 li.
saying that he owes it not: and if the law be such that the confession of one
part intitles him to the whole, he may deny the whole to be due, in case he
have paid a part. But with these two Cautions, 1. That if he be asked
concerning a part, he answer to that as justly as he answers to the whole: 2.
That he do not make use of this subterfuge to defraud Sempronius of what is due
debt, but only to defend himself from the undue demand. These cautions being
observed, he has liberty so to defend his cause, because majori summae
negative prolatae minorem nec naturaliter nec civiliter inesse, say the
lawyers. A man by denying the whole does not deny the part, though he that
affirms the whole affirms the part; and therefore this defense is just because
it is true. * But now if in a just cause the Advocate or party may not tell a
lie; I conclude that much less may he do it in an unjust cause, and for the
defense of wrong. But [ much less] signifies nothing, for it may not at all be
done in either; and in pure, perfect negatives there can be no degrees. But in
artifices and crafty entercourses there is some difference; these may be used
to defend a just cause that can no other way be defended; but they may not be
used to promote an evil cause; because they of themselves though they be
indifferent, yet not serving a good end but an evil, do therefore become evil.
And therefore the Greek that denied the depositum of his friend, and offered to
swear at the Altar that he had restored it already, did not preserve his
conscience and his oath by desiring his friend to hold the staff in which he
had secretly conveyed the money. It is true, he delivered it into his hand,
desiring that he would hold it till he had sworn; but that artifice was a plain
cosenage, and it was prettily discovered: For the injured person in indignation
at the perjury smote the staff upon the ground, and broke it, and espied the
money. But that made all right indeed, though against the intention of the
perjurer. Such like arts as these must not be used to do a mischief: if they
do charity and justice, if they have not something to ligitimate them, they
have very much to excuse them.

7. It is lawful to do otherwise then we have said, 15.
when the doing is better then the saying: if the saying were ill, there is no
scruple of it; for it ought not to be done, but the saying is to be repented
of: not that the saying was a lie, for there is no way of making it good but by
causing it to pass into a lie, that is, into vanity and nothing. But then, if
the saying be less good, and the deed be contrary, and yet much better, the
truth is not so much as the bounty; and there is no injustice in the lie,
because there is charity in the action, and a sufficient leave presumed to be
given by him that is concerned. Thus the Emperor that said he would cut off
every one that pissed against the wall, being afterward appeased and persuaded
to mercy toward them that had done amiss, he expounded his words concerning
dogs, and caused all the dogs in the Town to be killed. No man here was
injured; and it had been an importune adhering to a truth, and a cruel
verification of his word, to have preferred his word before the lives of so many
Citizens.

8. It is not lawful to tell a lie to save our fame; 16.
but we must rather accuse our selves then tell a lie, or commit any other sin.
Nemo tenetur infamare se, is a rule universally admitted amongst the Casuists,
No man is bound to discover his own shame. And upon this account they give
leave to men to hide their sin, to leave their repentance imperfect, to tell a
lie, to hazard the not doing of a known duty, to injure innocent persons. Thus
when a man has stolen goods, he is bound to restore, but not if it cannot be
done without discovering his person, because no man is bound to disgrace
himself. If an adulteress has some children by her husband, others secretly by
a stranger, she is bound not to suffer the legitimate to be injured by
provisions for the other: this is true: but if she cannot prevent the injury to
the legitimate without discovering her self to her husband, Non tenetur, She is
not bound to defame self. If her husband examine her concerning it, she may
hold her peace: but if that increases the suspicion, she has no way to escape
but by denying it; for she is not obliged to betray or accuse her self. This is
the doctrine of the Canonists and Masters of Conscience in the Church of Rome,
which (as yet) are almost all that have written upon Cases. Habetur in
compendio Navarri per Petr. Guivar. edit. Antverp. 1595. page 93.
Navarre is the man whom I choose for all the rest. Nemo tenetur restituere cum
periculo famae consequentis virtutem moralem vel theologicam; non famae partae
in aliis rebus praeclaris, ut ingenio, divitiis, No man is bound to make
restitution with the hazard of his fame consequent to a moral or theological
virtue; that is, if it will make him suspected not to be a good man: but if it
will only hinder or hazard his reputation of wisdom or wealth or any thing of
these natures, it hinders not. And again in the case of an adulteress, Pagina
82.
Peccavit, sed potest absolvi, licet taceat, and noceat patri putativo and
haeredibus, quando timetur mors, vel amissio famae, etc. She has sinned, but
she may be absolved, though she hold her peace, and be injurious to the
supposed Father, and wrong the heirs; that is, if she be in peril of her life,
or fears the loss of her fame. To save a man's credit, an honest man, to whom it
would be a great shame to beg, videtur posse clanculum necessaria surripere,
Vide Compen. impress. Lugd. 1641. page 335.
may privately steal necessaries. So Diana. And if so, I do not doubt but he
may also lie, and deny it to save his credit, if he be asked uncivilly
concerning it. But this also the Doctors expressly affirm, that if Titius have
disgraced Caius by punishing his secret shame to defame him, he is bound to
make restitution of his good name, by denying what he said, that is, by telling
of a lie, or by mental reservation; and that is all one, as I shall prove in the
sequel. So Emonerius. Against these prodigies of doctrine I intend this
paragraph. We must not commit a sin to save our life, much less to save our
fame; and indeed nothing does more deserve infamy then to tell a lie, nothing
disgraces a man more: and if a lie be an injustice, then no end can save it
harmeless.

But then concerning our fame, 17.
we must rather let it go, then let our duty go. S. Aug. lib. de bono viduit.
cap. 22.
For though our fame is a tender part, and very valuable, yet our duty is more:
although our fame is necessary for others, yet a good conscience is necessary
to our selves: and he is cruel that neglects his own fame; but he is more cruel
that neglects his own soul: and therefore we may expose our good name to go as
God shall please, 1. When we ask counsel and remedy for our soul. 2. To avoid
the sin of pride, and punish the vanities of our spirit. 3. To exercise and
increase the grace of humility. 4. In humiliation and penance for our sins,
when our fame is not necessary to others, that is, when we are not eminent and
public persons. 5. When we are tied to any express duty which is indispensably
necessary, as restitution of fame or goods, and yet cannot be done without the
publication of our person and our shame. 6. When for our own greater good or
for the public interest we are commanded by a just and competent authority. 7.
And lastly, When we must either confess our sin or tell a lie, which is the
thing now in question; for we must rather suffer shame then do things worthy
of shame, rather be ashamed before men then be ashamed before God, that is,
rather be disgraced then damned: for nothing needs a lie but a sin to hide it,
and by a lie a sin is made two.

9. It is not lawful to tell a lie in humility, 18.
or the confession of sins and accusation of our selves. De verbi Apost.
Cum humilitatis causa mentiris, si non eras peccator antequam mentireris,
mentiendo efficer is quod evitaras, said S. Austin. He that lies in humility,
and calls himself a sinner in that wherein he was innocent, has made himself a
sinner by his lying. And this was it which Abbat Zozimus wittily and piously
replied; For when he said he was the greatest sinner, Dorotheus doctr. 2. n. 11.
and the vilest of men, to him that reproved him for saying so, and telling him
that it was not truly said of him, because every one knew he served God with
great diligence and great sincerity, and therefore he ought to speak more truly
of himself and more thankfully of God; Zozimus replied, You say very well, I
ought to speak truth of my self and thankfully of God; but I am false and
unthankful, but therefore I did say true, and not unthankfully. But we have
truth enough to say of our selves to make us humble without saying what is
false. Eth. lib. 4. c. 7.
(...), says Aristotle; to deny the good things that are in us, or to make
them less, is dissembling. All pride is a lie; but humility is truth: and
therefore it is but a dissembling humility that lives upon the bread of deceit.
Synesius Bp. of Ptolemais was a wise man and a great Philosopher. But when he
was chosen Bshop he refused it passionately, and that his refusal might be
accepted, declaimed most bitterly against himself; that he was a man given to
gaming, from which a Bishop should be free as God himself; that he did not
believe that the world would ever perish; that he did not assent to the article
of the resurrection of the dead; that being a Philosopher of the Stoical Sect,
he was something given to lying; that he was not popular in his opinions, but
humorous and morose, secret and resolute; that if he was forced to be a Bishop,
he would then preach all his opinions. For all this Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria consecrated him Bishop, as knowing all this to be but stratagem and
the arts of an odd fantastic humility. Evagr. lib. 1. c. 15. hist. Niceph.
lib. 14 c. 55.
But it was ill done; and Synesius had this punishment for his lying modesty,
that he was believed by posterity to be so heathenish and unworthy, that that
Church chose him Bishop only upon hopes he would mend. So Evagrius and
Nicephorus report.

10. 19.
In a just war it is lawful to deceive the unjust enemy, but not to lie; that
is, by stratagems and semblances of motions, by amusements and intrigues of
action, by ambushes and wit, by simulation or dissimulation, (...), by force or
craft, openly or secretly, any way that you can, unless you promise the
contrary: for it is in open war, if the war be just, lawful to do justice
upon the enemy all the ways we can; craft is but the facilitation of the
force; and when it is a state of war, there is nothing else to be looked for.
But if there be a treaty, or a contract, a promise or an agreement in any
thing, that is a state of peace so far, and introduces a law; and then to
tell a lie or to falsify does destroy peace and justice, and by breaking the
law reduces things to the state of war again. (...), Pindar.
It is lawful to do any thing to destroy your enemy; that is, so long as you
profess hostility: and therefore if you tell a false tale to him to deceive
him, when you are fighting against him, he is a fool if he believes you, for
then you intend to destroy him; but you are not unjust, you are in a state of
war with him, and have no obligation upon you toward him. Thus Elisha told a
lie to the Syrian army which came to apprehend him, 2 Kings 6. 19.
This is not the City, and this is not the way: and this is approved and
allowed by Plato and Xenophon, Homer and Pindar, Polybius and Thacydides,
Plutarch and Lucian amongst the Greeks, Philo amongst the Jews; and S.
Chrysostom amongst the Christians says, Lib. 1. de Sacerdotio.
If you examine all the bravest Generals, you shall find their bravest trophies
to be the production of fraud and craft. (...), and that they were more
commended then such who did their work by fine force. Thus the causing false
rumors to be spread amongst the enemies is an allowed stratagem in war,
neither ignoble nor unjust. Livius l. 3. 29.
Flaccus told that Aemilius had taken the enemies town, to dishearten the party
he fought against: and Quinctius the Consul caused it to be spread abroad that
the enemies on the right wing were fled. By such arts it is very usual to bring
consternation to the hostile party: and he whom you may lawfully kill, you may
as well deceive him into it, as force him into it; you being no more obliged to
tell him truth then to spare his life: for certainly of it self killing is as
bad as lying; but when you have no obligation or law to the contrary, and have
not bound your self to the contrary, you may do either. But this is at no hand
to be done in matters of treaty or promise, either explicit or implicit, as
in parties, and truces; and therefore it was a foul stain upon Hannibal, Val^^.
Max.
that he professing open war against the Romans did also profess it against
faith and justice, keeping no word or promise if it was for his advantage to
break it; and the Trojans were troubled in conscience at their fallacious
conducting of their wars, not by stratagem, but by breaking their oaths and
Covenants, -- (...)
(...), Iliad. 8.
etc
We fight with lying and breaking promises, which is unlawful to do. For
concerning this thing, that even in war we are bound to keep faith and
promise made to our enemies, it is certain and affirmed by almost all wise and
good men of the world: De offic. l. 1. c. 29.
Liquet etiam in bello fidem and justitiam servari oportere, nec ullum decorum
oportere servari, si violetur fides, said S. Ambrose; and he proves it by the
example of Joshuah, who kept his promise which the Gibeonites got fraudulently
from him. And the same is the sentence of S. Austin; fides quando promittitur,
etiam hosti servanda est, Epist. 1. ad Bonifac.
contra quem bellum geritur: and therefore when Nebuchadnezzar had conquered
Zedechiah, and taken him into protection and peace upon his word and promise of
fidelity, because he afterward did privately solicit the King of Egypt to
fight against the King, he was put to death with greatest cruelty. And this is
not only true between those who are public enemies, forreiners and strangers,
and supreme in their respective dominions, which the law properly signifies
under the word Hosts, l. quos nos, ff. de verborum signif. for this is without
question; and therefore all men condemn those that violate Ambassadors, or that
break the laws of truce; and every one blames Titus Labienus for wounding
Commius of Arras under the color of parlee: Hi^ius, Bell. Gallic. 8. c. 3.
Cicero, lib. 3. Offic.
but Attilius Regulus is commended for refusing to give his voice in the Senate
so long as he was not discharged of his oath made to the Carthaginians. But
this is also true, and our word and faith is sacred, when it is passed to all
sorts of enemies, to Rebels, to Thieves, to civil Adversaries, to condemned
persons, to Fugitive servants, such as Spartacus, Eunus and Athenio; and the
reason of all is the same. Inter quos juris alicujus communio est, inter eos
obligationem contrahi, They that are under the same law are equally bound; and
whoever promise or treat, do it at least by the law of Nature or Nations,
which alike bind them who are free from any civil obligation. This is that
which Triphoninus said, That if a thief intrusts any goods to the right owner,
not knowing that they are his own, he is not obliged to restitution; but every
man else is, if he have promised, because they are none of his, and therefore
he can be obliged to repay them: and for thieves and fugitives the people of
Rome did treat with them, and send Ambassadors; and all that was bound upon
them by that intercourse they kept religiously. And the same they did to
condemned persons; as appears in that famous case of Caius Rabirius, Vide Orat.
Cicer pro C^ Rabirio. Appian. bell Civil. 1.
who was questioned for killing L. Apuleius Saturninus against the public
faith given him by the people, when he and his companions fled to the Capitol
for immunity and a guard against the sentence of death which he had deserved.

But all this is to be understood so, that the faith and word be given by him
who has power to verify it: but when A. Albinus made a peace with King
Jugurtha, for which he had no commission, the Senate was not obliged to verify
it; and Camillus the Dictator broke the peace which the Romans had foolishly
made with the Gauls; and Scipio dissolved the contract which Masinissa and
Sophonisba made without his leave, who had the power. In this there is only
caution to be had that there be no combination to deceive or rescind what is
found to be disadvantageous, nor advantages taken by the change of hands. For
if the Romans finding relief come, made Camillus Dictator that they might by
pretense of his command break the peace, they did dishonourably and false; but
if he was Dictator before the peace, he had power, and he had reason. To this
can be referred the case of two Italian Gentlemen. Guarino had injured Antonio
de Imola; but confessed his fault, asked pardon, made amends: and then Antonio
swore his peace and his forgiveness, and that his hand should never be upon
him; but in his heart bore him a secret grudge, and therefore smote him
secretly, saying that Guarino was a Bandito, and therefore condemned by the
laws. This is to make our promise the cover of a lie, and the laws to minister
to crafty mischiefs. After a promise a man must not change his mind, and then
make excuses. Renunciatio sui juris per poenitentiam revocari non potest, says
the law, l. pactum, ff. de pact.

But deceiving the enemy by the stratagem of actions or words is not properly
lying; for this suppose a conversation of law or peace, trust or promise
explicit or implicit. A lie is the deceiving of a trust or confidence, but in
fighting there is none of that; it is like wrestling and fencing, a design to
make that part unarmed where he may strike the surer: and of this S. Clemens of
Alexandria affirms expressly concerning stratagems in war, Stromat. l. 1. c.
13.
Haec omnia licebit efficere, vel persuadendo, vel cogendo, vel injuriam
faciendo in iis ulciscendis quibus expedit, vel faciendo id quod justum est,
vel mentiendo, vel vera dicendo, vel etiam simul utendo aliquibus eorum in
eodem tempore. All these things it is lawful to bring to pass by persuasion, or
by force, by doing injury or harm there where we are to do revenge, by doing
that which is just, or by telling that which is true, or by lying, or by doing
any one or more of these together. Haec autem omnia, and quomodo oporteat uti
unoquoque eorum, cum Graeci accepissent a Moyse, non parvam accepere
utilitatem, When the Greeks received all these things from Moses, and how they
were to use any one and every one of these, they received no small advantage.

In this case, 20.
all the prejudice which the Question is like to have, is in the meaning and
evil sound of the word lying; which because it is so hateful to God and man,
casts a cloud upon any thing that it comes near: but lying (which S. Basil
calls extremam malitiae lineam, the extremity of malice, which S. Ephrem calls
the Rust of conversation) is indeed an enemy; but in war so it should be;
only in peace and contracts, and civil conversation, it is intolerable. In
war it is no lie, but an engine of war, against which the enemy is to stand
upon his guard: and if a man may falsify a blow, much more may he falsify a
word; and no justice, no promise, no charity, no law restrains the stratagems
in a just war; they which may be destroyed, may be deceived, and they may be
deceived by false actions, may by false words, if there be no collateral
obligation or law to the contrary. A just man, Qu. 10, and 11. in Josu^.
says S. Austin, is to take care of nothing but that his war be just; that
is, by a just authority, and for a just reason. Cum autem justum bellum
susceperit, utrum aperta, pugna, utrum insidiis vincat, nihil ad justitiam
interest, But if it be a just war, it matters not as to the question of
justice, whether he overcome by force or by deceit. Dolus and perfidia are
extremely different -- dolus an virtus quis in host requirat? and, Virg. L. 1.
ff. de dolo male.
bonum esse dolum si quis adversus hostem latronemve machinetur, said Ulpian,
Craft against a thief or enemy is good; but not perfidiousness. Nullo
discrimine virtutis ac doli prosperos omnes laudari debere bellorum eventus,
Lib. 17.
said Ammianus Marcellinus. To bring war to a happy end, you may use force or
wit; but at no hand break a promise, or be treacherous.

He that desires to see more particulars to the same purpose, 21.
may, if he please, see 5 Politic. c. 17.
Lipsius his politics, and Lib. 10. Pol. c. 38, and 46, 47.
Adam Contzen, together with the excellent examples of great and wise
personages in Polyaenus and Frontinus.

11. But this is not to be extended to a license of telling a lie of the enemy
in behalf of our own country, for fame and reputation, for noises and triumph;
and I remember that Poggius upon this account lost the reputation of a good
historian. Dum patriam laudat, damnat dum Poggius hostem,
Nec malus est civis, Sanazar. 1. Epig.
nece bonus historicus.
He was a good Citizen, but an ill historiographer, that commended all the
actions of the Florentines, and undervalued their enemies.

12. 22.
Princes may not lie for the interests and advantages of Government. Not in
contracts, treaties, bargains, embassies and all the entercourses of peace and
civil negotiation. For besides it is an argument of fear and infirmity to take
sanctuary in the little subterfuges of craft when they are beaten from their
own proper strengths, it is also a perfect destruction of government and the
great bands of society and civil intercourse; and if they be used to fail, no
man can be confident of that affirmative which ought to be venerable and sacred
up to the height of religion; and therefore the Egyptian law pressed this
affair well, Let all that break their word and oaths die for it; because they
are laden with a double iniquity, and pietatem in Deos violant, and fidem
inter homines tollunt, maximum vinculum societatis, They destroy piety and
reverence toward God, and faith amongst men, which is the great ligature of
society. And if Princes do falsify their word and lie, their neighbors can
have no intercourse with them but by violence and war, and their subjects
none but fear and chance. For Princes to lie is the greatest undecency in the
world: and therefore Diodorus Siculus tells that the Egyptian Princes used to
wear a golden chain mixed and distinguished with curious stones, Lib. 2.
Antiquit.
and they called it Truth; meaning that nothing was a greater ornament to a
Prince, nothing ought to be more sacred, or more remembered.

Bodinus says otherwise, 23.
and that Princes and Judges have leave, Lib. 3. de rep.
because sometimes they have necessity to lie; and of the same opinion was
Plato, provided it was done for the good of the people. But that which they
mean is only in affirmations and narratives, in adding confidences or
producing fears, in making laws and establishing religions; such as was that of
Numa; who when he had a mind to endear to the people those good laws which he
had made, said that he received them from the Goddess Aegeria. This may be done
against an enemy; and if it be for the good of the people, it has in it
charity and some show of prudence, but not to the bravery and magnanimity of a
Prince: but however it be in this, it can never be permitted to violate a
promise or a treaty, nor yet to tell false in a treaty, for that is against
peace and against justice. When there is in it no harm, but all good, as in
order to persuade the people to a duty, or to their benefit, they in a matters
of public life being like children in the affairs of their private, that is,
when their need and incapacity of being otherwise governed requires it, they
may be used as they can, according to that of the Persians, Sapientes dicunt
quod mendacium beneficium faciens melius est vero exitium parturiente, When a
lie does charity, it is better then an uncharitable and pernicious truth:
always supposing, that the lie which serves charity be not against justice;
but when it is in treaties, there a lie does not only disgrace the sincerity
of the prince that treates, but is of it self apt to hurt the other; and
therefore at no hand to be admitted.

The next inquiry is concerning person Criminal, 24.
and so for others in proportion.

Question II. Whether it be lawful to use restrictions and mental reservations,
so that what we utter is false, but joined to something within does integrate a
truth, and make up a true answer.
To this I answer, 25.
That this has no distinct consideration of it is own; but whether a mental
reservation makes that to be true which would otherwise be a lie. For if it be
still a lie, a criminal person may no more speak half truths then whole lies;
for that which is but the half of a true proposition, either signifies nothing,
or is directly a lie. And upon this supposition, this question is just to be
governed by the measures of the first; and in the same cases in which it is
lawful to tell a lie, in the same cases it is lawful to use a mental
reservation: for that which is lawful without it, is also lawful with it; and
the mental reservation does not save it harmless, if it be still a lie. That
therefore is the question, Whether he that speaks a lie, and thinks the other
part which makes it a true proposition, speaks truth yea or no.

The case is this. 26.
When Campian was taken in England, he gave out that his name was Butler: the
Magistrate inquires, and is so answered: he gives him his oath, and he swears
that his name is so; so much he said: but he added withal to himself,
secretly, [It is my name that I have borrowed, or my name for this time] But
that was not the question; for he was asked that he might be known, and he
answered that he might not be known. And he might as well have said, that is my
name, and have added in his thought, not at all, or, Hoc est nomen meum, and in
mind have added, falsum; and then the case would have been too plain, and too
contemptibly ridiculous: like the Sycophant in Plautus, Advenio ex Selencia,
Macedonia, Asia atque Arabia: this was a lie; but he turned aside and spoke
softly, quas ego neque oculis neque pedibus unquam usurpavi meis, and so he
made up the matter; but he was a liar still: for let the whole be true, yet he
speaks but half, and by that half deceives. All that he says is a lie, for the
contradictory of it is true; and it is concerning his answer, and the saying,
that the question is. It is not inquired whether the man think a lie, but
whether he speaks one; and not what it is to himself, for no man can lie to
himself, but what this is to him that asks, for to him he lies. And suppose a
man should write a proposition, and think the rest, to make it true, would not
all the world say he wrote a lie? What it is in writing, it is in speaking;
that which he speaks in the present case is a lie, and for that he is
condemned. For if the words are a lie without a mental reservation, then they
are so with it; for this does not alter the words, nor the meaning of the
words, nor the purpose of him that speaks them.

And indeed this whole affair is infinitely unreasonable; 27.
and the thinking one thing, and speaking it otherwise, is so far from making
it to be true, that therefore it is a lie, because the words are not according
to what is in our mind; and it is a perverting the very end and institution of
words, and evacuates the purpose of laws, and the end of oaths, making them not
to be the end of questions, and the benefit of society, and all humane
intercourse, and makes that none but fools can lie, none can lie but they which
cannot dissemble, that is, they which cannot think one thing and speak another,
they which cannot so much as think what is true, or what words would make it
true. Certain it is, the Devil need not ever tell a lie, and yet serve all his
ends. And besides all this, such a person gives the scandal of a lie, and
produces the effect of a lie, and does intend the end of a lie, and it is the
material part of a lie; only what the man ows to justice, he pays with
thinking.

But then I consider further, 28.
If the words spoken be of themselves a lie, and therefore he thinks it
necessary by a secret supply of thought to new-mould it into truth; to what
purpose is that done? that it may be no lie to himself? or that it may be no
lie before him to whom he speaks it? As for himself, he is not concerned in it,
but only that he speak truth; but the other is: and if it be a lie without
that supplement, (for therefore he supplies it secretly) then till it be
supplied and made up to him before whom he speaks it, it is a lie to him, to
whom it ought to be a truth. If the man be bound to speak truth to the
Magistrate, let him do it; but if he be not obliged, let him tell a direct
lie, for this supplement is but a confessing in conscience that it is a lie;
and therefore there is no need of such a dissembling artifice; there is more
ingenuity in saying that they are not tied to tell truth: but he that tells a
lie, and by his mental reservation says he tells a truth, tells two lies, one
practical, and the other in theory; one to the Magistrate, and the other to
himself.

I do not say that in all cases it is unlawful to use mental reservations,
29.
even in craftiness and escape. 1. S. Gregory has a case in which he affirms
it lawful, Lib. 6. in 1 Reg. c. 3.
Tyrannorum versutiam atque saevitiam quandoque esse pia fraud deludendam, and
objicienda eis quae credant, ut nocendi aditum non inveniant, To prevent and
elude the craft and cruelty of Tyrants, they must sometimes be deluded by a
pious cosenage; and something must be imposed upon their credulity, that their
ways of mischief may be obstructed. And then he adds, this is to be done so,
ut caveatur culpa mendacii; quod tunc been perficitur, cum illud fit quod
asseritur, sed quod sit sic dicitur, ut celetur; quia ex part dicitur, and ex
part reticetur: when there is nothing told that is false, but yet the matter
is hid, because it is not all spoken. Indeed this is one kind of innocent doing
it; but this is lawful to be done without great necessity, even for a probable
reason: it is nothing but a concealing of some part of the truth, and a
discovery of another part, even of so much as will serve our turn. But.

2. Restrictions conditional are lawful to be used in our entercourses: 30.
that is, the affirmation or negation, the threatening or promising of a thing
may be cum tacita condition, with a condition concealed; when that concealment
is not intended for a snare, but is (...), unusual dispensation, and is
competently presumed, supposed or understood. Thus God commanded Jonah to
preach against Nineveh, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed;
meaning, unless they did repent. Thus we may say, I will to morrow distribute
my alms, and will give you a part, meaning, if you will come for it. So for
affirmations: The Physician says to his Patient, [you are but a dead man;]
that is, unless some extraordinary blessing happen: [you are in no danger;]
meaning, if you will use the remedies prescribed. But in all these cases the
condition must not be insolent, undiscerned, contrary to reasonable
expectations, impossible* or next to impossible: for if it be such which cannot
be understood, the reservation is a snare, and the whole intercourse is a
deception and a lie.

3. If the reservation be not purely mental, 31.
but is understood by accidents and circumstances, it is lawful. The Shepherd
of Cremona that was asked concerning the Flock he kept, whether those were his
Sheep or no, answered confidently, that they were; meaning secretly, not his
own possession, but his own charge, and not his Neighbor Morone's Flock. He
said true, though his thought made up the integrity of his true proposition,
because it was not doubted, and he was not asked concerning the possession, as
not being a likely man to be so wealthy. So the guide whom you ask upon the
road, tells, you cannot go out of your way, meaning, if you follow your plain
directions, and be not wilful, or careless, or asleep; and yet he says truth,
though he speaks but half, because he deceives none, and is understood by all.
Thus the Prophet Isaiah said to Hezekiah when he was sick, Isa. 38.
Thou shall dye and not live; meaning, that the force of the disease is such as
to be mortal, and so it stands in the order of Nature: and when afterward he
brought a more comfortable message, he was not thought a liar in the first,
because they understood his meaning, and the case came to be altered upon a
higher account.

4. When things are true in several sense, 32.
the not explicating in what sense I mean the words is not a criminal
reservation. Thus ou^ Blessed Savior affirmed, that himself did not know the
precise day when himself should come to judge the World; that is, as S. Austin,
and generally the Christian Doctors say, Theophylact. in 24. Matthew.
as Man he did not know it, though being God he did know all things. But 1.
this liberty is not to be used by inferiors, but by superiors only; 2. not
by those that are interrogated, but by them which speak voluntarily; 3. not by
those which speak of duty, but which speak of grace and kindness: Because
superiors, and the voluntary speakers, and they which out of kindness speak,
are tied to no laws in this particular, but the measures of their own good
will; and the degrees of their kindness, of their instruction, of their
communication, are wholly arbitrary: but the inferiors, the examined, the
speakers out of duty and obligation, are tied to answer by other men's measures,
by their exigencies, demands, understandings, and purposes; and therefore must
not do any thing whereby that truth which they have right and interest to
enquire after, may be hindered. The conclusion is this, in the words of S.
Gregory, Moral. lib. 10. c. 27.
Sapientia justorum est, nil per ostensionem fingere, sensum verbis aperire,
The wisdom of just men is to make no pretenses for deception, but by words to
open the secret of their heart.

Question III. Whether it be lawful to equivocate, 33.
or use words of doubtful signification with a purpose to deceive, or knowing
that they will deceive; and in what cases it is so.
To this I answer as to the former, 34.
Where it is lawful to lie, it is lawful to equivocate, which may be
something less then a plain lie: but where it is not permitted to tell a lie,
there the equivocation must be innocent, that is, not deceiving, nor intended
that it should. And this is that which the Hebrews call, cord and cord loqui,
to speak dissemblingly, labiis dolosis, with lips of deceit. For it is
remarkable, that cord and cord signifies diligence and sincerity, when it
means work or labor; but it signifies falsehood and craft, when it means
speaking: for Nature has given us two hands, and but one tongue; and therefore
a duplicate in labor is a double diligence, but in talking it is but a double
fraud. Tacitus observes of Tiberius, Verba ejus obscura, suspensa, perplexa,
eluctantia, in speciem composita, His words were obscure, broken, interrupted,
perplex and intricate, striving and forced, and made for show and pretenses.
Now if by artifices you deceive him that trusts you, and whom you ought not to
deceive, it is but a lie dressed in another way, S. Aug. de conflictu virt. and
vitiorum.
and it is all one: For nec artificioso ingenio, nec simplici verbo oportet
decipere quenquam, quia quolibet artis modo mentiatur. So that in solution of
this question we are only to consider what equivocal speeches may be used,
that is, which of them are no lies: for the rest, they are lawful or unlawful
by the measures of the first question; for sometimes equivocation is a lie, and
equally destructive of civil intercourse. Duplex responsio habet effectum
simplici^ silentii. You had as good not speak at all, as speak equivocally; for
a double speech is as insignificant as a single silence.

1. It is lawful upon a just cause of great charity or necessity to use in our
answers and entercourses words of diverse signification, 35.
though it does deceive him that asks. Thus Titius the Father of Caius hid his
Father in a Tub, and to the Cutthroats that inquired for him to bloody
purposes he answered Patren in doliolo latere: now that did not only signify a
little Tub, but a Hill near Rome, where the villains did suspect him to be, and
were so diverted. Thus we read of a Greek that in the like case hid his Brother
under a wood-pile; and to the inquisitors answered that he did lie hid (...),
somewhere in the wood. Now in these cases where there is no obligation to tell
the truth, any man may use the covers of truth; especially when in this case it
is not a lie: for an equivocation is like a dark-lanthorn; if I have just
reason to hold the dark side to you, you are to look to it, not I. If Christian
simplicity be not concerned in it, nor any other grace indirectly, certain it
is that truth is not concerned: For, In ambiguo sermon non utrumque dicimus,
sed duntaxat quod volumus, said Paulus the Lawyer, l. 3. ff. de rebus dubiis.
Now that part of the ambiguity which I intend it in, is true, I would never
else use that way to save my conscience and to escape a lie; so that if nothing
else be concerned, truth is safe. But then care also must be taken that he who
has right to be answered, be not defeated without his own fault. For,

2. If I intend to deceive him, 36.
it must be such a person whom I have power to deceive; some one that is a
child, or a madman, or an incompetent person to judge for his own good, and
one that no other way will be brought to do himself good, one that is willing,
or justly so presumed. For unless I have power or right to deceive him, I must
not intend to deceive him by any act of mine directly.

3. If it be fit that he be deceived, 37.
though I have no right to do it, let him deceive himself; it must be by his
own act; to which I may indeed minister occasion by any fair and innocent
means. It is fit that he who by violence and injury intends to do mischief to
innocent persons, be hindered from it; and there is much good done if an
innocent be rescued, and no harm done to the Tyrant if he be diverted, and no
wrong or injustice if he do deceive himself. Thus if he runs into error by a
just and prudent concealment of some truth; if he is apt to mistake my words
out of a known and by me ^bserved weakness; if his malice is apt to make him
turn all ambiguous words into his own sense that will deceive him; if I know he
will listen to my whispers to another person, and watch my secret talk to
others; I am not bound to say what will inform him, but what will become my
intercourse with the other: In all these and the like cases, if I use my own
liberty, I do no man injury. I am not bound to speak words of single
signification: if it be sufficient to express my meaning, if it be in the
nature and use of the words apt to signify my mind, and to speak that which is
true, let him that stands by look to it; I do all that I am obliged to do by
the interest of justice and truth. For in these cases, he that speaks does but
minister occasion to him that is mistaken; like him that represents artificial
sights before the eye, or as the rainbow in the clouds is occasion of a
popular error that it is full of colors.

4. But then this must be so used, 38.
that the amphibology or equivocation be not insolent and strange, but such as
is usual in forms of witty speech. For then he who uses them does no more
deceive his hearer, then he that speaks obscurely or profoundly is the cause of
error in the ignorant people. Thus if Caius promise to pay to Regulus an
hundred Attick drachmes; he is tied to do it if he does owe it, else not: for
if he owes none, he must pay none, and he did not promise to give him any
thing. For if a meaning be clearly contained in the word spoken, it may be made
use of to any just and reasonable advantage; especially if that word ought or
was likely to have been understood by the concerned hearer. But this may not be
done in fraud and to the diminution of any man's rights. Asper buys corn and
linen of Camillus who is newly come from Egypt: they agree together that
Camillus shall receive ten talents; but that he shall give him as a free gift
half of it back again; and call the ten talents the just price, and the
telling it a just solution. If Asper sells his linen by the proportion of the
great price told over, he is a Cosener; and uses the words of price, and
payment, and gift, fraudulently: the amphibologie might have been used to ends
of justice and reason, but not of knavery and oppression.

5. And this must also be upon just cause. 39.
For if a Magistrate sends to inquire for Titius, and the officers ask an
Titius sit domi, if he be at home: to him we may not answer, Titius non est
domi, he does not eat at home; meaning the word est in a sense less usual, to
deceive him in the more common, who ought not to be deceived at all: but to
save a man's life from violence and injury it may be done. This way has been
sometimes used to vile purposes. Thus Cleomenes having made truce with his
Enemies for thirty days, used to plunder his Country in the night; and Labeo
having agreed to give up half his Navy to Antiochus, cut his ships in pieces
and made them good for nothing. The like stories are told of Alexander, of the
Locrians, of Otho Moguntinus. But it was a barbarous thing of Pericles, who
promised safety to the Enemy if he would lay aside his iron, that is, their
arms, as all the world understood it, and as the nature of the thing did
signify: when he had done so he fell upon the whole body of them and cut them
in pieces, showing for his excuse, the iron buttons that they had upon their
Coats. Such frauds as these are intolerable in their event, and evil in their
cause, and detested by all good and just men. To this purpose I remember a
worthy story told by John Chokier, of a Spanish Governor of a Town in Millain
who kept a Noble person prisoner with hard usage, and when his Lady came to
petition for his liberty, promised to deliver her Husband to her if she would
let him lie with her. The poor woman being wearied with his temptation and the
evil usage of her Husband, consents and suffers it. When the Governor had
obtained his lust, he would also satisfy his anger too; and kills her Husband,
and to verify his promise, gives her Husband to the Lady, but newly murdered.
The Lady complains of this, and tells her sad story to Gonzaga the Spanish
General: he finds it to be truth, and made the Lady this amends. He commands
the Governor to marry the Lady, that by his estate she might be recompensed
for the dishonor: and then, the same day causes the Governor to loose his
head to pay for his dishonorable falsehood and bloody lie. It was a justice
worthy of a great Prince; and the reward was justly paid to such a cruel
equivocation. This was subdolus congressus, a crafty treaty, quo nil turpius,
said Antoninus the Emperor, nothing is baser and more dishonorable then it.
Thus did Darius to the Noble Oebasus the Father of three brave Sons, and Xerxes
to Pythius the Father of five; they killed what they promised to leave with the
Father, adding to their cruelty the reproach and scorn of cosenage. A man has
right to use what words he will according to the received use; but he must not
use them to evil purposes: and a man may go a little from the more common use
to that which is rare, so it be within the signification of the word, provided
there be just cause; that which has good in it to some, and no injury to any.

6. There is between lying and equivocation this only difference, 40.
that this may upon less necessity and upon more causes be permitted then
lying. For provided that these measures now described, which are the negative
measures of lying, be observed; if a man speaks doubtful words and intends
them in a true sense, he may use his liberty; always provided that he use it
with care, and to the reputation of Christian simplicity. In arts and sciences,
in jest and entercourses of wit, in trial of understandings and mystical
teachings, in prudent concealments and arts of secrecy, equivocal words may be
used with more freedom. Solvite Templum hoc, says Christ, Dissolve this
Temple, viz. of my body, and I will raise it up in three days. So did that
excellent Confessor in Eusebius, 8. l. Hist. c. 22.
to Firmilianus asking of what Country he was, he answered, that Jerusalem was
his Country; Seorsim apud animum suum ita Divinitus philosophatus, privately in
his mind speaking Divine mysteries, says the Historian. This was well and
innocent, because an equivocal speech has a light side as well as a dark: it
is true as well as false, and therefore it is in its own nature innocent; and
is only changed into a fault, when it is against justice and charity, under
which simplicity is to be placed.

Under these measures are to be reduced those little equivocations which are
used sometimes in craft, 41.
but most commonly in wit; such as are to answer by anagrams, so as to tell a
true name but disguised by transposition of letters and syllables, or to give
the signification of a name in other words. Thus if a man whose name is
Dorotheus calls himself Theodorus, for Nicolaus, Laonicus, for Demonicus,
Nicodemus; it is an equivocation or an art of deception, but such as may be
legitimated by the cause: but if the inquiry be in a serious matter, the answer
must be serious and material, true, and significative to the purposes of law,
and justice, and society. And therefore if Nicodemus had been interrogated by
Pilate in a serious cause, he might not have said his name was Demonicus; and
the reason, is, because he might not have concealed it. But when it is lawful
to conceal it if we can, this is a just way of doing it; for it is not lie in
it self, and can be made to do or to minister to that good which is intended.
Thus in the book of Tobit we find that the Angel Raphael called himself Azarias
the son of Ananias, which indeed is the name of his office, or the Rebus, the
meaning of his present employment, that is, Auxilium Domini, Filius nubis
Domini, The aid of the Lord, Son of the Lords cloud; meaning that he was sent
from the Lord in a cloud or disguise to be an aid and a blessing to that
religious family. And he that called Arsinoe (...) Juno's violet, kept all the
letters of the name right, and complemented the Lady ingeniously. But these are
better effects of wit then ministeries of justice; and therefore are not to be
used but upon great reasons, and by the former measures, when the matter is of
concernment.

Question IV. Whether it be lawful by false signs, 42.
by actions and pretenses of actions, to deceive others for any good end: and
in what cases it is so.
To this question I answer in the words of Aquinas, 43.
because they are reasonable pious, ^. 2^. q. 3. art. 1.
Ad virtutem veritatis pertinet, ut quis talem se exhibeat exterius per signa
exteriora qualis est; ea autem non solum sunt verba, sed etiam factae: and a
little after, Non refert autem utrum aliquis mentiatur verbo, vel quocunque
alio facto, It is all one if a man lies, whether it be by word or by deed. A
man may look a lie, and nod a lie, and smile a lie.

But in this there is some variety: 44.
For 1. all dissembling from an evil principle and to evil purposes is
criminal. For thus Tertullian declaims bitterly against those Ladies who (says
he) being taught by the Apostate Angels oculos circumducto nigrore fucare, Lib.
de discipl. and habitu. virg.
and genas mendacio ruboris inficere, and mutare adulterinis coloribus crinem,
and expugnare omnem oris and capitis veritatem, besmear their eyebrows with a
black semicircle, and stain their cheeks with a lying red, and change the
color of their hair into an adulterous pretense, and drive away all the
ingenuity and truth of their faces. And Clemens Alexandrinus is as severe
against old men that with black-lead combs put a lie upon their heads; and so
disgrace their old age, which ought to be relied upon, believed and reverenced
for truth. And it was well said of Archidamus to a man of Chios who did stain
his white hairs with black and the imagery of youth, the man was hardly to be
believed, when he had a lie in his heart, and bore a lie upon his head. These
things proceeding from pride and vanity, and ministering to lust, or carried on
with scandal, are not only against humility and sobriety and chastity and
charity, but against truth too; because they are done with a purpose to
deceive, and by deceit to serve those evil ends. To the same purpose was the
fact of them of whom Dio Chrysostomus speaks, Orat. 21.
who knowing that men were in love with old Manuscripts, would put new ones
into heaps of corn and make them look like old: such also are they who in
Holland lately would exactly counterfeit old Meddals, to get a treble price
beyond the value of the metal and the imagery. These things and all of the like
nature are certainly unlawful, because they are against justice and charity.

2. But there are other kinds of counterfeits, 45.
such as are gildings of wood and brass, false stones, counterfeit diamonds,
glass depicted like emeralds and rubies, a crust of marble drawn over a
building of course stone; these are only for beauty and ornament, and of
themselves minister to no evil, Vide Senecam epist. 115.
but are pleasant and useful: now though to sell these images of beauty for
real be a great cheat; yet to expose them to be seen as such, and every man be
left to his liberty of thinking as he please, and being pleased as he can, is
very innocent.

3. There is a third sort of lying or deceiving by signs not vocal: 46.
that is, the dissembling of a passion, such as that of which Seneca complains
in the matter of Grief, which is the simplest of all passions; but pretended by
some without truth to purposes not good. Sibi tristes non sunt, and clarius cum
audiuntur gemunt, Epist. 99.
and taciti quietique dum secretum est, cum aliquos viderint in fletus novos
excitantur. So did Gellia in the Epigram, Amissum non flet cum sola est Gellia
Patrem:
Si quis ad est, jussae prosiliunt lachrymae.
They are full of tears in company, but in their retirements pleased well
enough. Now things of this nature are indifferent; but are good or bad
according to the cause or the design. Mourn for the dead, says Ben-Sirach, and
that a day or two, lest thou be evil spoken of. That end is honest; and
therefore to mourn in solemnity is good, if we cannot mourn in passion: and the
laws enjoin to a man and woman respectively annum luctus, a year of solemn
mourning; all which time it is not supposed the passion should be troublesome
and afflictive. Thus we find David pretending madness before Achish the King of
Gath; it was for his life: and we do not find any of the ancient Doctors
blaming the dissimulation.

4. But that which is here the principal inquiry is, 47.
whether signs not vocal, which have in them ambiguity, and may signify several
things, may be used with a purpose to deceive. And to this the answer is the
same with the former in the case of equivocation, with this only difference;
That as there is some more liberty in the use of equivocal words, then of a
simple lie; so there is some more liberty yet in equivocal actions then in
words, because there may be more reasons for such dubious actions then for
dubious words, and they are not so near, so usual, Vide Aq^inat. in 3. ^. did.
38. art. 3. ad 5.
so intended significations of our mind, nor ministeries of intercourse and
society. But where they are taken so, they are to be governed by the same
rules; save only that a less necessity may be a sufficient legitimation of
such dubious signs: concerning which, besides the analogy and proportion to the
former rules, there is no other measure but the severities of a good and a
prudent man taking into him the accounts of Christian simplicity and ingenuity.

I have only one thing to add in order to practice. 48.
There is a liberty in the forecited cases there where there is a necessity,
and where there is a great charity. For in these cases it is true what S.
Chrysostom says, Fraudis quidem magna vis modo ne fraudulento animo fiat: quam
ipsam tum ne fraudem quidem nominandam putaverim, verum Oeconomiam quandam
potius ac sapientiam artemque, qua possis e mediis iisque imperviis
desperatarum rerum angustiis difficultatibusque correctis and emendatis animi
vitiit evadere. There is a great use of artifices in our words and actions when
we are hard put to it in desperate cases and extremest difficulties, and then
these arts are not indeed deceptions, but just escapes. But yet this I say,
that it is not safe to use all our liberty; because when it is practiced
freely, we oftentimes find our selves ill Judges of the necessity. And however
it be, yet it is much more noble to suffer bravely then to escape from it by a
doubtful way; 1. for the love and honor of simplicity, 2. for the endeavors
of perfection, 3. for the danger of sin, 4. for the peril of scandal. And it
was bravely done of Augustus Caesar, who when he had promised ten thousand
Sesterces to him that should bring Corocotta, a famous Spanish thief, alive
into his presence; Corocotta himself came and demanded the money, and had it,
and he was spared besides: he escaped for his wit and confidence; but had the
money pro fide Caes^^is, according to the faith and nobleness of Casars
justice: for he might have made use of the ambiguity of his words to have kept
the money, and hanged the thief; but he thought it Nobler to do all that he
could be thought to have intended by his words. (...), says Aristotle, Lib. 4.
Eth. c. 7.
The brave and magnanimous man does not sneak, but speaks truth and is
confident.

It cannot be denied what S. Clemens Alexandrinus said, 49.
(...), a good man will for the good of his neighbor do something more then
he would do willingly and of his own accord; yet when it is his own case, it
is better to let go his liberty then to run a hazard. Sarah did lie, and she
was reproved by the Angel; Abraham did so too, says Tertullian, Saram sororem
suam mentitus est, but he was reproved by Abimelech: Jacob did lie to his
Father, but he is not commended for it; and Rachel did dissemble, but she died
in childbirth, and it was occasioned by that, say the Jewish Doctors: Simeon
and Levi destroyed the Sichemites by a stratagem, but they troubled the house
of Israel by it: Thamar deceived Judah, but she played the harlot in deed as
well as in words. And concerning those worthy persons mentioned in Scripture
who did lie or dissemble, the Christian Doctors have been put to it to make
apologies, and excuses, and justifications for them, and are not yet agreed how
to do it. S. Basil and S. Chrysostom are two examples of several proceedings.
S. Basil always bore his heart upon his hand, and showed it to every one that
was concerned. Saint Chrysostom used craft against the simple, and fraud
against him that spoke all things in simplicity. Vide in fine li. 1. de Sacerd.
Chrysostom was forced with laborious arts to excuse and justify it, and did
it hardly: But S. Basil had no scruple concerning his innocence; what he had
concerning his prudence and safety does not belong to the present question.
Sermon. of Christian simplicity.
But of this last particular I have given larger accounts in a Discourse on
purpose.

The conclusion is this, If a man speaks a direct downright lie, 50.
he can very hardly be innocent: but if by intrigues of words and actions, per
involucra verborum (as Cicero calls it) per orationem intortam (as the Comedy)
by covers of words, and by crooked speeches, a man have intercourse, he had
need be very witty to be innocent according to the Hebrew proverb, If a man
have wit enough to give cross and involved answers, let him use it well; if he
knows not how to do it well, let him hold his peace. It was but a sneaking
evasion of S. Francis, when the pursuers after a murderer asked if the man came
that way; No, says the Friar, thrusting his hand into his sleeve, he came not
here. If a man's wit be not very ready and very clear, while he thinks himself
wise, he may become a vain person. The Devil no question has a great wit, and
a ready answer; yet when he was put to it at his Oracles, and durst not tell a
downright lie, and yet knew not what was truth many times, he was put to most
pitiful shifts, and trifling equivocations, and arts of knavery; which when
they were discovered by events contrary to the meaning which was obvious for
the inquirers to understand it made him much more contemptible and ridiculous
then if he had said nothing, or confessed his ignorance. But he that does
speak, and is bound to speak, must speak according to the mind of him with whom
he does converse, that is, so to converse, that by our fault he be not deceived
against his right, against justice or against charity, and therefore he had
better in all things speak plainly: for truth is the easiest to be told; but no
wit is sufficient for a crafty conversation.

RULE VI. It is not lawful for private Christians without public authority to
punish Malefactors, but they may require it of the Magistrate in some cases.
IN the law of Nature it was permitted: 1.
but as the world grew older, and better experienced, and better instructed, it
became unlawful and forbidden; in some places sooner, in some places later.
The Ephori among the Lacedaemonians might kill Criminals extrajudicially; and
Nicolaus of Damascus relates, that amongst the Umbrians every man was the
revenger of his own injuries: for till by laws men were defended, they by
revenges and retaliation might drive away the injury as far as was necessary.
But because when a man is in pain and grief he strikes unjustly and unequally,
and judges incompetently, laws were made to restrain the first license, and to
put it into the hands of Princes only, because they being common Fathers to
their people, were most likely to do justice equally and wisely. Iccirco enim
judiciorum vigor jurisque publici tutela videtur in medio constituta, ne
quisquam sibiipsi permittere valeat ultionem, said Honorius and Theodosius,
That no man might avenge himself, Laws and Judges and Tribunals were appointed
for public justice.

But for this, 2.
provisions at first could not be made so generally, but that some cases would
happen, and some gaps be left open, which every man must stop, and provide for
as well as he could. Thus we find that Phinehas, when he saw God was angry with
the Sons of Israel about the matter of Moab, himself, to divert the anger that
was already gone forth, smote Zimri, a Prince among the Simeonites, and his
fair Mistress in his arms, and killed them in their Crimes. From his example
many Zelots amongst the Jew took liberty to kill a man that sinned apparently.
So Mattathias killed a Jew that offered sacrifice according to the manner of
the Greeks; and the People killed three hundred of their Countrymen upon the
like account. But this quickly grew into excess and irregularity; and therefore
when our Blessed Lord was zealous for the honor of the Temple, he went no
further but to use a little Whip to affright them from their profaneness.

And yet in some cases God permitted private persons to be Executioners; 3.
as in case a Jew tempted his Child, Deuteronomy. 13. 9.
or Brother, or Neighbor to Idolatry, the tempted person might kill him
without delating him to the Judge: and in a cause of Blood, the next of kin
might kill the Manslayer if he overtook him before he took Sanctuary. But here
the cases were such that the private person was not Judge, but by leave from
God was Executioner upon the notoreity of the fact: for although for a dead
person his nearest relation might with his own hand take vengeance; yet if
himself was wounded, he might not, but by the sentence of the Judge, say the
Doctors of the Jews; because he ought not to be Judge where he could hardly be
moderate.

In the Sea, 4.
and in desert places, where there can be no appeals to Judges, every man is
Executioner of the sentence of the law of Nations. Thus we find that Julius
Caesar pursued the Pirates in the Mediterranean and Adriatic Seas; and because
the Proconsul would not, he gathered a sudden Navy and overtook them, and
hanged them upon the main-yards of their own Vessels. Thus the wild Arabs and
Circassian Thieves, that live in vast places, and under no Government, being
public Enemies of Mankind, and under no laws, nor treaties or communications
of peace, may be killed by every one that is injured and spoiled by them, when
he can do it. To this agrees that of Tertullian, In publicos hosts omnis homo
miles est; and that of Democritus, (...), He that kills a thief and a robber
with his own hand, or by command, or by consent, is innocent, (...). But this
is to be understood of the permission in the law of Nature.

For in Christianity men are not easily permitted to touch blood; 5.
not hastily to intermeddle in the causes of blood; not to give sentence for
the effusion of it: these things are to be done with caution, and a slow
motion, and after a loud call, and upon a great necessity, because there are
two great impediments: the one is the duty of Mercy, which is greatly required
and severely exacted of every Disciple of Christ; and the other is, that there
is a Soul at stake when blood is to be shed, and then they are told, that as
they judge they shall be judged, as they measure it shall be measured to them
again. And therefore Criminal Judges have a tender employment, and very unsafe,
unless they have the guards of a just Authority, and a great mercy, and an
unavoidable necessity, and public utility, and the fear of God always before
their eyes, and a great wisdom to conduct their greatest dangers.

That which remains and is permitted in Christianity is, 6.
1. The punishment of reprehension, of which every wise and good man may be
judge and minister: for as S. Cyprian said that every Bishop is a Bishop of the
Catholic Church, that is, wherever he chance to be, he must not suffer a Soul
to perish if he can help it, but has right every where to minister to the
necessities of Souls, who are otherwise destitute, and every where to pray in
private, to bless, to absolve dying persons, to supply the defects of a widow
and desolate Church; so every good man has power to punish a base and vicious
person by severe and wise animadversions of reproof. For a wise man is never a
private man (said Cicero;) and Nasica, and Cato, and Fabius, and Lollius were
in authority like perpetual Consuls, always in power over a vicious man.

2. It is not against the laws of Christianity, 7.
that Parents, and Tutors, and Masters, and Governors should punish Criminals,
that is, such as are subject to them, and by such punishments as are permitted
by law, and by such measures as are agreeable to the just and charitable ends
Jubet Deus ut manus nostras super minores semper habeamus, hoc est, ut
peccantes eos assiduis verberibus corrigamus, n^ amore inuili and indulgentia
nimi^ e^u^entur ad malum, and ad vitia nutriantur, Lactant. lib. 6. instit.
of their respective governments, and by the analogy and proportions of
Christian mercy and clemency: in the execution of which punishments there need
no other laws be given but what are dictated by the mind of a charitable,
dispassionate and a good man. But then in these Governments there is more
liberty then in any other but the supreme: for a personal injury done to a
Father or a Tutor may be punished by the Father or Tutor respectively, and so
also it may by the Supreme power, Cum dignitas authoritasque ejus in quem est
peccatum tuenda est, ne praetermissa animadversio contemptum ejus pariat, and
honorem levet, said Taurus the Philosopher in A. Gellius. An injury done to a
Superior is a contempt of his authority as well as injurious to his person;
and if it be not punished, will soon disorder the superiority. But then this
must be wholly for emendation; and though anger may be the instrument, yet
charity must be both the measure and the end.

3. When the law has passed a sentence, 8.
and given leave to any subject to be executioner, he that is injured may do
it. But this is to be understood in one case only that concerns the Subject,
and one that concerns the Prince. 1. For if the Prince commands that whoever
finds such a person shall smite him to death if he can, every man is bound to
it, if the law be just: as in the case of Treason, or deserting their military
station, it has sometimes been decreed. In reos Majestatis, against Traitors
every man is a Soldier, says Tertullian, who affirms it also concerning all
public Enemies. 2. The other case, which relates to the advantage of the
Subject, is, when the execution of the public sentence is necessary to be done
speedily for the prevention of future mischiefs. Thus Justinian gave leave to
every man to kill the Soldiers that came to plunder; for in that case there
was no staying for solemnities of law, and the proceedings and method of
Courts; C^d. rubr. quando liceat se sine judice vindicare.
Melius enim est occurrere in tempore quam post exitu^ vindicare. Vestram
igitur vobis permittimus ultionem, and quod serum est punire judicio,
subjugamus edicto, ut nullus parcat militi, cui obviare telo oporteat ut
latroni. This which the law calls a revenge is but a mere defense, it is a
taking the mischief before it be intolerable; and therefore this will be the
more out of question: for certainly if some punishments are lawful, all
necessary defenses are much more; this only excepted, that the degree of this
is excessive and uncharitable, and therefore ought not to be done, but in those
cases where the evil likely to be suffered by the innocent is intolerable, as
if the plunder be the undoing of a man and his family, and will cause them to
perish, or to be extremely miserable; and therefore Ulpian said well, Furem
nocturnum si quis occiderit, ita demum impune feret, si parcere ei sine
periculo suo non poterit, Though the law permits a man to kill a Night-thief,
yet he may not do it if he can secure himself without it: but when to spare
the Thief will be his own undoing, the^ he may. For it is true which was said
of old, Res omnes conditae famulantur vitae humanae; And again, Nobilissimum
est quod orbis habet humana vita. Nothing is fit to be put in balance to the
life of man; and therefore when a man's life and a man's goods are compared
abstractly, these are extremely out-weighed by that: and therefore for little
and tolerable losses it were well if the laws would appoint lesser punishments
then Death. But when it is considered, that a great loss makes a man and all
his family live a miserable life, and men willingly venture their lives to save
such great portions, the laws that put such thieves to death are very
justifiable. And it is observable that when God in Moses law appointed a mulct
of money upon thieves, it was supposed to be in such robberies where the thief
was able to restore fourfold. Add to this, that if our laws did provide that
stolen goods should be restored, they would less need to give leave to the
true man to kill the thief. But now that he is the more likely to be undone,
because no restitution is to be made him, he may in the case of such great
spoilings be better allowed to be the executioner of the sentence of the law to
prevent his ruin, and to defend his right. But it were much better if he would
not at all use this liberty.

4. But when the evil is past if the law permits the execution of her sentence
to the injured person; 9.
it is to be supposed that there is only an indulgence to the grief of him
that is wronged, and therefore if he kills the injurious man, he is indemnified
in law, but not quitted in Conscience. Thus when the Civil law of old, L.
Gracchus C. ad legem Juliam, de Adulteriis, and at this day the Spanish laws
permit the wronged Husband to kill the adulterer, it is lawful; that is, it is
not against justice, and therefore the law cannot punish it: but because it is
extremely against charity, his Confessor ought not to absolve him without
repentance and amends; for the Gospel does not approve it. The reason is,
because if the injury be done, the execution is merely revenge, without the
mixture of any good thing to legitimate it. Now if the law does it by her
ministers, it is (...), an example, (...) (as Demosthenes his expression is)
that others may be afraid, and not be tempted by impunity. But if the man does
it by his private hand, there is in it less of observation and exemplarity; or
if there were not, yet there were less intended; and therefore the private
executing hand is not so innocent: (...), Romans 12. 19.
says the Apostle, we must not avenge our selves: this can hardly be
reconciled with such executions. There is only this allay in it, that if the
wronged husband can no other way prevent his dishonor and his wives sin or
continuance in it, if the law permits it to him, it may be supposed to be done
for prevention, not for revenge; and if it be so, as it is supposed, it has
many degrees of excuse, and some of lawful, but nothing commendable; for
nothing can reconcile it to charity, because (as I observed before) there is a
soul in the way which ought strangely much to be regarded. Nay there are two
Souls: for it was rarely said by Pythagoras, as Iamblichus relates, (...), it
is better to suffer the injury then to kill the man: For after death there
shall be a judgment; he that did the wrong shall be punished, and he that
spared him shall be rewarded.

5. But if the Criminal be of so desperate an impiety that he seems
incorrigible, 10.
and of a long time has seemed so (for that is the best way to prove him so)
then it is lawful for a private hand to be executioner of the public sentence;
but he that is injured ought not to do it. Not that it is murder, or directly
unlawful in the precise action: but that it can hardly be quitted from revenge;
and it will be hard for any man to be so good as not to have just cause to
suspect himself, if he be so bad, upon the mere permissions of law to thrust
his hand into his brothers heart. Other persons may do it out of zeal or love
of their countries good. The Civil law gave leave exercendae publicae ultionis
adversus latrones, desertoresque militiae, of executing the anger of the law
against fugitive soldiers, and common robbers: he that had not been robbed by
them might better do it then he that had: for it being permitted pro quiet
communi, for the public peace, he is a good patriot that honestly and justly
ministers to that end alone; but he that has suffered by them, had need be an
Angel, if he does not spoil that good end by the mixture of revenge; and if he
be an Angel he will find a better employment then to kill a man where it is not
commanded, and where it is not necessary.

6. Some affirm that Princes are never to be reckoned to be private persons, 11.
when they proceed according to the sentence and meaning of the law, though
they do proceed brevi manu, as the style of the law is; and do not proceed by
the methods and solemnities of law by reason of disability to do it. Thus if a
man grow too hard for the laws, the Prince must send Soldiers to him, not
Sergeants, if the case be notorious and it be a public sentence: and the Lord
Mayor of London did strike Wat Tyler, though he was not convicted in law, nor
sentenced by the Judges. Upon this account the King of France offered to defend
the killing of the duke of Guise: concerning which I cannot give accounts,
because there might be in it many secrets which I know not. But if there wanted
nothing but solemnities of law, and there wanted power to suppress him by open
force, and that it was just and necessary that he should die, and by law he was
guilty of it, if there was any thing wanting which should have been done, he
that died was the cause of it, and therefore to him it was to be imputed. But
supposing what these men affirm to be true; (concerning which I shall affirm
nothing) yet this is very rarely to be practiced, because it is seldom lawful,
if ever it be, and not without the concurrence of very many particulars, and is
very easily abused to extreme evil purposes; as in that intolerable and
inhumane massacre of Paris, which all generations of the world shall speak of
with horror and the greatest detestation. But concerning the thing it self that
which the lawyers say is this, Generale edictum accedente facti evidentia habet
vim latae sententiae, when a law is clear, and the fact is evident, the
sentence is already past: and therefore some of them are apt to say, To do the
same thing in a chamber is not murder, if it be justice when it is done upon a
scaffold; for the same demerit in the criminal and the same power in the
Supreme is an equal cause and warranty of the execution. And since it is
cheaper to employ a Physician then an army, and there is less prejudice done to
the public by such a course, since the State of Venice kills upon suspicion,
and there are some things known which cannot be proved, and cannot be suffered,
and since we see that solemnities of law, like thin aprons, discover more shame
sometimes then they hide, and give more scandal then they remove; these men are
more confident then I am: for they dare warrant this course which I dare not.
But he that will adventure upon this, must take care that it be done 1. by a
competent authority, 2. upon a just cause, 3. for a great necessity, 4.
according to the intent and meaning of the law; 5. it must be in summo and mero
Imperio, by one that is absolute and supreme; 6. it must be upon notoreity of
fact, 7. when there is no scruple of law, 8. and if after all this there be no
scruple in conscience, 9. nor yet any other means of securing the public, 10.
and the thing have in it as great charity to the public, as there is in it
justice to the particular, 11. and that the war be not justum bellum, that
is, between supreme powers, 12. nor yet any treaty, or promise, faith or
covenant to the contrary between the supreme and the inferior offending; 13.
nor yet there be a scandal of greater mischief then can be procured by the
unsolemn proceeding; 14. nor is done refragante judicio procerum, and
sententiis juris prudentum, against the earnest advice of prudent and grave
persons, which if it happen will arrest the resolution, and give check and
consideration to the Conscience: then it is supposed by many that there may be
reason enough to forbear what cannot be used, that is, the solemnities of law,
which are the methods of peace, not to be expected in a state or time of war.
And by this time it will be so hard to do it justly, that it will be better to
let it alone. For after all these cautions and proviso's, it is not permitted
to assasinate or privately to murder the Criminal, but to proceed by open force
or by avowed manners of justice, though they be not solemn, and the common
ways of peace; that is, they must be owned in public, and asserted by law,
either antecedently or ex post-facto. An example of the first way is frequently
seen in in France; where the fugitives of law are proceeded against in their
absence, and executed in effigy; and in the states of Italy against the
Banniti: and of the second way examples have been seen in the Manifesto's of
some Princes when they have been put to such extrajudicial and private ways of
animadversion. But these things happen not but in such places where Princes are
more absolute, and less Christian, or that the Subject transgresses by power.

7. Upon the like account it has in some ages of Christianity it self, 12.
but in many ages of Gentilisme, been permitted that by single duel men prove
their innocence, and oppress the supposed Criminal: -- puroque pioque duello
Quaerendas res censeo --
said one of the Roman Senators to Ancus Martius. Now concerning this I shall
not need to say much; because now long since all Christian Princes and States,
and all Churches and Ecclesiastical persons have condemned it as a grievous
crime, upon these two accounts: 1. Because it is a tempting God by ways which
he has never allowed, it is a lottery that he never gave warrant to: and upon
this account it was that Pope Nicolas the first forbad the Emperor Lotharius to
try his wives suspected chastity by the combat of two champions, Cause. 2. qu.
5. c. 22. monomachiam. Decret. tit. de vulgari purgat. 6 Stows Annals. 25. of
Henry
cum hoc and hujusmodi sectantes, Deum solummodo tentare videantur; and to the
same purpose Pope Celestine and some others did forbid it 2. Because the
innocent person is exposed to equal danger with the Criminal, and has been
oftentimes oppressed; as it happened in the case of William Ca^ur an armourer
in Fleetstreet, who being by his servant John David falsely accused of treason,
was yet slain in Smithfield by his perjured adversary: and then the people have
accepted the event as a divine testimony, which in this case being to a lie and
to the false part, must needs be infinitely dishonorable to God. But if it
were not for these and some other evil appendages, and if the innocent person
were sure to prevail, and the law made the private hand the minister of
Justice, who only can tell the secret, and therefore is the surest Judge,
there is no peradventure it might as well be done by that hand as by any other.
But this cannot be reduced to practice at all; but in the whole conjunction of
affairs is highly criminal and intolerable. In Spain we find that a duel was
permitted between two eminent persons [ los infantes de lara, the Spaniards
call them] only upon the accusation of an injury done to some Ladies, the
daughters of Rodrigo de Bibar; and the victory was gained by him that was
innocent: and another by the men of Zamora in the case of the death of King
Sanctus; and quickly they found advocates and defenders. And Vasquius affirms
it may as well be permitted by law, as that an injured Husband should kill the
adulterer. But besides the reasons formerly alleged against such private
executions of an uncertain sentence; because they have no foundation in justice
or charity, neither in public or private good, they are deservedly banished
from all Christian Countries.

But this is to be understood only of Judicial Duels, 13.
whether Criminal or Civil; for as for Duel extrajudiciall and private, it is
so Unjust, so Uncharitable, and so Unreasonable, so much against all Laws of
God and Man, so infinitely against the piety of him that survives it, so
infinitely against the hopes of him that dies in it, that nothing can excuse
it: but even Duels which are permitted by laws, ought not to be so, and are not
permitted by religion; excepting only when the Duel is a compendium of war,
and is designed to do justice, and to prevent the greater issues of blood.

Thus the Romans and Albans determined their wars by the fight of three
Champions of each side; 14.
and the Curiatii being subdued by Horatius Cocles, the City Alba came into
subjection to Rome. David and Goliath fought for their respective Countries; but
the Duel did not determine it directly, but only discouraged the conquered
party. Upon the same account Clodoveus the first Christian King of France
offered to fight with Alaricus Prince of the West Goths; nobilissimo pari
fortunam utriusque gentis decretum in, Lib. 5. hist. Ital.
said Paulus Aemilius: and Guicciardine tells that when the French and Italian
armies were ready to join battle, the fortune of the day was committed to
thirteen Champions on either part. in Dobunis.
Cambden reports that when the Saxons and Danes grew weary of the so great
effusion of blood caused by their daily wars, misso in compendium bello,
utriusque gentis fata Edmundo Anglorum and Canuto Danorum Regibus commissa
fuerunt, qui singulari certamine de summa Imperii in hac insula depugnarunt.
Edmund and Canutus fought in a little Island by Gloucester, and drew the war
into a compendium, and saved the lives of their Subjects by hazarding their
own. William Duke of Normandy offered this to Harold before the battle in
Sussex: And King John of England to Lewis of France, by deputed Champions. And
Richard the second of England challenged Charles the sixth of France concerning
the title of the French Crown. And Pope Martin allowed the Duel between Charles
of Anjou and Peter of Arragon to determine the question concerning the Kingdom
of Sicily. These indeed are great Examples, and are then only just when the
wa^ is just, and on that side only on which it is just. Bald. 5. conf^^. 493.
Haec est necessitas quae bellum justificat (says Baldus) cum ad bellum
extremo loco confugitur, When the war is necessary and the case is extreme, the
necessity makes it just, when the contrary evil is intolerable: and when things
are come to this pass, then it is true what Bodinus says, Non interest quo
numero adversus hosts decernatur, It matters not by how few the war be ended.
Such a Duel is a just war, Horat. epist. l. 1. ep. 2.
as all war anciently was called a Duel, Graecia Barbariae lento collisa
duello, All Greece and Barbary fought a duel; it is duarum partium congressus,
the contention of two armies as well as two single persons: and that the words
are synonyma we find in Varro De lingua Latina.
, Festus in verb. Duellum.
, Plautus Amphitruo.
, and P. Merula in lib. 1. Annal. Enn.
; but concerning the thing it self, who please to see more instances and
precedents, more arguments and verifications of it, may at his leisure find
many particulars in Frisius de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 26.
, Ayala lib. 1. c. 3.
, Bocerus lib. 2. c. 8.
, Alciat de Singul. certam. c. 3.
, Bodinus de Rep. c. 4. l. 7.
, Beuther conclus. 76.
, and Albericus Gentilis de Jure belli, lib. 1. c. 3.
.

I have now described the prohibitions of private executions, together with the
cases in which they have been or may be permitted. The next Question is upon
the latter part of the Rule.

Whether it be lawful for a Christian to require of the Magistrate that his
offending Brother may be punished.
If the injured person be designed only to punishment (...), 15.
and (...), out of anger and a desire to be revenged, there is no question but
it is infinitely Unlawful. Render not evil for evil, and diverse other
prohibitive words of our Blessed Lord, cannot mean less then the forbidding of
revenge, though obtained and desired from the hand of justice; for although the
Magistrate is bound to do it, if required, yet he that requires for vengeance
sake is of an Unchristian spirit: and this was observed by Dion in Plutarch,
(...), To receive and require amends from the law is more just then that injury
against which justice is required; but it proceeds from the same weak
principle; and therefore it is fit for none but fools and weak persons: --
quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi exiguique voluptas Juvenal.

Ultio: continuo sic collige, quod vindicta
Nemo magis gaudet quam femina --
or rather it becomes not such persons; for nothing can become them but to
leave their folly and to grow wiser; for it is caecus and irrationalis furor,
as Lactantius calls it, inhumanum verbum est, says Seneca, it is unreasonable,
and inhumane, and brutish: (...), said the Jews of Alexandria, We are not
delighted in taking revenge against our Enemies, because by the laws of God we
are taught to have compassion on men. And therefore is this much more to be
observed in Christianity, where we are all members one of another, united to
Christ our head; and therefore we should comport our selves as members of the
same body: concerning which Cassiodore says prettily, De amicitia.
Quod si manus una casu aliquo forte laedat alteram, illa quae laesa est non
repercutit, nec se erigit in vindictam, If one hand strikes the other, it is
not stricken again, neither does the other think to be revenged; as knowing it
was too much that one was smitten.

2. It is lawful for a Christian to require of the Magistrate to punish him
that is injurious, 16.
if he justly fears a future and intolerable evil; for then it is but a calling
to the law for a just defense, without which the Magistrate should bear the
sword in vain. Clemens Alexandrinus defines (...) or punishment (meaning that
which is just, and in some cases reasonable to be required) to be (...), a
return of evil (not for the vexing of the injurious, but) for the relief or
commodity of the complainer. But if it be that which Aristotle defined it,
(...), f^r the satisfaction of him that punishes, that is, that he may have the
pleasure of revenge, then it is intolerable. And therefore it must be always
provided that this appeal respect the future only, and not that which is past;
for that is revenge, and this is caution and defense.

3. In all repetitions of our rights which are permitted to Christians before
Christian Judges, 17.
it is not lawful for Christians to take any thing for amends beyond the real
loss or diminution of good: for that is a retribution of evil, which at no
hand is permitted to a Christian. The Jews might receive fourfold, Christians
must be content with simple restitution of their loss and real damages.

4. Christians must not go to law but upon very great cause; 18.
and therefore some of the Heathens, Musonius, Maximus Tyrius, and others,
would not allow (...), any amends at law for reproachful or disgraceful
words. And the Christians, who neither were nor ought to be behind them,
desired not their Calumniators to be punished. So Justin Martyr, We will not
those to be punished who do calumniate us. Their own perverseness and
ignorance of good things is enough already of calamity. (...), A Christian is
commanded by Christ our new Lawgiver not to be revenged, no not a little.
Abstinere a litibus etiam plusquam licet, said Cicero, We must abstain from
suits of law, even far beyond our convenience: and in the Primitive Church they
took all honest things for Commandments, and therefore did not think it
lawful at all to go to law; (...), says Justin Martyr of them, Vide Great
Exemplar, part. 2. p. 363.
They do not go to law with them that rob them. But that it is lawful, the
public necessities are a sufficient argument; and yet men for want of charity
make more necessities then needs: for if charity be preserved according to its
worthiest measures, there would be no suits of law, but what are not to be
avoided; that is, there would be none for revenge, but some for remedy and
relief. And this was that which apud Lysiam.
Musonius said, (...), It is not ingenuous to be running to law upon every
provocation though by real injury: (...), said Pythagoras, A wise man will
neither revile his neighbor, nor sue him that does. For Good men (said
Metellus Numidicus) will sooner take an injury then return one: and if we read
the Sermon of Maximus Tyrius (...); Sermon. 2.
whether it may be permitted to a good man to return evil to the injurious? it
will soon put us either to shame, or at least to consider whether there be no
command in our religion, of suffering injuries, of patience, of longanimity, of
forgiveness, of doing good for evil; and whether there be not rewards great
enough to make amends for all our losses, and to reward all our charity; and
whether the things of this world cannot possibly be despised by a Christian;
and whether peace and forgiveness do not make us more like to God and to the
Holy Jesus. Certainly if a Christian be reproached, railed at, spoiled, beaten,
mutilated, or in danger of death, if he bears it patiently and charitably, he
may better say it then Achilles did in Homer, -- (...), I hope for this charity
to be rewarded by God himself. If a man have relations, and necessities, and
obligations by other collateral duties, he must in some cases, and in many more
he may defend his goods by the protection of laws, and his life and limbs; but
in no case may he go to law to vex his Neighbor: and because all lawsuits are
vexatious, he may not go to law, unless to drive away an injury that is
intolerable, and that is much greater then that which is brought upon the other.

5. When a Christian does appeal to Christian Judges for caution, 19.
or for repetition of his right, he must do it without arts of vexation, but
with the least trouble he can; being unwilling his Neighbor should suffer any
evil for what he has done. Omnia prius tentanda quam bello experiundum. He
must try all ways before he go to this; and when he is in this, he must do
it with as little collateral trouble to his adversary at law as he can. To this
belongs that of Ulpian, Non improbat praetor factum ejus qui tanti habuit re
carere, ne propter eam saepius litigaret. Haec enim verecunda cogitatio ejus
qui lites exsecratur non est vituperanda. A man must be modest and charitable
in his necessary suits at law; not too ready, not too greedy, not passionate,
not revengeful: seeking to repair himself when he must needs, but not
delighting in the breaches made upon his Neighbor.

In order to this, 20.
it would prevent many evils, and determine many Cases of Conscience, or make
them easy and few, if evil and rapacious Advocates that make a trade, not to
minister to justice, but to heap up riches for themselves, were not permitted
in Commonwealths to plead in behalf of vicious persons and manifest
oppressors, and in causes notoriously unjust. Galeatius Sforza Duke of Millain
being told of a witty Lawyer that was of evil employment, a patron of any thing
for money, employing his wit to very evil purposes, sent for him, and told him
that he owed his Painter a hundred Crowns, and was not willing to pay him; and
therefore asked him if he would defend his cause in case the Painter should
require his money at law. The Advocate promised him largely, and would warrant
his cause; which when the Duke heard from his own mouth, he caused him to be
hanged. The action was severe, but strangely exemplary. I have nothing to do
with it, because I am not writing Politics, but Cases and Rules of Conscience:
but I have mentioned it as a great reproof of all that which makes Causes and
Suits of Law to be numerous; which is a great sign of corruption of manners, if
not of laws, in any place; but amongst Christians it is a very great state of
evil. And therefore Charles the ninth of France made an edict that whosoever
began a suit at law should pay into the Finances two Crowns; which if his cause
were just he should lose, if it were unjust the law would sufficiently punish
him besides: but even upon a just cause to go to law, is not the commendation
of Christian justice, much less of charity, (...), Then charity is best
preserved amongst Citizens, not when there are most decisions, of causes, but
when the suits are fewest.

RULE VII. It is not lawful to punish one for the offense of another; merely,
and wholly.
QUod tute intristi, tibi comedendum est, 1.
said the Comedy, As you knead, so you must eat; and he that eats sour grapes,
his teeth only shall be set on edge. This is the voice of Nature, of God, of
rightreason, and all the laws, and all the sentences of all the wise men in the
world; and needs no farther argument to prove it. But there are in it some
cases which need explication. 1. Concerning persons conjunct by Contract; 2. In
persons conjunct by Nature; 3. In them which are conjunct by the society of
Crime. For in all these one in punished for the fault of another; but how far
this can be just and lawful, are useful inquiries in order to the conduct of
Conscience.

1. The first inquiry is concerning persons conjunct in Contract; 2.
such as are Pledges in War, Sureties for Debt, Undertakers for appearance, and
the like. Concerning Pledges in War, it has been sometimes practiced in
warlike Nations, to put them to death when their parties have broke their
promise. The Thessalians killed 250, the Romans 300 of the Volsci; and this
they might do by the law of Nations: that is, without infamy and reproach, or
any supposed injustice: they did practice it on either side. But the thing it
self is not lawful by the law of God and Nature, unless the Pledges be equally
guilty of the Crime. When Regulus was sent to Rome to get an exchange of
prisoners, and himself upon his promise was engaged to release them, or to
return himself; when he persuaded the Romans not to release the African
prisoners, the Carthaginians had reason to account him guilty as his Country.
But when the Pledges are not, it is against the law of Nature to put to death
the innocent. For either the Pledges are violently sent in caution against
their wills, or with them. If against, then the wrong is apparent, and the
injustice notorious. If with their will, it is to be considered, it is beyond
their power; for, nemo membrorum suorum Dominus videtur, says the law, l.
liber ff. ad legem Aquiliam: and therefore it is that in Criminal causes, where
Corporal punishment is inflicted, no man is permitted to be Surety for another,
but in Civil causes he may; because no Surety may lawfully be put to death for
the Principal, as is noted by the Gloss in cap. Cum homo 23. q. 5. The reason
is plain; He that is Surety for another can engage nothing of which he is not
the Lord, and over which he has no power; and therefore he cannot lay his
body, his life, or limb, at stake. No man has power to engage his soul for the
soul of another, that is, so as to pay his soul in case of forfeiture to acquit
another; for it is not his, it is another; it is his who has purchased it and
is Lord over it, that is Christ: and so is our body redeemed by the blood of
Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
For ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and in
your spirit, which are God's, says the Apostle. Now this is so to be
understood, not that one man may not feel the calamity which the sin of another
can bring upon him; but that the law cannot inflict Corporal punishment upon
any relative, so as the Criminal shall escape, and the law be satisfied, as if
the offending person had suffered. If a Father be a Traitor, the law may justly
put him to death though the wife will die with sorrow. But the law cannot put
the wife to death, or the son, and let the husband go free. One relative may
accidentally come into the society of another punishment, not only if they be
partners of the Crime, but though one be innocent; but one cannot pay it for
the other and acquit him. This I say is to be understood in Corporal
punishments.

But in Pecuniary punishments the Case is otherwise. 3.
For a man is Lord of his money, and may give it away, and therefore may oblige
it; and he that is Surety for another debt, gives or lends it to him that is
principally obliged; and therefore it is just to take it, and the Surety has
power to do it. But by the way it is observable, that the Surety can only
oblige his money, or himself to the payment of his money: but when the
Creditors had power to torment the insolvent Debtors, no man could give himself
a Surety directly for that torment; but by making himself a Debtor, he did by
consequence make himself Criminal if he did not pay, and so might with as much
justice be tormented as the principal Debtor.

But the whole business is unreasonable as to this instance, 4.
and therefore the inquiry is soon at an end, and the case of conscience wholly
different; for in this particular it is not only unlawful to punish the Surety
with Corporal punishment, but even the Principal that is insolvent is to be let
alone. If he fell into poverty by his prodigality, the law may punish that as
she please; or if he intends to defraud the Creditor, he may be punished, or
constrained to pay: but if he fall into poverty (...), as Justinian's
expression is, by unavoidable accident, not by impious courses, it is against
justice and charity to put him to trouble.

Concerning which, 5.
though it be not pertinent to this rule, but here only very well occasioned, I
shall give this short account, that at once I may be wholly quit of this
particular. * In the laws of the XII Tables it was permitted to Creditors to
imprison, to torment, to put their insolvent Debtors to death; and if they were
many of them they might cut the body in pieces, and every man go away with his
share. Nihil profecto immitius, nihil immanius, Lib. 20. cap. 1.
says A. Gellius, nisi, ut reipsa apparet, eo consilio tanta immanitas poenae
denuntiata est, ne ad eam unquam perveniretur. It was an intolerable and cruel
justice, and only therefore published in so great a terror, that it might never
be put in execution: and indeed, as he observes, it was never practiced.

But addici nunc and vinciri multos videmus, 6.
says he; that was the next Cruelty: The Debtors were sold and all their
goods; even Kings, subject to the Roman Empire, were with their Crowns and
Purple, their Scepter and Royal Ensigns, published by the Crier, and made
slaves to pay their debts. The King of Cyprus was so used, as Cicero in his
oration pro Sextio sadly complains. The dividing the body of the Debtor was
changed into the dividing of his goods; but this also was hateful and
complained of by wise and good men. Si funus id habendum sit quo non amici
conveniant ad exequias cohonestandas, sed bonorum emptores ut Carnifices ad
reliquias vitae lacerandas ac distrahendas, Oratione pro Quintio, apud Livium,
l. 6.
said Cicero: and Manlius most worthily, seeing a Roman led to prison like a
slave for debt, cried out, Tum vero ego nequicquam hac dextra Capitolium
arcemque servaverim, si civem commilitonemque meum tanquam Gallis victoribus
captum in servitutem ac vincula duci videam. To what purpose did I save the
Capitol, if a citizen and my fellow-souldier shall for debt be made a slave as
if he were taken prisoner by the Gauls? and therefore he paid the debt and
dismissed the prisoner.

But because this was cruel and inhumane, 7.
when Paetilius and Papirius were Consuls, a law was made that all the goods
and possessions of the Debtors should be obnoxious to the Creditors, but not
his body; but yet so that the Debtors did work for their Creditors, but not in
chains: and this lasted till the lex Julia decreed (in Augustus his time) that
the insolvent Debtors might quit all their goods, but neither suffer chains,
nor slavery, nor do labor for their Creditors: but the benefit of this law
extended not to prodigal and vain persons, L. 1. C Theod.
but to those only qui vi majore aliqua fortunis evertebantur, (that was their
word) who were undone by any great violence, by shipwreck, or fire, or any
accident unavoidable. For as for others, they were delivered to the Capital
Triumvirat and punished ad Columnam Meniam, that is, whipped extremely; and
this continued until the time of Gratian the Emperor, Vide Raevardum ad Ll. 12.
Tabul. c. 8.
who decreed that such Debtors who were not eversi per vim majorem, should not
receive any benefit by quitting all their goods; but if they were less then
their debt, Lib. 1. Cod. Theod. qui bon. ex leg. Jul. ced. and l. si victum.
ff. de re judic.
ad redditionem debitae quantitatis congrua atque dignissima suppliciorum
acerbitate cogantur, they should be compelled by torment to pay a due
proportion: and in this there might be severity; but it had in it very much of
Justice. But for the other part of it, of the entire cession of goods, and that
the insolvent miserable Debtor should be exposed to starving, this had neither
charity in it nor justice; and therefore after much complaining, and attempts
of ease, it was wholly taken away by the Emperors, Constantine, Gratian, and
Justinian, Novel. 135. l. 2. C. de exact. tribut. l. 10.
(...). It is infinitely unjust that he who is fallen into poverty without his
fault should be constrained to live a shameful life, without his daily bread,
and the necessary provisions for his back: and then it was ordered that if the
Debtor did ejurare bonam copiam, that is, swear that he had not goods
sufficient to pay the debt, he should be free.

This was made into a law long before the time of Gratian; 8.
when Sylla was Dictator, Popilius demanded it, and it was decreed. But Tyrants
usually make good laws, and after they are dead are so hated, that even their
good laws are sometimes the less regarded: and so it happened in this
particular; In Rullum.
in so much that Cicero spoke against L. Flaccus for desiring to have Sylla's
laws confirmed. But it soon expired through the power of the rich usurers, In
Catilin.
as we find by the complaint of C. Manlius in Salust; and even so long as the
lex Popilia did prevail, yet they had ar^s to elude it: for though they could
not bind the Debtors in public prisons, yet they would detain them in their
own houses; and though it was a great and an illegal violence, yet the poor
man's case is last of all heard, and commonly the Advocates and Judges have
something else to do.

This is a perfect narrative of this affair; 9.
in all which it is apparent that wise and good men did infinitely condemn the
cruel and unjust usage of insolvent Debtors who were per vim majorem eversi,
not poor by vice, but misfortune and the Divine providence. The violence and
the injury is against natural justice and humanity, or that natural pity which
God has placed in the bowels of mankind; as appears by the endeavors of the
wiser Romans to correct the cruelty of Creditors. But the Debtors, though by
degrees eased, yet were not righted till Christianity made the laws, and saw
justice and mercy done. S. Ambrose complained most bitterly of the Creditors in
his time; Lib. de Nabuthe, cap. 5.
Vidi ego pauperem duci dum cogeretur solvere quod non habebat; trahi ad
carcerem quia vinum deesset ad mensam potentis; deducere in auctionem filios
suos ut ad tempus poenam differ possit: inventum forte aliquem qui in illa
necessitate subveniret, etc. I have seen a poor man compelled to pay what he
had not to pay; and dragged to prison because his creditor had not wine enough
to drink; and to defer his punishment a while, Offic. lib. 1.
forced to sell his sons at an outcry. Grandis culpa est, (says he) si te
sciente fidelis egeat, si scias eum sine sumptu esse, fame laborare, and non
adjuves; si sit in carcere, and poenis and suppliciis propter debitum aliquod
justus excrucietur. It is a great fault, if when you know it, you suffer a
faithful man to want meat and provisions; if a just or good man be in prison,
and in chains or torments for debt. Now if persons not interested in the debt
might not suffer such a thing to be and abide, much less might any Christian
do such a thing. If every man that could, was bound to take off the evil; it
is certain it was infinitely unlawful to inflict or to lay it on: and
therefore the remains of this barbarity and inhumanity amongst us does so
little argue Christianity to be amongst us, that it plainly proves that our
Religion has not prevailed so far upon us as to take off our inhumanity.

Of the same nature is that barbarous custom of arresting dead bodies, 10.
and denying them the natural rights of burial till a debt be paid. Ascelinus
Fitz-Arthur arrested the body of William Duke of Normandy, Conqueror of
England, Lib. de Tobia cap. 10.
upon something a like account. But S. Ambrose blames such unnatural cruelty,
and derides the folly of it; Quoties vidi a foeneratoribus teneri defunctos pro
pignore, and negari tumulum dum foenus exposcitur? Quibus ego acquiescens dixi,
Tenete reum vestrum, and ne possit elabi, domum ducite; claudite in cubiculo
isto carnificibus duriores: quoniam quem vos tenetis, carcer non suscipit,
exactor absolvit; To them who seized on dead bodies for their debt, I called
out, Hold fast your Debtor, carry him home lest he run away, O ye that are more
cruel then Hang-men. But of this sufficient: for whatsoever is against the law
of Nature, to have named it is to have reproved it. Only there is one case in
which if dead bodies be arrested for debt, I cannot so much complain of it; and
that is in the Customs of France, where they never imprison any alive for a
Debt, unless he be expressly condemned to it by the sentence of the Judge, or
contracted upon those terms with the Creditor: but when the man is dead they
lay their claim, because they cannot hurt the man. This I find in Gaspar
Beatius, who cites these Verses for it out of Johannes Girardus, no ill Poet,
but a good Lawyer. Heus principes, duodecim
Tabulae inopem crudeliter
Quae debitorem dissecant,
Aut jura, mores publici,
Quae carceribus illum misere
Et opprimunt and enecant,
Nimis mihi, nimis displicent;
Qui Gallum habuit mos bonus
Idem and verus probabitur
Nimis mihi cuique and bono,
Quo Creditores debita
Petant sibi post funera.
But I suppose he might speak this in jest, to represent the lenity of
Frenchmen in not casting their Debtors into prison. But if a Debtor should, as
Argiropilus, jesting at his death, make his rich friends the heirs of all his
debts, it would spoil the jest.

Now I return to the other inquiries of the Rule.

The second inquiry is concerning persons conjunct by nature; 11.
whether (for example sake) Sons or Nephews can be punished for the faults and
offenses of their Fathers and Grandfathers. Concerning this, I find Paulus the
Lawyer and Baldus speaking exact Antinomies. For Baldus in l. id quod
pauperibus, qu. 9. C. de Episcopis and Clericis, affirms, Haeredem teneri ad
poenam ad quam defunctus fuerat condemnatus, The heir of his father inherits
his father's punishment: but Paulus in l. si poena, ff. de poenis, says
expressly, Haeredem non teneri ad poenam defuncti, The heir is not bound to
suffer the punishment of the dead. * But they are both in the right: for the
Heir is not tied to suffer the corporal punishment to which his Father was
condemned, because his Father had no dominion over his Son's body or his own;
but over his goods he has, and therefore can transmit these with their proper
burden: and therefore the Heir is liable to pay the Fine to which his Father
was sentenced, and to pay his Father's debts, and is liable to the same
compulsion, with this only caution, that if the Father be under torment or
imprisonment for insolvency, the Son be no way obliged to that; because whether
the insolvency of the Father be by his fault or his misfortune, still the Son
is not obliged: for as he is not bound by his Father's personal fault to suffer
personal punishment, so neither for his misfortune can he be obliged beyond the
suffering of a descending poverty. If his Father was insolvent by his Crime,
the punishment was to go no further then the fault, and therefore no torment
was entailed: but if he were insolvent by misfortune, neither the Father nor
the Son for that could deserve any further evil; and if the Father transmitted
no goods, no advantage to the Son, there is no reason he should transmit a
burden: Nemo fiat deterior per quem melior factus non est, says the Law. And
therefore S. Ambrose complained of a sad sight he saw; Lib. de Tobia cap. 8.
Vidi ego miserabile spectaculum, Liberos pro Paterno debito in auctionem
deduci, and teneri calamitatis haeredes, qui non essent participes
successionis, and hoc tam immane flagitium non erubescere Creditorem, I have
seen Sons sold Slaves for their Fathers debt, from whom they were never like to
receive an Inheritance; and which is yet more strange, the Creditors were not
ashamed of the impious Cruelty. But this is a ruled case both in Divinity and
Law. Nunquam unus pro alio potest poena corporis puniri, 3. p. q. 41. in 4. a.
4. Corol. lar. 3.
said Alexander of Hales, and Thomas Aquinas, No man can suffer corporal
punishment in the place of another: the same with that in the law, l. Crimen
ff. de poenis. in 2. 22. q. 108. a. 4. ad. 2.
And therefore of all things in the world, conjunction of Nature, which should
be a means of endearment, and the most profitable communications, ought not to
be an instrument of the communication of evil. Unius factum alteri qui nihil
fecit non nocet, l. de pupillo, 5. si plurium. ff. Nov. op. nunt. And again,
Peccata suos teneant autores, nec ulterius progrediatur metus, quam reperiutur
delictum, l. Sancimus, 22. C. de poenis. But it is expressly instanced in this
matter of succession, Unusquisque ex suo admisso poenae subjiciatur, nec alieni
criminis successor teneatur, The Son may succeed in his Father's burdens and
misfortunes, but not in his crimes or corporal punishments. l. crimen, ff. eod.

And this is the measure of the third inquiry. 12.
For they who are conjunct in crime, are equally obnoxious to punishment; and
therefore if one be punished for the fault of another, it is just to him that
is punished, and mercy to them that are spared. For when all are criminal, all
are liable to punishment, Livius l. 38.
and sometimes all do suffer. So did the Campanian Legion that rebelled at
Rhegium, and possessed the Town for ten years; they suffered every man, Sueton.
in Julio, c. 69. in August. c. 24.
four thousand heads paid for it. So did the ninth Legion under Julius, and the
tenth Legion under Augustus, every man was punished. For the rule of the law
is, Quod a pluribus pro indiviso commissum est, singulos in solidum obligat, l.
semper, 2. ff. Quod vi aut cl. and l. item Mela, 2. ff. ad legem Aquiliam. When
every man consents to the whole crime, every man is wholly criminal. If ten
thieves carry away a load of iron, every man is tied to the punishment of the
whole. * But sometimes only the Principals are punished. Livius l. 36.
Thus at Capua seventy Princes of the Senate were put to death for rebelling
against the Romans, and three hundred of the Nobility were imprisoned, and two
hundred twenty five of the Sorani. And this way is often taken by Princes, and
wise Generals, and Republics, Lib. 45.
ut unde culpa orta esset ibi poena confisteret. And C. Decimus was heard with
great applause, when in the case of the Rhodians he affirmed, that the fault
was not in the People, but in their Principals and Incendiaries; meaning, it
was not so in the People as in their Leaders. And in Tumults it often happens
as it did at Ephesus, when S. Paul had almost been torn in pieces with the
People: the greater part knew not why they were come together, but all were in
the Tumult; and in such cases it is justice that one be punished for many, a
few for all: and therefore S. Ambrose did highly reprove Theodosius the
Emperor for killing 7000 of the Thessalonians for a tumultuary rescuing a
Criminal from the hand of the Magistrate, and killing the Governor and some
great Officers in the sedition. * Sometimes the Criminals were decimated by
lot, as appears in Lib. hist. 6.
Polybius, Lib. 14, and 17.
Tacitus, In Crasso.
Plutarch, Civil. 2.
Appian, Lib. 48.
Dio, In Opilio Macrone.
Julius Capitolinus, who also mentions a centesimation. And the reason of this
equity Cicero well discourses in his Oration pro Cluentio, ut metus, viz. ad
omnes, poena ad paucos perveniret, That some may be punished, and all may be
made to fear: for the Soldiers being made to fear the bigger fear of their
Generals, would never fear the less fear of the Enemy, who does not strike so
surely as the Executioner; and therefore they might afterward become good Men
and good Citizens. But because in public offenses the cases may be different,
they are by this measure reduced to reason.

If the tumult or war be by the command of Magistrates, 13.
the People are to be affrighted, or admonished, but the Commanders only are
to be punished. Ne alieni admissi poenam luant quos nulla contingit culpa, l.
ult. ff. de bon. Damnat. For the People are soon commanded by him that stands
next above them. And therefore since to obey is like a duty, it is not easily
to be reckoned to a real crime, and the greatest punishment.

But if the fault be done by the People without authority or excuse, 14.
but just as fire burns a house by chance, or water breaks a dam by its mere
weight, then it is to be considered whether the Criminals be many or few: if
few, they may all be punished without breach of equity, upon the account of the
rule of the law, Quae poena delictis imposita est, si plures deliquerint, a
singulis in solidum debetur, l. item Mela, ff. ad leg. Aquil. But if many were
in the crime, then the rule of equity and the gentleness of the law is to take
place, ut poenae interpretatione potius molliantur, quam exasperentur, leg.
poen. ff. de poenis, a few should be punished for all the rest, ut supersint
quos peccasse poeniteat. For it is of great avail for the public interest,
that as some be cut off, so some should remain alive, that they may repent. And
in this sense is that of Lucan, -- quicquid multis peccatur inultum est.
Besides that it is evil to the Commonwealth to lose so many Subjects, it is
also sometimes dangerous; -- sed illos
Defendit numerus junctaeque umbone phalanges.
The determination of these two particulars I learn from Cicero in his Oration
pro Flacco, Vobis autem est confitendum, si consiliis Principum vestrae
civitates reguntur, non multitudinis temeritate, optimatum consilio bellum ab
istis civitatibus cum populo Romano esse susceptum. If the Nobles govern your
Cities, then the Nobles made the war, and the People are innocent. Sin ille tum
motus est temeritate imperitorum excitatus, patimini me delicta vulgi a publica
causa separare, But if the Rabble did the fault, the City is not to be
punished; it is not a public offense. Multitudo peccavit, sed non Universitas.
For a Rabble does not make a City, a People, or a Republic: for to make this,
it must be coetus qui jure aliquo continetur, l. metum. animadvertendum. ff.
quod met. cause. a multitude under government, and a legal head.

But if both the Magistrates and the People be in the offense, 15.
culpa est penes paucos concitores vulgi, said C. Decimus; it is better that
the Ringleaders and the Boutefeus should lie at stake, and feel the severity,
while the other are instructed and preserved by the gentleness of laws and
Princes.

There are some other questions and cases of Conscience concerning penal laws;
but they can with more propriety be handled under other titles, and therefore I
shall refer them to their several places. But for the likeness of the matter I
have here subjoyned some Rules concerning the measures and obligations of
Conscience in the matter and laws of Tribute.

Of Laws of Tribute. RULE VIII. The laws of Tribute are moral laws, and not
penal, except it be by accident; and therefore do oblige the Conscience to an
active obedience.
HIm to whom we pay tribute, 1.
we owe obedience to. It is S. Paul's argument to prove that we ought to obey
the powers that are set over us, because to them we pay tribute; Romans 13.
which tribute is not introduced by Tyranny, but is part of that Economy by
which God governs the world, by his Deputies and lieutenants, the Kings and
Princes of the earth. Nec quies gentium sine armis, nec arma sine stipendiis,
nec stipendia sine tributis haberi possunt, said Tacitus. No peace without
laws; no laws without a coercitive power; no power without guards and
soldiers; Ad hoc tributa praestamus, ut propter necessaria militi stipe^dium
praebeatur. S. Aug. lib. 22. c. 74. c. Faust. Manich.
no guards without pay: and that the soldiery may be paid, and the laws
reverenced, and the power feared, and every man's right be secured, it is
necessary that there be tribute. Ut sit ornamentum pacis, subsidium belli and
nervus reip. tributum est pecunia populo imperata quae tributim a singulis
proportione census exigebatur, said Varro. But besides this, the very paying
tribute is the sign and publication of our subjection. It is a giving him that
which is his own: Cicero prolege Manilia.
for he that coyns the money, has the power of the law, and this from the
custom of the world for many ages. The Persians first imprinted the figure of
their Prince upon their money, after them the Greeks: hence were those names of
coin, the Darics, and Philippics; for the money having the impress and figure
of the Prince, the name and the value from the Prince, is a seizure and solemn
investiture in the government of that people: and our Blessed Lord was pleased
from hence to argue that therefore they ought to pay tribute to Caesar; because
what way soever he came first to it, Christ does not there dispute, but he was
over them, and he protected them in peace, righted their causes, relieved their
oppressions, stamped their money, gave value to that, and protection to them,
and therefore they were bound to pay their tribute. It was res Caesaris, as he
was pleased to call it, the things of Caesar; it was due to him for the public
ministry of justice: and this is also urged by S. Paul, for they are Gods
ministers, watching for this very thing, that is, for your good; and therefore
are to be maintained according to the dignity of that ministration.

Now as we owe tribute to whom we owe obedience; 2.
so we owe obedience to whom we owe tribute: that is, if he have authority to
exact tribute, we are bound in Conscience to pay it. It is a law as much
obliging the Conscience as any other. Numus or Nummus from Numa, say the Roman
Critics; because King Numa first stamped money amongst them. But I suppose it
is from a Greek fountain, Numus and Numisma from (...), Lib. 5. Eth. cap. 8.
and that says Aristotle is (...), from the law: for he that stamps money,
gives the law; and amongst others, and for the defense of all laws, this law of
paying money to him by way of Tribute is obligatory.

And the case does not differ by what name soever it be imposed; 3.
vectigal, tributum, census, (...), were the words amongst the Greeks and
Latins, and did signify portions of money paid from lands, from merchandise,
for heads, excisum quid, something that is cut off from the whole, for the
preservation of the rest; that is excise money: but whatever the words be, S.
Paul reckons them all to be (...), due debt; Matthew. 22. 21.
and thefore (...) says our Blessed Lord, (...), says S. Paul, restore, Romans
13. 7.
or pay it; it is a debt due by the ordinance of God. It is all but tribute;
even the census or pole money is tribute: so it is called by Ulpian, l. 3 ff.
de Censibus, tributum capitis, the tribute of the head. The same use of the
word I have observed out of Ammianus and Tertullian. This I the rather note,
that I might represent the obligation to be all one by the law of God, though
the imposition be odious and of ill name amongst the people, according to that
saying of Tertullian, In Apolog.
Si agri tributo onusti viliores, hominum capita stipendio censa ignobiliora,
Fields under contribution are cheaper, and men under a tax are more ignoble.
Angaria is another sort of tribute; an imposition of work and upon the labors
of the Subject. It is indeed the worst and the most vexatious; but it is
species tributi, a kind of tribute, and due by the laws of religion, where it
is due by the laws of the nation: and therefore those persons are very
regardless of their eternal interest, who think it lawful prize whatever they
can take from the Custom House; whereas the paying of tribute is an instance
of that obedience which is due to them that are set over us, not only for
wrath, but also for Conscience sake, and S. Paul never uses the word
Conscience, but when it is the concern of a soul. In 1. Reg. 14. 11. q. 1. c.
28.
It is S. Ambrose his observation, who also uses this argument, Magnum quidem
est and spiritale documentum, quo Christiani viri sublimioribus potestatibus
docentur esse subjecti, ne quis constitutionem terreni Regis putet esse
solvendam. Si enim censum Dei filius solvit, quis tu tantus es qui non putes
esse solvendum? It is a great and a spiritual doctrine that Christians be
subject to the higher powers. For if Christ paid tribute, what art thou, how
great, how mighty, that thou think thou art not obliged?

RULE IX. The laws of Tribute have the same conditions, causes, powers, and
measures with other laws of Government.
THis Rule requires that Vectigalia sine Imperatorum praecepto, neque Praesidi,
neque Curatori, neque Curia constituere, nec praecedentia reformare, and his
vel addere, vel diminuere licet, ff. de Publican. l. 10.

Vectigalia nova nec decreto civitatum institui possunt, Sever. C. de vectigal.
nov. instit. non post. l. 2. and Gallien. l. seq. ait, Non solent nova
vectigalia inconsultis principibus instituti.

Placet nullum omnino Judicem de caetero Provincialibus inferendum aliquid
indicere, ut ea tdntum sedulo cunctorum studio pensitentur, quae Canonis
instituti forma complectitur, vel nostra clementia decernit inferenda, vel
delegatione solemniter sanciente, vel epistolis praecedentibus, Constantin. l.
8. C. de excusat. mun. lib. 10.


the authority be supreme, that the cause be just, that the end be public,
that the good be general, that the people receive advantage. Which is to eb
understood of tribute which is not penal, nor compensatory. For sometimes
Tributes are imposed upon a conquered people Deuter. 20.
as fetters upon a fugitive, to load him that he run away no more; or to make
amends for the charges of a war. If they were in fault, they must bear the
punishment; if they did the evil, they must suffer the evil; that at the charge
of the conquered themselves also shall enjoy peace. So Petilius said to the
Gauls, Tacit. hist. l. 4.
Nos, quanquam toties lacessiti, jure victoriae id solum vobis addidimus quo
pacem tueremur, You have provoked us, and we have conquered you; and yet have
only imposed the punishment of so much tribute on you, that at your charge we
will keep the peace, So concerning the Greeks Lib. 1. ad Quintum fratr. ep. 1.
Cicero affirms that they ought to pay some part of their fruits that at their
own expenses they be restrained from undoing themselves by Civil wars.

But then this is at the mercy and good will of the Conqueror; 2.
for the tribute he imposes upon them as punishment, he is so the Lord of it,
that however he dispose of it, it must be truly paid. And the same is the case
of a tribute imposed by way of fine upon a City or Society: the Supreme power
is not bound to dispense that in public uses; and if he does not, yet the
Subject is not at liberty in his Conscience whether he will pay it or no. For
in this case it is not a law of manners but of Empire; and is a private
perquisite of the Prince, as the Prince himself can be a private person: which
because it cannot be in any full sense or acceptance of a law, but in nature
only, so neither can the tribute be of so private emolument, but it will at
least indirectly do advantage to the Public.

In other tributes, 3.
such which are legal, public, and universal, the tribute must be
proportioned to the necessity and cause of it; it must be employed in that end
to which it was imposed and paid, (for that is a part of commutative justice)
it must be equally laid; that is, as far as it can be prudently done, supposing
the unavoidable errors in public affairs in which so many particulars are to
be considered (for this is a part of distributive justice:) and where there is
a defailance in these, I mean a constant and notorious, there the Conscience is
disobliged (as far as the excess and injustice reaches) just as it is from the
obedience to other laws that are unjust; of which I have given account, * in
the third Rule of the first Chapter of this Book. But this I say is true in
such tributes as are of public and common use. For those which are for the
expenses and personal use of the Prince, if he spends them well or ill, the
Subject is not concerned; but only that he pay it according to the law and
custom. In these the Supreme power is a Supreme Lord, in the other he is but a
supreme Steward and Dispenser.

As the laws of tribute have their original and their obligation, 4.
so they have their dissolution as other laws have, with this only difference,
that the laws of tribute, when the reason ceases, if they be continued by
custom, are still obliging to the Subject, Pra^crea cum pedagia, gui lagia,
salinaria tibi legatus interdixerit, authoritate Apostolica duximus
declarandum, illa esse pedagia, salinaria, guidagia interdicta, quae non
apparent Imperatorum, vel Regum, ^el Later an^nsis Concilii largitione
concessa, vel ex antiqua consuetudine a tempore cujus non extat memoria
introducta. Innocent. 3. de verb. signif. c. super quibusdam, 1.
it being reason enough that the Supreme power has an advantage by it, which
cannot be so personal but that it will, like the brightness of the Sun,
reflect light and heat upon the Subject.

Lastly, 5.
in the levying and imposing tribute, by the voice of most men, those things
usually are excepted which are spent in our personal necessities. Whatsoever
is for negotiation may pay, but not what is to be eaten and drank. This tribute
nevertheless is paid in Spain, for it is that which they call, Alcavala; and in
Portugal, where it is called Sisa. I suppose it is the same with the Excise in
England and the Low Countries; and yet is much spoken against for these
reasons, 1. Because it is too great an indication or likeness to slavery, and
an uningenuous subjection to pay tribute for our meat and drink and the
necessaries of life; it is every day a compounding for our life, as if we were
condemned persons, and were to live at a price, or die with hunger, unless by
our money we buy our reprieve. 2. The other reason of the complaint made
against this, is because by this means the poor and he that has the greatest
charge of children, and he that is the most hospitable to strangers and to the
poor, shall pay the most, who yet of all men ought most to be eased. And upon
these or the like reasons the Civil Law imposed Gabels only upon Merchandises
for trade and gain and pleasure. L. Universi. C. de vectig. and l. omnium. C.
eod.
And of this opinion are generally all the Canonists and most of the Civilians,
and very many Divines: but when Scholars come to dispute the interest of
Princes and the measures of their gain or necessities, they speak some things
prettily, but to no great purpose. In these and all other Cases of this nature,
Kings and Princes will do what they please; and it is fit they should, let us
talk what we will, always provided, that they remember they are to answer to
God for their whole Government, and how they should be enabled to make this
answer with joy, they are to consult with the laws of God, and of the land, and
with their Subjects learned in them both: and that, above all men, Princes
consider not always what they may do, but what is good; and very often, what
is best. * This only. Tribute upon meat and drink is not of it self unjust;
but it is commonly made so: for whether the tribute be paid only by the
Merchant, as in Castile and England, or by the Merchant and him that spends
them for his need, and not for his gain, as in Portugal; yet still the poor man
is the most burdened in such cases: for the Merchant will sell the dearer, and
then the evil falls upon the poor housekeeper, contrary to the intention of all
good Princes; which if they will take care to prevent, I know nothing to hinder
them, but that by the same rules which they observe in making other laws they
may take their liberty in this.

RULE X. Tribute, and Customs which are due, are to be paid whether they be
demanded or no.
THis is but the result of the former discourses. 1.
For if a tribute be just, it is due debt, and to be paid as any other: and
humane laws do not only make the paying tribute to be necessary in the virtue
of obedience, for then unless the law expressed that it ought to be paid,
though it be not particularly demanded, the subject not demanded were free; but
the laws place this obedience in the form and matter of its proper kind of
virtue, it is justice to pay it, and that must not be omitted at all; for our
duty is not to depend upon the diligence of other men; and if the Ministers of
the Prince be negligent, yet we must not be unjust. This is true in Subjects
and Natives; but strangers are free, unless they be required to pay: always
supposing, that they go in public ways and with open address. For it is
presumed that they are ignorant inculpably in the laws of the Country, and
they are less obliged; but therefore these defects are to be supplied by the
care of them that are interested. But if they know it already, they are obliged
as the Natives according to the laws, and must not pretend ignorance, in fraud
and cosenage.

But this also is to be understood of customs and tributes which are just. 2.
In which number those which are of an immemorial time and long use ever are to
be presumed. Those which are newly imposed, may better be considered whether
they be or no, because they want that approbation which is given to the old.
But whatsoever are unjust, do not oblige to payment; and the Merchant may use
all just ways of escape, and concealment. He may not lie, nor forswear, nor
deny them to be there when they are there, and he is asked; but he may hide
them, or go into secret ways: and if he be discovered, he must suffer as they
please, but his conscience is free.

He that paies not tribute upon pretense that it is unjust, 3.
that is, it is imposed by an incompetent authority, or in an undue manner, or
unjust measure, must be sure that it is unjust, and not only think so. For if
he be deceived, he does not err with a good Conscience, unless he use all the
diligence and ingenuous inquiries that he can. His ignorance must not, and
cannot innocently prejudice the Princes rights. If therefore he inquire well
and wisely, unless the injustice be very clear and certain, he will at most but
doubt concerning it; and if he does, the surer way is to pay it: but if he does
not doubt, but is fully persuaded of the injustice, if he thinks true, he is
innocent; but if he thinks amiss, he is not only guilty of a culpable
ignorance, but of a criminal injustice.

If the Subject does doubt, 4.
the presumption is for the advantage of the Prince, because he is the better
person, and public, and he is rather to be secured then the private and the
inferior. And therefore I wonder at those Lawyers and Divines that say
otherwise, upon pretense that in dubiis melior est conditio possidentis, The
possessor is to be preferred in doubtful cases. For supposing this, yet the
Prince is in the possession of law, and the Subject in possession of fact: the
Prince is in possession of an actual right and law of demanding it, and
therefore his condition is to be preferred. For in the practice of paying
tribute, it is not sufficient cause of omitting to pay it, that the Subject
doubts whether it be, or is not sure that it is just. For unless he be sure it
is unjust it is sure that he is bound to pay. And therefore in this case, let
no Merchant trust his own judgment, but the sentence of a wise spiritual Guide,
or of Council learned in the laws.

One thing only I advertise in order to practice: 5.
let no man think that because some subjects farm the Customs, and that the
portion which is concealed does not lessen the incomes of the Prince, therefore
it may be lawful to hide from them all which they can hide. For the Farmer
has what he gets in the right of the Prince, and in his own right he has
nothing from the Subject, but from his Supreme; who therefore is bound to
defend that right, and to complain of that wrong: and the husbandmen in the
Gospel who denied to pay to the Stewards of the King the fruits of the vineyard
which in their Kings right were demanded of them, were thrown into outer
darkness.

But then, 6.
as S. John Baptist gave counsel, the Tribute-men and Farmers must exact no
more then is appointed them; nor yet in cruel and vexatious manners, nor with
the exactest and utmost measures, but with such moderation as may be far from
rapine. Tributorum and Fisci nunquam mala causa nisi sub bono principe, was an
old saying, Whatsoever was demanded by the Tribute-Gatherers, it was all
justice, whether it were right or wrong, unless the Prince were gentle and
good. But the Vulture-like greediness and unconscionable, unchristian and
avaritious proceedings which are too frequent amongst such men, have made the
name of Exactors and Quid est publicanus? N^nne caput rapinae, and lex
violentiae? Quid est publicanus? Praedo sine pudore, medius exterminii. Nonne
immanior furibus publicanus? Fur namque vel metuens furatur, hic autem
delinquit confidenter. Fur laqueos tegit, timet, hic autem quicquid fecerit
legem putat. Lex furem deterret ab illicitis, hic ad iniquum malitiae suae
compendium legem trahit. Quis eo iniquior qui verbis justitia justitiam damnat,
and armis innocentiae spoliat, vulnerat, occidit Innocents? lege utique legem
per^ertit, and dum urget ad legem, exlex est, Laurent. Episc. Mediol. in Homil.
Publicans so infinitely, so intolerably hateful. Curandum in primis, ne magna
injuria fiat. Juvenal. Sat. 8.

Fortibus and miseris tollas licet omne quod usquam est
Auri atque argenti, scutum gladiumque relinques
Et jacula and galeam, spoliatis arma supersunt.
It is not good to provoke the valiant by making them poor and miserable; for
they that have not a cloak may have a sword: and by how much you make them the
less considerable in peace, they are the more dangerous in war. And therefore
covetous Princes are to themselves the greatest enemies, excepting only their
more covetous Exactors.

CHAP. III. Of Kings, Princes, and all Supreme civil powers; and their Laws in
special.
RULE I. The Supreme power in every Republic is universal, absolute, and
unlimited.
THAT in every Commonwealth there is a Supreme power is without all question:
1.
There is no government without superiority; and where there is a Superior,
there is a Supreme; for he is so that has none above him. It matters not
whether this Supreme power be subjected in one or many, whether it be parted or
united: the consideration of these is material as to the goodness or badness of
a Government, but nothing to the power and absoluteness of it, nothing to the
present Rule. And therefore it is but a weak and useless distinction when we
speak of Kings and Princes, (by them meaning the Supreme Power) to say that
some are absolute, some are limited in their power. For it is true that some
Princes are so; but then they are not the Supreme power. It is a contradiction
to say that the Supreme power is limited, or restrained; for that which
restrains it is Superior to it, and therefore the other is not Supreme. And
therefore Albericus Gentilis said well, That he doubted concerning the Kings of
France and Spain, whether they were Supreme Princes, because in the affairs of
Religion they are subject to the Pope. He that has the Supreme power is only
under God; and to inquire concerning a King, whether he be tied to laws or
conditions, is not properly an inquiry after his power, but after the exercise
and dispensation of it. For though he may not always use it, yet the Supreme
power always is absolute and unlimited, and can do what he please. The
difference of a Tyrant and a King or a gentle Prince being only this, that a
Tyrant uses his absolute power unreasonably and unjustly and ordinarily; but a
King uses it not but in cases extraordinary, for just and good ends: and if the
Prince does not, some else must, who in that case is the Supreme. Sometimes the
Consuls, sometimes the Dictators, sometimes the Senate did do extraordinary
acts of power; but still they who did it had the Supreme power: and that is
necessary, and inseparable from Government, that, I mean, which is Supreme:
(...), the Greeks call it; Majestatem, the Latins: and be it in whom, or in how
many it happens, that power can do every thing of Government, and disposes of
all things in order to it, and is accountable to no man. For suppose a King
that has power of the Militia, and his Senate of making laws, and his people
by their Committees of raising money; this power of making war, and laws, and
levies is the Supreme power, and is that which can do all things: and although
one be accountable for moneys, and the other subject to laws, and two of them
under the power of the sword, yet this is but the Majesty or Supremacy parted,
and whether well or ill, I dispute not, yet when it is parted and when it is
united, it is supreme, and it is all. That Government which Aristotle calls
(...), seems (says he) to be a Kingdom but yet subject to laws, but is not
the Mistress of all; and this is true in many European Governments: but there
is another government where the Governor is (...), Lord of all, and but one
person; that is the perfect Monarchy: which although it be incomparably the
best, and like to that by which God governs the world, the first in the whole
kind of Government, and therefore the measure of the rest, yet that is no
greater power then is in every kind of Government; for be it where it will,
somewhere or other in all Government there must be a Supreme power, and that
power is absolute and unlimited. Now this being thus stated, the Rule is clear,
and the Jews expressed it by an odd device of theirs: for when their King died
they tied his thumb so in the palm of his hand, that the wrinkles of the fist
should, in a manner that might be fancied, represent (...) which signifies
Almighty; to denote that he was God's Vicegerent, and under him had the whole
power of Government. He had had in his hand a power like to the power of God,
but the other hand was open and had let it go.

Now that this is true is apparent by all the same reasons by which the
necessity of Government is proved. 2.
It is necessary that it should be so; for there are some states of things for
which nothing can provide but this absoluta potestas, Supreme and unlimited
power; as at Rome when the Gauls had almost possessed themselves of all, and in
many cases of their appointing Dictators, and in sudden invasions, and in the
inundation of tumults, and in all cases where laws are disabled to speak or
act. Ne res publica aliquid detrimenti patiatur, That the public should by all
means be preserved, in the greatest necessity they can have, and that is the
great end of power; and either the Commonwealth is like a helpless Orphan
exposed to chance and violence, and left without guards, or else she has so
much power as to use all means for her safety. If she have not a right to do
all that she naturally can, and is naturally necessary, she is deficient in the
great end of Government; and therefore it must be certain she has absolute
power: now wherever this is subjected, there it is habitually, there it is
always. I do not say it is always there where it is sometimes actually
administered; but there it is habitually from whence it is concredited actually,
and put into delegation and ministry: and this is the power that can do all
things of government; and because it is supreme, and it is so always, it
cannot be at any time less in judgment, because it is greater in power; that
is, it is accountable to no man whatsoever it does. Qui Rex est, Regem, Maxim,
non habeat.

This Supreme power is commonly expressed by Potestas Regia, 3.
or Kingly Power, or power Imperial; though when the Emperor was Lord of the
world, to be a King in most places went much less: but because most Kings have
been and are Supreme in their own Dominions, (and they always are so, and are
so acknowledged, to whom their subjects are bound by the oaths of allegiance,
and supremacy) by this word we commonly mean the Supremacy or the Majesty. So
Suetonius speaking of Caligula, says he was very near speciem Principatus in
Regnum convertere, to change the Government into a Kingdom, that is, to make
it absolute and supreme: and this distinction Piso used concerning Germanicus,
Principis Romanorum, non Parthorum Regis esse filium, meaning that the Parthian
Kings were absolute, but the Roman Princes ruled with the Senate: and Caesar
tells that Vercingetorix was put to death because he being but the Prince of
the Gauls affected the Kingdom. (...). Lib. 53.
So Dion described the power of a King, for that which they understood to be
the Supreme power. (...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
So the people in Aeschylus spoke to their King, In Arg. trag. supplic.
Thou art our City, our Commonwealth, above all Judicatories, thy Throne is
sacred and immured as an Altar, and by thy suffrage, by thy own Will thou
governest all things. This is the Jus Regium, this the Supreme power can do,
it can be no less then this in its own nature and appointment. So the power is
described by Theophilus, Decad. 1. l. 9.
(...), He has given to the King all power over the people. So it is described
by Livy, Reges non liberi solum impedimentis omnibus, sed Domini rerum
temporumque, trahunt consiliis cuncta, non sequuntur, Kings are not only free
from all lets and encumbrances, but are Lords of times and things, they by
their counsels draw all things after them, but follow not. The Greeks call this
Supremacy, (...), a power to rule without danger of being called to account by
men; S. Ambrose calls it, Non ullis ad poenam vocari legibus, tutos imperii
potestate, a power that is safe in its own circles, and can by no laws be
called to punishment: (...), that is Galens word, It is the chief or prime
principality. -- Toto liber in orb
Solus Caesar erit --
The King alone is free; all others are under Compulsories and Judges. But S.
Peter's phrase is better then all of them, (...). The King is the most eminent,
the Defender of all, and above all; (...), says Suidas. The King or the
Supreme has the power of defense, the power of the Sword, and that commands
all the rest: for (...), it signifies to be more then Conqueror. So the
Grammarians.

But in order to Conscience, Kings and Princes, 4.
I mean all Supreme powers, must distinguish potestatem Imperii ab officio
Imperantis; that is to be considered by Subjects, and this by Princes. Supreme
Princes always have an absolute power, but they may not always use it. He
that has a Sword by him is not always tied to use it, and he must cut his
meat with a Knife. (...), says Aristotle; It is a Kingdom when it is by rule
and measure, but if it be unlimited it is a Tyranny: that is, when affairs are
capable of a law and order, the Supreme power must so conduct them, He must go
in that path where they stand; but if they grow wild and irregular, he must go
out of his way to fetch them in again.

But then it is also to be considered that the absolute power of the Prince is
but an absolute power of government, 5.
not of possession; it is a power of doing right, but not a power of doing
wrong: and at the worst is but a power of doing private violences for the
security of the public. This power is excellently expressed in the Tables of
the Royal law written to Vespasian; Uti quaecunque ex usu reipublicae Majestate
Divinarum, Humanarum, publicarum, privatarumque rerum esse censebit, ei agere,
facere, jus potestasque sit, uti Augusto fuit. Augustus Caesar was the most
absolute Prince that ever ruled the Roman people; to him was granted, says
Alciat, De Magistrate.
to be free from laws, and all the necessity of laws, to be obnoxious to no law
written, and to have all the power of Kings: and yet all that power was but to
do every thing which he should esteem to be useful to the public, and
according to the Majesty of religion and all humane rights public and private.
And therefore he is Princeps Regni, but not Dominus, a Prince, not a Lord; and
the distinction is very material. For to be Lord, signifies more then the
Supreme power of Government. Qui primi fuerunt Romae Principes, etsi poterant
videri revera Domini, vitabant tamen valde Domini Nomen, veluti contumeliam ac
maledictum: non vitaturi si esset Nomen solius honoris, August. 53.
aut moderatae potestatis, says Suetonius. The first Princes of Rome esteemed
it a disgrace to be called Lords, because it was not a name of mere honor, or
of a moderate power; for if it had, they would not have declined it: but it
means an absolute power to dispose of all lives and all possessions; which is
beyond the power of the King or Prince. He that is a King rules over a free
people, but a Lord rules over slaves. Tacitus, according to the popular humor
of the Romans, supposed the power of a King to be too great a violation of
liberty; but Domination or Lording it was intolerable. Tacit. in Agric.
Principatus and libertas res sunt dissociabiles; magis tamen sunt
dissociabiles libertas and dominatio; for to be the absolute Lord cannot
consist either with freedom or propriety: and therefore Ovid prefers Augustus
before Romulus in this very instance, for speaking to Romulus of Augustus, he
says, Tu Domini nomen, Principis ille tenet. Augustus is a Prince, a gentle
Governor; Romulus was a Lord, that is, something that no man loves, but every
man serves and fears. This power is well expressed by S. Peter's word of (...),
a power not ministering to good, nor conducted by moderation. Maximum hoc regni
bonum rati,
Quod facta Domini cogitur populus sui
Tam far quam laudare --
When the people must suffer the will of their Imperious Lord and must commend
it, that is, be a slave in their persons and their labors, their possessions
and their understandings: that is more then a Prince or a gentle Lord will do;
for then the word is good, when the Man is gentle, and the Power is moderate.
But that which I intend to say is this, that the Supreme power of Government is
at no hand a Supreme power, or an Arbitrary disposer of life and fortunes; but
according to law, or according to extreme necessity which is the greatest law
of all. In the sense of Honor and of Moderate power the King is a Lord, but
not in this sense of law. Qui pleno jure Dominus est, alienandi, dissipandi,
disperdendi jus habet, says the law, l. 7. C. de relig. l. sed etsi, lege 25..
consuluit, ff. de haered. petit. By a Lord is meant he that has power to
dispose of the goods of the Vassals: and this a King or Prince has not. This
is not the Supreme power of Government. A King is not the Lord of his Kingdom,
of the territories of his Subjects, quia dominium in solidum non possit esse
duorum, says Cujacius, There cannot be two absolute Lords of the same land;
The right owner is the Lord, not the right King. Aliter reipublicae sunt agri,
aliter privatorum. Number quid dubium est, quin servus cum peculio Domini sit? dat
tamen Domino suo munus. Non enim ideo nihil habet servus, quia nihil est
habiturus, si Dominus illum habere noluerit, said one; The servant is within
his Lords peculiar, but yet he can make a present to his Lord. If his Lord
please, the servant shall have nothing; but yet it follows not, that therefore
he is possessed of nothing. Now if this be true in Slaves, much more infinitely
more is it in free Subjects; for otherwise are my lands my own, Lib. 7. De
benef. cap. 4.
otherwise they are the Princes. Jure civili omnia Regis sunt, (says Seneca;)
and tamen illa quorum ad Regem pertinet universa possessio, in singulos Dominos
descripta sunt, By the law all things are the King's; but even those things are
divided into peculiars, and have private Lords. It is all the Princes lands,
and he receives the tribute, and he receives the service and the duty of them
all; but the Lords receive the rents. The Athenians and the Thebans fight
concerning the bounds of their territory; and at the same time Polyaenus and
Thysias are at law about dividing their shepherds walks in the same place.
Ibid. cap. 5.
Sub optimo Rege, omnia Rex Imperio possidet, singuli dominio, The King governs
all, but the Subjects possess all their own: for so Livy might buy his own
Books of Dorus; they were Dorus his Books, and Livy's too: and when a Lord
receives his rent, the Tenant may call the lands his own. Some things are mine
by possession, some by use; some by title, some by incumbency; one is the
Author, and another is the Buyer; one is an Artificer, and another the Merchant
of the same thing; and the King has the power, but his Subjects have the
propriety. Cap. 6.
Caesar omnia habet; fiscus ejus privata tantum ac sua: and universa in Imperio
ejus sunt, in patrimonio propria. That Is the sum of this inquiry. The King has
all, and yet he has something of his own in his peculiar, and so have the
Subjects.

The effect of this consideration is this; 6.
That the Supreme power must defend every man's right, but must usurp no man's.
He may use every man's peculiar for the public necessity, and in just and
necessary Government, but no otherwise; and what is out of any peculiar
expended for the public defense, must out of the general right be repaied for
the private amends. 4. ad Herennium.
Verum etsi nostra tempore necessitatis patriae confer debeamus, tamen jure
naturae congruit ut communis salus, communis utilitas, commune periculum, non
unius duntaxat aut alterius, sed communibus impensis, jacturis, periculisque
comparetur, said Cicero. A King is to govern all things; but to possess nothing
but what is his own. Only concerning the necessity, if the question be, who
shall be Judge; it is certain that it ought to be so notorious that every man
might judge; but he who is to provide against it, is certainly the only
competent person, and has the authority. For he that is to stand against the
sudden need, ought to espy it. But if ever there be a dispute who shall judge
of the Necessity, it is certain, the Necessity is not extreme; and if it be
not, yet it ought to be provided against when it is intolerable. Ahab had no
right to take Naboths Vineyard; but if the Syrian army had invaded Israel, Ahab
might have put a Garrison in it, or destroyed the Vines, to have saved or
served his Army.

And to this sense Lyra expounds the Jus Regium, 7.
the right of the King, 1 Samuel 8.
described by Samuel to the People of Israel: for (says he) there is a double
right; the one in the days of necessity, and then all things are in his power
so far as can truly serve that public necessity: but when that necessity is
over, that right is useless, and is intolerable. And by this means the
different opinions of the Jewish Doctors may be reconciled. Rabbi Jose says,
that whatsoever is here set down, it was lawful for the King to do. R. Juda
says, that this description was only to affright the People from persisting
in their desire of a King. Both might say true; for that it was not lawful in
ordinary Government to take the peculiar of the Subject, appears clearly in the
case of Naboth. But that in extraordinary it is just, needs no other argument
but because it is necessary: and it appears also in the case of David and
Nabal, upon whom David would have done violence, because he sent him not
Provisions for his Army out of his own peculiar. But it is considerable, that
this Royal power described by Samuel is no more then what is necessary to be
habitually inherent in all Supreme powers; this is potestas imperantis; he may
licite facere in tempore necessitatis, legitime semper, In time of need he may
use it lawfully, but always legitimately, that is, if he does, he only abuses
his power, but it is his own power which he abuses: Deuter. 17.
for when Moses described the usage and manner of a King, he did it by the
measures of peace and piety, and the laws of natural justice and equity, with
the superfetation of some positive constitutions which God commanded for that
King, as part of the Judicial Law. But when Samuel described the manner of
their King, he described the whole power in ordinary and extraordinary; the
power, I say, but not the office* Moses described the office, but not the power.

I add to this another consideration; 8.
That whether all that the Hebrew King did or might do was warranted by God or
no, it matters not to us. For if it be no more then the necessary requisites of
Supreme power to be used in time only of necessity, we need not fear that this
precedent can injure the rights of any People: but if there were in it
something more then was good, it was certainly a peculiar of that People, who
desired a King to rule over them as the neighbor Nations had; right or wrong
they stood not upon that; and therefore Samuel described to them what that was
which they required. It was no warranty to the King to do so, but to the
People to suffer it: but if it was ill, it was their own desire; for so the
neighbor Kings did govern, using too much of their power, and too little of
their duty and office. And therefore God was angry with his People, not that
they desired a King; for God gave them three things in charge, say the Rabbis,
which they should do when they came into the Land of Promise, That they should
blot out the name of Amalek, that they should choose a King, that they should
build a Temple. Therefore the choosing of a King was not it that offended God,
but that they should desire that a King should reign over them in the manner as
the Gentiles had: For they thought (says Josephus) (...), that all would be
well if they had the same form of Government as the Nations had. Now their
neighbor Nations were governed the most tyrannically, and the People served
the most sl^vishly in the whole World. -- dociles servire Sabaeos, The Sabeans
(says Claudian) were apt to serve: dociles ^erilem far manum Syros and
Parthos, and omnes qui aut ad Orientem aut ad Meridiem sunt barbaros, Contr.
Christian.
said Julian, All the Syrians and Parthians, and all the Nations of the East
and South, were used to slavery; cont^ntos sub Regibus vivere Dominos
imitantibus, their Kings were absolute Lords of possessions as well as of
tribute and government; and the People were ple^s'd to have it so: and the
Israelites would follow their example. Ecce in hoc errarnat (says a Jewish
Doctor) quod Israelitarum conditio non est. (...) Rex aliquis pro sua
voluntate, ut Imperatores Gentilium, qui sanctum populis suis leges, quascunque
animis concipiunt. Their error was in (...) a King as the Gentiles had; for
their condition would not (...) it that their King should make laws according
to his own will and humor, as did their neighbor Kings, who were proud and
barbarous, and counted easiness of access a lessening of Majesty, and would be
bound by no measures but their own will: and therefore said God to Samuel, They
have not rejected thee, but me; that is, they would have a King, not such as I
have commanded in my law, but such as they see among their Neighbors, who make
laws themselves without me. And therefore although God commanded Samuel to
hearken to them, and make them a King; yet by terrors, like those on Mount
Sinai, he first made them confess their fault, and therefore to submit to a
King of God's choosing, who should reign by God's law.

So that it is to no purpose that this place has been so tortured by
Interpreters, 9.
and pulled in pieces by disputation; while they contend on one side, that this
was a description of the King's power, on the other, that it was a prediction
of matter of fact: for it was neither one nor the other alone, but a
description of the manner of the Heathen Kings; and a representment of what it
was which they asked, and what was like to be the effect of that power which
they desired God would set over them: but the question of the extent and
liberties of the Supreme power is no way concerned in it. For it matters not
what the Eastern and Southern Kings did; for they did that in ordinary, which
is not to be done but in cases extraordinary; they did that for pleasure, which
was not to be done but for necessity. But as to the thing it self; Nothing can
be more certain, but that 1. In all Republics, somewhere or other, there is a
Supreme power. 2. That this power can do all things of Government; so that
nothing is so great, but if it be necessary, it is just, and can be done: for
if there were any time, and any case in which evil may happen, and no
provisions may be made for it, in that case, and at that time it is an Anarchy,
there is no Government at all. 3. That this Supreme power, being a power of
Government, must also be a Conservator and great Minister of Justice; and
therefore must suppose every man's right to be distinct, and separate, and
firm: and by consequence, that he has nothing to do with men's propriety, but
to defend them in peace, and use them in war so as is necessary, that is, so as
is unavoidable; according to that saying of Maimonides, Potestatem habet Rex
ordinandi mundum juxta id quod praesens hora postulat. There are some sudden
accidents against which there are no regular provisions in laws; but to provide
for them at the instant by extraregular means, is within the power of the
supreme. But in all this whole question the saying of Baldus is the best
measure of the consciences of Princes: Clausula de plenitudine potestatis
semper intelligitur de potestate bona and laudabili, 1 Consil. 245.
The plenitude of power of all things in the world ought the least to be
feared, because it never is to be used but for the greatest good.

Upon the occasion of this discourse the Lawyers sometimes dispute,

Whether it be lawful, 10.
and in the power of the Supreme Prince or Magistrate, to aliene or lessen his
princely rights, or to give away any parts of his Kingdom.

But to this the answer is easy. 11.
For 1. whatsoever is their right by just conquest, or is (...), in their
private possession, they may aliene as any private person may his lands. Thus
Solomon gave the (...) twenty cities (which his Father in law the King of Egypt
had conquered and given him with his wife in dowry, and which himself had won)
to Hiram* Alexander gave all his Kingdoms to his Princes that served him in
his wars. Attalus gave Asia to the people of Rome; Nicomedes gave Bithynia:
the Father of Mithridates had Paphlagonia by gift: and in England it was said
that Edward the Confessor gave England by Will to the bastard of Normandy: and
diverse of our Kings did in their Wills at least recommend a successor; Edward
the sixth did, but it came to nothing. But when the Donor or the Donee
respectively can make it good, then it holds in law, and not otherwise; for
questions of this nature used to be determined by the sword, and not by
discourses.

2. But yet this is certain, 12.
that where the Princes are trustees of the people, and elective, or where the
right of succession is in a family by law or immemorial time, no Prince can
prejudice his Heir, or the people that trusted him. Nothing is here to be done
without consent, not only because the alienation cannot be verified against
consent [in which case Charles the sixth of France desired his will might be
confirmed by the Nobles; and the King of Macedonia went up and down to all the
cities to recommend to them Antigonus whom he desired to make a king:] but
because in these cases, though Kings have the supreme power, yet they have it
not pleno jure, by a fullness of dominion. It may be as Aristotle calls it
(...), a full, supreme, absolute and entire principality; yet by not being in
full and entire private possession it is by all rights to be administered, but
without wrong cannot be alien'd. Hottoman will by no means admit that in any
case a Kingdom can be alien'd: Illust. Quaest. 1.
because it is the case of persons as well as of things; and they cannot be
disposed of like slaves or beasts. But he considered not that subjection to
Princes can best stand with personal liberty; and this cannot well be secured
without that: for where there is no civil government, every man that is
stronger can make me a slave; but by the power of a Prince I am defended in my
liberty: and Hottomans objection must needs be invalid, unless there be no
liberty but where there is no government.

RULE II. The Supreme power is superior to the Civil laws, but not wholly free
from them.
THis Rule has been thrust into great difficulty by the interests and mistakes
of Princes and Subjects respectively. 1.
For it has been disputed whether Princes be free or no from the laws of their
kingdom; and things of this nature when they once are questioned, are held
more pertinaciously, and desired more greedily, and possessed suspiciously, and
conducted with jealousy, and looked upon with envy or indignation. For the
Prince, if it be but disputable, will yet conclude for his own interest; and it
is argument enough for him that it is so, because it is not certain that it is
not so. And the subjects will upon the same account suppose the Prince bound to
his laws, because they know nothing to the contrary; and therefore they presume
for the authority of the laws, as the Prince does for the immunity of his
person. But then because it is questioned, the Prince, lest he loose it quite,
will hold the faster; and the people will snatch at it more impotently, lest
they be slaves for ever. And therefore disputations in this case are not
prudent or safe; but precepts, and sermons, and great examples, and the sayings
of wise men, and positive affirmations in those particulars that be manifest.

Princeps legibus solutus est, 2.
said Justinian, The Prince is not tied to laws: Instit. d. tit. 2.
for it seems impossible that he that has power over the law, he that gave it
being, and can give it a grave, should be less then that which has no
greatness but what it borrows from him. Indeed if the Prince had divested
himself of his power when he made the law, he had been subject to it; but then
he could have no power to abrogate it: which because it is inseparable from the
legislative power, it follows that the life of the law is in continual
dependence from, and therefore in minority and under him; and therefore the
lawyers have a proverbial verse, Non est Rex legi, sed lex obnoxia Regi. For a
law without a compulsory power is nothing but good counsel at the best; and the
supreme power cannot be compelled: for he will not compel himself, he cannot;
he may be willing, but he can never force himself; and to the supreme no man is
superior, and therefore none else can compel him: therefore the Divines use to
say, and so do the Lawyers too, that Kings are subject to the directive power
of the laws. The distinction I acknowledge, but believe it here to be to no
purpose: for laws have no such power, and a directive power is no power; for if
it can only direct, it is not a law, for a law obliges, and does not only
direct: and as for the mere matter of counsel, the Prince need not be at the
charge of a law for that, his Counselors, his Bishops, his Lawyers, his
friends can do that without a law. The same thing is usually said concerning
just men. Justis lex non est posita, says the Apostle, The law is not made for
the righteous, but for the wicked: that is, the compulsory of laws is not at
all designed for them that obey without compulsion. Not but that the just are
under the power of laws, and the laws were made to command them the particulars
and the instances of obedience; and if they prevaricate, they shall feel it.
But they are so willing to obey, and so love government and the virtues
commanded by the laws, that the laws are of no use to good and just men, but to
direct them to what is required of them; and so they are under that which is
improperly called the Directive power of laws; but Princes are not so. The
Supreme power may if he will obey; so may the just man: but this man must obey
or he shall be punished, but not so the Prince. The laws of themselves may
direct the Prince; but it is because he will have it so: but they direct the
just, because they have authority to command, and to punish, only that the
just will not let it come so far. It is but a shadow of liberty to say I am not
under the compulsion, but the direction of laws: for such persons if they will
not be directed shall be compelled, and it is better to be willing then
unwilling; for call it what you will, you are commanded to do it, and you must
obey. Now this being the case of the just subject, and not the case of the
Supreme power, whether just or unjust, it is clear that the Prince or supreme
power is not subject to any power of the laws; the law is no Commandment to
the Prince, and whatsoever is nothing but counsel, is no law.

And yet on the other side we find good Princes saying otherwise; 3.
and they who are apt enough to advance their own power, yet confessing their
power to be less then the law, that is, that themselves are bound to keep it:
so said the Emperor, C. de legib. and constit. l. 4. Digna vox est Majestatis
regnantis, legibus alligatum se Principem profiteri, It is a voice worthy of
the Majesty of a Prince, to profess himself tied to his laws. Patere legem quam
tu ipse tuleris, said the wise man; Suffer the law which thou thy self have
made: the same with that of Pittacus, Pareto legi quisquis legem sanxeris. And
the equity of this, besides that it is apparent, is also given in the law, l.
1. ff. de pactis. Nihil tam humanae fidei consentaneum est, quam ea quae
placuerunt servari. If they have pleased the Prince in the sanction, let them
also please him in the observation, for that is agreeable to the faith and
ingenuity of worthy persons.

These things are but seemingly opposed, 4.
for both parts are true, and are to be reconciled by the following measures.

1. The Supreme power is not under the fear of the laws, 5.
but is to love the virtue and order that is there commanded. For there is a
necessity introduced by public honesty as well as by fear. And therefore the
Greek Lawyers in their Commentaries upon that of the Institutions, that the
Prince is free from laws, expound it to be meant of penal law; that is, they
cannot be punished for prevaricating, or for not keeping them: and Decianus
said the same thing, Non quia iniqua liceant, sed quod non timore poena, sed
amore justitiae: It is no more lawful for Princes to do unjust things, then
for their subjects; but they are invited to do worthy things, not because they
are to fear the punishment of laws, but because they must love justice; and
there is that necessity for them to do so, that there is of being great and
honored. The laws of honesty, of fame and reputation, which amongst all good
men are the guards of virtue, must endear it also to Kings: so Claudian to
Theodosius, Tu licet extremoslate dominere per Indos,
Te Medus, te mollis Arabs, te Ceres adorent;
Si metuis, si prava cupis, si duceris ira,
Servitii patiere jugum, tolerabis iniquas
Interius leges: tunc omnia jure tenebis
Cum poteris Rex esse tui: proclivior usus
In pejora datur, suadetque licentia luxum,
Illecebrisque effraena favet: tunc vivere cast
Asperius, cum prompta Venus; tunc durius irae
Consulimus, cum poena patet: sed comprime mentem,
Nec tibi quod liceat, sed quod fecisse decebit,
Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honesti.


A King is not to consider the greatness of his power, but of his duty; and not
reckon upon his impunity, but his reputation Vestri consilii, vestrae
prudentiae est spectare quid deceat vos, non quantum liceat. Cic. pro Rabitio.
; and because he does not fear the public rods and axes, let him respect
public honesty: so Accursius affirms, Principem, etsi legibus solutus sit,
honestatis tamen necessitate omnino teneri oportere: and this is the sentence
of Decius and most Lawyers. But Honestas non videtur infer necessitatem, say
the Lawyers. This does not make it simply necessary; but it persuades
vehemently, and upon Princes whose honor is both conscience and interest too,
it differs but little from it. For it makes that they ought to do what is fit.
But in Kings it is true what Muscornus Cyprius says, Hieron. Muscornus tract.
de Jurisdict. and Imp.
Verbum illud [debet] non coactionem, sed rationalem quandam persuasionem
denotare videtur. It is their duty, and they ought to do it; and that
signifies every thing but compulsion. However a Prince is only free from one
compulsory which is upon his subjects: but is under many which touch not them.
God enjoins him a greater duty, Principes qui Superiorem non habent, plus
puniuntur a Deo, and itaque caveant sibi, ne peccent. Castr. 11. C. de jud.
and exacts it with greater severity, and will punish their delinquencies more
sharply: potentes potenter, says the Wisdom of Solomon, mighty men shall be
mightily tormented; and Tophet is prepared for the King. * Kings have a greater
need in their affairs then the small fortunes of their subjects; and therefore
have need of a greater piety to secure so great a providence. They have more to
loose, and therefore need a bigger caution to secure it; they have more at
stake to endear obedience: and since a King is but one person, and is strong
only by the obedience of his subjects, and that obedience is secured only by
love, and that love can no way be obtain^d but by beneficence and justice; if
he breaks these securities, he may have cause to consider that of Tacitus,
Princeps unus est civium and senatus consensui impar, that one man against a
multitude is nothing; and that the Senate and the people are stronger, and need
not fear him alone, but he alone may have cause to fear all them together
Vindicta certe maxima in nobis siua est. Cogunt timere? odisse rursum possumus:
jus^a odia superant omne vindictae genus. Meursi.
; and that the sins of a Prince are often punished by the sins of the people.
He can consider that he is to govern a multitude whom nothing can unite but an
Almighty power; that they are as contingent in their love and hatred, as chance
it self; that no fortune in a King is moderate; that when it declines it
oftentimes runs to extremity; that he seldom hears truth, never meets with a
bold and a wise reprover; that he has many flatterers, and but few friends;
that he has great powers of doing evil, and temptations and opportunities
always ready; that his very being superior to laws leaves his Spirit
infinitely unguarded and spoiled of one of the greatest securities of virtue;
that impunity is a state of danger; that when virtue is left only under a
Counsel and cold recommendation, and is not made necessary by laws, he had need
have a great and a mighty virtue to make it necessary by love and choice; and
that such perfect virtues are but rarely obtained, and after a long practice;
that fear is the beginning of wisdom; and therefore Princes are very much to
seek in this particular, because they have nothing to begin with; and to choose
virtue for love is not usual with beginners, but is the consummation of the
most perfect: so that we may well pray, God help poor Kings, who if they do
virtuously must needs be infinitely dear to God, because it is so extremely
difficult to be so, and nothing can make them so but two conjugations of
miracles; the excellencies of the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of a King. So
that it is no privilege to Kings that they are above the power of their laws;
it is their objection, and the evil of their state. Only it is necessary to
others that these should dwell in danger: and as for their obedience to laws,
it is not bound upon them by the same cord that ties the Subject, but by
another; it is not necessary for the same reasons, but it is by a greater
necessity.

2. But then these supreme Compulsories being wholly conducted by the hand and
providence of God, 6.
do plainly tell us that the supreme Power is obliged to all the laws of God,
to the laws of Nature and Christianity. A King has no power to govern but
according to Gods laws. For if he does, though he have no Compulsorie below,
yet above there are enough, and to Gods laws the greatest Power on Earth is
entirely subordinate. (...), The law is the supreme King of all, said Pindar.
The same is also said by Chrysippus, by Aristotle, (...). 4. (...).
and diverse others: and Plato affirms that destruction is imminent upon that
City where the Magistrate governs the law, and not the law the Magistrate: and
again, (...), The Prince that rules not by laws is nothing but a grievance to
his Subjects. But that these great Persons mean the laws of God and Nature is
explicitly plain in Plutarch, Lib. de regno
who having affirmed that the law must rule the Prince, adds by way of
explanation, that it be that Jaw, (...), not which is written in books or
tables, but the law of reason that always dwells within; that law that always
is his guard, and never suffers the soul to be without a guide, that is the law
that is superior to Princes. Some little instances of particulars of this law
were decreed by Servius Tullus King of the Romans; of which Tacitus says,
praecipuus Servius Tullus sanctor legum suit, queis etiam Reges obtemperarent;
he made laws of that Nature that even Kings themselves should obey them. For as
Regum timendorum in proprios greges, So it is as true, Reges in ipsos imperium
est Jovis; As the people are Subjects of the Prince, so is the Prince of God;
they must obey their King, and their King must obey God: Concerning whose Law
it was said to Domitian by Apollonius Tyanaeus, Apud (...).
Haec mihi dicta sint de legibus, quas si tibi imperare non putaveris, ipse non
imperabiis, If thou do not think these laws ought to rule over thee, thou
shall not rule at all.

Upon this account a Prince may not command his Subjects to fight in an unjust
cause, 7.
according to that saying of S. Hierom, In Eph^^. 6.
Cum Dominus carnis a Domino Spiritus adversum imperat, non est obediendum; We
must not obey the Rulers of this world, the Lords of our flesh, when they
command any thing contrary to the laws of the God and Lord of all Spirits. The
commands of Princes must be, as Tertullian says, intra limits disciplinae,
within the bounds of our religion; and therefore the Athenians laughed at
Stratocles for desiring them to make a law that whatsoever pleased King
Demetrius should be the measure of piety to the Gods, and of justice amongst
Men. Gods law is the measure of the Princes power; not his will the measure of
that: and therefore the Jews that were Soldiers under Alexander could by no
tortures be compelled to assist in the building of the temple of Belus in
Babylon; and the Thebaean legion under Julian the Apostate refused not to fight
for their Prince against the Barbarians, and they refused not to die, but they
refused to be executioners of the Martyrs that died in the cause of
Christianity.

But this is to be practiced that the Princes just laws be not neglected upon
the arrest of every fancy or foolish opinion. 8.
If it be certain that it is against the law of God, then we are safe in our
disobedience. Idcirco Romanas leges contemnimus, In Martyrol. Romans
ut jussa Divina servemus, said Sylvanus the Martyr, Because we are sure these
Roman laws are against the Commandments of God, we easily despise them. But if
we be not sure, but are in doubt whether the laws be just or no, we are to
presume for the laws, and against our own fears. For nothing is at all of
advantage due to the laws, if we prefer before them any opinion of our own
which we confess uncertain; and although we are not to do any thing of which
we doubt, yet in a doubt we are to obey laws, because there is a doubt on both
sides: and as we fear the thing is unjust, so we have reason to fear the evil
of disobedience, for we are sure that is evil; and therefore we are to change
the speculative doubt into an active judgment, and a practical resolution, and
of two doubts take the surer part, and that is to obey; because in such cases
the evil, if there be any, is to be imputed to him that commands, not to him
that obeys, who is not the Judge of his Prince, but his Servant. Servus herilis
imperii non Censor est, sed Minister, said Seneca. They that are under
authority are to obey, not to dispute. But of this I have given an account
already in the first Book, Chap. 5. Rule 6.

3. But then concerning the civil laws of his Country we are to distinguish; 9.
for some concern the People only, and some concern the Prince only, and some
are common to both. Those that concern the People are such as require tribute,
and labors, and manners of trade, their habits and dwelling. In these and all
such the people are obliged and not the Prince: for the duties are either
relative and concern their part only of the relation; or else by the nature of
the things themselves do point out their duty, and in these things there is no
question. For not the King but the people are to pay tribute, and the Kings
lands are free, if they be in his own possession.

4. But there are some laws which concern the Prince alone, 10.
as all acts of grace, and ease to the people; all that he has been pleased to
promise, the forms and laws of Government, and to whatsoever himself has
consented, by all those laws he is bound; because in such cases as these it is
true what Pliny said to Trajan in his Panegyric, In nostris, simili religione,
ipse te legibus subjecisti, Caesar, quas nemo Principi scripsit; sed tu nihil
amplius vis tibi licere quam nobis. The Prince had not a law imposed upon him,
but he became a law unto himself; and when he has bound himself there is the
same necessity upon him as upon his Subjects.

5. Other laws yet do concern both Prince and people; 11.
such as are all contracts and bargains. Licet serviant aedes meae, ei tamen
cum quo agitur non serviunt, quantum enim ad eum pertinet, liberas aedes habeo.
l. 4. S^ serve. vind. Although my house is bound to serve the public necessity,
yet in respect of him that contracts with me, my house is free. So also it is
in the acquisition of new rights, the repetition of the old, and generally in
all those things that are established by the law of Nature, or do concern him
personally, and not in the capacity of a King. L. 3. C. de r^sta. L. 6. C. qui
test. ^^c. po.
Thus says the law, In imperfecto testamento nec Imperatorem haereditatem
vendicare posse saepe constitutum est, The Prince cannot be heir if the
testament of the dead man be illegal. Sometimes and in some places, it may be,
fewer witnesses will serve in the Princes case then in another man's, but then
it is because fewer in his case are required by law; but still the law is his
measure as well as of his Subjects.

6. The great laws of the Kingdom do oblige all Princes, 12.
though they be supreme. Such were those which were called the laws of the
Medes and Persians; whose Princes, although they were the most absolute and
supreme, yet they were inferior to those laws, as appears in the Book of
Daniel. These are by way of eminence called Leges Regni, the Kingdoms laws.
Such are the Golden Bull of the Empire; the law Salic and the Pragmatical
Sanction in France; the Magna Charta and the Petition of Right in England; and
in other Countries the like, as who please may particularly for Spain see in
Mariana. Lib. 20.
This is confessed by all, and it relies upon natural justice, the Prince
having consented to it; it is either sponsio Principis, or conditio regnandi;
he was admitted either upon that condition, or with it.

7. Whatsoever the Prince has sworn to, 13.
to all that he is obliged not only as a single Person, but as King: for
though he be above the laws, yet he is not above himself, nor above his oath,
because he is under God; and he cannot dispense with his oath or promise in
those circumstances and cases in which he is bound. And therefore although the
Prince is above the laws, that is, in cases extraordinary and priviledg'd
cases, and the matter of penalties; yet he is so under all the laws of the
Kingdom to which he has sworn, that although he cannot be punished by them,
yet he sins if he breaks them. Not that the law does bind him, for it cannot
bind without a compulsory; and against him the law has no such power: but yet
he is bound to the law, though not by it; the obligation comes not from the
law, but from other causes, from his promise, his oath, his contract, his
religion, his reputation, his fear, his hopes, his interest, and especially
from God himself. For it is carefully to be observed in this particular, that
though a promise gives a man right to the thing which is promised, it does not
always give him a right over the person. A King is like him that promises a
thing under a curse; if he fails, the injured person is not to curse him, or to
inflict the curse upon him, but that is to be permitted to God alone. And
therefore if a King swears to his People to make no law without their consent,
he is bound to perform his word; but if he does not, God, and not they are to
punish the perjury. The King's promise, or cession, or acts of grace do never
lessen or part his power, but they tie his person. An Act of Parliament in
England, if it be made with a clause of perpetuity, that if an act should be
made to rescind it it should be void, that first Act of it self is invalid.
Clausulae deroganti si derogetur, valet ut posterius testamentum, ita posterior
constitutio, say the Lawyers, Concerning which Cicero has written an excellent
epistle to Atticus, lib. 3. epist. ad Attic. epist. 24. It is as if a man
should make a Will to annull all future Wills of his own; it shows indeed that
he had then a mind to have that to be his standing will: but how if his mind
change? Constantine made a law, that Widows and Orphans should not be cited to
the Emperor's Court for judgment, or compelled to come, though he himself
should command them: but yet if he did command them, that first rescript stood
for nothing. Antiochus the third commanded the Magistrates not to obey him if
he commanded any thing against the laws: but if he should command any such
thing, it were not safe for them to urge himself against himself. The Roman
Emperor bade his Officer use his Sword against him if he broke the laws: but
this gave him no power over his Prince in case he had gone against the laws; it
is nothing but a confident promise, and an obligation of his honor and his
conscience, of which God alone is the Superior and the Guardian.

The custom of supreme Princes swearing to govern by laws was very ancient: 14.
we find an example of it amongst the Gothish Kings in Cassiodore; Cassiod.
var. l. 10. 16, 17.
amongst the late Greek Emperors in Zonaras and Cedrenus. Anastasius the
Emperor swear to observe the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon; Adrian the
Emperor swear that he would never punish a Senator but by the sentence of the
Senate; and Trajan having promised to rule with justice and clemency,
consecrated his head and right hand to the anger of the Gods if he broke his
word: and Plutarch tells, that the Kings of the Cossari swear to the Epirots,
that they would govern according to the laws. And indeed abstracting from the
oath and promise, Kings are bound by natural justice and equity to do so: for
they are not Kings unless they govern; and they cannot expect obedience, unless
they tell the measures by which they will be obeyed; and these measures cannot
be any thing but laws, which are at first the will of the Prince; and when they
are published to the People, then they are laws, but not till they be
established by rewards and punishments, which are the portion of the People
good and bad. Now this is the natural way of all good Government, there is no
other; and to govern otherwise is as unnatural as to give Children meat at
their ears, and hold looking-glasses at their elbows that they may see their
face. If Kings be not bound to govern their People by their laws, why are they
made? by what else can they be governed? by the will of the Prince? The laws
are so; only he has declared his will, and made it certain and regular, and
such as wise men can walk by, that the Prince may not govern as Fools govern,
or as a Lion does, by chance, and violence, and unreasonable passions. Ea quae
placuerunt, servanda, says the law, l. 1. ff. de pactis. If this had not been
the will of the Prince, it had been no law; but being his will, let it be stood
to: when the reason alters, let his will do so too, and the law be changed,
that the measures of right and wrong, of obedience and disobedience may be
known.

We have seen how Kings are bound; 15.
the next inquiry is, how they are freed, and how they are superior to laws.
Antonius Augustinus says, that by the Lex Regia, or the Jus Regium, Kings,
that is, the Supreme power, Authen: si q^is de eden.
are only freed from some laws: and this he gathers from the words of the
Royal law written to Vespasian, Uti quibus legibus ne Augustus teneretur, iis
Vespasianus solutus esset: quaeque ex quaque lege Augustum facere oportuit, ea
omnia Vespasiano facere liceat, Where Augustus Caesar was free, Vespasian
should be free: but those things which Augustus ought to do, all those
Vespasian might. The word liceat in his case was modestly put in; not but that
oportuit had been the better word to express his obligation, as well as the
duty of Augustus: but it was therefore chosen to represent that to be expected
from him, but could not be exacted; it was his duty, but no compulsion lay near
him: but certain it was, that the power of the People being devolved upon him
(for it had been a popular Government) as the People were bound to the laws
which themselves have made, so was the Prince. The People were, for there was
none else to keep them: but therefore so was the Prince, for he had but the
same power which the People formerly had when they were Supreme. But then that
they were tied but to some laws, and not to others, is very true: but so, that
he was tied to all those laws which were intended to oblige him directly, and
indirectly to all the rest, that is, to govern the People by their measures
only.

But now if we inquire from what laws they were freed, 16.
and what is the right of a King or the Supreme power more then of the People:
I answer,

1. It consists in that which we in England call The King's Prerogative; in the
Civil Law the Lex Regia, or Vespasian's Tables; by the Jews (...), the (...),
the statute or proper appointment of the King: the particulars of which are
either described in the respective laws of every People, or are in their
customs, or else is a power of doing every thing that he please that is not
against the laws and customs of his People, without giving a reason. Cum lege
antiqua, quae Regia nuncupatur, L. 1. ff. de constitut. Princip. and sed and
quod Principi. instit. de Jure Nature. and praef. pandect. l. 1. ff. de offic.
praef. praet. and Cod. de vet. Jur. enucleand. l. 1. sed and hoc.
omne jus omnisque potestas populi Romani in Imperatoriam translata sunt
potestatem, says the law. Amongst the Romans that was the Jus Regium, that the
Prince could do all that ever the People could: now what that was, we find in
Dionysius, by the concession of Romulus, Populus Magistratus creanto, leges
sciscunto, bella decernunto, The People might create Magistrates, make laws,
and decree peace and war. That is the Right of Kings, or the Supreme power.
Lib. 8.
Guntherus has summed them up from the laws and customs of the Empire, and
some ancient Italian Governments. Ac primum Ligures, super hoc a Rege rogati,
Vectigal prorsus, cudendae jura monetae,
Cumque molendinis telonia, flumina, pontes,
Id quoque quod Fodder.
Fodrum vulgari nomine dicunt,
Et capitolicium certo sub tempore censum:
Haec Ligures sacro tribuerunt omnia fisco.
Haec and siqua pari fuerunt obnoxia juri,
Praelati, proceres, missisque potentibus urbes
Libera Romano reliquerunt omnia regno.
But the Jus Regium, what it is in the consent of Nations, who please may see
in Aristotle's Politics lib. 3, and 4. in Polybius lib. 6. Herodotus in
Euterpe, in Halicarnassaus lib. 4, 5, 7. in Valerius Maximus l. 7. in Orat. qua
suadet concordiam patrum and plebis in fin. in Tacitus 4. Annal. in Suetonius
in Tiberio c. 30. in Dion. lib. 53. and in the later Politics, Fabius
Albergatus, Zimara, Bodinus, Aretinus, and generally in the Commentators upon
Aristotle.

2. 17.
It consists in the King's immunity from obligation to some solemnities of law
to which his Subjects are obliged. Ratum esse actum, etiamsi actio non habeat
plenam rectitudinem, dum jus non desit, say the Lawyers. Comm. Pii 2. lib. 3.
Of which nature is that for which Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope Pius the
second, laughed at Henry the sixth of England, that his Public Instruments had
no Test but his own, and he wrote Test meipso, Witness our self: in which the
King does imitate the King of Kings, of whom S. Austin says, Lib. 20. de
Civit. Dei, c. 26.
Testem se dicit futurum, quia in judicio suo non indiget testibus. He swears
by himself, because he has none greater; and is his own witness, because he
needs no other: and it is enough that a King says it, because his word ought
to be great and venerable, as his Power and his Majesty. And it was not only
in the matter of coercion, but of solemnities, Nov. 105.
true which Justinian said, Omnibus a nobis dictis Imperatoris excipiatur
fortuna, cui and ipsas Deus leges subjecit, The fortune of the Emperor is to
be excepted from the edge and from the forms of laws, because God himself has
made the laws subject to the Emperor.

3. The King is therefore solutus legibus, 18.
or free from laws, because he can give pardon to a Criminal condemned: for the
Supreme power is not bound to his own laws so, but that upon just cause he can
interpose between the sentence and the execution. This the Stoics allowed not
to any wise man, as supposing it to be against justice; and to remit due
punishment, is to do what he ought not: for what is due is just, and what is
against that is unjust. All which is very true, but nothing to the purpose. For
it is true, that it is but just that Offenders should be punished; it is due,
that is, they are obliged to suffer it; poena debita ex part reorum, it is
their debt, not the Kings; they are obliged, not he: and yet it is just in him
to take it, that is, he may: but he is not obliged in all cases to do it. And
in this also he is an Imitator of the Economy of God, who, according to that
of Lactantius, legem cum poneret non utique sibi ademit omnem potestatem, sed
habet ignoscendi licentiam, God and the Vicegerent of God when they make laws
have not exauctorated themselves: but as that law is an efflux of their
authority, so it still remains within the same authority that they can pardon
Offenders. Thus David pardoned Shimei and Joab, and would fain have pardoned
Absalom, if the hand of Joab had not been too quick for him. And this cannot be
denied to the Supreme power, because the exercise of this is one of the
greatest virtues of a Prince: which was well observed by Pericles on his
deathbed, when his weeping Friends about him praised, some of them his
Eloquence, some his Courage, some his Victories, lifting up his head a little,
Et quid hoc est? (says he) aut parva aut fortuita laudatis: at illud maximum
omittitis, quod mea opera nemo pullam vestem sumperit. That he had no public
executions, that no man was put to wear Blacks for his Friends, was a clemency
greater then all the praises of Eloquence, or a prosperous fortune. -- Quisquis
est placide potens
Dominusque vitae, Sen. Herc. Fur.
servat innocuas manus,
Et incrucentum mitis Imperium regit,
Animoque parcit, longa permensus diu
Permensus aevi spatia, vel Coelum petit,
Vel laeta felix nemoris Elysii loca.
But all the World commends Clemency, the gentle hand of a Prince, Senec. De
clement.
his unwillingness to kill, his readiness to save: for, Principi non minus
turpia multa supplicia, quam Medico funera, Many executions are as great a
dishonor in a Princes reign, as many funerals in a Physicians practice: and
therefore Cassiodore says that a good and a gentle Prince will sometimes pass
the limits of equity that he may serve the ends of clemency; Variat. 11.
quando sola est misericordia cui omnes virtutes cedere honorabiliter non
recusant, for to mercy all other virtues count it honor to give place. And
this Charles the 5th and Maximilian the second signified by their devise of an
Eagle pearching upon a thunderbolt, with an Olive in her beak: and Nerva and
Antoninus Pius impressed upon their money a thunderbolt upon a pillow; to
signify that vindicative justice ought to sleep sometimes. * Now certainly this
being so great an excellency in a Prince, is not greater then his power.
Imperatori licet revocare sententiam, and reum mortis absolvere, and ipsi
ignoscere; quia non est subjectus legibus qui habet in potestate leges terrae,
says S. Austin. The Emperor, who can make laws, is not subject to laws, or so
tied to them but that he may revoke his sentence and pardon a Criminal.

This I say is part of his Royalty; 19.
but is only then to be practiced when it can consist with the ends of
government, that is, when the public interest can be preserved, and the
private injury some other way recompensed. These indeed are the general
measures not of the Princes power, but of his exercising this power justly.

1. When the Criminal is a worthy person and can be beneficial to the
Republic. 20.
Thus in the Low Countries a pardon in ordinary cases of felony is granted of
course to him that can prove he has invented some new art: and one lately
saved his life by finding out a way exactly to counterfeit old medals.

2. If the person has already deserved well of the public. 21.
Thus Horatius Cocles was spared though he killed his sister, because he got
honor and liberty and safety and dominion to Rome by killing the three
brothers, the Curatii: and Solomon spared the life of Abiathar the High Priest,
because he bore the Ark before David, 1 Kings 2. 26.
and was afflicted in all his troubles. *

3. When the Criminal can be amended, 22.
and the case is hugely pitiable, and the fact not of greatest malignity. Thus
oftentimes we see young men pardoned, and the first fault lightly punished; and
because young Caesar was in the flower of his youth and a Princely boy, Sylla
was more easily prevailed with for his pardon.

4. If the fault be private, 23.
and not brought to public courts, it is easily pardoned, though delated by a
private information, Conquiri ad judicium necesse non fuit: some things when
they are made public cannot be dismissed, but are not to be inquired after. It
was the advice of Cicero to his Brother Quintus concerning a certain Criminal.

But all this is upon supposition that the crime be not of greatest mischief,
24.
or foulest scandal and reproach; for if it be, nothing can be taken in
exchange for it; a great virtue cannot make compensation for a very great
crime: and this is particularly true of Treason, of which those words of
Bartolus are to be understood, De offensionibus erga dominum non est
compensatio ad servitia eidem impensa, The services done to a Lord cannot make
satisfaction for a conspiracy against him. And therefore the Romans caused
Manlius Capitolinus to be thrown headlong from that rock from whence he had
thrown the Gauls when he saved the city. He produced the spoils of thirty
enemies, forty donatives from Generals, two civic crowns, eight murals; yet all
would not save his life and get his pardon. But yet in these things the supreme
power is so free from laws that it does these things irregularly; Clementiam
liberum habere arbitrium, said Seneca, Clemency has a great liberty, and a
free choice: but they are obliged only to see that the public be not
prejudiced, and that every private interest be secured by causing amends to be
made to the injured person where it can; and then it is true of every supreme
Prince which Seneca advised Nero often to remember, Occidere contra legem nemo
potest; servare nemo praeter me, No man at all can put a man to death against
the law; and none can save except the Prince.

4. The supreme power is above the laws, 25.
* because he can dispense, * he can interpret them, * and he can abrogate
them, * he can in time of necessity govern by the laws of reason without any
written law, * and he is the Judge of the necessity. Thus the Kings of Israel
had power over the judicial laws, though of the Divine sanction. For God forbad
that the corpse of a Malefactor should hang after sunset upon the accursed
tree; but yet Maimonides says that the King suspendit and relinquit suspensos
diebus multis, he hangs them and leaves them hanging for many days; when it is
necessary by such terror to affright the growing impiety of wicked men; that
is, when the case was such that the laws were capable of equity or
interpretation. For this was not merely an effect of his power, but of his
reason too. It was a custom among the Jews to condemn but one person in one
day, unless they were in the same crime, as the adulterer and the adulteress;
but the King might condemn many at once when it was for the interest of justice
and the republic. Thus their King could by the prerogative of his Majesty
proceed summarily, sit in judgment alone without assessors, condemn upon the
testimony of one, and by the confession of the party; which the Sanhedrim might
not do, but were tied to acquit him that confessed the fact. Add to these,
Vani capitis est existimare superiorem non posse evocare sine causae
cognitione. Innoc. in c. ad aures de Temp. Ord.
the Supreme can in some cases be Judge and witness; that is, can himself
condemn a criminal for what himself only saw him do. He can also be Judge in
his own case; as if he be injured, railed upon, defrauded, or the like: all
which are powers above the law, and here were to be named for the understanding
of the present Rule; but how they are to be conducted is of distinct and
special consideration, and to be reserved to their proper places. I end this
whole inquiry with that of Statius, -- quid enim terrisque poloque
Parendi sine lege manet? vice cuncta geruntur.
Alternisque premunt propriis sub Regibus omnis
Terra: premit felix Regum diademata Roma:
Hanc ducibus fraenare datum, mox crescit in illos
Imperium Superis --
There is nothing in the earth but is under a law and tied to obedience: all
the earth are under Kings, and the Kings are under the Romans, and the Romans
under their Princes, and their Princes under God; who rules them by his own
laws, and binds them to rule by their Countries laws, and ties them to do
justice, and is pleased when they show mercy. But as they are to do justice by
the sentence of the laws, so they must not show mercy against law; for even the
prerogative of Kings is by law, and Kings are so far above their laws, as the
laws themselves have given leave. For even the (...), the remission of the
rigor of the law, the very Chancery and ease of laws is by law established.

RULE III. It is not lawful for Subjects to rebel, or to take up arms against
the supreme Power of the Nation, upon any pretense whatsoever.
WHen Nehemiah was deputed by Artaxerxes to be Governor of Judaea, 1.
and had commission to rebuild Jerusalem and the Temple, the neighbor Kings
that opposed him were enemies to Artaxerxes, because Nehemiah was lieutenant to
the King. He that despises me, despises him that sent me, says our Blessed
Savior. Senatus faciem secum attulerat, auctoritatem reipublicae, said Cicero
of one that was deputed and sent from the Senate. He had the gravity of the
Senate and the authority of the Commonwealth. Now this being true of the
supreme Power in every Government, that it is potestas Dei vicaria, it is the
Minister of God, appointed by him, set in his place, invested with a ray of his
Majesty, entrusted with no Power but his, representing none but him, having
received the Sword from his hand, the Power of life and death from his
warranty; it must needs follow that he who lifts up his hand against that
supreme Person or Authority that God has appointed over him is impious against
God and fights against him. This the Apostle expressly affirms, and there needs
no more words to prove the Rule, He that resists, resists the ordinance of God
*. He does not say, he that does not obey is disobedient to God, for that is
not true. Sometimes it is necessary not to obey, as it happened to the captive
Jews under Nabuchodonosor, and to the Apostles under their Princes; they could
not obey God and them too: and then the case of Conscience was soon resolved.
But they that could not obey, could die; they could go into the fire, suffer
scourgings and imprisonments, that was their (...), their great Sanctuary;
which in behalf of the Christians Gregory Nazianzen thus expresses, (...), I
have but one remedy against all my evils, one way to victory, thanks be to
Christ, I can die for him: that is (...), to obey where they can, and where they
cannot to be sure to lie down under the burden which they cannot carry. For
though in some cases it is lawful not to obey, yet in all cases it is
necessary not to resist.

I do not know any proposition in the world clearer and more certain in
Christianity then this Rule, 2.
and therefore cannot recount any greater instance of humane infirmity then
that some wise men should be abused into a contrary persuasion. But I see that
interest and passion are always the greatest arguments, where they are
admitted. But I have an ill task to write Cases of Conscience, if such things
as these shall be hard to be persuaded: for there are very few things in which
any man is to hope for half so much conviction as in this article lies before
him in every topic; and if I should determine no cases but upon such mighty
terms as can be afforded in this question, and are given, and yet we prevail
not, I must never hope to do any service to any interest of wisdom or peace,
of justice or religion. And therefore I am clearly of opinion that no man who
can think it lawful to fight against the supreme power of his Nation, can be
fit to read Cases of Conscience; for nothing can ever satisfy him whose
Conscience is armor of proof against the plain and easy demonstrations of this
question. But this question is of the same nature as all clear and necessary
truths, never obscure but when it is disputed; certain to all men and evident
if they will use their own eyes; but if they call for glasses of them that make
a trade of it, it may chance not to prove so. But I will speak of it with all
easiness and simplicity.

1. The Scripture is plain, 3.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: and, Eccl. 10. 20. Eccles. 8. 2, 3.
I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the oath
of God -- for he does whatsoever pleases him. Where the word of a King is,
Prove. 30. 31.
there is power, and who may say unto him, What does thou? Against him there is
no rising up. There are many more excellent words in the Old Testament to this
purpose; but nothing can be plainer then these dogmatically to establish the
doctrine of the Rule. No man can question him; no man may rise up against him;
he has power, he has all power; we are by the law or the oath of God bound to
keep his Commandment; and after all, we must not reproach him in our secret
thoughts. No man needs this last precept but he that thinks the King is an evil
man, or has done wrong: but suppose he have, or that he is supposed to have,
yet Curse him not, Do not slight him, (...)
so it is in the Hebrew; Regi ne detrahas, so it is in the Vulgar Latin,
Disparage not the King: but the Chaldee paraphrase adds, Even in thy
Conscience, in the secrets of thy heart speak not evil of the King, and in the
closets of the chambers of thy house speak, not evil of the wise man; for the
Angel Raziel does every day from heaven cry out upon the mount of Horeb, and
his voice passes into all the world: and Eliahu, the great Priest, flies in the
air of heaven like a winged Eagle, and tells the words which are spoken in
corners by all the inhabitants of the earth. By the way I only observe this,
that we are forbidden to speak evil of the rich or the mighty man, the wise
man, so the Chaldee calls him, that is, the Princely men of the world, the
Magistrates and Nobles, whom S. Peter calls (...), Captains or rulers sent by
the King: of these we must say no evil in our private houses, lest a bird of
the air, lest that which has wings, that is, lest the Angel that attends us
orders it so as to pass into publication; for the government of the other world
reaches strangely even to us, and we speak not a word in vain, but by the
Divine providence it is disposed to purposes that we understand not. But when
he speaks of the King or the supreme, whom S. Peter calls (...), then it is
(...), call him not accursed in thy heart, not so much as in thy thought; which
because it is only perceived by God who is the searcher of the heart, it shows
plainly that as Angels take care of the rich and the wise, the mighty and the
Nobles, so Kings are the peculiar care of God, who is the King of Kings and the
Lord of Lords. But then (to leave all curiosities) if we may not speak or think
reproachfully of the King, we may not do that which is more and that which is
worse: and I think there needs no more to be said. But it is as clear all the
way.

In the New Testament, 4.
sufficient are the excellent words of our Blessed Savior, (...) not to resist
evil, that is, not to stand against it, not to oppose evil to evil; which
obliges all Christians that at least without the magistrate they cause no
return of evil to the offending person; that no man be his own avenger, for
vengeance belongs to God, and he has delegated that to none but to the supreme
Magistrate, who is (...), Gods minister to be a revenger of wrath under him.
Now if no man must pay evil to his brother that has injured him but by the
hand of the supreme power, how can it be possible that it can be lawful to
render evil for evil to the supreme power it self? by whose hands shall that be
done? by none but by his Superior, who is God alone, who will take care to
punish evil Kings sufficiently: only we must not do it; we must not pray him
to do it; for that is expressly against the words of Solomon, that is cursing
the King in our thought, and not at all to be done. But besides this there are
many more things spoken by our Blessed Lord to determine us in this affair.
Render to Caesar the things that are Cesars; and to Pilate Christ said, Thou
should have no power over me unless it were given thee from above; meaning
that Cesars power, whose Deputy Pilate was, was derived from God, and
consequently that, except God, none is greater upon Earth then Caesar: and
again, If my Kingdom were of this world, my servants would fight for me; which
plainly enough confirms the power of the Militia in the supreme Magistrate,
Christ leaving it where he found it.

But that there may be no dispute concerning these things, 5.
the Apostles, who are expounders of the words of Christ and the meaning of his
Spirit, tell us plainly, (...), to be subject (...) to supreme powers; the same
with S. Peter's (...), to the King as to the Supreme, that is to the King, if
he be a King indeed, if he be the supreme; to be subject to these powers, and
not to resist, for these reasons. 1. Because this supreme power is ordained of
God: 2. Because he that resists, resists God whose minister the Prince is: 3.
Because God has armed the powers which he ordained with a sword of power and
revenge: 4. Because it is for our good that we submit to him; for he is Gods
minister for good, that is, for the public good, under which thine is
comprehended: 5. Because it is necessary; the necessity being apparent in the
nature of the thing and in the Commandment of God: 6. Because God has bound
our Conscience to it: 7. He has tied this band upon us with fear also: and 8.
lastly, because whoever does not obey where he may lawfully, and whosoever does
in any case resist, shall receive damnation to himself both here and hereafter;
here upon the stock of fear, hereafter upon the account of conscience; for both
for fear and for Conscience we must obey in good things and lawful, and we must
not resist in any. For indefinitely we are commanded not to resist, without any
distinction reservation of case; and Ubi lex non distinguit, nemo distinguere
debet. He that will go about to be wiser then the law, in equity will not be
better then a fool. This therefore is the sum of S. Paul's discourse, Romans 13.
per totum.

S. Paul was the Doctor of the Gentiles, 6.
S. Peter of the Jews: and therefore this doctrine is sufficiently con^ign'd to
all the world: for S. Peter has preached this doctrine as largely as S. Paul,
1 Pet. 2. 13, ad 17. verse.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord, that is, for his
sake, upon his Commandment and for his honor; these ordinances being Gods
ordinances, (...), they are ordained by God, all of them, the King principally,
his captains and officers which he has sent, in the next place. But him and
his Ministers we must receive and honor and obey, and submit to them; for it
is Gods case and his Ministers; God and his Ministers and Lieutenants, the King
and his. He that despises him whom the King sends, despises the King; and he
that despises him whom God sends or makes his deputy, despises God. Submit
therefore, for it is the will of God; Submit, for this is well-doing; Submit,
for so we shall put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: Meaning that since
the enemies of Christ are apt to speak evil things of you, glad would they be
if they had cause to accuse you for not being obedient to government; and some
are ignorant and foolishly pretend the liberty and privileges of Saints
against the interests of obedience; the mouths of these men must be stopped,
and you must submit to Kings, that you may please God and confute the
adversaries. Now the specification of this great duty and the particular case
of Conscience follows; Fear God, Honor the King: Servants be obedient to your
Masters; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. (...), for
this is thank-worthy: and this is full to the question in hand. For the general
precept which S. Peter gave is, (...), submit to every ordinance, to the King,
to his Magistrates or deputies and captains, and lastly submit to the lowest of
all dominions, even servants to their masters; not only to the good and
gentle, but to the morose and harsh. Now if so to inferior masters, whose
dominion is no greater then their interest, and their interest is no greater
then their price, and is still under the power of Kings; much more to Kings or
to the supreme power. * And indeed even subjection to Kings is the gentlest and
most eligible kind of service. Then would my servants fight, said Christ,
meaning it of the subjects of his Kingdom: and Livy calls populum Romanum
servientem cum sub Regibus esset, they did serve their Kings. * And indeed as
the Governments of the world then were, Kings were most absolute, and the
people entirely subject, and far from liberty: and therefore this of servants
might very well be a specification and a particular of their duty to Kings and
Captains; and whether it were or no, it is for the former argument [ from the
less to the greater affirmatively] infinitely certain that the same duty is due
to Kings though harsh and cruel: for indeed there were then none else; Nero was
the supreme, and he was none of the best that ever wore purple.

It were very easy to draw forth more arguments from Scripture to this purpose;
7.
but I forbear to name more then this abundance which is contained in these now
cited: but I shall not omit to observe that the Apostles did make use of that
argument which I urged out of Solomon, that we are not to speak evil of the
King; from whence the unlawfulness of resisting is unanswerably concluded: Jude
8.
for S. Jude giving the character of the worst of men and the basest of
heretics, reckons up in the bill of their particulars, that they despise
dominion and speak evil of dignities; which as it is an infallible mark of an
evil person, so it is a using of a Prince worse then S. Michael the Archangel
durst use the Devil; against whom, because he was a Spirit of an higher order,
though foully changed, he durst not bring a railing accusation, (...) a
judgment or accusation with blasphemy in it: for all evil language of our
Superior is no better then blasphemy; He did blaspheme God and the King, was
the crime pretended against Naboth.

If from the plain words of Scripture we descend to the doctrine and practices
of the Church of God, 8.
we shall find that all Christians when they were most of all tempted, when
they were persecuted and oppressed, killed and tormented, spoiled of their
goods, and cruelly and despitefully used, not only did not rebel when they had
power and numbers, but professed it to be unlawful. But this I shall draw into
a compendium; because it being but matter of fact, and the matter in Scripture
being so plain that it needs no interpretation, the practice and doctrine of
the Church, which is usually the best commentary, is now but of little use in a
case so plain. But this also is as plain it self, and without any variety,
dissent or interruption, universally agreed upon, universally practiced and
taught, that let the powers set over us be what they will, we must suffer it,
and never right our selves. Tertullian boasts with confidence, that when
Pescennius Niger in Syria, and Clodius Albinus in France and Britanny rebelled
against Septimius Severus a bloody and cruel Emperor, and pretended piety and
public good, yet none of the Christians joined with either. The Theban legion
in the 18th year of Diocletian suffered themselves to be cut in pieces every
man, six thousand six hundred sixty and six in number, by Maximianus the
Emperor; no man in that great advantage of number and order and provocation
lifting up their hands, Biblioth. PP. Tom. 8. edit. Binian.
except it were in prayer: of these Venantius Fortunatus has left this
Memorial, Queis positis gladiis sunt arma e dogmate Pauli,
Nomine pro Christi dulcius esse mori.
Pectore belligero poterant qui vincere ferro
Invitant jugulis vulnera chara suis.
They laid down their weapons and lift up their arms; they prayed and died in
order: and this they did according to the doctrine of S. Paul. But when Julian
was Emperor, an apostate from his religion, a great persecutor of the
Christians, Orat. 1. in Julian.
and who by his cruelty (as Nazianzen observes) brought the commonwealth it
self in danger, though his army did most consist of Christians, yet they had
arms for him, but none against him, save only that by prayers and tears they
diverted many of his damnable counsels and designs. But the particulars are too
many to recite what might be very pertinent to this question from Antiquity. I
shall therefore serve the interest of it as to this topic by pointing out the
writings of the ancient Doctors where they have given testimony to this great
article of our religion, which who please may find in S. Clement constit. l. 7.
c. 17. S. Irenaeus lib. 5. Advers. haeres. c. 20. Justin Martyr, Apolog. 2. ad
Antonin. Imperatorem, Tertullian ad Scapulam, and Apolog. adv. Gent. cap. 30.
S. Cyprian ad Demetrianum, Hosius apud Athanas. ad solitariam vitam agentes,
Liberius ibid. S. Hilary ad Imperat. Constantium, S. Athanasius ad Antioch.
quaest. 55. and Apolog. ad Constant. vide etiam factum Basilii in Monodia
Nazianz. inter opuscula Basilii, Nazianzen. 2. orat. contr. Julian. Optatus
Milevitanus lib. 3. contr. Parmen. S. Chrysostom. orat. 2. ad pop. Antioch.
tom. 6. edit. Savil. Et in 1 Timoth. c. 2. v. 1.
S. Ambrose Epist. 33. ad Marcellinam, S. Cyril. in Evang. Johan. l. 12. c. 36.
S. Hieron. comment. in 2. Dan. S. Augustine. lib. 4. de civit. Dei, c. 33. and
lib. 5. c. 21. and in Psalm. 124. Et Epist. 54. ad Macedon. and tract. 6. in
Johan.
Anastasius P. epist. unic. ad Anastasium Imper. Symmachus P. ad eundem Anast.
Imp. Leo P. ad Leonem Imperat. and epist. 13. ad Pulcheriam, S. Gregor. Mag.
Epist. l. 7. ep. 1.

After him succeeded ( Sabinianus being interposed for one year only) Boniface
the third, 9.
who obtained of Phocas to be called universal Bishop: since when periit virtus
Imperatorum, periit pietas Pontificum, says one, the Kings lost their strength
and the Bishops lost their piety; yet in the descending ages God wanted not
many worthy persons to give testimonies to this great truth and duty. Such were
Stephen the sixth apud Baronium tom. 10. A. D. 885. n. 11. Gregorius Turonensis
hist. lib. 5. cap. 1. Council. Toletan. 5. can. 2. and Concilium Toletan. 6. c.
14. Fulgentius parallel. ad Thrasimundum Regem, Damascen. parallel. 1. c. 21.
V. Bid, lib. 4. expos. in Samuel. Leo 4. cap. de capitulis, did. 15. S.
Bernard epist. 221. to Lewis le Gros: vide etiam epist. Walthrami Epis.
Nanumberg. quae habetur in appendice Mariani Scoti.

Now it is very observable that in the succession of about six Ages, 10.
in which the Holy Doctors of the Church gave such clear testimony of the
necessity of obeying even the worst Princes, and many thousands of holy
Christians sealed it with their blood, there was no opposition to it; and none
of any reputation, no man of learning did any thing against the interest or the
honor of Princes, excepting only (so far as I have observed) Lucifer
Calaritanus, who indeed spoke rude and unbeseeming words of Constantius the
Arrian Emperor; but that he may lessen nothing of the universal consent to this
doctrine, Orat. in obit. fratr. Satyri.
S. Ambrose does lessen very much of his reputation, saying that through he was
with the true believers banished for religion, yet he separated himself from
their Communion. But in the next period, I mean after Gregory the Great, it was
not unusual for the Bishops of Rome to stir up subjects to rebel against
their Princes, and from them came the first great declension and debauchery of
the glory of Christian loyalty and subjection to their Princes; witness those
sad stories of P. Gregory the seventh, P. Urban and Paschal, who stirred up the
Emperors Son against the Father. I speak it to this purpose, because it
produced an excellent epistle from the Churchmen of Liege in behalf of the
Emperor and of their Bishop, who with his Chapter was excommunicated for
adhering to his loyalty, and Robert Earl of Flanders commanded by the Pope to
destroy him and all his Priests. But in behalf of Princes and the duty of
subjection to them many excellent things were spoken, diverse judgments of God
fearfully falling upon rebellious people are recited, not only in that Epistle
of the Clergy of Liege, but in the life of Henry the 4th, apud Simon. Scard.
Emperor, in fasciculo rerum sciend. published at Colen. From all these Fathers
and Ancient Authors now cited, magnum mundo documentum datum est (that I may
use the words of the Author of the book last cited) a great instruction and
caution is given to the whole world that no man rise up against his Prince. For
all these Authors give clear and abundant testimony to these truths, That the
power of the supreme Magistrate is immediately from God, * That it is subject
to God alone, * That by him alone it is to be judged, * That he is the governor
of all things and persons within his dominions, * That whosoever speaks
reproachfully of him cannot be innocent, * That he that lifts up his hand
against him strikes at the face of God, * That God has confounded such persons
that against the laws of God, and their own oaths, and the natural bonds of
fidelity, have attempted to spoil their supreme Lords, That Herman and Egbert
that did so were confounded for so doing, as though they had never been, That
Rudolphus had his hand cut off and felt diverse other of the divine judgments
for this impiety. And this being the constant universal doctrine of the Church
of God for 1200. years, and this derived from the plain, the express, the
frequent sayings and Commandments of God in the Old and New Testament,
declared by his Prophets and Apostles, and by his most holy Son himself,
nothing can with greater certainty determine and conduct our Conscience then
this Rule. For the confirmation of which I remember S. Bernard tells a pretty
little story, in a Sermon upon these words of Christ, I am the Vine: Been
quidam Rex cum percussus humana sagitta, etc. It was well said of a King who
being wounded with a barbed arrow, they that were about him desired he would
suffer himself to be bound till the head were cut out, because the least motion
irregular would endanger his life; he answered, Regem ligari nullo modo decet,
A King must at no hand be bound; let the King be ever safe, but let his power
be at liberty. I end this topic with the words of S. Austin and of the sixth
Council of Toledo, lib. 5. de Civit. Dei. c. 21.
Non tribuamus dandi regni atque imperii potestatem nisi vero Deo, Let us
attribute the power of giving the right of empire to none but to the true God
alone. Ille unus verus Deus qui nec judicio nec adjutorio deserit genus
humanum, quando velit and quantum voluit Romany regnum dedit: qui dedit
Assyriis, vel etiam Persis; qui Mario, ipse Caio Caesari; qui Augusto, ipse and
Neroni; qui Vespasiano, vel Patri vel Filio, suavissimis Imperatoribus, ipse
and Domitiano crudelissimo; and ne per singulos ire necesse sit, qui
Constantino Christiano, ipse Apostatae Juliano. Hoc plane Deus Unus verus
regit, and gubernat ut placet. The one true God, who never leaves mankind
destitute of right and help, has given a kingdom to the Romans, as long as he
please and as much as he please. He that gave the supreme power to the
Assyrians, he also gave it to the Persians. He that gave it to Marius a common
Plebeian, gave it to Caius Caesar who was a Princely person. The same authority
he gave to Nero that he gave to Augustus; he gave as much power and Authority
to the most cruel Domitian as he gave to Vespasian and to Titus the gentlest
and the sweetest Princes; and to be short, he gave the Authority to Constantine
the Christian, and the same afterward to Julian the Apostate: for this great
affair he rules and governs as he please.

But all this is no more then what natural and necessary reason does teach all
the world: 11.
Hanc Deus and melior litem natura diremit. For this which I have alleged from
the Fathers is properly a religious reason. It is Gods power which is in the
supreme Magistrate, whether he be good or bad: therefore whoever rebels against
him, rebels against the power and dispensation of God; and to this there is
nothing reasonable to be opposed. But then that which I am now to say is
derived to us by the reason that every man carries about him, by the very law
of Nature. Naturam vero appello legem Omnipotentis
Supremique Patris, quam prima ab origin rerum
Cunctis imposuit rebus, jussitque teneri
Inviolabiter. --
By the law of Nature I mean the prime law of God which he unalterably imposed
upon all men in their first Creation, that by reason and wise discourses they
should govern themselves in order to that end which is perfective of humane
nature and society. The law of nature is the law of God which is reasonable and
necessary to nature: now by this law or necessary reason we find it very fit
that we should divest our selves of the practice and exercise of some rights
and liberties which naturally we have. So Aristotle observes, Polit. 7. c. 13.
Homines adductos ratione multa praeter mores and naturam agere, si aliter agi
melius esse sibi persuaserint, Men do somethings against their natural
inclination, if by natural reason they find it best to do so. Now Nature
having permitted every man to defend himself as well as he can against
violence, did by an early experience quickly perceive that few men had power
enough to do it against every violent man; and therefore they drew into
societies, gathered their strength, and it was put into the hands of them who
by a joined strength could, and by promise and interest and duty would do it:
and by this means the societies had peace, and might live quietly. Now the
natural consequent is this, that if all our power is united and entrusted to
one head, we must not keep it in our hands. If the supreme power be the
avenger, we must not meddle; if he be Judge, we must submit, for else we are
never the nearer to peace. For when we were so many single persons we were
always in war, but by unity and government we come to peace: therefore
whatever we could do alone, we having put into the common stock, our natural
right of defense is in the public hand, and there it must remain for ever; and
we are to be defended by the laws, and they only are now the ministeries of
peace. This is S. Paul's argument, I exhort that prayers and supplications be
made for all men; 1 Timothy 2. 2.
for Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: plainly implying that the security
and peace of societies depends upon the power and authority of Kings and
persons in eminency and trust: for none must make war but he that does it for
all men's interest; and therefore it is peace with all that are under
government: but then that which is designed to keep peace must feel to war
from them whom it is designed to keep in peace, that they may not feel the
evils of war. It government be necessary, it is necessary that we should obey
it; if we must obey it, we must not judge it; if we must not judge it, we may
not endeavor to punish it: and there is nothing in the world a greater
destruction to it is own ends, then the resisting or rebelling against
government; because if we be above it, how are we subjects? if subjects, how
are we it is Judges? if no Judges, how can we be avengers? if no avengers, why
are we not quiet and patient? If we be not above, we are below; and therefore
there let us abide: but if we be above, then we are the supreme power; and then
it is all one. That which is said all this while concerns the subjects, and not
the Supreme, to whom by our natural necessities, by a general contract of
mankind, by the law of nations, by the command of God, and by the civil laws of
all republics the subject is bound, lib. 3. Confess. cap. 8.
and does owe obedience and maintenance, and honor and peace. Generale pactum
est societatis humanae obedire Regibus suis, said S. Austin, It is a covenant
that all mankind have agreed in, to be obedient to their Kings.

But all this is true: 12.
but since Kings are for defense and Justice, for good and not for evil, for
edification and not for destruction, good Kings must be obeyed; but what if
they be evil and unjust, cruel and unreasonable enemies of their people, and
enemies of mankind?

This is that I have been saying all this while, 13.
that let him be what he will, if he be the supreme, he is superior to me, and
I have nothing to do, but something to suffer; let God take care, if he
please, I shall be quickly remedied, till then I must do as well as I can. For
if there be any case in which the subjects may resist, who shall be Judge of
that case? can this case be evident and notorious? and does it always consist
in indivisibili? If it does not, then many things are like it, and who can
secure that the subjects shall judge right? For if they were infallible, yet
who will engage that they will not do amiss? what warrantly have we against
the ambition and the passion and the interest of the reformers of supreme
powers? And is it not better to suffer inconvenience from one then from every
one that please? But if you allow one case, you must allow as many as can be
reduced to it; and who is not witty enough against Governors, to find excuses
enough to bring them down?

2. What remedy is there is case the supreme power be ill administered? 14.
will not any remedy bring greater evils then the particular injustices which
are complained of? It was well said of Xenophon, (...), He that opposes his
General and Prince, Dion. Cassius.
opposes his own safety. For consider, what order can be in a family, if the
boys rule their Fathers and rebel against their command? How shall the sick be
cured, if they resist the advice and prescriptions of the Physicians? And they
that sail are like to suffer shipwreck, if the Boat swain and the Swabbers and
the boys shall contradict the Master. So it is impossible that there can be
safety in a commonwealth, if they who are appointed to obey shall offer to
rule. (...), For by nature it is necessary and profitable and ordered
accordingly, that one should rule and the rest should be obedient.

And therefore these wild cases are not to be pretended against that which
natural reason and natural necessity have established. 15.
We cannot suppose a King that should endeavor to destroy his Kingdom. We may
as well suppose a Father to kill his children, and that therefore in some cases
it may be lawful for children to rebel against their Fathers, turn them out of
doors, and, as they see occasion, cut their throats that the inheritance may be
theirs. Whom can we suppose worse then Julian, then Domitian, then Nero? and
yet these Princes were obeyed, and did never proceed to the extremity of such
desperate hostilities: Nay Nero, as bad as he was, yet when he was killed, was
quickly missed; for in a few months three Princes succeeded him, and there was
more blood of the Citizens spilt in those few months then in Nero's fourteen
year. And who please both for their pleasure and their instruction to read the
Encomium of Nero written by the incomparable Cardan, shall find that the worst
of Princes do much more good then they do harm. But, semper Corpori grave est
Caput, the head always aches, and is a burden to the shoulders, and we complain
much of every little disorder. Put case a Prince by injustice do violence to
some of his subjects, what then? Qui unum, qui plures occidit, non tamen reip.
laesae reus est, sed caedis, said Seneca, It is not the killing of some
Citizens that destroys the Commonwealth: and there are not many Princes that
proceed so far as to do open and professed wrong to the lives of their
subjects; but many subjects have done violence, open and apparent, to the lives
of their Princes, and yet the subjects are aptest to complain. Quis Princeps
apud nos regnavit e Vi^ecomitum aut Sfortiadum familia quem non aliquis Civis
noster etiam sine causa, sed sola ambitione, ferro aggressus sit? pauci certe,
Which of our Princes of such and such a family has not been set upon to be
murdered by some of their Subjects, without cause, but meekly out of ambition?
very few. And he that reads Hector Boethius his history of Scotland may say as
much as Cardan, and for a longer time. Every man complains of Kings and
Governors; we love them not, and then every little thing makes him a Tyrant:
but it is in this case as in the case of women (says Albericus Gentilis) we
cannot be without them, and yet we are not pleased when we are tied to them. *
If any such thing could happen that a King had a mind to destroy his people, by
whom should he do it? He alone can hardly do it; and he could hardly arm his
people against themselves. But what should he get by it? he cannot be so
unreasonable: but suppose it, what then? Oppression will make a wise man mad
(says Solomon) and there are some temptations bigger then a man's strength; and
this would be one of them, and the people would be vexed into the sin of
rebellion; and then it may be, God would cut him off, and punish the people;
and here would be calamity enough in this whole intercourse, but nothing
lawful. For we have nothing dearer to us then our lives and our religion; but
in both these cases we find whole armies of Christians dying quietly, and
suffering persecution without murmur. * But it cannot be done, it cannot easily
be supposed that an evil Prince should be otherwise then one that is cruel and
unjust, and this to fall upon some persons: for let him be lustful, he shall
not ravish the Commonwealth; and if he be bloody, his sword cannot cut off
very great numbers; and if he be covetous, he will not take away all men's
estates: but if a war be made against him, these evils will be very much more
universal; for the worst of Princes that ever was has obliged a great many,
and some will follow him out of duty, some for fear, some for honor, and some
for hopes; and then as there is no subject that complains of wrong but he has
under the government received more right then wrong, so there is none that goes
to do himself right, (if that be all he intends, and not covetous and
ambitious designs) but in the forcing it he will find more wrong then right.

3. But I demand, Are there no persons from whom if we receive wrong we must
not be avenged of them? 16.
To a Christian it had been a more reasonable inquiry, whether there be any
persons of whom we may be avenged. Certainly there are none of whom we may be
avenged without the aid or leave of the public power. But what if our Father
do us wrong? may we strike him? (...), to bear our Fathers unjust wrath was
one of the precepts the young man of Eretria had learnt of Zeno: and what then
if we be injured by the public Father? Magno animo Regis, velut parentis
contumeliam tulit; it was said of Lysimachus: and ut parentum sa^vitiam sic
Patriae patiendo ac ferendo leniendam esse, said Livy. If we must bear with our
Fathers, Bell. Jugurth.
so also with our Princes. Vi regere Patriam aut Parents, quanquam and possis,
and delicta corrigas, importunum est, said Sallust, Though it were in your
power, though you might reform some evils, yet to rule your Parents or your
Prince by force is not reasonable. And it was an excellent saying which Cicero
had from Plato. lib. 1. Fam. ep. 9.
Tantum contendere in rep. oportet quantum probare tuis civibus possis, vim
neque parenti neque patriae afferri oportere. Id enim Plato jubet, quem ego
vehementer sequor: and qui hanc causam sibi fuisse ait reipublicae non
attingendae, quod cum offendisset populum Atheniensem prope jam desipientem
senectute, cumque eum nec persuadendo nec cogendo regi posse vidisset, cum
persunderi posse dissideret, cogi f^^ esse non arbitraretur, To contend and
fight in a Commonwealth can never be approved by the Citizens: strive so much
as you can justify: but you must offer force neither to your parents nor to
your country, that is the supreme government of your Country. And when Plato
saw the people of Athens almost doting with age, he despaired of prevailing
upon them by persuasion; but yet to compel them by force he concluded to be
impious. But can any man loose by patience? has it no reward? or is there no
degrees of Counsel in it? that is, Is not some patience acceptable though it be
not necessary? shall it have no reward, if it be more then we are bound to? If
it shall be rewarded, though it be greater then is simply necessary, then it is
certain, that whatever we suffer under evil Princes, to be quiet and peaceable
is infinitely better then to resist: For that shall have a good reward; this
seldom misses an ill one. But if there be no counsel, no degree of uncommanded
patience, then all patience is necessary; for it is certain none is sin: for
Christ was glorified by suffering the greatest injuries, and his Martyrs have
trodden the same way of the Cross; and so must we if God calls us to it, if we
will be his Disciples.

4. But again I consider, 17.
Does every subject that is a wicked man forfeit the right in his estate,
otherwise then law appoints? Is dominion founded in grace? or is it founded in
law and labor, in succession and purchase? And is it not so in Princes? with
this only difference, that their rights of government are derived from God
immediately; for none but he can give a power of life and death: can therefore
any one take away what they did not give? or can a supreme Prince loose it by
vice, who did not get it by virtue, but by gift from God? If a law were made to
divest the Prince of his power in case of ill government, then he were not the
man I mean, he is not supreme but subordinate, and did rule precariously, that
is as long as his superior judges will give him leave. But for the supreme he
is sacred and immured, just as the utmost orbs of heaven are uncircumscrib'd;
not that they are positively infinite, but because there is nothing beyond
them: so is the supreme Magistrate, nothing is above him but God: and therefore
in his case we may use the words of Livy, si quis adversus ea fecisset, nihil
ultra quam improbe factum adjecit lex, If he does any thing against reason and
justice, there is no more to be said but that it was ill done. * But if he does
not do his duty, that is no warranty for me not to do mine; and if obedience
and patience be a duty, then the one is as necessary, and the other is more
necessary when he does not do what he ought. * And after all, the supreme
power in every Christian republic has no power to kill a subject without law,
nor to spoil him of his goods. Therefore neither can a subject kill or
exauthorate the supreme at all; for there is no law to do it: and if he be the
supreme power, he is also lawgiver, and therefore will make no such law
against himself; and if he did, he were neither wise nor just.

Either then stop all pretenses, 18.
or admit all. If you admit any case in which the subjects may fight against
their Prince, you must admit every case that he will pretend who is the judge
of one. But because Government is by God appointed to remedy the intolerable
evils of confusion and the violence and tyranny of every strong villane, we
must keep our selves there; for if we take the sword, or the power, or the
legislation, or the Judicature, or the impunity from the Supreme, we return to
that state of evil from whence we were brought by government. For certain it
is, all the personal mischiefs and injustices done by an evil Prince are
infinitely more tolerable then the disorders of a violent remedy against him.
If there be not a derniere resort, or a last appeal fixed somewhere, mischiefs
will be infinite; but the evils that come from that one place will soon be
numbered, and easier suffered and cured.

It were easy to add here the sentences of the wise heathen to this very
purpose; 19.
for though religion speaks loudest in this article, yet nature her self is
vocal enough: but I have remarked some already occasionally, to the same sense
with that of Tacitus, Imperatores bonos voto expetendos, qualescunque
tolerandos: So the wiser Romans at last had learnt their duty. The same also
was the sentence of the Greeks; (...), Eurip.
We must patiently suffer the follies of our Rulers. So did the Persians, --
quamvis crudelibus, Claudian.
aeque
Paretur Dominis,
Though the Lords be cruel, yet you must obey them as well as the gentle. But I
am weary of so long telling a plain story. He that is not determined by these
things, I suppose will desire to see no more. But if he does, he may please to
see many more particulars in Barclay, in Grotius, in Monsieur de la Noue, in
Albericus Gentilis, in Scipio Gentilis, in Bishop Bilson, in Petrus Gregorius
and Bodinus. I conclude, many supreme Princes have laid aside their kingdoms,
and have exchanged them for honor and religion; and many subjects have laid
aside their supreme Princes or Magistrates, and have exchanged them for liberty
and justice. But the one got, and the other lost. They had real advantages; and
these had words in present, and repentance in reversion.

RULE IV. The Supreme Civil Power is also Supreme Governor over all persons
and in all causes Ecclesiastical.
IF this Rule were not of great necessity for the conduct of Conscience, 1.
as being a measure of determining all questions concerning the Sanction of and
obedience to all Ecclesiastical laws, the duty of Bishops and Priests to their
Princes, the necessity of their paying tribute, and discharging the burdens and
relieving the necessities of the Republic, I should have been unwilling to
have meddled with it; because it has so fierce opposition from the bigots of
two parties, the Guelphs and the Gibellines, from Rome and from Scotland, from
S. Peter and S. Andrew, the Papist and the Presbyterian: and they have placed
all their great interest and their greatest passions upon this question, and
use not to be very kind to any man that shall at all oppose them.

2. From the Church of Rome we have many learned men, 2.
servants of the Pope, who affirm that all Government^ Ecclesiastical belongs
to him; that he only can make laws of Religion, that in that he has a
compulsory over Kings, who are his subjects, dependant upon him, by him to be
commanded in matters of religion; to which all temporalties are so subordinate,
that if not directly, (as some of them say) yet indirectly, as most of them
say, in ordine ad Spirituale bonum, for the good of the Church and of religion
he can dispose of them. The great defenders of this doctrine are De pontif.
Romans l. 2. c. 17.
Bellarmine and Annal. Eccles.
Baronius, Contr. Apol. Eccl. Angl.
Harding and Contr. Episc. Eliens.
Eudaemon Johannes, in Comment. in Esther.
Fevardentius and in Theatr.
Mariana, de Justa abdicat. Henric. 3.
Boucher and De jure Magistratuum.
Ficklerus, De potestate Papae.
Alexander Carerius and De temp. et spirit. Pontif. potestate.
D. Marta, Of the broken succession.
Doleman, and generally the Jesuits, and all the Canonists.

On the other side, 3.
the Presbytery pretends mightily to the scepter of Jesus Christ, as the Pope
does to the Keys of S. Peter, and they will have all Kings submit to that; as
there is all the reason in the world they should: but by this scepter of Christ
they mean their own classical meetings, and the Government that themselves have
set up the other day; to which the first inventer of it was at first forced
pitifully to beg suffrages of allowance, and that it might be endured; but as
ill weeds use to do, it quickly grew up to that height, that like the Bramble
it would be King, and all the birds and beasts must come under the shadow of
it. The great Masters of this invention after Calvin are de Presbyterio
Beza, in his last Reply
Cartwright, Christian. poli^ia.
Lambertus Danaeus, lib. disciplinae
Gellius Snecanus, loci comm. Theol.
Guil. Bucanus, Observat. in Psalm. 1.
Hermannus Renecherus, De jure regni apud Scotes.
Buchanan, treatise of Obedience
Christopher Goodman, De jure magistratuum
Brutus Celta, Francogallia
Francisc. Hottoman, the Author of the Book called Speculum tyrannidis Philippi
Regis, Dial. 2. p. 65.
and the Dialogues of Philadelphus: and if any one would see more of these, he
may find enough of them in the writings of that Excellent and Prudent Prelate
Dr Bancroft Archbishop of Canterbury.

Concerning the pretenses of the Church of Rome, 4.
they are as invalid as can be wish^t. For although there are some overtures of
Scripture made, as Tibi dabo claves, and Ecce duo gladii, and Pasce oves, which
are strange arguments to considering persons to prove the Pope superior to
Kings, (and concerning them I shall not need to use any argument, but set down
the words of the Bishop of Maestricht in an excellent oration of his recorded
by Aventine. lib. 5. Annal. Boior:
Ambitiosi and superbi sunt qui illud Domini Deique nostri elogium, Quodcunque
solveris super terram, etc. and quodcunque ligaveris erit ligatum, etc.
perfricta front interpretando adulterant, suae libidini servire cogunt, and
nobis ceu pueris, and omnium rerum imperitis, astu illudere student, They that
expound such words of Christ to serve their pride or lust of Empire are
impudent, and think us to be fools and children, and fit to be cosen'd and
fooled out of our senses:) yet these were made no use of to any such purpose
for many Ages after the Apostles death; and therefore upon wiser accounts they
cause this great article to rely upon some prudential motives, and some great
precedents and examples. The particulars I shall consider in the following
numbers: but that which here lies in my way is their great boast of the fact of
Pope Zachary deposing Childeric King of France in the year 750, and appointing
Pepin the Kings Marshall to be King in his Room. Upon the warranty of this
Example Gregory the 7th endeavored to justify his proceedings against the
Emperor Henry 4th. Epist. ad Perimannum Epis. Metens.
Bellarmine will not endure with patience to hear that any one did this feat
but the Pope only; and on all hands they contend mightily that it was he, and
not the Nobles and people of France. They indeed were willing but they had no
authority, therefore they appealed to him as the Ordinary Judge; and he
declared for Pepin, and God declared for that Judgment that it was according
to his will: for the event was blessed, Pepin was prosperous, and his son
Charles the Great grew a mighty Prince, and France a potent Empire, and
Religion and the Church had great increment and more advantages then before or
since.

But when men judge of actions by the events, 5.
they only show themselves willing to be cosen'd by prosperity, and that they
will endure nothing that has affliction with it; but so they become advocates
for the greatest villainies, because they could never come to their greatness
if they were unprosperous. And therefore there is no judging of lawful or
unlawful by the event, till the last event be tried: and at the day of our
death and at the day of Judgment, the event of things is the best argument and
the best trial of right and wrong. But besides this, the folly of these men is
infinitely seen in this very instance. For it is no wonder that the Church of
Rome was prosperous and did thrive upon that change: Pepin and Pope Zachary
helped one another and divided the spoil; and Pepin and Charles having no
warranty and reputation in that treasonable surprise of the Crown of France,
but what they had from the opinion the world then had of the Bishop of Rome, it
concerned Charles to advance the Papacy, that the Papacy might support him. But
by all that is before him in this world, a man knows not whether he be worthy
of love or hatred, says Solomon; and a man's fortune is seen in his children:
and therefore if the Popes servants would look a little further then their own
advantages, they might have considered what is observed by Paulus Aemilius and
Beneventus of Imola, that in the days of Charles the Great, who was son to
Pepin, the Empire was divided; (which was the curse in which God punished
Solomon in the person of Rehoboam) that his son Ludovicus Pius was served just
as his Grandfather served his Master the King, for his son Lotharius did most
unnaturally rebel against him, deposed him and thrust him into a cloister; and
that he himself felt the judgment of God, for himself also was deposed, and
succeeded to by Lewis the second, who was prosperous in nothing, but in every
undertaking the wind blew in his face. His son was Ludovicus nihili, so they
called him; a cipher of a King, and stood for nothing. He indeed left an heir
to the Crown: but he also was a man that had no heart, and his son had no head;
for Charles the Bald was an extreme pitiful coward, and Charles le gross was a
fool. After these succeeded Arnulph, who was eaten up with lice, the sad
disease of Herod; and in his son Lewis the fourth that race was quite
extinguished. And now if we judge of things by the event, have we not great
reason even upon this account to suspect the fact of Zachary, (though it was
not his authority, but his consent and his confederacy with the Rebel) to be
extremely displeasing to Almighty God, when there was not one of his line but
went away with a share of the Divine anger? But such reasonings as these
concern none but them who feel them; they may suspect the thing, and better
examine their confidences when they feel any extraordinary evils, which most
commonly are the consequents of a great sin and a mighty displeasure. But
others are to do as they should have done at first, go by rule, and not
venture upon the thing to see what will become of it. * Being now quit of this
by which they have made so much noise; all their other little arguments will
soon melt away when they come to be handled.

But as for the other pretenders (viz. 6.
those of the Presbytery,) to a power superior to Kings in Ecclesiastical
Government; they have not yet proved themselves to have received from Christ
any power at all, to govern in his Church; and therefore much less by virtue
of any such power to rule over Kings. I do therefore suppose these Gentlemen
not much concerned in this question, because they are incapable of making
claim; not only because Religion is no pretense to Regalities, and that
Spiritual power is of a nature wholly different from the power of Kings; but
because if the Spiritual were to be above the Temporal, yet even then they are
not the better. For they have not only none of that Spiritual power which can
pretend to Government, but it does not yet appear that they have any at all:
and this relies upon the infinite demonstrations of Episcopal Government and
power; which being one of the words and works of Christ, must needs be as firm
as heaven and earth. But if they be concerned, they will be concluded.

And first in general, 7.
it is necessary that the supreme power of Kings or States should be governors
in Religion, or else they are but half Kings at the best, Cum jus conferendi
opi ^a sacerdotia ab Henrico Imp. vi fuerat extortum, ea res (inquit Paulus
AEmilius lib. 5.) multum virium Imperatoriae Majestati detraxit in animis
popularium, plus enim quam dimidium suae jurisdictionis perdidit.
for the affairs of Religion are one half of the interest of mankind: and
therefore the laws of the XII Tables made provision for religion as well as for
the public interest. Jus triplex tabulae quod ter sanxere quanternae
Sacrum, Auson.
Privatum, and populi commune quod usquam est.
And this is so naturally and unalterably entailed upon the supreme power, that
when Attalus the King of the Pergamenians made the people of Rome his Heir
with these words only, Populus Romans bonorum meorum haeres esto, Let the people
of Rome be Heir of all my goods; by [ His goods] they understood, Divina
Humanaque, l. 4. Eutrop. l. 2. L. Flor.
publica and privata, says Eutropius, and Florus, all power in things public
and private, Humane and Divine. For since Religion is that great intercourse
between God and us, it is impossible to deny to him who stands next to God the
care of that by which we approach nearest to him; lib. 8.
and this I learned from Justine. Jure ille a Diis proximus habetur per quem
Deorum Majestas vindicatur, He is rightly placed next under God, by whom the
Majesty of God is asserted. And therefore the Christians must alter their
style, and no more say that the Prince is homo a Deo secundus, and solo Deo
minor, (which are the words of Tertullian) next to God, and only less then
him, if between God and the Prince there is all that great distance and
interval of the Government of Religion. He is the best and greatest person that
rules the best and greatest interest: and it was rightly observed of S. Paul
concerning controversies civil, for money or land, 1 Cor. 6.
Set them to judge who are least esteemed amongst you; for that is of the least
concern: but he that is Judge of life and death, that is, the Governor of
bodies, and he that governs the greatest affairs of souls, he indeed ought to
be of highest estimation. Bishops and Priests are the great Ministers of
Religion, but Kings are the (...) the great Rulers and Governors of it. And
this is easy to distinguish. For as the Kings Judges and Council learned in the
Law minister law to the people, yet the King is the supreme judge in law; and
the Kings Captains and soldiers fight his battles, and yet he is summus
Imperator, and the power of the Militia is his: so it is in religion, it must
be ministered by persons ordained to the service, but governed by himself: He is
not supreme unless he have all the power of Government.

2. The care of religion must needs belong to the supreme Magistrate, 8.
because religion is the great instrument of political happiness: ad magnas
Reip. Lib. 2. de Divinat.
utilitates retinetur religio in civitatibus, says Cicero; and unless he have
power to manage and conduct it, and to take care it be rightly ordered, the
supreme power has not sufficient to defend his charges. If the Prince cannot
conduct his Religion, he is a supreme Prince just as if he had not the militia;
or as if he were Judge of right but not of wrong; or as if he could reward but
not punish; or as if he had cognizance but of one half of the causes of his
people; or as if he could rule at land but not at sea, or by night but not by
day. But how if an enemy comes with a fleet against him, will he send a Brigade
of horse to take a squadron of ships? The case is just the same; for if God
breaks in upon a Nation for the evil administration of religion, how shall the
Prince defend his people or answer to God for them? And this is no
inconsiderable necessity: For besices that justice and charity, and temperance
and chastity, and doing good and avoiding evil are parts of religion, and yet
great material parts of government and the laws, the experience of mankind and
natural reason teaches us that nothing is so great a security or ruin to a
State as the well or ill administration of Religion. Dii multa neglecti dederunt
Hesperiae mala luctuose: Horat.

and Cicero, Orat. 5. in Ver^em.
Omnia prospera eveniunt colentibus deos, adversa spernentibus, The people that
have care of Religion are prosperous, but unhappy when they are irreligious.
(...), in Bacchis
says Euripides; and
(...). in Supplic.

Religion is the band of families, and a strong foundation to Commonwealths.
(...), so Plutarch; it is the ligature of all communities, and the firmament of
laws: the same with that of Synesius, (...), First let religion be settled,
because it is the strong Base and column upon which a Kingdom does rely. And
of this we have God himself a witness: Seek the Kingdom of heaven and the
righteousness thereof in the first place, and all these things [that is the
necessaries of the world and of this life] shall be added. For so says the
Apostle, Piety is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. And to this that of Homer rarely accords,
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
The sense of which is well enough rendered by that of Justinian, Novel. 42.
(...), that he would take care concerning Ecclesiastical government or the
affairs of religion; for if this be kept in peace, all the whole republic
will be prosperously administered, reliqua nobis exuberabit politia. So it is
rendered by one of our Saxon Kings. The very trees will bring their fruit in due
season, and the sea will give her fish, and the earth shall give her increase,
when Kings take care of justice and religion. Eorum imperiis remp. amplificuam
qui relizionibus paruissent, dixit Cicero, de Not. Deor. l. 2.
By religion Princes increase their Empire. So Orat. de arusp. resp.
Cicero affirms of the Romans, non calliditate ac robore, sed pietate ac
religione omnes gentes nationesque superavisse, They overcame all the Nations
not by force or craft, but by piety and religion. To which purpose is that of
Valerius Maximus, Non dubitaverunt sacris Imperia servire: ita se rerum
humanarum futura regimen existimantia si Divinae potentiae been atque
constanter essent famulata, The Greatest Empires made no scruple of ministering
to Religion, as believing that then they should most prosperously prevail in
the Governments of the world, if they well and constantly did service to the
Divine Almighty power. Now this is not to be understood as if it meant that if
a King were a good man and personally religious it would procure blessings for
him and his people; though that be true in some proportion of events: but it
signifies that they should be religious Kings, that is, as such take care to
defend, to promote, to conduct and to govern it to advantages and for the
honor of God. And this observation is made by S. Austin in his epistle to
Bonifacius. How do Kings serve the Lord in fear, but by forbidding and by a
religious severity punishing those things which are done against the Lords
Commandments? For otherwise does he serve him as a Man, otherwise as a King.
As a man he serves him by living faithfully: But as a King he serves him by
establishing laws, commanding righteousness, and forbidding the contrary. So
did Hezekiah serve God by destroying the Groves and the idol Temples, and all
those things which were built against the Commands of God. In the like manner
King Josiah did serve God: and the King of Nineveh served him by compelling all
the city to serve the Lord. Thus King Darius served God by delivering the idol
to Daniel to be broken, and casting his enemies into the Lions den: and
Nebuchadnezzar served him by forbidding by a terrible law all his subjects to
blaspheme. For in this, Kings serve the Lord as Kings, when they do those
things for his service which they cannot do but as Kings. Now if religion be
the great interest, the preserver, the enlarger of Kingdoms, it ought to be
governed by the hands of these whose office it is to enlarge or to preserve
them. For if the instrument be conducted by other hands, the event shall depend
upon them, and then they, not Kings, shall be answerable for the felicity or
infelicity of their Nations. And it was rarely well said of Plutarch, contra
Colot.
that a city might be as well built in the air, without earth to stand upon,
(...), as a republic can either be constituted or preserved without the
support of religion. That supreme power therefore that has no government of
religion is defective in a necessary part of it is life and constitution.

3. The supremacy and conduct of religion is necessary to the supreme power, 9.
because without it he cannot in many cases govern his people. For besides that
religion is the greatest band or laws, and conscience is the greatest
endearment of obedience, Solo sacramento inclyti principes tuti sunt, Symmach.
lib. 10. ep. 54. Maximum, dicente Catone; majoribus nostris telum, ex quo
plures pace susceptae quam bello gentes fuere devictae, quo solo continetur
omnis societas, and dissoluto dissolvitur. Appius lib. 6. in fin. Omnium
primum, rem ad multitudinem imperitam, and illis seculis rudem efficacissimam,
Deorum metum injiciendum ratus est. Livius lib. 1. Primum enim militiae
vinculum est religio, and signorum amor, and deserendi nefas. Senec. epist. 96.
and a security for Princes in closets and retirements, and his best guard
against treasons; it is also that by which the common people can be carried to
any great or good or evil design. And therefore Livy observes of Numa, that to
establish his Government he first settled religion, as supposing that nothing is
more powerful to lead the people gently, or to drive them furiously, then to
imprint in them the fear of God, or to scare them with religion. And therefore
the Prince cannot rule without it: He is but the shadow of a King and the
servant of his Priests; and if they rule religion, they may also rule him. And
that for two great causes.

1. 10.
Because the propositions and opinions of religion have and are directly
intended to have great influence upon the whole life and all the actions of
mankind. For how if the Ministers of religion preach the Stoical fate, and that
all things that come to pass are unalterably predetermin'd, who need to care
how he serves God, or how he serves his Prince? Suetonius says of Tiberius,
that he was religionis negligentior, quippe persuasionis plenus cuncta fato
agi, careless of religion, because he was fully persuaded that all things came
by destiny. To what purpose are laws or punishments, rewards and dignities,
prisons and axes, rods and Lictors, when it is injustice to punish a criminal
for being unavoidably miserable? and then all government is at an end when
there can be no virtue nor vice, no justice nor injustice: for what is alike
necessary, is equally just. But upon some such account as this Plato said that
they are not to be suffered in a Commonwealth who said that God is the Author
of evil. * And what are likely to be the effects of that persuasion which is a
great ingredient in the religion of some men, [That Dominion is founded in
grace; that evil Princes may be deposed; that heretics may be excommunicated,
and their subjects absolved from the oath of their allegiance; that faith is
not to be kept with heretics; that it is lawful to tell a lie before a
Magistrate, provided we think up the truth; that Kings are but executioners of
the decrees of the Presbytery; that all things ought to be in common?] By such
propositions as these it is easy to overthrow the state of any Commonwealth;
and how shall the Prince help himself, if he have not power to forbid these and
the like dangerous doctrines? A Commonwealth framed well by laws and a wise
administration, can by any one of these be framed anew and overturned. It is
therefore necessary that the Prince hold one end of this staff, lest himself be
smitten on the head.

2. 11.
The other great cause is this, Because religion has great influence upon
persons as well as actions; and if a false religion be set on foot, a religion
that does not come from God, a religion that only pretends God, but fears him
not, they that conduct it can lead on the people to the most desperate
villainies and machinations. We read in the life of Henry the third of England,
Matthew. Westmonast. in Henr. 3.
that when he had promised any thing to his Nobility that he had no mind to
perform, he would presently send to the Pope for a Bull of dispensation, and
supposed himself acquitted: and who could suffer such a religion that destroyed
the being of contracts and societies, or bear the evils consequent to such a
religion? And of the same nature, but something worse in the instance, lib. 8.
Rerum Gallicar.
is that which Arnaldus Ferronius tells of, that the Roman Lawyers answered to
Ferdinandus Davalus, that at the command of the Pope he might take up arms
against the Emperor Charles the fifth, his Prince, without any guilt of
Treason. And it was yet very much worse which was done and said by the Pope
John 22. against the Emperor Lewis the 4. Quod si nobis obtemperare
detrectaverit, Aventin. lib. 7. Annal.
Patriarchis, Episcopis, cunctis Sacerdotibus, Principibus, Civitatibus
imperamus ut eundem deserant, ac nobis parere cogant, Patriarchs and Princes,
Bishops and Priests were not only allowed, but commanded to forsake their
Emperor, and to compel him to obey the Bishop of Rome. By these and much more
it appears, the evil Ministers of a false religion have great powers of doing
what they please: Nam faciunt animos humiles formidine Divum,
Depressosque premunt ad terram --
They make the people absolute slaves, and lift them up again with boldness to
do mischief. (...), said Plutarch, The rude people are easy and apt to
superstition: in Sertorio.
and when they are in, they are ready for any violence. Superstitione qui est
imbutus quietus esse non potest, said Cicero: they cannot be quiet when they
have got a wild proposition by the end. And this is too much verified by the
histories of almost all nations: for there is none but has smarted deeply by
the factions and hypocrisies of Religion. Diod. Sicul. lib. 6. c. 10. Florus
lib. 3. c. 16.
The Priests of Jupiter in the Island of Meroe did often send the people to
kill their Kings. Eunus a Roman slave armed 60000 men upon pretense of a
religious ecstasy and inspiration. Maricus in France did the like: so did an
Egyptian in the time of Claudius the Emperor, lib 2. De bello Judaic. cap. 12.
mentioned by Josephus, who led after him 30000. men against the Romans. The
two false Christ's, the one in the time of Vespasian, the other under Hadrian,
prevailed to the extreme ruin of their miserable countrymen. Leo and the
Turkish Annals tell us strange events and overthrows of Government brought to
pass by the arts of religion in the hands of Elmahel and Chemin Mennal in
Africa: the first taking the Kingdom of Morocco from Abraham their King,
together with his life; the other forcing the King of Fesse to yield unto him
the Kingdom of Temesna. In Asia Shacoculis of the Persian Sect by his religion
armed great numbers of men, and in three great battails overthrew the Turkish
power, and put to hazard all their Empire.

They that knew none of these stories did know others like them, 12.
and at least knew the force of religion to effect what changes pleased them
who had the conduct of it; and therefore all wise Princes, ancient and modern,
took care to prevent the evil by such remedies and arts of government as were
in their hands. Three remedies were found out; two by men, and one by God.

1. 13.
The ancient governments of the world kept themselves and their people the
religion of their nation, that which did comply with their government, that
which they were sure would cause no disturbance, as being that which was a part
of the Government, was bred up with it, and was her younger sister; but of
foreign rights and strange and new religions they were infinitely impatient:
by the prohibition and exclusion of which by their civil laws, as the supreme
power secured the interest and peace of the republic, so it gave demonstration
that the civil power was supreme also in the religion. Upon this account we
find that Aristotle and A^axagoras were accused; Socrates and Protagoras were
condemned, for holding opinions and teaching contrary to the religion of their
country, and it was usual with the Athenians so to proceed: lib. 2. cont^.
Applon.
so Josephus writes of them, (...), they did severely punish any man that speak
but a word against the religion established by law. The Scythians also put
Anacharsis to death for celebrating the feast of Bacchus by the Grecian rights
-- For these nations accounted their country gods to be entertained and
endeared by their country religion, and that they were displeased with any new
ceremonies. * But this thing was most remarkable in the state of Rome. Live.
lib. 15.
For this was one of the charges which they gave to the Aediles, Ne qui nisi
Romani Dii neque alio more quam patrio colerentur. And Marcus Aemilius recited
a Decree to this purpose, Live. lib. 39.
Ne quis in publico sacrove loco novo aut externo ritu sacrificaret. And this
they made a solemn business of, says Livy, quoties Patrum Avorumque aetate
negotium Magistratibus datum est ut sacra externa fieri vetarent, In the days
of our Ancestors they often made laws forbidding any stranger rites; but
commanded that only their own country gods should be worshipped, and that
after their country manner. For this was enjoined in the laws of the XII.
Tables, Nemo separatim Deos cabessit. No man must have a religion of his own,
but that which is appointed by laws. And upon this stock Claudius banished the
Jews from Rome, and quite extinguished the superstition of the Druides, which
Augustus Caesar had so often prohibited. But most full to this purpose is the
Narrative which Dio makes of the counsel which Mecaenas gave to young Octavian,
(...), Worship God always and every where according to your Country Customs,
and compel others so to do: but hate and punish the bringers in of strange
religions; because they who bring in new Deities and forms of worship, they
persuade men to receive other laws, and make leagues, Covenants, factions and
confederacies.

And therefore to prevent innovations in religion, 14.
the Romans often inquired after those who had books of strange religions, and
when they found any they burned them; Live. 5. dec. 3. and lib. 10. dec. 4. in
Augusto, c. 31.
as we find in Livy and Suetonius. They would not suffer the rites of religion
to be publicly disputed: and Augustus would not have the Causes of the Rites
of Ceres heard in open Court. And when Ptolemy of Egypt was pressed to hear the
Controversy between the Jews and the Samaritans concerning the Antiquity of
their Religion, he would not admit any such dispute, till the Advocates would
undertake their cause to be just upon the pain of death, so that they who were
overcome in the cause should die for it; and that they should use no arguments
but those which were taken from the received laws of their Country, the law of
Moses: Joseph. lib. 13. Antiq. Judic. c. 6.
they did so, and the advocates of the Samaritan party being overcome were put
to death. For they knew that to introduce a new religion with fierceness and
zeal would cause disturbances and commotions in the Commonwealth; and none are
so sharp, so dangerous and intestine as those which are stirred by religion.
Pro aris and focis is the greatest of all contentions, for their Country
religion and their Country dwellings: for their Altars and their hearths even
old women and children will carry clubs and scalding water. Novel. 103. c. 2.
This caution therefore was also observed by Christian Princes. Justinian gave
in charge to the Proconsul of Palaestine to prevent all popular tumults which
from many causes use to disturb the Province, tum vero maxim ex diversitate
religionum....quandoquidem ut multos illic tumultus existere cernimus, neque
leves horum eventus: but especially those that proceed from diversities of
religion; for this begets many tumults, and these usually sit very heavy upon
the Commonwealth: the changes of religion being most commonly the most
desperate paroxysmes that can happen in a sickly state. Which Leontinus Bp. of
Antioch expressed prettily by an Emblem; for stroaking of his old white head,
he said, When this snow is dissolved, a great deal of dirty weather would
follow: meaning when the old religion should be questioned and discountenanced,
the new religions would bring nothing but trouble and unquietness.

This course of forbidding new religions is certainly very prudent, 15.
and infinitely just and pious. Not that it is lawful for a Prince to persecute
the religion of any other Nation, or the private opinion of any one within his
own; but that he suffer none to be superinduced to his own to the danger of
peace and public tranquillity. The persuasions of religion are not to be
compelled: but the disturbances by religion are to be restrained by the laws.
And if any change upon just reason is to be made, let it be made by authority
of the supreme: ut respublica salva sit; that he may take care that peace and
blessings may not go away to give place to a new problem. When it is in the
Princes hands he can make it to comply with the public laws, which he then
does best of all when he makes it to become a law it self. But against the law
no man is to be permitted to bring in new religions, excepting him only who
can change the law, and secure the peace. Beyond this no compulsion is to be
used in religion: lib. 1. Paedag. c. 1.
(...), said S. Clemens Alexandrinus, All religion must enter by exhortation;
for it is intended to beget a desire in our mind that is of the same cognation,
a desire of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. apud
Cassiodorum, lib. 2. Variar. ep. 27.
The same with that of Theodoricus King of the Romans, Religionem imperare non
possumus, quia nemo cogitur ut credat invitus: and Theobaldus writing to the
Emperor Justinian argued well, lib. 10. ep. 26.
Since God himself is pleased to permit many religions, we dare not by force
impose any one; for we remember to have read that we must sacrifice to God with
a willing mind, not by the command of any one that compels. And therefore the
old Romans, the Greeks, the Scythians, although they would admit no new
religion amongst their own people, would permit to every Nation to retain their
own; by this practice of theirs declaring that religion is not to be forced
abroad, nor changed at home, but that it was by the supreme power of the
Republic to be conducted so as to comply with the interest of the
Commonwealth. This was the first remedy against the evils of religious
pretenses; which by being conducted in the hands of the Civil power shows that
to be supreme even in the Questions of Religion.

2. The other which was found out by Men, 16.
is that they did take the priesthood into the hands of the supreme civil
power; and then they were sure that all was safe. Marsil. Ficin. in praefat.
lib. Trismeg. Strabo lib. 5. In bell. Alexandr. Diod. Sicul. l. 6. c. 10.
The Egyptians chose their priests out of their Schools of learning, and their
Kings out of their Colleges of Priests. The Kings of Aritia, a place not far
from Alba, were also priests of Diana: The same is reported of the priests of
Bellona, that they were the Kings of Cappodocia, says Hirtius; and the priests
of Pantheon were supreme Judges of all causes, and conductors of all their
wars. The Kings of Persia were always consecrated to be Princes of the
ceremonies, so was the King of Lacedaemon: and at this day the Kings of Malabar
are also Bramenes or priests; and it was a law amongst the Romans, Sacrorum
omnium potestas sub Regibus esto, The power of religion and all holy things was
to be under their Kings: lib. 10. Aeneid.
and Virgil ever brings in his Prince Aeneas as president of the sacrifical
rites; and of something to the same purpose Ovid makes mention, Fastor.
Utque ea nunc certa est, ita Rex placare Superna
Numina lanigerae conjuge debet ovis.
The King with the sacrifice of a Ram was to appease the Gods. lib. 2. De not.
Deor.
So did Romulus and Numa; Romulus auspiciis, Numa sacris constitutis fundamenta
jecerunt Romanae civitatis, said Cicero: they built Rome, and religion was the
foundation of the city. And the same custom descended with the succeeding
Kings, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus reports, (...), They had the government of
all sacrifices and holy rites, and whatsoever was to be done to the Holy Gods,
was done by them.

When afterward they separated the priesthood from the civil power, 17.
they appointed a sacrificing King to take care of the rites, but they kept him
from all intermedling with civil affairs; he might bear no office in the
Commonwealth, Festus Pompeius, lib. 17. Dionys. Halic. lib. 4.
nor have any employment in the army, nor make an oration to the people, nor
meddle with public affairs: and yet besides this caution, the supreme
Magistrate was Pontifex Maximus; and although he did not usually handle the
rites, A. Gell. lib. 10. cap. 15.
yet when he pleased he made laws concerning the Religion, Live. lib. 2.
and punished the Augurs, and the Vestal virgins, and was superior to the Rex
sacrorum, and the whole College of priests.

But when the Commonwealth was changed into Monarchy, 18.
Augustus annexed the great Pontificate to the Imperial dignity, and it
descended even to the Christian Emperors, who because it was an honourary
title, and was nothing but a power of disposing religion, they at first refused
it not: but upon this account it was that Tacitus said of the Roman Emperor,
Annal. lib. 3.
nunc Deum munere summum Pontificem summum hominum esse, The greatest priest is
also the greatest Prince. * Now this device of theirs would indeed do their
business, but it was more then was needful. For though it were certain that
religion in the hands of the supreme Magistrate should never disturb the
public; yet it might be as sure if the Ministry were in other hands, and the
Empire and conduct of it in their own. And that was Gods way.

3. For God has instrusted Kings with the care of the Church, 19.
with the custody of both the Tables of his Law, with the defense of all the
persons of his Empire; and their charge is to preserve their people in all
godliness and honesty, in peace and in tranquillity: and how this can be done
without the supreme care and Government of religion is not easy to be
understood.

4. But this appears in that Kings, that is, the supreme power of every Nation,
are vicegerents of Christ, Hebr. 1. 2.
who is Head of the Church, and Heir of all things; Revel. 1. 5. 11. 17. 17.
14. 19. 16.
He rules with a rod of iron; He is Prince of the Kings of the earth; The
only potentate, King of Kings and Lord of lords; To him is given all power in
Heaven and Earth, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
and by him Kings reign. Matthew. 28. 18.
So S. Athanasius, Sermon. de B. Virg.
(...), Christ taking his throne has translated it and given it to holy
Christian Kings to return them back to the house of Jacob. The Fathers of the
Council of Ariminum writing to Constantius the Arrian Emperor, say to him, that
by Christ he had his Empire given him; (...), By him thou art appointed to
reign over all the world. And upon this account Liberius gave him this advice,
(...), Fight not against him who has given thee this Empire; and in stead of
thanksgivings, pay him not with dishonor. For the Prince being an Arrian and
denying the Divinity of Christ, did dishonor the Prince of the Kings of the
earth, who had deserved better at his hands. The consequent of this
consideration is this, If Christ as the supreme King does rule his Church, and
in this kingdom has deputed the kings of the earth, and his vicars they are,
then they are immediately under him in the Government of Christ's Church. For
Christ in Heaven is both King and Priest. As King he reigns over all the world
for the glory of his Father and the good of his elect; as Priest he intercedes
for all mankind, and particularly for them who shall be heirs of Salvation.
Now in both these relations he has on earth deputed certain persons to
administer and to imitate his kingdom and priesthood respectively. For he
governs all the world, but he does it by his Angel Ministers, and by Kings his
deputies. He officiates in his priesthood himself, and in this he has no
deputy; for he intercedes for us continually: but he has appointed an order of
holy and consecrated persons to imitate the offices of this priesthood, to
minister the blessings of it to the people, to represent the death of the
Cross, to preach pardon of sins to the penitent, to reconcile lapsed and
returning sinners, that is, to minister to the people all the blessings which
he by the office of priesthood procures in Heaven for us. Now it is certain
that he has made deputies of his Kingdom; for all power being given to him as
the great King, there can be no Government upon earth but what he appoints. The
Government is upon his shoulders, and all the earth is his inheritance, and
therefore from him all just Government is derived. Now it being manifest that
he is the fountain of all Kingly power, it is also as manifest that all this
power is delegated to the Kings of the earth; for by me Kings reign, says the
wisdom of God, and it is one of his most glorious appellatives, that he is
Prince of the Kings of the earth; and it is as certain that none of this kingly
power was given to the ministers of religion, but expressly denied to them. The
Kings of Nations exercise dominion; that is their province: but it shall not be
so amongst you: But he that is greatest amongst you let him be your minister.
That Is your state, you are ministers of the kingdom to other purposes, in
other manners; you do your work by serving, by humility, by charity, by
labors and compliance, by gentle treatments and the gentlest exhortations;
nothing of a King is to be in you, Synes.
but the care: (...), for to join the kingdom and the priesthood Evangelical
is to join in one band things of the most differing nature: for the name of
Kings has power and constraint, Rods and axes; the name of priests and
Apostles has in it nothing but gentle manners and holy ministeries. Kings can
compel; the ministers of religion must entreat. They can kill; but at the most
these can but rebuke sharply. These can cut off from spiritual communion, and
deny to give them mysteries that will hurt the wicked and the indisposed; but
they can cut them off from life it self. Kings justly seek honors, wealth and
dignity, and it is allowed them by laws and by necessity, and by their reason:
But priests must not seek their own, but only the things of Jesus Christ. They
must indeed be maintained; the ox cannot labor if his mouth be musled: but
though this be his maintenance it must be no part of his reward. Our blessed
Saviors word is rendered by S. Matthew by (...), Matthew. 20. 25.
The Kings of the people do rule Imperiously. This very word is also used by
S. Peter, and forbidden to the elders of the Church, and to it is opposed
(...), to feed the flock like shepherds. The manner of (...) used by S. Paul,
or (...) used by S. Matthew and S. Peter, the exercising dominion is
compulsion, and great riches: this is also forbidden to the Clergy, they must
not do any thing (...), nor (...), not for profit to themselves, not with
violence or imposing necessity upon others. The Ministers of religion are very
considerable in this Kingdom of Christ, to promote and to advance it by holy
preachings and holy ministrations: but it is true which was solemnly declared
in Babylon to the prince of the Captives, officium ipsi non potestatem injungi,
et ab eo die incipiendum ipsi servire omnibus; their eminency is nothing but an
eminency of service, it is the greatest ministry in the kingdom, but has in
it the least of Empire. But of this I shall have occasion to give a fuller
account. For the present, that which the present argument intends to persuade
is, that the Ministers of religion are only officers under Christ's priesthood,
but subjects in his kingdom, which is administered by Angels and Christian
princes in all the Imperial, in the defensive and coactive parts and powers of
it. The Christian King or supreme magistrate can do every thing (...), as
Comatenus said, only except the sacred Ministeries: which is the same which
was said by the famous Bishop of Corduba, Hosius in Athanasius; Neque igitur
fas est nobis interris Imperium tenere, neque tu sacrorum et thymiamatum habes
potestatem, Imperator, hoc est jus adolendi. The good Bishop was speaking of
the fact of Ozias, who though he had power over the priests, yet had nothing to
do to meddle with the rites of priesthood: It is not lawful for us to meddle
with Empire or the rights of Government; nor for thee, O Emperor, with the
rites of incense. The sum is this, If Christ by his kingly power governs his
Church, and Christian Kings are his Deputies, then they also are the Supreme
under Christ of the whole Government of the Church.

5. So that now I shall not need to make use of the precedents of the Old
Testament, 20.
nor recite how David ordered the courses of the Levites, the use of the bow in
the Quire, the solemnities of public service, nor how Solomon put Abiathar
from the High Priesthood, nor how Jehu, nor Hezekiah, nor Josiah reformed
religion, pulled down Idols, burnt the groves, destroyed the worship of Baal,
reduced the religion of the God of Israel. This indeed is an excellent
argument, because it was a time in which God gave his Priests more secular
eminency and external advantages then ever he did since, and also because
Christ changed nothing in the kingdoms of the earth; he left them as he found
them, only he intended to make them ministers and portions of his kingdom;
and that they should live privately, and govern publicly by his measures, that
is, by the justice and mercy Evangelical. But this argument I was the more
willing to touch upon because the Church of England much relies upon it in this
question, and excommunicates those who deny the Supreme civil power to have the
same authority in causes Ecclesiastical, which the pious Kings of the Hebrews
had over the Synagogue: But I find the ancient Doctors of the Church pressing
much upon the former medium, That Christ has specially entrusted his Church to
Christian Princes. For,

6. Christ shall call Christian Kings to account for souls. 21.
Cognoscant Principes seculi Deo se debere rationem reddere propter Ecclesiam
quam a Christo tuendam suscipiunt. Nam sive, augeatur pax and disciplina
Ecclesiae per fideles Principes, sive solvatur, ille ab eis rationem exigit qui
eorum potestati suam Ecclesiam credidit, in Sent. c. 51.
said Isidore Hispalensis. Let the Princes of the world know that they must
give an account to God for the Church which they have received from Christ into
their Protection. For whether the peace and Discipline of the Church be
increased by faithful Princes, or whether it be dissolved, he who has
entrusted his Church to their power will exact an account from them. And
therefore P. Leo to Leo the Emperor gave this advertisement, Epist. 75.
Debes incunctanter advertere Regiam potestatem tibi non solum ad mundi
regimen, sed maxim ad Ecclesiae praesidium esse collatam, You must diligently
remember that the supreme power is given to you not only for the government of
the world, but especially for the safety and defense of the Church. Now this
defense not being only the defense of guards, but of law; not only of
persons, but especially of Religion, must needs infer that Kings have
something more to do in the Church then the Court of Guards has: he defends
his subjects in the service of God; he defends and promotes this service; he is
not to defend them if they disserve Christ, but to punish them, and of this he
is Judge and Exactor: and therefore this defense declares his right and Empire.
Ex quo Imperatores facti sunt Christiani res Ecclesiae ab ipsis dependisse: so
Socrates expresses this question. Ever since the Emperors became Christian the
affairs of the Church have depended upon them. They did so before, but they
did not look after them: they had the power from Christ, but they wanted his
grace: they owed duty to him, but they paid it not, because they had no love
for him. And therefore Christ took what care he pleased, and supported it in
persecution, and made it grow in despite of opposition: and when this he had
done long enough to prove that the religion came from God, that it lost nothing
by persecution, but that his servants loved him and died for him, then he
called the Princes into the house of Jacob, and taught them how to administer
his power to the purposes of his own designement. Hence come those expressions
used often by Antiquity concerning Kings, calling them Vicarios Dei, verae
religionis Rectores, (...), the Deputies of God, Governors of true Religion,
the Captains and Conductors of faith and Godliness; ad quorum curam, S.
August. Ep. 166.
de qua Deo rationem reddituri erant, res illa maxim pertinebat, For to their
care Religion and the Church did belong, and concerning that care they were to
give an account to God.

Now if we descend to a consideration of the particular charges and offices of
Kings in relation to the Church, 22.
it will not only be a mighty verification of the Rule, but also will minister
to the determination of many cases of Conscience concerning Kings and
concerning the whole order Ecclesiastical. This I shall do in the following
Rules, which are but appendices to this.

RULE V. Kings have a legislative power in the affairs of Religion and the
Church.
THis is expressly taught by S. Austin. 1.
In hoc Reges sicut eis divinitus praecipitur Deo serviunt in quantum Reges
sunt, Contr. Crescon. l. 3. c. 51.
si in suo regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad
humanam societatem, verum etiam quae pertinent ad Divinam religionem, In this
Kings in that capacity serve God according to the Divine Commandment, if in
their respective kingdoms they command good things and forbid evil, not only
in relation to humane society, but in order to religion.

The least part of this power is to permit the free exercise of it, 2.
and to remove all impediments, and to give it advantages of free assemblies,
and competent maintenances and just rewards and public encouragements. So
Cyrus and Darius gave leave and guards and rescripts, warranty and provisions
and command to the Jews of the Captivity to build the Temple. So Constantine
and Licinius did to the Christians to practice their religion. Thus Hezekiah
and some other pious Kings of the Hebrews took away the offenses of the people,
the brazen serpent, the groves and images, the altar of Bethel, and the
idolatrous services. And of these things there is little question; for the
Christian Princes by their Authority shut up the Temples of the Heathen Gods.

That which is yet more considerable is, 3.
that by punishments they compel their Subjects to serve God and keep his
Commandments. That which was observed of the Primitive Christians, that they
tied themselves by oaths and Covenants to serve God, to do justice, not to
commit adultery, to hurt no man by word or deed, to do good to every man they
could, to assemble together to worship Christ, that Christian Princes are to
secure by laws, that what men will not do by choice, they may whether they
will or no; and this not only in things relating to public peace and the
interest of the Republic, but in the immediate matters of religion: such as
are laws against swearing, against Blasphemy, against drunkenness and
fornication and the like, in which the interest of souls is concerned, but not
the interest of public peace. Hoc jubent Imperatores quod jubet Christus; and
it is a great service to Christ that the fear of men be superadded; because to
wicked persons and such for whom the severity of laws was made, it often
prevails more then the fear of God.

But that which is more then all this is, 4.
that besides those things in which God has declared his will, the things of
the Church, which are directly under no Commandment of God, are under the
supreme power of Christian Princes. I need no other testimony for this but the
laws themselves which they made, and to which Bishops and Priests were obedient
and professed that they ought to be so. And this we find in the instance of
diverse Popes who in their epistles gave command to their Clergy to observe such
laws which themselves had received from Imperial edicts. For there are diverse
laws which are by Gratian thrust into his collection which were the laws of
Christian Princes. The Canon Judicantem. 13. q. 5. expressing the office of a
Judge in the Cognizance of causes, attributed by Gratian to Pope Eleutherius,
was a law made by the Emperor Constantine, l. 1. C. de Judic. C. Theodos. and
so was that which was attributed to P. Fabian against accusers, Can. si quis
iratus: it is in the Theodosian Code and was made by the same Prince. The
Canons which go under the names of 3. q. 6. c. 16, 17. and 2. q. 8. c. 4.
Sixtus and 2. q. 3. c. 3.
Adrian and Fabian before cited of the same title were made by Gratian the
son of Valentinian the Elder: 3. q. 6. c. 1.
who also made the rescripts for restitution of Church-goods taken from Bishops
when they were forced from their Sees, attributed to Pope Caius and Pope John.
Theodosius the Emperor made the Canon qui ratione 3. q. 9.
for order in accusations, which yet is attributed to Pope Damasus, but is in
the Theodosian Code: for thus the Popes easily became lawgivers when they
adopted into the Canon the laws of their Princes, which by their authority
prevailed beyond the memory of their first makers. The Canon Consanguineos, 35.
q. 6.
for separation of marriage within the prohibited degrees, was not the Popes,
but made by Theodosius, as it is thought, at the instance of S. Ambrose: and
Valentinian made the Canon Privilegia for confirmation of the privileges of the
Church, 25. q. 2.
which goes under the Name of Anacletus. I could reckon diverse others, for
indeed the volume of the Decrees is full of such constitutions which the
Christian Emperors made, but they were either assumed by the Popes or imputed
to them. But that the Popes as Ecclesiastics had no authority to make laws of
Ecclesiastical affairs, but that the Emperors had, was sufficiently
acknowledged by Pope Honorius. c. 1. Ext. de juram. calum.
Imperator Justinianus decrevit ut Canones Patrum vim legum habere oporteat,
That the Canons of the Fathers became a law in the Church, was by the
constitution of the Emperor Justinian. For that was all the end both of the
labors of war and the Counsels of peace, ut veram Dei cultum orbis nostri
plebs devota custodiat, said Theodosius and Honorius in their letters to
Marcellinus: that our people may devoutly follow the true worship of God.

Upon this account we find that Constantine, 5.
Anastasius and Justinian made laws concerning the expense and rites of
sepulture. Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius forbad dead corpse to be interred
within the memorials of Martyrs and Apostles. Honorius appointed the Number of
Deanes in the Metropolis, and the Immunities of every Church. Leo and Anthemius
forbad alienation of Church Lands. But what should I instance in particulars?
they that know not this are wholly strangers to the Civil law, particularly the
first book of the Code, the Authentics, the Capitulars of the French Princes,
the laws of the Goths and Vandals, and indeed of all the Christian Princes of
the world. But the first titles of the Code, De summa Trinitate and fide
Catholica, De sacrosanctis Ecclesiis, De Episcopis and Clericis, De Episcopali
Audientia, De haereticis, Manichaeis, Samaritis, De Apostatis, and diverse other
are witnesses beyond exception. * Now in this there is no exception of matter.
For whatsoever is under Government is also under the laws of Princes: Novel.
133.
(...), said Justinian. Nothing comes amiss to the Prince, every thing is
under the Royal cognizance. Constantine made laws concerning festivals, and
appointed what labors might and what might not be done upon the Lords day; C.
de feriis. l. 3. and Cod. Theod. de fer. l.
and so did Leo the Emperor. Valentinian the Elder made a law that no
Clergyman should receive an inheritance by the will or gift of widows and
orphans, unless they were of the Kindred. S. Epist. 31.
Ambrose complains heavily of the law, 1. Leo. 6. Novel. 54.
and so does S. Ep. 2. ad Nepotian.
Hierome, but confesses it was just, and procured by the avarice of some
Clergymen who under cover of religion made a prey of the widows. But this
Decree was sent to Pope Damasus and publicly read in the Churches of Rome. And
Honorius the Emperor made a law concerning the election of the Pope. Which two
last instances I reckon to be very great, because at Rome now-a-daies they are
intolerable.

But if all these laws were made by Emperors only by force, 6.
against right and justice, and beyond their just power, then we are never the
nearer for this argument: tom. 7. A. D. 541.
and that it is so, Baronius is bold to affirm, who upon this title blames
Justinian for meddling with the affairs of the Church: for Quid Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? what has the Emperor to do with the Church? we know who said it.
And therefore a Synod at Rome under Symmachus abrogated a law made by Basilius
a Deputy of King Odoacer in an assembly of Ecclesiastical persons, in the
vacancy of the Sea Apostolic, upon the death of Simplicius. Now the law was a
good law, it forbad the alienation of the goods of the Church; yet because it
was a law made by a laick, they thought fit to annul it.

To these things I answer, 7.
that it matters not what Baronius says against Justinian, apud Radenon. in
Frider. lib. 1. cap. 15.
for Pope Hadrian the 4th, who is much more to be credited, commends him, and
propounds him as a great Example imitable by all Princes: and it was not
Justinian alone, but very many other Princes both before and after Justinian:
and therefore to ask what has the Emperor to do with the Church? might
become Donatus (whose saying it was, and whom S. Austin confuted for saying so)
but it becomes not any man that loves truth and order. Epist. 166.
As for the Roman Synod under Symmachus, the matter was this. He would needs
make himself head of a Synod without the Bishop, (for he was lately dead) and
made a law with an Anathema for the Sanction, and would have it pass not for
the law of the Prince, but for a law of the Church; which because the
Ecclesiastics had no reason to accept for such, when it was not so, they did
annul it: talem legem viribus carere, nec posse inter Ecclesiastica ullo modo
censeri, said Eulalius the Bp. of Syracuse in that Synod. * But that this makes
nothing against the Prince his power of making laws, appears by the great
submission which even the Bishops of Rome themselves made to the Imperial laws,
even when they liked them, and when they liked them not. I instanced before in
Damasus causing the law of Valentinian against Clergymen receiving
inheritances from widows to be read in all the Churches of Rome. Pope Boniface
consented to the law which Honorius the Emperor made about the election of the
Pope, and was so far from repudiating an Ecclesiastical law made by the Prince,
that he entreated him to make it. But that which is most material to this
inquiry is, the obedience of S. Gregory the great to Mauritius the Emperor, l.
2. ind. 11. ep. 61.
who made a law that no Soldier should turn Monk without his leave. This S.
Gregory esteemed to be an impious law, he modestly admonished the Emperor of
the irreligion of it. But Maurice nevertheless commanded him to publish the
law. The good Bishop knew his duty, obeyed the Prince, sent it up and down the
Empire, and grave this account of it: Utrobique quae debui exolvi, qui
Imperatori obedientiam prabui, and pro Deo quod sensi minime tacui, I have done
both my duties, I have declared my mind for God, and have paid my duty and
obedience to the Emperor. Legibus tuis ipsi quoque parent Religionis
Antistities, Epist. 10.
said Pope Gelasius to Anastasius the Emperor. Even the Bishops, the Ministers
of Religion, obey thy laws. Now this is not for decency only, and upon prudent
considerations, but upon necessity and by the Divine authority: cognoscentes
Imperium tibi superna dispositione collatum, as knowing that the Empire is
given to thee by God. And therefore the great Prelates of the Church, when they
desired a good law for the Churches advantage should be made, they presently
addressed themselves to the Emperor, as to him who alone had the legislative
power. I have already instanced in pope Boniface entreating Honorius to make a
law concerning the election of the Pope. Sergius also Patriarch of
Constantinople petitioned the Emperor Heraclius to publish a pragmatic sanction
that no man should be admitted into the Clergy but into a dead place. * These
things are so plain, c. 14.
that I may justly use the words of the Fathers of the 6th Council of Toledo,
speaking of Chintillanus their King, Nefas est in dubium deducere ejus
potestatem cui omnium gubernatio superno constat delegata judicio, It is
impiety to call in question his power, to whom the Government of all is
certainly deputed by the Divine Judgment. I therefore conclude this particular
with the excellent words of Cardinal Cusanus. lib. 2. Cath. Concord. c. 40.
It becomes not any man to say that the most sacred Emperors, who for the good
of the Republic did make many constitutions concerning the election of
Bishops, collation of benefices, observation of religions, did err. Nay, we
have read that the Pope of Rome has entreated them that they would publish
laws concerning Divine worship, and for the public good, and against sinners
of the Clergy. And lest peradventure it be said that the strength of all these
Constitutions did depend upon the approbation of the Authority Apostolical or
Synodical [viz. of the Pope or Council] I will not insist upon this: although
(let me say this) I have read and collected fourscore and six chapters of
Ecclesiastical Rules of the Ancient Emperors, which were to no purpose to
insert here, and many other of Charles the Great and his successors, in which
many dispositions or appointments are to be found concerning the Pope of Rome,
and all Patriarchs, and the conservation of Bishops and others; and yet I never
read that ever any Pope was asked to approve those laws, or if his approbation
did intervene, that upon that account the laws did bind. But it is read that
some Popes of Rome have confessed that they had those Imperial laws in
veneration. And this thing is so true and so publicly known, that the French
Ambassadors openly told it in the Council of Trent, that the Kings of France,
by the Example of Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, Justinian and other
Christian Emperors, made many laws concerning holy things, and that these did
not only not displease the Roman Bishops, but they put many of them into their
Canons: that the chiefest Authors of these laws, Charles the Great and Lewis
the ninth, they thought worthy to be Canonis'd and declared Saints, and that
the Bishops of France and the whole order Ecclesiastical have piously ruled and
governed the Gallican Church by the prescript of those Ecclesiastical laws
which their Kings had made.

RULE VI. The Supreme Civil Power has a power of Coercion of every person in
the whole Order Ecclesiastical.
HE that says all must be subject, 1.
need not instance in particulars, and say that Titius and Sempronius, and the
village Curate, and the Bishop of the Diocese must be subject. But yet because
of the pretenses of some, the Fathers of the Church have found it necessary to
say, that even Ecclesiastics must be subject; Homil. 23. in Epist. ad Romans
and that they are a part of the all. So S. Chrysostom explicating the words
of S. Paul, says [ But Paul gives us those reasons which command us of duty to
obey the powers; showing that these things are commanded to all, not to
Seculars only, but to Priests and Monks: which he shows in the very beginning,
when he says, Let every soul be subject to the supereminent powers; although
thou be an Apostle, or an Evangelist, or a Prophet. For this obedience or
subjection (be sure) will not destroy thy piety. That S. Chrysostom here speaks
of secular powers is evident in the whole Homily, and it appears also in the
words here reported; for he says that even an Apostle must be subject, who
because he has no Superior Ecclesiastical must be subject (if at all) to the
Secular, or Supreme Civil power. And this place is so understood by S. Irenaeus
lib. 1. cap. 24. S. Basil in Constit. monast. cap. 22. S. Ambrose upon this
place, and S. Austin lib. de Catech. rud. c. 21. and contr. Parmen. l. 1. c. 7.
who expressly derides those that expound the [ higher powers of S. Paul] by
Ecclesiastical honors.

But this thing is evident by notoreity of fact. 2.
Theodoret tells of Eusebius Bishop of Samosata, Hist. l. 4. c. 15.
that when the Imperial edict of banishing him from his See, and sending him
into Thrace, was brought by a messenger in the twilight, he charged him to say
nothing, lest the people should tear the officer in pieces. But the Bishop
according to his custom went to evening prayer; and then with one servant,
with a book and a pillow went to the water side, took a boat and passed over to
Zeugma. The people having soon missed their Bishop, followed him, found him
out, would fain have brought him back; but he refused, and told them is was the
precept of the Apostle, to be obedient to the higher powers: and upon that he
rested, and they returned. And the same was the submission, and the same was
the reason of S. Athanasius, as appears in his Apology to Constantius the
Arrian Emperor; Apolog. 2.
and the same subjection was professed by Justin Martyr to Antoninus the
Emperor, Nos solum Deum adoramus, et vobis in rebus aliis laeti inservimus,
Imperatores ac Principes hominum profitentes, We only worship God, in other
things we cheerfully serve you, as professing you to be Emperors and the
Princes of mankind. Ego quidem jussioni subjectus, said S. Gregory to
Mauritius, I am subject to command: and then it is certain, he was subject to
punishment in case he disobeyed the command. Ad hoc potestas super omnes
homines Dominorum meorum pietati coelitus data est. Epist. ad Mauritium.
He had no more immunity then any man else, for from heaven a power is given to
the Prince over all men. Comm. in Tit. 1.
The effect of this instance and these words of Gregory is acknowledged by
Espencaeus, Gregorius Magnus agnoscebat Imperatoribus concessum esse dominari
Sacerdotibus, Gregory the Great acknowledged that to the Emperors it was
granted to rule over the Priests. de Privileg. c. super specula. c. innotuit,
de Arbitr.
And the same was affirmed by Pope Honorius, c. 1. de No. oper. nunc. c.
constitutus de In integr. restitut. c. authoritate, de Concess. praeb. in 6.
Sancta Ecclesia legum saecularium non respuit famulatum quae aequitatis and
justitiae vestigia imitantur, The Holy Church refuses not to obey secular laws
that are equal and just.

But I undertook to evidence the truth of this Rule by matter of fact and
authentic precedents. 3.
Constantine received the Libells which the Bishops at Nice had prepared one
against another. He told them indeed that it was more fit for them to judge
him, Vide Athan. de Synod.
then he them, and therefore he burned the papers; Socrat. l. 1. c. 25.
but this signified nothing but that it was a shame to them whose office was to
reprove all sinners, Sozom. l. 2. c. 28.
to accuse one another of crimes before their Prince. But that this was nothing
but a modest redargution of them appears, because he did upon their
condemnation of Arrius banish him, Theodor. l. 1. c. 20.
and recalled him without their absolution of him. id. ibid. c. 31.
He banished Eusebius and Theognis, whom the Council had deposed, and took
cognizance of the cause between Athanasius and the Bishops his accusers;
Athanas. Apol. 2
that it might appear what he had said to the Prelates at Nice was but a modest
reproof or a civil complement, for it was protestatio contra factum. If he said
that, he said one thing and did another. * His son Constantius caused Stephen
Bishop of Antioch to be convened in the palace upon the law de vi publica, and
the lex Cornelia de sicariis. His lay-Judges heard him, found him guilty, and
commanded the Bishops to depose him from his Bishopric and expel him out of
the Church. His brother Constans heard Narcissus of Cilicia, Marcus the Syrian,
Theodore of Thrace and Maris of Chalcedon against Athanasius and Paul Bishop of
Constantiople. Socrat. l. 2. c. 14.
Valentinian the Emperor set a fine upon the head of Chronopius the Bishop,
Sozom. l. 3. c. 9. l. 2. Quorum appel.
and inflicted diverse punishments upon the Bishops Ursicinus, Cod. Theod.
Ruffus, Ursus and Gaudentius for making schisms to the disturbance of the
public peace. Gratian the Emperor deposed Instantius, Salvianus and
Priscillian from their bishopris and banished them, and afterward recalled
them. Socrat. l. 6. c. 16.
Arcadius the Emperor heard S. Chrysostom's cause and banished him; and Pope
Innocent, who found fault because he gave wrong Judgment, yet blamed him not
for usurping of a right to judge him. Theodosius the younger imprisoned Bishop
Memnon and S. Cyril of Alexandria. Indeed the Prince was misinformed by John of
Antioch; but when by the Great Ephesine council, he was rightly instructed, he
condemned John of Antioch, and afterward released the two Bishops at the great
and passionate Vestra pia genua protensis manibus attingimus. Anastas.
biblioth. in Symmacho. Epist. Hormisdae 56, 57. Novel. 42. et ponitur in
Council. Genesis 5. Act. 1. Liberatus in Breviat. c. 22.
petition and importunity of the Council of Ephesus. And when Ibas Bishop of
Edessa had excommunicated some priests of his Diocese, they appealed to the
Emperor and were heard. Theodoric King of Italy received accusations against
Pope Symmachus, and sent Altinus a Bishop to be the visitor of that See, and
afterward remitted the matter to a synod. Justinus the Emperor gave judgment
upon Dorotheus Bishop of Thessalonica for sedition and homicide. Justinian
banished Julian the Bishop of Halicarnassus, Severus Bishop of Antioch, Peter
of Apamea and Zoaras a Priest: but he also judged the cause of Pope Sylverius
for certain treasonable letters; and recalled him from banishment, but so that
he should not be restored to his See, unless he were found innocent of the
accusation.

I could reckon very many more instances to the same purpose, 4.
but these are as good as more; especially being but particulars of that power
and just consequence of that authority which I have proved by the laws of God
and the confessions of the Church to be inherent in the Supreme power. ad Can.
12. syn. Antioch.
I sum up this with the words of Balsamo. Quia statutum est nullum per alium
injuria afficiendum, ipse Patriarcha ab Imperatore, qui Ecclesiae habet
potestatis scientiam, judicabitur forte ut sacrilegus, vel male de fide
sentiens, vel alicujus criminis reus: Hoc enim judicialiter actum vidimus
diversis temporibus, Because it is commanded that one man should not injure
another, the Patriarch himself shall be judged of the Emperor, who has
cognizance over the power of the Church peradventure for sacrilege, or for
heresy, or for the guilt of any other crime; for we have diverse times seen such
judicial processes. And to the same purpose the seventh Canon of the first
Council of Matiscon subjects the Clergy to the secular Judge in the causes of
theft, witchcraft and murder; and the Council of Toledo which is cited c.
filiis 16. q. 7. does the like in the matter of robbery or cosenage. For either
Clergymen are not subjects, or they are bound by the laws of their Prince. If
they be not subjects, how come they free? If they be subjects, where is their
privilege? or is the Spiritual calling of a nature so disparate and estranged
from the Commonwealth, that it is no part of it? or is it better then the
Secular? The questions are worthy inquiring after; but the decision of them
will take off many prejudices from this great measure of Conscience, concerning
the fountain of humane laws and Judicatories.

But upon a closer view of the particulars it will be found that the whole
matter is a mistake; 5.
a false consequence drawn from a true estimate of religion: For all men grant
that religion is the greatest excellency, that our souls are the biggest
interest, that all our wealth is best employed when it is spent in Gods
service, that all things must yield to our duty to God: These are all very
true, as every thing else is when it is truly understood; but what then?
Therefore the ministers of religion are to be preferred before the ministers of
policy? Well, suppose that, for it is true that every thing is best in it is own
place and time. But what? therefore the ministers of religion are superior to
Princes, whose Government and care, whose office and employment is merely
temporal? That will not follow; nor this, Therefore the ministers of religion
are in all things better; nor this, Therefore they are in nothing inferior; nor
this, Therefore they are not subject to Civil Government, and civil
punishments. But these things must be considered apart.

I. Question. In what sense the service of God is to be preferred before every
thing else.
To this I answer, 6.
1. That if the service of God be taken in a sense opposed to any other thing
which is not the service of God, there is no peradventure but it is to be
preferred before every thing; for the question is no more then this, whether we
ought to serve God, or not to serve him. For if that which is not Gods service
comes in competition with that which is, if the first be preferred, God is
directly despised.

2. If by the service of God is meant the virtue of religion expressed in
external action, 7.
as saying our Prayers, receiving the holy Sacrament, visiting Churches,
sitting at the memorials of Martyrs, contemplation, fasting, silence, solitude,
and the like, then it is as certain that the service of God in this sense is to
be preferred before many things, but not before all things; not before many
things of our ordinary life, not before many things of civil society. For to
keep a holy day is a part of the service of God, but not to be preferred before
bodily labor in our trade, if that labor be necessary for the feeding our
family with daily bread. Contemplation is an excellent part of the Divine
service; but charitable actions are more useful. To hear a good Sermon is
good; but to snatch even an ox out of a pit is to be preferred before it. This
our Blessed Savior taught us in those excellent words, I will have mercy and
not sacrifice. For not only the precise virtue of religion is the Divine
service, though by propriety it has obtained the name: but the doing all our
duties, the works of our calling, all charitable ministeries, all useful
trades, all the graces of the spirit expressed in actions and obedience, is the
service of God, and of one it cannot be said, it is better then another; for
they shall all be required in their season. For,

3. It is one thing to inquire which is in it self more excellent, 8.
and another thing to ask which we are to choose; one thing to say this is to be
preferred in estimation, and another to say this is to be preferred in
practice. Ecstasies and raptures and conversing with blessed spirits are
certainly actions and passions respectively of greater eminency then dressing
the sores of poor boys in Hospitals; and yet he that does this, serves Christ
and does good, while he that follows after the others may fall into the
delusions of the Devil. That which is best in it self is not best for me: it is
best for the best state, but not for the state of men who dwell in
imperfection. Strong meat is better then milk, but this is best for babes; and
therefore he would but ill consult to the good of his child who, because it is
a princely boy, would feed him with bief and venison, wild boar and the juice
of great fishes. Certainly a Jewel is better then a piece of frize; and Gold is
a more noble and perfect substance then barley: and yet frize and barley do in
their season more good then gold and Jewels, and are therefore much more
eligible. For every thing is to be accounted of in it is own place and scene of
eminency: the eye loves one best, and the tongue and palate, the throat and
stomach love the other. But the understanding which considers both gives the
value according to the degree of usefulness, and to the end of it is ministry.
Now though our understanding can consider things in their own perfections, and
proportion honor and value to them; yet that which is better then honor, love
and desire, union and fruition are due to those things most, which it may be we
honor least. And therefore there are some parts of the service of God which
are like meat and cloths, and some which are like gold and Jewels; we value and
admire these, but we are to choose the other: that is, we prefer one in
discourse, and the other in use; we give better words to one, and better usages
to the other. And therefore those parts of the Divine service which are most
necessary, and do most good to mankind, are to be chosen before those that
look more splendidly, and in themselves import more perfection. The foundation
of a house is better then the roof, though the roof be gilded; and that part of
the service of God which serves the needs of mankind most, is to be chosen
before those which adorn him better: so that actions of high and precise
religion may be the excellencies and perfections of a humane soul; but the
offices of civil governors, their keeping men in peace and justice, their
affrighting them from vile impieties, may do much more good to mankind, and
more glory to God in the whole event of things.

4. But then if it be inquired whether is better, 9.
Prayers or Government, a Pulpit or a Court of Judicature; I am to answer that
they are both best in their time. The Pulpit rules on Sundays, the Court of
Judicature all the week after. The Pulpit guides the Court, and the Court gives
laws to the Pulpit. The Pulpit gives counsel to this, and this gives commands
to that. But there is this difference, if the Pulpit says amiss we are not
bound by it: but if the Court judges ill, we may complain, but we must submit.
But then to inquire which is better, when they are both the servants of God, is
to make a faction in the house of Unity; and as there can be no good end served
in it, so there can be no good ground of reason or revelation by which it can
be determined.

5. If the question at last be, 10.
whether is to be preferred, the service of God, that is, an act of religion,
or an act of civil life; I answer, that ordinarily religion is to be preferred,
when there can be a question reasonably asked which is to be chosen. That is,
if it be indifferent as to the person, there is no indifference in the thing:
for the religious act does more honor to God and more good to us. But it is
because that where our life and time is empty of other duties, then and there
is the time and proper season of religion. But if it be not indifferent to the
man, but an act of life or civil calling be in it is season and appointment,
then this is to be preferred before that.

6. Lastly, 11.
it is to be observed, that there are seasons ordinary and extraordinary in our
services of God. Every thing in it is season is to be preferred: and therefore
upon Festivals we are to go to Church and to public offices, upon other days
to follow the works of our calling: and so prefer both in their time. But
sometimes these ordinary seasons are invaded by extraordinary necessities, and
then that must prevail which is most necessary in it is season, and the other
must give place. Now because this happens often in the needs of our life, and
not very often in the needs of Religion, therefore in cases of Natural or
Political necessities, the things of the Commonwealth are to be preferred
before the things of the Church; that is, the service of God in charity before
the service of God in the virtue of external religion: and the reason is,
because this can stay, and the other cannot; and this can be supplied with the
internal, that is, the religion of the heart, but that cannot be supplied with
the charity of the heart.

Question II. Which are to be preferred, and which are better, things Spiritual
or things temporal?
To this the Patrons of Ecclesiastic Monarchy give a ready answer out of S.
Gregory Nazianzen, 12.
speaking to the Presidents. Orat. 15. ad subd. tim. percul.
Nam vos quoque potestati meae meisque subselliis lex Christi subjicit.
Imperium enim ipsi quoque gerimus, addo etiam praestantius ac perfectius; nisi
vero aequum est spiritum carni fasces submittere, and coelestia terrenis
cedere, The law of Christ has subjected you also that are civil Magistrates to
my chair. For we also have an Empire, yea a better and more perfect then
yours, unless it be reasonable that the Spirit should submit to the Flesh, and
heavenly things give place to earthly. For temporal things belong to the body,
and spiritual things to the soul: by how much therefore the soul is above the
body, by so much spiritual things are above the temporal. For a temporal end is
and ought to be subordinate to a spiritual; because temporal felicity is not
the last end of man, but spiritual and eternal: this therefore being the
greatest, ought to be ministered to by the cession of the temporal.

To this I answer, 13.
that temporal things ought to yield to spiritual, if by spiritual things be
meant the glory of God, and the good of souls, but not to every thing that is
spiritual. For though it be a spiritual employment to serve God in the
communion of Saints, and the life of a man be a temporal thing; yet a man is
not bound to lose his life to go to public churches, but for his own souls
salvation, for the promotion of religion and the honor of God he is. A man is
very much better then a beast; yet the life of a beast is better then the
superfluous hair of a man's beard. The honor and reverent usage of Churches is
a spiritual concern and a matter of religion; and yet when an army is hard put
to it, they may defend themselves by the walls and strength, and preserve their
lives with an usage of the Church, which was never intended by the patron that
built it, or the Bishop that consecrated it. When temporal life and eternal are
compared, when the honor of God or the advantage of a man are set in
opposition, when the salvation of a soul and the profit of trade are
confronted, there is no peradventure but the temporal must give way to the
spiritual. But when a temporal necessity and a spiritual advantage are
compared, the advantage in the nature of the thing is overballanc'd by the
degree of the necessity, and the greatness of the end: and it is better to
sell the chalices of the Church, and minister to religion in glass or wood,
then to suffer a man to starve at the foot of the Altar. The consequent of this
consideration is this, That although spiri^^al things are better then temporal,
yet not every thing of spiritual nature or relation is to be preferred before
all temporals.

2. Another consideration is this, 14.
that there is difference also in the degrees and measures of cession or
yielding. Temporal things must yield, that is, we must so order our affairs
that by them we serve God; our money must go forth in justice and charity, our
time must yield up portions to religion, our persons must decline no labor for
Gods service, and if ever there comes a contest between our duty and our
profit, or our ease, or our advantage, we must by the loss of these secure our
gains and our interest in that. But this preferment of one before another does
not consist in giving to one secular advantages before the other, temporal
honors, and precedences in processions, in escutcheons and achievements, but
in doing the duty of that which is incumbent, and making the other minister to
that which is more necessary. He that preferres religion before the world is
not tied to bestow more money upon his chapel then upon his house. If God had
chosen him one place of residence, and a Temple for his house and for the
religion of the Nation, as he did among the Jews, there had been a great
decency and duty of doing so upon many accounts; for then the question had been
between religion and irreligion, zeal and contempt, love of God and neglect;
and then the determination had been easy. But now since the whole end of
internal Religion can be served by giving to places of religion that adornment
which may make the ministeries decent and fitted, and of advantage; beyond
this, when we come to a dispute between that which is in order to a spiritual
end, and that which serves a temporal, more things are to come into
consideration besides the dignity of the relation.

3. For it is yet further to be observed, 15.
that when it is said that all temporal things are subordinate to our Spiritual
ends, the meaning is, that all the actions of our life, all that we are, and
all that we have, must be directed actually or habitually to the great end of
man, the glorification of God and the salvation of our souls; because God has
ordained this whole life in order to that; and therefore in the generality it
is true that all temporal things are to minister to spiritual. But then this is
to be added, that temporal things are not ordained to minister to spiritual
intermedial things, such, I mean, which are not directly and in circumstances
necessary. I must serve God with my substance; therefore I must by my substance
contribute to the just and appointed ministeries of religion: but it does not
follow, that if the Church multiply Priests unnecessarily, and God has
multiplied my children naturally, that therefore I must let my children want to
feed the numerous company of them that can minister spiritual things. The whole
is subordinate to the whole, that is all our temporalities are given us to
serve God with: but then they are given us also to serve our own needs that we
may serve God; but they are not any other ways subordinate, but to enable us to
serve him, not to serve the particular spiritual end, unless it be by
accident, that is, not unless we cannot serve God without it.

4. For temporal things and spiritual things have both the same supernatural
end, 16.
that is, Gods glory and eternal felicity. And sometimes they severally tend to
this end, and then they are to go their own ways, and not to minister and be
subordinate to each other. But sometimes they are to combine and to cooperate,
and then temporal things must serve spiritual, and spiritual must serve the
temporal. For example. The Temporal or Civil power has for it is end public
tranquillity, that men may serve God in all Godliness and honesty. The
Ecclesiastical power has the same end: (...), said Isidore Pelusiot. I shall
not now consider the whole effect of this truth, but in order to the present
say, that since both temporal and spiritual things minister to the same end,
that is, salvation of mankind, they are distinct methods or instruments to that
end, and of themselves are not in subordination to one another; but as temporal
things must serve spiritual when there is need, so must spiritual serve the
temporal when they require it: The temporal power must defend religion, and
religion must minister to the public peace. The Prince must give advantages to
the Ministers of religion; and the Ministers of religion must pray for the
Princes armies, his prosperity, his honor, and by preachings and holy arts
must give bridles to the subjects, keeping them in duty by the means of
Conscience. The Prince by laws and fear makes men just and temperate, chaste and
peaceable: The Priest does but the same thing by the word of his proper
ministry. He that does it most effectually is the most happy: but he that will
go about to compare which does it most, and therefore is to be preferred,
shall then hope to do it prosperously when he can tell which side of the
Aequinoctial has most stars, or whether have most drops of water, the
Northern or the Southern seas. The sum of this consideration is this, that
although temporal things in their latitude are to serve spiritual ends, meaning
the great end of the perfection of our Spirits: yet so must the intermedial
spiritual things serve the same great end; but the intermedial temporal and the
intermedial spiritual are not subordinate to one another, unless it be by
accident, and that may and often does happen on either side.

But I must add one thing more for explication; 17.
and that is, that though all things of the world are to minister to the great
end of souls, and consequently are subordinate to that great end; yet it is
(that I may use S. Paul's expression in another case) by reason of him that has
put all things under it: for this subordination is not natural, or by the
nature of the thing, but by the wise Economy and disposition of God; who
having appointed that all things shall be sanctified by the word of God and
prayer, that Natural powers shall be heightened by grace, and shall pass into
supernatural, and this world into another, has by his own positive order
disposed of temporal things and powers beyond their own intention. But
otherwise, temporal things have an ultimate end of their own, terminating all
their natural intention and design. Thus the end of the Mariners art is not the
salvation of the souls of them that sail with him, but the safe landing of
their persons and goods at the port: and he that makes statues has for his end
a perfect image. Indeed the man may have another end, to get reputation, to
maintain his family, to breed up his children in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord, and at last the salvation of his own soul, by doing things honest and
profitable: but though these may be the ends of the man, yet they are not the
ends of his Art; and therefore his Art has no natural subordination, because
it has no natural order to Eternal salvation. And this is the case of many
Temporal things, especially Arts, offices, entercourses and Governments.
Therefore supposing all that is said in the objection, that temporal felicity
is not the last end of man, but spiritual and eternal, yet though it be not the
end of a man, it may be the end of humane Government; and by not being in a
natural order to spiritual ends, though spiritual be a better thing, yet it
follows not that it ought to take place of that, upon the account of its being
better in another kind. The body indeed is subordinate to the soul, because it
has all its motion and operation and life from the soul, and in a natural
conjunction and essential Union is it is appointed instrument: but Temporal
things and Spiritual are not so conjoined, and do not naturally, but by
accident minister to each other; and therefore are made subject to each other
alternately, when they are called to such accidental or supernatural
Ministrations.

Question III. Whether are to be preferred, Spiritual or Temporal persons?
How Spiritual things are to be preferred before Temporal I have already
accounted; 18.
but it is a consideration distinct from that, whether Spiritual persons be to
be preferred before Temporal. For from things to persons it will not follow:
and he that has a better art is not always the better man; and he that is
employed in the best concernments, has not always the advantage of profession.
There was a time in Rome when the Physicians were but servants, and had not the
liberty of Romans; but certainly it is a better trade then fighting: and yet
then the soldiers were accounted the greater men. Herod the Sophister had a
son that was a fool and could never learn the Alphabet, but he had two and
twenty slaves that were wise fellows; but the Master was the better man. But
when the question is concerning the honor and dignity of persons, we are to
remember that honor est in honorante: many men deserve honor that have the
least of it, and it is as it is put upon us by others. To be honored is to
have something put to them, it is nothing of their own. Therefore in this
question there are two things to be asked: the one is, what Spiritual persons
deserve; the other is, what is given them. They may deserve more then they
have, or they may have more then they deserve; but whether either or neither
happens, He that honors himself, his honor is nothing; but he is honorable
whom God or the King honors: and therefore spiritual persons ought to receive
much, but to challenge none; and above all things ought not to enter into
comparison with them from whom all temporal honor is derived. But when the
question is concerning the prelation of Secular or Ecclesiastic persons, the
best answer is given to it, When they strive to prefer one another in giving
honor to each other. But I remember that the legates at Trent were horribly
put to it to place the Orators of the Kings of France and Spain, who would both
go first: they at last found an expedient, and they did both go first, and
both were preferred in several positions. So is the spiritual person and the
civil, they are both best, but the honor of one is temporal, and the honor of
the other is spiritual; or rather, one is properly called Honor, and the
other, Reverence. Honor the King, Reverence his Priests. But this Question is
not properly a question of right, but of duty: and the spiritual man must not
call for it, but the other must pay it. And it is something a sad consideration
to think that all the Questions of the preference and comparison of spiritual
and temporal persons do end in covetousness and ambition, to which spiritual
eminency, let it be never so great, was never intended to minister. For the
honor due to spiritual persons for their spiritual relation is a spiritual
honor, and that though it be never so great cannot well be compared with
temporal; for it is a great honor in another kind: but whatsoever temporal
honors are given to them, are then well given when they are done in love to
religion; and are then well taken when the advantage passes on to the good of
souls, and does not sully the Spiritual man with spiritual pride, or temporal
vanity. Socrates complains that the Bishops of Alexandria and of Rome were
fallen into Empire, or Dominion. That Is none of the preference proper to a
spiritual man. He is then honored, when his person is had in reverend and
venerable esteem, when his counsel is asked, when his example is observed and
followed, when he is defended by laws and Princes, when he is rescued from
beggary and contempt, when he is enabled to do his duty with advantages, when
he can verify his Ecclesiastical power, when he can vindicate religion from
oppression, and lastly, when his person which is the relative of religion
receives those advantages which as a man he needs, and which can adorn him as
such a man. But if he disputes for any other honor, so much is his due as is
given him by Christian Princes or Commonwealths, and no more; and he will gain
the more by making no further question. Christ gave his Apostles power
abundantly, but the greatest honor he gave them was to suffer for his Name;
and of this he promised they should want nothing: but when Kings became nursing
Fathers of the Church, and she sucked the breasts of Queens and princely women,
then the Spiritual person and guides of souls had temporal honors heaped on
them, as the offerings were made for the Tabernacle, more then was sufficient.
For it quickly rose into excess, and then the persons of the Prelates fell
into secular affections, and grew hated and envied and opposed. Ammianus
Marcellinus giving an account of that horrible sedition raised in Rome in the
contest between Damasus and Ursicinus about the Papacy, says he wonders not
that the Prelates did so earnestly contend for the Bishopric of Rome, cum id
adepti, futuri sint ita securi, ut ditentur oblationibus Matronarum,
procedantque vehiculis insidentes, circumspecte vestiti, epulas curantes
profusas, adeo ut eorum convivia Regales superent mensas, Because when they
have obtained it, they are safe and warm, full with the oblations of the good
women, and are carried in their caroches, and are neatly habited, and
splendidly feasted, and themselves keep Tables beyond the profuseness of
Kings. Now although Bishops are Men, and Religion it self is served by men who
have bodies and secular apprehensions, and therefore does need secular
advantages; yet this belongs to them as Men, not as Spiritual. It is just as if
you should call the General of an Army Holy Father, and beg his blessing, and
set him in the chiefest place of the Quire, and pray him to preach upon the
greatest Festivals of the year, and run in multitudes to hear him speak. These
are the proper honors of spiritual persons; and the splendour of the world is
the appendage of secular achievements: whatsoever is necessary for their
persons in order to the advantages of religion is very fit to be given by
Princes to the Bishops, who will certainly modestly entertain it, and by pious
conduct transfer it to the glory of Christ and the good of souls. But this is
none of the Honor that Christ invested their Holy order with: They have an
honor and a blessedness which none but themselves can take from them. The
Rosary of Christian graces is the tiar of their head, and their office is their
dignity, and humility is their splendor, and zeal is their Conquest, and
patience is their Eminence, and they are made illustrious by bringing peace,
and promoting holiness, and comforting the afflicted, and relieving the poor,
and making men and women useful to the public, and charitable in their
ministeries, and wise unto salvation. This is that which was spoken by God in
the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 43. 4.
Since thou wast precious in my sight thou have been honorable. And this was
observed by the Pagan, who being surprised with the secular splendour of the
Roman Bishops liked it not, but said that there was another way for them to be
truly happy: Esse poterant beati revera, si magnitudine urbis despecta quam
vitiis opponunt, ad imitationem Antistitum quorundam provincialium viverent,
quos tenuitas edendi potandique parcissime, vilitas etiam indumentorum, and
supercilia humum spectantia, perpetuo Numini verisque ejus cultoribus ut puros
commendant and verecundos. They are the words of Ammianus Marcellinus whom I
lately mentioned. The Roman Bishops might indeed be truly happy, if they
despising the splendors of the city would live as some Bishops in the
Provinces, whom their temperate and spare diet, their plain habit and their
humble carriage represent to God and all God's servants as persons pure and
modest. But then if this discourse have any thing of reason, piety or truth in
it, it must needs be infinitely certain that spiritual persons are to be
preferred before the temporal in spiritual honors, but not in temporal
regards; they have nothing to do with them by virtue of their order or their
office: what they have to their Persons by the favor of Princes and Nobles is
of another consideration, and so this question is changed into an advice, and
best ends in a Sermon or Declamation.

Question IV. Whether the Eminency of the spiritual calling, and the consequent
prelation of spiritual persons, can exempt them from secular coercion, and make
them superior to Princes.
In what senses Bishops have any superiority over Princes I shall afterward
explain: 19.
Now the question is concerning secular superiority, and immunity from the
temporal sword of Princes. Now to this, I suppose, what I have already said may
be able to give an answer. For the spiritual order gives no temporal power at
all; and therefore if all temporal power be in the supreme Civil Magistrate,
all men that can deserve to feel the edge of the sword are subject to it. For
what? Had Archimedes reason to take it ill of the Romans for not sending for
him and making him General in the Syracusan war, because he was a better
Geometrician then any of all their Senate? Lewis the eleventh of France had a
servant who was an excellent surgeon, and an excellent barber, and dressed his
gout tenderly, and had the ordering of his feet and his face, and did him many
good offices. But the wise Prince was too fond when for these qualities he made
him governor of his Counsels. Every good quality, and every eminence of Art,
and every worthy employment has an end and design of it is own, and that end
and the proportions to it are to be the measure of the usage of those persons
which are appointed to minister to it. Now it is certain that spiritual persons
are appointed Ministers of the best and most perfective end of mankind, but to
say that this gives them a title to other Ministeries which are appointed to
other ends, has as little in it of reason as it has of revelation. But I
shall not dispute this over again, but shall suppose it sufficient to add
those authorities which must needs be competent in this affair, as being of
Ecclesiastic persons, who had no reason, nor were they willing, to despise
their own just advantages, any more then to usurp what was unjust.

When Origin complained of the fastuousnesse and vanity of some Ecclesiastics
in his time, 20.
they were bad enough, but had not come to a pretense of ruling over Kings upon
the stock of Spiritual prelation: but he was troubled that some had quit their
proper excellency, consisting in the multitude of spiritual gifts, their
unwearied diligence in the care of souls, their dangers, their patience, their
humility, and their dyings for Christ. Et haec nos docet sermo Divinus (says
he) The word of God teaches us these things. But we either not understanding
the Divine will set down in Scriptures, or despising what Christ to such
purposes recommended to us, are such that we seem to exceed the pride even of
the evil Princes of the world: and we do not only seek for guards to go
before us like Kings, but are terrible to the poor, and of difficult access,
and behave our selves toward those who address themselves to intercede for
some thing or some person, that we are more cruel then Tyrants, and the secular
Lords of their subjects. And in some Churches you may see (especially in the
Churches of the greatest cities) the chief of the Christian people neither
affable to others, nor suffering others to be free in their entercourses with
them. These things are out of the way of the Ecclesiastics, for these things
cannot consist with piety and humility, and the proper employments of such
persons who gained the world by cession, and got victory over whole Kingdoms
by trampling upon Devils, and being trampled upon by men. Bishops should be
like the Symbols of the Blessed Sacrament, which although for the ornament of
religion and for our sakes and because we would fain have opportunity to
signify our love to Christ, we minister in silver and gold, yet the symbols
themselves remain the same plain and pure bread and wine, and altered only by
prayers, and by spiritual consecration, and a relative holiness. But he were a
strange superstitious fool who, because the Sacramental bread and wine are much
better then all the Tables and viands of Princes and all the spoils of Nature,
will think it fit to mingle sugar and the choicest spices of Arabia with the
bread, and amber-griece and powder of pearl and the spirit of gold with the
chalice. These are no fit honors to the H. Sacrament: the symbols of which are
spoiled when they are forced off from the simplicity and purity of their
institution and design. So it is with spiritual persons: their office is
spiritual, and their relation is holy, and their honors are symbolical. For
their own sakes, Princes and good people must cause decent and honorable
ministeries and accommodations to be provided for them; but still they must
remain in their own humility and meekness and piety, and not pretend to
dignities heterogeneal, and Eminences secular, because their spiritual
employment is very excellent. It was S. Gregory Nazianzen's wish, Ora. post
reditum.
that there were in the Church (...), Neither precedence of Episcopal Sees, nor
any Eminency of one place above another, nor any Tyrannical or pompous
provisions and solennities, that we might be distinguished only by our virtue.
Now if prelation by order and Ecclesiastical Economy amongst the Bishops was
of so ill effect, so little necessary, and so greatly inconvenient that the
good Bishop wished there we^e no such thing; there is little reason to doubt,
but he would have infinitely condemned all pretensions of a power over civil
governments. But the Bishops of Rome were not at that time gone so far. The
Archimandrites of Constantinople, in 5ta Synod. Act. 1. Tom. 2. Council.
complaining against the Eutychians, write to Pope Agapetus, that if they be
still permitted [ licenter omnia accedent, non contra Ecclesiasticos solos, sed
etiam contra ipsum piissimum Imperatorem, nostrum and vestrum honorabile caput]
They will do insolences not only to the Ecclesiastics, but also to our most
pious Emperor, who is the honorable head both of you and us. * This power of
headship or supremacy over the whole order Ecclesiastical was acknowledged in
the Church for about a thousand years: for besides the apparent practice and
approbation of it, which I brought in the former pages, Herman. in Chron.
we find that the Emperor Henry the second did deprive Widgerus of the
Archbishopric of Ravenna, and deposed Gregory the sixth from the Papacy.

And therefore we find that those ancient Prelates that called upon Princes to
pay reverence to them, 21.
and an acknowledgment of that Authority which Christ entrusted in their hands,
accounted them wholly to be distinct things, and not at all invading each
others limits. For Christ by making them Christians did not make them less to
be Princes: and Christian Emperors could not go less then the heathens; they
were certainly no loosers by their baptism. For it had been a strange argument
for Sylvester to have used to Constantine, Sr, give up your self a Disciple to
the most Holy Jesus, and you shall have a crown hereafter, and here also you
shall still reign over all but me and my Clergy; to us indeed you must be
subject, and by us you must be governed, but the Crown Imperial shall be
greater then every thing, our Mitres only excepted. If this had been the state
of the question, I wonder by what argument could the Prince have been persuaded
to become Christian: when it was so obvious for him to say, that Sylvester had
reason to move him to preach Christ, since he got so much temporal advantage by
it, but that he could see little reason why himself should loose and Sylvester
get, and become a Disciple of Christ to be made a Minor and a Pupil to the
Bishop. And indeed it would have been a strange Sermon that preaches humility
to Emperors and dominion to Bishops. But their sermons when they were at the
highest were of another nature. De humanis rebus judicare permissum, est, non
praeesse Divinis. So P. tom. de Vinc. an^them.
Gelasius declares the limit of the Imperial and priestly power: Of all things
belonging to this world the Emperor is to judge; but not to be the president or
chief Minister of holy rites. Gelasius spoke it upon occasion, because
Anastasius the Emperor did unnecessarily interpose in the absolution of Peter
Bishops of Alexandria. This Pope Gelasius supposed was of another nature, and
not relative to the things of this world, and therefore not of Imperial
cognizance. But all the things of this world belong to him. And if all things
of this world, then all persons of this world. For circa actiones proprie
versatur Imperium, say the Lawyers, Rule and Empire and all power of judicature
is principally concerning actions; but actions are done by persons, who
therefore are subject to government. And upon this (...) vile thing, Regis haec
auribus intimare non differant, Let him without delay be accused unto the King.
apud Baron. tom. 10. A. D. 904. ^. 17.
And Lambert the Emperor about the year of our Lord 900 having some contest
with the Pope, propounded this first article in a Synod at Ravenna, If any
Roman of the Clergy or the Senate, of what order soever, shall either
voluntarily or by compulsion appeal to the Imperial Majesty, let no man presume
to contradict him: -- until the Emperor by himself or his Missives shall
deliberate concerning their persons and their causes. Did. 10. c. de
capitulis. 2. q. 7. c. Nos si.
Thus we find Pope Leo the 4th submitting himself to Lotharius the Emperor,
and promising obedience: and to Ludovicus he professes that if he have done
amiss he will amend it according to his sentence, or the judgment of his
Deputies. Upon the consideration of these and many other particulars Gratian,
11. 9. 1. c. sicut enim.. ex his. 2. q. 2.. item.
though unwillingly, confesses that in civil causes a Clergyman is to be
convened before the civil Judge: and although a little after he does a little
praevaricate in the matter of criminal causes, yet it was too late; for he had
said it before, Regum est corporalem irrogare poenam, Kings have the power of
inflicting corporal punishments: and therefore if a Clerk were guilty in a
criminal cause, the secular Judge had power over him, said the Fathers of the
first Council of Matiscon, cap. 7. But it matters not much, for a greater then
Gratian said it in his own case before the civil power, If I have done any
thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die: they are the words of S. Paul.

Question V. Whether is to be obeyed, the Prince or the Bishop, if they happen
to command contrary things?
To this I answer, 22.
that it is already determined that the Emperor is to be obeyed against the
will of the Bishop. For so it was in the case of Mauritius and S. Gregory; for
the Bishop was fain to publish the Princes Edict which yet he believed to be
impious. It was also most evident in S. Athanasius of Alexandria, S. Gregory of
Nazianzum, S. Chrysostom of Constantinople, Eusebius of Samosata, who by
injustice were commanded to leave their Dioceses.

But this is to be understood in actions which can by Empire and command be
changed into good or bad respectively: 23.
because such actions are most properly the subject of humane laws. For in what
God has expressly commanded or forbidden, the Civil or Ecclesiastical power
is only concerned to serve the interest of the Divine Commandment, to promote
or to hinder good and evil respectively. But whatsoever is left undetermined by
God, that the supreme power can determine: and in such things if there could be
too supreme powers, the government were Monstrous, and there could be no
obedience; for no man can serve two Masters. Now the (...) against the Canons
of the Church; but then we are to follow the civil law, because the power is by
the law of Nature supreme and Imperial. The matter of the Civil power and
Ecclesiastical is so wholly differing, that there where either has to do it
cannot contradict the other; but if they invade the rights of one another, then
the question grows hard. But the solution is this;

If the Bishop invades the rights of the Civil power he is not at all to be
obeyed, 24.
for he has nothing to do there. But if the Civil power invades the rights of
the Bishop, then they are either such rights which are his by positive laws and
humane concession, or such which by Divine appointment are his due.

All those which are the Bishops right by positive laws may by the same power
be rescinded by which they were granted; 25.
and therefore if a King makes a law against the rights of the Church, and the
Bishop protests against that law, the King and not the Bishop must prevail. For
Neminem sibi imperare posse, and neminem sibi legem dicere, a qua mutata
voluntate nequeat recedere, say the Lawyers. A man may change his will as long
as he lives; and the supreme will can never be hindered: for summum ejus esse
Imperium qui ordinario juri derogare valeat is a rule in law, He that is the
supreme can derogate by his power from an ordinary right, viz. by making a
contrary law.

But if they be the rights of Bishops and the Ministers of Religion by Divine
appointment, 26.
then the Bishops command is to prevail, cum condition crucis; that is, so as
the subject must submit to the Princes anger, and suffer for what he cannot
do, according to that of S. Austin, Imperatores cum in errore sunt, pro errore
contra veritatem leges dant, per quas justi and probantur and coronantur, non
faciendo quod illi jubent, quia Deus prohibet, Mistaken Princes make ill laws;
but by them good men are tried and crowned, by not doing what God has
forbidden them. This is much more modestly expressed then that responsory in
the Roman Breviary, speaking of the Apostles, Isti sunt triumphatores and amici
Dei, qui contemnentes jussae Principum meruerunt praemia aeterna, De communi
Apost. R. 6.
They have deserved eternal rewards by despising the commands of Princes. The
expression is hard; for though their impious laws are not to be obeyed, yet
indefinitely it is not safe to say, their commands are to be despised. And none
ever less despised the laws then they who, because they could not obey them
against God, yet obeyed them against themselves; by suffering death at their
command, when they might not suffer a sin.

But then this also suffers diminution. 27.
For if the Ecclesiastical power in such things where their authority is proper
and competent and Divine, give any negative or prohibitive precepts, they may
and they must be obeyed entirely; because every negative is indivisible, and
has neither parts nor time: and in this they are but proclaimers of the Divine
Commandment, which if it be negative it can never be lawful to do against it.
But in positive instances of commandment, though from Divine Authority, (for
that is the limit of the Ecclesiastical power and authority) if the King
commands one thing and the Bishop another, they are severally to be regarded
according to the several cases. For the rule is this, That all external actions
are under the command of the Civil power in order to the public government:
and if they were not, the Civil power were not sufficiently provided for the
acquiring the end of it is institution: and then it would follow that either the
civil authority were not from God (expressly against S. Paul) or else all that
God made were not good, as being defective from the end of it is creation
(expressly against Moses, and indeed against the honor of God.) Now because
external actions are also in order to religion internal, it happens that the
Spiritual power has accidentally power over them. Here then is the issue of
this inquiry: when an external action is necessary to the public service, and
yet in order to religion at the same time, the positive commands of the
Spiritual superior must yield to the positive commands of the supreme Civil
power. For that which has a direct power is to bepreferr'd before that which
has but an indirect power. Thus it is a divine precept that we should not
neglect the assembling of our selves together. Upon the warranty of this, the
Guides of souls have power to command their flocks to meet at the Divine
service; and they are tied to obey. But if at the same time the Prince has
given command that those persons or some of those who are commanded to be at
the Divine Offices, be present on the guards, or the defense of the city walls,
they are bound to obey the Prince, and not the Priest at that time. * For
besides the former reason, when external actions are appointed by competent
Authority, they are clothed with circumstances with which actions commanded by
God, and in which Ecclesiastics have competent Authority, are not invested: and
amongst these circumstances, time and place are the principal. And therefore it
follows that in external actions the command of the Prince is always to be
preferred before the command of the Church; because this may stay, and that
cannot: This is not by God determined to time and place, but that is by the
Prince; and therefore by doing that now, and letting this alone till another
time, both ends can be served: and it were a strange peevishness of Government
(besides the unreasonablenesse of it) to cross the Prince to show our power,
when both may stand, and both may be obeyed; if they did not crowd at the same
narrow door together, there is time enough for them to go out one after
another; and by a little more time, there will be a great deal of more room. I
have heard that when King James the 6th of Scotland was wooing the Danish Lady,
he commanded the Provost of Edinburgh and the Townsmen upon a certain day to
feast the Denmark Ambassadors, and to show all the bravery of their Town and
all the splendour they could: of which when the Presbytery had notice, they to
cross the King proclaimed a fast to be kept in the Town upon that very day.
But the Townsmen according to their duty obeyed the King: and the Presbytery
might have considered that it was no zeal for God that the Fast was indicted
upon that day; but God might have been as well served by the Tuesday fast as by
the Monday. Thus if the Ecclesiastic power has admitted a person to
Ecclesiastical Ministeries or Religions, if the supreme Civil power requires
his service, or if he be needed for the public good, he may command him from
thence, unless there be something collaterally to hinder; as if the Prince
have sworn the contrary, or that the person required have abjured it by the
Princes leave: but supposing him only bound by the Ecclesiastical power, the
supreme Civil power is to prevail over it, as being the lord of persons and
actions external. An instance of this was given by Mauritius the Emperor
forbidding his soldiers to turn Monks without his leave, though the law was
made sore against the mind of S. Gregory who was the Bishop of Rome. And thus
A. D. 1040.
Casimire King of Poland was taken from his gown, and invested with a Royal
Mantle; and diverse Monks have been recalled into the employments of armies, or
public Counsels, or public Governments.

But this also is to be understood with this provision. 28.
The supreme Civil power has dominion over external actions, so as to govern
them for time and place and other circumstances. He can forbid sermons at such
a time; he can forbid fasts or public solennities and meetings when he please,
and when it is for the interests of government: and concerning any accident or
circumstance and manner he can give laws, and he must be obeyed. But he cannot
give laws prohibiting the thing it self, out of hatred or in persecution of the
religion: for then the Ecclesiastic power is to command not only the thing,
but the circumstances too. For the thing it self, it is plain; because it is a
Divine Commandment, and to this the Spiritual power must minister, and no
Civil power can hinder us from obeying God: and therefore the Apostles made no
scruple of preaching Christ publicly, though they were forbidden it under
great penalties. But then for the circumstances, they also in this case fall
under the Ecclesiastical power. If the Prince would permit the thing, he might
dispose of the accidents; for then he is not against God, and uses his right
about external actions. But if he forbids the thing, they that are to take care
that God be obeyed must then invest the actions with circumstances; for they
cannot be at all, unless they be in time and place; and therefore by a
consequent of their power over the thing they can dispose the other, because
the circumstances are not forbidden by the Prince, but the thing, which being
commanded by God and not being to be done at all but in circumstances, they
that must take care of the Principal must, in that case, take care also of the
accessory. Thus we find the Bishops in the Primitive Church indicting of Fasts,
proclaiming assemblies, calling Synods, gathering Synaxes: for they knew they
were obliged to see that all that should be done which was necessary for the
salvation of souls and instruction of lives by preaching, and for the
stabiliment of the Church by assemblies and communions. Now the doing of these
things was necessary, and for the doing of these they were ready to die; for
that passive obedience was all which they did owe to those laws which forbad
them under pain of death: for it was necessary those things should be done, it
was not necessary they should live. But when the supreme Civil power is
Christian and does not forbid the thing, there is no danger that God shall not
be obeyed by the Prince his changing and disposing the circumstances of the
thing; and therefore there can be no reason why the Prince should be disobeyed,
commanding nothing against God, and governing in that where his authority is
competent. Thus if the supreme Civil power should command that the Bishops of
his Kingdom should not ordain any persons that had been soldiers or of mean
trades to be Priests, nor consecrate any Knight to be a Bishop; though the
Bishops should desire it very passionately, they have no power to command or
do what the Civil power has forbidden. But if the supreme should say there
should be no Bishops at all, and no ordination of Ministers of Religion
according to the laws of Jesus Christ, then the question is not whether the
supreme Civil power or the Ecclesiastical is to be obeyed, but whether Man or
God: and in that case if the Bishops do not ordain, if they do not take care
to continue a succession in the Church of God, they are to answer for one of
the greatest neglects of duty of which mankind is capable; always supposed
that the order of Bishops is necessary to the Church, and that ordination of
Priests by Bishops is of Apostolical institution, and that there is no Univocal
generation of Church-Ministers but by the same hands which began the (...)
succession, and has continued it for almost seventeen ages in the Church. Of
which I am not now to interpose my sentence, but to answer the case of
Conscience relying upon the supposition. This only I am to add, that
supposing this to be necessary, yet it is to be done cum condition crucis,
with submission to the anger of the laws if they have put on unjust armor; and
to be done with peaceablenesse, and all the arts of humility and gentleness,
petition and wise remonstrances.

* But there is yet one reserve of caution to be used in this case. If the
Civil power and the Spiritual differ in this particular, the spiritual must
yield so long, and forbear to do what is forbidden by their lawful supreme,
until it be certain that to forbear longer is to neglect their duty, and to
displease God. If the duty or if the succession can be any way supplied, so
that the interest of religion be not destroyed, then cession or forbearance is
their duty. And therefore if the King of Portugal should forbid consecrations
of Bishops in his Kingdom not for a time, but for ever, the Bishops were bound
to obey, if they could be supplied from other Churches, or if it were not
necessary that God should have a Church in Portugal, or if without Bishops
there could be a Church. But if they be sure that the Bishops are the head of
Ecclesiastical Union, and therefore the conservators of Being; and if the
remaining Prelates are convinced that God has required it of them to continue
a Church in Portugal (as it is certain that by many regards they are determined
there to serve Gods Church, and to provide for souls and for the religion of
their charges) and if they could be no otherwise supplied with Ecclesiastical
persons of the order and ordination Apostolical, as if other Churches would not
ordain Bishops or Priests for them but upon sinful conditions, and violation of
their Consciences: then the Spiritual power is to do their duty, and the
supreme Civil power is to do their pleasure; and the worst that can come is
the crown of Martyrdom, which whosoever gets will be no looser. And therefore
I cannot without indignation consider it, that the Pope of Rome, who pretends
to be a great Father of Christians, should not only neglect but refuse to make
ordinations and consecrations in that Church: which if their Prince should do,
the Bishops ought to supply it by their care; and therefore when the Prince
desires it, as it is infinite dishonor to the Bishop of Rome to neglect or
refuse, in compliance with the temporal interest of the King of Spain, so it is
the duty of the Bishops of Portugal to obey their Prince. But I have nothing to
do to meddle with any man's interest, much less that of Princes: only the
scene of this case of Conscience happens now to lie in Portugal, and the
consideration of it was useful in the determination of this present question.

But this Question has an appendent branch which is also fit to be considered.
29.
What if the Civil laws and the Ecclesiastical be contrary? as it happens in
diverse particulars; as if the Prince be a heretic, an Arrian or Macedonian,
and happens to forbid the invocation of the Holy Ghost, or giving Divine
honors to the Son of God, and the Church has always done it, and always
commanded it. What is to be done in this case? This instance makes the answer
easy: for in matters of Faith it is certain the Authority and laws of God have
made the determination; and therefore in these and the like the Church is bound
to do and to believe and to profess according to the commandment of God. But
how if the Prince does not forbid the internal duty (for in that his authority
is incompetent) but commands only that there should be no prayers to the Holy
Ghost put into the public Liturgies of the Church; to this the answer is
certain, That though in all externals the supreme Civil power is to be obeyed,
yet the spiritual power in such cases is tied to confess the faith which the
Prince would discountenance, and to take care that their charges should
plentifully supply in all their private devotions what is not permitted to them
in public. And the reason of this is not that they are tied to do any thing
in opposition or scandal to the Prince; but that they are in duty and charity
to provide lest the public discouragement and alteration of the circumstance
of the duty, do not lessen the duty internal and essential: and therefore they
are to put so much more to the private, that they may prevent the diminution
which is likely to come upon the private duty from the public prohibition.

But there are some Civil laws which are opposed to Ecclesiastical, 30.
not by contrariety of sanction and command hinc inde, but by contrariety of
declaration or permission respectively. Thus if the Ecclesiastical laws have
forbidden marriage in a certain Degree, and the Civil power has permitted it,
then the subject may more safely obey the power Ecclesiastical; because by so
doing he avoids the offending of religious persons, and yet disobeys no command
of the Prince; for no Civil power usually commands a man to marry in a certain
Degree: and therefore when he is at liberty from the Civil law, which in this
case gives him no command, and he is not at liberty from the Ecclesiastical
law, which has made a prohibition, he must obey the Church; which if it had no
power over him, could have made no law, and if it have a power, it must be
obeyed; for in the present case there is nothing to hinder it. So it is in such
things which are permitted for the hardness of men's hearts or the public
necessity. The permission of the Prince is no absolution from the authority of
the Church. Supposing Usury to be unlawful, as it is certain many kinds and
instances of it are highly criminal, yet the Civil laws permit it, and the
Church forbids it. In this case the Canons are to be preferred. For though it
be permitted, yet by the laws no man is compelled to be an Usurer; and
therefore he must pay that reverence and obedience which is otherwise due to
them that have the rule over them in the conduct of their souls.

* The case is alike in those laws where the Civil power only gives impunity,
31.
but no warranty. As in such cases when laws indulge to a man's weakness and
grief; as when it permits him to kill any man that creeps in at his windows, or
demands his purse of him on the high way, or to kill his adulterous wife if he
surprises her in the sin: If the Civil power promises impunity, and does not
intend to change the action from unlawful to lawful, as in some cases it
does, in some it cannot; then if there be any laws of the Church to the
contrary, they pass an obligation upon the conscience, notwithstanding the
Civil impunity. And there is great reason for this. For since the affairs of
the world have in them varieties and perplexities besides, it happens that in
some cases men know not how to govern by the strictest measures of religion,
because all men will not do their duty upon that account; and therefore laws
are not made [ ut in Platonis republica, but as in faece Romuli] with exact and
purest measures, but in compliance and by necessity, not always as well as they
should, but as well as they may: and therefore the Civil power is forced
sometimes to connive at what it does not approve. But yet these persons are to
be governed by conscience; and therefore it is necessary that that part of the
public Government which is to conduct our consciences more immediately should
give a bridle to that liberty which, by being in some regards necessary, would
if totally permitted become intolerable. And therefore the spiritual power puts
a little myrrh into their wine, and supplies that defect which in the
intrigues of humane affairs we bring upon our selves by making unnatural
necessities.

But then if it be inquired, 32.
whether it be lawful for the spiritual power by spiritual Censures to punish
those actions which the Civil power permits; I answer, that the Church makes
laws either by her declarative and direct power, or by a reductive and indirect
power: that is, she makes laws in matters expressly commanded by God or
forbidden, or else in such things which have proportion, similitudes and
analogies to the Divine laws. In the first she is the declarer of Gods will,
and has a direct power. In the second she has a judgment of discretion, and
is the best Judge of Fit and Decent. If the Church declares an act to be
against Gods commandment, or bound upon us by essential duty, in that case,
unless there be error evident and notorious, she is entirely to be obeyed: and
therefore the refractary and the disobedient she may easily coerce and punish
by her censures, according as she sees it agreeable and conducing to Gods glory
and the good of souls, although the Civil power permits the fact for necessity
or great advantages. And the reason is, because as the Civil power serves the
ends of the republic by impunity and permission, so there is another end to be
served which is more considerable, that is, the service of God and the interest
of souls, to which she is to minister by laws and punishments, by exhortations
and the argument of rewards: and as every power of Gods appointment is
sufficient for it is own end, so it must do it is own portion of duty for which
so competent provisions are made. And therefore the Spiritual power may in this
case punish what the Civil power punishes not. * With this only Caution, if
the Civil power does not forbid the Church to use her Censures in such a
particular case: for if it does, it is to be presumed that such Ecclesiastical
coercion would hinder the Civil power from acquiring the end of it is laws,
which the Ecclesiastical never ought to do; because although her censures are
very useful to the ends of the spiritual power, yet they are not absolutely
necessary, God having by so many other ways provided for souls, that the Church
is sufficiently instructed with means of saving souls though she never draw her
sword. But the Civil power has not so many advantages.

But if the laws of Church are made only by her Reductive and indirect power,
33.
that is, if they be such that her authority is not founded upon the express
law of God, but upon the judgment of discretion, and therefore her laws are
concerning decencies and usefulnesses and pious advantages, in this case the
Church is not easily to proceed to Censures, unless it be certain that there
is no disservice nor displeasure done to the Civil power. For it will look too
like peevishness to cross the Civil laws, where it is apparent there is no
necessity, and no warranty from a Divine commandment. The Church would not
have her laws opposed or discountenanced upon little regards; and therefore
neither must she without great necessity do that which will cause some
diminution to the Civil laws, at least by interpretation.

And after all this, 34.
if it happens that the Civil power and the Ecclesiastical command things
contrary, there is a fault somewhere, and there is nothing to be done but to
inquire on which side God is; for if he be not on the Churches side by a direct
law in the matter, he is not on the Churches side for her relation, but on the
Kings side for his authority.

From the matter of the former Question arises another like it.

Question VI. Whether in the Civil affairs and causes of the Ecclesiastical
power and persons the presumption ought to lie for the King, or for the Church.
This Question must suppose the case to be dibious, 35.
and the matter equal on both sides as to the subject matter; for else there
needs to be no question, but judgment must be according to the merit of the
cause: and it must suppose also that neither of them will yield, but use their
own right; for if either did, themselves would make an end of the question: but
when both are in pretense, and the pretense is equal in the matter and the
argument, and that the cause is to be determined by favor and privilege,
whether is to be preferred? I do not ask which is to be preferred in law; for
in that question, the laws and customs of a people are the rule of
determination: but whether there be in conscience any advantage of presumption
due to either.

To this I answer, 36.
that in the most pious ages of the Church the presumption was ever esteemed to
lie for the Church when the Princes were Christians: and when the question is
of piety not of authority, of charity not of Empire, it is therefore fit to be
given to the Church, 1. Because if the Civil power takes it to it self, it is a
Judge and a party too. 2. Because whatever external rights the Church has, she
has them by the donation, or at least enjoyes them by the concession of the
supreme Civil power, who in this case by cession do confirm at least, and at
most but enlarge their donative. 3. Because the spiritual power is under the
Kings protection, and has an equal case with that of widows and orphans. It is
a pious cause, it is the cause of the poor and the unarmed. 4. The King is
better able to bear the loss, and therefore it is a case of equity. 5. The
Church is a relative of God and the Minister of Religion, and therefore the
advantage being given to the Church, the honor is done to God; and then on the
Kings side it would be an act of religion and devotion. 6. If the Civil power
being judge prefers the Ecclesiastics in the presumption, it is certain there
is no wrong done, and none has cause to complain: but if it be against the
Ecclesiastics the case is not so evident, and justice is not so secured, and
charity not at all done.

And if it be thought that this determination is fit to be given by a
Churchman; 37.
though it be no objection while it is true and reasonable, yet I endeavored
to speak exactly to truth, and for the advantage of the Civil power, though the
question is decided for the Ecclesiastics. For in such cases, as the
Ecclesiastics will have advantage if they in dubious cases never will contend,
of the Civil power will ever have the better of it if in these cases they
resolve never to prevail.

Although these inquiries have carried me a little further then the first
intention of the Rule, 38.
yet they were greatly Relative to it. But I shall recall my Reader to the sense
and duty of it by the words of S. Gregory, who says that Christus Imperatori
and omnia tribuit, Epist. 64. ad Theodorum medicum.
and dominari eum non solum militibus, sed etiam Sacerdotibus concessit, Christ
has both given all things to the Emperor, but a power of dominion not only
over the soldiers, but even over the Priests themselves. And that great wise
disposer of all things in Heaven and Earth, who makes twins in the little
continent of their Mothers Womb to lie at ease and peace, and the Eccentric
motions of the Orbs, and the regular and irregular progressions of the
stars, not to cross or hinder one another, and in all the variety of humane
actions, cases and contingencies, has so wisely disposed his laws that no
contradiction of chance can infer a contradiction of duty, and it can never be
necessary to sin, but on one hand or other it may for ever be avoided; cannot
be supposed to have appointed two powers in the hands of his servants to fight
against or to resist each other: but as good is never contrary to good, nor
truth to truth, so neither can those powers which are ordained for good. And
therefore where the powers are distinct they are employed upon several matters;
and where they converse about the same matter, as in external actions and
persons they do, there one is subject to the other, and therefore can never be
against it.

RULE VII. The supreme Civil power has jurisdiction in causes not only
Ecclesiastical, but internal and spiritual.
(...) said Aristotle, 1.
Of things belonging to God the King is the Governor. Polit. l. 3.
Therefore besides that the supreme Civil power is to govern all persons and
all actions and ministeries which are directly external, it is to be considered
that actions internal, as they can be made public, have also influence upon
the persons and lives, he fortunes and communities of Men; and therefore either
are so far forth to be gonerned by them who are governors of men in their
lives and fortunes, in their societies and persons, that they may do good to
them, or at least do no hurt.

Therefore as the supreme Princes and Magistrates have in several ages of the
Church indulged to Ecclesiastics a power of Civil government, 2.
privileges and defensatives in ordine ad spiritualia, that is, to enable them
with the help of the Civil power to advance the interests of religion and the
spiritual men, which by evil men is apt to be despised, as all the threatenings
of the Gospel and the terrors of death and the horrible affrightments of the
day of Judgment are: so God has given to the supreme Civil power authority
over all public religion in ordine ad bonum temporale. Princes and States did
the other, but God did this. That was well, very well; but this is necessary,
and that was not. The reason of both is this, Because no external accident can
hinder the intentions of God in the effects of religion and the event of souls.
Religion thrives as well in a storm and in persecution as in sunshine. God had
more summer friends under Constantine, but possibly as many true ones under
Diocletian; or if he had not, it was men's fault, their weakness, not their
necessity. But the Civil interest can be really hindered by the intervening of
new doctrines and false manners of worship: and the commonwealth if it be
destroyed has no recompense in eternity: and therefore God has not called
them happy when they are troubled, and has not bidden them to suffer
rebellion, or to rejoice when men speak evil of dignities, and he has not told
them that great is their reward in heaven; but the whole purpose and proper end
of the government being for temporal felicity, though that temporal felicity is
by the wisdom of God made to minister to the eternal, the government expires
in this world, and shall never return to look for recompense for it is
sufferings. But every single Man shall; and though temporal power can be taken
from Princes, yet a man's religion cannot be taken from him: and therefore God
has given to Princes a supreme power for the ordering of religion in order to
the commonwealth, without which it had not had sufficient power to preserve it
self; but he has not given to Ecclesiastics a power over Princes in matter of
government in order to spiritual things, 1. because though spiritual things may
receive advantage by such powers if they had them, yet they may do as much
harm as good, and have done so very often, and may do so again. 2. Because God
has appointed to spiritual persons spiritual instruments sufficient to the end
of that appointment. 3. Because he has also established another Economy for
religion, the way of the cross, and the beaten way of humility, and the
defensatives of mortification, and the guards of self-denial, and the
provisions of contentedness, and the whole spiritual armor, and prayers and
tears, and promises, and his holy spirit, and these are infinitely sufficient
to do Gods work, and they are infinitely the better way. 4. Because religion
being a spiritual thing can stand alone, as the soul can by it self subsist:
and secular violence can no more destroy faith, or the spiritual and true
worship of God, then a sword can kill the understanding. 5. Because if God had
given a temporal power to Ecclesiastics in order to a spiritual end, then he
had set up two supremes in the same affairs, which could never agree but by the
cession of one; that is, the two supremes could never agree but by making one
of them not to be supreme.

And the world has seen this last particular verified by many sad experiments.
3.
For when the Roman Emperors residing in the East gave great powers and trusts
to the Patriarchs of the West, by their Spiritual sword they began to hew at
the head of gold, and lop off many Royalties from the Imperial stock. And Leo
Iconomachus for breaking down the images of Saints felt their power, for they
suffered not the people to pay him tribute in Italy, threatening to interdict
them the use of Sacraments and public devotions if they did. But as soon as
ever they began by spiritual power to intermeddle in secular affairs, they
quickly pulled the Western Empire from the East, and in a convenient time
lessened and weakened that of the West. For Pope John the third combined with
Beengarius and Adalbar his son against the Emperor Otho the great, and they
must pretend themselves to be Kings of Italy. Pope John the 18th made a league
with Crescentius, and stirred up the people against Otho the third. Pope
Benedict the ninth excited Peter of Hungary to pretend to the Empire, only to
hinder Henry surnamed Niger from entering into Italy to repeat his rights. And
all the world knows what Gregory the 7th did to Henry the fourth; how he first
caused Rodulph of Suevia, and afterward Ecbert of Saxony to fight against him:
and here their great quarrel was about the power of choosing the Pope. Then they
fell out about the collation of Bishoprics; for which cause Pope Gelasius the
XIIth caused the Archbishop of Mentz to rebel against Henry the 5th; and there
the Pope got the better of him, and by the aid of his Norman forces which he
had in Sicily beat him into compliance. Then they fell out about some fees of
the Empire; and Innocent the second raised up Roger the Norman against
Lotharius the XII. about the Duchy of Pouille: and S. Bernard being made
Umpire in the Quarrel, the Pope got a share in Bavaria, for whoever lost,
signior Papa, like the butlers box, was sure to get, by the advantage of his
supreme conduct of religion which by this time he got into his hands.

And now he improved it providently. 4.
For the same Innocent stirred up Guelphus Duke of Bavaria against Conrade the
third; and thence sprang that dismal and bloody faction between the Guelphs and
Ghibellins. But what should I reckon more? Vide Luitpran. lib 6. c. 6.
Cuspinian, and Theodoric. a Niem in vita Othon. 3.
I must transcribe the Annals of Germany to enumerate the hostilities of the
Roman Bishops against the Emperors their lords, when they got the conduct and
Civil government of religious affairs into their power. Frederic Barbarossa,
Henry the sixth, his brother Philip, Frederic the second, Henry the seventh,
Frederic of Austria, Lewis of Bavaria, Sigismond, Frederic the third, felt the
power of a temporal sword in a religious scabbard: and this was so certain, so
constant a mischief, that when the Pope had excommunicated eight Emperors, and
made the temporal sword cut off them whom the spiritual sword had struck at,
the Emperors grew afraid. And Radulph of Haspurg when he was chosen Emperor
durst not go into Italy, which he called the Lions den, because the entrance
was fair, but few returning footsteps were espied. And it grew to be a proverb,
lib. 4. Chron.
says Guicciardine, Proprium est Ecclesiae odisse Caesares, The Church hates
Caesar; and the event was that which Carrion complained of, Sceleribus
Pontificum hoc Imperium languefactum est, By the wickedness of the Bishops of
Rome the Roman Empire is fallen into decay.

These instances are more then enough to prove that if Religion be governed 5.
by any hand with which the Civil power has nothing to do, it may come to
pass that the Civil power shall have no hands at all, or they shall be in
bands. The consequence of these is this, That if the supreme Civil power be
sufficient to preserve it self, it can provide against the evil use of the
spiritual sword, and consequently can conduct all religion that can by evil men
be abused, so as to keep it harmless. If by excommunications the Bishop can
disturb the Civil interest, the Civil power can hold his hands that he shall
not strike with it, or if he does, can take out the temporal sting, that it
shall not venom and fester. If by strange doctrines the Ecclesiastics can
aliene the hearts of subjects from their duty, the Civil power can forbid those
doctrines to be preached. If the Canons of the Church be seditious or peevish
or apt for trouble, the Civil power can command them to be rescinded, or may
refuse to verify them, and make them into laws. But that we may not trust our
own reason only, I shall instance in the particulars of jurisdiction, and give
evident probation of them from the authority of the best ages of the Church.

And first in general, 6.
that Kings or the supreme Civil power is by God made an Overseer, a Ruler, a
careful Father, a Governor, a Protector and Provider for his Church, is
evident in the Scriptures, and the doctrine of the Primitive ages of the
Church. Nutritii and patres Ecclesiae is their appellative which we are taught
from Scripture, Nursing Fathers of the Church. Pastores; that is the word God
used of Cyrus the Persian, Cyrus my shepherd: and when the Spirit of God by
David calls to Kings and Princes of the earth to kiss the Son lest he be
angry, it intends that as Kings they should use their power and Empire in those
things in which the Son will be worshipped by the children of men. For besides
the natural and first end of government, which is temporal felicity, of which I
have already spoken, there is also a supernatural, the eternal felicity of
souls; and to this Civil government does minister by the Economy and design
of God: and therefore it was well said of Ammianus, lib. 39.
Nihil aliud est Imperium (ut sapientes definiunt) nisi cura salutis alienae.
It is true in both senses; Empire is nothing else (as wise men define it) but a
power of doing good by taking care for the salvation of others. To do them
good here, and to cause them to do themselves good hereafter, is the end of
all government. ^pud Cyril. ep. 17.
And the reason of it is well expressed by the Emperor Theodosius Junior to S.
Cyril, Quandoquidem ut vera religio justa action perficitur, ita and
Respublicautriusque open nixa florescit, As true religion is perfected by
justice, so by religion and justice the republic does flourish; and therefore
he adds, Deus opt. Max. pietatis and justae actionis quoddam quasi vinculum
nos esse voluerit, The Emperor is by the Divine appointment the common band of
justice and religion.

In pursuance of this truth, 7.
Eusebius tells that Constantine the Great was wont to say to the Bishops
concerning himself, de vita Constant. lib. 4. c. 24.
Vos intra Ecclesiam, ego extra Ecclesiam a Deo Episcopus constitutus sum, You
within the church walls and I without, but both of us are appointed by God to
be Bishops or Overseers of his Saints and servants. And in the edict of
Valentinian and Martian, which approves the acts of the Council of Chalcedon,
they are both called Inclyti Pontifices, illustrious Bishops: and the Emperor
Leo 3. in his Epistle to Gregory the Bishop of Rome says of himself (...), I
am both a King and a priest; meaning in office, not in order, in government,
not in ministeries. These and such like words are often used in the Letters
enterchang'd between the Princes and the Bishops in the Ancient Church, of
which that of Leo the Roman Bishop concerning the French Capitulars is
remarkable, writing to Lotharius. De capitulis vel praeceptis Imperialibus
vestris vestrorum Pontificum praedecessorum irrefragabiliter custodiendis and
conservandis, quantum valuimus and valemus in Christo propitio, and nunc and in
aevum nos conservaturos modis omnibus profitemur. It was a direct Oath of
supremacy. Concerning the Capitulars or Imperial precepts given by you and your
predecessors who were Bishops, (viz. in their power and care over Churches) we
through the assistance of Christ promise as much as we are able to keep and to
conserve them for ever. The limit of which power is well explicated by S.
Austin in these words, Epist. 166.
Quando Imperatores veritatem tenent, pro ipsa veritate contra errorem jubent;
quod quisquis contempserit, ipse sibi judicium acquirit, When the Emperors are
Christians and right believers, they make laws for the truth and against false
doctrines; which laws whosoever shall despise, gets damnation to himself.

For if we consider that famous saying of Optatus, 8.
that Ecclesia est in republica, non respublica in Ecclesia, The Church is in
the commonwealth, not the commonwealth in the Church, and the Church is not a
distinct state and order of men, but the commonwealth turned Christian, that
is better instructed, more holy, greater lovers of God, and taught in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus; it is not to be imagined, that the Emperors or
supreme governors should have the less care and rule over it by how much the
more it belongs to God. This fancy first invaded the servants when they turned
Christians; they thought their Masters had then less to do with them. The
Apostle tells them as in the case of Onesimus, that it is true, they ought to
love them better, but the other were not the less to be obedient; only there
was this gotten by it, that the servants were to do the same service for the
Lords sake, which before they did for the laws. But it is a strange folly to
imagine that because a man has changed his opinion he has therefore changed
his relation; and if it were so, he that is weary of his Master, may soon
change his service by going to another Tutor. Religion establishes all natural
and political relations, and changes none but the spiritual; and the same
Prince that governs his people in the time of the plague is to govern them when
they are cured; and the Physician that cured them has got no dominion over
them, only in regimine salutis he is principal, he is to govern their health.
The cases as to this are parallel between the soul and the body. In Concii.
Roman. sub Martino l.
And therefore the Emperor Constans declared his power and his duty too, de
omnibus curam agere and intendere quae recipient ad utilitatem
Christianissimae nostrae reipublicae, to take care and to intend all things
which regard the advantage of our most Christian commonwealth: and Aimonius
tells of King Clodovaeus, that in one of the Councils lib. 4. cap. 41.
of Africa held at Clupea he described his office and duty by these two
summaries, publicis rebus consultores advocare, and ea quae Dei and sanctorum
ejus sunt disponere; to consult about public affairs of the commonwealth,
and to dispose of those things which belong to God and to his saints.

But the consideration of the particulars will be more useful in this inquiry,
9.
and first

The supreme Civil power has authority to convene and to dissolve all synods
Ecclesiastical.

This appears 1. in that all the first Councils of the Church after the 10.
Emperors were Christian were convocated by their Authority. The Council of
Nice was called by Constantine, as is affirmed by de vita Constant. l. 7. c. 6.
Eusebius, lib. 1. hist. c. 1.
Ruffinus, lib. 1. c. 16.
Sozomen and lib. 2. hist. c. 5.
Theodoret: and when the Eusebians had persuaded Constantine to call a council
at Tire against Athanasius, the Prince understanding their craft and violence
called them from Tire to Constantinople apud Athanas. apol. 2.
: and by the same Emperor there was another Council called at Arles. The
Council at Sardica in Illyria was convened by the authority of the Emperors
Constans and Constantius, as the Fathers of that Synod themselves wrote in
their letters to the Egyptians and Africans: apud Athanas, ibid.
and Liberius the Bishop of Rome with many other Bishops of Italy joined in
petition to Constantius to convocate a Council at Aquileia; Theodor. lib. 2. c.
16. in dial. and Liberius in Epist. ad Hosium Cordub. apud Baron. Tom. 3. A. D.
353. n. 19.
not to suffer them to do it, but that he would, for to him they knew it only
did belong. Theodosius the Emperor called the second general Council at
Constantinople; as Socrates, Sozomen and Nicephorus relate: and the Fathers of
the Council Synod. constit. libell.
write in their Synodical constitutions, with this expression added, ea quae
acta sunt in sancto Concilio ad Tuam referimus Pietatem, whatsoever was done in
that Synod was wholly referred and submitted to the Princes piety. The great
Ephesin Council, which was the third Ecumenical, was convened by Theodosius
Junior, exproprio munere and officio, apud Cy^il. Ep. 4.
and ex animi sui deliberatione, so himself affirms, out of his own free
choice, according to his office and his duty. But his rescript by which he
convened the Council is a most admirable letter, and contains in it a full
testimony of the truth of this whole Rule, and does excellently enumerate and
imply all the parts of the Imperial jurisdiction in causes of religion. Epist.
17. apud Cyrilium.
The sum of which are in the preface of that rescript in these words, Our
commonwealth depends upon piety [or religion] toward God, and between them
both there is great cognation and society; for they agree together, and grow by
the increase of one another: so that true religion does shine by the study of
justice, and the commonwealth is assisted by them both. We therefore being
placed in the Kingdom by God, having received from him the care both of the
Religion and the prosperity of the subject, we have hitherto endeavored by our
care and by our forces to keep in perpetual union: and for the safety of the
republic we are intent to the profit of our subjects, and diligently watch for
the conservation of true religion; but especially we strive that they may live
holily, as becomes holy persons, taking care, as it befits us, even of both
(for it is impossible we should take good care of one if we neglect the other.)
But above the rest, we are careful that the Ecclesiastical state may remain
firm, so as is fit to relate to God, and to be in our time, and may have
tranquillity by the consent of all men, and may be quiet by the peace of the
Ecclesiastic affairs; and that true religion may be kept unreprovable, and the
lives of the inferior Clergy and the Bishops may be free from blame. This is
the sum of his duty, and the limit of his power, and the intention of his
Government. And to these purposes he called a Council, threatening punishment to
any Prelate who was called if he neglected to come. If the Emperor took more
upon him then belonged to him, he was near a good Tutour that could well have
reproved him, the Fathers of the Ephesin Council; but if he took upon him but
what was just, this testimony alone is sufficient in this whole question. But
he ended not so, but shortly after called another Council in the same place, In
Council. Chalced. act. 1. scribensad Dioscorum Alex. Leo Epist. 21. Tom. 1.
Epist. RR. PP.
against the will of Pope Leo, who yet was forced to send his Deputies to be
assistant at it. But that Council had an ill end: and to repair the wounds made
to truth by it, Pope Leo petitioned the Emperor for another to be held in
Italy. But the Emperor was then not much in love with Councils, having been so
lately deceived by one; and therefore put it off, and died: and his successor
Martianus called one at Nice, but changing his mind had it kept in Chalcedon. I
shall proceed no further in particular, but account it sufficient what Cardinal
Cusanus acknowledges. Sciendum est quod in universalibus octo Conciliis semper
invenio Imperatores and Judices suos cum senatu primatum habuisse. For this is
more then the mere power of calling them; de Concord. l. 3. c. 16.
for that he might do upon many accounts: but the Emperors and his Judges and
Council always had the primacy in the eight general Councils.

As the Emperors did convene, 11.
so they did dismiss the Ecclesiastical conventions; as appears in the acts of
the Ephesin Council, where the Fathers petition the Emperor, that he would free
them from that place, and give them leave to wait upon him to see his face,
Vide etiam Baron. Tom* 5. A. D. 441. n. 103. Theod. l. 2. c. 19. 20.
or at least he would dismiss them and send them home to their own Churches.
The same petition was made by the Bishops at Ariminum to the Emperor
Constantius, and by the Fathers at the Council of Chalcedon fine 6tae act.
to Martianus. But these things did never please the Italians after their
Patriarch began to set up for Ecclesiastical Monarchy, and they, as soon as
they could, and even before their just opportunities, would be endeavoring to
lessen the Imperial power and to take it into their own hands. But this is one
of the things that grew to an intolerable mischief; and was not only against
the practice of the best ages, and against the just rights of Emperors, but
against the doctrine of the Church.

For S. Hierom reproving Ruffinus, 12.
who had quoted the authority of some Synod, Apol. ad. Ruffin. lib. 2.
I know not where, S. Hierome confutes him, by this argument, Quis Imperator
jusserit hanc Synodum congregari? There was no such Synod, for you cannot tell
by what Emperors command it was convened. To this purpose there was an
excellent Epistle written by certain Bishops of Istria to Mauritius the
Emperor, enumerating from the records of the Church the convention of
Ecclesiastical Councils to have been wholly by the Emperors disposition; apud
Baron. A. D. 590. to. 8. n. 40.
in which also they dogmatically affirm, Semper Deus praesentia Christianorum
Principum contentiones Ecclesiasticas sedare dignatur, God does always
vouchsafe to appease Church-quarrels by the presence of Christian Emperors:
meaning that by their authority the Conciliary definitions passed into laws.
But who please to see more particulars relating to this inquiry, may be filled
with the fight of them in the whole third book of William Ranchin his Review of
the Council of Trent.

The supreme Civil power has a power of external Judgment in causes of Faith.

This relies upon the former reasons, 13.
That since propositions of religion and doctrines of Theology have so great
influence upon the lives of men, upon peace and justice, upon duty and
obedience, it is necessary that the supreme Civil power should determine what
doctrines are to be taught the people, and what to be forbidden. The Princes
are to tell what religions are to be permitted and what not: and we find a law
of Justinian forbidding anathematisms to be pronounced against the Jewish
Hellenists; Novel. 146.
for the Emperors did not only permit false religions by impunity, but made
laws even for the ordering their assemblies, making Ecclesiastical laws for
enemies of true religion: so necessary it is for Princes to govern all religion
and pretenses of religion within their Nations. This we find in the Civil law,
in the title of the Code de Judaeis, in many instances. A law was made by
Justinian also that none should be admitted into the Jewish Synagogues that
denied Angels, or the Resurrection, or the day of Judgment. Thus the Civil
power took away the Churches from the Maximianistae, because they were an under
sect of the Donatists condemned by their superiors. But then that the Christian
Princes did this and might do this and much more in the articles of true
religion, is evident by many instances and great reason.

There is a title in the first book of the Code, 14.
Ne sacrosanctum baptisma iteretur, Vide l. nemo. ff. de summa Trinitate.
against the Anabaptists. C^arles the Great made a decree against the
worshipping of Images, and gave sentence against the second Nicene Council in
that particular: and Sozomen reports that Constantine cut off unprofitable
questions, to prevent schisms in the Church; which example our Kings of
England have imitated by forbidding public preachers or Divines in schools to
meddle in the curious questions of Predestination. Thus the public laws of a
Nation often declare who are and who are not heretics: and by an Act of
Parliament in England they only are judged heretics who for such were
condemned by the four general Councils. Upon this account many Princes have
forbidden public disputations in matters of religion: to this purpose there
was a law of Leo and Anthemius, l. qui in Mon. C. de Episc. and Clericis; and
Andronicus the Emperor hearing some Bishops disputing with some subtilty upon
those words [ my Father is greater then I] threatened to throw them into the
river, Nicet. Choniat.
if they would not leave such dangerous disputations. Heraclius the Emperor
forbad any of those nice words concerning Christ to be used: some did use to
say that in Christ there was a single energy, some said there was a double; but
the Emperor determined the question well, and bad them hold their peace and
speak of neither: for, as Sisinnius said to Theodosius, disputando de sacris
accendi tantum contentionem, there is nothing got by disputations but strife
and contention: and therefore Princes are the best Moderators of Church-mens
quarrels, because Princes are bound to keep the peace. And consonantly to this
Isidore spoke well, 23. q. 5. c. principes.
Sane per regnum terrenum coeleste regnum proficit, ut qui intra Ecclesiam
positi contra fidem and disciplinam Ecclesiae agunt, rigore principum
conterantur, apsamque disciplinam quam Ecclesiae humilitas exercere non
praevalet, cervicibus superborum potestas principalis imponat. The Civil power
advances the interests of the heavenly Kingdom by punishing them who sin
against the faith and discipline of the Church; if they be intra Ecclesiam,
within the Church, their faith and manners both are subject to the secular
judgment.

But not only so, 15.
but they are to take care to secure and promote the interest of truth: for
though, as S. Paul says, doubtful disputations do engender strife, yet we
must contend earnestly for the faith; with zeal, but yet with meekness too:
and therefore that matters of faith and doctrines of good life be established,
it is part of the Princes duty to take care. Imperator, ut communis (...)
existens and nominatus, Synodalibus praest sententiis and robur tribuit,
Ecclesiasticos ordines componit, and legem dat vitae politiaque ^orum qui
altari serviunt. Et rursus ut uno verbo dicam, solo sacrificandi excepto
ministerio, reliqua Pontificialia privilegia Imperator repraelentat? Demetr.
Chomaten. in resp. Orien. F^agrius Leonis Imp. Concilii Chalced. approbarionem
vecat decisionem de fide, lib. 3. c. 4. etc. 5. videat lector totum hujus re^
processum ex l. 1. Heracl^^, incip. Cum sanctus, inter constit, Imperial. Cum.
S. (inquit) Sophronius, tunc fummo Sacerdotio fungens Hierosolymis, subjectis
sibi sacerdotibus convocatis synodice demonstrasset eos qui unam in duabus
Christi naturis volun^aiem atque energiam affirmarent palam unam quoque natur^^
statuere, eique Johannes Papa Romanus assensus esset, Imperator edictum
proponit, Neque singularem, neque duplicem in Christo energiam esse asserendam,
According to which we find that when a rumor was spread that brought Pope
Pelagius into suspicion of heresy, King Childebert sent Rufinus to him to
require him either to recite and profess the Tome of S. Leo in which there was
a good confession of faith, or else that he should do the same thing in his
own words. Pope Pelagius sent this answer: Satagendum est ut pro auferendo
suspicionis scandalo obsequium confessionis nostrae Regibus ministremus, 25. q.
1. c. Saragendum.
quibus etiam nos subditos esse sacrae Scripturae praecipiunt, We must take
care that for the avoiding suspicion we exhibit to Kings the duty of our
confession: For to them the holy Scriptures command even us to be obedient. And
not only for the Faith of Bishops and even of Popes, but for their Manners
also Kings were to take care, and did it accordingly. Justinian made laws that
Bishops should not play at dice, nor be present at public spectacles; and he
said of himself, maximam habere se sollicitudinem circa vera Dei dogmata,
Novel. 123. c. 10.
and circa Sacerdotum honestatem, that his greatest care was about the true
doctrines of God, and the good lives of Bishops.

I do not intend by this, 16.
that whatsoever article is by Princes allowed is therefore to be accounted a
part of true religion; for that is more then we can justify of a definition
made by a Synod of Bishops: but that they are to take care that true doctrine
be established; that they that are bound to do so must be supposed competent
Judges what is true doctrine, else they guide their subjects, and some body
else rules them, and then who is the Prince? By what means and in what manner
the Civil-power is to do this I am to set down in the next Rule; but here the
question is of the power, not of the manner of exercising it: and the answer
is, that this power of judging for themselves and for their people is part of
their right; that no article of religion can become a law unless it be decreed
by God, or by the Prince; that the Bishops declaration is a good indication of
the law of God, but that the Princes sanction makes it also become a law of the
Commonwealth: that the Prince may be deceived in an article of religion is as
true as that he may be deceived in a question of right, and a point of law; yet
his determination has authority, even when a better proposition wants it: that
error must serve the ends of peace, till by the doctrines of the wiser
Ecclesiastics the Prince being better informed, can by truth serve it better.

RULE VIII. The supreme Civil power is to govern in Causes Ecclesiastical by
the means and measures of Christ's institution, that is, by the assistance and
ministeries of Ecclesiastical persons.
KIngs are supreme Judges of the Law; 1.
for cujus est loqui ejus est interpretari, He that speaks, best knows his own
meaning: and the lawgiver is certainly his own best interpreter. But in cases
where there is doubt, the supreme Civil power speaks by them whose profession
it is to understand the laws. And so it is in religion. The King is to study
the law of God; nec hoc illi dictum ut totus ab alieno ore pendeat, ipsequi a
se nihil dijudicet, Tortur. Tort.
said that learned Prelate of Winchester, not that he should wholly depend in
religion upon the sentences of others, but be able of himself to judge. But
where there is difficulty, and that it be fit that the difficulty be resolved,
there the supreme Civil power is to receive the aid of the Ecclesiastic, from
whose mouth the people are to require the law, and whose lips by their office
and designation are to preserve knowledge. The Doctors of the Jews tell that
when Jephthah had made a rash vow, he might have been released if he had
pleased: For if a horse had first met him, he had not been bound to have
offered it to God; but it must have been sold, and a sacrifice be bought with
the price; and much more must a man or a woman have been redeemed. But because
Jephthah was a Prince in Israel, he would not go to Phinehas the high Priest
to have had his vow interpreted, commuted, or released. Neither would Phinehas
go to him, because he was not to offer his help till it was implored. Phinehas
did not go to Jephthah, for he had no need, he had no business: and Jephthah
would not go to Phinehas, because he was the better man. In the mean time the
Virgin died, or, as some say, was killed by her Father: but both Prince and
Priest were punished, Jephthah with a palsy, and Phinehas was deprived of the
Spirit of God. For when the Prince needs the Priest he must consult him; and
whether he consults him or no, the Priest must take care that no evil be done
by the Prince, or suffered by him for want of Counsel.

But the Princes office of providing for religion, 2.
and his manner of doing it in cases of difficulty are rarely well discoursed
of by Theodosius the younger in a letter of his to S. Cyril, of which I have
formerly mentioned some portions..... Pietatis doctrinam in sacra Synodo in
utramque partem ventilatam eatenus obtinere volumus quatenus veritati and
rationi consentaneum esse judicabitur, The doctrine of godliness shall be
discussed in the sacred Council, and it shall prevail or pass into a law so
far as shall be judg^d agreeable to truth and reason. Where the Emperor gives
the examination of it to the Bishops to whose office and calling it does
belong: but the judgment of it and the sanction are the right of the Emperor,
who would see the Decrees should be established if they were true and
reasonable. The judgment I say was the Emperors, but in his judgment he would
be advised, taught and established by his Bishops. Sed nec eam doctrinam
indiscussam patiemur; cui dijudicandae eos praefici oportet qui sacerdotiis
ubivis gentium praesident, per quos and nos quoque in veritatis sententia
stabilimur, and magis magisque identidem stabiliemur, That doctrine that is in
question we will not suffer to escape examination; but those shall be
presidents of the judgment who in every Nation are the appointed Bishops, by
whom we also our selves are confirmed in the true Religion, and hope every day
to be more and more established.

When the supreme power has called in the aid and office of the Ecclesiastic,
3.
good Princes use to verify their acts accordingly, to establish their
sentences, to punish the convict, to exterminate heretics and suppress their
doctrines. Thus Honorius and Arcadius the Emperors by an Edict repressed
Pelagius and Caelestius whom the Bishops had condemned; Constantine after the
sentence of the Nicene Fathers against Arius, banished him. Theodosius the
Elder having diligently conferred with the Orthodox Bishops, and heard
patiently what the others could say, Sozom. l. 7. c. 12.
by a law forbad them to have public assemblies who denied the
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father. Per Consilium Sacerdotum and
Optimatum ordinavimus, constituimus, and diximus; it was the style of King
Pepin in the Council of Soissons. And of this nature the instances are very
numerous. For semper studium fuit Orthodoxis and piis Imperatoribus pro tempore
exortas haereses per congregationem religiosissimorum Archiepiscoporum
amputare, and recta fide sincere praedicata in pace sanctam Dei Ecclesiam
custodire, in 5ta Synod. Constant.
said Theodorus Silentiarius. All the pious and orthodox Emperors did use this
instrument and manner of proceeding, for the cutting off heresies, and the
sincere publication of the faith, and the conservation of the Church in peace.

But that this manner of Empire may not prejudice the right of Empire, 4.
it is to be observed that in these things the Emperors used their own liberty,
which proved plainly they used nothing but their own right. For sometimes they
gave toleration to differing Sects, sometimes they gave none; sometimes they
were governed by zeal, and sometimes by gentle Counsels, only they would be
careful that the disputes should not break the public peace: but for their
punishing Recusants and Schismatics they used their liberty; so we find in the
Acts of the great Ephesin Council, that Theodosius the 2d resolved of one, but
not upon the other. At vero sive illi veniam impetraturi sint qui a Patribus
victi discedent, sive non, nos sane civitates simul and Ecclesias conturbari
nequaquam sinemus, Whether those who are convict of heresy by the Fathers shall
be pardoned yea or no, yet we will be sure not to suffer the Repu^lick or the
Churches to be disturbed.

This I observe now in opposition to those bold pretenses of the Court of Rome,
5.
and of the Presbytery, that esteem Princes bound to execute their decrees, and
account them but great ministers and servants of their sentences. Now if this
be true, then Princes must confirm all that the Clergy decrees: If all, then
the supreme Prince has less then the meanest of the people, not so much as a
judgment of discretion; or if he have, it is worse, for he must not use his
discretion for the doing of his duty, but must by an implicit faith and a
blind brutish obedience obey his Masters of the Consistory or Assembly. But if
he be not bound to confirm all, then I suppose he may choose which he will, and
which he will not: and if so, it is well enough; for then the supreme judgment
and the last resort is to the Prince, not to his Clercs. And that Princes are
but Executioners of the Clergyes sentences is so far from being true, that we
find Theodosius refusing to confirm the Acts of the great Ephesin Council: for
having been informed (though falsely) that affairs were carried ill, apud Acta
Council. Ephesians. in liter. Theod. ad Synod.
he commanded the Bishops to resume the question of the Nestorians: for their
acts of condemnation against them he made null, and commanded them to judge it
over again, and that till they had done so, they should not stir to their
Bishoprics. The ministry was the Bishops all the way, but the external
judgment and the legislative was the Princes. apud Surium die 5. Jun.
So Charles the Great reformed the Church, Episcopos congregavi, etc. I
convocated the Bishops to counsel me how Gods law and Christian religion should
be recovered. Therefore by the counsel of my Religions Prelates and my Nobles
we have appointed Bishops in every City, and Boniface their Archbishop, and
appoint that a Synod shall be held every year, that in our presence the
canonical decrees and the rights of the Church may be restored, and Christian
religion may be reformed. But because this must be evident as a consequent of
all the former discourses upon this question; it will be sufficient now to
sum it up with the testimony of S. Austin writing to Emeritus the Donatist.
Epist. 164.
Nam and terrenae potestates cum schismaticos persequuntur ea regula se
defendunt, quia dicit Apostolus, Qui potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi
resistit.... Non enim frustra gladium portat, When the Civil power punishes
Schismatics they have a warrant from an Apostolical Rule, which says, He that
resists, resists the ordinance of God: For they bear not the sword in vain. It
is not therefore by a commission or a command from the Church that they punish
Schismatics, but [constituunt adversus vos pro sua sollicitudine ac potestate
quod volunt] they decree what they please against them according to their own
care and their own power.

So that when it is said that Princes are to govern their Churches by the
consent and advice of their Bishops, 6.
it is meant not de jure stricto, but de bono and laudabili: It is fit that
they do so, it is the way of Christ's ordinary appointment; He that hears you
hears me: and to them a command is given, lib. 5. Epist. 32.
to feed all the flock of Christ. In pursuance of which it was a famous
rescript of Valentinian the first, cited by S. Ambrose, In causa fidei vel
Ecclesiastici alicujus ordinis eum judicare debere qui nec munere impar sit,
nec jure dissimilis. These are the words of the rescript: that is, he would
that Bishops should judge of Bishops; and that in causes of faith or the Church
their ministry should be used, whose persons by reason of the like employment
were most competent to be put in delegation. But to the same purpose more of
these favorable Edicts were made in behalf of the Church by Theodosius and
Valentinian the second, lib. 1. Cod. Theod. de relig. Novel. Valen. de Episc.
Jud. l. graviter. ibid. Novel. 89.
by Arcadius, Honorius and Justinian: and indeed besides that it is reasonable
in all cases, it is necessary in very many; because Bishops and Priests are the
most knowing in spiritual affairs, and therefore most fit to be counselors to
the Prince, who oftentimes has no great skill, though he have supreme
authority. I remember that when Gellius the Praetor was sent Proconsul into
Greece, Cicer. lib. 1. de leg.
he observed that the Scholars at Athens did perpetually wrangle and erect
schools against schools, and divided their philosophy into Sects; and therefore
sending for them, persuaded them to live quietly and peaceably, and to put
their questions to reference or umpirage, and in it offerr'd his own
assistance: but the Scholars laughed at his confident offer to be a moderator in
things he understood no more then his spurs did. He might have made them keep
the peace, and at the same time make use of their wit and his own authority.
And although there may happen a case in which Princes may, and a case in which
they must refuse to confirm the synodical decrees, sentences and judgments of
Ecclesiastics: yet unless they do with great reason and upon competent
necessity, they cannot do it without great scandal, and sometimes great
impiety. But of this I shall discourse in the next Chapter. For the present, I
was to assert the rights of Princes, and to establish the proper foundation of
humane laws; that the Conscience may build upon a rock, and not trust to that
which stands upon sand, and trust to nothing.

I have been the larger upon these things because the adversaries are great and
many, 7.
and the pretenses and the challenges high, and their opposition great and
intricate, and their affrightments large; for they use something to persuade
and something to scare the conscience. Such is that bold saying of Pope Leo the
xth, Council. Latersub Leon. 1.
A jure tam Divino quam humano laicis potestas nulla in Ecclesiasticas personas
attributa est, Both by Divine and humane laws Ecclesiastics are free from all
secular power. But fierce and terrible are the words of the Extravagant Unam
sanctam. Porro subesse Romano Pontifici omnem humanam creaturam declaramus,
dicimus, definimus and pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis, That
every man should be subject to the Bishop of Rome, we define, we say, we
declare and pronounce to be altogether necessary to salvation. This indeed is
high; but how vain withal and trifling and unreasonable I have sufficiently
evidenced. So that now the conscience may firmly rely upon the foundation of
humane laws, and by them she is to be conducted not only in Civil affairs,
but in Ecclesiastical, that is, in religion as well as justice: and there is
nothing that can prejudice their authority, unless they decree against a law
of God; of which because Ecclesiastical persons are the preachers and
expositors by ordinary Divine appointment, Princes must hear Bishops, and
Bishops must obey Princes: or because audire and obaudire to hear and to obey
have great affinity, I choose to end this with the expression of Abbot Berengar
almost 1100 years ago, lib. de Myster. sign. in Biblioth. SS. PP.
Sciendum est quod nec Catholicae fidei nec Christianae contrarium est legi, si
ad honorem regni and sacerdotii Rex Pontifici and Pontifex obediat Regi, It is
neither against the Catholic faith nor the Christian law that the Prince obey
the Bishop, and the Bishop obey the Prince: the first is an obedience of piety,
and the later of duty; the one is justice, and the other is religion.

CHAP. IV. Of the power of the Church in canons and censures, with their
obligations and powers over the conscience.
RULE I. The whole power which Christ has left in ordinary to his Church is
merely spiritual.
THat there are great things spoken by the Doctors of the Primitive Church of
the Ecclesiastical or spiritual power is every where evident, 1.
and that there are many expressions which prefer it above the secular; all
which I shall represent in stead of others in the words of S. Chrysostom,
because of them all he was the most eloquent, and likeliest in the fairest
imagery to describe the powers of his Order. Hom. l. 4. ex verb. Isaiae.
Others are the limits of the Kingdom, others of the Priesthood; for this is
greater then that: and you must not estimate it by the purple and the gold. The
King has allotted to him the things of this world to be administered; but the
right of Priesthood descends from above: Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven. To the King is committed what is here below; to me,
that is to the Bishop, things celestial. The bodies are entrusted to Princes,
but the souls to Bishops. The King remits the guilt of bodies, but the Bishop
the guilt of sins. The Prince compels, the Bishop exhorts. He governs by
necessity, but we by counsel; he has sensible armor, but we spiritual
weapons; he wageth war against the Barbarians, but we against the Devil. Here
then is a greater principality. For which cause the King submits himself to the
Priests hand, and every where in the Old Testament the Priests did anoint
Kings. Where by the way, though it be not exactly true that the Kings of Israel
and Judah were always anointed by Priests, 2 Kings 9. 4.
but sometimes by Prophets who were no Priests, as in the case of Jehu yet
supposing all that, the discourse is true enough, and the spiritual power in
relation to a nobler object is in that regard better then the temporal; and
therefore is in spiritual account in order to a spiritual end above that which
serves the less excellent. But the effect of this discourse is, that Kings are
subject to Bishops just as the Princes of Israel were to those that anointed
them; that is, they came under their hands for unction, and consecration, and
blessing, and counsel, and the rites of sacrifice. And all this is very true;
and this is all that was or could be intended by S. Chrysostom, or those other
eminent lights of the Primitive Church, who set their Order upon a candlestic,
and made it illustrious by the advantage of comparison. The advantages are
wholly spiritual, the excellencies are spiritual, the operations are spiritual,
and the effects are spiritual; the office is spiritual, and so is all the
power. But because the persons of the men in whom this spiritual power is
subjected are temporal as well as Princes, and so are all their civil actions,
therefore whatever eminence they have for their spiritual employment, it gives
them no temporal advantage; that comes in upon another stock: but for the
spiritual it is as much as it is pretended; but then it is no more.

For it is purely spiritual. 2.
Where any thing of temporal is mingled with it, it is not greater in that, but
subject to the temporal power. Without this there could never be peace: and
where the jurisdiction of two Courts do enterfere, there is perpetual
wranglings. But God having ordained two powers has made them both best; and
yet so that both of them are inferior: but because it is in differing powers,
they both rule in peace, and both obey with pleasure. How the Ecclesiastic
state is subject to the Civil I have largely accounted: Now I am to describe
the eminencies, powers, advantages and legislations of the spiritual:
concerning which we shall have the best light if we rightly understand the
nature and quality of the power.

As my Father sent me, 3.
so send I you, said Christ to his Apostles. Now it is plain how the Father was
pleased to send his Son; with humility and miracles, with a low fortune and a
great design, with poverty and power, with fullness of the spirit and
excellency of wisdom. That was the manner. The end was, the redemption of Man,
the conquering of the Devil, the preaching of the Gospel, the foundation of the
Church, the instruction of faith, the baptizing Converts, the reformation of
manners, the extirpation of sin. This was the entire end, and that was the
just manner in which Christ was sent into the world: And since his Apostles and
their successors were to pursue the same ends and no other, they were furnished
with the same power: and Christ gave them the Holy Ghost, and gave them
commandment and power to teach all Nations, to baptize them, to bind and to
loose, to minister his body and his blood, to exhort and to reprove, to comfort
and to cure, to make spiritual separations of the vile from the precious. This
is the sum of all the Commissions they had from Christ.

This power and these commissions were wholly Ministerial without domination, 4.
without proper jurisdiction, that is, without coaction; it being wholly
against the design of the religion, that it should be forced; and it being far
removed from persons, so disposed, so employed, so instructed to do it. And
therefore one of the requisites of a Bishop is (...), He must be no striker: he
had no arms put into his hand to that purpose; the Ecclesiastic state being
furnished with authority, but no power, that is authoritate suadendi, non
jubendi potestate (that I may use the expression in Tacitus) an authority to
persuade and to rebuke, but no power to command, as the word is used in the
sense of secular dominion.

Concerning which that the thing be rightly understood, 5.
we must first truly understand the word. in l. 1. in verbo Potest. FF. de
jurisdict.
Accursius defines Jurisdiction to be potestatem de publico introductam cum
necessitate juris dicendi and aequitatis statuendae, A public power of doing
right and equity. It is potestas ad jus dicendum, so Muscornus Cyprins, A power
of giving sentence in causes between party and party. But we shall best
understand the meaning of Jurisdictio by that place of Cicero. Orat. in Verrem
4ta.
Quid ergo istius in jure dicendo libidinem demonstrem? Quis vestrum non ex
urbana jurisdictione cognovit? Quis unquam isto Praetore Chelidone invita lege
agere potuit? Judices citari jubet: jubet citari Heraclium: citatur reus
Sopatrus: Stenium citari jubet: atque ut aliquando de rebus ab isto cognitis,
judicatis, and de judicibus datis desistamus dicere, etc. From which words it
is plain, that jurisdiction is a power of magistracy to summon the parties, to
hear their cause, and to give sentence. And therefore in Suetonius we often
find these expressions, Imperatorem jus dixisse, cognovisse, judicasse, The
Emperor took cognizance, did judge, did give sentence, that is, did exercise
jurisdiction. Empire is always included under jurisdiction; and it is divided
into a cognition of capital and pecuniary causes, as appears plainly in the
title of the Code De jurisdictione, which handles both causes: and Asconius
Paedianus in his argument upon the 4th action against Verres proves expressly
that Capital actions are part of jurisdiction. To which purpose is that of
Suctonius in the life of Augustus; Dixit autem jus non diligentia modo summa
sed and lenitate, Cap. 33.
siquidem manifesti parricidii reum, ne culleo insueretur, quod non nisi
confessi afficiebantur hac poena, etc. But of this there is no question. Now of
jurisdiction thus understood, it is evident that the Ecclesiastic state has no
right derived to them from Christ, that is, no power to punish any man
corporally, or to compel them to answer in criminal causes; they have no power
of the sword, no restraint upon the body: but having care of souls, which
cannot be governed by force, they are to govern as souls can be governed, that
is by arguments and reason, by fear and hope, by preaching of rewards and
punishments, and all the ways of the noblest government, that is, by wisdom
and by the ways of God.

This appears in the Apostles description of their own office and power. 6.
What is Paul and what is Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.
but Ministers by whom ye believed? Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.
stewards of the Mysteries of Christ: to us is committed the word of
reconciliation; 2 Cor. 6.
we are Ambassadors for Christ; Act. 26.
(...) we are not lords over the flock; but as though God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. Luke 12.
Thus Christ set them over the household, not to strike the servants, but to
give them their meat in due season; that is, as Optatus expresses it, to
minister the food of Gods word and Sacraments to the servants of the family.
lib. 5. contr. Parmen.
Nolite vobis majestatis dominium vindicare; nam si ita est, vindicent sibi and
ministri qui m^nsae dominicae famulantur, ut pro humanitaete exhibita ab
invitatis gratulatio eis referatur....Est ergo in universis servientibus non
dominium sed ministerium. Therefore esteem not your selves to have any thing
but the ministry and service, nothing of dominion. And indeed we need
challenge no more: It is honor enough to serve such a Prince, to wait at such
a table, to be stewards of such a family, to minister such food. This service
is perfect freedom; and that is more then can be said of the greatest temporal
dominion in the world. Homil. 35. in Matt. apud Chrysostom.
Principes Ecclesiae fiunt ut serviant minoribus suis, and ministrent eis
quaecunque acceperunt a Christo. The same with the words of Christ, He that is
greatest amongst you, let him be your minister. For the honors in Christian
religion at the first look indeed like dignities; ibid.
but indeed they are not diverse honors, but diverse services: as it seems to be
an honor to the eye that it enlightens the whole body, but it is not it is
honor, but it is ministry; so it is amongst the Saints; it is not his honor,
but his act. And so is the Apostleship thought to be a great dignity, but it is
not so; but it is his ministry. For So S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.
If I preach the Gospel it is no glory to me: for necessity is laid upon me,
and woe is unto me if I do not preach the Gospel: for if I do it willingly, I
have a reward; but if unwillingly, there is nothing but a stewardship entrusted
to me. The consequent of this discourse is this in the words of the same
Father, Quicunque desiderat primatum in terra inveniet confusionem in coelo,
Whosoever desires primacy ( meaning amongst the Ecclesiastics, and by virtue of
their order and office) upon earth, shall find confusion in Heaven.

But this is most expressly and clearly taught by the Fathers of the Church. 7.
so S. Gregory Nazianzen, in Apologet.
He that is set over others (speaking of Bishops) laying behind him every sin,
must proceed in godliness, so that by the example of his spiritual growth he
may draw others unto virtue, especially by that form of humility which was
delivered to us by the Lord. Non enim oportet vi vel necessitate constringere,
sed ratione and vitae exemplis suaderc, For no man is to be constrained by
force or by necessity, but persuaded by reason and good examples. in Epitaph.
Nepot. Ep. 3.
And thus S. Hierome distinguishes the Ecclesiastical power from the Regal.
Ille nolentibus praeest, hic volentibus: ille terrore subjicit, hic servituti
donatur: ille corpora custodit ad mortem, hic animas servat ad vitam. The King
governs whither men will or no, the Bishop none but the willing. He subdues
them by terror, but the Bishop is but the servant of the peoples souls. The
King keeps bodies reserved for death, but the Bishop takes care of souls that
they may live eternally. Upon this account S. Chrysostom considers the great
difficulty there is in the discharge of the Episcopal office, Homil. 3. in Acta
Apost.
and affirms it to be more troublesome then that of Kings; as much as the rage
of the sea in a tempest is greater then the curlings of a troubled River: and
he gives this reason for it, Quoniam illic plures sunt qui adjuvant, eo quod
ligibus ac mandatis omnia peraguntur: hic vero nihil tale, neque enim licet ex
authoritate praecipere, Because there are more helpers in the secular
government; for all things are transacted by laws and by commandments: but
here (meaning in the Ecclesiastic state) there is no such thing; for it is
lawful, but we have no authority to command any thing. For Homil. 3. in Tit.
Hom. 3. in Acta.
In potestate subjectorum est obedire vel non. They are not domestics, they are
not properly subjects, but obedientiam habentes in sua ipsorum potestate, they
have their obedience in their own power: they may if they will, and they shall
have a good reward; but if they will not, they may choose. For with this power
and upon these terms the Holy Ghost has made them overseers, to feed, not to
rule, the Church of God, that is, not to rule by Empire, but by persuasion. And
this is intimated by the Epistle to the Hebrew^s Obey them that are set over
you, Hebt. 13. 17.
and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls: that they may do it
with joy, not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. That is, Submit
your selves to your spiritual Rulers cheerfully and willingly: if you do not,
they can have no comfort in their ministry; it will grieve them to find you
refractary, and you will be the loosers by it, for their grief will do you no
profit. Now if these Rulers had a power of coercion, he could quickly make them
willing, and the (...) the anguish would fall upon the disobedient. The same
precept is in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, where the words do themselves
expound the nature of the government, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12.
We beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor amongst you and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very high in love for
their works sake. And immediately after he calls them in partem sollicitudinis,
into a participation of this rule, v. 14.
(...), We beseech you, brethren, to admonish, or to warn, to reprove them
that are unruly. That is, you must help us in our government: we are over you
to admonish you, but you must admonish one another: that will help our work
forward when you are willing. But they which are over you must be highly
esteemed, not for their dignity, but for their works sake, not in fear, but in
love; for they are over you not by Empire, but by discourses, not by laws, but
by exhortation. And certainly this is the best government in the world; that
the people of God sit populus voluntarius should serve God with reason and
choice, with love and pleasure and eternity of satisfaction. And this is
observed also by S. Chrysostom. The Princes of this world (says he) are so
much inferior to this spiritual power, by how much it is better to rule over
the wills of men then over their bodies: and that is the state of Ecclesiastical
government, concerning which who please to see much more, may with pleasure
read it in S. Chrysostom in his first Homily upon the Epistle to Titus, and the
11th Homily upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, and in his second book of
Priesthood.

Now against this it will not be sufficient to oppose any precedents of
government under the Old Testament. 8.
He there that did not obey the word of the High Priest was to die the death;
Deuter. 17. 8.
for they had (...), a true proper formal jurisdiction given them by God: and
when Moses sat in judgment, (...), says Philo, the Priests were his
assessors; and Judaeis sacerdotii honos firmamentum potentiae erat, the honor
of the Jewish priesthood was a great establishment to the power of the Nation,
says Tacitus. For the Priest were (...) Bishops, and Judges of controversies,
and by the law appointed to inflict punishment upon criminals, said Josephus.
contr. Appi^^. l. 11. c. 6.
But in the Gospel there was no such thing. The Jewish excommunications were
acts of power and a mixed Empire; ours are securities to the sound part, and
cautions against offenders. Their preachings were decrees sometimes; ours can
be but exhortations and arguments to persuade and invite consent.

But neither can it be denied but that the Apostles did sometimes actions of a
delegate jurisdiction. 9.
Thus S. Peter gave sentence of death against Ananias and Sapphira; S. Paul
inflicted blindness upon Elymas the Sorcerer, and delivered Hymenaus and
Alexander and the incestuous Corinthian to be buffeted by Satan; and S. John
threatened to do the like to Di^trephes. That this was extraordinary appears by
the manners of animadversion, which were by miracle and immediate Divine
judgment; for those which were delivered to Satan were given up to be
corporally tormented by some grievous sickness or violence of an evil spirit,
as 1 Corinthians. homil. 15.
S. Chrysostom, de Poenit. l. 1. c. 17. S. August. contr. Epist. Parmen. l. 3.
c. 1.
S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, and diverse others of the Fathers do affirm. But
therefore this was an act of Divine jurisdiction, not of Apostolical: It was a
miraculous verification of their Divine mission, seldom used, not by ordinary
emission of power, but by an extraordinary spirit: for so S. Paul threatened
some criminals in the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 13. 2.
that if he did come he would not spare them: but it was because they made it
necessary by their undervaluing of his person and ministry. Since ye do so,
since ye do look for a sign and proof of Christ speaking in me, you shall
have it. It is not S. Paul's ordinary power, nor his own extraordinary, but
(...) an experiment of Christ's power, who was pleased to minister it by S.
Paul, as well as by any other Apostle: something like those words of our
Blessed Savior, An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign; and
the sign of the Prophet Jonas shall be given them. But then there was great
necessity, and some prodigious examples were to be made to produce the fear of
God and the reverence of religion, that the meannesse and poverty of the
Ministers might not expose the institution to contempt: and because the
religion was destitute of all temporal coercion, and the Civil power put on
armor not for it but against it, therefore God took the matter into his own
hand, and by judgments from heaven verified the preachings Apostolical. Thus
when the Corinthians did use the Lord's Supper unworthily God punished them
with sickness and with death, 1 Cor. 11. 30.
as the Apostle himself tells them: for to denounce them after and to pronounce
them before were equal actions of ministry, but equally no parts of
jurisdiction. This way continued in the Church, though in very infrequent
examples, till the Emperors became Christians, and by laws and temporal
coercions came to second the word of Ecclesiastical Ministry. For S. Cyprian
tells of some persons who being afflicted with evil spirits were cured at their
baptism, who afterward upon their apostasy from the faith were afflicted
again, and again fell into the power of the Devil: Epist. 75.
Recedente siquidem disciplina recessit and gratia; when they forsook Christ,
himself took the matter into his own hand, and was not wanting by an act of his
own jurisdiction to declare that he was their Lord, and would be honored by
them or upon them.

And this was the rod that S. Paul threatened to the Schismatical Corinthians;
10.
not any emanation of the ordinary power of ministry, but a miraculous
consignation of it: for these things (as S. Chrysostom observes) S. Paul calls
signa Apostolatus mei, 2 Cor. 12. 12. Homil. 14. in 1 Cor. Homil. 29. in 2 Cor.
Homil. 5. in 1 Timothy
the signs of his Apostleship wrought among them in signs and miracles and
powers: this was effected in healing the sick, and in striking the refractary
with the rod of God; in giving fight to the blind, and making them blind that
would not see; in raising the dead to life, and causing them to die that would
not live the life of righteousness. But this was not done (...), not by any
power of their own, but by that power to which they only ministered, by the
power of Christ who (blessed be his holy Name for it) keeps this power only in
his own hands. In these their power was no more a power of jurisdiction then
Elias had, who, as S. James said, prayed that it might and prayed that it might
not rain; and called for fire from heaven. And just so the Apostles being moved
by an extraordinary spirit did, when the spirit saw cause, minister to the
Divine judgment. But that was not their work; they were sent of another errand,
and were entrusted with other powers.

But after all this, 11.
it is certain that there were in the Church some images and similitudes of
jurisdiction in their spiritual government. The soul is not, cannot be,
properly subject to any jurisdiction but that of God. For jurisdiction is the
effect of legislation, and is in the mixed Empire as the other is in the mere.
Now none can give laws to souls but God; he only is Lord of wills and
understandings; and therefore none can give judgment or restraint to souls but
God. But as by preaching the Ecclesiastic state does imitate the legislation of
God; so by the power of the Keys she does imitate his jurisdiction. For it is
to be observed that by the Sermons of the Gospel the Ecclesiastics give laws to
the Church, that is, they declare the laws of God; and by the use of the Keys
they also declare the Divine jurisdiction: for as the Church can make no law of
Divine worship or Divine propositions, of faith or manners, but what she has
received from Christ and his Apostles; so neither can she exercise any judgment
but the judgment of God. To that she ministers by threatenings and
denunciations, by comforts and absolutions, as she ministers to the legislative
of God by preaching and publishing, by exhortation and command.

For there is an Empire in preaching; 12.
there is a power of Command which the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of
God must exercise. To this purpose S. Chrysostom discourses excellently, Homil.
13. in 2 Timothy
There are some things which need teaching, some which need commanding: if
therefore you invert the order, and had rather command where it is necessary
for you to teach, you are ridiculous; and as bad if you go about to teach
where you rather should command. That men should do no evil, you need not
teach, but to forbid it with the force of a great authority: and so you must
command them that they should not give heed to Jewish fables: But if you would
have them give their goods to the poor, or keep their virgin, here you have
need of doctrine and exhortation. Therefore the Apostle said both, Command and
teach.....Thus you see that a Bishop must not only teach, but sometimes it is
necessary that he should command. * But then this being a doctrinal precept, or
commanding by the force of a clear and confessed doctrine, has in it no other
Empire but that it is a Commanding in the Name of God, and means this only,
that some things are so clear and obvious, so necessary and confessed, that he
who neglects them is condemned by himself; he need not be taught, but only
commanded to do his duty: but if he will not, God, who gave him the law, has
also jurisdiction over him: and to this also the Church does minister; for the
Bishop commands him in Gods Name, and if he will not, he can punish him in Gods
Name, that is, he can denounce Gods judgments against him; and that is our
ministerial jurisdiction: he can declare him to be out of the way of salvation,
and unworthy to receive the holy mysteries and pledges of salvation. This is
our coercion.

But the use of the Keys does differ from proper jurisdiction in this great
thing, 13.
That if the Keys be rightly used they do bind or loose respectively; but if
they err, they do nothing upon the subject, they neither bind nor loose. Now
in proper jurisdiction it is otherwise: for, right or wrong, if a man be
condemned he shall die for it; and if he be hanged he is hanged. But the Church
gives nothing but the sentence of God, and tells upon what terms God will or
will not pardon. If the Priest minister rightly and judge according to the will
and laws of God, the subject shall find that sentence made good in heaven by
the real events of the other world, which the Priest pronounces here upon
earth. But if the Priest be deceived, he is deceived for himself and for no
body else; he alters nothing of the state of the soul by his quick absolution,
or his unreasonable binding. For it is not true here which the Lawyers say of
humane Jurisdictions, Quod Judex errans pronunciavit, ob authoritatem jus
dicentis transit in rem judicatam. The Priest has no such authority, though
the Civil power have. The error of the Judge does not make the sentence
invalid; his authority prevails above his error: but in the other it is the
case of souls, and therefore is conducted by God only as to all real and
material events, and depends not upon the weakness and fallibilities of men.
And therefore the power of remitting sins given to the Church, is nothing but
an authority to minister that pardon which God gives by Jesus Christ. The
Church pardons sins as the Levitical Priest did cleanse the lepers, said S.
Hierom; that is, he did discern whether they were clean or no, and so restored
them to the congregation: but apud Deum non sententia Sacerdotum, sed reorum
vita quaeritur, God regards not the sentence of the Priest, but the life of the
penitent. For the Priest, aliquid est ad ministrandum ac dispensandum verbum ac
sacramenta, ad mundandum autem and justificandum non est aliquid; is something
as to the ministry and dispensation of the word and sacraments, but nothing as
to the purifying and justification of a sinner: for none works that in the
inward man but he who created the whole man. They are the words of S. Austin.
This therefore is but verbum reconciliationis; the word of reconcilation is
entrusted to us: but we properly give no pardon, and therefore inflict no
punishment.

Indeed the power of the Keys is by a Metaphor changed into a sword, 14.
and S. Paul's wish [ I would they were even cut off that trouble you] seems to
be the warrant; and by excommunications evil persons are cut off from the
congregation of the Lord. And it is true that the Ecclesiastical authority is a
power of jurisdiction, just as Excommunication is a sword. But so is the word
of God, sharper then a two edged sword; and so is a severe reproof, it cuts to
teh bone. Nec censorium stylum, cujus mucronem multis remediis majores nostri
retuderunt, aeque posthac atque illum gladium Dictatorium pertimescamus, Orat.
pro Cluentio.
said Cicero. The Censors tongue was a sword, but our Ancestors sometimes did
not feel it smart; and we fear it not so much as the sword of the Dictators.
But how little there is of proper jurisdiction in Excommunication we can
demonstrate but by too good an argument. For suppose Julian robbing of a
Church, striking the Bishop, disgracing the religion, doing any thing for which
he is ipso facto excommunicate: tell him of the penalty he incurs, cite him
before the Bishop, denounce it in the Church; what have you done to him that
shall compel him to do his duty? Suppose he will not stay from the Church,
that he will go to another, to a strange country, or that he despises all
this. Have you made him afraid? have you troubled him? have you grieved him?
have you done that which shall make him do so no more? But Julian was about to
renounce Christianity, and thinks it all a Fable. Or suppose less then that:
suppose a man that keeps a concubine, and knowing that he sins, and yet
resolves not to quit the sin, he abstains from the communion and the public
service of the Church; if the Bishop admonishes him to leave the partner of his
sin, how if he will not? By what compulsory can the Ecclesiastic state enforce
him? If you threaten to drive him from the Communion, he has prevented you; he
never comes at it. If from prayers, you do him a kindness; for he loves them
not. If from Sermons, then he will enjoy his lust without controlment. What can
the Church do in this case? But suppose yet once more, that a violent hand
shall pull down the whole Episcopal order, what shall the Church do then? will
she excommunicate the men that do it? They say the order it self is
Antichristian; and can they fear to be excommunicated by them? And who fears to
be excommunicated by the Presbytery that believes them to be a dead hand and
can effect nothing? And in the sum of affairs, only the obstinate and the
incorrigible are to be proceeded against by that extreme remedy. And to them
who need that extreme it is no remedy: for they that need it, care not for it:
and what compulsion then can this be? If it be any thing really effective, let
it be persuaded to them that shall deserve it; for it must work wholly by
opinion, and can affright them only who are taught to be afraid of it. It can
only do effort upon them who are willing to be good in the way of the Church:
for it is a spiritual punishment; and therefore operates only upon the spirit,
that is upon the will and understanding, which can have no coercion: so that in
effect it compels them who are willing to be compelled, that is, it does not
compel at all, and therefore is but improperly an act of Jurisdiction.

For that which the Ecclesiastics can do, 15.
is a suspension of their own act, not any power over the actions of other men:
and therefore is but an use of their own liberty, not an exercise of
jurisdiction. He does the same thing in Sacraments as he does in preaching: In
both he declares the guilty person to be out of the way to heaven, to be
obnoxious to the Divine anger, to be a debtor of repentance; and refusing to
baptize an evil Catechumen, or to communicate an ill-living Christian, does but
say the same thing: he speaks in one by signs, and in the other he signifies
by words. If he denies to give him the Holy Communion, he tells him he is not in
the state of grace and the Divine favor, he tells him that he has no communion
with Christ; and therefore by denying the Symbols says that truth which by his
Sermons he publishes. All the effect and real event is produced by the sin of
the man; and the Minister of religion tells him as God's messenger what he has
done to himself, and what will come upon him from God. This is judicium, non
jurisdictio, a judging, not a jurisdiction; a judging a man worthy or unworthy;
which does not suppose a superiority of jurisdiction, but equals do it to
their equals, though in this the Clergy has a superiority, and an authority
from God to do so.

Add to this, 16.
that the other effects of Excommunication are not any force or impression upon
the Delinquent, but are the caution and duty of the Church, or sanior pars of
them that are innocent; for it is a command to them to abstain from the society
of the criminal: for to him it is no direct obligation; indirectly it is, as I
have already affirmed and shall afterward discourse.

This discourse cannot lessen the power and authority of the Church; 17.
it only explicates the nature of it, because it is useful to many cases of
conscience, and does rightly establish the foundation of this great measure of
conscience, [Ecclesiastical laws] and it adds grandeur to it. For it is in the
Ecclesiastical government as it was in the Judaical before they had a King.
They had no King of their own, but God was their King; and he did exercise
Jurisdiction, and appointed Judges over them, and wrought miracles for their
punishment or their escape respectively: and so it is in the Church; Christ our
head keeps the spiritual regality and the jurisdiction in his own hands, but
sends us to minister it according to his laws; which if we do, they who are
found criminals cannot indeed be smitten by us, but they shall be smitten by
God: and therefore Christ said the same thing to his Missionaries as God did to
Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but me, said God; and, He that despises
you, despises me, said Christ. And now, although Kings have the sword in their
own hand, and can smite the disobedient; yet we cannot: but God will smite them
that are disobedient to the Church: and that is worse for them that feel it, and
better for them that are but threatened; for it is true, that by repentance they
may escape that which is threatened by the Church, which in the Commonwealth
they cannot: but these that feel it are in a worse condition; for it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; and, who can dwell
with the Everlasting burnings? For our God is a consuming fire.

RULE II. The Church has power to make laws and to give Commands obliging the
conscience, that is, tying the subjects to obedience under the penalty of
committing sin, or of incurring the Divine displeasure.
BY the Church it is certain I must first mean the Church Catholic, 1.
or all the Governors of the Christian assemblies in the world: because if it
be in a part it is in the whole; and if it be neither in a part nor in the
whole, it is no where. But yet because the whole Catholic Church, that is, all
the Governors of Churches (for if we speak of the Church making laws, we must
mean the governing part of the Church) did never meet since the days of the
Apostles, who being few and united and absolute and supreme could then do what
could never be done since: it is necessary for the reducing this Rule to
practice, that the legislation and the power of commanding be subjected in some
more particular subject; and therefore I shall instance in the least. By the
Church, I mean every particular Church joined to the head of Union; and by the
particular Church, I mean the Angel of that Church, Epist. ad Florent. Pupian.
lib. 4. ep. 9.
the Bishop; according to that saying of S. Cyprian, Scire debes Episcopum in
Ecclesia esse, and Ecclesiam in Episcopo, The Bishop is in the Church, and the
Church in the Bishop: that is, he is in the Church as the head is part of the
body, and the Church is in him as in their representative, and all their power
is ministered by his hand, and their interest promoted by him; and he is the
hand of God and the hand of the people; this lifted up, and that let down; this
in the ministry of prayers, and that in the ministry of blessings. Homil. 61.
in Matthew.
And therefore S. Chrysostom expounding those words of Christ, Tell it unto
the Church, says that they mean, tell it to the Bishop of the Church, who is to
minister food and Discipline to the congregation.

Now all the power of commanding and making Ecclesiastical laws, 2.
that is, laws of Religion, is wholly in the Pastors and Bishops in the supreme
order of Ecclesiastics. If there be two orders of Divine institution, it is
certain that one is the superior; and therefore one only is to rule in
eminency, and the other can rule but in minority and substitution: and that
which is appointed to rule is the superior. Now the case then is clear as to
the present purpose: the Presbyters were under Bishops, and might be accused
before them and rebuked by them; we see it plain in the case of Timothy and
Titus, to whom S. Paul gave rules of Court, and measures of taking cognizance
of causes brought before them. There was plainly the judging order and the
judged: The Elders or Presbyters were judged; over them were Overseers placed.
Par in parem potestatem non habet. Since therefore a judicatory was placed in
the Church, though it was a spiritual only and without temporal coercion, yet
it had a just authority; and therefore must suppose a distinction in the Clergy
of superior and inferior. Now because there can be no union political without
government, and the government which was appointed was that of the (...) the
ruling Clergy, it follows that the Bishop being the head of spiritual union in
the first institution of the Church, every society of Christians is reckoned
one by the unity of the Bishop; and therefore that society of a Bishop and his
parish is the least indeed, but it is a Christian Commonwealth. Now the
practice Apostolical and Primitive administering this power by one and one in
every Church, where there were many Presbyters, it must be evident that he who
was superior to the Presbyters was to rule in every congregation; and because
there was none superior to him by Divine or Apostolical appointment, all the
legislative or commanding power in the Church is founded in the Episcopal
order, and therefore that one Bishop has in his own charge a legislative or
power of command; and therefore much more when many Bishops meet together. A
Diocese is the least circuit of government, but it is an entire body subject to
distinct commands; that is, every Diocese has one set over them in the Lord,
to whom the people are by the commands of Jesus Christ tied to give obedience.

Whether the Diocese be little or great, 3.
allowed or disallowed, in City or in Country, divided into parishes or not
divided, under Metropolitans or not under, of many Churches or but one, it
matters not: where there is a Bishop and a congregation there is a Diocese, and
there is a power of commanding and a necessity of obeying, intra limits
disciplina, within that pale in which they have warranty and power to govern
and to give commandments. As for parishes in the late sense of the word, that
is, the charge of a single Presbyter, it is no body politic of Apostolical or
Divine appointment: for the Presbyters were called in partem sollicitudinis
into the help of the Ministry; but they had no cure of souls, save only by
delegation and special and temporary appointment, for some whole ages in the
Church: and therefore the Governing and the Commanding Authority cannot be
extended to Parishes and to their Curates which are of late date, and received
no power from Christ but that of Ministry, which is also conveyed by the
Bishops hands. But then because above the Bishop there is no appointment in the
whole religion, it is necessary that the legislative be established in him: if
we go higher we can never come to a society of Apostolical or Divine
institution in the Church, because between the whole Catholic Church, either
in diffusion or representation, and a single Diocese, all the intermedial
unions, as of Metropolitans, Primates, Patriarchs, Councils Provincial or
Ecumenical, are by consent and positive and humane institution, but they
directly estabish no Divine Government. This only is properly such. And though
this can suffer alteration as to the administration of it, yet the proper seat
of the authority is the Bishop, by virtue of his order. Whether the Bishop of
Rome received the power into himself alone, and so conveyes it to all other
Bishops, is not material to our present inquiry; for that is a question of the
manner of receiving it, not of the power when it is received. I shall in order
to other purposes discover the unreasonablenesse of that fond pretense and
novelty. But that which I say is, that those persons who by Christ's appointment
to or by the Apostles were authorized to govern the Church, are the heads of
Christian societies, and every such society is a distinct government; and that
this cannot be the division of parishes, because that division was later then
the authority: and though this be true also of Dioceses as they are now
divided, yet that division being but accidental to the charge, and the charge
being an appointed relation, that which is accidental and superinduced cannot
prejudice the nature and institution of it, but that a Bishop and his charge
more or less is an entire society or Commonwealth, as much as the thing can
be; that is, according to the nature and capacity of the subject matter, it is
an entire government, and Prelate and people make the parts of the integral
constitution.

To the verification therefore of the power thus subjected, 4.
all those titles of eminency and superior office recorded in Scripture do
aptly minister: as that they are called Pastors, and Rulers, and Praepositi,
and (...) Bishops or Overseers of the Church: He that hears them, hears Christ,
who has sent them as himself was sent. Upon the account of these the first
rulers of Churches in Scripture did give laws to their people, and threatened
the disobedient not only by the force of their extraordinary power, but by the
effects of their ordinary ministry. The particular instances of command I
shall enumerate when I give account in what things they have power to make
laws; but these words of power were sufficient warrant, and were like seals to
their Commissions and Monitors of their duty. But so the Rulers of the Church
did practice their power, and taught the necessity of obedience.

To this purpose are those words of S. Clement to S. James the Brother of our
Lord; 5.
These things, 1 p^^t. Clem. 1. in a^e.
most dear Brother, I have received from the mouth of holy Peter, who gave the
commands, and I have endeavored to show them to thee, that thou may command
them all to be kept inviolate, because Ecclesiastical affairs ought not to be
done carelessly but with diligence. Therefore let no man think that without
danger he can neglect these precepts, or dissemble them; quia in judicio Dei
ignis aeterni tormenta sustinebit qui Ecclesiastica decreta neglexerit, because
in the judgment of God he shall suffer the torments of an Eternal fire who
shall neglect the decrees of the Church. But he that shall hear thee as the
Minister of Christ commanded, shall receive glory: But he that shall not hear
thee, or rather the Lord speaking by thee, shall receive to himself damnation.

S. Ignatius is very frequent and express in this particular. 6.
Be subject to the Bishop as to the Lord. Epist. ad Trallian.
For he watches for your souls as he that must give an account to God. For it
is necessary that you do nothing without the Bishop. For he that is
disobedient to Bishops, will be altogether without God, impious, Epist. ad
Magnes.
and a despiser of Christ, and a disparager of his ordinance. And again, It is
fit that you obey your Bishop, and in nothing to contradict him. For he that
does, despises not him that is visible, but in him despises the invisible God,
who cannot be despised of any one. For the Bishop has not his promotion from
men, but from God.

Tertullian speaking of the power and judicatory of the Church, 7.
says, in Apologe.
Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes and censura Divina; nam and
judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei conspectu, There are
exhortations, chastisements and a Divine censure; for the judgment of the
Church is with great weight and efficacy, because it is amongst them who are
certain that they shall appear before God: and it is the greatest forerunning
of the great Judgment, if any one sins so that he be banished from the
communion of prayers, assemblies and all holy intercourse.

To which if we add the words of S. Cyprian, 8.
we shall find not only the power and authority warranted, but the subject of
the power declared to be the Bishop. Ep. ad Cornel. Papam lib. 1. ep. 5.
Since there are such and so great and many other examples and precedents by
which the Authority of the Bishop and his power is established by Divine
ordinance, what sort of men do you suppose them to be who, being enemies of
Bishops and rebels against the Catholic Church, are not affrighted with the
threatening of God admonishing them, nor yet with the revenge of the future
judgment? For heresies have arisen and schisms commenced from no other cause
then this, that men do not obey [ the Bishop] the Priest of God: neither do
they consider that there is in the Church for a time a Judge in the stead of
Christ, to whom if all the Brethren would obey according to the Commands of
God, no man would move any thing against a college of Bishops; no man would
after the Divine judgment is passed, after the suffrage of the people, and the
judgment of the Bishops his assessors, make himself a judge not of the Bishop,
but indeed of God himself; no man would divide the Unity of the Church; no man
by a self-pleasure and pride would make a new heresy apart by himself.

I only add the testimony of S. Hierom, 9.
it being in a clear case as to the thing it self; and the difficulty being
only in the measures, the manner and instances of obedience. in Regul.
Monachor. cap. 17.
Episcopus vester cui Ecclesiae commissum est regimen, etc. Your Bishop to whom
the government of the Church is committed, whom God has placed as the surveyor
of his vineyard, the shepherd of the sheep, the director of the flock, the
leader of the people both in the city and the country in which ye live, let him
nourish you with a singular care, and feed you with the meat of holy doctrine,
and in the presence of God take especial care of your souls: let all men
devoutly and with an even mind as to God obey him to whom all the city is
committed.

But because I have given a larger account of this duty in general, in
Episcopacy asserted Sect. 34, 35.
a Discourse on purpose, I shall more properly consider in what particular
cases the conscience is, or is not, bound to obey the Church Governors.

RULE III. The Church has power to make laws in all things of necessary duty,
by a direct power and a Divine authority.
SAint Ignatius discoursing of the Bishops power, 1.
commands subjection to him in so large and comprehensive terms, that they
seem to put an end to all further inquiries in this rule of conscience, by
making all inquiries to be useless; ad Trallian.
because an obedience universal is due. Necesse est ut quicquid facitis, ad
Magnes.
nihil sine Episcopo tentetis, and in nullo illi refragari: And again, Nec
quicquam videatur vobis consentaneum quod sit praeter illius judicium; quod
enim tale est, Deo inimicum est. It is necessary that whatsoever ye do, ye do
nothing without the Bishop; that ye be obedient to him, and be refractary
against him in nothing: Neither let any thing please you that is besides his
judgment; for whatsoever is so is an enemy to God. The same also he repeats in
other places, Epist. ad Ephesians.
and gives it in command to other Churches. But this is too general to guide
any man, and therefore of it self requires a limit: and therefore himself does
explicate it in his letter to the Church of Smyrna. Sine Episcopo nemo quicquam
faciat eorum quae ad Ecclesiam spectant, Without the Bishop let no man do any
thing of that which belongs to the Church; that is, whatsoever is entrusted to
the Bishops charge, the conduct of souls, the duties of religion, the
commandments of God, the Sacraments of the religion, the Orders of the Divine
institution, the interior actions of grace, and the external which are of
necessary ministry and relation to them, are under the Discipline and
legislation of the Church. For in these things only his charge, and therefore
in these things only his authority does lie.

Thus the Bishop has power to command his subject or parishioner to put away
his concubine; 2.
and if he does not, he not only sins by uncleanness, but by disobedience
too. For the authority of the Church being spiritual, it has power over the
spirit, and introduces guilt upon the soul if it be disobeyed. So that it is
but folly and ignorance to think the Bishop has no power, because he is to
command only in those things where God has commanded already. For though he
is God's Minister and commands not by his own will, but by God's, yet he has
the authority of God given to him to do that: and besides that it is not
reasonable to think that God would give the Church-Rulers his authority for
trifling and needless purposes; it is also evident in the thing it self, that
it is of great effect, because even in these things he is the voice of God, and
judges in the place of God, and affrights sinners with the accents of his
displeasure, and upon this account brings a burden upon the disobedient which
was not brought upon him before the command and sentence of the Church.

Whatsoever therefore the Bishop commands us as from God, 3.
in that his power and legislation is properly exercised: and it is absolutely
to be obeyed without any other condition or reserve, but that it be indeed the
will and commandment of God. lib. de Praecepto and dispensation^
So S. Bernard, Quicquid vice Dei praelatus homo praecipit, quod non sit tamen
certum displicere Deo, haud secus omnino recipiendum est ac si praecipiat ipse
Deus, Whatsoever the Prelate in the stead of God commands, provided you are
certain it does not displease God, it must be received as if God himself
commanded it. For what difference is it whether God by himself, or by men his
Ministers, or by his ministering Angels make his will and pleasure known unto
us? Where it is observable that he does not give leave to disobey if we
question whether it be God's will or no; for if it be a question, the
presumption is for the authority imposing it: and in that case, though it be a
doubt in theory, yet that must not hinder the practical obedience; because it
is as certain that our lawful superior has power to command us to obey when
we are not certain of the thing, as it is certain that it is a sin if we do it
in a doubting conscience by our own authority. For the authority of God in the
hand of a Prelate is warrant enough to determine us when we know nothing to the
contrary, though our own will is not. If we have a doubting conscience, we have
nothing (while the doubt remains) to oppose against it but our will, and that
is not sufficient, but a Divine authority is. Now although in the present case
it does not work to the clearing of the material doubt, yet it does operate to
the clearing of the duty: and therefore S. Bernard said well [ quod non sit
tamen certum displicere Deo] unless you are sure, that is, be fully persuaded,
you displease God in obeying the Bishop, it is certain you do displease God by
disobeying him.

For it is a part of our obedience not to judge his sentence, 4.
that is, not to give judgment against him in a question of difficulty, but to
stand to his sentence. ad Rusticum Monach.
Credas tibi salutare quicquid ille praeceperit; nec de Majorum sententia
judices, cujus officii est obedire and implere quae jussa sunt, said S. Hierom
in a like case. It is your part to obey, and to do what is commanded, and not
to judge your judges, but to believe all that to be good which your Prelate
commands you; meaning when his command is instanced in the matter of the Divine
Commandment. In things that are plain and easy, every man can be a Judge,
because indeed their needs none, for there is no question: but in things of
difficulty, and where evidently God is not dishonored, it is very much our
duty to obey the Church.

Thus the Church has power to command us to be devout in our prayers, 5.
to be charitable to our Brother, to forgive our enemy, to be heartily
reconciled to him, to instruct the ignorant, to follow holiness, and to do
justice, and to be at peace with all men; and he that obeys not, does walk
disorderly, and may be used accordingly with all the power the Church has
entrusted to her, according to the merit of the cause: but it is certain he
sins with a double iniquity that refuses Gods Commandment and the precept of
his spiritual superior; for in these things every Minister can exhort, but the
Bishop can command, that is, he binds the Commandment of God by a new
obligation and under a distinct sin, the sin of disobedience.

RULE IV. The Church has power to make laws in such things which are helps and
apt ministeries and advantages of necessary duty.
This Rule is expressly taught by S. Basil: 1.
Necessario ea nos in memoriam debemus redigere quae dicta sunt ab Apostolo, In
regul. brevior. cap. 14.
Prophetias nolite spernere.... Ex his autem intelligitur quod si quid nobis
imperatum est quod idem sit cum mandato Domini, aut adjuvet, illud tanquam
voluntas Dei studiosius diligentiusque a nobis suscipi debet, We must remember
what the Apostle said, Despise not prophesyings. But if any thing be commanded
us which is all one with the command of God, or may help it, it ought to be
undertaken by us with diligence and study as if it were the will of God. Thus
if our Bishop in his precepts and sermons of chastity command that the women
go not to the public spectacles, where are represented such things which
would make Cato blush, and Tuccia have looser thoughts, they are bound in
Conscience to abstain from those impure societies; and not only from the lust,
but from the danger. For in vain is it that God should entrust the souls of the
people to spiritual Rulers, and give them wisdom to do it, and commandment to
do it with diligence, and gifts of the Holy Spirit to enable them to do it
with advantage, if the people were not tied in duty to decline those places and
causes where and whence they do usually perish.

And in pursuance of the Episcopal authority in the like instances it was that
S. Chrysostom held his pastoral staff over the disobedient: 2.
for the Church had declared that in the holy time of Lent the people should
live austerely, and therefore he told them at that time especially that they
should not go to the public shows and theaters; and to the disobedient he
adds this threatening, Homil. 6. in Genes.
Sciant omnes his criminibus obnoxii, si post hanc nostram admonitionem in ea
negligentia manserint, non toleraturos nos, sed legibus Ecclesiasticis usuros,
and magna austeritate docturos ne talia posthac negligant, n^ve tanto contemptu
Divina audiant eloquia, Let all that are guilty of such crimes know that if
after this admonition they persist in this neglect, we will not suffer it, but
use the laws of the Church against them, and shall teach them with great
austerity that hereafter they do not hear the Divine Sermons with so great
contempt.

Upon the same account the Church in her Sermons of repentance does usually, 3.
and has authority to enjoin actions of internal and external significations
and ministeries of repentance. In the Primitive Church the Bishops did indict
fasting-dayes, and public Letanies and processions or solemn supplications and
prayers to be used in the times of public danger and necessity. Lib. de
jejunio in psychicos
This we find in Tertullian, Episcopi universae plebi mandare jejunia assolent,
non dico de industria stipium conferendarum, ut vestrae capturae est, sed
interdum and ex aliqua sollicitudinis Ecclesiasticae causa, The Bishops are
wont to command fasting days to all the people, not for secular ends, but for
Ecclesiastical necessity and advantage. For when God has established an office
and ministry, it is certain he made it sufficient to acquire all the ends of
it' s designation: since therefore the government even of internal actions and
a body or society of men must suppose external acts, ministeries, circumstances
and significations, no man can from without govern that which is within,
unless he have power to govern that without which the internal act cannot be
done in public, in union and society.

And here comes in that Rule of the law, 4.
The Accessory follows the nature of the Principal; which has been so
infinitely mistaken and abused by the pretenses of Romanists and Presbytery for
the establishing an Empire Ecclesiastical in things belonging to themselves,
not to God. For the soul being the principal and the body it is instrument, they
hence argue that they to whom the souls are committed, have therefore a right
to govern the body, because it is accessory to the soul; and if the body, then
also the accessories of the body, actions, circumstances, time, wealth, lands
and houses; in order to the spiritual good of the soul: which proposition
because it is intolerable, it can never be the product of Truth, and therefore
must be derived from a false understanding of this true rule of the lawyers.
But because in it is true meaning it serves to conduct many, and particularly
this rule of Conscience, it is necessary that we know the true meaning of it.

The Rule [The Accessory follows the nature of the Principal] explicated.
Therefore for the understanding of it so far as can be in order to our design,
5.
it is to be inquired, how we shall know which is the principal and which is
the accessory? 2. In what sense the accessory must follow the nature of the
principal.

1. That which is principal to one purpose, 6.
is but the accessory to another sometimes. If Titius hires my land and builds
a house upon it, the house is but the accessory, because it came after my land
was in possession. But if Titius buys my house standing upon my own land, he
buys the land too; for the land is but the accessory, and the house is the
principal: because the house being the purchase, it cannot be at all but upon a
foundation, and therefore the ground is the accessory, and after the house in
the intention of the buyer. Villa fundum quaerat, it is sometimes true; but
ordinarily, Fundus quaerit villam.

2. That which is of greatest value is not always the principal, 7.
but sometimes is the accessory. The picture of Apollo upon a laurel board is
much more precious then the wood, and yet if Apelles should take Lucian's wood
and draw the picture. Lucian will make bold with the board, and consequently
carry away the picture. A jewel set in gold is much better then the gold, but
yet the gold is the principal, because it was put there to illustrate and to
adorn the gold; l. cum aurum. 19.. perveniamus ff. de aur. and argent. leg.
according to that of Ulpian, Semper cum quaerimus quid cui cedat, illud
spectamus, quid cujus rei ornanda causa adhibetur. And therefore if Caius dying
leave me in legacy his black-cloth suit, I shall also receive the
diamond-buttons that adorn it: because these were placed there to adorn it; and
therefore are the accessory, because they are usu minores, and wholly set there
for the ministry of the other. Quod adhibetur alterius rei causa; that is
principal for whose sake the other was sent or put. And therefore it is no good
argument to conclude that the body is the accessory, because the soul is more
noble. Cedent gemmal phialis vel lancibus inclusae auro argentove. The soul is
indeed a jewel set in gold; but is therefore an accessory to the body in some
cases. He that buys the body of a slave, has right to all the ministeries of
the soul; and the man is bound to serve his Master with a ready mind and a good
will; and the soul is a (...) of the body. The body is first, and the soul
comes afterward to give it life and motion.

3. When two substances concur to the constitution or integrity of a third, 8.
one is not the accessory to the other. The eye is not the accessory to the
head, nor the foot to the leg, nor the hand to the arm; for that only is an
accessory, quod alterius rei causa adhibetur aut accedit: If it comes in
accidentally and be wholly for the others sake, then it is an accessory. Thus
order and decency and circumstances of time and place are for the ministeries
and ornament of religion, and therefore are accessories. The outward act is the
less principal and an accessory to the inward, for to the inward it wholly
ministers; and consequently he that disposes of one may also govern the other,
because the less principal is included in the more, and the less and the more
have not two administrations, because they have but one use. But the soul and
the body are two distinct substances of differing ministrations, acting to
several and sometimes to contrary purposes; they are parts of the same man, a
better and a worse, but not a principal and accessory, unless it be by
accident and in some uses and to some purposes; and then sometimes one
sometimes the other is the principal. Concerning which the Rule is this.

4. Those things which of themselves are not, 9.
but by accident may be made accessories to a principal, are then to be
esteemed to be so when they actually and wholly are joined in use to the
principal, and serve the end of the principal, but have none of their own. Thus
when the soul prays passionately, if the lips move without a deliberate act of
understanding, but obeying the fancy, the body in that case is purely the
accessory. I say in that case: for if the body receive a command to other
purposes, as to attend upon the Prince at the same time when the soul prays, in
that case they are both principals; and neither of them is accessory to the
other. And therefore although it will follow that when the body ministers to
the action of the soul wholly, and has no distinct work and office of its own
in that action, he that commands the soul, can also command the body; for they
are in that ministry but as one: yet it will not follow that when the body is
not (...) have also an absolute and irrespective nature, operation or design,
it cannot be governed in any thing of this, because of it is relative nature and
conjunction in the other; for there it is not accessory. For it is the nature
of the (...), The conjunct cause or reason, when it is there, the work will
follow: but when it is away, there will be no event, says the Philosopher.

6. It is not enough to make a thing to be accessory, 11.
that it is designed for the use and ministry of another that is principal;
but it must be actually applied: for till then it is but a potential accessory,
which gives no right, and changes no nature, and produces no effect. Bridles
and saddles are made to be used with horses: but he that buys all the horses
in a fair cannot claim all the saddles and bridles which are in the same fair
to be sold; because they are not yet become the accessories, but are only
designed to be so. It is intended that the body should minister to the soul in
matters of religion; but because it ministers also to other actions of the
soul, he that rules the soul does not by consequence rule the body, unless it
be actually applied, and be conjunct with the soul in the ministeries of
religion.

2. These may be sufficient to declare so much of the nature of accessories as
is of use in our present questions. 12.
The next inquiry is, what is the meaning of these words, [The accessory [
follows the nature] of the principal.] For it cannot be meant that whatsoever
is said of one may be said of the other; or whatsoever may be done to one, may
be done to the other. The Rulers of souls have power to excommunicate or to cut
them off from the body of the Church, which is the greatest spiritual power,
and is after it is own manner a spiritual death. Now suppose the body be an
accessory to the soul, it will not follow that he that can cut the soul off
from the Church, can cut the body also off from the Commonwealth. But the
meaning is, that duplici and diverso jure censeri non debent, they who are
joined in one action are to have one judgment, though according to their
respective measures. If the soul does well, so does the body ministering to the
soul. If it be good to pray, it is good to appoint times and places to pray in,
because without time and place you cannot pray: If time and place be contingent
and irregular, so are our prayers; if our prayers be solemn and fixed, so must
they. And thus also it is in matter of Government. If the Bishop is to guide
the devotion of the soul, he can also give rules to the body in all that which
it ministers to that action of the soul; and when they two make one complete
action by way of principal and accessory, they are the same one entire subject
of government. But this is to be extended no further. This passes not to the
distinct actions or ministeries of the body; but is confined to that in which
it is, and so long as it is one agent with the soul: neither can it pass to
warrant any other impression upon the body, but that it be commanded and
conducted in the (...) the Curator bonorum; and the Physician that gives physic
to the body, and conducts the regiment of health, is not Master of his
wardrobe: and the Epigram derided Herod the Empiric, Clinicus Herodes trullam
subduxerat aegro:
Deprensus dixit, Stulte, quid ergo bibis?
because when he came to take away his patients sickness, he took away his
plate. If the principal act be confirmed by an accessory oath, though the
principal act prove null and invalid in law, yet the man is tied by the
remaining oath. A man cannot offer to God an indifferent action or thing. And
therefore he that promises to God to walk three turns every day, has done
nothing; the act is null, and he is not obliged to pay that to God: but if an
oath did supervene, that must stand, c. cum contingat. extr. de jurejur.
though the principal of it self be null; because every oath that can without
sin be kept, must stand. The alienation of a Minors lands is rescinded by law,
yet the obligation and caution of the Tutor for the accessory verification of
the principal sale will stand: because there is a reason that separates the
accessory from the principal, and the law intending to rescind the translation
of the Dominion, not to rescind the contract, leaves the principal loose, and
the accessory bound. This is also thus in actions principal and accessory,
which the law calls personales and hypothecarias. Maevius dies and divides his
estate between Lucius and Lucullus; but he was indebted 20 talents, and for
caution had engaged some jewels. Lucius pays his five talents, and Lucullus
pays four of the other: the personal action of Lucius is dissolved, but the
accessory is not; for till Lucullus his personal or principal be taken off, the
accessory and cautionary remains upon them both: and this also has a
particular reason, and so have all those cases in which this Rule fails.

From whence I infer, 14.
that this thing is sometimes reasonable, and sometimes unreasonable, but it is
never necessary but in one case; and that is when the accessory is necessary
and inseparable, either by reason of a natural or positive conjunction. For
some things are accessory by use and customs, some by laws and commandments,
some by the nature of the thing. Now of the first two sorts the measures are
contingent and alterable: the laws sometimes declare a thing to be accessory,
and at other times it is no so: and if by use or contract or custom a thing be
accessory, it ceases to be so if the accessory be particularly excepted. As if
I buy a house, it is by custom concluded that I intend the garden that is
joined to it; and he that sels a horse, sels his bridle: but if the garden be
reserved, and the bridle be excepted, the rule is then of no use.

Now to apply this to the present inquiries. 15.
1. Because the body is not in the nature of the thing an inseparable,
necessary accessory to the soul in spiritual actions and ministeries, but the
soul can pray alone, and be charitable alone, and love God alone, and the body
has actions, and intentions, and interests which mingle not with that which
the spiritual rulers are to govern; therefore it cannot be inferred that the
body is subject in all things to them who govern souls.

But 2. 16.
It does follow and may by force of this rule be inferred that they who are to
govern the religion and spiritual actions of the soul, can also govern the
actions of the body which minister immediately and necessarily to the necessary
actions of the soul: and therefore because it is a duty that we communicate in
the Communion of Saints, when that duty is actually and of necessity to be
done, the Bishop has power to command the bodies of men to be present in
Christian assemblies, according to the precept of the Apostle, Neglect not the
assembling of your selves together.

And yet further, 17.
to come home to the present Rule, there are several degrees of necessity, and
several reasons of it. Some things are necessary for life, and some for health.
Some are necessary for single Christians, some things are necessary for
societies; some things are necessary in private, and some in public; some
things are for order, and some for precise duty; some things are absolutely,
and some are but respectively and in order to certain ends necessary. The body
is an accessory to the soul, atque eodem jure censendum, to be judged by the
same laws, governed by the same persons, subject to the same sentence and
conduct, not only in things of absolute necessity, but even in things of great
advantage; not only in private necessity, which is always indispensable, but
even in public necessities of the Church, in which there is greater latitude
and more liberty: and the reason is, because even these lesser degrees of
necessity are required of us by Divine Commandment; and it is not only
commanded to us to do that which is lawful, but that also which is of good
report; not only that we glorify God, but that our Brethren be edified. And in
proportion to this, it is required of the guides of souls that they give good
account of them, but it is required of us also that we so comport our selves
that they may do it with joy: Hebr. 13. 17.
which cannot be supposed, if their power be kept within the bounds of a simply
and indispensably necessary internal religion; it cannot be done without
prosperous circumstances and advantages of religion: in these therefore if
spiritual guides have not power to give commands, they have not all that is
necessary by all the kinds of necessity which God made.

But this Rule we see verified by authentic precedents. 18.
For the Apostles at Jerusalem indeed thought fit to impose nothing but those
necessary things which are specified in their decretal: but S. Paul used also
this authority by the measures of the present Rule, and commanded beyond the
limits of absolute necessity, even that which he judged convenient; and
verifies his authority in his Epistle to Philemon, Philem. 8. verse.
I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient: and
this he actually did to the Corinthian Church, commanding that all things
should be done decently and in order.

Now although it be true that in these things the Apostle had some advantages
which the Bishops in succession have not; 19.
he had an infallible spirit, and what he called convenient was so indeed; and
he had converted Philemon, he was his Father in Christ, and he was one of the
pillars upon which Christ built the Church, and he was to lay the foundation
for an everlasting building: yet because the instance to the Corinthian Church
was such which was of a perpetual reason, and it would be for ever necessary
that things should be done in the Church decently and in order, and the
question of decency would for ever have variety and flux, succession and a
relative uncertainty, it was necessary that of this there should be perpetual
Judges and perpetual Dictators: and these can be no other but the Rulers of the
Church, who have the same power as the Apostles had in this, though not so many
advantages of power. When the Bishops judge truly concerning necessity, and
such decencies and reasonablenesses as are next to necessity, they can enjoin
them, only they cannot judge so surely; and therefore although there may be
more causes of laying aside their commands, yet it is never lawful without
cause.

But this is not to be extended to such decencies as are only ornament, 20.
but is to be limited to such as only rescue from confusion: the reason is,
because the Prelates and spiritual guides cannot do their duty, unless things
be so orderly that there be no confusion, much less can they do it with joy;
and so far their power does extend: for although that is not required of the
governors but of the people, that the Rulers office be done with joy; yet
because it is required of the people, they sin if they hinder it; therefore the
Rulers have power to enjoin it. But if it can go beyond this limit, then it
can have no natural limit, but may extend to sumptuousness, to ornaments of
Churches, to rich utensils, to splendour, to Majesty; for all that is decent
enough, and in some circumstances very fit. But because this is too subject to
abuse, and gives a secular po^er into the hands of Bishops, and an authority
over men's estates and fortunes, and is not necessary for souls, and no part of
spiritual government, it is more then Christ gave to his Ministers.

This also is to be added: 21.
that because this power is derived to spiritual Rulers upon the account of
reason and experience of things and the duty of the people, that the Rulers
should be enabled to give an account of their charges with joy, therefore it is
only left to the people to do it or not, under the pain of a sin; but they
are not to incur spiritual censures upon the stock of noncompliance in
things not simply necessary or of essential duty. For to compel them to
advantages will bring but little joy to the Ruler: he must secure the main duty
whether they will or no; that himself is to look to, and therefore to use all
the means God has put into his hand; and for that he must look for his joy
when he comes to give up his account: but that he himself should do his duty
with joy, that is with advantages, with ease, with comfort, being a duty wholly
incumbent on the people and for their profit, if they will not comply, they
sin; and it is not profitable for them, Hebr. 13. 17.
says the Apostle, that is, they loose by it; but to this they are at no hand
to be constrained, for that will destroy his joy as much as the letting it
alone.

Beyond this the Bishop has no authority to command what he can persuade by
argument, 22.
he is to take care it be well and wisely, to the glory of God and the good of
his Church, to the edification of all men that are interested, and the special
comfort and support of the weak. The sum of which power is excellently summed
up by S. Paul. 1 Thessal. 4. v. 2, 3, and 6.
For ye know what Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. For this is the
will of God, even your sanctification: That ye abstain from fornication....
that no man defraud his Brother. In these things the spiritual power is proper
and competent. But the Apostle adds, He therefore that despises, despises
not man but God, who has also given us his holy Spirit. That is, In those
things which are certainly the laws of God the Bishop is to rule entirely
according to the power given him. But because God has not only given his
authority; but his spirit too, that is, he has given him wisdom as well as
power, it cannot be supposed to be for nothing: whatever he wisely orders, that
is of necessary relation to the express command of God, or is so requisite for
the doing of it, that it cannot be well done without it by any other
instrument, nor by it self alone. In this it is to be supposed that the spirit
of government which God has given to his Church will sufficiently assist, and
therefore does competently oblige: less then this the Spirit of God cannot be
supposed to do, if it does any thing beside giving and revealing the express
commandment and necessary duty.

Beyond these strict and close measures there is no doubt but the Spirit of God
does give assistance: 23.
as the great experience of the Church, and the effects of government, and the
wise rules of conduct, and the useful Canons, and the decent Ceremonies, and
the solemn rites, and the glorifications of God consequent to all this do
abundantly testify. But yet beyond this, the Bishops can directly give no laws
that properly and immediately bind the transgressors under sin: and my reasons
are these.

1. Because we never find the Apostles using their Coercion upon any man but
the express breakers of a Divine Commandment, 24.
or the public disturbers of the peace of the Church and the established
necessary order.

2. Because even in those things which were so convenient that they had a power
to make injunctions, 25.
yet the Apostles were very backward to use their authority of commanding; much
less would they use severity, but entreaty. Philemon. 8, ^.
It was S. Paul's case to Philemon before mentioned; Though I might be much
bold in Christ to enjoin that which is convenient; yet for love's sake I rather
entreat thee.

3. In those things where God had interposed no Command, 26.
though the rule they gave contained in it that which was fit and decent, yet
if men would resist, they gently did admonish or reprove them, and let them
alone. So S. Paul in case of the Corinthian men wearing long hair, If any man
list to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God: that
is, let him choose; it is not well done, we leave him to his own liberty, but
let him look to it.

4. If the Bishops power were extended further, 27.
it might extend to Tyranny, and there could be no limits beyond this
prescribed, to keep him within the measures and sweetness of the government
Evangelical: but if he pretend a Divine authority to go further, he can be
absolute and supreme in things of this life which do not concern the Spirit,
and so fall into Dynasty, as one anciently complained of the Bishop of Rome,
and change the Father into a Prince, and the Church into an Empire.

But this hinders not but that the power of spiritual Rulers may yet extend to
a further use, 28.
not by a direct power of command, or of giving laws, but by all the indirect
and collateral ways of obligation, as of fame, consent, reputation of the man,
the reverence of his person, and the opinion of his wisdom and sanctity, by
voluntary submission, and for the avoiding scandal: when any of these causes of
action or instruments of obligation do intervene, the Bishop does not directly
bind, but the people are bound: and their obligation from all these principles
are reduced to two heads. The matter of scandal; in which case, under pain of
sin they must obey in all lawful things, when by accident and the concurse of
emergent causes it is scandalous to disobey. And the other is, Their own
consent; for however it be procured fairly, if they once have consented, they
are become a law unto themselves, and so they remain till this law suffers
diminution as other laws do that die: of which I am afterward to give account.

There is one way more by which Ecclesiastical laws do bind; but this is the
matter of the next Rule.

RULE V. When the Canons or Rules of Ecclesiastical Rulers are confirmed by the
supreme Civil power, they oblige the Conscience by a double obligation.
(...), 1.
say the Greek Lawyers. The power of making laws, viz. of determining things
not commanded by God, or of punishing prevarications against Gods laws or their
own, is granted to Kings. And therefore as secular Princes did use to indict or
permit the indiction of Synods of Bishops; so when they saw cause, they
confirmed the sentences of Bishops and passed them into laws. Before the
Princes were Christian, the Church was governed by their spiritual guides, who
had authority from God in all that was necessary, and of great convenience next
to necessity; and in other things they had it from the people, from necessity
and from good will, by hope and fear, by the sense of their own needs, and the
comfort of their own advantages. It was populus voluntarius, the people came
with free-will-offerings, and were at first governed by love as much as now
they need to be by fear and smart. But God was never wanting to his Church, but
made provisions in all cases and in all times. Of that which was necessary
Christ left in his Ministers a power of government: and in that which was not
primely necessary, but emergently and contingently came to be useful and fit,
he only left in his Ministers a power to persuade; but he gave them an
excellent spirit of wisdom and holiness by which they did prevail, and to
the people the spirit of love and obedience: and these together were strength
enough to restrain the disobedient. For as in the Creation there was Light
before the Sun, that we might learn that the Sun was not the fountain of light,
but God: so there was a government in the Church even before the Princes were
Christians, that the support and ornament of Gods Church might be owned as an
efflux of the Divine power, and not the kindness of Princes. But yet as when
the Light was gathered and put into the body of the Sun, we afterward derived
our light from him, and account him the Prince of all the bodies of light: so
when the government external of all things was drawn into the hands of Princes
becoming Christians, to them the Church owes the heat and the warmth, the light
and the splendour, the life of her laws, and the being of all her great
advantages of maintenance and government. At first the Church was indeed in the
Commonwealth, but was reckoned no part of it, but as enemies and outlaws, were
persecuted with intolerable violence; but when the Princes of the Commonwealth
became servants of Christ, they were also nurses of the Church, and then it
became a principal part of the Republic, and was cared for by all her laws.

For this first way was not like to last long; 2.
for good manners soon corrupt, and a precarious authority, though wise and
holy, useful and consented to, was not stable as the firmament of laws that
could compel: and yet it became necessary by new introduced necessities that
there should be rules and measures given in things relating to the Church,
concerning which God himself had given no commandment; as concerning order in
Synods and conventions Ecclesiastical, the division of Ecclesiastical charges,
the appointment of under-ministeries in the Church, the dispensation of
revenues, the determination of causes and difficulties in manners of speaking
or acting, and whatsoever was not matter of faith or a Divine Commandment: in
all that new necessities did every day arise, and the people were weary of
obeying, and the Prelates might press too hard in their governing, or might be
supposed to do so when they did not, and the peoples weariness might make
them complain of an easy load; and it was not possible well to govern long by
the consent of the people who are to be governed. It pleased God to raise up a
help that should hold for ever, and when the Princes became Christian and took
care of all this, that is, of all the external regiment of the Church, of all
that was not of spiritual nature and immediate necessary relation to it, then
the Ecclesiastical laws were advised by Bishops and commanded by Kings; they
were but Rules and Canons in the hands of the spiritual order, but laws made by
the secular power. And now these things are not questions of the power of the
Clergy, but a matter of obedience to Kings and Princes.

These Canons before the Princes were Christian were no laws further then the
people did consent; 3.
and therefore none but the men of good will, the pious and the religious
children of the Church did obey: but now that Princes have set the Cross upon
their Imperial globes and scepters, even the wicked must obey; all are tied by
all manner of ties, and all can be compelled that need it. These Ecclesiastical
laws so established the Greeks call (...), Edicts, orders, and golden bulls,
commanding or making into laws the sentences and rules of Synods. The (...),
that is the effect and production of Bishops in their conventions; that is, they
have jus pronunciandi quid sanctum, quid non, a right of pronouncing what is
for Gods glory and the interests of religion, and what not: but the (...), the
establishment and the command belong to Princes. The Synod has a (...) or a
right of judging, but the (...) or confirmation of it into a law belongs to the
Civil power. So we find in a Synodal Epistle de non avellendis episcopis a sua
Metropoli, (...), some such thing as this has been found done by the decree or
judgment of a Synod, but established by after-judgement of the King. To the
same sense are those words of (...) applied to the Bishops Canons, and (...) to
the Kings Edict upon them; and therefore the Emperors and Princes were said
(...), in act. Council. C. P.
to put the seal of their authority to the decrees of the Fathers. Vide Chapt.
3. Rule 8. hujus libri.


For it was never known in the Primitive Church that ever any Ecclesiastical 4.
law did oblige the Catholic Church unless the secular Prince did establish
it. The Nicene Canons became laws by the Rescript of the Emperor Constantine,
says Sozomen. He wrote an Epistle and commanded that all Churches should keep
Easter by the Canon of the Nicene Fathers, and made it capital to keep any of
the books of Arius. * When the Council of Constantinople was finished the
Fathers wrote to the Emperor Theodosius, and petitioned ut edicto Pietatis tuae
confirmetur Synodi sententia, that he would be pleased to confirm the sentence
of the Council by his Edict: ut quemadmodum literis quibus nos vocabas
Ecclesiam honorasti, ita etiam decreta communibus suffragiis tandem facta
sigillo tuo confirms. The Emperor had done them favor and honor in calling
them together, and they petitioned he would also confirm what they had agreed
upon, and by his seal make it authentic. The confirmation of the Canons and
Decrees of the great Ephesin Council by the Emperor is to be seen at the end of
the Acts of the Synod: and Marcian the Emperor wrote to Palladius his Prefect a
letter in which he testifies that he made the Decrees of the Council of
Chalcedon to become laws. For having forbidden any person to make assemblies
and orations of religion in public, he adds this reason, Nam and injuriam
facit reverendissimae Synodi judicio, si quis semel judicata ac recte disposita
revolvere and public disputare contenderit; cum ea quae nunc de Christiana
fide a Sacerdotibus qui Chalcedone convenerunt per nostra praecepta statuta
sunt, etc. For he does injury to the judgment of the most reverend Synod, if
he shall unravel and dispute the things which were there judged and rightly
disposed; since those things appointed by the Bishops met at Chalcedon
concerning Christian faith were commanded by us; or were appointed by our
Commandment.... Nam in contemptores hujus legis poena non de^rit, They that
despise this law shall be punished. Thus also the Fathers of the fifth General
Synod petitioned Justinian to confirm and establish their Canons into a law, in
the same form which was sent to Theodosius by the Bishops of the General
Council at Constantinople before mentioned. Vide Council. Tolet. 6.
The same Prince also published a Novel in which he commands vim legum obtinere
Ecclesiasticos Canones a quatuor Synodis, Nicena, Constantinopolitana prima,
Ephesina prima and Chalcedonensi expositos and confirmatos; that all the laws
which were made or confirmed by the four first General Councils should have the
force of laws: that is, all their own Canons and those of Ancyra, Gangra,
Antioch and Laodicea, which were then adopted into the Code of the Universal
Church, though they were but Provincial in their original.

So that now upon this account the Ecclesiastical laws are as obligatory to the
conscience as those which are made in a Civil matter; 5.
and there is no difference but in the matter only: but for that there will be
some advantage; for as the Civil power has authority in Ecclesiastical
matters, so the spiritual power has a share in the legislative: the matter is
handled by the Ecclesiastics, and the law is established by the secular. And
therefore if it be thought that the cognizance of these things is not proper
for seculars, those that think so may be satisfied that the Bishops have judged
the thing already; and they that think the Bishops have no power of making the
law, may learn to obey, because the Prince has by his legislative established
it. So one hand helps another, and both are lift up to God, but will fall heavy
upon the disobedient.

. 2. Of CENSURES Ecclesiastical.
I have given the general measures of the Legislative power of the
Ecclesiastical state: next to this I am to account concerning their Coercitive.
2. and then return to the inquiries after the more particular subjects of this
power. 3. and their particular laws and their obligations upon the conscience
in external order. 4. and in matters of faith. 5.

RULE VI. Kings and Princes are by the ties of Religion, not of power, obliged
to keep the laws of the Church.
THe laws of the Church I have already divided into such which she makes by a
Divine authority, 1.
such which concern our essential duty, in which she has power to command and
rule in her appointed manner; and into those which are external, political and
contingent, such which Princes if they please make up into laws, but the
spiritual power cannot. In the first sort, Kings and Princes are as much tied
to obedience as the meanest Christian subject. For the King, though he be
supreme in government Political, yet his soul is of Christ's fold, and to be
conducted by a proper shepherd. It is no contradiction that the same person
should be supreme, and yet obey in another regard in which he is not supreme.
The Captain that fights in a ship commands the soldiers in chief, but himself
obeyes the Master; and the safety of the soldiers depends upon them both: for
they are distinct powers in order to distinct purposes. For Kings must give an
account for Bishops that they live well in the political capacity, and Bishops
for Kings in their spiritual; and therefore they must obey each other: and we
find that persons of greatest honor in the days of peace, serve under Captains
and Generals in the time of war; and when Themistius, an excellent
Philosopher, who from his chair did rule and dictate wise things, and give laws
to the understandings of his Auditors, and was admired by his Prince, was by
the Emperor Constantius advanced to a prefecture, in an excellent Epigram he
says to himself, (...), Now ascend downwards, for thou have already descended
upwards. The same dignity is above and below in several regards. But in this
there is no difficulty, because the souls of Princes are of equal regard, and
under the same laws of God, and to be cleans'd and nourished by the same
Sacraments, and tied to the same duty by the Commandments of God as any of the
people; in this there is no difference.

But in matters not of necessary duty, 2.
not expressly required by God's law and the necessary, unavoidable, immediate
consequents of it, there being no laws but what themselves have made, they are
no otherwise obliged then by their own civil laws, of which I have already
given account. This thing is particularly noted by Balsamo upon the 16th Canon
of the Council of Carthage, who affirms that by the reason of the power given
to Princes from God they are subject neither to their laws nor Canons. And of
this latter he gives this instance, That although by the XIIth Canon of the
Council of Chalcedon it was decreed that no city should for the future acquire
the title of a Metropolis; yet after this Justinianea prima was made an
Archiepiscopal seat and had Metropolitical rights, to the diminution of the
former rights of Thessalonica: but Balsamo instances in diverse others. There
was an ancient Canon of great celebrity in the Church, that every city should
have a proper Bishop: but the Bishops of Isauropolis and Tolma besides their
own, had others; so had the Bishops of Lichfield and of Bath in England: they
had other cities under their jurisdiction which had no Bishops in propriety.
For if Kings did give limit to their Dioceses they might divide again, and give
a new limit; since it is not in Kings as it is in people. The power that goes
from the people is like water slipped from their hands, it returns no more, and
does not abide in the first place of it is efflux; but when an act of power
passes from the King, any deputation or trust, any act of grace or delegation
of jurisdiction, it is like heat passing from the fire, it warms abroad, but
the heat still dwells at home. It is no more the less, then the Sun is for the
emission of it is beams of light.

And this is apparent in all the privileges and concessions made to the Church,
3.
which are as revocable as their duty is alterable. For Princes are so far from
being obliged to perpetuate such rights which themselves have indulged, that it
is a ruled case, and the Greek Fathers sometimes make use of it to this very
purpose, Leunclav. (...).
(...), If a King has given a gift, he may recall it in case the beneficiary
proves ungrateful. The same with that in the feudal laws of the Lombards,
Feudum amittit qui feudum sciens inficiatur. If he wittingly denies the fee, or
refuses homage, he looses it. But this depends upon the reasons of the second
Rule in the third Chapter of this Book.

But although in strict right the Kings laws oblige him not, 4.
yet because de bono and laudabili he is in the senses above explicated obliged
to his civil laws, therefore much more is he tied to the observations and
Canons of the Church, as being specifications of religion, instances of love to
God, significations of some internal duty, or outer guards to piety, great
examples to the people, and honors to the Church of Christ, and that which
above all external things will enable the Rulers and guides of souls to render
their account with joy; and the King shall never so well promote the interests
of religion by any thing, as by being himself subject to the religion: for who
will murmr at those laws which the King himself wears in a phylactery upon
his forehead and his wrists? Facere recte cives suos princeps optimus faciendo
docet; cumque sit Imperio Maximus, exemplo major est, said Velleius Paterculus.
This is most of all true in religion, whose laws look too like policy when they
are established only by penalties, but they are accounted religion when they
are made sacred by example. To which purpose is that of Tacitus, Annal. 3.
Obsequium in Principem and aemulandi amor validiora quam poena ex legibus. It
is duty to our Prince, and it is our honor to imitate the example of the
Prince; and these prevail more then penalties. Haec enim conditio principum, ut
quicquid faciant, praecipere videantur, Declam. 4.
says Quintilian. Their example is the best law. Sic agitur censura, and sic
exempla parantur,
Si Judex, alios quod jubet, ipse facit.
So laws and judgments and good manners are best established, when by the
examples of Kings and supreme Judges they are made sacred.

Add to this, that the laws of religion have most of them the warranty of some
internal grace or other, and are to be reckoned in the retinue and relation of
that virtue, and therefore cannot in many instances be broken without some
straining of our duty to God, which is by the wisdom and choice of men
determined in such an instance to such a specification. But this is to be
understood only in such laws which are the (...) outerguards, the exercises of
internal religion, not in the garments and adornments of the relatives and
appendages of religion. If a Prince despises the Festival of the Church,
nothing but a competent reason will excuse him from being or at least from
seeming irreligious. And in whatsoever instance he has made or consented to
laws of religion, if by them he can suppose the people may serve and please
God, he is much more obliged then they; not by the duty of obedience, for he
owes none, but by the virtue of religion: for besides that his soul must live
or die by greater measures and exactions of those virtues which bring the
people unto heaven, every action of his that deserves an ill report, it is but
scandal in the lesser people, but to him it is infamy. For the Kings Escutcheon
is blazoned otherwise then that of his subjects: the Gentry by metals, the
Nobility by precious stones, but Kings by planets. For in a King there is
nothing moderate. de Clementi^
Cavere debet qualem famam habeat, qui qualemcunque meruerit, magnam habiturus
est, said Seneca. His fame, let it be good or bad, it will certainly be very
great.

The sum is this: 5.
Kings are so tied to their own Ecclesiastical laws, that they must take care
they be not despised by their example, that the religion designed by them be
promoted, that that part of the Commonwealth which most secures to them
obedience and peace, and procures them the most and greatest blessings, be not
discouraged or disadvantag'd: but they are not so tied that every act of
omission is imputable to them, though it have no other cause but the use of his
liberty; for in this his duty differs from that of his subjects: for obedience
which the subject owes is a part of justice, and that has no degrees, but
consists in an indivisible point where it can be practiced, and where it can be
understood; for he is unjust that does one act of injustice. But religion has
a latitude of signification and instances, and a man may be very religious who
yet does not keep a Saints day where by obedience he is not bound; which is the
case of Kings. Therefore what Seneca said of the cares of Kings, may be said of
the external observations of the laws of religion, Remissum aliquando animum
habebit, nunquam solutum, He may remit something of the strict observance, but
he must never esteem himself wholly quit.

But this is to be understood only in externals and rituals; 6.
concerning which one said excellently, Pleraque ex iis magis ad morem quam ad
rem pertinent, They are nothing of the substance of religion, but only
appendages, and manner, and circumstances: and therefore; Sapiens servabit ea
tanquam legibus jussa, non tanquam diis grata, A wise man will observe rituals
because they are commanded by laws, not that they are pleasing to God. They are
the words of Seneca quoted by S. Austin. lib. 6. de civit. Dei.
Since therefore these are wholly matter of obedience, Kings are free, save
only when they become bound collaterally and accidentally. But in matters of
essential duty, the King has equally with his subjects no liberty, but much
more direct duty, and many more accidental obligations. The whole affair is
well enough expressed by Cicero, de Divinat. 2.
Religioni parendum est: nec patrius mos contumaciter repudiandus. The Prince
must obey religion, and he must not despise the customs and the manners of his
Country; that is, in the better words of our Blessed Savior, These things they
ought to do, and not [wholly] to leave the other undone.

But the liberty of Princes in these Ecclesiastial laws of order, 7.
and circumstance, and ritual observances is very apparent in the practice of
the Hebrew Kings, who yet possessed this liberty, that even in the rituals of
the Divine ordinance they sometimes did dispense. Thus David eat the
shewbread; Levit. 7. 20. 2 Chronicles. 30. 28.
and Hezekiah permitted some that were unclean to eat the passover, otherwise
then it was written: only Hezekiah prayed to God not to impute it to them, and
gave them way: and under his reign the Levites did kill the sacrifice twice,
which was only lawful for the Priests to do. Levit. 1. 5. 2 Chronicles. 29. 24.
and 30. 17.
But it was a favorable case, because the Priests were but few, and the
sacrifices were very numerous: and if it be (as the Greek expression is)
lawful (...) to loose a little of the exactness of the rituals of the Divine
appointment, it is certain where the man is the lawgiver, he can much more use
the liberty. But it is not good to do all that is lawful.

RULE VII. It is not lawful for the Ecclesiastical power to excommunicate
Christian Princes, or the supreme Civil power.
IN the sentence and 1.
penalty of the lesser excommunication as it is used in the Church there are
three portions of evil. In one the Bishop is the author or minister, in the
other the people, and in the third the Prince. The first is a denying to
minister the holy mysteries. The other is a withdrawing from the communion and
conversation of such a person: which although it be done most of all in the
greater excommunication, yet it is done also in some proportion in the less,
for emendation of the erring brother; not for extermination, as appears in the
Apostolical precept given to the Church of Thessalonica, 2 Thessal. 3. v. 6,
and v. 14, 15. And the last is, the supervening temporal punishments by which
Princes use to verify the just sentences of the Church against refractary
Criminals.

Concerning the last, 2.
it is certain it wholly is owing to the power and favor of the Prince; who by
that favor is not supposed to lay violent hands upon himself, who if he did,
could quickly take them off again: however the Church inflicts not them by her
own authority, but by that of the Prince, who will not, like the tree in the
Fable, lend a stick to the hatchet, to be hewn down or hurt by it afterward.

But then concerning that part which is inflicted by the people, 3.
which is abstinence from the society of the offender till he repent and make
amends and get his pardon, it is infinitely certain the Church cannot inflict
that on Kings; because it is destructive of the duty which the people owe to
their Prince, and of the rights which the Prince has from God indep^ondently
from the religion.

Besides this, 4.
nothing ought to be done to the dishonor of the supreme power, to whose happy
government fame is almost as necessary as power: and the imposing upon them
disgraceful penalties is (...), a note of dishonor and blasphemy; for they
are to esteem their King as a heathen and a publican, from whose society they
are to estrange themselves as from a pestilence. Invisum semel principem seu
been seu male facta premunt, says Tacitus. If he once fall into such a
calamity and dishonor, whether he do well or ill afterward, it shall be evil
to him.

And yet further, 5.
the power of assemblies and public meetings is wholly by the laws and
permission of Kings; and nothing is more unreasonable then that any man should
interdict Kings from public meetings by whom himself has leave to meet
publicly. And therefore we find Imperial laws making provisions in this very
particular, and so far from being subject to any thing of this nature, that the
Emperors gave orders and strict measures to the Bishops when they should, and
whom they should or should not separate from Churches and Communions; as is to
be seen l. 30. Cod. de Episc. and Clericis and in the 123. Novel of Justinian.
For even in those actions of Bishops in which themselves have liberty and
Divine authority, yet the supreme Civil power has external jurisdiction. Thus
Mauritius the Emperor commanded Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, to
communicate with John of Constantinople; and anciently in France the Princes
were wont to compel the Clergy to officiate; and when the Pope had interdicted
the kingdom of England, the King compelled the Priests and Bishops to open
their Churches: so it is in Holland, and so in Venice, and so in all places
where Kings know their power and their interest and their duty.

For if excommunication be only an act of caution and prudence, 6.
it is very great prudence not to involve Kings in it, lest they be provoked by
the evil usages of the Church; and if it be nothing else, certainly it cannot
be necessary to be done at all. But if it be an act of external jurisdiction,
it derives from Kings, and therefore they are not under it but over it: for no
coercion in the hands of man ought to touch those who are reserved only for
the judgment of God. Apud serenissimum Regem opus est exhortatione potius quam
increpatione, consilio quam praeceptis, doctrina quam virga, said Hildebertus
the Bishop. The King is to be exhorted, not reproved; counseled, not
commanded; and to him not a rod, but doctrine is to be used: and Ivo Bishop of
Chartres Epist. 171.
said the same thing. Kings if they abuse their power are not to be provoked;
but in case they refuse the admonition of Bishops, they are to be left to the
Divine judgment; where they will be punished the more severely, by how much
they were the less obnoxious to humane monitions. So Gregorius Turonensis, Si
tu excesseris, quis te corripiet? Si autem nolueris, quis te damnabit, nisi is
qui se pronunciat esse Justitiam? He spoke to King Chilperic. If thou be
exorbitant, who shall correct thee? If thou refusest, who shall condemn thee,
but he only who is the Everlasting Righteousness? For if S. Paul gave in
charge to Timothy that each person should receive an impression and emanation
from the Pastoral charge according to his quality, and commanded that he should
not rebuke an Elder, but entreat him as a Father; 1 Timoth. 5. 1.
much less would he have permitted any to have punished the Father of the
Country and his own superior, and him who is less then none but God, and by
whom himself can rule others in external actions, and who in these very
administrations is superior, and can give laws, and inflict penalties, and is
judge and the remedy of all abuses.

And if concerning this inquiry we consult the doctrine and practices of the
Fathers in the Primitive and Ancient Churches, 7.
we shall find that they never durst think of excommunicating Kings. They had
no power, no right to do it. Homil. 4. de verbis Isai. Vidi Dominum.
Nam Sacerdotis tantum est arguere, and liberam praestare admonitionem, says
S. Chrysostom, Priests can only reprove and argue, and give a free admonition:
and therefore the first supreme Prince that ever was excommunicated by a
Bishop, was Henry the Emperor by Pope Hildebrand.

But against this that I say now the Doctors of the Church of Rome make a
mighty outcry, 8.
saying that Philip the first Christian Emperor was excommunicate and thrust
amongst the penitents; Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 27.
that Babylas the Bishop of Antioch thrust the Emperor Decius with his hands
against his breast from the doors of the Church; Chrysostom. adv. Gentes.
that Athanasius excommunicated the Prefect of Libya, Basil. Ep. 47.
and S. Basil commanded in his Diocese that he should be avoided; Paulin. apud
Baron. A. D. 387.
that S. Ambrose did excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius; Theod. lib. 5. c. 17.
that S. Chrysostom forbad Eudoxia the Emperesse to enter into the Church
doors; Leo Aug. orat. de vita Johan. Chrysostom. Niceph. lib. 13. c. 34.
that Innocentius excommunicated Arcadius; Aug. Epist. 6. in append. Greg. lib.
2. Ep. 36. Anastas. Biblioth in Greg. 2.
so did Synesius to Andronicus the Prefect, S. Austin to Bonifacius, Pope
Symmachus to Anastasius the Emperor, Pope Vigilius to Theodora the Empress,
Gregory the second to the Exarch, Gregory the third to Leo Isaurus. Instances
enough, if they be right and true, to show that the Fathers were of another
mind then the Rule pretends.

But in this heap I must separate what is true and certain from what is false
and uncertain, 9.
and give an answer to them, and the rest will not trouble us. * The story of
the Emperor Philip is vehemently suspected: but if it were true, yet it was no
excommunication, but his own submission to the discipline of penitents; to
which, says Eusebius, he was persuaded by the Bishop. * And the same was the
case of S. Ambrose to Theodosius: the Prince was persuaded to it, ultro a
communione abstinuisse Theodosium aiunt Ruffinus lib. 2. c. 18* and Waremund.
ab Ere^b. c. 2. (...) reg. n. 35. et seqq.
but it was only to do his repentance after the manner of the penitents in
those days; the Bishop only refused to celebrate in the presence of the
Emperor if he would not give testimony of his repentance toward God. This the
Emperor did, because he was a good man, and things were then in such a
conjunction, that there was nothing amiss: but that S. Ambrose could not have
verified his power, if the Emperor had been unwilling, and the Emperor did do
more then was necessary. But S. Ambrose said that he had his warrant to use the
Emperor so, from a vision. His warrant was extraordinary: for he had no
ordinary power or commission. * The excommunications of the Prefects by S.
Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Austin, Synesius and Gregory the second do not come
home to the inquiry, because the Prefects were but subjects and had not the
privilege of supreme Princes. * The fact of Babylas to Decius was not
excommunication: for Decius was a Heathen, and the Church has nothing to do
with them that are without; but Babylas was zealous and fierce, and acted with
the spirit of a Martyr, to which he hastened by his fervor. * S. Chrysostom
indeed did that to Eudoxia which did not become him, and which he had leisure
and cause enough afterward to repent: he did in anger what himself in the
sober hours of his life professed to be more then he could justify. That of
Innocentius to Arcadius is of no credit, and so is that of Symmachus to
Anastasius, as being only seen in the Epistles of the Popes of Rome;
concerning which there is nothing certain, but that very many of them are
certainly spurious. The pretended excommunication of Theodora by Vigilius has
no testimony. Contra Theodoram and Acephalos Vigilius pronunciavit damnationis
sententiam, lib. 2. Ep. 36.
said Gregory. But this was nothing but a condemnation or rejection of the
heresy of the Acephali with which she was partaker. And the like was the case
of Leo Isaurus; it was sententia damnatoria, a condemnation of his opinion,
called by Zonaras (...). But these things are only pretended to make noises.
Pope Hildebrand was the first that ever did any thing of this nature; as is
expressly affirmed by Authors of great credit, by Otho Frisingensis, by
Godefridus Viterbiensis, and by Onuphrius, who counted all the other pretenses
either fabulous or to no purpose.

But yet there is a third portion of excommunication, 10.
which is a denying to administer the holy Communion to Princes of a scandalous
and evil life; and concerning this there is no question but the Bishop not
only may, but in some cases must do it. Nolite dare sanctum canibus, said
Christ, Give not that which is holy to dogs; and cast not pearls before swine.
But this is not an act of jurisdiction, punishment or coercion, but of charity
to the Prince and duty in the Bishop. It is just as if a Physician should
refuse to give drink to an hydropic patient; he may have it if he will be
willing to die, but if the other refuses his ministry in the reaching it, he
is charitable and kind, not imperious and usurping. For whatsoever is in the
Ecclesiastical hand by Divine right, is as applicable to him that sits upon the
Throne as to him that sits upon the Dunghill. But then the refusing it must be
only by admonition and caution, by fears and denunciations Evangelical, by
telling him his unfitness to communicate, and his danger if he do: but if
after this separation by way of sentence and proper ministry the Prince will
be communicated, the Bishop has nothing else to do but to pray, and weep, and
unwillingly to minister. S. Gregory's case with Mauritius the Emperor was like
this. The Prince commanded him to be the minister to hand an unlawful Edict to
the Churches: the Bishop told the Prince it was a sin which the Prince went
about, prayed, admonished, declam'd, did all that he could to hinder it, and
then obeyed; that is, he did all he could to God, by using all his authority,
the word of his proper ministry, and then all that he owed to the Prince, by
submitting his external ministry to his command. The unlawful proclamations
and Edicts of a true Prince may be published by the Clergy in their several
charges; but yet they must not conceal from the people any thing of their duty,
nor yet from their Prince when they can declare it. It was also the case of
Saul and Samuel. 1 Samuel 15. 25.
The King desired Samuel to join and communicate with him in the service of the
Lord. He with the liberty of a Prophet refused at first, and declared the
heinousness of Saul's sin; but at last, when the King's will was pressing and
importunate, Samuel did obey his voice and did join with him. Ivo Bishop of
Chartres tells that in such cases where Princes will not comply with the
customs and disciplines of the Church, the Bishops must do their duty by
saying, Nolo te fallere; introitum hujus visibilis Ecclesiae periculo tuo te
habere permitto. Januam regni coelestis tali reconciliatione tibi aperire non
valeo. Sr, I will not deceive you; at your peril be it if you will come into
the holy place to partake of holy mysteries. I declare to you, that this
ministry [of the communion] is not any reconciling of you to God. I cannot do
that, unless you repent. But the reason of this is wholly upon this account,
because the Ecclesiastical state has no proper coercion by Divine right, but
is a Minister of the Divine coercion, of spiritual promises and threatenings;
their power is spiritual and internal, it has it is effort upon the spirit, and
not upon the outer man, and therefore is to proceed by methods fitted to the
spirit, that is, by reason and argument, by the fear of God, and the terror of
his threatenings, by the love of God and the invitation of his promises. But all
the ministeries and compulsions about the external is the gift and leave of
Princes; and therefore it descends, but ascends not, unless they please; [of
which by and by.] Admoneri quidem possunt, increpari, argui a discretis viris:
quia quos Christus in terris Rex Regum vice sua constituit, damnandos and
salvandos suo judicio reliquit, said the Church of Liege in their Epistle to
Paschalis: Kings may be admonished and reproved and argued by discreet persons;
but they whom Christ the King of Kings has appointed to be his vicars on
earth, are entirely to be left to his judgment.

Upon the likeness of matter it is to be inquired

Whether the guides of souls have a proper and spiritual power to enjoin
penances or Ecclesiastical satisfactions to a Prince that has sinned
publicly. 11.


The answer to this depends upon the premises. 12.
For the Church when she enjoined public satisfactions, did separate from the
Communion those whom they thrust into the place of public penitents. Now if
the Bishops may not separate the Prince from the Communion, then neither impose
those penances to which that separation did minister: But this is one of the
Censures of the Church, and part of that coercitive power which she has by the
permission of Princes and the voluntary submission and consent of good people:
And therefore it cannot be done, unless the Prince please. In the Primitive
Church, when this discipline was in godly use, none could be compelled to it,
but by conviction in public, or private confession, and in both cases their
own consent was either express or implied; and therefore much less can this
be done to the supreme power whether he will or no. ad Can. 12. Synodi Ancyranae
Imperatoria unctione poenitentiam tolli, said Balsamo, From the suffering
penances Kings are quitted by their anointing: and upon those words of David,
[Against thee only have I sinned] S. Ambrose has this note, He was a King, he
was held by no laws, because Kings are free from the bands of delinquents;
Neque enim ullis ad poenam vocantur legibus tuti Imperii potestate, Neither are
they by any laws called to penance, being safe by the power of their Empire.
And since the Primitive Church was infinitely restrained in imposing public
penances on Bishops, for the honor of their order and dignity of their
persons, we shall the less need to doubt of their opinion or practices
concerning Kings.

But yet we find that some excellent good Princes did submit to such imposition
of penances, 13.
and did abstain from the public communions till they had given testimony of
their repentance toward God. So the Emperor Philip, (...), he of his own
willing mind placed himself amongst the penitents. So did Theodosius under the
discipline and conduct of S. Ambrose. But these things are but cautelously to
be drawn into example, and as they give no power to the Bishop, so every
seldom do they advantages to Kings. Henry the Emperor was a sad example of
it, for his affairs went into diminution, and his person into contempt, and
his power into pupillage as soon as ever he had done penance at Canusium
barefooted, in a cold winter, for three days together, and had endured the
insolency and scorn of Hildebrand. And when Kings made themselves less, the
Bishops became greater without any good to the Church, but not without much
detriment to religion.

But neither may Princes be reproved publicly. 14.
For if he will not be obedient to the will of God in the voice of his
ministers publicly teaching, or privately admonishing, and prudently
reproving; he that goes about to reprove him publicly, intends by that means
by some indirect coercion to compel him, either by shame or by fear; neither of
which ought to be imposed by a subject on the Prince. For it is to be observed
that reproof is a part of Empire and superiority, and differs not from
teaching, save only that it is manus linguae, it is the hand of the tongue,
not the voice only. He that reproves teaches only minors: and though Kings
are so in respect of the conduct of their souls, yet it must not be done to
them but very sparingly, because it can very hardly be done without diminution
of their dignity; and teaching or declaring their duty will do their work for
them if they please, and if they do not please, he that reproves will do the
Prince no good, but he shall hurt himself, and shall not be a Martyr when he is
smitten. Let no man therefore pretend zeal for God in excuse of any boldness
more then Priestly toward Kings. For the work of God is oftentimes better done
by a gentle hand, then by a strong. -- peragit tranquilla potestas
Quod violenta nequit: Claud. in Paneg. Mallii.
mandataque fortius urget
Imperiosa quies --
And if we esteem reproof unseasonable where it is likely we may do hurt, and
where it is not likely we shall do good, much more is not this course prudent
to be used to Kings, who may be provoked by your ungentle Sermon, or may be
hardened by your fire. For every Prince has not the gentleness of Antigonus,
patiently to hear himself reviled: but if he had, yet it was but reason that
Antigonus sapek when he bade the Soldiers if they would revile him, to go
further off. And such men should do well to consider how ill themselves would
take it if they were publicly in the Pulpit called schismatics or
incendiaries. * But how and if the people be as zealous as the Priest, and
think it lawful to call their King by all the names of reproach which they
hear in the sermons of the Ministers? And if the Bishop calls a spade a spade,
it is very possible the people may do so too, for they are soon taught to
despise their rulers; and then it is to be remembered what Aristole says,
(...). If they once come to despise their Prince, they will soon unclasp his
royal Mantle.

It is true that the Ministers of religion are stewards of the mysteries of God
and Ambassadors for Christ: 15.
and though I cannot say that they who upon this account think they have power
publicly to reprove vicious Kings, and in plain language give names to their
vices and publish their shame, do overvalue their dignity, for that cannot
easily be done; yet I say they use it incompetently and imprudently; for the
effect of this power and dignity is not to upbraid, or to disgrace, but to
edify and do good to all men according to their capacity: and therefore S.
Paul, when he had declared his office and commission to be Christ's Ambassador,
he adds, as the full, express and proper issue of that power, we pray you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God.

The old Prophets took liberty, 16.
and were bold in their reproofs, and troubled Kings; Amos. 7. 10.
and the people sometimes were stirred too much upon such accounts: but when
the Prophets were charged with sedition, they only gave in answer the express
Commandment of God. And therefore it was that Amos being very bold was bidden
not to prophesy and more at Bethel, Amos 7. 13.
because it was the Kings Chapel and the Kings Court: and he was forced to
plead a special mission; which the Priests had not, and therefore we do not
find that ever they used any such license and freedom of reproof, except in
such cases in which they also became prophets; as it happened to Jehoiada, 2 Chronicles. 24. 20. and that is the very case of the Ministers of, the Gospel, who
unless they had a special commission, must teach according to the duty and
obedience, the gentleness and prudence of the religion; lest it be said to
them as was said by King Amaziah to a bold man that spoke openly to him, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16.
Have they made thee the Kings Counselor? cease thou, why should they smite
thee?

Now in this there can be the less doubt, 17.
for they mistake it that suppose this to be a question of duty; it is only an
inquiry after the manner of doing the duty: and therefore although for the
former reasons this manner of doing their duty is not fit, yet it is necessary
that the duty should be done. For miser est Imperator cui vera reticentur. No
misery is greater then that Kings shall not be taught their duty. They must be
taught it all: and in this no liberty, if it be prudently conducted, can become
licentious. To which purpose, the Bishops and Ministers of religion must thus
comport themselves to Kings.

1. Let the public doctrines be instructive, 18.
but not apt to raise suspicion of the Prince. 2. Let it be in things certain
and of evident and apparent duty. 3. Let no doctrines be fitted to private
interests and partialities in the State. 4. let no reproof of Kings be in
Pulpits, for it is uncivil toward any ut quis crimen audiat eo loco quo
refellendi copia non sit, as the Roman said, that a man should be reproved in
that place where for reverence and religion sake the man may not answer for
himself. de Maledic. c. 1.
And therefore Clement the third caused a Clergyman to be punished because
multis coram astantibus verba quadam in depressionem officii and beneficii
nostri protulit, he spoke words in a public audience tending to his
disparagement: and the Emperors Theodosius, tit. C. Si quis Imper maled.
Arcadius and Honorius made a law, Si quis modestiae nescius, and pudoris
ignarus, improbo petulantique maledicto nomina nostra crediderit lacessenda,
etc. That if any man, forgetting shame and modesty, thought fit to dishonor
the Emperors, he should not presently be punished: for if the man were a fool
or a light person, the thing was to be despised; if he were a mad man, he was
to be pitied; if injurious or angry, he might be forgiven: but, ad nostram
scientiam referatur, ut ex personis hominum dicta pensemus, and utrum
praetermitti an exquiri debeant censeamus: the Princes would have it referred
to their cognizance and judgment whether such persons should be punished or no.
5. Let there be no doubtful speeches in public sermons scattered amongst the
people concerning Princes, for they are public seditions, not sermons. 6. When
it is necessary or when it is prudent that private addresses to Princes be with
a sacerdotal freedom, let it be in cases of great crimes, and evidently proved
and evidently vicious, neither derived from uncertain rumors of the people, nor
from trifling suspicions, nor yet be in matters of secret concernment and
undiscerned reason. A Prince may be reproved for notorious adultery, or evident
murder against the forms of law; but not so freely in the questions of wars
or judicature: for the Bishops private opinion may be warrant enough for him to
speak it when he is required, but not to reprove a Prince upon pretense of
duty, and by a spiritual authority, when the matter of fact or the question of
right is uncertain.

RULE VIII. Ecclesiastical Censures are to be inflicted by the consent and
concurrence of the supreme civil power.
BY Ecclesiastical censures I mean the greater and lesser Excommunication. 1.
This is a separation of a Criminal (who is delated and convict by witnesses,
or by confession voluntary) from the peace and communion of the Church, till he
has by exterior signs signified his internal repentance: this is called the
lesser excommunication. The greater is only of refractary and desperate
persons, who will be subject to no discipline, make no amends, return to no
goodness, and forsake no sin. These the Church throws out from her bosom,
and shakes the fire from her lap, and quits her self of the plague: and this is
called the greater excommunication, or the anathema. Both these are bound by
the Ecclesiastical power: but the first is bound that he maybe purged of his
sins; the second, that the Church maybe purged of him. The first is bound as a
man is tied fast that he may be cut of the stone; the other is bound as a
Criminal that is going to execution: he is bound that he may be thrown into
outer darkness. Not that the Church has power to damn any man, but when she
observes a man confirmed in impiety, she does antedate the Divine judgment, and
secures the sound members, and tells what will befall him in the day of
judgment. In the first case, the penitent is like a wandering sheep; in the
second he is turned a goat or a woolf; and by their own acts acts also as well
as by the power of the Keys they are both bound: the first consents to the
Medicin, and the reprobate has by his own act incurred that death which the
Church declares; and both are acts of discipline, and directly or indirectly
consequent to that power which Christ has given to his Church of binding and
loosing, and to the charge of the conduct of souls.

These two are by the fifth Roman Synod under Symmachus distinguished by the
names of excommunication (meaning the lesser) and anathema. 2.
He that breaks the decrees of this Synod, let him be deprived of the
Communion: but if he will not amend, anathemate feriatur, let him be anathema.
The same we find in the Synod of Turon. c. 25. which commands that all the
curses of the 108 [alias 109] Psalm be cast upon Church-robbers, ut non solum
excommunicati, sed etiam anathematizati moriantur; that they may die not only
excommunicate, but anathematized. They which are never to be restored to the
Communion, but are to be accursed; so Agapetus expresses it in his 6th Epistle.
This is called eradication; while the lesser excommunicates are still members
of the Church, Hom. 50. in Psalm. 101.
as S. Austin notes.

There is yet a third sort of excommunication, 3.
brought in by zeal and partiality, a willingness to rule or to prevail; which
is no part of the power given by Christ, but taken up as it happened; it is not
part of Jurisdiction so much as improper, not an act of the power of the Keys:
and that is a refusing to communicate with him who is not excommunicate, a
punishing one whom we have no power to punish, a doing that which we have no
power to do at all, or to such a person over whom confessedly we have no
authority or jurisdiction. For when this humor was got into the manners and
customs of the Church they made a new distinction; and there was a communio
cum fratribus, and a communio cum omnibus Christianis. He that might
communicate with the people might not in some cases communicate with the
Priests and Bishops his Brethren. The distinction we find in the 45. Chapter of
the Council of Auxerre, and in pursuance of it we find one Bishop refusing to
communicate with another. Thus if a Bishop came not to the Synod of his
province it was decreed in the fifth Council of Carthage, Can. 10.
ut Ecclesiae suae communione debeat esse contentus, that he should only
communicate with his own Diocese. The like to which we find in the second
Council of Arles can. Vide distinct. 18. cap. placuit. etc. si quis autem, and
cap. si quis Episcopus.
19. in the Council of Tarracon can. 6. and the Council of Agatho cap. 35. Thus
Epiphanius Bishop and Metropolitan of Cyprus refused to communicate with the
Bishop of Jerusalem, who was not his suffragan.

Concerning which way of proceeding, 4.
1. it is evident that there is no authority in it, or any thing that is like
to jurisdiction, and 2. sometimes there may be duty, but 3. most commonly there
is danger. 1. * There is evidently no authority: for if the authority were
competent and the cause just, they might proceed to excommunication. But this
was sometimes done by equals to equals, as by Bishop to Bishop, by Church to
Church, as by Victor to the Churches of Asia, by Stephen to the Churches of
Africa, and by angry or zealous Bishops to them that were not of their humor or
opinion. Sometimes it was done by inferiors to their superior, the people
withdrawing themselves from their pastor; so the Samosatenians refused to
communicate with their Bishop that was thrust upon them after the expulsion of
Eusebius. So that evidently in this matter there is no authority to verify it.

2. Sometimes there may be duty: 5.
as if a Bishop be a heretic or an open vicious person, his Brother that is a
Bishop may use that liberty to him as the people might do to a Brother that
walks disorderly; that is, withdraw from his society, that he may be ashamed:
and if his communicating with him will give countenance to his heresy, or
offense to his people, he is bound then to abstain and to refuse it: and so is
the people tied not to communicate with their Priest or Bishop, if the
condition of his communion be a sin, or the countenancing of a sin. And thus we
find in the Annals of Spain, that a daughter of an Arrian King of Spain
suffered death rather then receive the Communion from the hands of an Arrian
Bishop. In her case her refusal was duty, and her suffering was Martyrdom,
because her Father imposed his command of communicating with the heretical
Bishop as a secret allowance of the heresy, which in that case she was to
refuse, and obey God unto the death.

But when this does accidentally become a matter of duty, 6.
the charity of our communion is no further to be refused then we are obliged
by our duty; we are not to refuse it to that person, but for that cause, and
therefore in other cases and upon all other accounts we are tied to do the
charity of Christians. I will not communicate with a Roman Priest in his
worship of Images, or in his manner of Praying for the dead, or invocation of
Saints; but I may not refuse to say the Lords Prayer and the Credo with him,
unless by chance it give offense to some weak uninstructed person. I will not
receive the Communion from the hands of him who was ordained by a Presbytery
without a Bishop; because his hand is a dead hand, and reaches me nothing: but
because he is my Brother, I will not refuse to give him the Communion if he
will require it at my hand, which was made sacred by the Holy Ghost invocated
by the prayer and the lifting up of the Bishops hand. I will not come to their
Communions; but if they would use good forms of Liturgy, and preach well, I
would not refuse to communicate in such assemblies: unless (as I said before)
I be accidentally hindered by some other duty drawing me off a while.

But then thirdly, when it is not an express and a clear duty, 7.
it is always a great danger, an occasion of schisms and divisions in the
Church, and consequently may be an infinite breach of duty, a certain violation
of one virtue, for the uncertain preservation of another: it is commonly the
daughter of spiritual pride, an accounting of our selves more holy then our
Brethren, whom by such means we oftentimes provoke to jealousies and
indignation; and so sometimes altars are erected against altars, and Pulpits
turn to cock-pits, and seats of scorners and of proud and illiterate
declamations. Upon this account Christendom has bled for many ages. The
division of the East from the Western Churches, and in the West the division of
Rome from diverse Churches, the Protestants and Reformed, came in at this door;
while one Church either pretends the singularity of truth, or the eminency of
authority over other Churches: by which two things the Church of Rome has been
author of the permanent and greatest schisms of Christendom. For indeed little
better can be expected when the Keys of the Church, which were given for the
letting in or shutting out of single criminals or penitents respectively, are
used to oppose multitudes. A man may lock his chamber door, but he cannot put a
lock upon the Ocean: Contr. Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2.
and it was wisely said of S. Austin, that to excommunicate a single person
cannot make a schism, unless the multitude favor him; intimating that a
multitude is a dangerous thing to be involved in censures. The King nor the
people are not to be excommunicated, is an old Rule. For if the whole multitude
be excommunicate, with whom shall we communicate? if great parts of them be,
they plainly make a schism, if they unwillingly suffer the censure; and
therefore that one Church should do this to another is very hardly possible to
be done with wisdom, or charity, or necessity. For when S. Paul bad his flock
to abstain from the society of fornicators, he told them he meant it only in
the small numbers of the Brethren, where, it may be, one or two in a Diocese or
city of that religion might be criminal; for he would not have them to go out
of the world to keep that Canon, and therefore meant not to involve the
multitudes of fornicators which were in the world. But now he that
excommunicates a Church, either does nothing at all, or he obliges every one in
that Church to separate from that multitude; and then if he must not go out of
the world, he must go out of that Country, which no spiritual power can
command, and which the Apostle never did intend, as appears in his caution and
the whole Economy and reason of that Canon.

But I am to add this also, 8.
That there is scarce any case practicable in which, if it be indifferently
permitted to the people to separate from the communion of their superior, it
will not very quickly proceed to mischief and become intolerable; a remedy
worse then the disease. When Nestorius had preached these words, S. Cyril. Ep.
18. ad Caelestinum.
whoever shall say that the Virgin Mary is the Mother of God, let him be
accursed, the people had reason to be offended; but they did ill when they made
a tumult: for when the people are stirred, zeal is the worst thing about them.
Thus when the two Deacons of Pope Vigilius were displeased with their Bishop in
the cause of the three articles which the Pope had condemned in the fifth
General Council, they very pertly withdrew themselves from his communion; and
the effect of it was, that almost all the Roman Church and diverse other Western
Churches did so: and so did the people of Istria to their Bishops in the same
cause, Paulus Diacon. degest. Longob. lib. 3. c. 12.
and so did many more: and the evil grew so great, when every one would as he
pleased withdraw himself from the communion of their Bishop or Priest, that it
was under great penalty forbidden by the eighth Synod the tenth Chapter.

But this may be done in these following cases. 9.


1. When the superior has manifestly erred in faith, that is, in an article of
his Creed, or a plain proposition of Scripture, or in an article established or
declared by that authority which has bound him and them equally, and in which
they conceive no error. Thus the Priests and people of Constantinople withdrew
themselves from the communion of Eunomius, Theodoret. lib. 4. c. 14.
because he erred in an article determined by the whole Church, and established
by the laws of Emperors, and as they believed clearly declared in Scripture.
But when Plato the Monk withdrew himself from the communion of Tarasius the
Patriarch of Constantinople because he refused to excommunicate the Emperor,
Baron. A. D. 795.
it was an insolence fit to be chastis'd by the rod of Ecclesiastical
discipline.

2. Priests may withdraw themselves from the communion of their Bishop, 10.
and people from the communion of their Priests, in things declared by laws to
be against the peace of God and the Church, when the fact is evident and
notorious. But this is not to be done by single persons, but by the whole
community: and the reason is, because the fact is not evident, or not
scandalous to that degree as to deserve this canonical punishment, unless the
congregation be offended, or the congregation note it; for though the Bishop be
more public then any single person, yet he is not more public or of more
concernment then all his Diocese. These particulars, that is, in Josu. Hom. 7.
this leave and this caution I have from Origin, explicating in what sense we
are bound to cut off our right hand. Ego qui videor tibi manus esse dextra, and
Presbyter nominor, and verbum Dei videor praedicare, si aliquid contra
Ecclesiasticam disciplinam and Evangelii regulam gessero, ita ut scandalum tibi
Ecclesia faciam, in uno consensu Ecclesia conspirans excidat me dextram suam,
and projiciat a se. If I that am thy right hand, and preach the word of God,
do any thing against the discipline of Gods Church and the rule of the Gospel,
so that I give offense to the whole Church, let the whole Church consenting
together cut me off and throw me away.

3. But all this is to be understood to be done by permission or authority of
the Prince, 11.
in case he shall interpose, because where public divisions and breach of
peace are in agitation, the Commonwealth is more concerned oftentimes then
religion; and therefore where the laws of God do not intervene, the laws of
the King must, or the whole separation is a sin. And therefore we find that
when Gregory the first, Bishop of Rome, had thus refused to communicate with
John Bishop of Constantinople, he was commanded by the Emperor Mauritius to
communicate with him. And it is very fit that such heats and private judgments
and zealous, but unnecessary, proceedings should be kept from inconveniences by
such public persons who are to take care of peace and of the public. For if
such separations be not necessary, they are not lawful; and if they be not the
only way to avoid a sin, they are a ready way to commit one. For because every
man's cause is right in his own eyes, when such heats as these happen between
confident persons, every man is judge in his own cause; and what is like to be
the event of such things, all the world can easily imagine.

But now concerning those other two proper kinds of excommunication, 12.
the greater and the lesser, they have the same consideration, if we mean them
according as the Church now uses them; that is, if they be imposed upon men
against their will. For as for the lesser excommunication, so as it was used in
the Primitive Church, and so as the Church of England wishes it were now
restored, when penitents came and submitted themselves to the discipline of the
Church, and had exercises, stations and penitential times allotted to them, and
were afterward with joy and comfort restored to the peace of the Church, it is
a ministry done by consent, and without any evil, and no man has to do with
it. But if the consent of the Criminal be not in it, the Bishop cannot compel
him; but the Bishop and the King can. And therefore we find that the Emperors
made laws in this very particular; and Justinian in his 123 Novel commanded
that no Ecclesiastic person should excommunicate any one, unless the cause
were first approved. Which law was commended by the Council of Paris under
Ludovicus; and by John the 8th, who upon the authority of that law inhibited
some Bishops from excommunicating one Bichertinus.

By this I do not mean to say that the Ecclesiastical judge has not power to
deny a Criminal the peace and communion of the Church, 13.
by declaring him to be unworthy to communicate; but because as the laws and as
the customs of the world are now, there is disgrace, and there is temporal
evil consequent to such Ecclesiastical separations, the Bishop can be
restrained in the actual exercise of his spiritual authority, if there be any
thing in it of temporal concernment.

And therefore if the Bishop did excommunicate any of the Princes servants, 14.
or any whom the Prince had a mind to communicate and converse withal, the
censure was to be reversed; ut quod principalis pietas recipit, nec a
sacerdotibus Dei alienum habeatur, as the Fathers of the 12th Council of Toledo
did decree; Cap. 3.
that what the piety of the Prince does receive, the Bishops may not reject.
For to avoid the company of any person is an effect of excommunication indeed,
but not inseparable: and because to converse with any of his subjects is a
right of Kings that none of his Bishops can divest him of, the Bishop can
excommunicate no man without the Kings leave; that is, he cannot separate him
from the society of the faithful. And therefore Ivo Bishop of Chartres
justified himself upon this account for conversing with one Gervasius that was
excommunicate. Pro Regia enim honorificentia hoc feci fretus authoritate legis,
Epist. 62.
si quos culpatorum, etc. I did it (says he) relying upon the authority of the
law, and for the honorable regard of the King. And this he advises to others
also, in his 171 Epistle: and S. Anselme, though he was extremely troubled with
the Popes peevish injunctions against the King of England's right in the matter
of Investitures, yet in his Epistle to Prior Ernulph he gives leave that though
he durst not by reason of the Popes personal command to the contrary, yet they
might communicate with those whom the Pope had excommunicated for receiving
Investitures from the King. Now although this appendage of excommunication,
that is, abstention from the civil society of the Criminal, is wholly subject
to the laws and power of Princes; yet the spiritual part of the
excommunication, that is, a separation from the communion by declaring such a
person to be unworthy, and using to him the word of his proper ministry, is so
wholly under the power of the Ecclesiastic order, that when the King commands
that the company of the excommunicate should not be avoided, yet the man is not
absolved from his sentence in the Court of Conscience, but is bound to satisfy
the Church if she have proceeded legally and canonically. The King can take off
the temporal penalty, but not the spiritual obligation; that is, the man is not
to demand the Sacrament till he be absolved. If the King commands it, the
Bishop must not deny his external ministry: but the man sins that demands it,
because he communicates unworthily, that is, by a just power, but not by a just
disposition. He must repent of his crime before he can come innocently.

For it is to be observed that in this affair one part concerns the Criminal,
15.
and another concerns the people. The Criminal is bound to abstain from the
communion: that duty is incumbent upon him, because he is judged to be unworthy
of it by that authority which he is bound to trust, in case there be no
apparent error. But to be thrust from civil society is not directly any duty of
his, but is incumbent on the people. Now though the Bishop can in some cases
advise this, yet in a Christian Commonwealth he cannot without leave command
it: and therefore the censure or judgment of the Church is to have effort upon
the Conscience of the guilty, and this invades no man's right; it is for his
good that is concerned, and is wholly a spiritual power, and intrenches not
upon the civil right of any man, much less upon the public and supreme power.
* In the lesser excommunication, if the subjects be not voluntary, or be not
subjected by him that has the power over them, that is, the King, they cannot
be compelled by the Bishop to any external act or abstention. But if they do
themselves submit, or are submitted by their supreme, they are bound not only
to obey the censure of the Church, but themselves to go away from company that
know not of this calamity: as I have Chapt. 2. Rule. 2. Number. 15
already instanced.

3. The sentence of the greater excommunication, 16.
though to be estimated in many particulars by the former measures, yet has in
it something of particular consideration. This is the great Anathema Maranatha,
the excision of a man from the body of the Church; without which body,
whosoever is in that manner justly separate, there is no salvation to him: and
this the Church called by the name of anathema. Not that whenever the word
anathema is used, the greater excommunication is signified; for it is very
often used as an earnest expression of the dislike of a thing: so the Clergy of
Edessa, when they purged their Bishop Ibas of the Crimes objected to him in the
Council of Chalcedon, Act. 10.
they solemnly protested they knew no evil of him, anathematizantes
nosmetipsos, and terribili gehennae nosmetipsos obnoxios facientes, si novimus,
anathematizing themselves and exposing themselves to the guilt of eternal
damnation if they knew any such thing. Such anathemata are denounced against
sacrilegious persons in the donatives made to the Church: and thus diverse
Councils do pronounce anathema to false propositions, Cod. de summa Trinit. l.
and Justinian in the Code uses the same execration against certain heresies.
Now to such an anathema as this all persons can be subject, Kings and Princes,
Bishops and Priests, Multitudes and single persons. There is nothing
considerable in this, but that the cause be great and worthy: for whoever he be
that works abomination, let him be who will, yet he is abominable, and shall be
separated from the communion of Saints in the day of the New Jerusalem.

But the inquiry that remains is concerning the great anathema or excision of
obstinate criminals from the body of the Church, 17.
which is the only excommunication that Christ gave in commission and
warranty. For so the Fathers expound those words of Christ, But if he will not
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen and a publican; that is,
not to be esteemed for a Brother, in Psalm. 5. poenit. in it. Tract. 27. in
Johan.
or a Christian, says S. Gregory; quia neque influxum habet a capite, neque
participat de Spiritu Christi, says S. Austin, he neither has any influence
from the head, nor partakes of the Spirit of Christ. This man the Church does
not pray for, does not pray with, does not communicate, does not hope well of;
he receives no assistance and gifts of grace from the holy Spirit of God: and
S. Jude says, his works are gone aforehand unto judgment. Videlicet peccator
gravis and scandalosus, notorius, aut accusatus and convictus, he who is a
grievous and a scandalous sinner, notorious or convict, being ^^prov'd by the
Bishop in the public assemblies of the Church, if he will not be humbled, but
remains incorrigible and perseveres in his scandalous sins, tum anathemate
feriendus est, and a corpore Ecclesiae separandus, then he is to be smitten
with the anathema, and to be separated from the body of the Church: so. ubi
supra
Gregory. To this there is nothing else consequent, but that the man, unless
he timely and mightily repent, will be damned; and in the mean time that every
man account him to be no Brother, and have no intercourse with him, but as with
a Turk or a Jew.

Now concerning this, 18.
he that is in Ecclesiastical authority, and has received the holy order, has
this power; and he that has a charge can minister this power: and so long as
nothing temporal and secular is mingled with it, the Bishop can do it wholly
by his spiritual authority; and in this he does nothing depend on the supreme
Civil power, save that he be permitted to exercise his spiritual office. For
though it be true that any Bishop can by the Civil power be hindered from
ministering in public assemblies, for he may be banished or deposed, and
another put in his chair, or all his offices may be suspended quoad exercitium
actus (as the Schools speak) so that he may not exercise his power; yet a
Bishop that has a flock, that is permitted actually to do what Christ has
empowered him to do, can by his own sole authority inflict this sentence upon
scandalous and refractary, disobedient and impenitent, rebellious and
persevering sinners: and if the Church could not do this, she had not power
sufficient to the ends of her designation; she were no body politic, but
without government and power; Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18.
and all that discourse of our Blessed Savior in the 18th of S. Matthew, and
his commands of delating refractary Criminals to the Church, and the promise to
verify in heaven what they shall reject on earth, were words signifying nothing
and of no effect. But because no wise man will imagine that it must follow that
the Ecclesiastic state, they to whom Christ promised to give the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, they who are Stewards of the household and dispensers of the
mysteries of the Gospel, have this power subjected in themselves independently
from the Civil power, as they have a power to baptize, and to consecrate, and
to ordain Ministers of religion; and they can no more be hindered from one then
from the other; they may de facto, and they may by a competent power, but if
they be, it is persecution. That this Bishop or that, that Cyprian or
Silvester, that Valerius or Augustine should be the man, is under the power of
the Civil Magistrate; but the man that is permitted to use the powers Christ
put into his hand, can upon persons so disposed pronounce God's anathema and
the Churches.

Now the reason of the difference why the Bishop cannot do this in the lesser
excommunication, 19.
and yet can in the greater, is this, because the greater is of Divine
institution, and the other is of humane, never used but by consent, or by a
superinduced civil authority, and therefore must still depend upon the causes
of it is being. Add to this, there is a precept annexed to this power: there is
a double duty; the Bishop is to separate the vile from the precious, the
leprous from the sound, and the people are to take heed of such impure
mixtures. But in the lesser excommunications there may possibly be something of
prudence; yet as there is no proper authority in the Ecclesiastical superior
but what is given him by consent, so there is no obligation or duty in the
subjects: it is well when they submit to this discipline, and go to be cured
by the public hands even for every malady; but they are not bound to this: but
if they be delated or be notorious and great Criminals, here the Church is
warranted by God to proceed to discipline, and to separation and excision of
the refractary. This only has effort upon the soul; but the lesser
excommunication is a discipline of Ecclesiastical institution; and so is that
denying of communion to equals or superiors, and so is irregularity, and so is
refusing to mention a name in our collects and public or private prayers, and
so is suspension and interdict, degradation and deposition: they are all of
Ecclesiastical positive constitution, no part of the power of the Keys,
nothing of Divine authority; but are introduced by the consent of Churches, and
verified by custom, consent and the laws of Princes, and so come accidentally
to pass an obligation, but effect nothing directly upon the soul. That is a
peculiarity of the greater excommunication: and that which stands next to it is
the lesser excommunication; which although it be humanum inventum and of
positive institution, yet because it is a part of the greater, and proceeds in
the same way, upon lesser causes, but to designs of charity and edification,
it is an use of the spiritual sword, it is the lancing of a sore, but not the
cutting off a dead part; but it may be admitted to be a consequent of the power
of binding or loosing, and so I have already called it Numb. 1. of this Rule.
. For it is a part of that intermedial monition which Christ has in general
commissionated his Ministers and guides of the Church to make. If an offender
will not mend by private, and by a more public admonition, tell it to the
Church; then the Church is to do something when the stubborn criminal is
delated to her. The Church must try if he will repent upon her monition: for
then the Ecclesiastical Rulers are to exhort him into repentance, to reprove,
to correct, to do what spiritual Fathers ought to do: the particulars of
which because they are not specified by our Blessed Lord, they are left to the
prudence of the Ecclesiastical Governors; so that the general Discipline is
warranted, but the particular is left to their choice who by the analogies of
the consequent power of the Keys can proceed by lesser and an intermedial
process. But the power of the Keys is given in order to something that is to
be done afterward. For that is only the warranted and express authority, and
that which imitates coercitive jurisdiction the nearest, that those be cut off
from the Church who by their voluntary submission will not amend and submit to
the paternal rod and gentle correption.

RULE IX. Excommunication inflicted upon a light cause binds externally, but
not internally; but if it be inflicted upon an unjust cause, it binds not at
all.
THis latter part of the Rule is evident and consented to by all. 1.
For in this the Civil and Ecclesiastical power differ. The Civil power, if it
condemns the Innocent, has effect upon him, and does afflict or put him to
death: But the Ecclesiastical power does nothing, unless the man has done the
mischief to himself. For God having undertaken to verify what the Church does,
it must be supposed that the Church must do right, else God will not verify
it; and then it signifies nothing, but that the Governors Ecclesiastical have
sinned. in Jerem. c. 23.
Ejiciunt oves qui contra justitiam de Ecclesia separant, says S. Hierom, They
that against right cast a man from the Church, they are ill shepherds, and
drive the sheep from their folds where Christ loves to see them: and therefore
Alexander the second 24. q. 1. c. Audivimus, says that: unjust
excommunications are not to be slighted and neglected; De vita spirit. an.
lect. 2. ad em.
and Gerson says, it is honorable to the Church that such a Prelate should be
resisted to his face. But this in case of injustice and manifest abuse: such
are those excommunications in the Bulla coenae Domini, ^n which those persons
who do their duty, who do not consent to the errors and abuses of the Church
of Rome, who read good books that discover their horrible impieties, are
excommunicated: it is Brutum fulmen; it is harsh as the noise of peacocks, but
does no more harm to them that are intended.

But now in the other part of the Rule there is difficulty, 2.
and it is occasioned by a discourse of S. Leo in his 93. Epistle; Let not the
Communion be easily or lightly denied to any Christian, nor at the pleasure of
every angry Priest; because the mind of the avenger ought unwillingly and with
a kind of grief to proceed to the infliction of vengeance even upon a great
guilt. For we have known some for slight actions and words excluded from the
grace of the Communion, and a soul for which the blood of Christ was shed, by
the infliction of this so severe a punishment wounded, and as it were disarmed
and spoiled of all defense, exposed to the assaults of the Devil, that it might
be easily taken.] By which words. S. Leo seems to say that he who for a
trifling cause is excommunicate, does nevertheless feel all the evils of that
greatest censure. He says well and true: But he does not say that he is
separate from God, that he shall perish everlastingly, that God will in heaven
verify what is done upon earth; but he reproving this impiety, that the greater
excommunication should be inflicted for trifles, tells the real evils which do
follow: for the excommunicate being separate from the communion, denied the
prayers of the Church, banished from the communion of Saints, is divested of
all these excellent helps and spiritual defensatives against the power of the
Devil. Now this is very true, though the cause were wholly unjust; and much
more if the cause be something, though not sufficient. De facto the man is
deprived of the helps of the Church, and the advantage of holy Ordinances: and
though God will, if the man be a good man and devout, hear his private prayers,
and supply him with secret strengths, and in his behalf rebuke the Devil; yet
it was a worthy cause of complaint in S. Leo, to consider that this evil was
done for little things, and that for so small occasions God should be put to
his extraordinary way, and the man be deprived of the blessings of the ordinary.

But whether this sentence so slightly inflicted do really bind the soul
before God, 3 Tract. 6. in Matthew.
is a question which Origin inquired into, but durst not affirm it; but
concludes that it obliges in the Church and before men: for whether it obliges
before God or no, Deus scit; nos autem pronunciare non possumus, secundum quod
scriptum est, Nolite judicare] God only knows, but we must not judge. But yet
if it be his unhappy lot to fall into such a calamity, factum valet, fieri non
debuit; the ecclesiastical Ruler did very ill in it, yet the man is bound to
the Church. Qui ergor in peccato levi correptus... non se emendat, nos quidem
sic eum debemus habere quasi publicanum and ethnicum, abstinentes ab eo, ut
confundatur, He therefore that is taken and excommunicate for a small fault,
and will not amend, we must esteem him as a Heathen and a Publican, that he may
be ashamed. Indeed the Church has put a heavy and an unequal load upon such a
person, and has erred greatly; for no man is to be separate from the Church of
God, but he that separated himself from God, and has left his duty: but
therefore if the Church do excommunicate him whose action or words though it
be faulty, yet it can consist with the state of a good man, and does not
destroy the love of God, the censure was too heavy as to the external, and
false as to the internal; for the man is not fallen from God, but does
communicate with the Head, and continues to receive of the Spirit of Christ.

But yet even such a man is bound externally: for this is the meaning of that
famous saying of S. Gregory, Pastoris sententia etiam injusta timenda est, In
Evange. Homil. 26.
The sentence of a Bishop though it be unjust is to be feared; that is, though
it be in a cause that is not great and competent enough, but if it be in a
light matter, yet it is to be feared; not only because the man is deprived of
the prayers and communions of the Church (which though it happen to an innocent
person is a great evil, and therefore is to be feared, though it be in all
senses unjust) but also because it binds the man that is deprehended even in a
light fault, to submit to the judgment and satisfactions of the Church. The
burden is very great, and ought not to have been imposed; but when it is it
must be suffered, because no repentance can be too great for any sin: and
although the Bishop made a false judgment concerning the man, and he does not
stand so before God as before the Church, that is, for his first little
offense; yet being censured and unfortunate, if he refuses to obey that which
is indeed too much to be imposed, but will do him no hurt, it is not his first
little sin, but his great contempt that is to be accounted for before God with
the greatest severity.

But then if it be inquired in what cases only excommunication may be lawfully
inflicted; the answer is easy; but I choose to give it in the words of the
Fathers, In Josue. Homil. 21.
because there is in this case reason and authority (...) Ubi peccatum non est
evidens, ejicere de Ecclesia neminem possumus, (...) forte eradicantes zizania,
eradicemus simul cum ipsis etiam triticum: So ^rigen. Unless the fact be
evident, no man must be excommunicate, for else we may peradventure root up the
wheat with the tares. But that is not enough.

2. 6.
No man must be excommunicate but he that is peccator gravis and scandalosus,
In 5 Penit. Psalm.
a grievous and a scandalous sinner; so S. Gregory: and like to this is that of
Aristotle, (...), We must not separate from every sinner; but from the
intolerable and malicious. For what should a man proceed to violent remedies,
when a gentle application will make the cure? and for a trifling cause to cut a
man off from the communion of the Church, is to do as the man (...) the fable,
that espying a fly upon his neighbors forehead; went to put it off with a
hatchet, and struck out his brains. And therefore the Fathers in the Council of
Worms can. 2. decreed, Ut nullus Sacerdotum quenquam rect^ fidei hominem pro
parvis and levibus causis a communione suspendat: praeter e^s culpas pro quibus
antiqui patres arceri jusserunt aliquid committentes. In the infliction of
Censures the Church should follow the practice of the primitive Fathers,
excommunicating no true believer but for some very grievous fault.

3. Neither is this sufficient of it self: a scandalous sin alone is not
enough, 7.
for excommunication is the last remedy. Omnia prius tentanda quam bello
experiendum; when nothing else will do it, then this is to be used: for if the
man will be amended by private correction, or by public admonition, if he be
ready to hear his brother, or to obey the Church, why should he be esteemed as
a heathen man and a publican? Si non audierit ecclesiam, is the condition of
using the keys; if he will not hear the Church: so it is in the Charter, if
being publicly convict and reproved by the Bishop, he will not be humbled, but
remains incorrigible and perseveres in his sin, then he is to be excommunicated
and smitten with the anathema. Like to this is that of Chrysippus, (...). Some
things are to be turned from, with our head a little aside; and from some
things we must run away. Some things are more earnestly to be avoided; and from
others we must be parted for ever. So S. Gregory in the place above cited.
Spirituali gladio superbi and contumaces necantur dum de Ecclesia ejiciuntur,
Lib. 1. ep. 11.
so. S. Cyprian, The proud and the contumacious are slain by the spiritual
sword when they are thrown out of the Church. Inobediens truncatur, is S.
Epist. 1.
Hierom's expression, He that is rebellious or disobedient to the discipline
and correction of the Church, he is to be cut off.

Now all these must be joined together. 8.
If the fact be not notorious or proved, a man must be so severely smitten we
know not why. And if the fact be evident, yet unless it be great, it deserves
not the biggest punishment. For the judge is cruel, and not just, that puts a
man to death with torments for spitting in his parlour: and the judgment of the
Church being nothing else but an effective and terrible declaration of the
judgment of God, must not be exterminating and final for things of little
concernment, but according to the wisdom which we see, and the mercy which we
hope for. And after all, if it be evident and great, yet the last remedy must
not be used at first; and a man will not have his arm cut off for a felon upon
his finger, or the gout in his wrist, or an ulcer that can by any other means
be cured. But when in a great pestilence and danger of infection there is no
other remedy; when the fire rages desperately, and can by no other means be
stopped; then pull the house down, and separate the infected from the city; he
is fit for nothing but charnel-houses, and the society of the dead.

4. This caution Gerson instances in pecuniary matters. 9.
For (says he) not ever contumacy against the orders of Courts Ecclesiastical
is to be punished with this death. De vita Spirit. anim. lect. 4. corol. 7.
If it be in matters of faith or manners, then the case is competent: but when
it is a question of money and fees, besides that the case is full of envy and
reproach, apt for scandal and to bring contempt upon the Church, the Church
has no direct power in it; and if it have by the aid of the civil power, then
for that a civil coercion must be used. It is certainly unlawful to
excommunicate any man for not paying the fees of Courts; for a contumacy there
is an offense against the civil power, and he has a sword of his own to avenge
that. But excommunication is a sword to avenge the contumacy of them who
stubbornly offend against the discipline of the Church in that wherein Christ
has given her authority, and that is in the matters of salvation and damnation
immediate, in such things where there is no fecular interest, where there can
be no dispute, where the offender does not sin by consequence and
interpretation, but directly and without excuse. But let it be considered how
great a reproach it is to ecclesiastical discipline if it be made to minister
to the covetousness or to the needs of Proctors and Advocates; and if the
Church shall punish more cruelly then civil Courts for equal offenses: and
because she has but one thing to strike withal, if she upon all occasion
smites with her sword, it will either kill too many, or hurt and affright none
at all.

5. Spiritual censures must not be inflicted for temporal causes, 10.
in questions of right and secular concernment, for which the civil sword is
sharp enough and proper. In the Church of Rome it has been very usual to use
excommunications for the discovery of thefts, or the manifestation of secret
actions. Diverse examples of which are in the Decretals and later Canons of the
Church; but not till the Church had been extremely corrupted both in Doctrine
and Manners. But this advice is the same almost with the former, and relies
upon the same reason. But who please to see more of it may see it in Gerson de
vita spirit. anim. lect. 4. Corol. 7. and sermon. in Council. Rhemens. partit. 2.
consid. 2. provis. 2.

As as Corollary to these advices, I am to add one thing that is of great use
and consideration, 11.
and that is, That when a law is made that who ever shall commit such a fact
shall be ipso facto excommunicate, it must never be understood of the greater
and proper excommunication; for if it be, it is unlawful and it is ridiculous.
For the abscission from the Church is not to be used but after all other
remedies: when the crime is delated or notorious, and the person called, when
he has been admonished and reproved, and called to repentance, if after all he
refuses and rebels, then he is to be cut off, else not: and therefore no man is
ipso facto cut off. The offense alone deserves it just as it deserves
damnation: but because God is pleased graciously to call a sinner to
repentance, and cuts him not off till he has refused his gentleness and
forbearance, the Church must do so too, following the Economy of God; for if
the Church kills on earth, and God saves in heaven, it is clear she has not
rightly used her power, and therefore must not kill at the first dash.

If therefore it be inquired whether all such sentences in law which declare a
man to be in certain cases ipso facto excommunicate be unlawful, 12.
the Arch-Bp. of Spalato, who is fierce against them, answers affirmatively and
confidently, Lib. 5. de Rep. Eccles. cap. 9. n. 23, 24.
and disputes well against them: but his reasons are overvalued by him and are
not demonstrative; for they all rely upon this proposition, That no man can be
tied to be executioner of any sentence against himself, which I have proved to
be false Chap. 2. Rule 2.
. * What then do such sentences effect more then others which are comminatory,
and threaten the sentence only to be inflicted by the Judge if the crime be
delated and proved? Gerson says he learned thus to answer from his Master,
That the Judge in such cases, when the fact is proved or confessed, may pass to
sentence without any further Judicial process; which in other cases he cannot
do. But Gerson and his Master would fain have been at a new thing, but they
could not hit it right. For whether any such thing was effected or no, or
whether any more was intended, is not a matter of conscience; for this whole
proceeding is not the ministry of the keys, but wholly a humane invention,
done with great reason, and is of prudent conduct, and warranted by precedents
in Scripture: and since in those places where many such laws are made and used
it is certain that the lawgivers intend more, and more is practiced, i^ is not
true that Gerson's Master told him, that these laws produced nothing but a
power for the Judge to proceed summarily. And therefore he neither answered
right in the point of law, nor in the case of Conscience; and yet he said well,
that such sentences of excommunication do not oblige others to abstain from
the society of the excommunicate. It is true, but not for his, or for the
reasons of the learned Arch-Bp. of Spalato; but for this reason, because these
sentences do not intend to involve the offender in the greater
excommunication, which is not to be inflicted but upon him that has sinned
griveously, and after admonition refuses to amend. For if the greater
excommunication were intended, the laws were unlawful, and the sentence unjust.
For a crime in manners is like an error in faith: this without pertinacy is
not heresy, and that without contumacy does not deserve excommunication. But
what then?

Therefore all those laws which inflict the sentence of excommunication ipso
facto are to be understood of the lesser excommunication, 13.
and they mean thus much only, That the Church declares that all such
criminals are obliged to confess their sin, to abstain from the Communion till
they have truly repented, to submit themselves to the judgment of their
spiritual guide, to receive discipline at his hand, and manners of emendation;
and in this sense the laws are pious and reasonable, useful and of great
effect: but how much the conscience of the criminal is by them obliged is a
secret of which we know nothing; but this we know, that where such laws are
used and understood, without such submission and amends, a man that desires to
be good can have no peace of conscience.

The like is to be said of those ancient Canons of Councils which for light
causes impose and decree the sentence of excommunication. 14.
Thus the fourth Council of Carthage decrees him to be excommunicate qui
sacerdote verbum faciente in Ecclesia egressus de auditorio fuerit, Cap. 24.
who shall go out of the Church before the Sermon be ended. Very many of the
same nature might be produced, but they all mean the same thing; that he that
is delinquent in the instance when he is delated and convict shall be separate
a while from the Communion, (for that was the Discipline of those times) and
thrust into the place of public penitents.

RULE X. It is not lawful to communicate with those whom the Church has by a
just sentence excommunicated.
THat is, 1.
all prohibited Communion is unlawful: as if they be driven only from holy
offices, then we must not admit such persons to our assemblies; if a civil
intercourse be prohibited, that the Criminal by shame might be brought to
repentance, then that also must be denied him: for if he be bound by the
censure of the Church, then we also who are the relatives of that coercion are
tied to do our duty to the Church.

To which purpose there is an excellent discourse in S. Cyprian, 2.
Wherefore lib. 1. Ep. 4.
( says he) although there be some of our colleagues that think it fit to
neglect the Divine discipline, and do rashly communicate with Basilides and
Martialis, this thing ought not to disturb our faith; since the Holy Ghost in
the Psalms threatens such persons, saying, Thou have hated discipline and cast
my words behind thee: if thou saw a thief thou did go with him, and were
partaker with the adulterers. He shows that they were consorts and partakers
of other men's sins who were joined with the delinquents. Romans 1. 29, 30, 31.
But this thing also the Apostle Paul writes, saying, They are whisperers,
backbiters, haters of God.... who knowing the judgment of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them. For ( says he) they that do such things are
worthy of death. He manifests and proves that they are worthy of death and
shall come to punishment, not only that do evil, but they who consent to them
that do evil; who whilst by an unlawful communication they are mingled with
evil sinners, and that will not repent, are polluted with the contact of the
guilty, and because they are joined in crimes, they are not separated in
punishment.

The Church having so good warrant from Scripture proceeded to 3.
add Ecclesiastical penalties to those that would not verify her Sentences of
just excommunications. For when some had got a trick to meet in houses and pray
in Conventicles, because they were forbidden, or did voluntarily refuse to
enter into Churches, the Council of Antioch took notice of it, Cap. 2.
and forbad all such communions and assemblies and entercourses under the pain
of excommunication. But this was decreed by the Canons commonly called
Apostolical, Can. 10. a^^ 11.
Si quis cum excommunicato saltem i^ domo simul oraverit, iste communione
privetur, He that prays with an excommunicate person so much as privately in a
house, let him be deprived of the Communion. The same we find often in the
Ancient Epistles of the Popes; in the Cap. 7.
second and in the Cap. 73.
fourth Council of Carthage, in the first Council of Cap. 15.
Toledo, and in the Synod at Cap. 39.
Auxerre in France, in the first Council of Cap. 33.
Bracara, in the Council of Cap. 8. and 21.
Touraine, and the Council of C. 9.
Verne.

But this is to be understood with one caution, 4.
and to be reduced to practice by another. 1. Although the Church
excommunicates the^ that communicate with excommunicates, yet it is always to
be understood that the partners are only smitten with a lesser
excommunication, and obliged only externally, not internally. For there may be
many cases very favorable in which an innocent person may innocently
communicate with a heathen and a publican: and therefore in such cases in which
a man does not take part against, or directly or by intention despise the
Church, or give countenance, strength or increment to the sin of the
excommunicate, but with simplicity pursues other lawful purposes, and designs
nothing of these, he is only tied to give satisfaction to the Church; but is
not guilty before God. For the places of Scripture quoted by S. Cyprian
abovementioned are only spoken of such persons who by their society approve,
and in their hearts do consent to such crimes. But every man that goes along
with them in their journey or in their Merchandise, does not go along with
them in their crime; and yet if they be forbidden to go along the road with
them, and yet will do it, they may justly be presumed to go along in their
consent and approbation: and therefore the Church does well to forbid such to
come to her communions till she be satisfied, that is, till the contrary does
appear, or amends be made. But because in many cases the contrary can be made
to appear, and in more cases the contrary is true, whether it can be made to
appear or no, therefore in such cases it must be understood, that the companion
of the excommunicate is only bound in the face of the Church by such censures,
and not in the Court of heaven. Epist. 93.
And to this accords that of S. Leo, Certainly when any such cause does happen,
that for the heinousness of some crime committed any one is justly deprived of
the Communion, he alone ought to be punished who is involved in the guilt; nec
particeps debet esse supplicii qui consors non docetur fuisse commissi, neither
is he to partake of the punishment that was not a consort of the fact.

2. This rule is to be reduced to practice with this caution, 5.
That the Church intends not to forbid any such intercourse or communion to
which we stand preoblig'd by the law of Nature, or any law of God, or of the
Civil supreme power, from which the Church cannot absolve us. The sentence of
excommunication does not enjoin a son not to help his aged Father, nor the
Physician to give him physic in his sickness, nor the tenants to pay their
rent, and talk with their landlord about his and their necessities, nor the
feudatary to pay homage to his lord: to prohibit Natural or Civil duties the
Ecclesiastical power has nothing to do. If the Civil power has forbidden a
civil duty, he may, and then the subject is civilly bound in all things but
where God has commanded a duty. For even the King cannot command a wife not to
pay her duty to her husband, nor a child to his mother. To these they are bound
by God, though they die for it; and if the Prince be angry, yet God is well
pleased.

For although the supreme power can forbid even an action that is of it self
good and pious, 6.
and we are in the proper circumstances bound to obey him, and in this case
also obedience is better then sacrifice; yet when the piety is necessary, and
not under choice and counsel, but under a Commandment, the King and the
Bishop singly or conjunctly have no power to forbid it. (...)
(...),
for these are things that are not of to day or yesterday, but of an eternal
rectitude, and no man knows when they did begin. For upon this account Antigona
in Sophocles defends the fact of burying her dead Brother against the Kings
commandment, Even the Gods themselves, that is, the great Rulers of the world,
are subject to these laws. So Euripides, (...) in Hecuba.

(...)
(...).
This law rules them that rule the world: and therefore the Greek Tragedy does
rarely well call these laws (...), because all men and all things are under
their feet. It is, as Pindar calls it, (...), a law that is the King of all
things mortal and immortal. And therefore excommunications, though verified by
the secular power, cannot forbid the necessary and dutiful entercourses of
relations, or the issue of any duty commanded by a former obligation in the law
of God.

But if the Church will take her measures from the words of her commission, 7.
which as they are her only warrant, so they are the best rule, the external
effect of excommunication is this only, that we esteem him that refuses to
hear the Church as a heathen and a publican. If we account and use him so, it
is bad enough; but then we have no warrant to use him worse. And then as we eat
and drink and talk and buy and sell with heathens without sin, why also not
with excommunicates, this precept notwithstanding? I say, this precept
notwithstanding, for it is more then an indulgence or a leave to use them so;
it is a commandment: the Rulers and stewards of God's household are tied to
separate refractary Criminals from the sound part; and the people are bound to
be separate, for they also have a share in this binding and loosing by way of
consent and compliance and verification, according to that of S. Austin, de
verbo Domini, Homil 15.
Si fratrem habes pro Ethnico and publicano, ligasti illum in terris; si
correxeris fratrem, solvisti illum in terris. The people are to bind and loose,
that is, to esteem him that is bound as a heathen and a publican, and to assist
in the correcting of him, by bringing him to repentance by the instrument of
shame. But this being matter of office, and not merely of benefit, it is
evident that it is a precept, and not a leave only, a Commandment, and not an
indulgence.

But then if we enquire to how much and to what manner of usages it does oblige
us, 8.
we shall be able to understand our duty best by considering that it is a
proverbial expression, or a form of execration, to signify impious and profane
persons, of the vilest reproach. Just as in the Old Testament, Levit. 25. 47.
of what Nation soever he was, yet a stranger from the Covenant of God was
called an Aramite or a Syrian; and when S. Paul said that S. Timothie's Father
was a Greek, the Syriac interpreter calls him an Aramite: so here a heathen and
a publican signifies a wicked and a reprobate person; as we call cruel people
Turks, and in the time of the holy war all very vile and intolerably vicious
or hated persons were called Saracens. Harlots and Publicans Christ joins
together; Matthew. 21.
so Publicans and Sinners the same with Heathens and Publicans. Meaning that
all contumacious sinners, that upon admonition and Ecclesiastical correption
refuse to repent, are to be accounted enemies and strangers to the rights and
promises of the Gospel, enemies to the religion, and separate from God, and
given over to a reprobate sense.

But it cannot be inferred from hence that the same usage which the Jews gave
to Heathens and Publicans, 9.
we are tied to have toward excommunicates. That we must have no worse is
certain, but not such, not so bad, is also very true; because our Blessed
Savior did not even amongst them approve of those harsh and contemptuous
usages; (...), they would not eat, nor drink, nor trade, nor come to them. Non
monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti,
Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos.
They would not do common civilities or charities to an uncircumcised man, to
a heathen. But when our Blessed Savior had used them better, and so taught
others to converse with them, to do them good and to save their souls, it will
be very reasonable to collect from hence, that Christ did not intend by this to
enjoin us to such treatments of the excommunicates as the proud Pharisees gave
to Publicans and heathens: but the manner of speech was in use among the Jews
to signify impious persons and great sinners, and so Excommunicates are to be
accounted.

That therefore which remains is, 10.
that the usage here intended is, that they should be separate from the
communion of holy offices, from partaking in the mysteries of religion; for
that was the known use of the words of binding and loosing among the Jews,
which Christ used in giving the Church a power of excommunication. To bind
signifies to forbid, and to loose signifies to give admission and leave,
according to that usual saying of the Jews, There was nothing bound by Ezekiel
or by David but what was bound in the Law, that is, they forbad nothing else.
So that the accounting these persons separate from God, and forbidding them to
enter into the communions of the sons of God in the mysteries of their
religion, is all that can by any probability be inferred from hence, excepting
what is superadded from common reason and the laws of nature; that if beyond
this there be danger of receiving hurt, the separation go further: and
therefore the Apostles gave caution to their converts that they should not
salute or admit into their houses false Apostles, because of the imminent
danger; but beyond this I find no Divine Commandment.

Whatsoever therefore besides these things is superadded by the laws of the
King of the Canons of the Church is to be obeyed upon those accounts, 11.
where no other duty is prejudiced; and therefore in this there is no other
rule of Conscience, but that we first attend to the laws of God concerning our
other duties, and then to the laws of the King in this. But in the thing it
self, excommunication cuts the refractary sinner from the communion or
religious intercourse of the Church; he is not to be reckoned as a Brother, or
a relative in our religious friendship and union. The offices of humanity and
civility are not to be denied to him; but there ought to be no dearnesse and
proximity of friendship: we are not to take much care of reproving him; his
ears are shut to truth, and he cannot hear good counsel; hujus ergo desperanda
salus (as Cicero said of the like persons) unless a new hope arise, we may
despair of his salvation.

One thing more I add, 12.
That when the Church inflicts censures upon those who communicate with the
Excommunicates, it is not upon a real belief that all such persons are guilty
of the same crimes by secret approbation or consent, but because she cannot
tell whether they be or no; for it is a just legal presumption, and has some
natural probability that it is so; and the Church is but too justly offended
and scandalized at such communications and intercourse. But then on all sides
there is a difference to be made, and the Church must not be so offended when
he that communicates with the excommunicate apparently does not, or by that
communion cannot be presumed to partake of the principal sin: and therefore
besides the tyranny and usurpation and illegal proceedings of Hildebrand
against the Emperor Henry, excommunicating him upon pretense of Simony in the
matter of Investitures, he did foolishly and unreasonably excommunicate all
them that did partake or converse with him. For first the Church has no power
directly to make laws in the matter of secular conversation: and if it be said,
by consequence and legal presumption the Church concludes such persons that
communicate with the excommunicates to consent or partake of the crime; that is
according as the matter is, and in this case is extremely unreasonable and
foolish: for it cannot be imagined that all the subjects of the Emperor should
be partners of the bargains, or should know of them, or believe any such thing,
or approve it, if they did know or believe it; and the communicating with their
Prince as subjects could not infer it, with any seeming probability, that they
were all simoniacs.

But then on the other side, 13.
the sons of the Church must be with curiosity restrained in their communions
with such excommunicates, whose conversation does with probability involve us
in the guilt and participation of the principal crime: and this is especially
to be observed in sins about Government, and in matters of persuasion, that is,
in matters of heresy and schism; for their word eats like a canker, that is,
these crimes are infectious and scatter themselves into all that converse with
them, or is very likely so to do; and therefore in these cases the subjects
may be more restrained from intercourse with excommunicates, and it must be a
greater necessity that must warrant it, then may pass and be allowed in other
cases.

This is all I find necessary to be considered in the matter of Ecclesiastical
censures, 14.
in order to the regulating of conscience: which the Casuists in the Roman
Church have handled in great volumes, and make it commonly the one half of all
their inquiries and ministeries of Conscience. For all the questions and
considerations concerning suspensions, irregularities, interdicts, depositions
and degradations, absolutions of the dead and of the absent, the forms of
absolution, reservation of cases, delegations and licenses, absolutions against
our wills, and by others who bound us not, and upon false suggestions,
absolutions upon condition and reincidences, sentences uncertain and unknown,
excommunications comminatory and ipso facto, papal and episcopal, common and
special, principal and delegate, by regulars and seculars, the excommunication
of Angels and Devils, of fowls and beasts, Pagans and Jews, and thousands of
questions, cases, accidents, incidents, limitations of times appendant to all
these, which make the peace of conscience to be as impossible as the conduct of
it, all these are cut off by the simplicity of truth, and the plainness of
Divine institutions, which are few, and easy, and useful, and reasonable; wise,
but not perplexed; severe, but not insnaring. But those things which are
introduced by humane authority and rely upon secular interests, the artifices
of covetous or ambitious men, and are maintained by force and false or
uncertain principles, they are fit for the forum contentiosum for Courts of
strife, but not for the Court of Conscience, which is troubled by any thing
that destroys peace as certainly as by that which destroys innocence.

III. Of CANONS Ecclesiastical.
That which I am next to inquire of, is, concerning the more particular persons
or communities of men in whom the Ecclesiastical power is subjected, and where
we are to find the records of Ecclesiastical laws, and from whom the
obligations of Conscience do proceed, and in what matters their authority is
competent, and their Canons obligatory. That is, to what and whose
Ecclesiastical Canons the Conscience is, and how far it is bound.

RULE XI. The Canons of the Apostles which are of Order and external government
do oblige the Conscience by being accepted in several Churches, not by their
first establishment.
THat the Canons which the Apostles made did oblige the Churches to whom they
were fitted and directed is without all question, 1.
according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 9.
To this end also did I write, that I might know the proof of you, whether ye
be obedient in all things. For whatsoever was their ordinary power, yet they
had so much of extraordinary, had such special commissions and warranties from
Christ, had such gifts and miracles of power, so much wisdom, so much charity,
and so entire a government, and were the only fountains from whence the rules
of the Church were to be derived, that their word ought to be a law to whom it
was sent, and a precedent to them that should hear of it: it was like the
pattern in the Mount, to which all Churches in equal circumstances and the same
conjunction of affairs might conform their practices.

Thus we find that the Apostolical decree of abstaining from blood 2.
was observed by more Churches then those of Syria and Cilicia to which the
Canon was directed; and the college of Widows or Deaconesses, though provided
for the first ministry of the churches and relief of ancient widows, derived
it self into the manners of the Western Churches, and lasted longer then there
was need. There was no hurt in it; the reverence to the persons and dignity
Apostolical was foundation enough to bear a greater burden: but the retention
of such Canons and orders was just like the retention of the Judicial laws in
some commonwealths, which they did in regard to the divine wisdom; though they
in so doing did piously indeed, but yet did not imitate that wisdom by which
those laws were made.

But because it is evident that the laws of order and government were fitted to
times and places and present necessities, 3.
the same wisdom that so fitted the laws and things together, did also know
that those rules were not good when the things were changed and grew unfit for
that measure. The Apostles in their first preachings and conversation in
Jerusalem instituted a coenobitic life, and had all things in common with the
believers; indeed no man was tied to it: and of the same nature were their
Canons, Counsels and advices, and propositions of what was best. But that
advise related to the present necessities of believers: they were likely to
suffer persecution, and the nation was in a little time to be destroyed, and
therefore it was prudence to sell their lands, and charity to divide the use of
it. But if any man shall say that this obliges all Christians, he is
unreasonable; but if they do not, then it is certain that their laws oblige
according to the subject matter and the changing reasons of things, and
therefore not by their authority alone, but by their authority also who are
judges of the reason of things, and can declare with obligation.

But yet further, 4.
The orders which the Apostles gave to their Churches, though they be as good
now as they were then, and have equal circumstances, yet unless it can appear
that they by them intended to oblige all ages of the Church, although they were
not free then, yet they are free now. Now this is certain, that they gave no
such laws but what they received in Commandment from Christ; and when ever
they said of any particular, This say I, not the Lord, they gave but an advice,
or made a temporary order; but when they said, This we have received from the
Lord, it is always a doctrine of faith, or a moral Commandment. So that the
rules of order being neither of these are but topical, and limited, and
transient; such which when they are chosen by the Rulers of Churches they
become Canons and measures of practice, but else not. The Apostle made an order
in the Corinthian Church that men should not pray or prophesy having their
heads covered: but yet in France the preachers are covered, and do not think
they prevaricate an Apostolical Canon; because they supposed it reached no
further but to that Church, or at least was agreeable to the manners and
customs of those places. S. Paul appointed that they should lay aside every
first day of the week something for the poor: but he that shall choose to do
this upon his weekly fasting-day, does as well; he does the same thing in
another circumstance. * S. Paul gave in order to Timothy that a Bishop should
not be a novice; meaning in age, or in Christianity, or both: and yet S.
Timothy himself was but a novice, being chosen Bishop at the age of XXV years,
as the Ecclesiastical histories report; and Theodosius chose Nectarius being
but newly converted; and the people chose S. Ambrose to be Bishop before he was
baptized, and the election was confirmed by Valentinian. Fabianus, Cyprian,
Nicolaus, Severus, Tarasius, were all novices or new Christians when they were
chosen Bishops; Consult. Art. 23.
and yet the Church made no scruple of that Canon of the Apostles, because to
break it was more for the edification of the Church. And I remember that
Cassander, speaking of the intolerable evils that fell upon the Church by the
injunction of single life to Priests and Bishops, he says this law ought to
have been relaxed, although it had been an Apostolical Canon. * Thus also it
happened in the Canon concerning the college of widows, Novel. 123. c. 12, 13.
Let not a widow be chosen under threescore years; and yet Justinian suffered
one of forty years old to be chosen, and had no scruple, and he had no reproof:
but that was no great matter; for the whole institution it self is now laid
aside, and other appointments are established. * And which is most of all, that
Decretal of the Apostles which was made in full Council, the most Ecumenical
Council that ever was in Christendom, made at the request of the Churches of
the Gentiles, and the inquiry of the Jews, forbidding to eat things strangled,
is no where observed in the Western Churches of Christendom; Lib. 32. contra
Faustum Manich. c. 13.
and S. Austin affirmed that if any man in his time made a scruple of eating
strangled birds, every man did laugh at him. But of this I have given a full
account Lib. 2. Chap. 2. Rule 2.
.

Now if those Canons Apostolical which are recorded in Scripture, 5.
and concerning which we are sure that they had Apostolical authority, be
without scruple laid aside in all Christendom, some every where, some in some
places, it is evident that it is the sense of the whole Catholic Church, that
the Canons of the Apostles for order and external measures of Government had a
limited sphere of activity, and bind not beyond their reason and convenience,
that is, as every Church shall find them fitted to their own measures; and
therefore this is much more true in such things which are but pretendedly
Apostolical, whose name is borrowed, whose story is uncertain, whose matter is
dubious, whose records are not authentic: and therefore whatever else can be
pretended to be Apostolical, and is of this contingent nature and variable
matter, is evidently subject to the present authority of every Church or
Christian Kingdom which is supreme in its own dominion.

But besides the reasonableness of the thing, 6.
we see it practiced in all places without dispute or question; that those
things which are called Canons Apostolical, and either were not so, or not
certainly so, are yet laid aside by those Churches who pretend to believe them
to be so. The 5th Canon of the Apostles in that collection which is called
Apostolical, appoints that the first fruits shall be sent home to the houses of
Bishops and Priests, and makes no question but they divide them amongst the
Deacons and Clercs; but I think in the Church of Rome they pay no first fruits,
and what they do pay, the Bishops and Priests keep unto themselves. But this
is nothing. The 6th Canon commands that a Priest or a Deacon should not under
pretense of religion put away his wife: now this is so far from being received
in the Church of Rome, that for this very Canon's sake Baronius calls the
collection apocryphal, and rejects them from being Apostolical. The 7th Canon
forbids a Bishop or Presbyter to have any thing to do in secular affairs,
under pain of deposition. This would destroy much of the grandeur of the Church
of Rome if it were received. And the 10th destroys one of their great
corruptions in discipline and doctrine, for it is a perfect deletery of their
private Mass; it excommunicates those of the people who come to Churches and
go away before they have received the Communion, calling them disturbers of
the Church: now this at Rome would seem a strange thing. And yet all these are
within that number of fifty which Baronius says were known to antiquity. But
he that desires more instances in this affair, may consult the Canons
themselves, amongst which he will find very few observed at this day by any
Church in Christendom. The Church of Rome pretends to believe that the
wednesday and friday fast were ordained by the Apostles; Reginald. prax. fori
poenit. l. 4. c. 12. sect. 3. p. 148. n. 133.
and yet the wednesday fast is not observed except by particular order and
custom but in very few places. * I shall give one instance more. The Apostles
commanded the feast of Easter to be celebrated upon the Sunday after the full
Moon which should happen after the vernal Aequinox: So the Western Churches
said. The Eastern pretended another Canon from S. John to celebrate it after
the manner of the Jews: and though they were confident and zealous for that
observation upon the Apostolical warrant; yet the Western Bishops at first, and
afterward the whole Church did force the Easterlings to change that rule which
they and their forefathers had avowed to all the world to have received from S.
John; and it is observable that this was done upon the designs of peace and
unity, not upon any pretense that S. John had never so given it in order to the
Asian Churches.

RULE XII. All those Rituals which were taught to the Church by the Apostles
concerning ministeries, which were of Divine institution, do oblige all
Christendom to their observation.
I Instance in the Holy Sacrament first of all: 1.
concerning which the Apostles delivered to the Churches the essential manner
of celebration, that is, the way of doing it according to Christ's commandment:
for the words themselves being large and indefinite were spoken indeed only to
the Apostles, but yet they were representatives of all the whole Ecclesiastical
order in some things, and of the whole Christian Church in other, and therefore
what parts of duty and power and office did belong to each the Apostles must
teach the Church, or she could have no way of knowing without particular
revelation.

Thus the Apostles taught the Bishops and Priests to consecrate the Symbols of
bread and wine before they did communicate; 2.
not only because by Christ's example we were taught to give thanks before we
eat, but because the Apostles knew that the Symbols were consecrated to a
mystery. And this was done from the beginning, and in all Churches and in all
ages of the Church; by which we can conclude firmly in this Rule, that the
Apostles did give a Canon or rule to the Churches to be observed always, and
that the Church did never believe she had authority or reason to recede from
it. For in those rites which are Ministeries of grace no man must interpose any
thing that can alter any part of the institution, or make a change or variety
in that which is of Divine appointment. For the effect in these things depends
wholly upon the will of God, and we have nothing to discourse or argue; for we
know nothing but the institution, nothing of the reason of the thing: and
therefore we must in these cases with simplicity and obedience apply our selves
to practice as we have received, for we have nothing else to guide us: memory
and obedience, not discourse and argument, are here in season.

And in this we have an evident and apparent practice of the Church handed to
us by all hands that touch these mysteries: 3.
as who please may see in Apol. 2. ad Anton.
Justin Martyr, lib. 4. Ad. haer. c. 34.
Irenaeus, lib. 8. contr. Celsum.
Origin, Mystag. Catech. 3. and 4.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem, and of in. Johan. lib. 10. c. 13.
Alexandria, lib. De spir. S. cap. 27.
S. Basil, S. Gregory Nyssen de vita Moysi, lib. 2. Contr. Par.
Optatus Milevitanus, in 2. Tim. Hom. 2. Sermon. de prodit. Jud.
S. Chrysostom, de Sacram. lib. 4. c. 4.
S. Ambrose, Ep. 1. and Ep. 85. ad Evagrium, and in Sophon. c. 3.
S. Hierom, de Trinit. lib. 3. c. 4. contra Faust. Manich. lib. 20. cap. 13.
and Sermon. 28. de verbis Domini.
S. Austin, Dial. 1.
Theodoret, Sermon. 5. de Paschate.
Gregorius Emissenus, Dial. l. 4. ^. 58.
Gregory the Great, de Fide. l. 4. c. 14.
Damascen, in 1 Cor. cap. 10.
Remigius, lib. de Corpore Domini.
Paschasius and diverse others, and absolutely in all the liturgies that ever
were used in the Church: so that the derivation of this Canon from the Apostles
is as evident as the obedience to it was universal.

But where the Apostles did not interpose, 4.
there the Churches have their liberty; and in those things also which
evidently were no part of the appointed liturgy or ministration, in those
things though it be certain the Apostles did give rules of order and decency,
yet because order is as variable as the Tactics of an army, and decency is a
relative term, and has a transient and changeable sense, in all these things
there is no prescription to the Church, though we did know what the Churches
Apostolical did practice, for they did it with liberty: and therefore we are
not bound; the Churches are as free as ever; though the single persons in the
Churches can be bound, yet the Churches always have liberty.

And indeed that is the best sign that the Apostles gave no perpetual order in
any instance, 5.
and that it is no part of the institution or the ministry of grace, when the
Ancient Churches, who were zealous for the honor Apostolical, and accounted
every thing excellent that derived from them, did differ in their practices.
Thus the Greek and Latin Churches did always differ in the Sacramental bread,
the Latins consecrating in unleavened bread which the Greeks refuse: if either
one or other had been necessary they should have been clearly taught it, and if
they had, there is no reason to believe but they would have kept the depositum,
there being no temptation to the contrary, and no difficulty in the thing, and
no great labor to preserve; the daily use of the Church would have had in it
no variety; for no traditions are surer, or easier preserved then the (...) the
matters of liturgy and the Rituals Apostolical: which when we find that they
were unitedly and consentingly kept by the Ancient Churches, we may well
suppose the Apostles to be the first principle of derivation, and that the
thing it self was necessary and a part of the religion; but if at first they
varied, they had no common principle, and therefore they had no necessity.

Thus that the Bishop or Priest should be the only Minister of consecration is
an Apostolical Canon or Rule, 6.
ad quorum preces Christi corpus sanguisque conficitur, Epist. 85.
says S. Hierom: and the continuation and descent of this particular from the
manners of the Apostolical ministration is evident in the fore-alleged
testimonies. Now because by this constant derivation we can pursue the track up
to the Apostles, and from their practice and teaching of it we can understand
it to be the will of God, and because this whole ministry is an act of grace
and depends only upon the will of God, we perceive the thing to be necessary
and unalterable, we must look for grace in the ministeries of grace so as God
has appointed them; and therefore in these things the Churches of the
succeeding ages have no authority, no liberty, no variety. * That women do
communicate in the holy mysteries is not set down in the institution: but the
Church derives her warranty from the interpretation and order and practice
Apostolical: the Church was taught by the Apostles to admit them, and she
always did it: and these things amongst sober and modest men do sufficiently
prove one another. They always did it, and therefore they were taught it by the
Apostles: and they were taught to do so by the Apostles, and therefore they
were obliged to do it. And now in matters of salvation and common duty, the
rule of the Church is, Panormitan. in capit. Majores in princip. in 510 Notab.
Scriptura loquens in Masculino procedit etiam in foeminino. There is no
difference in sexes, and before God it is now as it shall be in the
resurrection, There is neither male nor female with him, but all alike.

That the Symbols were to be consecrated, 7.
and who were to consecrate, and who were to receive, were of great necessity
to be taught and determined: and in all this we see unity and necessity,
authority and obedience; but when we go beyond this and the plain and
necessary and constituent parts of the institution we find variety and
uncertainty. That bread is to be used is plain: but whether leavened or
unleavened neither Christ nor his Apostles have left in charge or memory. That
wine is to be blessed is certain: but whether mingled with water or not
mingled, we are not determined by any authority. That the bread and wine are to
be blessed we are sure: but in what form of words, and whether by the mystic
prayer, or the words of institution, is not derived to us by sufficient
tradition. That the Lords Supper is sacredly and with reverence to be received
is taught us by the Apostles: but whether this reverence ought to be expressed
by taking it virgin saliva, fasting, or not fasting, the Apostles left the
Churches to their choice. In those things which did cooperate immediately to
the grace of the Sacrament, in those we were not to invent any thing, and in
those we were tied to obey what was delivered us.

And the same is the case in Baptism, 8.
in which that which was necessary is that the person be baptized in water, and
in the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost: but whether the Priest shall
say, Ego te baptizo, as the Latins do, or Baptizetur servus Christi, as the
Greeks do, is indifferent: and if the Apostles had used any other little
variety of words, yet if there was not in the first Churches an unity and
universality of practice, it is certain the Apostles did not by their act or
Canon intend to oblige all Christendom; but themselves did it with liberty,
and therefore so might the Churches after them.

For, 9.
excepting those things which the Apostles received from Christ in which they
were ministers to all ages, once for all conveying the mind of Christ to the
generations to come, in all other things they were but ordinary Ministers, to
govern the Churches in their own times, and left all that ordinary power to
their successors, with a power to rule their Churches, such as they had, and
therefore what ever they conveyed as from Christ, a part of his doctrine or any
thing of his appointment, this was to bind for ever; for Christ only is our
lawgiver, and what he said, was to last for ever: in all things which he said
not, the Apostles could not be lawgivers, they had no such authority; and
therefore whatsoever they ordered by their own wisdom, was to abide as long as
the reason did abide; but still with the same liberty with which they appointed
it; for of all men in the world they would least put a snare upon the
Disciples, or tie fetters upon Christian liberty. But in Divine Commandments,
and in what were the appointed ministeries of grace, they were but the mouth of
Christ and Ministers of his holy spirit; and in those things, what they told to
the Churches is our law for ever.

Of the same nature is the distinction of Bishops from Presbyters, 10.
and the government of the Church by them: for this being done in the Apostles
times, and immediately received by all Churches, who every where and ever since
were governed by Bishops and by Presbyters under them, it is not only still to
be retained unalterably, and is one of those great things in which the present
Churches have no liberty or authority to make a change, but it is to be
concluded to be a law of Christ, which the Apostles did convey with an intent
to oblige all Christendom; not only because the Apostles could not in things
indifferent oblige or make a law to succeeding ages, for they had no authority
and could not govern Churches after they were dead, and it was against the laws
of Christ that the commandments of men should be taught for doctrines, and it
is against Christian liberty, that a lasting necessity should by man be put
upon any thing, and the succeeding Churches would be straightened in the liberty
which Christ had given them, and in which they were bound to stand fast; not
only all this, but this was a Ministry of grace, the Bishops were for ever
appointed to give a gift by the laying on of hands: and therefore here was an
appointment by Christ and by Christ's spirit; for there is not in the world a
greater presumption then that any should think to convey a gift of God, unless
by God he be appointed to do it. Here then could be no variety, and no
liberty: this Canon Apostolical is of eternal obligation, and the Churches
cannot otherwise be continued.

But then in the appendages and annexes of this, 11.
the Apostles did do their ministeries; they did invocate the holy Spirit upon
those which were to be ordained: but in these they had no commandment what
form to use. Imposition of hands and prayer were the necessary and appointed
ministry; for in these things the Churches did not vary, but took them from
the Apostles as the appointed liturgy: but with what forms of words, and with
the tradition of what instruments, is left to the choice and Economy of every
Church.

RULE XIII. In the Rules which the Apostles gave to their Churches in things
indifferent, the Church has a liberty; but it is not to be used but for great
reason and great necessity, and for the edification of the people committed to
their charge.
THe reasons of this Rule are these two. 1.
First, because it is a great regard to the honored names of the Apostles, the
pillars and foundations of the Church, that there be not an easy change made of
what they in wisdom had determined to be the measures of order and decency. *
But this is to be understood in such things which change not, and whose nature
although it be not of moral obligation, yet the reason that bound it first may
be perpetual, and such which cannot be succeeded to, and cannot be excelled.
Thus the keeping of the Lords day, besides all the other reasons derived from
the nature of the thing, yet even for this alone, because it derived from the
Apostles, is to remain so for ever: because the reason being at first competent
for which they kept their assemblies, and gave that day to religion, and the
same reason remaining for ever, and another cannot come in place of it, and a
greater there cannot be, although the Churches are not in Conscience directly
bound, yet collaterally and indirectly they are. For it would be a plain
contempt of the persons and wisdom of the Apostles, besides the disrespect to
the mystery it self, to change the Sunday Festival into any other day; for
since there can be no reason for so doing, and a greater blessing then Christ's
Resurrection we are not to expect, and a greater reason for the keeping of a
day then a thanksgiving for the greatest blessing there cannot be (except a
Divine commandment) the only reason why any Church should change it must
relate to the Apostles, and therefore be no less then a contempt of their
persons and a lessening of their eminence, and could not be less then an
intolerable scandal.

The other reason is, 2.
because the Apostles even in things where they had no Divine Commandment, yet
had the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 7. 40.
the spirit of wisdom and government; and therefore where evidently there is
not an inconvenience, or an uselesnesse, or an unreasonablenesse by reason of
the change of times and circumstances, the Churches are on the surer side when
they follow the practice and precedents of the Apostles, and have the
confidences of a reasonable hope that such appointments are pleasing to Christ,
since it is not unlikely that they were derived from the Spirit of Christ. But
in these cases the practices and Canons Apostolical must be evident and proved:
For since in these particulars of lesser concernment, we do but presume and
conjecture that the Apostles were taught by the Spirit immediately; if it be
but a conjecture also that the Apostles did teach or practice it, we have two
lame feet, and cannot tread securely.

I shall give one instance in this particular, 3.
but it will be of great use, not only for the verification of this
explication of the Rule, but in order to conscience, because it is in some
Churches tied with straight cords, and pretended to be very necessary, and of
great obligation upon this stock, because it was appointed by the Apostles: and
it is the observation of Lent and the weekly fasting-days.

Of the Lent-fast, and the weekly fasting-days.
The fast of Lent of all that are not pretends the most fairly to have been an
Apostolical tradition; 4.
and if it could prove so it would with much probability pretend to have been
imposed with a perpetual obligation.

Of the first we have many testimonies from the Ancient Fathers. 5.
So S. Hierom, Epist. 54, ad Marcell.
Nos unam quadragesimam secundum traditionem Apostolorum toto anno, tempore
nobis congruo jejunamus. Sermon. 6. de 40ma
So S. Leo, Quod ergo in omni tempore unumquemque convenit facere Christianum,
id nunc sollicitius est and devotius exequendum, ut Apostolica institutio
quadraginta dierum jejuniis impleatur. And again, Sermon. 9.
A Sanctis Apostolis per doctrinam spiritus sancti majora sunt instituta
jejunia, ut per commune consortium crucis Christi, nos etiam aliquid in eo quod
propter nos gessit ageremus. Origin. l. 6. c. 19. p. 83. a.
To these agrees Isidorus Hispalensis, Quadragesima in universo orb
institutione Apostolica observatur circa confinium Dominicae passionis. To
which Dorotheus a Greek Abbat does consent, save only that he says more;
Biblioth. PP. Graecolat. T. 1. p. 839.
for he affirms that the Apostles did consecrate the seven quadragesimal weeks
of fasting. So that here we have four Ancient Authors giving testimony that the
Lent-fast was a tradition or an appointment Apostolical.

Now if it came from the Apostles by way of precedent or authority, 6.
the thing it self has in its nature or appendage some advantages by which
with much reasonableness we may believe it was intended to bind all ages of
the Catholic Church. Because the usefulness of it will be as much now as ever
it was; and it being a specification of the duty of fasting, which will never
be out of season, and having always the same common cause, that is the
precedent of Moses and Elias, and the example of our Blessed Savior himself,
the duty not being relative to time or place, and the reason of the institution
being of perpetual regard, and the usefulness very great, and the thing pious
and holy, and add to these, all Churches ancient and modern having received it
till now of late, it will be very like a duty incumbent upon all Churches and
all ages to observe this fast which the Apostles with so much reason did
prescribe.

And in pursuance of this we find some excellent persons in the Ancient
Churches saying expressly that this institution is warranted to us from
Christ. 7.
So S. Austin, The Caresme or Lent-fast has an authority of a Fast both in the
Old Testament from the fast of Moses and Elias, Epist. 119. ad Januar. in Psalm.
110.
and out of the Gospel (because so many days the Lord fasted) demonstrating
that the Gospel does not differ from the law: and again, By that number of
forty in which Moses and Elias and our Lord himself did fast, was signified
unto us that we must abstain from secular delights. The same thing also is
affirmed by S. Hierom, in Isai. l. 16. c. 58.
Moses and Elias in their forty days hunger were filled with the conversation
of God: and our Lord himself fasted so many days in the wilderness that he
might leave to us the solemn days of fasting; or, as he says in another place,
in Jonae cap. 3.
haereditatem nobis jejunii derelinquens, ad esum corporis sui sub hoc numero
animas nostras praeparat, leaving to us the inheritance of fasting, under this
number he prepares our souls for the eating of his body. So Isidore, The first
is the fast of Lent, which began from the fast of Moses and Helias and of our
Blessed Lord, who fasted so many days.

Now although these Fathers intend not to say that our Lord did command this
fast, 8.
but gave us a precedent and an example to imitate as well as we can; he was
the occasion why the Church took that time, and performed that severity: yet
the example of our Blessed Lord cannot be neglected without sin: Non enim,
Fratres, leve peccatum est indicta^ Quadragesimam a Domino non jejunare, and
jejunia consecrata ventris voracitate dissolvere, etc. said the Author of the
25th sermon in the works of S. Ambrose. It is not a light sin not to keep the
Lenten-fast which was indicted by our Lord, and with the greediness of the
belly to dissolve these consecrated fasting-days. For what does he deserve that
breaks the fast which Christ indicted? If therefore thou will be a Christian
thou must do as Christ did. He that had no sin fasted forty days: and wilt not
thou who have sinned keep the Lent-fast? He (I say) that had no sin yet fasted
for our sins: Think therefore in thy Conscience what a kind of Christian thou
art, when Christ fasting for thee thou will eat thy dinner. This Author whoever
he was (for it was not S. Ambrose) supposed that the example of Christ was a
sufficient indiction of the Quadragesimal fast. But it is to be observed that
it is not unusual with Ancient writers to affirm a thing to be by Divine right,
if there be in Scripture but an authentic precedent and example of it. Thus
when the Canon law affirms in 6. de censibus, cap. Quanquam, That the Churches
and Churchmen are free from secular exactions not only by humane but also by
Divine right: which saying because to our ears it must needs seem extremely
harsh, the Gloss upon the place does soften it, by referring it to the fact of
Joseph to the Egyptian Priests, Vide Bellar. lib. 1. de cleric. c. 28.. quinta
propositio.
and of Artaxerxes to the Israelites. So that it is not intended that things of
this nature be Divine precepts properly so called; but such which the Church
for decent regard takes up in imitation of so great examples: and indeed they
are such, which when the Church has upon such accounts taken up, cannot be
omitted without sin, if they be omitted without cause: for then they have
authority when they are commanded by our superiors. But the example of our
Blessed Lord in such extraordinaries as these is but a very weak argument to
introduce an institution, ordinary and perpetual, troublesome and ensnaring.
But of this that we may be rid at once, I will set down the judgment of S.
Austin and of S. Chrysostom. S. Aug. in Psalm. 90.
In what shall we imitate the ways of Christ? Shall it be in that magnificence
in which God was in the flesh? Or does he exhort us to this, or exact of us to
do miracles such as he did? He did not say, Ye shall not be my disciples
unless ye walk upon the sea, or unless ye raise to life him that has been
dead four days, or unless ye open the eyes of one that was born blind. What
therefore does he mean, saying, Ye must enter by the door; Learn of me,
because I am meek and humble in heart? that is entering in by the door, that is
the imitation of Christ that is required of us. But S. Chrysostom says the same
thing, Homil. in Matthew. 47.
and more pertinently and applied to this matter of fasting: He does not say
his fast is to be imitated, although he might propound those forty days of
his: But, Learn of me, for I am meek and humble in heart: yea rather
contrarily, when he sent the Apostles to preach the Gospel, he did not say,
Fast, but, Eat whatsoever is set before you. Now this argument of our Blessed
Lord's example being removed, and it being certain that from his example to
conclude a Divine precept in such extraordinaries and external actions is the
worst argument of the world, and it being expressly affirmed by S. Chrysostom
that Christ did not in his fasting propound himself as imitable by us, we may
now return to the first consideration and pretense, and inquire whether or no
the fast of Lent was a tradition and Canon Apostolical: that is, not only
whether this did descend from their practice (for if Christ's example did not
oblige us in this, much less could that of the Apostles;) but also whether the
Apostles did deliver this as a rule for the practice of the Churches in all
descending ages.

The Lent-fast is not a tradition or Canon Apostolical.
This first appears in that we find it affirmed often in Antiquity that the
fasts of the Church were arbitrary and chosen, 9.
without necessity and imposition from any authority. Which thing was observed
by Socrates, speaking of the Lent-fast. Because no man can show in any record
that there was a Commandment concerning this thing, lib. 5. cap. 22. Grae. 21.
Latin.
it is manifest that the Apostles did permit a free power in the same, leaving
it to every ones mind and choice, that every one might do what was good,
without the inducement of fear or of necessity. For so we ought to fast and to
abstain (says Prosper) that we may not submit our souls to a necessity of
fasting and abstaining, de vita contemplat. lib. 2. cap. 24.
that we may not do a voluntary thing by an involuntary devotion. But of this
we have elder testimony: for when Tertullian scraped together all that he could
to justify the Lents of Montanus, the new fasts which he for discipline would
have had the Churches for ever to observe, he laid hold upon the practice of
the Catholics to verify Montanus his imposition, saying that the Catholic
Bishops did enjoin fasts sometimes and ex aliqua sollicitudinis Ecclesiasticae
causa, lib. De jejun. cap. 13.
upon the occasion of some trouble or affliction in the Church, that is,
temporary fasts, or solemn days upon special emergent accidents. He adds also
that they kept the Paschal fast, the two days before Easter, in which the
Bridegroom was taken from them: but in these days they did sometimes live on
bread and water, ut cuique videbatur, and haec ex arbitrio agentes and non ex
imperio; they did this not by any command, but by choice and as they pleased
themselves: for so the Catholics did say and believe, sic and observasse
Apostolos, nullum aliud imponentes jugum certorum, and in commune omnibus
obeundorum jejuniorum, Cap. 2.
that the Apostles did fast as every Christian else did and ought to do, ex
arbitrio, pro temporibus and causis uniuscujusque, as every one had cause and
opportunity and will; but they imposed no other yoke of certain, and for ever
to be observed fasts. Laxus ac liber modus abstinendi
Ponitur cunctis: neque nos severus
Terror impellit: sua quemque cogit
Velle potestas.
Sufficit quicquid facias, vocato
Numinis nutu prius, inchoare,
Sive tu mensam renuas, cibumve
Sumere tents.
So Prudentius, Cathemet. hymn. 8.
expressly affirming that even in his time there were no laws of set and
annual fasts: for that very thing Victor Antiochenus makes to be a difference
between the Old and New Testament; in Marc. cap. 2.
for the faithful in that time had fasting-days appointed by God, quae proinde
modis omnibus explere obligabantur, etiamsi alias noluissent, which they were
bound by all means to observe though against their will; but under the Gospel
we fast by the love of virtue, and the choice of our own will, rather then by
the coaction of any law. Epist. 68. ad Casulanum.
For quibus diebus jejunandum sit nullo Apostolorum praecepto definitum
reperiri, said S. Austin; what days we are to fast is no where to be found
determined by any precept of the Apostles.

2. 10.
This also appears in that we find the original of the Quadragefimal or
Lent-fast attributed to other causes and beginnings then the tradition or Canon
Apostolical. Collat. 22. c. 30.
Cassian says, that as long as the perfection of the Primitive Church did
remain, there was no observation of a Lent-fast; for they who spent the whole
year in abstinence were not tied with the necessity of a precept or legal
sanction. But when the multitude of the believers every day cooling in their
devotion did brood upon their wealth.....id tunc universis sacerdotibus
placuit, then it seemed good to the Bishops to recall men to the work of
holiness by a Canonical indiction of fasts, and to give to God the tenth of
their days. Cap. 9.
So that the cause of the institution of this fast was the universal declension
of the Primitive piety: and the Authors of it were the whole consent of
Bishops. Something like this was that of S. Chrysostom, who complaining of the
diminution of the Primitive heats of piety, and their unworthy communicating,
in Vet. Test. T. 5. Hom. in eos qui Pascha jejunent.
especially at Easter, adds, (...), etc. When the Fathers had observed the
hurt that came from so careless conventions, they meeting together appointed
forty days for fasting and prayer and hearing Sermons, and holy assemblies. S.
Austin does not, as Cassian, impute it to the sanction of the Bishops, nor to a
Council of the Fathers, as S. Chrysostom, but to the custom of the Church. Ut
quadraginta illi dies ante Pascha observentur Ecclesiae consuetudo roboravit:
Epist. 119. ad Januar.
Sic etiam ut octo dies Neophytorum distinguantur a caeteris, The custom of
the Church has established the observation of forty days before Easter, and
the eight days after Easter for the Novices. Both from the same principle. But
it was not the authority of the Apostles, but the custom of the Church that
made it into a law. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26.
In Irenaeus his time there was a custom of fasting about that time, for one
or two days or more, but it was (...) a simple and a private custom. But when
it was made, it was only for the imperfect, and the men of the world that
spent their year in gathering money, and misspent their time; they only were
intended in the constitution. This we have from S. Hierom, in Galat. l. 2.
jejunia a viris prudentibus propter eos constituta fuisse qui magis saeculo
vacant quam Deo, Some prudent men appointed the solemn fasts for their sakes
who spent their time in the affairs of the world, more then in religion. And
since it is consentingly affirmed that the great end of the Lent-fast is for
preparation to the Easter communion, what use (at least to this great purpose,)
can it be of to those pious persons who communicate every fortnight, or it may
be every week in the year? But it is true that the great end and ministry of
the Lent-fast was in order to the Easter communion, but it was of such persons
who being admitted to public penance upon Ashwednesday were reconciled and
admitted to the communion upon Easter Day: which custom being not in use, the
use of Lent in order to the chief end to which it did minister is wholly lost.
It was therefore true which S. Hierom said, that Lent was for the imperfect and
secular persons, for public penitents and persons convict of scandalous
crimes, for men of the world, and not for the religious, who every month or
week observe the religion of Easter, and live in a state of perpetual
preparation. Perfecti non tenentur lege jejunii, They that all the year lived
strictly were not bound to the observation of Lent: so Cassian; and from him de
Offic. Eccles. l. 1. c. 36.
Isidorus Hispalensis and de Instit. Cleric. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Rabanus Maurus: and the same thing also was affirmed by S. Homil. 10. in Genes.
Chrysostom, from whom Cassian, who was his scholar, might receive it.

3. 11.
Some of the Ancient and Primitive writers affirm Pope Telesphorus to have been
the first author of Lent-fast about the year 136. So Eusebius in his Chronicon
affirms, Quadragesimale jejunium a Telesphoro per hoc tempus institutum ac
praeceptum quidam scribunt, Some write that Telesphorus commanded the
Quadragesimal fast. Scaliger believes this not to be the saying of Eusebius, as
not being to be found in the Greek MS. copies: but however, till Scaliger's
time it was in the middle ages of the Latin Church and so downwards believed;
and it was affirmed expressly by ubi supra, cap. 34.
Rabanus Maurus and de Divin. offic. l. 4. c. 9.
Rupertus.

4. 12.
The Thing and the Name was unknown in the Church in the first three Ages. This
is very apparent in Tertullian, who making his apology for the fasting-dayes of
Montanus, says they are no such great matter that the (...) the spiritual men
(so he calls the Catholics) should complain of them as of so intolerable yoke
upon the Disciples. It was but ten days in all; Sozom. l. 7. cap. 19. Petav.
in not ^ ad Epiph. p. 361. Tertull. de jejun. c. 15.
two weeks, abating Saturdays and Sundays: and Sozomen says these two weeks
were before Easter. Now if the Catholics had known of our Lent then, of forty
days fast, they would never have been so unreasonable to complain of the ten
days of Montanus; and that was all he imposed in the whole year, let the time
be when it will. And yet this was more then the Catholics did; for when from
their practice (as I noted before) Tertullian would fain have drawn some
warranty and countenance, he says that the Apostles did not quite extinguish
all difference of days; Cap. 14.
for if they did, why did the Catholics then observe Easter every year? why the
fifty days of joy after it? why the Wednesday and Friday fast, and [good
Friday or] the preparation-day? and why the Saturday fast? though indeed this
ye never fast but at Easter. Here is all the solennities both of feastings and
fastings which the Church then had: and therefore it is easy without much
diligence to discover the weakness of those pretenses which derive from more
ancient record, but indeed are nothing but deceptions and interpolations. Such
as is the 69th Canon Apostolical, which commands the observation of Lent to a
Clergyman under pain of deposition, to a layman under excommunication. But
the imposture of these Canons, especially of the last 36, amongst which this is
one, are abundantly acknowledged by men of all persuasions. And so is that of
S. Ignatius to the Philippians, Despise not the Lent, for it contains an
imitation of the conversation of our Lord. But of this Epistle the Ancients
make no mention, Dissert. ad Ignat. cap. 12.
and that it is supposititious is very fully proved by the learned and most
Reverend Primate of Ardmagh, and it is so notorious as nothing can be more; for
the author of this Epistle condemns that which S. Ignatius and his
neighbour-Churches did, and calls him a companion of them that killed Christ,
that keeps Easter after the manner of the Jews. But of this enough. But as to
the thing; If the Lent fast were of Apostolical institution, it were strange
there should be no mention of it in the certain writings of the three first
ages; not a word of it in Justin Martyr or S. Irenaeus, in Tertullian or
Clemens Alexandrinus, in Clemens Romanus his genuine Epistle to the
Corinthians, nor in S. Cyprian. There is indeed a little shred taken out of
Origen's tenth homily on Leviticus [ Habemus enim quadragesimae dies jejuniis
consecratos] we have the days of Lent designed for fasting. But concerning
this I can only say that the homilies were supposed to be S. Cyril's, written
in the fifth age and published in his Name; but whoever be the author, he that
wrote them destroys the letter of the Scripture all the way, out of his own
brain, and is a man of no great authority, de Verbo Dei lib. 4. c. 11.
says Bellarmine: and therefore it remains certain that in the three first
ages of the Church there was no mention made of the quadragesimal or
forty-dayes fast in Lent, and therefore it was not derived as a law or by rule
from the Apostles: but so strange a thing it was that there should be any
common prescript fasts, that Apollonius accused Montanus for it, he was (...),
he taught the solutions of marriage, and made a law for fasting-dayes.

5. 13.
The Quadragesimal fast was relative and ever in order to the Easter feast, and
therefore could not be before that for whose sake it was appointed. But the
feast of Easter was, and the Sunday festival was introduced by custom and
arbitrary choice, for relaxation of labors and the memory of Christ's
resurrection: indeed it was at the beginning of the dissemination and
prevailing of Christianity, but it was without a Divine command, or an
Apostolical Canon, lib. 5. c. 22.
if we may believe Socrates. (...), The feast of Easter and other feasts, every
man as they pleased in several places did out of a certain custom celebrate
the memory of the salutary Passion. For neither our Savior nor the Apostles
appointed this by a law. For the Apostles did not trouble themselves about
making laws for feasts, (...), but to introduce piety and a good life. The rest
was permitted to the good will of the Churches, who being sensible of the great
benefits of Christ's passion and resurrection, would quickly introduce a custom
of such a pious gratitude: Hist. lib. 12. c. 32.
and Nicephorus tells the same story, and in words very like. And the thing was
not long in doing; it was so reasonable, so pious, so obvious, so ready and
prepared, that at the very beginning all Christians did it, though, as it
happens, in several Churches after several manners. And supposing that these
Greeks say true, yet it is no more lessening to the sacredness of that great
feast, that the Apostles did not intend to make laws concerning it, then it is
to Baptism, that S. Paul says, Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach
the Gospel; that is, though to baptize was a holy office, yet he was to attend
something that was greater and required his diligence and presence. But this
adds some moments to the sacredness of this and other such feasts, that the
Apostles left it to the piety and good will of the Churches, as knowing that
the Spirit of God, which they had received to this and greater purposes, was
more then sufficient for the leading them into a specification of their piety
and gratitude upon such great causes: and it was a very great matter that
instantly all Churches did consent in the duty, without any law, or common
teacher, but the Spirit of God and right reason. The result of this
consideration is this, That if the Apostles left the celebration of Easter and
other feasts to the choice and piety of the Churches, it is not likely that
they bound the Lent-fast by a Canon, since the Lent was always acknowleged to
be a preparation for Easter, and was never heard of before there was a
Christian Easter. But if I may have leave to interpose my conjecture (for it is
no more) I suppose Socrates by Pascha does not mean the day of the
Resurrection, but the day of the Passion; and that he intends only to say that
the solemnity of the Good Friday devotion was not appointed by Christ and his
Apostles, but left to the piety and gratitude of the Church. The reasons of my
conjecture are these. 1. Because Socrates calls it (...); the memorial of
Christ's passion; which the Easter Sunday was not, but of the resurrection. 2.
Because we find the word Pascha used by the Ancient Fathers in the same sense;
(...) said Timotheus Alexandrinus, to fast on the Pasch: so (...), S. Clement
calls the good friday fast, the Paschal fast, meaning that then began the
Jewish passover, and then Christ our Passover was offered for us. So
Tertullian, lib. de Orat. c. 14.
Sic and die Paschae, quo communis and quasi publica jejunii religio est,
merito deponimus osculum, etc. The day of the Pasch is a public and a common
day for the religion of fasting; which because it was never true of Easter Day,
and being always true of good friday, he must mean this. 3. Because it is very
probable that the Easter festival was in use, Vide lib. 2. Chapt. 2. Rule 6.
Numb. 55, 56.
though not commanded, in the Apostles time, therefore because they kept the
memorial of the resurrection the first day in every week; and therefore
Socrates could not in all likelihood mean that day, but the Pascha passionis,
the Paschal passion, not the Paschal resurrection. And then upon this account,
though this fifth argument will not prevail, it is because we need it not; for
whatever destroys the premises in this case, does establish the Conclusion.
For if by Pascha he means the Paschal fast, that is, Good Friday, then he gives
testimony, and that very consonantly to the prime antiquity, that it was left
free and undetermined by Christ and his Apostles: but if he should mean the
Easter feast, and did say true, yet it will follow from hence, that much more
must the preceding fast be left undetermined.

6. If any man should say that Kings are all created, 14.
as Adam was, in full stature and manhood by God himself immediately, he could
best be confuted by the midwives and the nurses, the Schoolmasters and the
servants of the family, and by all the neighborhood, who saw them born
infants, who took them from their Mothers knees, who gave them suck, who
carried them in their arms, who made them coats and taught them their letters,
who observed their growth and changed their ministeries about their persons.
The same is the case of the present article. He that says our Lent, or forty
days fast before Easter, was established by the Apostles in that full growth
and state we now see it, is perfectly confuted by the testimony of those ages
that saw it is infancy and childhood, and helped to nurse it up to it is present
bulk.

For it is not to be denied but that from the very first ages of the Christian
Church of which we have any records, 15.
it was with sacredness and religion observed that before the feast of Easter
they should fast. (...) S. Clement calls it; (...), so the Council of Gangra
about the time of the Nicene Council, the fasts which were delivered in common,
and observed by the Church; apud Socrat. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 3.
(...), the appointed fasts, so Constantine called them. But this Paschal fast
was nothing like ours, it was not our Quadragesimal; it was but a fast of one
or two days at first and in some places. For at first the Christians were very
shie of receiving any load of ordinances and burdens to their consciences, as
soon as ever they had entered into the liberty of Christians. They did all that
reason, and all that love would require: but if love was the parent of their
observations, they would do them in love, and not in necessity, lest they
should be again entangled in a yoke of bondage. That they kept their fasts with
liberty, besides the foregoing testimonies, lib. 5. Haeretic. fabul. cap. 29.
is expressly affirmed by Theodoret, who blaming the heretics that abstained
from flesh and wine as being abominable. Ecclesia vero (says he) de his nihil
praecipit: neque enim horum usum interdicit. Ideo alii quidem permissis
voluptatibus securi fruuntur, alii vero abstinent: and nemo qui recte sapiat
condemnat eum qui comedit; nam and abstinentia and participatio sunt in mentis
potestate. But the Church commands nothing in these things, and forbids not to
use flesh and wine; and therefore some enjoy them freely, others do abstain,
and no wise man condemns him that eats: for to eat or to abstain is in the
power of every man's will. Now if the Church had from the Apostles received a
law of the Lent-fast, or if in the Church there had been a law to command
abstinence from flesh in Lent, it had not been truly said of Theodoret,
Ecclesia de his nihil praecipit; for a commandment for a time and a revolving
period, certainly is a commandment. But this further appears in the variety
which is in all the actions and minds of men when they are at their own choice.
Of this a fragment of Irenaeus mentioned by Eusebius is a great testimony: lib.
5. Hist. cap. 26.
for there had been an unlucky difference between the Western and Eastern
Churches about their keeping of Easter, and Pope Victor was transported into
heats upon the question, and received from S. Irenaeus this sober
advertisement, For there is not only a controversy about the day of Easter,
but about the kind of fasting. For some suppose they ought to fast but one day,
others two, others more; some measure their day by forty hours of day and
night. And this variety of them that observe the fasts did not begin in our
age, but long before us with our Ancestors, who, as it is likely, retaining a
custom introduced by simplicity and a private choice, did propagate it to
posterity. And yet nevertheless all these lived peaceably one with another,
and we also keep peace together; for the difference of the fast is so far from
violating the agreement of faith, that it does commend it rather. Here was the
Paschal fast observed by all men, but with great variety and a proportionate
liberty. The cause of the variety was this, which was also the ground of their
practice. They thought that the words of Christ, [ when the bridegroom shall be
taken from them, in those days shall they fast] were to be meant of the
interval of Christ's death and burial, lib. de Jejun. c. 14.
as we learn from Tertullian. Now because it was but one whole day that Christ
was in the grave, some fasted but one day, beginning on the Friday afternoon.
Others consider that Christ was about 40 hours dead, and the bridegroom was
absent so long; and therefore reckoned their fast to 40 hours, beginning from
the ninth hour on Good Friday, and eating nothing till the morning of Easter
day: and this was the most severe and the most prevailing amongst them; and
this is the (...) the quadragesimal fast, this gave occasion to the name, which
was kept when the forty hours was changed into forty days, and new analogies
and new reasons found out for it, and their fasting for the absence of the
bridegroom was changed into a fasting in imitation of Moses and Elias and our
Blessed Savior in the wilderness. Only by the way let me observe that at
first they had no appointed fasts, but of those hours in which the bridegroom
was taken from them, that is, none but the Paschal fast; as Tertullian
expressly affirms, lib. de Jejun. cap. 2.
illos dies jejuniis determinatos putasse in quibus ablatus est sponsus, and
hos esse jam solos legitimos jejuniorum Christianorum, The Catholics had no
other days appointed for fastings, no other were the legitimate fasting days
for Christians (as they thought) but only those in which the Bridegroom was
taken from them.

But S. Irenaeus said that some fast one day, 16.
some two, and others more. Some kept the whole six days of the Passion week;
we find mention made of it in Dionysius Alexandrinus about the 255th year of
Christ, (...), Epist. can. ad Basil.
the six days of fasting; but he affirms that all do not equally observe them.
For some fast all the six days, some two, some three, some four, lib. 3. Exp.
fidei and hae^^s. 75.
some none. But by Epiphanius his time the fast had possessed the whole six
days almost every where, (...), All the people spend the six days of the Pasch,
or before Easter, in dry diet: but by this time the word (...) or Quadragesima
had prevailed, and was used to signify the Paschal fast. The word was used in
the Council of Nice, which commanded two Synods every year to be held in the
Provinces, and the first of them to be (...) in the Quadragesimal fast. But
this did not signify the fast of forty days, for that was not yet brought into
the Church.

But first the matter is clear that the word Quadragesima is often used in
antiquity and by other good Authors to signify a set time of fast, 17.
but plainly less then forty days. Epist. 54. ad Marcel.
S. Hierom says that the Montanists do make tres in anno quadragesimas, three
Lents; and yet two of them were but of five days a piece, and whether the third
was more or less we cannot tell: and this Tertullian plainly affirms, lib. de
jejun. c. 15.
who was himself a Montanist. And this thing also came into the practice of
some Catholics; for they did so too in the time of Amalarius, they kept tres
quadragesimas, three quadragesimal fasts; lib. 4. de offic. Eccles. c. 37.
and yet that before Midsummer and that before Christmas were much shorter then
forty days. The same word is several times used by lib. 4. de instit. ^^^ic. c.
1.
Rabanus Maurus and lib. 6. Rational. de 1a 40mae Dominic.
Durandus. But that the use of the word may be no prejudice to the right
understanding of the thing, we find the thing noted by Hist. lib. 5. c. 22.
Socrates and wondered at exceedingly, that since there was so great difference
in the number of days, yet all alike called it (...), or the quadragesimal
fast. The same also we find in lib. 7. cap. 19.
Sozomen, noting that some did only observe three weeks of five days to the
week, out of the number of the seven antepaschal weeks, and yet nevertheless
called it Quadragesima: and the same also we find in Nicephorus, who (I
suppose) transcribed it from them: and in Cassian's time, when the Lent-fast
came up to the number of 36 days, in notis ad Tertull. de jejun.
yet he still calls it the Quadragesima or the 40 days fast: and it is no
wonder, if Rigaltius say true, that all the set and stationary fasts of the
Primitive Christians were called Quadragesimals. But the first use of the word
is in the Nicene Council; unless the words of Origin be allowed to be good
record: but yet both in Origin, and in the Nicene Council, though the word be
used, yet without any remark of the number of the days, or intimation of it,
until the Council of Laodicea A. D. 460. Can. 50.
, which mentions more weeks then one in the Lent, commanding to fast also upon
the Thursday of the last week in Lent. For by this time it was come to three
weeks, in some places more, and in some less, as appears in Socrates, Sozomen,
Cassian and Nicephorus above quoted.

But for the reason of the word Quadragesima there are various conjectures. 18.
Cassian says it is an imitation of Christ's fast of forty days, Collar. 21.
cap. 28.
and so had the name from thence. But he adds some little Cabalistical things
of the number of forty in the Scripture, which are to no great purpose. But his
first conjecture is not altogether unreasonable; and Rigaltius makes use of it,
saying that the Apostles having obliterated the Jewish fasts, to which Christ's
forty days fast put an end, and asserted us into liberty, they would upon that
day on which Christ wrought our liberty for us, nailing the handwriting of
ordinances to his Cross, ubi supra
consecrate a fast to the memorial of this great work of redemption for us; [
ut obliteratis Judaeorum Sabbatis jejunia sua Christiani, quae Domino suo
tantula pro tantis offerrent, de jejunii Dominici spatio vocitarent] that the
Christians might call their fast by a name taken from the duration of the Lords
fast, that since they could not attain to that great fast, they might at least
have it in venerable memory. But this although it be ingenious and pretty, yet
it is something violent, and has no warrant from antiquity; and the question
is better answered from the words of Irenaeus in Eusebius, who says that they
who kept the Paschal fast would some of them produce the fast to forty hours:
now the whole fast being in memory of the bridegrooms being taken away, and he
having been absent, as they computed it, forty hours, this proportion did
better carry the analogy, and therefore easily carried away the name, and a
quadragesimal of hours is as proper as a quadragesimal of days, and has a
better warranty then any other conjecture. But this I remarked before.

But afterward the number of weeks increased: 19.
it came in some places to six and seven weeks; Collat. 21. c. 27.
so Cassian. But it was diverso more, for some would fast Saturdays, and some
would not; but they made it but to be 36 days however: so we find it in S.
Gregory, that 42 days were the appointment of Lent, lib. 40. Homil. Hom. 16.
but taking away the Sundays, six and thirty days remain for fasting. But in
all this whole affair there was nothing yet universally determined by any law
of the universal Church. For in Rome about the year 437 they fasted but three
weeks before Easter, [and out of them they excepted Saturdays and Sundays Hac
clausula inseritur in loco non suo: oportuit enim p^st narrationem de Ecclesiis
Grace and Alexandrina interseri. Videat lector Hugonem Menardum in notis ad
Gregor. Sacram. qui etiam aliter emendat hunc locum satis mendosum.
.] But in Illyricum, in Greece and Alexandria they begin their Lenten fast
above six weeks before Easter. Others begin seven weeks before Easter, but fast
by intervals, and observe but fifteen days in all: and yet all call this the
quadragesimal fast. So lib. 5. c. 22. Homil. 16. ad pop. Antioch.
Socrates. And S. Chrysostom says it was the custom against Easter to ask
every one how many weeks he had fasted; and you should hear some answering two,
some three, some all. For at Constantinople the Lent was longest: It was of
seven weeks there and all up unto Phoenicia, lib. 7. c. 19. lib. 12. c. 34.
as Sozomen and Nicephorus report: but all this while with liberty, by custom,
and without a law. S. Austin tells that in some places they would not fast the
Thursdays in Lent: Epist. 118. ad Januar.
indeed the Council of Laodicea had commanded they should, but that was but
provincial, and did not oblige and was not received every where; and that
saying which is reported out of the constitutions of S. Clement might prevail
as far, Jejunium quintae hypocritarum est. But at Rome this was then observed,
they did not fast on Thursdays, nor yet on Tuesdays, or they might choose: Sermon.
4. de 40ma
so we find in S. Leo exhorting them to the Monday, Wednesday, Friday and
Saturday fast, and on Saturday to watch beside. And because of the defalcation
of these days in every week, some that were very zealous made up their Lent to
be eight weeks, and began it on Sexagesima Sunday, but at last it settled upon
Ash Wednesday, and has endured so to this day in many of the Western Churches.

Now if all this be not sufficient to prove that the forty days fast of Lent
was not a Canon or institution Apostolical, 20.
I cannot tell by what measures the question can be filled: and if the Apostles
were the Authors of it, yet because the Churches kept themselves in great
liberty and variety, it is certain that if they did so still, there would be no
diminution to religion. For the use of it being wholly for preparation to the
Easter communion, and the setting apart some portion of our time for God's
service, it can then only be of use, when it ministers to such ends with an
advantage so great as to recompense the trouble, and so material as to quit it
from a vain observance. * But how it can be enjoined, and how it ought to be
practiced, I shall consider in the inquiries concerning the condition of
Ecclesiastical laws. Here I was only to quit the Conscience of this snare
which is laid for her by some unskilful Fowlers, and to represent that the
Apostles did not by any Rule or Canon oblige the Christian Churches.

That which remains is this, 21.
that we consider that it is and ought to be no prejudice to this liberty, that
S. Hierom calls Lent an Apostolical tradition. For it was very easy for them
who loved the institution, and knew it very ancient, and that the custom of it
did descend from Apostolical persons, to call it a tradition Apostolical. It is
no wrong to S. Hierom if we think he did so here: for he did as much as this
comes to in the question of the Saturdays fast, for in his Epistle to Lucinus
he says, Unaquaeque provincia abundet in sensu suo, and praecepta majorum
leges Apostolicas arbitretur, Let every Province abound in their own sense, and
suppose the precepts of their Ancestors to be Apostolical laws. But that the
Churches had no such law upon them, but were at liberty, appears from all the
premises; which I sum up with the words of S. Austin. The Christians, not
that the meats are unclean, contr. Faustum Manich. l. 30. cap. 5.
but for mortification, do abstain from flesh and fruits; some few always, or
else at certain times: Sicut per quadragesimam fere omnes, quanto magis quisque
vel minus voluerit, seu potuerit, As in Lent almost all men, more or less
according as every man is able, or as every man is willing.

He that desires to see more particulars concerning the history, 22.
the original, the variety and increase of Lent, may, if he please, read them
in Cassian, in Amalarius, Alcuinus and Rabanus of old, and of late, in
Durandus, in Hugo Menardus a Benedictine his notes in Gregor. Sacramentarium,
in Petavius his notes upon Epiphanius, Rigaltius upon Tertullian, Scaliger's
admirable animadversions upon Eusebius, in that excellent Epistle of Erasmus to
the Bishop of Basil de interdicto esu carnium, in Delaunoy, Filescac and Daille
de j^juniis and 40ma
. Out of these any man may satisfy his curiosity; I have endeavored only to
satisfy the Conscience.

Concerning the weekly fasts of Friday and Saturday, 23.
the former of them is of great antiquity in the Church, as being in use in
Tertullian's time, and without variety always observed after it once began. We
find the Wednesday and Friday fast mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus, and the
Wednesday station is equally in Tertullian. Stromat. 7.
But the Saturday fast was for some ages counted abominable in the whole
Church; but it came into the Latin Church in time, but with so much scandal to
the Greeks, that in the year of our Lord 707 they excommunicated them that
fasted on the Saturday, and to this day persevere in the same mind. But that
neither one nor the other was of Apostolical institution, is of it self clear
by the consequence of the former discourse concerning Lent; the Apostles having
made no laws concerning fasting-days, as I have made apparent. * The Rogation
fast (all the world knows) was instituted by Mammercus Bishop of Vienna: and as
for the Ember-weeks, they can pretend to no antiquity that is Primitive, and
rely for their authority upon a spurious epistle of Pope Calixtus, which is
pretended to have been written about the year 221, and which is abundantly
detected of forgery by many persons, but especially by Mr Blondel. Tertullian's
words are a hatchet to cut off all fasting-days from pretending to Apostolical
authority, affirming that the Montanists did fast but two weeks in the whole
year, and in them not on Saturdays and Sundays (though S. Hierom is pleased to
lay three Lents to their charge,) and that the Catholics blamed them for
imposing so much; but themselves did fast only upon those days the bridegroom
was taken from them, that is, the paschal fast; that they did sometimes
interpose half-fasts, and live on bread and water for some time, Co^^a ^^ych. ^
2. 13, 15.
but ut cuique videbatur, haec ex arbitrio agentes, non ex imperio, as every
man saw cause, doing these things by choice and not by command.

The result of this discourse is this, 24.
That the Apostles did not lay a yoke upon the Disciples neck in the matter of
fasting, much less in the forty days fast of Lent; that as in relation to the
Apostles, the Conscience is at liberty. Now whether or no any positive
constitution of the Rulers of our Churches can or do oblige the Conscience to
the observation of Lent, and how far, I shall consider in the next Paragraph
of this Chapter.

RULE XIV. The Canons of the ancient General and Provincial Councils are then
laws to the Conscience when they are bound upon us by the authority of the
respective Governors of Churches.
A General Council is nothing but the union of all the Ecclesiastical power in
the world. 1.
The authority of a General Council in matters of Government and Discipline is
no greater, no more obligatory then the authority of a Provincial Council to
those who are under it. A General Council obliges more Countries and more
Dioceses, but it obliges them no more then the Civil and Ecclesiastic power
obliges them at home A General Council is an Union of Government, a consent of
Princes and Bishops, and in that every one agrees to govern by the measures to
which there they do consent: and the consent of opinions adds moment to the
laws, and reverence to the sanction; and it must prevail against more
objections then Provincial decrees, because of the advantage of wisdom and
consultation which is supposed to be there, but the whole power of obligation
is derived from the Authority at home. That is, if twenty Princes meet together
and all their Bishops, and agree how they will have their Churches governed,
those Princes which are there and those Bishops which have consented are bound
by their own act, and to it they must stand till the reason alters, or a
contrary or a better does intervene; but the Prince can as much alter that law
when the case alters, as he can abrogate any other law to which he has
consented. But those Princes which were not there, whatever the cause of their
absence be, are not obliged by that General Council; and that Council can have
no authority but what is given them by consent, and therefore they who have not
consented, are free as ever.

The Council of Florence, 2.
so called because, though it was begun at Ferrara, yet it was ended there,
Pope Clement 7th calls the eighth General Council in his Bull of April 22th
1527. Vide Surium in Epist. ad lectorem, ante Council. Ferrar. tom. 4. Council.
yet others call it the 16th: but it was never received in France, as
Panormitan in Tract. de Council. Basil. circa princ. n. 6. Vide etiam Nicolaum
de Clemangiis
tells us: for the King of France did forbid expressly and upon great
penalties that any of his subjects should go to Ferrara to celebrate that
Council; and after it had been celebrated, and Charles the 7th was desired by
Pope Eugenius to accept it, he told the Legates plainly, that he had never
taken it for a Council, and he never would. The Council of Basil, though the
King of France had sent his Ambassadors thither, and had received it as a
Council, yet he approved it but in part, for he rejected the last thirteen
sessions, and approved only the first two and thirty; Vide prooemiu^ pragmat.
sanct.
some of them as they lie, others with certain forms and qualifications: and
this was done to fit and accommodate them to the exigencies of the times and
places and persons, Guil. Benedict. in repetit. cap. Raynutius.
says Benedict a French lawyer. And upon the like accounts the last Council of
Lateran is there rejected also. Thus in England we accept not of the Council of
Trent, and excepting the four first General Councils, which are established
into a Law by the King and Parliament, there is no other Council at all of use
in England, save only to entertain scholars in their arguments, and to be made
use of in matters of fact, by them to understand the stories of the Church.
Where any thing else is received into custom and practice of law, it binds by
our reception, not by it is own natural force.

But I have already spoken sufficiently of this thing Chapter 3. Rule 7. and
Chapter 4. Rule 5.
. 3.
I now only mention it to the purpose that those religious and well-meaning,
persons who are concluded by the canon of an Ancient Council, and think that
whatever was there commanded it lays some obligation upon the Consciences of
us at this day, and by this means enter into infinite scruples and a restless
unsatisfied condition, may consider that the Ancient Doctors of the Church had
no jurisdiction over us who were born so many ages after them; that even then
when they were made they had their authority wholly from Princes and consent of
Nations; that things and reasons, that jurisdictions and governments, that
Churches and Dioceses, that interests and manners are infinitely altered since
that time; that since the authority of those Fathers could not be permanent and
abide longer then their lives, it being certainly not greater then that of
Kings, which must needs die with their persons, that their successors may be
Kings as well as they, and not be subjects of the dead, the efficacy of their
rules must descend upon succession by a succeeding authority; that therefore
they prevail upon us by a new force, by that which is extrinsecal to them; and
therefore in such cases we are to inquire whether the thing be good, and if it
be, we may use it with liberty till we be restrained, but we may also choose;
for then we are to inquire whether the thing be a law in that Government to
which we owe obedience: for that the Fathers met at Laodicea, At Antioch, at
Nice, at Gangra, a thousand, 1100 or 1300 years ago, should have authority
over us in England so many ages after, is so infinitely unreasonable, that none
but the fearful and the unbelievers, the scrupulous and those who are (...),
of a slavish nature, and are in bondage by their fear, and know not how to
stand in that liberty by which Christ has made them free, will account
themselves in subjection to them. If upon this account the Rulers of Churches
will introduce any pious, just and warrantable Canon, we are to obey in all
things where they have power to command; but the Canon, for being in the old
Codes of the Church, binds us no more then the laws of Constantine.

RULE XV. The laudable Customs of the Catholic Church which are in present
observation do oblige the Conscience of all Christians.
THis we have from S. Paul, who reproves the contumacy and regardlesse comport
of those who, 1.
against the usages of Christians and the places where they lived, would wear
long hair: We have no such custom, not the Churches of God. In such cases
where there is no law, the manners of Christians introduce a law so far, that
we cannot recede from it without some probable cause; or if we do, we cannot
do it without scandal and reproach. And indeed it is an act of love to conform
to the customs of Christians with whom we do converse, who either will think
you blame their custom, or despise their persons, if you comply not. S. Austin
gave his advice to the same purpose, Epist. 76. ad Casulanum Presbyter.
In his rebus de quibus nihil certi tradit scriptura Divina, mos populi Dei vel
statuta Majorum pro lege tenenda sunt. Et sicut praevaricatores divinarum
legum, ita contemptores Ecclesiasticarum consuetudinum coercendi sunt. If the
holy Scriptures have not interposed in the particular, we must keep the
customs and decrees of our Ancestors as a law: and as they that prevaricate
the Divine laws are to be restrained, so are all they that despise the customs
of the Church. * It is a Catholic custom, that they who receive the Holy
Communion, should receive it fasting. This is not a duty commanded by God: but
unless it be necessary to eat, he that despises this custom, gives nothing
but the testimony of an evil mind.

But this is first to be understood in such Customs as are laudable, 2.
that is, such which have no suspicion or moral reproach upon them, such which
are reasonable and fit for wise and sober persons. It was a custom of the
Primitive Church, at least in some places, not to touch the earth with the bare
foot within the Octaves of Easter: this was a trifle, and tending to phantastic
opinions and superstitious fancies, and therefore is not to be drawn into
imitation; only so long as it did remain, every man was to take care he gave
no offense to weak persons, but he was to endeavor to alter it by all fair
means and usages. It was a custom in many Churches anciently, and not long
since in the Church of England, that in cases of the infants extreme danger the
midwives did baptize them. This custom came in at a wrong door, it leaned upon
a false and superstitious opinion; and they thought it better to invade the
Priests office, then to trust God with the souls which he made with his own
hands and redeemed with his Sons blood. But this custom was not to be followed
if it had still continued; for even then they confessed it was a sin, factum
valet, fieri non debuit; and evil ought not to be done for a good end. Quod si
a mulieribus baptizari oporteret, profecto Christus a Matre baptizatus esset,
and non a Joanne: aut cum nos ad baptizandum misit, misisset mulieres nobiscum
ad hoc: nunc vero nusquam neque jussit Dominus, neque per Scripturam tradidit,
utpote qui naturae convenientiam and rei decorum nosset, tanquam naturae author
and legislator, lib. 3. c. 9.
said the Author of the Constitutions under the name of S. Clement. If women
might be suffered to baptize, Christ need not have gone to S. John, but might
have been baptized by his Mother; and Christ would have sent women along with
the Apostles when he gave them commission to preach and to baptize. But now our
Lord has neither commanded any such thing by his word, or in Scripture; for
the author and lawgiver of Nature knew what was agreeable and decent for their
Nature. lib. de Virg. veland.
To this agrees that of Tertullian, Non permittitur mulieri in Ecclesia loqui,
sed nec docere, nec tingere, nec offerre, nec ullius virilis muneris nedum
sacerdotalis officii sortem sibi vendicare, A woman is not permitted to speak
in the Church, nor to teach, nor to baptize, nor to offer, nor to do the
office of a man, much less of a Priest. see the Divine institution of the
order and offices Minister. sect. 4.
This custom therefore is of the nature of those which are to be laid aside.
(...), No man baptizes but he that is in holy Orders, said Simeon of
Thessalonica; and I think he said truly. But above all things, opinions are not
to be taken up by custom, and reduced to practice: not only because custom
is no good warranty for opinions, and voluntas fertur carere oculis,
intellectus pedibus, the will has no eyes, and the understanding has no feet;
that is, it can do nothing without the will, and the will must do nothing
without that; they are a blind man and a lame when they are asunder, but when
they are together they make up a sound man, while the one gives reason, and the
other gives command: but besides this, when an opinion is offered only by the
hand of custom, it is commonly a sign of a bad cause, Disput. 18. in 1 Cor.
11. in solut. 8vi. dub.
and that there is nothing else to be said for it; and therefore it was a
weakness in Salmeron to offer to persuade us to entertain the doctrine and
practice of Indulgences, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Images and the like,
because they are customs of the Church, meaning his own.

2. This is to be understood also of the Customs of the Catholic Church. 3.
For if the Churches differ, it is indifferent to take either or neither as it
may happen. lib. 3. Paedagog. cap. 3.
Clemens Alexandrinus said it was a wickedness to pull the beard, because it
is our natural, it is a generous and an ingenuous ornament: and yet Gregory the
7th, Bishop of Rome, made Archbishop James shave his beard close, pretending
that it had been always a custom in the Western Churches; lib. 8. Registri,
Epist. 10.
Consuetudini sanctae obedire coegimus, We have constrained him to obey the
holy custom. In such cases where several Churches have several usages, every
Church is to follow her own custom, and every of her subjects to obey it.

3. Though every subject is tied to the custom of his own Church, 4.
yet he is not to give offense when he converses with another Church that has
a differing custom: according to that rule and example of S. Ambrose, Quando
hic sum, non jejuno Sabbato; quando Romae sum, jejuno Sabbato: and ad
quamcunque Ecclesiam veneritis, ejus morem servate, si pati scandalum non
vultis aut facere, Epist. 86.
When I am at Millain I do not fast on the Saturday, when I am at Rome I do:
and to whatsoever Church you shall come, keep the custom of that Church, if ye
will neither give nor receive offense. And these words S. Austin made use of to
this very purpose, Epist. 118.
Totum hoc genus liberas habet observationes, nec disciplina ulla est in his
melior gravi prudentique Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat quo agere viderit
Ecclesiam ad quamcunque forte devenerit. The best way is to do as that Church
does where you happen to be. And in the same instance S. Hierom gave answer to
Lucinus, servandam esse propriae Ecclesiae consuetudinem, The custom of the
place of our own Church is to be observed. And therefore at Millain it is
counted a violation of their rights when the Roman Priests come into the
Ambrosian Churches, and refuse to use the Missal of S. Ambrose, but use the
Roman. It is a custom in the Church of England to uncover the head or to bow
the knee when the name of Jesus is named: the custom is not only innocent but
pious, and agreeable to the duty of every Christian, and therefore abstracting
from the injunction, the custom it self is sufficient to exact conformity of
all modest persons. But if a son of the Church of England shall come into other
Protestant Churches who use it not, he is to comply with them in the omission,
unless himself be persuaded that it is a Divine Commandment; and yet even
then also, the specification and the circumstances of time and place may be
undetermined, and leave him in a capacity to comply for a time, and in a
limited place.

4. It is required that the custom be of present observation, 5.
or else it does not oblige the Conscience. Thus it is a custom of the
Catholic Church that at the Baptising of Infants there be Godfathers and
Godmothers. This custom is still of use in the Church of England: and
although much of the reason for which they were first introduced is ceased, and
the case altered; yet it is enough to every man that is a subject, that it is
the custom: and therefore if any man shall dispute and prove that the thing it
self is not now necessary, that is no warranty to him to omit it, so long as
the custom is allowed and upheld, and is no evil. But if the custom be left
in a Church, that it was a Catholic custom and of long use in the Church is of
no obligation to the Conscience. Socrates tells that omnes ubique in orb
terrarum Ecclesiae, lib. 5. Hist. cap. 21.
all the Churches in the world, every week upon Saturday celebrate the
mysteries. Alexandrini tamen and Romani ex antiqua traditione istud facere
renuunt. But the Churches of Alexandria and Rome refuse to do so, because they
have an ancient tradition to the contrary. And in this they had their liberty.
It was a long and a general custom in the Church upon all occasions and
motions of solemnity or greater action to make the sign of the Cross in the
air, on the breast, or on the forehead; but he that in England should do so
upon pretense because it was a Catholic custom would be ridiculous. For a
custom obliges by being a custom amongst them with whom we do converse, and
to whom in charity and prudence we are to comply: and therefore to do an
action that was a custom there where it is not a custom, must be done upon
some other reason then because it is a custom; or else it is done because
there is no reason. It was a custom of the Catholic Church to reserve infants
all the year till Easter to be baptized, except it were in cases of necessity
or great danger: but we have no such custom now; nor the Churches of God; and
therefore to think we are bound to comply with that or any such custom, is to
make our selves too fond admirers of the actions, and more then servants to the
sentences and customs of Ancient Churches.

5. An Ecclesiastical custom against an Ecclesiastical law does not oblige the
Conscience. 6.
It does in many cases excuse, but when there is no scandal accidentally
emerging, it never binds us to follow it. I say it can excuse from penalty,
then when the Ecclesiastical law has been neglected, because the Governors
are presumed to do their duty; and therefore if they who made the law suffer
it to be commonly broken, it is to be supposed they are willing the law should
die: and this is the sense of that in the Comedy, Mores leges perduxerunt jam
in potestatem suam, Plaut. Trinum.
Customs give limit to laws; and they bind according as the manners of men
are. And this the lawyers extend even to a custom that is against the law of
God. Baldus in l. observare,. proficisci, circa fin. ff. de officio proconsul.
and leg.
So the Presidents of Sena at the entry into their office take an oath in form
that they will never receive bribes; and yet they do so, and are known to do
so, and because of the general custom are never punished: and much of the same
nature are the oaths taken at the Matriculations and admissions into
Universities and offices respectively, concerning which it were very well there
were some remedy or prevention. But if it can be understood that the lawgiver
intends the law should be in force, and that the negligence of his Ministers or
the stubborn and uncomplying nature of the subjects is the cause of the want of
discipline; then the conscience is obliged to the law, and not excused by the
custom See the VIth Rule of the last Chapter of this Book.
. And yet further, when the law is called upon, then although there be a
custom in the Church against the Canon, it neither preserves from sin, nor
rescues from punishment: quia lex derogat consuetudini, say the lawyers; when
the law is alive the custom is dead, because the custom took it is life from
the diminution of the law; and when there is a law actually called upon, the
custom to the contrary is a direct evil, and that against which the law is
intended, and which the law did intend to remedy. The Church has made laws
that no man shall fast upon the Lords day, nor the great Festivals of the year:
if a custom of fasting upon Christmas Day should in evil and peevish times
prevail, and the law be unable or unwilling to chastise it, but suffer it to
grow into evil manners; when the law is again warm and refreshed and calls for
obedience, the contrary custom is not to be pretended against the law, but to
be repented of. In the Church of England there is a law, that when children are
baptized they shall be dipped in the water; only if they be sick it shall be
sufficient that it be sprinkled upon them: but yet the custom of sprinkling
all does prevail. In this case we are to stand to the law, not to the custom,
because the law is still in force, and is actually intended to prevail
according to the mind of the Church, and it is more agreeable with the
practice, the laws and customs of the Primitive Church, and to the practice of
Christ and his Apostles. But of this I shall speak again in some of the
following Numbers.

6. An Ecclesiastical custom must be reasonable or useful, 7.
or it cannot oblige the conscience, except to avoid scandal, for that is in
all things carefully to be observed, right or wrong, so it be not a sin against
God; Customs must be kept, when the breaking them is scandalous. But excepting
this case, an unreasonable custom does not oblige. For no man is bound to be a
fool, or to do a foolish action. Now a custom in the Canon law is concluded
to be reasonable if it tends to the good of the soul. In the Civil law it is
allowed to be reasonable if it tends to any public good. Thus it is a custom
that Judges should wear their Robes upon their seats of judicature; that the
Clergy wear blacks. Doctores portant varium, quia habitus virum ostendit, says
the law, l. stigmata, C. de fabri. And that Priest were a strange peevish or a
weak person who should choose to wear gray, because there is no religion in the
color: his religion in this would have nothing else: and though these things
tend not to the good of the soul, yet they tend to the good of the public,
they distinguish men, that honor may be given to them to whom honor belongs.

For it is considerable, 8.
what the wiser Lawyers say, 1. That a custom is good if it contains bonum
honestum, any honesty or matter of public reputation. Thus it is a custom
that civil persons should not walk late in the night, but be in their houses at
seasonable times; it is a good custom that Bishops and Priests abstain from
going to Taverns; this custom is reasonable, and therefore does oblige those
that are concerned in it. 2. A custom is good if it contains bonum commune, if
it be for the common good: and of this sort there are many customs in every
nation which are passed into laws, as that in the cause of Dowries the Judge
should proceed summarily; that a fact be tried in the country where it was
done; that when any man is accused he should have his accusers brought before
his face. And thus also in the laws Ecclesiastical there are very many of this
nature; as that when Bishops visit their Churches there be allowance of
procurations and Synodals, and aptnesses for their entertainment; that when we
see a Bishop we beg his blessing; that when we come to a city we first go to
the Cathedral to pray, then to the Bishop to be blessed and prayed for; that
the contract of Marriage be publicly solemnized in Churches after three
publications; that children ask their Parents benediction: these things are of
public use, for the advancing of a necessary duty, for the mutual endearment
of Relatives, for the establishment of piety, for the conciliating authority,
and to many other good purposes, which whosoever can advance by the keeping of
a custom and complying with the manners of the Church where he lives, is not
to be excused if he will be stubborn and singular and proud. C. si Judex laicus
desent. excommunicat. lib. 6.
3. Baldus says, Bona est consuetudo quae continet bonum honorabile, It is a
good custom that gives honor and regard to whom it is due. Thus it is a
custom that the Consecration of Bishops should be in public Churches; that
the Degree of Doctor, because it is an honor, be not conferred sneakingly and
in conventicles. And upon this account, when any custom is honorable to
religion or to a mystery, it is not to be omitted, because the custom is good,
and in some proportions ministers to Religion and it is advantage.

Thus the Ministers of religion when they officiate are by an immemorial
custom vested in ables or surplices: 9.
it was intended as an honor to the religion, because the white and the purple
colors are the ensigns of Civil and Ecclesiastical dignity respectively, and
are in honor to each other alternately indulged, and Kings wear albes, and
Bishops and Judges wear purple; and our Blessed Savior was pleased to call it
the glory of Solomon, when he was clothed in the purest linen of Egypt, whose
whiteness though very bright, yet it fell short of the natural whiteness of
the lilly. Glory is nothing but the excess and greatness of honor, and
therefore these garments which were glorious upon Solomon, at least were given
to the Religious as ensigns of honor: the same which the Epigram says of the
purple Mantle which was stolen from Crispinus, lib. 8. Epigr. 48.
Quisquis habes, humeris sua munera read precamur:
Non hoc Crispinus te, sed abolla rogat.
Non quicunque capit saturatas murice vestes:
Nec nisi deliciis convenit iste color.
Such garments are not fit for every shoulder, they are marks of honor, and the
delicacies of the greatest and the worthiest Men. But that the white garment
was given to Religion, it had besides the honor to the persons, the Vide Liliu
Giraldum Syntag. 1. Deorum, titulo de Diis ex humanis actionibus: and
Chartarium lib. de Deorum^maginibus.
signification and emblem of a precept: It signified purity and truth, which
in Philostratus in the image of Amphiaraus is said to be clothed with garments
of snow, and covered with the purest whiteness; and lib. 2. Paedag. cap. 10.
Clemens Alexandrinus writes that Caeus the Sophister in the description of
virtue and vice, described virtue in a white robe; and so does Orat. 3. sub
finem.
Themistius invest truth, sitting upon an adamant, holding a bright splendour in
her hand, and clothed with an albe. Concerning this S. Clement of Alexandria
ubi supra, and lib. 3. cap. 11.
spoke much, even as much as the thing it self will bear: for it being nothing
but the color of a garment, is not to be proved to be necessary, and therefore
not to be valued in such a quality: but yet neither is the custom of that
color to be despised, because that color is a good emblem, and has as much
advantage as a color can have; and therefore there can be no reason to despise
the thing, or peevishly to go against the custom, where it is quitted from
abuse. But I shall add this to it, which is warranty enough for the Churches
choice, that the Primitive Christians, who were free enough from any
superstitious fancy concerning it, did nevertheless particularly affect and
choose this color. They saw that the Saints in the Revelation had (...) white
garments, and they were dipped in the blood of the Lamb: and S. Anthony to
represent himself a Christian did go in white, as S. Athanasius tells of him.
sub finem vitae Aedesil.
Eunapius tells that the Monks in Egypt went in black; and that many Christians
that lived in other places did so too, for modesty sake and gravity, in
humility and abjection, who please, may see demonstrated by many instances in
Baronius: An. Dom. 57. n. 77.
and that is a good precedent to warrant the custom of the ordinary Clergy
habit. But yet it is evident that very many Christians were pleased rather to
use the simple and native color of truth, Epist. 146.
the emblem of purity; and Synesius writing to one John the Monk that chose to
go in a black coat, writes that which is enough to be said in this whole
affair, Atqui nihilo deterius erat si candida foret: splendidissimae quippe
naturae dicatum ac consecratum id potius fuerit quod in his quae sensu
percipiuntur purius atque lucidius est. Sed si pullum ideo colorem probasti,
quod id aliorum qui ante te usurparunt imitatione feceris; laudo quicquid Dei
causa suscipitur, But it had been no worse if you had chosen the white, as that
which is agreeable to the nature of splendour and purity, and brighter and purer
to the eyes. But if you chose the black garment because it was the custom of
others that went before you, it is well; I commend any thing that is done for
God, lib. 2. de Legib.
and for the cause of piety. Colorem album Deo maxim decorum, said Cicero,
quod sit index puritatis and nitelae, omnemque fucum excludat veritate nativa
contentus, The white garment is most comely for religion, as being content with
it is native simplicity, and an indication of brightness and purity. Upon this
account it is a custom of clothing the bodies of dead in white; Videat lector,
si, placet, Plutarchum lib. de Iside sub initium, and 26. Romans quaest. and
Theodor. orat. 2. de Provid. and Eliam Cretensem in Nazian. orat. 4. in initio,
Arrianum lib. 3. cap. 1. and Philon. Jud. lib. de plantat. Noae.
for they that are dead are justified from sins, and they are candidates of
immortality. But it may be this was too much to be said of so small a thing: I
instanced in this, to show that this color was intended for an exterior
honor to religion, and that is sufficient (say the lawyers) to make a custom
reasonable; and if it be reasonable, it must be complied with.

7. A custom whose reason is not known, 10.
yet if it be of an immemorial time, and does transmit a right to
Ecclesiastical persons, is not without great reason and evident necessity or
public utility to be refused. Thus it is a custom in the Church of England
that certain rights be paid to the Rector of the Church if the corpse be
interred in the Chancel: and though in some places this did run into great
abuse, which was excellently reproved by that learned and good man Sir Henry
Spelman (...), in his learned and pious Tract de Sepultura; yet the thing was
not wholly to be blamed for the abuse sake, and the rights of any man are not
easily to be snatched away because he cannot prove how he came by them, if he
have had them long in possession. The thing was to have been reformed; but not
after the new manner, that is, wholly taken away. Consuetudo cujus initii
memoria non sit in contrarium praesumitur rationabilis, say Geminianus,
Cardinal Alexander and Panormitan; and they instance in a Prelate receiving
money beyond his procurations in his visitation. For though the reason of it be
not now known, yet it is presumed at first* there was a reason; and though we
have lost the record, yet he must not loose his right; unless that right of his
be manifestly other men's wrong. But this instance is to be understood so, that
the Sepulture be first performed, and the charity and the ecclesiastical right
be done to the dead; for these things cannot be contracted for: but when the
piety is performed, the oblations of the faithful which at first were
voluntary, and afterward came into custom, and so transferred a right, may be
received by the Rector, but must not be detained by the heir. Here in Ireland
there is a custom of receiving oblations at the baptism of infants; but if
the Priest refuses to baptize the child till he be secured of the money, he is
a direct Simoniac, for he contracts and takes a price for the Sacrament: but if
he confer the Sacrament, to which he is tied by his charge and by the laws of
God and Man, then afterward he has a right to the oblation which by law or
custom was to be given. But the office is to be done without it: for the
Infant has a right to the Sacrament before the Priest has a right to the
offering; and that came in by the laws of God, this by the customs of Men.

8. A Custom Ecclesiastical that is but of a legal and presumed reasonableness
does oblige us to a conformity. 11.
I call that a legal or presumed reasonableness, when the law in certain cases
does suppose it reasonable; and though it be not known to be naturally or
precisely so, yet because it is not known to be unreasonable, but there is a
probability to conjecture that it entered upon a right cause, it is permitted
and allowed. This happens in two cases. The first is when a Custom is besides
the law, and not against it. For if it be against a law, it ought not to
prevail at all, unless it be precisely reasonable, that is, unless the law in
the changing of affairs or in it self at first be unreasonable; for in that
case a custom that is naturally reasonable may be admitted, and if it be, must
be observed. But if it be only besides the law, and not against it, then it is
presumed to be reasonable, hoc ipso quod introducta est, say the Doctors,
therefore because it is introduced: and the reason is, because every thing is
presumed to be reasonable that is done generally, unless it be known to be
unreasonable; and the very interests of peace and the reputation and honor of
mankind require this, without any more inquiry; save only that this be added,
that if the custom introduced besides law be either universal, or of an
immemorial beginning, the law presumes the more strongly of the reasonableness
of it, and therefore in these cases it ought to prevail the rather. For to this
sense is that rule of S. Austin, Illa quae non scripta sed tradita custodimus,
quae quidem toto terrarum orb observantur, dantur intelligi vel ab ipsis
Apostolis, Epist. 11^. cap. 1.
vel plenariis Conciliis, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas,
commendata atque statuta retineri, Those things which are delivered to us not
by writing, but by tradition [or custome] which are observed in all the world,
we understand them to be either retained by the appointment or commendation of
the Apostles, or some General Councils, whose authority in the Church is of
great use.] That is, when the custom is universal and immemorial. For the
first we presume it to be very reasonable, it could not else have easily
prevailed upon the whole Church: and for the second we suppose it to have had a
very good beginning; for it adds moments to the custom, that when we know
nothing to the contrary, we presume the best of its original. Not that we ought
to conclude or to believe a Custom to have come from the Apostles, if it be
universal or immemorial; but that we ought to regard and reverence it as if it
did, because we know not in some cases whether it did or no. * But if it be
either one or other, it is sufficient to oblige us to retain it, or to comply
with it so long as it is retained. Thus the solemn days of Rogation which we
observe in the Church of England were not of an immemorial beginning; for they
were first used by the Bishops of Vienna, Mamertus, Isicius and Avitus; but yet
they were quickly universal, Homil. de Rogat.
non per Gallias tantummodo, sed pene per totum orbem, not only in France, but
in almost all the world, said Alcimus Avitus in his time: and therefore this
custom is not to be neglected by any single person, where the Church still
retains it; for this is sufficient to make a legal presumption of its
reasonableness.

* The other case is, that a Custom is presumed reasonable when the nature of
it is such that it can have no positive and natural unreasonableness, but is
capable of some extrinsic and accidental decency and fittingness. The custom
that is actually in the practice and manners of a Church is presumed
reasonable: and this is of use but in small matters, but yet such which little
and great men sometimes make great matters of; I mean presidencies and
priorities of place, sittings in the quire, precedencies in Councils. Now in
these cases Custom ought to prevail, for where there is no reason in the
thing, there Custom is a reason sufficient; and if a law ought to prevail
though there be no reason known for it, then so must Custom, because this is
esteemed as a law. Capit. Consuetudo 1. did. and l. de quibus, ff. de legibus.
And it is remarkable, that although in the introducing of a Custom, it
concerns the Governors of Churches to take care that it be reasonable; yet
when it is introduced that care is over, and then they are to take care to keep
unity and to avoid scandal. Praestat illic esse ubi nihil licet quam ubi omnia,
said one, It is better to be under a Tyranny then under an Anarchy; it is
better to be too much restrained then to be too loose: and if a Custom has
seized upon us, it is better to stand still under that arrest, then to break
the gentlest cords of a man, and inter into licentiousness. Perniciosior
temeritas quam quies. It is not good to move any stirs in a quiet Church, for
certainly peace is better then that which is only a little better then a
custom. And we see it by a sad experience, that those who are enemies and
stubborn to the innocent Customs of a Church, intend nothing but to get the
government into their own hands. Genus hominum potentibus infidum, sperantibus
fallax; as Tacitus said of the Astrologers, we have too much reason to say of
them, They are a sort of men that deceive their own confidents, and are no sure
friends to their Superiors: for to difavow Customs is a great dishonor to the
Government, and a reproach to the ministry of laws; and to their disciples
they preach liberty, that themselves only may rule them absolutely. Quanto
majore libertatis imagine teguntur, tanto eruptura ad infensius servitium;
Tacitus said it of such persons: by the exempting fools from the just rule of
their superiors, they make them their own slaves. But to rebel against the
Customs of a Church is an accusation not only of the Rulers, but a
condemnation of the whole society of the faithful.

9. A Custom in the administration of a Sacrament introduced against the
analogy and mystery, 12.
the purpose and signification of it, ought not to be complied with. I
instanced before in a Custom of the Church of England of sprinkling water upon
infants in their baptism; and I promised to consider it again. Resp. 2. cap. 4.
Baptizabant enim veteres, non manibus suis aquam baptizando aspergentes, sed
trina immersione hoc Evangelii sequentes, Ascendit ex aqua, ergo descenderat.
Ecce immersio, non aspersio; said Jeremy the Patriarch of CP. Straightway Jesus
went up out of the water, says the Gospel: He came up, therefore he went down.
Behold an immersion, not an aspersion. And the Ancient Churches following this
of the Gospel, did not in their baptismes sprinkle water with their hands, but
immerg'd the Catechu^en, or the infant. And therefore we find in the records of
the Church, that the persons to be baptized were quite naked; as is to be seen
in many places, particularly in the 11th Mystagogic Catechism of S. Cyril of
Jerusalem: and S. Dyonis Lib. de Eccl. Hi^^^^ch. cap. de Baptismo.
describes the ritual in the same manner. The Bishop puts his hand upon the
Catechumen's head, and giving a sign to the Priests, commands that they write
the name of the Catechumen and of his Godfather; which being written he says
the office or prayers, which when the whole Church has performed together with
him, he dev^sts him of his garments by the Ministers. And the same thing out of
the same Author is observed by Elias Cretensis in his notes upon the fourth
Oration of S. Gregory Nazianzen, and is reported also by S. Ambrose in his
tenth Sermon. Nudi in seculo nascimur, nudi etiam accedimus ad lavacrum, We are
born naked, and naked we enter into the waters of baptism. All which are a
perfect conviction that the Custom of the Ancient Churches was not sprinkling,
but immersion, in pursuance of the sense of the word in the Commandment, and
the example of our Blessed Savior. * Now this was of so sacred account in
their esteem, that they did not account it lawful to receive him into the
Clergy who had been only sprinkled in his baptism; as we learn from the
Epistle of Cornelius to Fabius of Antioch, Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 43.
(...), It is not lawful that he who was sprinkled in his bed by reason of
sickness should be admitted into holy orders. Nay it went further then this,
they were not sure that they were rightly Christened yea or no who were only
sprinkled; as appears in the same Epistle of Cornelius in Eusebius, (...),
which Nicephorus thus renders [ if at least such a sprinkling may be called
baptism:] and this was not only spoken in diminution of Novatus and
indignation against his person, for it was a formal and a solemn question made
by Magnus to S. Cyprian, an habendi sint Christiani legitimi, Epist. 76.
eo quod aqua salutari non loti sunt, sed perfusi, Whether they are to be
esteemed right Christians who were only sprinkled with water, and not washed
or dipped. He answers, that the Baptism was good when it is done necessitate
cogente, and Deo indulgentiam suam largiente, in the case of necessity, God
pardoning and necessity compelling. And this is the sense and law of the Church
of England; not that it be indifferent, but that all infants be dipped, except
in the case of sickness, and then sprinkling is permitted. And of this
sprinkling, besides what is employed in the former testimonies, there was some
little use in the Primitive Church. Quis enim tibi tam infidae poenitentiae
viro asperginem unam cujuslibet aquae commodabit? De Poenit. c. 6.
says Tertullian speaking to an impenitent person: Who will afford thee so
much as one single sprinkling of water? (meaning) for his baptism. And Surius
in the life of S. Laurence tells that as he was going to his Martyrdom, one
Romanus a soldier brought to him a pitcher of water that he might be baptized
of him as he went; which in that case must needs have been done by pouring
water upon him. Fudit aquam super caput ejus: so did S. Laurence also to
Lucillus, De rebus Eccle. cap. 26.
he powered water upon his head. And Walafridus Strabo from these very examples
concludes that in cases of necessity it is lawful to use sprinkling. He adds
also, that it is lawful to do it when there is a great multitude of persons at
once to be baptized: and Aquinas supposes the Apostles did so when the 3000 and
when the 5000 were at once converted and baptized. But this is but a
conjecture, and has no tradition and no record to warrant it: and therefore
although in cases of need and charity the Church of England does not want some
good examples in the best times to countenance that permission, yet we are to
follow her command, because that command is not only according to the meaning
and intent of the word (...) in the Commandment, but agrees with the mystery
of the Sacrament it self; For we are buried with him in baptism, says the
Apostle. In aqua tanquam in sepulchro caput immergentibus vetus homo sepelitur
and submergitur, deinde nobis emerge^tibus nouns resurgit inde: so S.
Chrysostom, In illud 3. Johan. Nisi quis renatus etc.
The old man is buried and drowned in the immersion under water, and when the
baptized person is lifted up from the water, it represents the resurrection of
the new man to newness of life. In this case therefore the contrary Custom not
only being against an Ecclesiastical law, but against the analogy and
mysterious signification of the Sacrament, is not to be complied with, unless
in such cases that can be of themselves sufficient to justify a liberty in a
ritual and ceremony; that is, a case of necessity.

And of the same consideration is it, 13.
that the baptism be performed with a trine immersion, and not with one only.
In England we have a custom of sprinkling, and that but once. To the
sprinkling I have already spoke; but as to the number, though the Church of
England has made no law, and therefore the custom of doing it once is the
more indifferent and at liberty, yet if the trine immersion be agreeable to the
analogy of the mystery, and the other be not, the Custom ought not to prevail,
and is not to be complied with, if the case be evident or declared. Now in this
particular the sense of Antiquity is clear. Nam nec semel, sed ter ad singula
nomina in personas singulas tingimur, Adv. Praxeam c. 28. De corona milit. c.
15.
says Tertullian: Dehinc ter mergitamur, We are thrice put under water, not
once; at the mention of every person we are dipped. The very same words we read
in S. Hierom against the Luciferians. But more largely it is explicated by S.
Ambrose. Thou were asked, Lib. 2. de Sacram. cap. 7.
Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty? and thou did say, I do
believe: and thou were plunged, that is, buried. Thou were asked again, Do
thou believe in our Lord Jesus Christ? and thou saidest, I do believe: and
thou were dipped or plunged; and therefore thou art buried together with
Christ. The third time thou were asked, Do thou believe in the Holy Spirit?
and thou saidest, I do believe: and the third time thou were plunged; that thy
threefold confession might wash away the many lapses of thy former life. S.
Denis says that the trine immersion signifies the Divine essence and beatitude
of God in a Trinity of Persons. in Dictis and interpret. Script. qu. 91. Vide
August: Homil. 4. and apud Gratian. de Consecr. did. 4. cap. 76.
S. Athanasius says it signifies the death, burial, and resurrection of our
Blessed Savior, together with his being three days in the grave. And this
thing was so the practice and custom of the Church, that in the Canons of the
Apostles Can. 49.
(as they are called) he that does not use trine immersion is to be deposed
from his dignity. (...), It is impious and ungodly to immerge but once in
baptism; so Zonaras upon that Canon: and S. Chrysostom derives it from
Christ's institution, Omnibus mysteriis velut signum imponens Dominus, in tribus
mersionibus aquae unum baptisma discipulis suis tradidit, Our Lord did as it
were impose a sign upon every mystery, and delivered one baptism to his
Disciples in three immersions or dippings: and therefore says, that though this
descended by tradition, yet it has the authority of a law. And the same thing
we find affirmed by Pope Pelagius, as he is cited by Gratian de consecrat. Lib.
4. Har^t. fabul.
did. 4. And Theodoret speaking of the heretic Eunomius, who first of all
without authority and against reason did use but single immersion, he says that
he subverted the rite of holy baptism which at first was delivered by our Lord
and his Apostles.

Now in these particulars it is evident that the Ancient Churches did otherwise
then we do: 14.
but that is not sufficient to force us to break the Ecclesiastical custom
which is of long abode with us. But when they say, these things are to be done
by Divine precept, we are to consider that upon it is own account: and though
some of the Fathers did say so, yet it can never be proved to be so; and it
were strange that there should be a Divine Commandment of which there is no
mention made in the four Gospels, nor in the Acts or Epistles of the Apostles.
But then that there is in dipping, and in the repetition of it more
correspondencie to the analogy and mystery of the Sacrament, is evident; the
one being a Sacrament of the death and burial of Christ, the other a confession
of, and an admission to the faith and profession of God in the most Holy
Trinity: and therefore I say, it is sufficient warrant that every single person
break that custom of sprinkling which is against the Ecclesiastical Law; and
it is also a sufficient reason to move the Church to introduce a contrary
custom to the other of single immersion, concerning which as yet there is no
law. But because there is even in sprinkling something of the analogy of the
mystery, as is rightly observed by Aquinas and Dominicus a Soto; and because it
is not certain that the best representation and the most expressive ceremony is
required; therefore the Church upon great cause may lawfully do either: but
because it is better to use dipping, and it is more agreeable to the mystery to
use it three times, and that so the Ancient Church understood it, therefore
these things are a sufficient warrant to acquit us from the obligation of the
contrary custom; because a custom against which there is so much probability,
and in which there is no necessity and no advantage, is to be presumed
unreasonable.

But if the custom of single immersion should by some new-arising necessity
become reasonable, then it not only might be retained, 15.
but ought to be complied with. Thus it happened in Spain in the year DC, the
Arrian Bishops finding their advantage in the readily-prepared custom of trine
immersion, used it and expounded it to signify the substantial difference of
the Son and the Holy Ghost from the Father. Upon this Leander the Bishop of
Sevil gives advice and notice to S. Gregory Bishop of Rome; who commends
Leander for using a single immersion, which he did to signify the Unity of
nature in the Divinity, and that he might not comply with the Arrians: and this
was afterward brought into custom, and then into a law by the fourth Council
of Toledo. Can. 5. alias 6.
But unless such an accident happen, and that the reason be changed, every
Church is to use her first customs, those which be right, and agreeable to the
sense and purpose of the Sacrament. But otherwise an evil custom is better
broken then kept.

RULE XVI. The Decrees and Canons of the Bishops of Rome oblige the conscience
of none but his own subjects.
THis must needs follow from diverse of the former discourses: 1.
for if Bishops in their spiritual capacity have no power of making laws of
external regiment without the leave of their Princes, or the consent of their
people, then supposing the Popes great pretense were true, that he is the head
or chief of the Ecclesiastical order, that from him they receive immediately
all the spiritual power they have, yet this will afford him no more then what
Christ left to the whole order; of which I have already given accounts.

But in this there will be the less need of inquiry, 2.
for since the Bishop of Rome by arts which all the world knows had raised an
intolerable Empire, he used it as violently as he got it, and made his little
finger heavier then all the loins of Princes: and in the Council of Trent, when
in the 25th Session the Fathers confirmed and commanded the observation of all
Canons, Cap. 20.
General Councils, Apostolical ordinances made in favor of Ecclesiastical
persons and Ecclesiastical liberty, they at once by establishing the Popes
Empire, destroyed it quite, for they made it impossible to obey, and the
Consciences of people were set at liberty, because they were commanded every
man to bear a steeple upon his back. For first there were an infinite number
of Apostolical ordinances, Lib. 2. c. 11.
says Cardinal Cusanus, which were never received even when they were made.
Then let it be considered what there is to be done to Gratian's decretum, which
is made part of the Popes law: and who knows in that Concordantia
discordantiarum, that contradictory heap of sayings, which shall, and which
shall not oblige the Conscience? But then the Decretals of Gregory the 9th and
of Boniface the 8th, the Clementines and Extravagants, all those laws in that
book which is called Collectio diversarum constitutionum and literarum
Romanorum Pontificum, and in another called Epistolae decretales Summorum
Pontificum in three volumes, and in another called Eclogae Bullarum and motuum
propriorum, and in another called Summa Pontificum, and in the seventh book of
the Decretals not long since composed, and in their Rules of Chancery, their
Penitentiary taxes, and some other books of such loads as these that I need not
add to this intolerable heap: but that a Christian Bishop should impose, and a
Council of Christian Bishops and Priests should tie upon the Consciences of men
such burdens which they can never reckon, never tell over, never know, never
understand; and that they should do it then when a Christian Emperor had
given advice that the Decrees and Canons should be reduced to a less number,
and made to conform to the laws of God, is so sad a story, so unlike the spirit
of Christ and to government Apostolical, that it represents the happiness of
Christendom that they are not obliged to such laws, and the unhappiness that
would be upon them if the Pope had the rule and real obligations of the
Consciences of Christendom.

But of these things the world has been long full of complaint; 3.
as appears in the writings of the Ubi supra.
Cardinal of Cusa, in In Defens. pacis part. 2. c. 23.
Marsilius of Padua, L. 7. Annal. Boiorum.
in Aventinus, in In ^. Been a Zenone, C. de quadrien. praescript.
Albericus Rosate, in In Confut. Primat. ^ apae 2. consider. princip.
Gregory Hambourg, in In Henrico 3.
Matthew of Paris, In part 2. A. D. 1247.
Matthew of Westminster, Lib. de ruina and reparar. Eccl.
Nicolaus de Clemangiis, In Praefat. libri de sacris Ecclesiae Ministeriis,
impres. 1551.
Franciscus Duarenus, Alliacens. de Reformat. ^ccles. consid. 2. See also the
Vergers Dream made in Latin in the time of Charles the fifth, and translated
into French.
the Cardinal of Cambray, and many others both collected by Goldastus, and the
Catalogus testium veritatis by Illyricus. Insomuch that if the people had not
been ignorant and superstitious, qui facilius vatibus quam Ducibus parent suis,
and more willing to obey their Priests then their Princes, and if the Princes
had not been by such means overpowered, these Decrees and Canons would have
been as easily rejected as many others have been. For if by the Papal sanction
they do oblige the Conscience, then they all oblige. If they all oblige, how
comes it to pass that, as Cusanus says, infinite numbers of them are rejected
when they are newly made? And if so many of them may be rejected, then which of
them shall oblige? If they oblige by the authority of the Pope, that is alike
in them all: If by the condition of the matter, then they bind as they agree
with our duty to God and to Princes, with the public good, and the edification
of the Church; and then the authority it self is nothing.

And it is no trifling consideration, 4.
that the body of the Canon law was made by the worst and the most ambitious
Popes. Alexander the third, who made Gratian's decree to become law, was a
schismatical Pope, an Antipope, and unduly elected: The rest were Gregory the
ninth, Boniface the eighth, Clement the fifth, John the 22, persons bloody and
ambitious, traitors to their princes, and butchers of Christendom by the sad
wars they raised, and therefore their laws were likely to be the productions
of violence and war, not of a just and peaceable authority.

But to come nearer to the point of Conscience; 5.
who made the Bishop of Rome to be the Ecclesiastical lawgiver to
Christendom? For every Bishop has from Christ equal power, and there is no
difference but what is introduced by men, that is, by laws positive, by
consent, or by violence. Ad Trinitatis instar, cujus una est atque individua
potestas, Baron. A. D. 499. n. 36.
unum est per diversos Antistites sacerdotium, said Pope Symmachus. As is the
power of the holy Trinity, one and undivided; so is the Episcopacy, divided
amongst all the Bishops, Lib. 4. Epist. 2.
but the power is the same. So S. Cyprian, Una est Ecclesia per totum mundum in
multa membra divisa: item Episcopatus unus, Episcoporum multorum concordi
numerositate diffusus, As there is but one Church in the whole world divided
into many members, so there is but one Bishopric parted into an agreeing
number of Bishops. And again, Let no man deceive the Brotherhood with a lie,
let no man corrupt the truth of faith with a perfidious praevarication: Lib. 4.
Epist. 3. Lib. 1. Fp. 3.
Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur, There is but
one Bishopric, and every one of us has his share: a part of the flock is
given to every Pastor. Now if one were the universal Bishop over all, then
these zealous words of S. Cyprian had not been reconcilable to truth and sense:
for then the unity of the Church had been by a unity of subordination, not by
an identity of office and a partition of charge. To the same purpose is that of
Pope Damasus, Epist. 5.
writing to the African Bishops to require their aid in a matter of
discipline, Nos excusare non possumus, si ejus Ecclesiam quae nobis generaliter
commissa est in quantu^ praevalemus puram a tam illicitis superstitionibus non
custodiamus, quia non aliter unus grex and unus Pastor sumus, nisi quemadmodum
Apostolus docet, id ipsum dicamus omnes, etc. The Church is committed to us in
common, and we have no other way of being one flock and one shepherd, but by
speaking the same things] that is, consenting and joining in the common
government. This is the same which S. Hierom affirmed, Omnis Episcopus, sive
Romae fuerit, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive
Alexandriae, sive Tanais, ejusdem est meriti, ejusdem sacerd^tii: It is all
one, there is no difference in worthiness and power, whether he be Bishop of
Rome or Eugubium, Constantinople or Rhegium, Tanais or Alexandria. For as it
was with the Apostles, Cyprian de unit. Eccles.
so with their successors; Hoc utique erant caeteri Apostoli quod erat Petrus,
pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis, What Peter was that the
rest of the Apostles were; He was the Vicar of Christ on earth, and so were
they, and so are their successors. Caput enim Ecclesiae Christus est, Christi
autem Vicarii Sacerdotes sunt, qui vice Christi legatione funguntur in
Ecclesia, said Pope Hormisda: and S. Cyprian calls the Bishop, unum ad tempus
vice Christi Judicem, Vide S. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 3. and lib. 5. ep. 6. S. Ambrose
in 1 Cor. 11.
the Deputy and vicegerent of Christ. S. Peter had the Keys given him, so had
the Apostles, and so have their Successors; S. Peter was the pillar of the
Church, and so were the other Apostles; He was a foundation, and so were they;
for Christ has built his Church upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets. He was (...), and every one of them was (...), a rock, and Christ was
the Cornerstone. And what they were in their perpetual office, that the
Bishops are. Antistitem puriorem caeteris esse oportet, ipsius enim [Christi]
personam habere videtur, est enim vicarius ejus, In Quaest. Vet. and N. Test.
q. ult. and ad fratres in Eremo, cap. 37.
ut quod caeteris licet, illi non liceat, quia necesse habet quotidie Christi
vicem agere, said S. Austin. A Bishop ought to be more holy then others,
because he has the person of Christ, he is his Vicar, what is lawful to others
is not lawful for him, for he every day is in his place or stead. Add to this,
that the power which the Bishops have, they have it immediately from Christ,
they are successors of the Apostles, of all, not of Peter only, many
Apostolical Churches which were established by others being succeeded in as
well as Rome; that these things are evident in matter of fact, and universally
affirmed in antiquity clearly and without dispute.

From hence it must needs follow that by the law of Christ one Bishop is not
superior to another. 6.
Concerning which I need no other testimony then that excellent saying of S.
Cyprian in the Council of Carthage, It remains ( says he) that we all speak
what every one of us does think, judging no man, and refusing to communicate
with no man that shall happen to be of a differing judgment. Neque enim
quisquam nostrum se Episcopum Episcoporum constituit, aut tyannico terrore ad
obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adegit; quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro
licentia libertatis and potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquam judicari ab
alio non possit, cum nec ipse possit alterum judicare: sed expectemus universi
judicium Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui unus and solus habet potestatem and
praeponendi nos in Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, and de actu nostro judicandi,
For none of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, or by tyrannical terror
compels his colleagues to a necessity of complying: for every Bishop has a
liberty and power of his own arbitrament, neither can he be judged by any one,
nor himself judge any other; but we all must expect the judgment of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who by himself and alone has power of setting us over the
government of his Church, and of judging us for what we do. Now if all Bishops
be equal in their power, then the Pope can by the laws of Christ make laws no
more then any Bishop can; and what the legislative of the Bishop is, I have
already declared and proved: and therefore for these and infinite other reasons
the Consciences of Christians may be at peace as to the Canons of the Popes,
out of his temporal jurisdiction. Concerning which other reasons who please to
require them may find enough in Lib. 2. Cap. 1, 5, 6.
Spalatensis, in the replies of our English Prelates in the questions of
supremacy and allegiance, in Chamier, Moulin, Gerard, and diverse others. I have
the less need to insist upon any more particulars, because I write in a Church
where this question is well understood, and sufficiently determined to all
effects of Conscience. I only add the saying of Aeneas Sylvius who was
himself a Pope, Epist. 288.
Ante Concilium Nicenum quisque sibi vivebat, and parvus respectus habebatur ad
Ecclesiam Romanam, Before the Nicene Council every man lived to himself ( that
is, by his proper measures, the limits of his own Church) and little regard was
had to the Church of Rome.

. IV. Of the matter and conditions of ECCLESIASTICAL Laws required to the
obligation of Conscience.
RULE XVII. Ecclesiastical laws that are merely such cannot be Universal and
perpetual.
I Do not mean only that Ecclesiastical laws can be abrogated by an Authority
as great as that which made them; 1.
for all positive laws both of God and man can be so, and yet there are some of
both which have been obligatory to all men under such a government, and during
such a period, that have been called perpetual and for ever. But that which is
here intended is of greater consequence and concern to the Conscience, and it
is this, That Ecclesiastical laws merely such, that is, those which do not
involve a divine law within their matter, must be so made as that they do not
infringe Christian liberty; and secondly, that they be so enjoined, that the
Commandments of men be not taught for doctrines. These are very material
considerations, but of great difficulty; and therefore it is fit they be most
seriously considered.

They must be imposed so as to leave our liberty unharm'd; 2.
that is, that the law be not universal, not with an intent to oblige all
Christendom, except they will be obliged, that is, do consent. For laws are
in public as actions in particular; actions are done by single men, and laws
are made by limited communities. A Society cannot be said to do an action, and
the whole world cannot be said to make a law; but as the action is done by a
determined person, so the law is made by a determined Government, as by the
Church of England, of Rome, of Millain; and the Catholic Church never yet did
meet since the Apostles days in any assembly to make a law that shall bind all
Christians whether they consent or no. And because one Church has not by any
word of Christ authority over another Church, and one King is not superior to
another King, but all are supreme in their own dominions, of which the Church
is at least a part, and if they be all Christian, it is that Church, that
Christian dominion; it must necessarily follow that no Ecclesiastical law can
be made with a power of passing necessary obligation upon all Christians. And
therefore the Code of the Catholic Church was nothing but a collection of some
private constitutions which were consented to by many Churches, and to which
they bound themselves, but did not long stand so, but changed them more or less
according as they pleased. And when the Roman Emperors made any Canon
Ecclesiastical into a law, it was a part of the Civil law, and by that
authority did oblige as other civil laws did, not all the world, but only the
Roman world, the subjects of that dominion.

But when any law or Canon Ecclesiastical is made, 3.
it is made by a certain number of Ecclesiastics, or by all. If by all, then
all consent first or last, and then every Bishop may govern his charge by that
measure; but that was never yet reduced to practice, and prevails only by
consent: But if by a certain number only, then they can but by that measure
rule their own subjects; but if they obtrude it upon others, then comes in the
precept of the Apostle, Stand fast in the liberty with which Christ has made
you free, and be not again entangled in the yoke of bondage. Galat. 5. 1.


For when Christ had made us free from the law of Ceremonies which God
appointed to that nation, 4.
and to which all other nations were bound if they came into that Communion; it
would be intolerable that the Churches, who rejoiced in their freedom from
that yoke which God had imposed, should submit themselves to a yoke of
ordinances which men should make: for though before they could not, yet now
they may exercise communion and use the same religion without communicating in
rites and ordinances.

This does no way concern the subjects of any government (what liberty they are
to retain and use, 5.
I shall discourse in the following numbers) but it concerns distinct Churches
under distinct Governments, and it means, as appears plainly by the context and
the whole analogy of the thing, that the Christian Churches must suffer no man
to put a law upon them who is not their Governor. If he have undertaken a
pious discipline, let him propound it, and for God's glory and the zeal of
souls endeavor to persuade it; for all that is not against Christian liberty,
until any man or any Church shall impose it, and command it, whether the
Churches please or no, whether they judge it expedient or no, whether it be for
their edification or not for their edification: that is not to be suffered; it
is against our Evangelical liberty, and the Apostolical injunction.

And this was so well understood by the Primitive Churches, 6.
that though the Bishops did appoint temporary and occasional fasts in their
Churches upon emergent and great accidents, as Tertullian affirms, yet they
would suffer no Bishop to impose any law of fasting upon others, but all
Churches would keep their own liberty, as I have already proved in this Chapter
Rule 13. n. 9.
and when Montanus did (...) make a law of fasting, not for his own Church, but
intended that all Christians should keep the fasts appointed, they made an
outcry against him and would not endure it; and yet he did it only for
discipline, not for doctrine, for piety, not as of necessity, as appears in
Tertullian's book of fasting, in the first and second Chapters: Vide etiam c.
13. and 15.
and they also did keep fasting-days set and solemn, every Bishop in his own
Church, at what times they would, but almost all upon Good Friday; but this was
by consent and with liberty, and that they ought to defend, and so they did.

But Ecclesiastical laws must not be perpetual.
That is, when they are made, 7.
they are relative to time and place, to persons and occasions, subject to all
changes, fitted for use and the advantage of Churches, ministering to
edification, and complying with charity. Now whatsoever is made with these
conditions, cannot be perpetual: and whatsoever Ecclesiastical Law has not
these conditions, the Churches ought not to receive, because they are
impediments, not advantages to the service of God. If they be thus qualified,
no good man will refuse them; if they be not, they are the laws of Tyrants, not
of Spiritual Fathers: For this whole affair is fully stated in those words of
our Blessed Savior; reproving of the Pharisees and their Ecclesiastical laws,
he says, they by their traditions did evacuate the Commandment of God, and
they taught for doctrines the commandments of men. The full sense of which
when we understand, we have the full measure of Ecclesiastical laws, not only
as they relate to the Churches and communities of Christians under distinct
governments, but to every single Christian under his own governor and
superior. These I say are the Negative measures: that is, Ecclesiastical laws
are not good and are not binding if they be imposed against the interest of a
Divine Commandment, or if they be taught as doctrines. Of the first there is
no doubt, and in it there is no difficulty: But in the latter there is a very
great one.

For when our superiors impose a law of discipline, 8.
they say it is good, it is pleasing to God, it is a good instrument and
ministry to some virtue, or at least it is an act of obedience, and that it is
so, is true doctrine: what hurt can there be in all this? The commandments of
men are bound upon us by the Commandment of God, and therefore when they are
once imposed, they cease to be indifferent, and therefore may then become (...)
doctrines and points of religion; what then is that which our Blessed Savior
reproves? and what is our Negative measure of Ecclesiastical laws?

To this the answer is best given by a narrative of what the Pharisees did, 9.
and was reproved: for all was not repugnant to the law of God, neither is all
that amiss which men teach to be done. For our Blessed Savior commanded us to
hear them that sat in Moses chair, and to do whatsoever they commanded: not
absolutely whatsoever, but whatsoever of a certain sort; that is, 1. whatsoever
they taught by a probable interpretation of what was doubtful, 2. or by
faithful counsel concerning things belonging to piety and charity, 3. or by a
determining to circumstances of time and place those things which were left to
their choice and conduct.

Whatsoever was besides these, 10.
that is, 1. whatsoever had it is foundation in the opinions of men, and not in
something certainly derived from God, if brought into religion, and imposed on
men's consciences as a part of the service of God, this is the teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men. But besides this 2. if what is deduced
only by probable interpretation be obtruded as a matter of faith; or 3. if
what is piously counseled, be turned into a perpetual and absolute law; or 4.
if that which was left to the choice and conduct of the governors, be handled
not as matter of liberty, but of necessity; in all these cases the
commandments of men are taught for doctrines.

The reason of these things is plain. 11.
For the first; If it have no foundation in the law of God, but in humane
opinions, and yet be taught for doctrine, it is literally the thing that is
here reproved. For the second. Whatsoever is but probably collected is not the
word of God, for that is always certain: it is true it is not probable in it
self, but in it self is true of false; but to him it is but probable, and
therefore to say this is the word or the Commandment of God, is more then the
man can say; it is to say that it is true in it self, that is, it is a doctrine
of God, when indeed it is but the word of Man for ought we know. * For the
third; When God has left it at liberty, if man turns it into a commandment,
and teaches it for the law of God, he does more then God would do, and more
then is true; for God never made it into a law, and man cannot make it to
become God's law: for the Ecclesiastic order being but God's Minister and the
publisher of God's will, must propose things as they received them from God;
that which is law, as necessary, that which is Counsel, as highly rewardable.
For the fourth; If it be left in the power of the Governors, then it is hoc
ipso evident that it is not necessary, and therefore though it may minister to
order and discipline, yet it must do no more: it may be called obedience, so
long as it is justly bound upon us with the cords of a man; but it must not in
any other sense nor at any time be called religion. How these two last sorts
may be made into laws I shall account when I speak of the positive measures of
Ecclesiastical laws; but abstracting from that superinduced obligation, to
teach these things as necessary which God has not made so, is to do as the
Pharisees did, whom our Blessed Savior so reproves.

An example of the first is the Pharisees teaching the washing of cups and
dishes, 12.
because they said that if a Gentile or any unclean person had touched their
vessel that touched their meat, the impurity would go into their body that eat
it, and from thence into their soul; and therefore they taught the doctrine or
tradition of cleansing vessels and washing their hands, (...), (...), as he
said in the Greek Comedy; finding out a vain remedy to cure a fantastical
disease. Thus in the Church of Rome, they exorcise salt and water to cast our
Devils; they give verses out of the Psalms or Gospels to charm witches; they
ring the bells to appease tempests, and very many more such ridiculous devices.
2. Of the second we have examples enough in the Council of Trent, who drew into
a body of articles, and declared those things, some of which are but probable
at most, and some of them apparently false, to be articles of faith: and under
this those also must needs be involved, who persecute men for opinions and
doubtful disputations. 3. Of the third, they are very evil examples who to
some whole orders of men lay an injunction of keeping Evangelical counsels:
such who forbid the whole order of the superior Clergy to marry, and command
them that are married to forsake their wives or their office and livelihood. 4.
But they are guilty of the fourth kind of prevaricating of the words of our
Blessed Savior, who persecute the breakers of an Ecclesiastical Law with a
severity greater then the violators of a Divine Commandment. For if there be
any liberty of any sort left after an indifferent action is made into a law of
man, it is all destroyed by them who give less liberty to the transgression of
that law then to the breach of God's law, under which there is left no liberty,
but the liberty of a cheerful and voluntary obedience. For they that do such
things must needs at least say that such humane injunctions are as necessary as
the Divine Commandments; for else why are they more severely punished?

The sum is this; 13.
Not only those who expressly teach that what they have invented is a
Commandment of God, but all they that say any thing is a law of God which is
not, though it be good, though it be probable, and all they which use arts and
secret devices and little arguments and inforcements, and press indifferent
things up to the height and necessity of religion and a Divine Commandment,
are guilty of this Pharisaisme, obnoxious to our Saviors reproof, and if it be
in the matter of Ecclesiastical laws, have exceeded their measures and their
power, and bind themselves, but not the consciences of their subjects. A
Commandment is not only then broken when we bid open defiance to it, but then
also when we do actions unlike the virtue of it, and actions tending to the
violation of it; that is, there are degrees of violation of a Divine law: and
an Ecclesiastical law that does in any degree break this law of our Blessed
Savior is therefore void, and is become intolerable.

Of these things I shall yet give two great examples, 14.
one of the Pharisees, and another of some that follow their example in this
affair. God gave a Commandment to the Jews of keeping holy the Sabbath Day,
their new Moons and some other solemnities. Now there were many particulars in
the observation which were not determined in the Law; but 1. what was doubtful
was to be expounded by their Doctors. 2. Some things were left to the liberty
of good people, and the measure of them was best determined by their Doctors
and men learned in the Law. 3. There were some Canons Ecclesiastical which were
outer guards and hedges to the law it self, that men might by those distances
be kept farther off from sin; and in these things their Rulers also had power.
Now though all this they could do, and might pretend an authority from God to
interpret the Law and to guide the Consciences, yet when they fell into
ridiculous Commentaries and useless Glosses, neither the law it self about
which their interpretations were employed, nor their authority which they had
from God could secure them from tyranny, and corruption, and doing violence to
Conscience, and imposing unequal burdens. Thus we find that their Rabbis
taught that upon a solemn feast day it was not lawful to catch fish in their
ponds, but they might hunt the hens and catch the geese in their yard. They
might not blow the fire with a pair of bellows, because that was too like the
labor of Smiths; but they might blow it through a hollow Cane. They might make
a fire and set on their pot, but they must not lay on their wood like the
structure of a house, that is, too artificially; and you must roast or boil no
more then was necessary: and if you made a fire, you might wash your feet with
warm water, but not your whole body. You must not touch an egg that was laid
that day; nay if you were doubtful whether it were laid that-day or no, yet you
might not eat it, and if that were mingled with a thousand, you might touch
none of them: but if you killed a hen, you might eat the perfect eggs that you
found in her. These and many more such little doctrines they taught to be
observed, as explications and manners of the observation of the Divine
Commandment: but these I have here transcribed from the Jews books, that we
may perceive the sense of our Blessed Savior's reproof by the instances of
their prevarication. He was pleased to speak to that of washing of cups and
platters: Mark 7. 4.
but it is also s^^d there, (...), there are many other things, such as that
was which they have received and teach, some of which I have recited. Now we
do not find that the Pharisees taught these as divine Commandments, but they
used them as if they were; they did them (...), they thought themselves the
more holy for doing them, they accounted them profane that did not, they placed
much of their religion and Pharisaisme or separation in them, esteeming them a
part of the divine worship: This was their case, and Christ gave their sentence.

The other instance which I promised is the law of the Roman Church in keeping
of Lent; 15.
which it is certain was no law of Christ; not so much as the interpretation of
a Divine law. Some of them pretend it was enjoined by the Apostles; others of
them say not, and these say true; so that it is a Commandment of men: but yet
this they teach for doctrine in the culpable and criminal sense, that is,

1. They value it more then some Commandments of God. 16.
I need no other proof but the words of Erasmus, Veluti parricida, pene dierim,
rapitur ad supplicium, Epist. ad Epis. Basil.
qui pro piscium carnibus gustarit carnes suillas, He that in stead of fish
shall but taste a piece of pork is dragged to punishment almost as if he were a
parricide. Gustavit aliquis carnes, clamant omnes, O coelum! O terra! O maria
Neptuni! Nutat Ecclesiae status, etc. If they see a man eat flesh, they are
amazed, they think the Church is in danger; they put men to death, to the
sharpest death of burning alive, for eating flesh; they shut up the Butchers
shambles, but leave open the public Stews.

2. They account it to be a part of the service of God, 17.
not only as it is an act of obedience to superiors, but in it self and
without any relative consideration. Lib. 2. de bonis operib. c. 9. tertio addit.
Bellarmine says they are not Christians that eat flesh in Lent: which words
are extremely false, or else every one that disobeys an Ecclesiastical law has
forfeited his Christendom; or else he places the sum and life of religion in
the keeping of Lent, and makes it a vital part, expressly prevaricating one of
the most glorious propositions of Christianity, placing the Kingdom of God in
meat and drink, Romans 14. 17.
not in righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost; and doing that which
the Apostle has forbidden, Coloss. 2. 16.
when he said to the Colossians, let no man judge you in meat and drink. If it
were only a question of obedience to the law, it were to be considered upon a
distinct account, and were a sin or duty respectively according to the several
dispositions of the person and the law: but no man says that he is no
Christian who at any time breaks any Ecclesiastical law; and therefore in this
more is pretended, and it is to be reckoned amongst the (...), the
commandments of men that are taught for doctrines.

3. They account the exterior action, the body of the injunction, 18.
the element of it to be a service of God; and for that part of it esteem
themselves the more holy and the better Christians, as appears in their
contentions about it, using arguments to prove the very Fast to be a sacrifice,
a pure oblation Beliar. ubi supra c. 11. item.
. Now it is true that fasting is a good ministry to diverse holy purposes, but
it is no more; it is that which can be supplied by other ministeries as apt,
and therefore that in kind is not necessary, nor required; it is that whose
work can be done without any ministry at all in some persons and some cases,
even by love and by obedience, by hope and fear, which are of themselves direct
graces, virtues and parts of the service of God. And therefore the Fathers of
the Church press in their Sermons and exhortations to fasting, that they would
take care to acquire the end of fasting, to be free from vice, to mortify the
affections and lusts; according to that saying of Isidore, Fastings with good
works are acceptable to God: But he that abstains from meat, Lib. 2. Senten.
cap. 44.
and does evil, imitates the Devils, quibus esca non est, and nequitia semper
est, They never eat, but ever do wickedly and perversely. But he fasts well
that fasts from maliciousness and secular ambitions. Take heed therefore,
Epist. 14.
says S. Hierom to Celantia, that when you begin to fast and use abstinence,
you do not think your self holy. For this strength adjumentum est, non
perfectio sanctitatis, it is not the perfection of sanctity, but a help only.
(...), and there is no profit at all of fasting, Homil. 3. ad pop. Antioch. and
hom. 4. and hom. 16.
unless all things else do follow, says S. Chrysostom; that is (...) an
abstinence from sin entirely: and again, what gain is it if (...) being void
and empty of good works we have kept the fast? If therefore another says, I
have fasted all the Lent, say thou, I had an enemy, but I am reconciled; I had
an evil Custom of detracting from my neighbors fame, but I have left it off;
I had an ungodly custom of swearing, but it is now amended. The sum is this,
which I represent in the words of Prosper, L. 3. de vita contemplat. cap. 10.
jejunia, abstinentiae, ac caetera hujusmodi, non pro justitia, sed cum
justitia Deo sunt exhibenda, Abstinence and fastings are not to be given to God
for good works, but with them. That is, they are of use in order to certain
purposes, which when they do effect they are good, when they do not, they are
useless troubles; and if they then be urged beyond their ministry, and
instrumentality, and for themselves, then we return to the beggarly elements
and rudiments of the synagogue: and if we suffer our selves to be brought under
the power of these things by laws and affrightments and spiritual terrors, then
we have lost our Christian liberty which was bought by the best blood of the
world.

4. But not only the exterior and instrumental act is absolutely urged and
taught as necessary, 19.
but a circumstance, a manner and form of that exterior instrument is
enjoined. It is enjoined not that we fast totally; but that we fast so: you may
dine if you will eat at the Merchants hours, after twelve or one of the clock,
but you may not eat flesh; you may eat sweetmeats, the most delicious fish,
the Sturgeon and the Scarus, the Lamprey and the Oyster, the Eele and the
Salmon, and all the delicacies of Nature, so you do not touch the fillets of a
Veal, nor eat an Egg or Milk, Curds or Cheese, or any thing that comes from a
beast or bird. Now what can be the meaning of this, when it comes to be
expounded by wise and sober men that can judge of the causes and differences of
things? For if abstinence and fasting be the thing that is required, this is
nothing of it: if we may dine, if we may fill our bellies with wine and
delicacies, if we may eat and, as Adam might, of all the garden of Eden, it is
no great matter as to temperance and abstinence, as to mortification and
austerities, if we abstain from one; it may be something as to our health, and
so certainly it is to very many bodies. It may be an instrument of vexation,
but it cannot edify. Is any man cured of his lust by eating nothing but fish
and broaths for forty days? He may indeed be made sick by it, and so very many
are, but the interest of no virtue is served by it, but by the other
permissions it may be more destroyed; and by fishes and broaths and artificial
meats provisions may be too abundantly made for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof. What therefore is in this manner of the law, but something of the
beggarly religion of meats and drinks? In the days of Prosper they abstained
from the flesh of beasts, but not of birds; and his sentence of that kind of
fasting is this, But they that abstaining from the flesh of four-footed beasts,
enjoy the flesh of Phesants and other precious birds or fishes, Lib. 2. de vit.
contempl. cap. 23.
seem to me not to cut off the delights of their bodies, but to change them,
and to cast away the common and cheap delicacies of flesh, that they may fill
their pleasures with more delicious and more precious flesh; not for
abstinence, but because some flesh is unclean, or rather, as I suppose, for the
tenderness of their wanton stomachs: since the nature of any flesh is not to be
condemned, if it be intended for man's use and appointed by God; but the lusts
of the flesh are to be avoided, which the Devil has superinduced and offers to
our senses. But they that would seem to themselves more abstinent, and by it
acquire same and noises, do so abstain from flesh, that they fill their vast
appetite with rare fruits and curious broaths: but spiritual abstinence
persuades not to refrain the use of certain meats, but the restraint of the
lust and the desire; and they are rather to be esteemed abstinent, who forbid
not to themselves the use of some meats, but the delights of the body.] And
indeed let it be considered; if a man pretending to mortify his body shall
abstain from wine, and will nevertheless drink sherbets and delicious beurages,
strong ale and Spirits, I suppose his body will not by that discipline be dead
to sin: and so it is in the abstinence from flesh, unless he also abstain from
all nourishment but what is necessary and made pleasant by want. For thus the
holy Primitives when they had gotten the custom of the Lenten fast, for two
days, or six days, or ten days, or fifteen days, according as the humor
increased, they did generally abstain from flesh; but so they did also from
fish, and wine, and all delicacies, and eat a dry diet, bread and water, herbs
and common fruits, turnips and berries, flies and nuts: and yet this they did
without making it a religion not to eat a bit of flesh; but upon occasion would
eat a meal of flesh, but not very delicious; and when their fasts were of many
days, they were not continual but intermitted. This latter I have already
proved; but that even in Lent the Primitive Christians did not abhor flesh,
appears beyond dispute in the case of Spiridion Bishop of Cyprus, who when a
traveller came to him in the time of Lent very weary and faint, and there was
no cold provisions in the house ready dressed, it being a time of fasting, bids
his daughter to boil some pork which was in the house powdered for the use of
the family: she did so, and her Father the Bishop eat of it, and bade his guest
do so too; who refused, saying that he was a Christian. The Bishop replied,
therefore the rather you ought not to refuse; because the word of God has
said, To the pure all things are clean. Lib. 1. hist. 11.
So Sozomen tells the story. By which it is apparent, that then it was not the
custom for Christians to eat flesh in Lent, for they eat nothing that was
pleasant, but they abstained because it was pleasant, not because it was flesh;
for of this they made no religion, as appears in the fact and exhortation and
argument of Spiridion. And of the same consideration was that law of Justinian,
in whose time, which was in the middle of the sixth Age, the Custom of
abstaining from flesh in Lent did prevail much; but because it happened in
Constantinople to be great scarcity of other provisions, the Emperor commanded
the shambles to be open and flesh to be publicly sold. Lib. 17. cap. 32. hist.
But Nicephorus tells that the people would not buy any, for they began to
think it to be religion not to touch, not to taste, not to handle. But the
Emperor and the wise men knew no religion against it. And that which Marcian
said to Avitus in the like case is very considerable, We know that charity is
better then fasting; Theodoret. hist. relig. in Marciano.
for charity is a work of the Divine law, (...), but fasting, is a thing
urbitrary and of our own choice. * Since therefore to eat flesh or not to eat
it, may become good or bad as it is used, and does not serve the end of
fasting, and such fasting does not serve the end of the spirit, not only to
make fasting to be religion, to which it does but minister, but to call that
fasting which they who first began Lent would call feasting and luxury, and to
make that to be essential to that fast, and that fast necessary to salvation in
the ordinary way of necessity, is not only to teach for doctrine the
Commandments of men, but to make the impotent, fantastic and unreasonable
devices of men to become Commandments.

5. That this may be an exact parallel with the practice of the Pharisees in
that folly which our Blessed Savior reproved; 20.
the Commandment does so little regard the true end of fasting, and that
fasting so little advance the use and interest of any virtue, that they spend
themselves even in the circumstances of some circumstances, and little devices
of superstition, taking care not to eat a turnip if boiled in a vessel in which
flesh was put, not to cut their bread with a knife that had carved flesh, not
to taste it, but to wash their mouth after a little whey or broth, if by chance
it has been touched: which things because they can serve no end of religion,
the law that requires such things must needs be foolish or superstitious; it
must either play with men's consciences as with a tennis-ball, or intimate some
pollution and unholiness at that time to be in the flesh, or else at least must
pretend to greater strictness then God does in the observation of his positive
laws; and it certainly introduces the greatest tyranny in the world, destroys
peace, and is the most unwarrantable of all the follies which can be incident
to the wiser part of mankind, I mean to them that govern others.

I will not instance in the ridiculous and superstitious questions which they
make about the keeping of this Ecclesiastical law; 21.
as whether it be a dinner or a supper if we eat after Even-song said at high
noon; whether a mornings draught does break the Ecclesiastical fast; whether a
man may eat a bit of bread with his drink, and yet be a good son of the Church;
whether a Cook that dresses meat for sick persons may lawfully lick his
fingers; whether he that eats one bit of flesh, sins anew if he eats another;
and whether or no he may not at the same rate eat flesh all the Lent after;
whether the wet nurse may eat flesh, because her baby may have good milk;
whether it be lawful to eat birds and fowls, because they were produced out of
the water: which doughty reason did encourage some to do it, of whom Socrates
speaks, Lib. 5. hist. cap. 21.
and is mentioned by Peter Comestor the Master of the scholastical history.
Which questions, if they that make them be in their wits, and think other men
are so too, they must needs believe that the keeping of Lent is so sacred, so
principal a point of religion, so great a service of God in the very letter and
body, in the crust and outside of it, that the observation of it must consist
in a mathematical point: it is like the Decalogue, the very letters of which
are numbered; and if a hair be missing, religion suffers diminution: and which
of all these it be, yet in every one of them they do what the Pharisees did
and what Christ reproved in them, and therefore forbids in all men, they teach
for doctrines the Commandments of Men.

6. To return to the particular of the Rule, 22.
They make an Ecclesiastical law, which is of a relative use and nature, to be
periodical and perpetual, which is unreasonable, and may be sometimes unjust,
and very often uncharitable, and therefore not the fit matter of an
Ecclesiastical law. For this is certainly the greatest deletery of the liberty
of Christian Churches, and a snare to Consciences, and is of it self apt to
introduce superstition and the opinion of direct religion into the discipline.

But this is to be understood of such laws which are intended for discipline,
23.
and are 1. a burden, and 2. of a nature relative to the future, and 3. of an
alterable use. For if a law were made that every man at a certain time of the
year should do a certain discipline to mortify his lust, it were a foolish
law; for the man at that time, it may be, needs it not, or he has another
remedy, or he is sufficiently contrite for his sins, and does his penance by
internal sorrow, or it may be he cannot at that time mourn, or it may be the
cause is altered, or a greater cause intervenes, and that ought to be served,
and therefore not this, for if you serve both, you tire obedience, and make
religion to be a burden: but which is most of all, a law of burden if it be
perpetual, makes the willing to be slaves, and tempts the unwilling to be
rebels; and because it is intended to minister to things contingent and
infinitely alterable, if the law be not so too, it must pass into an opinion of
being a Divine worship and religion, or else into more then an opinion and
imagination of tyranny. Add to this, that laws of burden are always against
charity, if they be not done in great necessity, or not effective of a good
greater then the evil; and therefore to impose such laws with a perpetual
obligation upon Churches, when it cannot be of perpetual use, and at all times
good, or just at such times necessary, is against the equity and charity of
that power which Christ entrusted in the hands of them whom he made stewards of
his household, feeders of his flock, and Fathers of his family.

But if the laws be relative to what is past, 24.
and no burden, but matter of ease or benefit, or comes from a perpetual cause,
or that which is unalterable, then the law may be such which will be
perpetually consented to, and kept for ever. Thus the Catholic Church keeps the
Lords day, not by an everlasting ordinance, but by a perpetual consent, and for
a never-failing reason; and that which makes it necessary now to keep that day,
and will do so for ever, is because the reason of it is always the same; and
in this case that which was fit at first, will be so at last, and all the way:
and things are in that constitution and conjunction, that no man can despise
that day, without being careless to return thanks for the resurrection of
Christ, and to separate a just portion of his time to the more solemn service
of God. But for all this, this is not a perpetual law imposed upon all
Churches; for God did not impose it, and no man has power to do it; for no
man's power can last longer then his life: and therefore no Bishop can oblige
his successors by any Canon, without the Civil power supervenes and fixes that
law by continuation. And therefore although God did enjoin the Jews an annual
fast for ever, and although the Rulers of the Jews did add some more, and they
were observed for ever: yet this will not infer that therefore now this may be
done in a law of the Church. For God who is a lawgiver does abide for ever,
and therefore his laws are to remain as long as he please: and the Rulers of
the Jews had both the powers, Civil and Ecclesiastical, conjunct, and they by a
current legislation still caused their fasts to be observed; but yet the
succeeding ages had been at liberty, and the Sanhedrim might have changed those
solemn days, but that they were established by Prophets and by those whom they
believed to speak the will of God: all which make their case special, and not
to be drawn into example and warranty in the sanction of Ecclesiastical laws in
the Christian Church. * To which let this be added, that the Jews might keep
and observe a religion of days and meats, and it not being against the analogy
of their manner of serving God, their Rulers had an equal power to make laws in
the difference of days and meats, as in any other matter whatsoever. But the
laws of the Church must minister to piety and holiness, and to nothing else;
and they must be exacted with prudence and charity, and in no other manner; and
they must be obeyed in love and liberty, and by no other measures: but the day
or the meat must ever be the less principal in the constitution; they may be
the circumstances, but no part of the Religion, and therefore cannot be
perpetual; but just as a Venice glass may, that is, if there be nothing to
break it, it may abide for many ages, but every thing that strikes it can break
the glass, and every requisite of reason or charity can put a period, or take
off the necessity of that portion in the law, which because it must be less
principally regarded, must accordingly be imposed and exacted, but cannot be
universal and perpetual.

The result of these considerations is this; 25.
1. Ecclesiastical laws may be made by particular Churches, to prevail in their
own governments, and to pass on their own subjects, but may not by one Church
be imposed upon another, much less from one to pass upon all.

2. Ecclesiastical laws may be made and continued by any authority so long as
that power lasts, 26.
and so long as the reason of the law does last: but it can be no longer a law
then it has influence from the remaining power who is to establish it
according to the remaining usefulness.

3. All Ecclesiastical laws in the matter of meats and drinks and days must be
wholly relative to religion, 27.
and the effect of graces and proper duties, and must not at all be imposed
with any regard to themselves, but to the ends of their ministry, and must
live and die according to the nature of Relative beings: but cannot be
perpetual, but where neither the cause nor the subject alters.

4. All Ecclesiastical laws must be imposed with liberty: 28.
not with liberty of the subjects to obey or not to obey, but with the liberty
of the whole Church, to change them or to continue them, to exact or to relax
them, to bind or to loose, as may best stand with prudence and charity, with
the interests of virtue or the good of the subject.

5. Ecclesiastical laws must serve religion, 29.
but must never pretend to be religion or a direct service of God. It is true
that all religious laws of our just superiors rightly imposed in order to any
virtue are adopted into the society of that virtue; as a law of fasting does
also enjoin a duty of temperance; a law of Christian festivity, in order to our
joy in God, and praising his Name, and paying him thanks, promotes all these
graces, and therefore he that keeps that day to these purposes, besides his
obedience, does an act of all those graces. Yet it is to be observed that the
observation of these laws can never formally be reckoned to be actions of those
graces; they are but ministeries and instruments, and they not necessary, but
useful only: and therefore he that does not observe that day, though it may
be he sins against obedience, yet he is not to be judged as if he were
intemperate, or unthankful, or unmindfull of God's benefits; because though
these appointments are made for the services of these graces, yet these are not
the adequate ministeries of them, they may be done by other ways at other
times, and they may at that time be omitted without any neglect of such graces.
If there be a just cause to omit the observation, then the omission is neither
disobedience, nor intemperance, nor unthankfullnesse: but if there be no just
cause, it is disobedience; and may be any of the other as it happens, but is
not certainly so. But though in these respects to obey an Ecclesiastical law
may be a doing an act of virtue together with the obedience, and so a serving
of God; yet because it is only in regard of the concomitant act of virtue,
which is served by the law, if that law do not serve that virtue, but by any
cause be destitute of it is purpose, that external action which the law enjoins
is so far from being a service of God, that if it be urged imperiously, or
acted for it self, and delighted in upon the Natural account, it enters into
religion, with which it has nothing to do, and so passes into superstition.

6. Ecclesiastical laws if by any means they be taught for doctrines and
Commandments of God, 30.
they become unlawful in the imposition, though the actions of themselves be
lawful; that is, they are unlawful laws, and do not bind the Conscience, for
they are such things in which no man can have authority, for they are a direct
destruction to Christian liberty, which no man ought to take from us. If they
once pretend to a necessity besides the equal necessity of obedience, they do
not oblige the subjects of any government; but if they pretend to a necessity
of obedience, they do not oblige any Churches besides that whose Governors
have made the law.

RULE XVIII. Ecclesiastical laws of Ceremonies and circumstances of external
observances do not bind the conscience beyond the cases of Contempt and
Scandal.
THat is they bind only in public, 1.
and not in private; they bind not for any thing that is in themselves, but for
something that is better then themselves; they bind, not for our own sakes, but
for their sakes that look on: and therefore when no body looks on, when they
have no end to serve, when they do no good, when they signify nothing, they
cannot bind at all; for whatsoever binds only for this reason, does not bind
at all when this reason is not. The Church of England commands that when the
Priest says the Responsory after the Creed at Morning or Evening Prayer, he
shall stand up: the purpose of it is, that the people who are concerned to
answer may the better hear: but if the prayers be said in private, none being
by, or it may be two or three that kneel near him, it is ridiculous to suppose
that the Priest sins if he kneels on to the end of those ejaculations. In some
cases he that officiates is bound to turn his face to the West, or to the body
of the Church; but if there be no body in the Church, but the Clerk at his
side, why he should do so, there is no reason to be given, and therefore it
cannot be supposed to be bound upon him by the law of the Church.

For it is highly considerable, 2.
that in these laws of Ceremonies it is otherwise then in laws which concern
the matter and instances of Divine Commandments. Because the laws of
Commonwealths can change actions of themselves indifferent into the order of
virtue and vice, if they be of the same matter and naturally capable: as when
Incest is defined to be a forbidden conjunction of persons too near in blood,
the law by forbidding the marriage of Uncle and Niece for that reason, can make
that to be incest: and killing can by the law be made murder when it is
forbidden, or not to be murder when it is justly commanded. Thus if there be a
law made that corn or gold-lace shall be sold at a certain price, the law which
is the measure of justice in contracts makes that price to be the instance of
justice, and what exceeds it to be unjust, if it be a just law. Because these
actions lying next to the instances of the Divine Commandment, and placed
there as outer guards to Gods Law, and being naturally the same actions, when
the prohibition comes from a just authority, then it is made to be a sin by the
law, and that sin by the nature and participation of the same reason. For he
that kills his adulterous daughter where it is permitted, does do the natural
act of killing as much as he that kills his Father; but where there is no law
against it, but by law she is sentenced to death, and that without solennities,
there is no (...), and therefore no (...) it is not a sin unless it be the
transgression of a law. So that the natural capacity and the supervening law
together make up the action to be such a sin. But now this thing can never be
in Ecclesiastical laws of ceremonies and rules of order: for they are not in
their matter and in their own nature like to religion or next to it; and
nothing can be religion but that service which God has chosen of himself, and
that which is naturally and internally so, as glorification of God, loving him,
obeying him, praying to him, believing him, and such other inward actions which
are taught to us by our natural reason and our prime notices of God. But
external actions and ministeries are then capable of being made religion when
God appoints them, and not else, because God will be worshipped externally as
he is pleased to appoint, Contra Celsum lib. 7.
according to that saying of Origin, Nemo qui oculis animae cernit, alio modo
Deum colit quam sicut ipse docuit, That man is blind in his reason, that will
worship God otherwise then he himself has taught.

* This only, 3.
The Church can adopt actions into religion which God has made ready, and
which he has prepared and fitted for religion; such as are free-will-offerings
and Counsels Evangelical: for when any man does choose to do any act which God
has recommended and not enjoined, this is religion; but this is only in such
things which are real graces appointed by the Divine law, and the instance
only is left undetermined: and how far the Church can command any of these
things, I shall afterward inquire; but for the present, these things can pass
into religion, because God has so prepared them.

But 2dly, 4.
external observances can become religion, if they be the outward act of an
inward grace; as giving money to the poor, worshipping God with the body; that
is, when they naturally express what is conceived and acted within, not when
they come from without: a commandment of man may make these actions to be
obedience, but they are made religion by the grace within, or not at all. Thus
fasting can be an act of religion, when it is naturally consequent to
penitential sorrow, and the hatred of sin: but when it is enjoined by men, then
it is but an instrument, and may be separate from all religion, and may be no
act of repentance, and can be made to be religion by no man but by the nature
of the thing.

But 3d^y, 5.
Ceremonies and rituals and gestures and manners of doing outward actions
cannot be made to be any thing but obedience: they are neither fitted by God,
as Counsels Evangelical are, nor yet by nature, as the outward actions of
virtue are, to become religion; nay they are separated from being religion by
the word of God, by the coming of Christ, by his death upon the Cross; and
days and meats and drinks, and carnal purities, Coloss. 2.
and external observances are now both by God and by nature removed far from
being any thing of the Christian, that is, of the Spiritual religion.

The consequent of these things is this, 6.
When a law is made, it binds either by the natural goodness of the thing, or
by the order and usefulness of it is ministry to something else, or only by
the authority. Ceremonies cannot be of the first sort, but of the second they
may, and then they oblige only so long as they can minister to the end of their
designation, but no longer. For if that be the only reason of their obliging,
then they oblige not when that reason is away. Now because they are only made
for order and decency, both which are relative terms, and suppose an action
done in public, there is no need, no use of them in private. But because even
after the reason ceases, the authority has reasons of it is own to be regarded,
and things that are not binding by their absolute or relative nature, may yet
bind by the authority and for the reverence of that, till there be opportunity
to annul the law, therefore when the reason of the ceremony does cease, or is
useless and operates not at all, we must yet regard the authority, that is, do
it honor, as Samuel did to Saul. If the thing it self be of an intrinsic
goodness, though made necessary only by the positive command, then it is to be
done for it self, and in private as well as public: * but if it be only a
relative ministry, then it has no reason beyond that relation; and if that
relation be public, it binds only in public: * but if it be only matter of
obedience, and have no reason else either absolute or relative, then the law
does not bind the Conscience, but even then we are bound so to comport our
selves that the authority may not be despised nor offended; that is, she is not
to be slighted or reproached, nor publicly disregarded; though for the
obedience it self in this case there is no absolute obligation, but the
not-obeying is to be conducted humbly, inoffensively, prudently and
regardfully. The reason of these things is this, because the Church makes no
absolute laws; she makes them for good ends, and beyond that she has no
authority: her legislative is wholly a ministry of grace and godliness, not of
empire and dominion. For the difference is this, Civil laws oblige in public
and in private, for reason and for Empire, when the cause ceases, and when it
remains, when the breach is scandalous, and when it is not scandalous: But the
Canons of the Church oblige only for their reason and religion, for
edification and for charity, when the thing is useful to others or good in it
self; but the authority it self being wholly for these purposes, is a ministry
of religion, but has in it nothing of Empire, and therefore does not oblige
for it self and by it self, but for the doing good, and for the avoiding evil:
and this is that which is meant by the cases of contempt and scandal.

These are the negative measures of ECCLESIASTICAL laws. The positive measures
are these.

RULE XIX. Ecclesiastical laws must be charitable and easy, and when they are
not, they oblige not.
WHen Ecclesiastical laws were conducted and made by the Spiritual power, 1.
the Bishops, Rulers of Churches, before the Civil power was Christian, their
laws were either Commandments of essential duty, or of that which was next to
it and necessary for it, or else they were indicted to a voluntary people, and
therefore to be presumed easy and gentle, charitable and useful, or it is not
to be thought the people would have been willing long to bear them. But when
the Civil power was the Ecclesiastical Ruler, and the Commonwealth became a
Church, the Spiritual sword was put into a temporal scabbard, and the Canons
Ecclesiastical became civil laws, though in their matter religious, and in
their original they were Ecclesiastical. Now if the laws be established by the
civil power, they must indeed be just and good; but yet if they be laws of
burden, and contain a load that is supportable, L. Prospicit. ff. qui and a
quibus.
they are to be obeyed. Quod quidem perquam durum est, sed ita lex scripta est,
said Ulpian; the case is hard, but so the law is written: meaning that though
it be hard, yet the law is to be obeyed so long as it is just. But when the
Ecclesiastical law is indicted by the spiritual power, the civil power only
consenting and establishing the indicted Canon, that corroboration adds no
other band to the Canon then that it be obeyed according to the intention of
the spiritual power, only so it becomes a law indeed, but it is a law only as
the Church can intend a law, or desire it to be imposed; that is, what the
Church might reasonably persuade, and fitly enjoin, that so much and no more,
in that manner and no other, the Civil power does corroborate it. For the
Ecclesiastical Canon put into the hands of the civil power and made into a law,
is like the twig of an apple tree grafted into the stock of a thorn; it changes
not the nature of it, but is still an apple: so is the Canon, still it is but
an injunction of the Church, though the Church be enabled temporally to
chastise the rebellious; but still the twig that is so ingrafted must retain
it is own nature, and must be no sowrer then if it grew upon it is own stock; it
must be such as is fit to be persuaded, such which men can be willing to, and
easy under, and of which they shall have no cause to complain: for since the
Church in these things has no power but to exhort and to persuade, and
therefore can enjoin nothing but what can be reasonably persuaded; she must not
by the aid of the temporal power enjoin those things which are cruel and
vexatious, and such to which no argument but fear can make the subject willing.
The Church when she has temporal possessions, always is a good Land-lady, and
when she makes judgments she meddles not with blood, but gives the gentlest
sentences, and when she is admitted to a legislative, she enjoins a (...) an
easy, a gentle yoke, and when she does not, the subject is concerned to avoid
the temporal evil threatened by the civil power; but not to give obedience to
the intolerable law of the Church, as in that capacity: for unless the law of
the Church be such that good men may willingly obey it, it cannot be enjoined
by the Church, and the Church ought not to desire the civil power to do it for
her: For since she has no power to command in such things where the Divine
authority does not intervene, all the rest is but persuasion; and he that has
power only to persuade, cannot be supposed to persuade against our will: and
therefore matters of intolerable burden are not the matter of Ecclesiastical
laws, because they certainly are against the will of all men, who can serve God
and go to heaven without them.

Not that it is permitted to any man as he please to obey or not to obey the
Ecclesiastical laws; 2.
nor that the spiritual authority so depends upon the consent of every subject,
that he is at his choice whether he will keep it or no: but that he is to obey
willingly; that is, that no more be imposed then what he may be willing to, and
then that he be not disobedient, when if he were not peevish, he ought to be
willing. For this is all that share of Christian liberty which under his just
superiors every single subject can enjoy; he may not break the law when he
please, but when he cannot keep it; not when he is not in the humor, but when
he is not in capacity; not because he will, but because without great evil he
cannot.

I shall give an instance in the Ecclesiastical laws of fasting, 3.
and by an inquiry into their obligation sta^e the sense and intention of this
Rule.

What persons are tied to the observation of Ecclesiastical Fasts, and in what
cases.
To the solution of which question, 4.
first we are to consider to what end the Church enjoins her Fast. For whoever
is involved in that end is also concerned in the law, ordinarily and regularly.
Thus if a Fast be only indicted to suppress incontinence, they who have no
temptation to it, or have a sufficient remedy by which they please God, are not
bound by that law, but in the cases of scandal and contempt. Fasting-spittle
kills a Serpent (says Pierius;) Lib. 14. Hier.
but if a man have a rod in his hand that will do it sooner, that law would be
fantastical that should command him to stay till he could kill the snake with
his fasting-spittle. * But if the Church intends many good ends in the Canon,
any one is sufficient to tie the law upon the Conscience, because for that one
good end it can be serviceable to the Soul: and indeed fasting is of that
nature that it can be a ministry of repentance by the affliction, and it can
be a help to prayer, by taking off the loads of flesh and a full stomach, and
it can be aptly ministerial to contemplation; and if fasting were only for
mortification of lustful appetites, then a virgin might not safely fast in
public, lest she fall into the suspicion of incontinence, or be exposed to the
bolder solicitations of the young men. Now because every one is concerned in
some one or more of these ends of fasting, all people are included within the
circles of the law, unless by some other means they be exempted.

But they are exempted from it who are sick and weak, 5.
spent with labor, or apt to be made sick, or hindered in their employment:
Nisi quem infirmitas impedierit, C. quadragesima. de consecr. did. 5. and cap.
2.. cum autem de observe. jejun.
says the Canon law; all are bound to keep fasting days but such who are
hindered by infirmity, -- seu
Dura valetudo inciderit, seu tarda senectus,
any bodily infirmity, whether of age or sickness, weakness or disease.
Concerning which, if the infirmity be evident, there is no question, for the
law does except such persons in the very sanction, or public and authentic
interpretations, and common usages. Women with child, children and old persons,
the sick and the traveller, the weary and the weak, the hard student and the
hard labourer, the poor man and the beggar, these are persons which need not
ask leave, for the law intends not to bind them. Now those that are but
probably so, that is, not well, apt to be sick, suspected with child, not very
weary, these also are within the power of having leave given them, that is,
capable of dispensation; that is, it may be declared that the law intends not
to bind them at all in such cases. So that upon this account none are bound but
the lusty and the lazy, the strong and the unimployed.

Now in these things there is no other certainty but what is set down in the
laws of every Church respectively, 6.
save only this, that in all Churches where such laws are used, they are ever
expounded by the measures of great Charity and Remission, excepting in such
places where they place Religion in external observances; and yet there also
they pretend great gentleness when they are charged with want of it by their
adversaries, as is to be seen in Albericus Pius his Lucubrations against
Erasmus.

But I consider that the laws of fasting are therefore very sparingly to be
imposed, 7.
when there are so many causes of being excused; and not at all but upon great
occasions, and particular emergencies: and when they are, the injunction is to
be so made, as fewest may be excused, and none may desire it but those who
cannot help it: and the evil of the contrary is very visible and apparent in
the fierce and decretory injunctions of the long Lenten fast, the burden of
which is so great, that they who do not think it religion, or a law of God, or
a part of the Divine worship, use all the arts they can to be eased of the
load, cosening the law, and easing themselves, and studying a new Cookery, and
destroying the end of the law by keeping the letter, and buying dispensations,
and complaining of the burden, and being troubled when it comes, and glad when
it is over. A law of fasting is very imprudent and very uncharitable when it
becomes, like Rehoboam's thigh, too big and too heavy for all the people: and
what good is done by such fasting, that could not with more ease and more
charity be acquired by other instruments or a better conduct of this? Lib. 1.
Fast.
Mantuan complained with great sorrow and great reason in this particular.
Adjungunt etiam primi jejunia veris;
Quae nisi sint servata, volunt nos ire sub orcum.
Aspice quam duris, aiunt, fraenata capistris
Gens electa fuit. Lex Christi aeterna, nec unquam
Cessatura, sinus (dicunt) sine tendat in amplos,
Ut sit conveniens, habilisque, and idonea toti
Humano generi, non importuna senectae,
Non onerosa inopi, non importabilis aegro.
The laws of religion should be, like the yoke of Christ, light and easy,
fitted to the infirmities and capacities of all men; for let them be never so
easy and delightful, we shall be too much tempted to neglect them, though the
laws themselves be no temptation to disobedience.

This is certain, 8.
that in a law of so great burden in it self, and so severely imposed, and so
fiercely punished, and so religiously accounted of, and so superstitiously
conducted, the conscience is so certainly made restless by the scruples of the
conscientious persons, the arts of the crafty, the ignorance of the over-busy,
and the witty nothings of the idly-imployed, that the good which accidentally
may be brought to some by it cannot pay for the many evils which it regularly
produces in others: and that law of fasting can never be so good as the peace
which it disturbs. For if you pretend your youth as a just excuse from the law
of Lent, you shall be told, that the Fast consists in the quality of the meat,
and in the singleness of the meal, and in the time of taking it; and that
though you are excused from eating fish or pulse, yet you must eat but once; or
if you do eat at night, yet you must not eat in the morning; or if you do,
yet you are to be advised how much can be called a meal. And then you are not
sure whether you are to fast at the beginning, or not till the consummation of
your fourteenth year: and when that is out, if the understanding be so little
as not to understand what and why and how, you fast to no purpose; and if
sooner you do understand, it may be you are obliged in conscience, though not
punishable by law. * If you be old, yet some old men are lusty and strong; and
the Church does not intend that the age alone, but that the infirmity should
excuse: and because this infirmity is divisible, it is not every infirmity that
will do it; and it may be you are an easy and too gentle a judge in your own
case; therefore you must ask; and who shall tell you? Cajetan and Navarre,
Filliucius and Gregory Sayr, Diana and Azorius understand no physic; and they
can tell you something in general of the law, but nothing absolutely in your
case: if you will, be at the charge and go to a Physician: for it may be if
you live in the Country, you have a learned man within ten or twenty miles, or
it may be forty, and upon all occasions you may know of him whether your case
requires ease; or it may be it ^equires leave this day, but you cannot have
your answer so soon, and the case will alter by to morrow; lib. 1. Aphor. 13.
and Hippocrates said, that senes facillime ferunt jejunium, old men bear
fasting better then young men: and though Cardan has upon that Aphorism spoken
according to his usual manner many ingenious things, yet whether you will put
your Conscience upon him or no is a material consideration. * But then if you
be sick, you must know whether fasting can consist with your condition: for not
every sickness can excuse you from the holy fast of Lent; or if you may not
eat fish, yet you may be obliged to the single refection, or to the time. But
that which is of material consideration is, that though you be not well, yet it
may be your fasting will do you no great hurt, and if it be but little, it
must not be stood upon; for fasting is intended to be an affliction of the
body, and therefore you must not be too hasty to snatch at ease and liberty.
But however, if you will inquire of learned men, you may have from the
Physicians some twenty or thirty rules by which you may guess when and in what
diseases you are excused from the quality of the diet, when you are dispensed
in the time, when in the frequency, when you must exchange one for the other:
and to this purpose you may inform your Conscience by reading de Victus (...)
in acut.
Vallesius, Cardan, Hollerius, Zacutus Lusitanus, Paulus Zacchias, in Specim.
m^d. Christ. lumin. 2.
Alphonsus a Fontech, lib. 1. Var. lect. c. 18.
Cognatus, libell. de Esu carnium.
Arnoldus de Villanova, Comm. in Isaac de di^^a particul.
Petrus Hispanus and his Author Isaac; and if you can find them agree, and that
your case is described, and their rules be rightly applied, and the particulars
be well weighed, and the judgment not biased by ease and fear and too great a
care of your health, you might do well, if it were not for one thing; and that
is, that Physicians are not to be trusted, for they will speak excellent reason
for the securing of your health, but they think they are not to answer
concerning the state of your soul; and therefore they lean too much upon the
wrong hand for your satisfaction, especially because Lent falls in the spring
aequ^nox, in which we are very apt to sicknesses. * But then if we pretend to
be excused by reason of labor and travel, every man must judge for himself:
and yet there are in this a great many things to be considered; for it must be
a considerable diminution of our strength, and a great inanition of spirits
that can dispense with us in this so great a law: but how great that must be,
if we be judges, we shall be too favorable; if others judge, they cannot tell;
and if we fear to be too gentle to our selves, we may be too rigorous, and by
the laws of fasting break the laws of charity. But then it may be our labor is
to come, and it will be necessary that we lay in stowage beforehand, lest we
faint by the way. And it is a great labor for a man to hunt all day, or to
manage the great horse, -- leporem sectatus, equoque
Lassus ab indomito: vel si Romana fatigat Horat. sermon. lib. 2. Sat. 2.

Militia assuetum Graecari, seu pila velox
Molliter austerum studio fallente laborem.
A little thing will weary a soft person, and a long sport will tire a strong
man: and my not these put in their plea for a pleasant or an early meal? for
hungry men will plead hard. And the labor of the mind is also a great
weariness to the bones; and who shall tell me how long I must study before I
may be allowed not to keep the punctualities of Lent? for the thinking man must
be fed tenderly and furnished with finer spirits. But then who shall come into
this license is worth inquiring; whether not only the hard Student, but the
Preacher that speaks long, and thinks little; whether Schoolmasters,
Advocates, Orators, Judges, for every one would be glad of a little liberty:
and if the bodily labourer shall be excused, whether all trades that sit long,
and work easily, as Shoomakers, Tailers, Glovers, Book-binders may pretend to
an exemption; for though Azorius is so kind as to except most of these, yet
others do not. And what shall the poor man do? his rule is commonly to eat
when he can get it; and if he be at a friends house must he refuse to eat,
because it is not his time? or must he starve, because there is nothing but
flesh? Unde fames homini vetitorum tanta ciborum est? Certainly he can hardly
be tied to the measures and rules of eating Ecclesiastically, that every day is
in dispute whether he shall or shall not have something that he may eat
naturally. But yet he is to inquire whether he be tied on those days to fast
when he can be provided for: and it would also be known whether a poor man is
not tied to refuse flesh and require fish where it can be had; and whether he
is not bound first to spend the fragments of his fish-basket before his bits of
flesh, and keep them only for necessity; and whether he may be secretly
pleased that he has that necessity put upon him that he has flesh but no
fish. There are also some hundreds of questions more that might be considered;
some are pleasant cases and some are sour, some can be determined and some
cannot. But the great case of Conscience in this whole affair is, What great
good that is which this law of Lent thus conducted can effect, which can no
other ways be effected, and which can be greater then the infinite numbers of
sin, and doubtings, and scruples, and fears, and troubles, and vexations, and
sicknesses, and peevishness, and murmur, and complaints, and laborious arts of
excuse, and cheating the law, and slavery, and tyranny, occasioned and effected
by it.

For although fasting is not only an excellent ministry to some parts of
religion, 9.
but of health also, Accipe nunc victus tenuis quae, Horat. Sermon. l. 2. sat. 2.
quantaque secum
Afferat: imprimis, vale as been --
yet all the world knows that long fasting is the most destructive thing in the
world to our bodies, and breeds diseases sharper and more incurable then
fulness and intemperance; and therefore the Canon law C. non dico. etc. non
me^^ocriter. de cons^^cer. did. 5.
forbids a fast of two or three days, and a fast beyond our strength. Therefore
it is certain that the Church cannot command a long fast: and therefore in the
beginning of the custom of Lent it was but a fast of one day, or two at most,
eating at night. And although this fast was then a fast of liberty, and
permitted to every ones choice; yet it might be enjoined in every Government,
according to the fore-described measures. But that in stead of a fast, the
Church should prescribe a diet, an ill diet, not only unpleasant, but
unwholesome, and that with so much severity, and with so much danger, and so
many snares, is no exercise of that power which Christ has given her, but of
that power which is usurped, ill gotten and worse administered. It is against
the law of charity, and therefore ought not to be a law of the Church; that men
be tied for forty days together to keep from their usual diet, not to be
temperate, but to be vexed and ruled, this I say is uncharitable, and therefore
unlawful. Hoc hic quidem homines tam brevem vitam colunt, Pseudol. Act. 3.
Scen. 2.

Quum hasce herbas hujusmodi in suam alvum congerunt,
Formidolosas dictu, non esu modo:
Quas herbas pecudes non edunt, homines edunt.
As the Cook in the Comedy complained, eating herbs and ill diet makes men to
live such short lives. And what interest of religion is served by eating fish
and nettle pottage, is not obvious to him that has tried it, or can consider
it: Thestylis hanc nimio pultem sale fecit amaram; Mantuan.
Death and sickness is in this pot. And I remember to have heard a Friar, none
of the meanest of his Order, say, that he never kept Lent for a long time
together, but at Easter he had a great fit of sickness: and therefore as the
Canonists say that a future labor and weariness may legitimate the breach of
the strict measures of the law as well as if it be actual and present; so may
the fear of sickness as well take off the obligation as when it is present:
and of this, every man that is not of an athletic health has reason to be
afraid.

But that which relates also very much to the law, 10.
though not so much to us, is this, that all this trouble is for little or no
good: if there be any good in it, it is relative, and transient, and
contingent, and inconsiderable, and without hazard otherwise to be acquired.
For though fools and poor folks are sometimes pressed with the evils of such a
change of diet, yet the witty and the rich can change all that law into the
arts and instruments of pleasure. For the greatest feasts and the greatest
Epicurismes use to be in fish. So he in the Comedy, Mostell. Act. 3. Scen. 2.
Musice hercle agitis aetatem, ita ut vos decet:
Vino and victu, piscatu probo, electili
Vitam colitis;
Wine and choice fish make music at the Table. Casina, Act. 2. Scen. 8.
Nam in re praesenti, ex copia piscaria
Consulere licebit.
They are forbid no sorts, no quantity, no delicacies of fish or wine. And if
this be objected to them, they answer, that fish is less pleasant, less
nutritive then flesh, and therefore wisely chosen by the Church to be the
entertainments of our Lenten table: but if you object, that fish is therefore
not to be eaten because it is unwholesome, breeds ill juices, and afflicts the
body; Vide Paul. Zacchiae Quae. medico-legal. lib. 5. tit. 1. quaest. 2. Lib.
2. de Conviv. cap. 25. vide Athenaeu^ lib. 1. Deip. cap. 25.
they answer, that we are mistaken; that fish is a delicacy; that Alexander the
great was so delighted with little fishes, that he would send them for presents
to his dearest friends; that Suetonius tells the same of Augustus Caesar; that
Bullinger tells that the Rhodians esteemed them* that loved and lived much upon
fish to be gentlemen and well bred, and all others clowns and of a rude palate;
that Julius Caesar at one triumphal feast entertained his guests with 8000
lampryes; that the great feast which Metellus made, and which we find described
in lib. 3. Saturnal. cap. 13
Macrobius, was especially made costly and delicious with the fish there
presented. -- quo pertinet ergo Proceros odisse lupos? He therefore that
objects against the severity and affliction of the Lenten diet, knows not the
arts of feasting; and complains of the Church for a stepmother, when she is
not only kind, but fond also in making such provisions. But if fish be un
wholesome, then eat herbs, but at no hand flesh. Parcite mortales dapibus
temerare nefandis
Corpora: 15. Metamorph.
sunt fruges, sunt deducentia ramos
Pondere poma suo, tumidaeque in vitibus uvae.
Sunt herbae dulces, sunt quae mitescere flamma
Mollirique queant; nec vobis lacteus humor
Eripitur, nec mella thymi redolentia flore.
Prodiga divitias alimentaque mitia tellus
Suggerit, atque epulas sine caede and sanguine praebet.
Carne ferae sedant jejunia. --
For lions and wolves, tigres and bears eat flesh; but God has provided great
variety of other things besides flesh. In some places milk is permitted, in
all, herbs and fruits and broaths: and these are agreeable to a weak stomach;
according to that of S. Paul, Qui infirmus est, olus manducat, He that is weak
eats herbs; de Re cibar. lib. 8. cap. 1.
it is the argument of Bruyerinus.

But I shall make a better use of it if I shall observe that S. 11.
Paul gives it as a note of infirmity, when Christians upon pretenses and
little arguments shall not dare to eat flesh, but in stead of them eat herbs;
they are weak in faith that do it, and do not consider that flesh can as well
be sanctified by the word of God and prayer, as lettice and asparagus: and that
a little flesh and course and common, will better serve the end of fasting, and
that fasting better serve the end of religion, then variety of fish, and a
belly filled with fruits and wind and superstition. All or any thing of this
may be done in discipline, and with liberty: but because it may be unfit for so
very many, and for all at some time, and may produce much evil, and has in it
no more good then to give us cause to say that it may be used, it is a very
unfit thing to become the matter of an Ecclesiastical law, a trouble and danger
to the body, and a great snare to the conscience, which it may entangle, but it
can never cleanse: -- pinguem vitiis albumque nec Ostrea, Horat. ubi supr^^.

Nec Scarus, aut poterit peregrina juvare Lagois.
To eat fish or herbs, are of so little use in religion, they are so trifling
an exercise of the body by restraining the appetite, that besides that all
bodily exercise profits but little, this is so little of that, as it is
conducted, and as it is even in the very permissions of the law, that it is not
worth all this discourse about it; only to rescue the conscience from such
snares and little intanglements is of great concernment. * Fasting is very good
to some purposes, at some times, and to some persons: but laws regard that quod
plerumque est, and therefore in the matter of a periodical and long continued
fast cannot but be uncharitable and unreasonable: and therefore when there is
cause for such injunctions, they are to be pressed with argument and
exhortation, not by Empire and necessity. For supposing the law otherwise
without objection, yet he that fasts against his will, does not serve God; and
therefore externally to be forced to do it, is not a lawful exercise of an
Ecclesiastical power.

This sum is this. 12.
If it be the fast of one day, it may be indicted by our lawful superior, with
the measures of prudence and charity, and according to the needs of the Church.
* But if it be the fast of many days together, it is a burden, and therefore
not to be exacted, lest it be uncharitable. But if there be a law, the law
ought to bend in all the flexures of reason and a probable necessity, and to
prevail only by the reason of the thing, not the force of a command. * But if
it be no fast, but a change of diet, it is of so little profit, that it will
not recompense the trouble, and will turn into superstition, and will more
minister to evil then to good, and is not properly the matter of an
Ecclesiastical law, and the Bishop has no power to make a law in this matter:
it is not for God, and it is not for religion, but for vanity, or Empire, or
superstition.

This only I am to add in order to the determination of our conscience in the
practice of this inquiry, 13.
That if there be a law made by the Civil power for the keeping Lent, then it
is for civil regards, and the law is not for superstition, but therefore to be
observed as other civil laws are, with the same equity and measures of
obedience; of which I am to give further accounts in the Chapter of the
Interpretation and diminution of humane laws. But if it be still an
Ecclesiastical law, indicted and suggested by the spiritual power, and only
corroborated by the civil power, and for them efformed into a law, then it
obliges the Conscience no otherwise then it did and ought to do in the hands
of the spiritual power; that is, only when the law is for good, and not for
evil, with Christian liberty, and not a snare, when it is fit to be persuaded
and ought to be complied with, then and there it may be indicted, and is to be
obeyed accordingly.

RULE XX. Ecclesiastical laws must ever promote the service of God and the good
of Souls; but must never put a snare or stumbling block to Consciences.
THE holy Primitives in their laws and actions ever kept that saying of the
Apostle in their eye and in their heart, 1.
(...), 1. Cor. 14. 26.
Every word, every action must be (...), for the use of edifying: Let all
things be done for edification: Ephesians. 4. 29.
and therefore much more must laws, which have a permanent causality and
influence upon the actions of the Church; for therefore they are either a
permanent good or evil.

When the Churches had hope of converting the Jews by gentleness and compliance
in some outward rites, 2.
the Church made laws of combination and analogy, of continuation and
correspondence in some observances. Thus the Apostles at the Council of
Jerusalem indicted the abstinence from blood, as being infinitely offensive to
the Jews, and apt to estrange their hearts from the whole religion of them that
eat it. And therefore the law was made that it might cement the stones of the
Spiritual building, Vide ult. caput 2. libri.
and the Jews and Gentiles might make the two walls of the Church. But when the
Jews refused to come in, and excepting the remnant only (of which S. Paul
speaks) which were saved, the rest grew to hate the Lord of life, then the
Church considered that to use their liberty would be for the edification of the
Church of the Gentiles; and then they remembered that Moses had given the Jews
flesh, but forbad them blood, but Christ gave us both flesh and blood, and
forbad neither; and therefore they returned to that use of it that was most for
charity and liberty, instruction and edification. * Upon the same account,
though the Church was kind to the Jews, yet they would take care not to offend
any of her children by retaining words that might abuse them into a good
opinion of their religion; and therefore at first they abstained from the name
of Priest, and Temple, as is to be observed. ^n Justin Martyr, Ignatius and
Minutius. * At the first the Christians kept the Jewish Sabbath; but in the
Council of Laodicea it was forbidden; and in the 70th Canon of that collection
which goes under the name of the Apostles, Can. 29.
which was published much about the same time, the Christians are forbidden [
neque jejunia cum Judaeis exercere, nec festos dies agere, nec quae in ipsorum
celebritatibus Xenta mittuntur accipere] to keep the Jewish fasts, or feasts,
or to receive their presents, viz. of unleavened cakes which upon those days
they usually sent abroad. And the reason of the prohibition is, lest Judaisme
should be valued, and lest Christians be scandalized at such compliance, as
Zonaras and Balsamo note upon that Canon of the Laodicea^ Council, but is more
fully discoursed by Constantine upon the keeping of Easter, Lib. 3. cap. 17.
as Eusebius reports in his life.

To this end all Laws and Canons must be made; 3.
not only for that great reason, because the end of the Commandment is
charity, and of all Ecclesiastical government is the building up the Church in
love; Ephesians. 4. 16.
but because the Church has no power to make laws which are not for
edification: and this the Apostle testifies twice in one Epistle using the same
words; 2 Corin. 10. 8.
that the power and authority which the Lord had given to him, was for
edification, 2 Cor. 13. 10.
not for destruction. * And this is not only so to be understood, that if the
Church makes laws which are not for edification, she does amiss; but that she
obliges not, her laws are null, and do not bind the Conscience. For it is
otherwise here then in civil laws: right or wrong the civil constitutions bind
the body or the soul; but because the verification of the laws of the Church is
in the hands of God, and he only materially and effectively punishes the
rebellious against this Government, it is certain he will do only according
to the merit of the cause, and not verify a power which he has forbidden. But
in the civil Courts there is a punishment that is exterminating of afflictive,
which can punish them whom God will finally absolve. Therefore it is that when
the Church does any thing beyond her commission, she does no way oblige the
Conscience, neither actively nor passively: the Church punishes no man
temporally, and God will not either temporally or eternally afflict those who
do not obey there where he has given no man power to command. And this is
greatly to be observed in all the cases of Conscience concerning Ecclesiastical
laws. If we understand where the spiritual power can command, where she can
exhort and ought to prevail, we have found out all the measures of our
obedience. But if she goes beyond her commission, she hurts none but her self;
for she has nothing to do with Bodies, and our Souls are in safe hands. And
the case is much alike, in case the spiritual law be bound by the civil power:
for the King when he makes laws of religion is tied up to the Evangelical
measures; and if he prevaricates, he does indeed tie us to a passive obedience,
but the conscience is no otherwise bound; and he is to govern Christ's Church by
the same measures with which the Apostles did, and the Bishops their successors
did and ought to do before the civil power was Christian. For he has no more
power over consciences then they had; and therefore he ought not by the
afflictions of the body to invade the soul: but if he does, (...), he has
only power over bodies, but no authorityover the Conscience. This being
considered, the Rule has effect in the following particulars.

1. 4.
This Rule is to be understood positively and affirmatively; that is, The
Church in all her constitutions must take care that the Church be edified and
built up in some grace or other. But not so, that whatsoever is for edification
she has power to command. The measures and limits of her legislative power I
have already described *; Rule 1, 2, 3, 4* of this chapter.
it must be within those circles: and though other things without them may be
useful, and fit for instruction, or to promote the interest of a virtue; yet
Christ has left them at liberty, and his Church has no power to bind beyond
his commission. They can exhort and persuade, and by consent they can
prescribe; but to the making of a law there is something else required, besides
that it be apt to edify or to instruct. For (besides that it must be of
something placed in her power) it must edify, and not destroy; it must build
up, and not pull down; that is, it must build with all hands, and not pull down
with one.

I instance in the institution of significant ceremonies, 5.
that is, such which are not matters of order and decency, but merely for
signification and the representment of some truth or mystery. Those which are
prudently chosen are in their own nature apt to instruct. Thus the use of
pictures in the Greek and in the Lutheran Churches is so far useful, that it
can convey a story, and a great and a good example to the people that come
thither, and so far they may be for edification. But because these can also and
do too often degenerate into abuse and invade religion, to make a law of these
is not safe; and when that law does prevail to any evil that is not easily by
other means cured, it does not prevail upon the Conscience: and indeed to make
a law for the use of them, is not directly within the commission of the
Ecclesiastical power.

But there is also more in it then thus. 6.
For although significant ceremonies can be for edification to the Church in
some degree, and in some persons; yet it is to be considered whether the
introducing of such things does not destroy the Church, not only in her
Christian liberty, but in the simplicity and purity and spirituality of her
religion, by insensibly changing it into a ceremonial and external service. To
the Ceremonial law of the Jews nothing was to be added, and from it nothing was
to be subtracted; and in Christianity we have less reason to add any thing of
ceremony, excepting the circumstances and advantages of the very ministry, as
time and place, and vessels and ornaments and necessary appendages. But when we
speak of rituals or ceremonies, that is, exterior actions or things besides the
institution or command of Christ, either we intend them as a part of the Divine
service, and then they are unlawful and intolerable; or if only for
signification, that is so little a thing, of so inconsiderable use in the
fullness and clarity of the revelations Evangelical, that besides that it keeps
Christians still in the state of infancy and minority, and supposes them
always learning, and never coming to the knowledge of the truth, it ought not
to stand against any danger or offense that can by them be brought to any wise
and good Christians.

In some ages of the Primitive Church, 7.
and in some Churches, they gave to persons to be baptized milk and honey or a
little wine (as we read in Tertullian and S. Lib. 1. contr. Ma^cion. Dial. adv.
Luciferianos.
Hierom) to signify that those Catechumens were babes in Christ; and in a rebus
to recommend to them that saying of S. Peter, as newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the word. Now besides that this was not usual, to give
hieroglyphics where they had plain precepts, and to give signs of things that
were present and perceived* it was of so very little use, that all Churches
that I know of have laid it aside. It was also a custom anciently, when they
brought the bread and wine to the altar or Communion Table, to present milk
along with it; and this also did signify nutrition by the body and blood of
Christ. Cap. 1.
But the Council of Bracara forbad it upon this reason, quia evidens exemplum
Evangelicae veritatis illud offerri non sinit, because Christ did no such
thing, and commanded no such thing; and therefore nothing is to be added to
those ceremonies which Christ left. * And indeed if the Church might add
things or rituals of signification, then the walls might be covered with the
figures of Doves, Sheep, Lambs, Serpents, Birds, and the Communion Table with
Bread, Wine, Herbs, Tapers, Pigeons, Raisins, Honey, Milk and Lambs, or whatever
else the wit of man or the nature and sense of the mysteries might invent or
import. But concerning such things as these, the judgment of Balsamen is this;
In Can. 82. Synod. 6. in Trullo.
Eos male facere arbitror, qui in Ecclesia columbas emittunt pro Spiritus
sancti adventu; and qui pro illa stella quae novo modo apparucrat, and erat
admirabilis, cereos accendunt; and qui arcanam and salutarem Domini, and Dei,
and Servatoris nostri Jesu Christi generationem thoro strato exprimunt; and
quae sunt supra rationem and mentis cogitationem humanis adinventionibus
describunt. To let a Pigeon fly to signify the coming of the Holy Spirit; to
light up candles to represent the Epiphany; to dress a bed to express the
secret and ineffable generation of the Savior of the world; to which he might
have added, to prepare the figure of the Crucifix, and to bury an image to
describe the great sacrifice of the Cross for the redemption of mankind; these
are things to no purpose: not only for the levity and theatrical gayeties and
representments unbefitting the gravity and purity and spirituality of Christian
religion; but also the manner of teaching these truths by symbolical things and
actions is too low, too suspicious, too dangerous to be mingled with the Divine
liturgies. Christ may as he please consign his own good things that he gives
us; but he consigns no good, and represents none, but what he also gives and
effects in that ministration and under that sign: but a symbolical rite of
humane invention to signify what it does not effect, and then introduced into
the solemn worship of God, is so like those vain imaginations and
representments forbidden in the second Commandment, that the very suspicion is
more against edification then their use can pretend to. But if any such ritual
or ceremony be introduced by custom or by consent, it ought to be used as men
use their champignons; they boil them in three or four waters, cleansing them
both by water and fire before they be used at all; much more before they be
persuaded into a law.

2. But when they can be innocently used, 8.
that is, when they can be made useful, and yet be innocent in themselves, yet
it is to be taken care of, that they may not only by their abuse, or by
mistake, but that by their number they be not troublesome and inconvenient.
This advice I learn from S. Austin, in whose time the Church had gone beyond
her rule and beyond her power in the introducing or permitting to be introduced
very many significant ceremonies; every one of which he could not directly
blame, but yet they were servile burdens, and intolerable besides, by their
number and their load. [ Etiamsi non intelligatur quomodo contra fidem sunt,
tamen quoniam onerant religionem, and servilibus oneribus premunt quam Christus
voluit paucissimis and Epist. 119. cap. 19.
manifestis celebrationeum Sacramentis liberam esse; propterea faciunt ut
tolerabilior sit conditio Judaeorum, qui etiamsi tempus libertatis non
agnoverunt, legalibus tamen sarcinis subjiciebantur, non humanis
praesumptionibus] Although it is not to be understood how these things are
directly against the faith, yet they burden religion, and load with a servile
pressure her whom Christ left free and charged only with the two Sacraments:
therefore our case is worse then that of the Jews; for though they had not a
time of liberty, yet they were charged only with burdens that God imposed, but
not with the presumptions of man: which words are a severe condemnation of such
laws and customs Ecclesiastical. And therefore there is reason to celebrate
and honor the wisdom and prudence of the Church of England, which has in all
her offices retained but one ritual or ceremony that is not of Divine ordinance
or Apostolical practice, and that is, the Cross in baptism: which though it be
a significant ceremony, and of no other use, yet as it is a compliance with the
practice of all ancient Churches, S. Cypriande lapsis: and epist. 56.
so it is very innocent in it self, and being one and alone is in no regard
troublesome or afflictive to those that understand her power and her liberty
and her reason. I said, she has one only ceremony of her own appointment; for
the Ring in marriage is the symbol of a civil and a religious contract, it is a
pledge and custom of the nation, not of the religion: and those other
circumstances of her worship, are but determinations of time and place and
manner of a duty; they serve to other purposes besides signification, they were
not made for that, but for order and decency, for which there is an Apostolical
precept, and a natural reason, and an evident necessity, or a great
convenience. Now if besides these uses they can be construed to any good
signification or instruction, that is so far from being a prejudice to them,
that it is their advantage, their principal end being different, and warranted,
and not destroyed by their superinduced and accidental use. * In other things
we are to remember that figures and shadows were for the Old Testament, but
light and manifestation is in the New; and the Egyptians indeed did teach
religion by Symbolical figures; and in the Eastern Empire their laws were
written with characters and abbreviatures; and in the schools of Plato and
Pythagoras they taught their scholars by numbers and figures; and Diodorus of
Tarsus and Origin brought in an allegorical way of expounding the Scriptures,
and almost wholly, but certainly too much left the literal and simple way of
interpretation, and so do the Perfectionists and some others at this day: but
we that walk in the light of the Gospel, and rejoice in that light, have
received from Christ and his Apostles an easier way of teaching the people; and
are not therefore to return to the elements and rituals of Jews and Pagan
schools. Christ left no sign but two that did also effect as well as signify:
and if they had only signified, and done no other good, we have no reason to
believe that they would have been appointed. But this thing is gone into so
great inconvenience in the Church of Rome, that there are not only so many
ceremonies as do fill a book in folio; but the reasons and significations of
them are offered to us by Durandus, Durantus, Vicecomes and others: but it is
certain that all the propositions and mysteries signified by them are very much
sooner learned then the meaning of those ceremonies. But that those rituals or
circumstances of Liturgy, the actions, gestures, habits, and instruments of
order and decency be also significant, gives an advantage to the things
themselves, and makes their first intended ministry of some more usefulness.

3. 9.
Ecclesiastical laws are not then for edification when they give offense to the
wise and to the good; to the lovers of peace and the obedient to government;
that is, when there is in their nature so much real evil, or so much cause of
jealousy of which the lawgivers cannot purge them, that the good and complying
principles that are in the good subjects cannot be sufficient to give them
entertainment. But of this the lawgivers are to be the Judges; and if they
insist upon them when there is cause enough to lay them aside, they sin against
their Brethren, and they sin against Christ. But the laws themselves do not
bind, if the exceptions against them be just and reasonable and sufficient:
which whether they be or no, the Church-Rulers shall judge at present, and God
shall judge at last: and in the mean time there can be no other rule given, but
that the superior and the inferior endeavor by all ways of prudence and
humility to satisfy one another. A peaceable mind, and willingness to learn,
and a charitable exposition, are the just dispositions of the subjects duty;
and the Governors are to take all the care of souls that can be supposed to be
the duty of spiritual Fathers: and if these things be done, there will be no
hatred, and no reproach, and no schism. But if the question be who shall
yield, the Governors certainly have authority, and the others say they have
reason: the one ought to be pitied, and the other ought to be obeyed; but both
ought to yield: only the subject must yield outward obedience though otherwise
it were not necessary, yet if it be lawful, it accidentally becomes so; and if
it be not lawful, or if he thinks it is not, yet he must be careful he give no
offense, but modestly, humbly and without reproach offer his reasons against
the law. But then the Governors also must yield: they must not consider how
much is possible for them, but how much is fit; they must mediate nothing of
Empire, but much of charity; they must consider which will do most good to the
souls to whom they do relate; they must with meekness instruct the gainsayers,
and with sweetness endeavor to win them, and bear with the infirmities of the
weak, if they can perceive the weakness to be innocent. But if a crime be
mingled with it, and be discerned, it is matter of edification that such
criminals be discountenanced, and the Authority be immured and kept from
contempt. But in these and the like accidents the Spirit of God must be
invocated and implored and endeared, that by his aides the Church may be safely
and wisely and charitably governed. Whoever wants wisdom must ask it of God;
and God will be easily entreated to do good, and to give good things.

This only is to be added, 10.
that according as the matter of the laws is of advantage, or necessity, or
only of convenience more or less, so are the Governors of Churches and Guides
of Souls to be more or less easy in dispensing or annulling their laws: till
then, neither the Rulers nor the subject can by any other means be excused from
sin but by a hearty inquiry, and a sincere humble labor to do their duty to
each other according to the best of their understanding. For if this does not
procure a just compliance, it will at least preserve peace and innocence: and
though the first is best, because it includes these, yet these are the next
best.

4. Ecclesiastical laws that encourage and adorn, 11.
and add degrees and moments and zeal to the service of God, are good
ministeries of edification; and till by excess or accident they convert into
evil, are of themselves fit to minister to religion.

Of Music in Churches.
Thus the use of Psalmody or singing of Psalms, because it can stir up the
affections, and make religion please more faculties, is very apt for the
edification of Churches. The use of Musical instruments may also add some
little advantages to singing, but they are more apt to change religion into
air and fancies, and take off some of its's simplicity, and are not so fitted
for edification. Ad disciplinas aliquid artificiale organum non esse
adhibendum, said Aristotle as he is quoted by Aquinas, 22^. q. 91. art. 2.
Artificial instruments are not fit to be applied to the use of disciplines.
That is, the music of instruments of it self does not make a man wiser, or
instruct him in any thing. This is true, and therefore they are not of
themselves very good ministeries of religion. But vocal music, being natural,
and the action of a man with the circumstance of pleasure, if it come to invest
religion is of great use, as all the experience of man can tell. Instruments
may guide the voice, and so they may be used; but they are but a friends friend
to religion, and can have no near relation to the service of God. Quaest. 107.
ad Orthod.
Justin Martyr asks the Question why the Church uses songs in her Liturgy after
the manner of the unwise and weak under the Law. Answers, (...), That merely to
sing is not proper to weak and ignorant persons, but to sing with inanimate
instruments, with dancings and with timbrels. Therefore in the Churches we do
not use hymns with such organs or instruments. And S. in Psalm. 150.
Chrysostom says that those instruments were permitted to the Jews ob eorum
imbecillitatem for their weakness: and he adds, As the Jews did praise God by
all the instruments of music, so we are commanded to praise him with all our
members, our eyes, our tongues, our ears, our hands. The same thing is also
affirmed by Isidore Pelusiot; lib. 1. Ep. 457.
Since God permitted sacrifices and effusions of blood for their childishness,
it is no wonder that he did tolerate that music which is made by the harp and
psaltery. But then in relation to us, he expounds that Psalm to signify not
literally, but mystically. By the sound of the trumpet he understands the
memory of the resurrection; by psaltery and harp, our tongue and mouth; by
timbrel and dances, our body and mind; by every thing that has breath,] every
spirit: Angels and men are called upon to praise the Lord. But now upon this
account we may easily perceive the difference of vocal from instrumental music
in Churches; this being but typical of that, and permitted then when they knew
not so well to use their voices and tongues to praise the Lord. And certainly
the difference is very material, not only because we find these wise men
saying that instruments were typical and permitted (...) for their tenderness
and infancy; but also because by the voice and tongue we can properly and
directly serve God, and as well by singing as saying, and better, if it be
better; which can never be said of instrumental music: which though I cannot
condemn if it be used as a help to psalmody, yet it must not be called so much
as a circumstance of the Divine service, for that is all can be said of vocal
music. But of this the use is very great, and I will only represent it in the
words of Justin Martyr; ubi supra
(...), simple and plain singing is left in Churches. For this stirs up the
mind with a certain pleasure unto an ardent desire of that which is celebrated
in the song; it appeases the desires and affections of the flesh; it drives
away the evil thoughts of our enemies that are invisible and secretly arise; it
makes the mind irriguous and apt to bring forth holy and Divine fruits; it
makes the Generous contenders in piety valiant and strong in adversity; and it
brings a medicine and remedy to all the evil accidents of our life. S. Paul in
his spiritual armoury calls this the Sword of the Spirit: for it is all of it
the word of God which is celebrated, in the mind, in the song and in the verse:
it drives away evil spirits, and the pious mind is by the songs of the Church
perfected in virtue.] The Eulogy is fair and large: but yet all wise and sober
persons do find fault when the Psalmody which is recommended to us by the
practice of Christ and his Apostles, does sensibly pass further into art then
into religion, and serves pleasure more then devotion; when it recedes from
that native simplicity and gravity which served the affections and holy
aspirations of so many ages of the Church; when it is so conducted that it
shall not be for edification, that is, when it is so made accurate and curious
that none can join in it but Musicians, and they also are not so recitative,
they do not sing and express the words so plainly that they which hear do
understand; for by this means the greatest benefit and use of edification is
lost: as appears in those words of S. Basil, in Psalm.
who when he had highly commended (...) the delight of melody mingled with
heavenly mysteries, he adds, (...), For this cause were the tunes of
harmonious Psalms devised for us, that they which either are young in years, or
novices in instruction, might when they think they sing, have their souls
instructed in the truth. (...), O the great wisdom of our Heavenly master,
which at the same time designs to have us pleased and instructed to perfection
by the singing of Psalms! But in this and all things like this, the rulers of
Churches are to do that which most promotes the end of their institution.
Salus populi suprema lex esto, is a rule which in this affair has no
exception: the salvation of one soul is more then all the interests in the
world besides.

5. Although Counsels Evangelical being observed are greatly for the glory of
God and for the edification of the Church; 12.
yet it is not for edification that they be enjoined, and therefore make not
the proper subject and matter of Ecclesiastical laws: and the reason is, all
that wisdom by which God was moved not to enjoin it, even because all men
cannot take it, and few men will; and the imposition is not (...) a gentle
yoke, but is a perpetual snare. For here is the difference between things
indifferent and Counsels Evangelical, though alike they be left under no
command by God, yet for several reasons: for things in themselves indifferent
are too little for the service of God, and Counsels Evangelical are too great
for our strengths; and therefore God will not be worshipped by those, and he
will not put any necessary upon these: but yet those may be made matter of
humane laws, because they may become useful to many purposes; but Counsels
cannot be made into laws, not because the nature of the things themselves will
not bear the load of a Commandment, but because our natures will not: and
therefore they are to be advised, encouraged, preached, practiced, commended
and rewarded; any thing but enjoined, or made into necessary duty. And indeed,
when we consider that Counsels of perfection are a direct worship of God when
they are performed, and that God only is to make laws of his own worship and
direct religion, and that in these he would make no law, because these should
not become necessary, but the instruments of a voluntary service, that in these
things we might show our love, as in the matter of his laws we show our
obedience; the Church cannot have a power legislative in these, for she is the
mouth of Christ, to command what he commands, to exhort to what he exhorts: and
as the Church cannot make that to be a part of the Divine worship which God
has not made so, and therefore things indifferent may become ministeries and
circumstances of religion, but no parts of it; so neither can any thing be
otherwise a Divine worship then God has made it, and therefore man cannot make
that to be a necessary worship which God has not made so, but has chusingly,
and wisely left to the choice of our will and love. And to this sense was that
saying of Athenagoras in his Apology for the Christians, Deus ad ea quae
praeter naturam sunt neminem movet, God moves no man to things which are
besides his nature; that is, he urges no man to do such things which must
suppose great violence to be done to nature.

But the great matter in this whole affair is, 13.
that Counsels Evangelical when they are not left at liberty become a snare;
not only because they are commonly great violations of our desires, or great
invasions of our interest, and therefore fit only to be undertaken by a very
few and after a long experience of their strength: but also because though they
be excellencies in themselves, yet in some cases and in some conjugations of
circumstances they do destroy another duty; as giving all our goods to the
poor hinders us from making provision for our relatives, a state of coelibate
exposes us to a perpetual ustulation; and then either by our contrary state of
affairs, or by our unequal strengths pull down that building which they
intended to set up. Some Canonists say that the Church forbids a mutual
congression of married paires upon Festival days; upon which days the Jews
thought it a special duty, but the heathens abstained: but how if one be
willing, and the other is not? he shall be put to dispute between two duties,
justice and religion, and shall be forced like him in the Satyr to ask pardon
for doing of his duty; Ille petit veniam quoties non abstinet Uxor Juven. Sat.
6.

Concubitu sacris observandisque diebus.
The Council of Eliberis commanded abstinence from conjugal rights for three or
four or seven days before the Communion. Pope Liberius commanded the same
during the whole time of Lent; quia pene nihil valet jejunium quod conjugali
opere polluitur, supposing the fast is polluted by such congressions: but
because this relied upon an heretical stock, that marriage is unclean, and
scarce to be allowed to be holy, of it self it seems unreasonable: but when
they commanded that those which were married should that day communicate, and
they that did communicate should that night abstain, (but that they had no
power to command any such thing,) the law it self laid a snare for souls, and
if it could have changed the action into a sin, would have engaged most married
paires to become sinners.

Upon the same account, 14.
but upon very much more reason, those Churches which enjoin coelibate to all
their numerous Clergy do unreasonably and uncharitably; they have no power to
make any such law, and if they had, they ought not to do it, upon the account
of this Rule, because they ought not to lay a stumbling block and a stone of
offense in their Brothers way.

Of the Marriages of Bishops and Priests.
Now concerning this, 15.
I shall first consider the purpose and influence of the Rule upon it. For if
this be a stone of offense, if this law be directly and regularly a snare to
consciences, it is certain it is an ungodly law, and of no obligation to the
subjects of any Church. Now this relying upon experience and being best proved
by the event of things, will be sufficiently cleared by the testimony of those
wise persons who have observed the evil, and wished a remedy by annulling the
law.

Aeneas Sylvius, 16.
who was afterward Pope Pius the second, said that the single life of the
Clergy was upon good reason at first introduced, Platina in vita Pii 2^. and
Sabellicus Ennead. 10. lib. 6. in c. cum olim. de cleric. conjugat.
but that for better reason it ought now to be let alone and taken off. And of
the same mind was Panormitan; saying that we are taught by experience that from
this law of coelibate not continency but a contrary effect does follow: for the
Priests do not live spiritually, neither are they clean, but are polluted with
unlawful mixtures to their great sin and shame, whereas it were chastity if it
were a society with their own wife. And indeed the scandal was so great, the
stories so intolerable, their adulteries so frequent, their lusts so
discovered, and the accidents so ridiculous, that the Clergy became the
contempt and jest of buffoons and drunkards, and the pity and shame of wise and
sober men. And it was a strange thing which in the history of the Council of
Trent is told out of Zuinglius, Vide etiam Sleidan. lib. 3.
that writing to the Cantons of the Suisses, he made mention of a law or edict
made by the magistrates their predecessors, that every Priest should be bound
to have his proper Concubine, that he might not ensnare the chastity of honest
women; adding, that though it seemed a ridiculous decree, yet it could not be
avoided, unless the word Concubine were changed into Wife, and the permission
before given to unlawful Concubinate might be given now to lawful Marriage.
And who please to see instances more then enough to verify the infinite
scandals given by the unmarried Clergy generally, may be glutted with them in
Henry Stephen's apology for Herodotus. * But if he be less relied upon, as
being a friend to the complaining side, A^t. 23.
the testimony of Cassander will not so easily be rejected, saying, If ever
there was a time for changing of an old custom, certainly these times require
it; where all the best and most religious Priests acknowledging their
infirmity, and abhorring the turpitude of perpetual fornication, if publicly
they dare not, yet privately they marry. And they that did not, did worse: for
things (says he) are come to that pass, that scarce one in an hundred
abstains from the fellowship of women. And Alvarus Pelagius telling sad stories
of the incests, De Planctu Ecclesiae lib. 2. art. 73.
uncleanness and fornications of the Priests and Friars, tells of their
gluttony, their idleness and ease, their pride and arrogance, their receiving
boys into their houses and cloisters, their conversation with Nuns and
secular women, that it is no wonder there is amongst them so impure a Clergy,
that so many good men have complained, and all have been ashamed of it. And
therefore upon this account we may consider the evils which the Church suffers
by such a law which permits their Clergy to walk in the fire, and commands them
not to be burned; or rather not that so much, but they forbid them the use of
cold water: I say, we may consider the intolerable scandals, the infinite
diminution of spiritual good, the great loss and hazard of souls, when
fornicators and adulterers, paederasts and the impurest persons shall by their
sermons and common talk dishonor marriage, and at the same time put their
polluted hands to the dreadful mysteries, and their tongues to sing hymns to
God, and to intercede for the people, who the night before have polluted the
temples of the Holy Ghost, and defiled them unto the ground. But I had rather
these things were read in the words of other men, and therefore I shall remit
the Reader that would see heaps of such sad complaints to the Via Regia of
Weicelius, to Andreas Fricius Modrevius de Matrimonio presbyterorum, and in his
Cap. 20. lib. 4. de Eccles.
Apology, Controvers. 15. sub initio.
Albertus Pighius, Lib. 7. de just. and jur. q. 6. art. 1.
Dominicus Soto, the Gravam. 75, and 91.
Centum Gravamina Germaniae, De vita spirit. animae, sect. 4. corol. 14. prop.
3.
John Gerson, De invent. ^erum lib. 5. c. 4.
Polydore Virgil. Many more might be reckoned, but these are witnesses beyond
exception; especially if we add that the complaints were made by wise and
grave men many ages together, and that their complaints were of an old canker
in the Church, that could never be cured, because the spiritual Physicians did
see, but would not take the cause away. For this thing we find complained of by
S. Lib. de conversione ad cl^ricos, cap. 20.
Bernard, Rupertus Tuitiensis his contemporary, who compares the Clergy of that
age to the Nicolaitans, whom God hated for their uncleanness, by the author of
the book de singularitate Clericorum attributed to S. Cyprian, by part. 2. tit.
46.
Guilielmus Durandus in his book de modo concilii Generalis celebrandi, S.
Hudelrichus Bishop of Auspurg, who wrote against the constrained single life of
Priests to Pope Nicholas, 183. lect. in Sapient.
Robert Holkot, De corrupto Eccles. statu.
Nicolaus de Clemangiis, De reformatione Eccles.
Petrus de Alliaco, Opusc. contr. Clericos concubinar. concl. ult.
Tostatus, Platina in the life of Pope Marcellinus. The scandal must needs be
notorious and intolerable when so many persons of the engaged party, of the
Roman Church, whence all this mischief came, durst so openly complain, and wish
the annulling of the law of single life to the Clergy, or that the spirit of
purity were given to all that minister to a pure religion, the religion of
Jesus Christ. But the thing it self was it is own indication; it was a black
cloud, and all good men abhorred it: for things came to that pass, that the
Bishops Officials took annuities from all their parish Priests for licenses to
keep Concubines; and if they came to a continent person that told them he kept
none, they replied, that yet he must pay, because he might if he would; as is
reported by diverse of their own, particularly by the Centum Gravamina, and by
Espencaeus in Epist. ad Titum, cap. 1. I end this with the words of Martinus
Peresius, Multis piis visum est ut leges de coelibatu tollerentur propter
scandala, Many pious persons have thought it necessary that the law of Priests
single life should be taken away by reason of the scandals which it brings. For
S. Paul was so curious, even in this very instance, that when he had but
commended the ease and advantages of the single life to all Christians in
regard of the present necessity, 1 Cor. 7.
and the affairs of religion under persecution, he presently claps in this
caution, I speak not this to lay a snare before you, sed vestro commodo: If any
of you find it for your ease or advantage, well and good, but at no hand let it
be a snare.

2. But that which next is considerable is, 17.
that this law is an intolerable burden. So said Paphnutius in the Nicene
Council; he called it (...); an excess of exactness: and therefore when some
Bishops would have had it made into a law, he advised the contrary; Nolite
gravare jugum Ecclesiasticorum, Lay not a load upon the Ecclesiastic state; for
marriage is honorable in all men and the bed undefiled: adding, that all
cannot bear that institution of life that is void of all affections; and as he
supposed, no man should be saved in his chastity if husbands were deprived of
their wives, but that such society was continence and chastity. So Gelasius
Cyzicenus tells the story. In actis council. Nicen. Paris. impress. cap. 3. p.
170. Acta ipsa e Vaticana Bibl. prodieru^^; latina facta sunt ab Alfonso Pisano
and Rober. Balforeo Scoto.
And though Turrian the Jesuit would fain make the world not believe it; yet
he has prevailed nothing. For it is not only related by Gelasius, but by
Hist. l. 1. cap. 4.
Ruffinus, by Socrates, Sozomen, by Aurelius Cassiodorus the Lib. 2. cap. 14.
Author of the tripartite history, by Verb. Paphnutius.
Suidas, Lib. 8. c. 19.
Nicephorus Callistus, and by Cap. Nicena, did. 31.
Gratian. And the Synod did obey the Counsel. And therefore the third Canon of
that Council cannot be understood by any learned man to be a prohibition to the
Clergy to marry: it forbids a Bishop, a Priest or Deacon, (...), to have a
woman introduced, unless she be a Mother, a Sister, or an Aunt, that is one of
whom there can be no suspicion. Mulierem extraneam, a woman that is not a
domestic; so Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Ruffinus, Cap. 122.
Fulgentius Ferrandus, and the Cap. 41.
fourth Council of Toledo expound the word (...). For by that time the opinion
of single life had prevailed both by right and by wrong; for in the three
hundred years of danger and persecution many that were under the cross would
not entangle themselves with secular relations, but fight naked and expedite:
but besides this, the Nicolaitans and the Encratitees and the Manichees and the
Montanists and the Gnostics and the Priscillianists had so disgraced marriage,
and pretended such purities to be in single life, that it was very easy in that
conjunction of affairs to insinuate it into the zeal and affections of some
less-discerning persons, who not being content to have marriage left at liberty
as it was during the whole 300. years, would needs have it imposed: not
discerning in the mean time that amongst those who pretended to the purities of
coelibate, some would yet bring women into their houses; so did the Hieracitae,
as Epiphanius reports of them, pretending they did not marry them, but made
them housekeepers: Haeres. 67. they were their gallants,* (...) apud Epiphan.
haeres. 63.
mere Platonics, or, as they called them, sisters; but they would kiss and
embrace tenderly, and sometimes sleep together, but still would be thought
Virgins, as we find in an epistle of S. Cyprian, Epist. 62.
where he commands such persons to be thrust from the Communion of the
faithful, unless they would either marry, or leave the communion of their women
(for that gloss had not yet invaded the persuasions of men which since has
prevailed: Sacerdos-amplectens mulierem, praesumitur benedicere, If a Priest
embrace a woman, it is to be presumed he only gives her a blessing.) And the
same S. Chrysostom tells of them in some homily he made against those that
brought in such women. Orat. 17, and Orat. 18. edit. Savil.
They were the companions of their single life; so Budaeus renders the word:
but it was usual amongst the Christians of those ages, Virgins to bring in men,
and Monks to bring in women: but these were condemned by the Council of Nice;
who yet did not prevail, but that they who might have wives or husbands had
rather have such friends and companions, which nevertheless gave infinite
scandal and reproach. S. Gregory Nazianzen speaks of them with no good will or
commendations at all, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
, He neither knew how to call them Videat lector qui velit plura de sensu hujus
vocabuli and Canonis, Gabrielem Vasquiu^ in 3. disp. 247. c. 4. and Micha^lem
Medinam lib. 2. de continentia, c. 21. and Georgium Calixtum de conjug. Cleric.
p. 174.
, whether married or unmarried, or between both; but at no hand was that kind
of life to be commended: but much less was it to be endured that men by new
laws should be crushed to death or danger under an intolerable burden. This was
the sense of the Nicene Council. And the same thing was affirmed by Dionysius
Bishop of Corinth to Pinytus Bishop of Gnossus, (...), the heavy yoke of
abstinence ought not to be imposed upon the Brethren. And of this the De vita
spirit, animae u^^ supra.
Chancellor of Paris, a good man and a wise, discourses gravely. Christ our
most wise lawgiver has left rituals or Judicials to their choice of whom he
said, He that hears you, hears me; but yet so that they should know they
are set over others for edification, not for destruction: and that they should
judge according to the law of God, which is the general rule for all the
professors of Christian religion under Christ who is their General Abbat; not
enlarging it, not restraining it, or making it harder then Christ expressed it
when he said his yoke is easy and his burden light. For the Prelates of the
Church have not power to bind their subjects to any things which are not
delivered in the Evangelical law professed by all Christians; they have no
other authority then Abbats have over their Monks, who, according to the
doctrine of S. Thomas and other Doctors, cannot command their Monks any other
thing then what they have professed in their Rule.] Now whether this be a
burden or no will need no inquiry, when there is not in all the laws of God so
much difficulty as in this very thing; insomuch that without a special gift of
God, it is impossible. I need not to prove this tell the sad stories of some
Saints who have fallen foully by the solicitations of their own nature; or how
that youth, in which age many enter into holy Orders, is a state of flames and
danger; that S. Hierom complains of it in his own particular, Scitis lubricum
adolescentiae iter, in quo and ego lapsus sum, he lost his glory of a virgin
body when he was young: Epist. 43. ad Chromatium
but I consider that those persons who have undertaken it, and had eminent
graces, and were persons of rare and exemplar sanctity, yet could not preserve
their virgin without almost destroying their body. Evagrius the Priest used to
go into a well in a winters night, S. Bernard into a lake, to cool their
burnings: S. Francis used to roll his naked body in snows, S. Omar in nettles,
S. Benedict upon thorns, S. Martinian upon burning coals, to overthrow the
strongest passion by the most violent pains. And were not that law intolerable
that should command all Ecclesiastics to do such things? They must do these
or worse: I speak of those who have not the gift of continence. For to say that
all men have it, or may have it if they will labor and pray for it, is to
speak against reason and 1 Cor. 7. 7. Matthew. 19. 11.
Scripture and experience. It is easier to give our bodies to be burned for
religion, then to live innocently in the state of perpetual burning: and
supposing those Saints now enumerated did by these violent remedies keep
themselves from pollution, yet it is not certain that they took the better part
when they chose ustulation before marriage, expressly against the Apostle, who
not only said, that it is better to marry then to fornicate, but, better to
marry then to burn: and that these violences did cure their burning, is so
false, that they do suppose them afflicted with burnings, and that therefore
they were constrained to use violent remedies; for those which men invent are
infinitely worse then that which God has appointed; so easy it was by marriage
to cure what they found scarce possible to keep from the extremest mischiefs,
but not possible to do in all degrees, by mortifications. And therefore S.
Hierom speaking of Virgins that did not do honor to their virginity by real
continence, he advised them, Ad Demetriad. virg.
ut aut nubant si se non possunt continere, aut contineant si nolunt nubere,
that they would contain if they will not marry, or marry if they cannot
contain: not only if they cannot contain from outward acts of uncleanness, but
even from the secret desires of it, and from burnings. Quid enim prodest (says
he) corporis pudicitia animo constuprato? In Jeremiam lib. 2. cap. 7.
The chastity of the body is of no profit, if the desires be burning and
dishonest. Casso saltem delectamine
Amare quod potiri non licet.
So the burning is well described in the Comedy. Uri est illegitimo coitu aut
foedis cogitationibus se polluere, Philippica 18.
said Alfonsus Virvesius, To burn, is to pollute our self with unlawful
mixtures, or with filthy thoughts; and these desires are not to be cured by
mortifications and corporal austerities. Nella guerra d' amor chi fuge vince,
says the Italian proverb. There is no contesting against this passion; even to
dispute against it is a temptation, even to fast and to be hungry does enkindle
the flame. Fames and sitis exasperat and incendit animos, says Seneca, Hunger
and thirst make a man angry: and anger and lust are fed by the same fuel, --
mea cum deferbuit ira
Nolo prognatam consule --
A spare and temperate diet gives no extraordinary maintenance to the desire,
and therefore it was advised and practiced in all ages: but there is enough of
desire in ordinary; even that which maintains health will keep up that natural
desire; and that which destroys health, destroys charity, and hinders us more
in the service of God then it can set forward. And S. Hierom says that he had
known them of both sexes who have by too much abstinence turned mad, Epist. 8.
and lost their wits. They that from God's mercy have received strengths to
live singly and purely, may use it as it serves best for God's glory and the
interest of their souls, and their own intermedial comforts. But it is to be
considered, that it is not only a gift of God that some men can contain, but
it is a peculiar gift that they will: and it is observed by wise and good men,
that this desire has or has not respectively been inspired by the spirit of
God in several ages of the Church according to their present necessities; and
when God gives the gift, then every thing will help it forward. But in the
present manners and circumstances of the world, as there is no public necessity
of it, so there is no great care taken to acquire it; for there where the
unequal laws of men have brought a necessity upon their Clergy, it is with them
as with those of whom Epiphanius complains, Lib. 6. haeres. 60.
Ut ne confundantur apud homines occulte scortantur, and sub solitudinis aut
continentiae specie libidinem exercent, They pretend purity in public, and
fornicate in private. And it is certain, that such courses are no fit means to
invite the spirit of purity to invest and adorn the Church. Neither is prayer a
certain way of obtaining this gift, any more then of the gift of a healthful or
a strong body; for God requires it of none of us directly; if accidentally he
does require it, he will give him wherewithal: but therefore the Apostle does
not say, But if a man does not contain, let him pray, but let him marry. It is
sufficient that God has given a remedy that is easy and infallible to all that
love God; and it is best to use that remedy which is best, and was by the best
Physician provided for all that need. Oportet compati and commetiri doctrinam
pro virium qualitate, and hujusmodi qui non possunt capere sermonem de
castitate, concedere nuptias, In Levit. l. 15.
said S. Cyril, Every ones strength must be measured, and so fit our doctrines
to their proportions, and to grant marriages to them who cannot receive the
word of Continence. Lib. de agone Christian. cap. 31.
And therefore what S. Austin said of Widows may be exactly applied to
Ecclesiastics, There are some that call them adulterous if they marry, and so
pretend themselves purer then the doctrine of the Apostle, who, if they would
confess their name, mundanos potius se quam mundos vocarent, they would prove
to be servants of interest rather then of purity. For they compel the Widows
[the Ecclesiastics] to burnings, because they suffer them not to marry. But we
are not to esteem them to be wiser then the Apostle Paul, who says, I had
rather they should marry then burn. And like to this is that of S. Hierom,
Contra Jovin. lib. 1.
Si quis consideret virginem suam, i. e. carnem suam, lascivire and ebullire in
libidinem, nec refraenare se potest, duplex illi incumbit necessitas, aut
capiendae conjugis, aut ruendi, He that considers his Virgin, that is, his
flesh, and observes it troublesome and boiling into desires, and cannot refrain
himself, has a double necessity upon him; either he must take a wife, or he
must perish. * And therefore they that pretend the gift of continence is in
every man's power, should do well to give God thanks that they find it so in
their own, but yet they should also do well to believe others who complain
that they have it not. De convers. ad Clericos cap. 29.
S. Bernard's wish was something to the same purpose of charity and security.
Utinam qui continere non valent, perfectione^ temerarie profiteri, aut
coelibatui dare nomina vererentur; sumptuosa siquidem turris est, and verbum
grande, quod non omnes capere possunt, I wish that they who cannot contain,
would be afraid to profess perfection, and undertake single life: for this is a
costly tower, and a great word that all cannot receive. Epist. 15.
Aeneas Sylvius having gotten a Lady with child, to his Father that was
troubled at it he replies, in sua potestate non fuisse ut vir non esset, he
could not help it: and when Origin had resolved to live continently, he found
no course but one would do it, even by making it impossible to be otherwise;
and he was followed by many, particularly by the Valesii: and Leontius, who was
afterward chosen Bp. of Antioch by the Arrians, having a woman in his house,
one of the (...) of which I spoke before, being commanded to put her away,
emasculated himself that he might have leave to sleep with her: but that
uncharitable folly produced a good law against it. For what chastity is that,
or what service of God is it for a man to offer to God a single life when he
has made himself naturally impotent? Extrem. libro de vera Virgin.
It is (that I may use S. Basil's expression) as if we should commend a horse
for not hurting any man with horns. But I observe it for this purpose, to
represent upon what terms the gift of continence was to be obtained by some who
would fain, but by this act showed plainly that they could not. Propterea leges
quae sunt connubia contra Baptista Mantuan. in vita Divi Hilarii.

Esse malas...... prudentia patrum
Non satis advertit... quid far recusat,
Quid valeat Natura pati. Cervicibus (aiunt)
Hoc insuave jugum nostris imponere Christus
Noluit. Istud onus quod adhuc quamplurima monstra
Fecit, ab audaci dicunt pietate repertum.
And therefore those laws that command single life to so many thousands of
Priests, Italians, Spaniards, Frenchmen, which are none of the most continent
nations of Europe, are a snare to those that cannot keep them, and a burden to
them that would, In Matthew. tract. 24.
and intolerable to both. So Origin complains of some imperious and imprudent
persons who in his time would be commanding single life and virginity; Non
solum quae docent non faciunt, sed etiam crudeliter and sine misericordia
injungunt aliis majora virtute ipsorum, non habentes rationem virium
uniuscujusque, They not only do not what they teach, but cruelly and
unmercifully enjoin to others things greater then their strength, not regarding
the measure of every one. For it is a burden bigger then the weight of all the
laws of Jesus Christ put together, except to such persons who are Eunuchs by
nature, or have received a particular gift of God; of which they may make use
as they find other things concurring. For to be able to contain is one gift,
and to be willing is another; and after all, that this can promote any end of
religion is but accidental, and depends upon a special providence and Economy
of affairs. It may be useful in some times, and to some persons, and to some
purposes; but of it self it is no act of religion, no service of God: and
that is the next consideration.

3. The law of coelibate is an unreasonable law, 18.
and besides that it does very much mischief to souls, it does no good at all.
For if single life have in it any greater purity or spirituality then chaste
marriages, yet even that single life is more acceptable when it is chosen and
voluntary; and if it be involuntary and constrained, it is not pleasing to God:
so that the law in this case does effect nothing but this, that they who are
willing may loose something of the reward, or may be uncertain whether they do
or no; and they that are unwilling are constrained either to hypocrisy, which
will bring them an evil reward, or to a burden and slavery which shall bring
them none at all. But that which I intended is this,

4. That all this stir is to no purpose; 19.
for Virginity is not more holy then chaste marriage, and the one does not more
advance religion then the other directly, but by accident, and in some
circumstances, and as an instrument fitted for use in it is own time. For as S.
Austin observes well, S. Paul does modestly dehort from marriage, De S.
Virginit. c. 16.
not as from an evil, but as from a burden:] neither is his advice for all
times, but for that present necessity; neither is it to the Clergy, but to all
Christians; neither is it for religion, but for convenience; neither was it
from the Lord, but from himself; nothing of the Gospel or spirituality, but a
matter of prudence, and the exterior conduct of affairs. For (...), marriage is
honorable, it is so to all, and such mixtures have in them nothing that
defiles, and he that is perfect in his constitution, if he be also so much a
Virgin as to have nothing that defiles, is a rare person, but it may be not to
be found; but if he be, yet he does arrive but to that state of things in which
the married man is, even when he does actually use his greatest liberty, he is
(...) undefiled. Which thing if the zelots in some of the first ages of the
Church had rightly observed, they would not have been so fierce for single life
upon the account of heretical principles. For they did it because they supposed
marriage to be a pollution: and if they did not expressly condemn it upon that
stock, yet they secretly suspected it, as not being confident of the truth of
the Apostles words, but suffering themselves to be a little abused by heretical
sermons, though they did not openly join in their communions and professions.
The Council of Gangra notes such persons as these, that refused the communion
from the hands of a married Priest; but in the fourth chapter pronounces
anathema against them: Ad Philadelph.
and S. Ignatius says that they who call the society of married pairs
corruption, and pollution, have the Devil that great Apostate dwelling in them.
For what state of life can be purer then that which is undefiled? and from
whence shall we take the measures of purity but from the fountains of our
Savior, from the holy Scriptures, the springs of salvation? But to this the
first ages of the Church gave apparent witness. Perfecti Christiani edunt,
bibunt, contrahunt Matrimonium, Lib. 7. Strom.
said Clemens Alexandrinus, Perfect Christians eat and drink and make
marriages: and therefore the (...), the perfect state of Orders is not at all
impugned or diminished by marriage. Lib. 1. c. 11.
Sozomen tells of Bishop Spiridion, (...), He was a plain man, he had wife and
children, but not at all the worse, not at all hindered in Divine things. The
same also is said of Gregory Bp. of Nazianzum the Father of S. Gregory the
Divine, and S. Basil, Et si matrimonio se vinxit, Greg. Naz. verba ex transl.
Volaterrani.
ita tamen in eo vixit ut nihil propeterea ad perfectam virtutem ac
Philosophiam consequendam impediretur. He comported himself so in the state of
marriage, that he was not at all hindered for obtaining the perfection of virtue
and [Christian] philosophy: and indeed what should hinder him? for marriage
does not. Matrimonium non solum nihil nobis obstat ad philosophandum Deo, S.
Chrysostom. hom. 21. in Genesis
si voluerimus esse sobrii, sed and magnam adfert consolationem: comprimit enim
insanum naturae impetum, nec turbari sinit quasi mare, sed efficit ut scapha
feliciter in portum appellet; and ideo Deus consolationem hanc tribuit humano
generi, For if men will be sober, marriage is not only no hindrance to
Christian philosophy, but also brings great aids and comfort. For it represses
the mad violences of nature, and causes that we be not troubled like the
enraged sea, but makes the vessel arrive safely to her port; and therefore God
has given this comfort to mankind.

For although it be true that, 20.
as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7. 34.
the Married cares for the things of the world, the Unmarried for the things of
the Lord; He, how he may please his wife, This, how he may be holy both in body
and in spirit; yet this is so far from disparaging holy Marriage, or making it
less consistent with the dignity and offices ecclesiastical, that in the world
there is not a greater argument to the contrary. For consider where every ones
trouble, and where their danger lies. The Married has more necessities and
more affairs in the world, and relations to look after: which if he well
provides for according to his power, he has indeed suffered some secular
trouble; but he has done his duty, and he is safe. But the unmarried is alone,
and without those relations; and therefore they may if they will let the things
of the world alone, and mind the present employment, which then was the
ministeries and attendancies Evangelical. But though they have less care of the
things of this world; yet their care which lies in another scene is a good care
indeed, but it is very great and tender, and has in it very great danger. --
poenaeque graves in coelibe vita. Auson.
The Unmarried takes care how she may be holy or clean in body and spirit. And
this is a care not only of greater concernment then that of secular supplies,
but to most persons of extreme difficulty and danger. For it is to no purpose
to be Unmarried, unless they remain pure in body and in spirit, that is, be
free from carnal desires as well as unclean actions: and how great a care is
required to this, I need not say, because all men that have tried it know: but
this care the Married need not know any thing of; for they have by God a remedy
provided for them, and they are in the holy state of marriage, without that
care, holy both in body and mind; so that it is easy to say where the advantage
lies. The one takes care to avoid want, the other to avoid damnation. The one
has troubles of this world, the other has dangers of the other. The hardest
province which the married man has is how to please his wife; but his affairs
are so well ordered, that he has not such difficulties to please God as the
other has: which thing was long since observed by S. Gregory Nazianzen, In
fun. Gorgo^.
that indeed single life is higher and better (if it be pure and undefiled) but
it is more difficult and more dangerous, and Marriage, which looks not so
splendidly, is yet much more safe.] But this comparison is true between persons
married, and the unmarried that have the gift of continence; for even that gift
does not exempt them from great dangers and great labors. But if there be any
burning, if there be a fire within, it is ill dwelling in the house where there
is no chimny; for that the smoke will fill every corner of the dwelling, and at
least make a perpetual trouble. But between the married, and the unmarried that
has not the gift of continence, which is far the greatest part of mankind,
there is no comparison at all. And therefore though in respect to that
conjunction of affairs, to the beginnings of a persecuted religion, in which
many of them were to live an ambulatory life, and suffer the spoiling of their
goods, and be thrust out of their houses, the Apostle had great reason to take
care lest by the greatness and superfetations of trouble they should be tempted
to forsake, and be vexed out of their religion: yet abstracting from that
consideration, In fun. Gorgo^.
the married estate is much more secure for the state of souls, and propter eam
quae in nuptiis est animi tranquillitatem (as S. Gregory Nazianzen affirms) and
for that peace of mind which is in chaste marriages, and is not in the state of
single life with them who are perpetually fighting with a dangerous enemy, who
is not always resisted, and if he be, is not always put to the worst. And
therefore it was rightly observed of S. Clemens Alexandr. As [single life, or]
Continence, Stromat. 3.
so Marriage also has proper gifts and ministeries which pertain unto the
Lord: but at no hand ought it to be admitted that marriage does hinder the
service of the Lord; it sets it forward very much, but hinders nothing; it may
be burdensome to those who are to travel and pass from country to country, but
to them who fix in a place, and who attend the ministeries of one people, it is
no hindrance; and then to the direct service of God in our personal piety and
spiritual safety it is a very great advantage: concerning which who please may
read S. Gregory concerning his mother Nonna, and the Epistles of Paulinus Inter
Epist. Augustini. Epist. 27. and 29.
concerning Amanda the wife of Aper, who were to their husbands admirable
advantages both in the affairs of the world and of religion. Sanctissimus
Samuel filios genuit: non tamen justitiae suae merita minuit. Zecharias
sacerdos vir justus in senectute sua genuit filium. ^uaest. Ve^. and N. Test.
qu. 127.
Qua ergo ratione accusatur, quod minime obesse probatur? so S. Austin. To
which add the instance of S. Chrysostom upon those words of Isai, [I saw the
Lord,] Quis ista loquitur? Isaias ille spectator coelestium Seraphim, qui cum
conjuge commercium habuit, nec tamen extinxit gratiam. Samuel the most holy
Prophet, and Zechary that just Priest, and Isaiah that Seer who saw the
celestial Seraphim, were not hindered from their greatest graces, favors and
perfections by the state and offices of marriage. The event of this
consideration I represent in the words of the same excellent Doctor, In 1 ep.
Tim. hom. ^0.
Quamvis nuptiae plurimum difficultatis in se habeant, it a tamen assumi
possunt ut perfectiori vitae impedimento non sint, Though marriage have in it
very much difficulty (in respect of domestic cares) yet it may be so undertaken
that it may be no impediment to a life of perfection. For even in respect of
secular cares and intrigues of business the single life, which seems in this to
have advantage, is not always found so innocent and disin tangled, and yet
some times even in this very regard a married man has or may have advantages
and ease and liberty: in 1 Cor. 7.
Videmus virgins de seculo cogitare, and Matrimonio junctos Dominicis studere
operibus, said S. Ambrose, Men of single lives take care for the world, and we
see them that are married study the works of the Lord. And if it were
otherwise, yet a law to command single life were very imprudent; unless they
could secure that they who have no wives shall have no children. But as Lipsius
said of the Roman Senate, Ad 14. Annal. n. 74.
who forbad their soldiers to marry, a Junone arcebant eos, non a Venere,
Romanae leges, the Roman laws forbad Juno to them, not Venus, for Contubernii
militibus semper jus, the soldiers always might have women, but no wives; so
it is amongst the Roman Prelates too much: but unless this also were so denied
them, that they could have no children, or that they who have no children shall
not be sollicitous to raise a poor family, or to increase a great, the law were
very unreasonable as to this very pretense. For that things are otherwise there
where single life is enjoined is too apparent, and it is complained of by lib.
de Planctu Eccl^s. 2. art. 15. A. D. 1330.
Alvarus Pelagius 300 years ago, and by in Johan. 16.
Platina and 4. did. 27. art. 1. q. 3.
Bonaventure, and it is notorious in all the Popes; diverse particulars of which
in the instance of Sixtus quintus are to be seen in the excellent hist. lib.
100.
Thuanus. I end this consideration with the excellent words of lib. 5. de
Provident. Dei.
Salvian, Novum prorsus est conversionis genus: licita non faciunt, illicita
committunt. Temperant a conjugio, and non temperant a rapina. Quid agis stulta
persuasio? peccata interdixit Deus, non matrimonia. This is a new and a strange
kind of conversion. They will not do lawful things, but they commit unlawful:
they abstain from marriage, but not from rapine. O ye fools, why are ye so
persuaded? God has forbidden sins, not marriages.

Although these considerations are a sufficient explication of this instance of
the Rule, 21.
and verify the first intention, that single life ought not by a law to be
enjoined to any one order of men; yet because the instance is of great
concernment beyond the limits of this Rule, I add that the Apostles and the
first ages of the Church not only forbad that the Clergy should put away their
wives, but left it indifferent for any man, or any order of men to marry: and
therefore that it ought not now to be done by the present guides of Churches,
who have less reason so to do; and if they had a greater reason, yet they
have a less authority. But Christ and his Apostles left it free. Of this
besides the matter and evidence of fact, there being no law of Christ or Canon
of the Apostles to restrain it, but a plain supposition of liberty, and
intimation of the thing done in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, there needs
no other testimony but that of Cratian. 26. qu. 2. cap. Sors.
Copula sacerdotalis, vel consanguineorum, nec legali, nec Evangelica, nec
Apostolica authoritate prohibetur, Neither the Old Testament nor the New,
neither Christ nor his Apostles have forbidden the marriage of Priests. de
Cleric. conjug. cum olim.
To which agrees that of Panormitan; Continentia non est de substantia Ordinis,
nec de jure Divino, To contain from marriage is not of Divine appointment, nor
necessary to them that are in holy Orders. The same also is affirmed by
Antoninus, as who please may see in summa, part. 3. tit. 1. c. 21.

Now then nothing remains to be considered but the practice of the Church, 22.
which how far it can oblige, I have already discoursed: but suppose it might
in other cases, yet for the reasons above described it ought to be altered in
this; for if such a law may not bind, much less can the practice; and yet if
the practice might, here was no Catholic practice. For as for the whole Greek
Church, dictinct. 31. c. Aliter.
the practice of that is drawn into a compendium by Pope Stephen. Aliter se
Orientalium traditio habet Ecclesiarum, aliter hujus S. R. Ecclesiae: Nam
illarum Sacerdotes, Diaconi and Subdiaconi matrimonio copulantur. The tradition
of the Eastern Churches is otherwise then that of the Roman Church: For their
Priests and Deacons and Subdeacons are joined in marriage. did. 28. cap. 8.
I shall therefore add no more to this confession but the Canon of the Council
of Ancyra, which orders that if Deacons in their ordination will profess that
they cannot contain, and that they intend to marry, they may. But if then they
profess otherwise, and do against their profession, they must cease from
their Ministry. And the practice is to this day, that the Greek and all the
Eastern Priests; are if they please, married men, and most of them actually are
so: though in the Eastern Churches they always did exhort their Clergy to
continence, yet they left it to their liberty, and they always took it.

In the Latin Church, 23.
from the time of Pope Siricius, and the second Council of Arles, which Binius
makes about the same time, at the end of the fourth Age after Christ, there
were some canons provincial injoyning single life to the Clergy; but the
practice was ever against the Canon: and as for the first 400. years or
thereabouts, all had liberty to be married if they pleased, so even afterward
they would take it, as they saw cause. This we find in S. Hierom, who to
Jovinian, objecting the marriage of Samuel, answers, that this was no prejudice
to the honor of the virgin-state, quasi non hodie quoque plurimi Sacerdotes
habeant Matrimonia, and Apostolus describat Episcopum unius uxoris virum;] for
the Apostle describes a Bishop the husband of one wife, and even at this day
most Priests are married. S. Hierom did not contend that all Priests ought to
be virgins; but that if they that could contain, would, it were much better.
But by this, the matter of fact against the law was evident. de Offic. lib. 1.
cap. ult.
S. Ambrose tells that in most remote or private Churches the Priests did use
marriage: In plerisque abditioribus locis, cum ministerium gererent vel etiam
sacerdotium, filios susceperunt. The clerical marriages were in his time almost
universal: and therefore many endeavored to persuade single life as much as
they could, and from arguments they came to affirmations, and so to laws by
little and little; but did not prevail. For when Petrus Damiani was sent from
Rome into France to persuade the Priests to put away their wives, they defended
themselves with the Canon of the Council of Tribur in Germany, and with the
words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 2. Baron. A. D. 1059. and A. D. 1065.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife; to which the Legate knew
not what to answer. And when in the year 1074 Pope Gregory the seventh sent
fierce letters to Germany about the same affair, the Archbishop of Mentz, to
whose conduct the business was committed, did publish the letters, but durst
not verify them; and neither by fair means nor by foul could cause the Priests
to put away their wives. And in England till the year 1100 it was not
prohibited to the Clergy to marry, apud Baron. A. D. 1075.
says Henry of Huntingdon: but then Anselme endeavored to put the Popes
letters in execution; Matthew. Paris Hist. Anglor. A. D. 1125.
and 25 years after the Cardinal of Crema was sent over to the same purpose:
but because he was taken in bed with an harlot, he got nothing but shame and
money, and so went away. But at last, after the attempts O bo^e Calixte, nunc
omnis elerus edit te. Nam olim Presbyteri solent ^xoribus uti. Id praevertisti
quondam cum Papa fuisti: Ergo tibi festum nunquam celebrabit honestum. Sic non
nimis facunde, sed vere nimis questus est olim non nemo.
and pressures and tyranny and arts of an hundred and thirty years continuance
(for it began in 970, and was not finished till An. Dom. 1100, as Lib. 6. Hist.
Angl. A. D. 970. Vide 27. q. 1. cap. ut lex. and Clem. cap. li^eras de filiis
Presbyter. and Innocent. c. ut clericorum. de vita and honestate cleric.
Polydor Virgil computes it) the Clergy was driven from their chaste marriages,
and they took themselves to Concubines, whom they could change or multiply, and
they found themselves undisturbed in that; and so they rested, till God being
long provoked by their impurest services, awakened Christian Princes and
Priests into liberty and holiness and reformation. For amongst the Canons
which are called Apostolical, the sixth severely forbids Bishops or Priests
upon pretense of religion to put away their wives,] according to the words of
Christ, What God has joined, let no man put asunder; and the words of the
Apostle, Defraud not one another, unless it be by consent, and for a time. And
therefore the Church of Rome, which makes orders to dissolve marriage, and
commands Priests which before were married to depart from their wives, speaks
and does against the practice of the Ancient Churches, and against the decrees
of Councils, and the Canons of the Apostles, and the express laws of Jesus
Christ. I end this with the saying of those in Mantuan, Tutius esse volunt qua
lex Divina sinebat
Isse via, veterumque sequi vestigia Patrum,
Quorum vita fuit melior cum conjuge, quam nunc
Nostra sit exclusis thalamis and conjugis usu.
The old primitives and holy Bishops and Priests in the first ages lived better
with their wives, then nowadays they do without them; and therefore it were
better to tread in their footsteps, and to walk in that way to which we are
pointed by the law of God.

One thing I am to add which is of material consideration. 24.
For every one observes in the story of the Church, that even then when they
did permit the Bishops and Priests to live with their wives and to get
children, yet the Church did even then forbid Bishops or Priests to marry after
their Ordination; and therefore many suppose that we might at least comply so
far with the Catholic Church, according as it is set down in the constitutions
Apostolical attributed to S. lib. 6. constable. Apost. cap. 17.
Clement, Non licere autem iis, si post ordinationem sine uxore fuerint, ad
nuptias transire: vel si uxores habuerint, cum aliis conjungi; but they must be
content with her whom they had at the time of their ordination; but after
orders they must not marry: and Paphnutius in the Nicene Council, said that
they did not do it, and left it as supposed that it ought not. Of this I do
not know any one that has given a reason, or considered it apart to any
purpose; and therefore it will not be useless or unpleasant if I give a short
account of it.

1. Therefore the Primitive Church chose her Priests and Bishops commonly of
great age, 25.
of known virtue and holiness. They were designed to a public and dangerous
employment, for some whole ages they were under persecution, and the way of the
cross was a great deletery to flesh and blood; and therefore they might the
rather require it of them whom in these dispositions they found fit to be taken
into an employment which would require a whole man, all his time and all his
affections. Now if we consider that the married Priests and Bishops were
commanded to retain their wives, and the unmarried had been tried to be of a
known and experienced continence, they might with much reason and great
advantages require that they should so remain; that is, they might ask their
consent, and might trust their promise: for here was liberty, and but little
danger. The Priests were few, and the unmarried much fewer, and their age
commonly such as was past danger, and the public affairs of the Church
required it, and the men were willing; and then all was right.

2. The Greek Church, 26.
and generally the Churches of the East, did by Custom and tradition oblige
their Priests to single life, if in that state they were ordained, because they
took care that if they could not contain they should take a wife before their
Orders, immediately if they pleased, and then enter into the Priesthood; as
appears frequently in the Greek laws and Canons, and particularly in the third
Novel constitution of the Emperor Leo the sixth. So that this was but a
circumstance of law, introduced for that which they apprehended to be decent:
and in matters of decency, opinion is the only measure. But if they might
marry immediately before their ordination and live with their wives, then it is
evident they did not believe that either the offices or the state of marriage
were against the offices and state of Priesthood. in quodlib. contr. Lutherum.
And this is affirmed by Cajetan, Nec ordo in quantum ordo, nec ordo in quantum
sacer, est impeditivus Matrimonii, Neither the order nor the appendant
holiness, that is, neither the office nor it is decency, are impeded by holy
marriages.] And therefore he adds [ that it can never be proved by reason or
by authority, that if a Priest does contract marriage, he does absolutely sin;
because the Priesthood does not dissolve the marriage, whether contracted after
or before; stando tantum in iis quae habemus a Christo and Apostolis, that is,
if we keep our selves within the limits of Christ's Commandments, and the
doctrine Apostolical.] And that is well enough; for if any Church or all
Churches did otherwise, the Custom was not good for many reasons: it did
dishonor to marriage, it made it to be secretly suspected of some
uncleanness, it gave too much countenance to heretics who disparaged it, it
made a snare to those who promised continence and found it difficult or
impossible, and at last it came to an intolerable mischief in the Church of
Rome, it brought in divorces, which God hates; for they teach that Orders does
dissolve Marriage, and that which Christ only permitted in the case of
adultery, they command in the case of ordination.

3. But because there are some persuasions that will not be moved unless they
be shown some precedents and practices of the Primitive Church, 27.
and will always suspect it to be ill for the superior Clergy to marry after
ordination, unless you can tell them that some good men did so before them,
for they rely more upon example then upon rule; therefore I shall represent
that although the ancient Canons and practices did generally injoyne their
Clergy not to marry after Orders, (before orders they might) yet this thing did
not prevail, but Deacons, Priests and Bishops, good men and orderly, did after
ordination use their liberty, as they found it necessary or expedient. Cap. 10.
This I have already remarked in the case of Deacons, who are permitted by the
Council of Ancyra to marry after ordination, if at their ordination they will
not profess continence. But Bishops and Priests did so too: which is plainly
gathered from those words of S. Athanasius to Dracontius, who refused to be
made Bishop because he impertinently thought it was not so spiritual a state as
that of Monks, since he saw the Bishops married men and full of secular
affairs: S. Athanasius answered him, that he might be Bishop for all that, and
keep on his way as he was before: for if that did hinder him, he let him know,
that all Bishops did not enter into the married estate, nor all Monks abstain.
Multi quoque ex Episcopis Matrimonia non inierunt; Monachi contra liberorum
patres facti sunt, Many Bishops did not contract marriages. Now if none did,
his answer to Dracontius had been more full, and would not have been omitted;
but therefore it is manifest that in his time some did. But Cassiodore gives an
instance in a Bishop and Martyr that took a wife but a little before his
Martyrdom, Tripart. hist. lib. 6. cap. 14.
Eupsychius of Caesarea in Cappadocia. In illo tempore ferunt Martyrio vitam
finivisse Eupsychium Caesareensem, ducta nuper uxore, cum adhuc quasi sponsus
esse videretur. He was first a Priest in Caesarea, but afterward he was a
Bishop; and so he is called by S. Athanasius, who mentions Sylvester and
Protogenes Bishops of Dacia, Orat. contr. Arianos.
and Leontius and Eupsychius Bishops of Cappadocia, of which Caesarea was the
Metropolis. This Eupsychius having newly married a wife, while he was yet but
as it were a bridegroom, gave up his life in Martyrdom for Christ. But this
was no news in the Greek Church; For Pope Stephen having affirmed that the
Greek Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons are joined in marriage, the gloss says,
Did. 31. C. aliter
Multi ex hac litera dixerunt quod Orientales possunt contrahere in sacris
Ordinibus, Many from these words have affirmed that the Easterlings can marry
in holy Orders. And it is also added by the gloss upon the same distinction,
that the Greeks in their ordinations do promise continence neither explicitly
nor tacitly: and if that be true, there is no peradventure but very many of
them marry after their consecrations. But because the Latin lawyers and
Canonists are none of the best historians, we may better inform our selves in
this particular from the Greeks themselves: amongst whom we find that for
almost two hundred years together after the Synod in Trullo, the Greek Priests
had after their Ordination two years time for probation whether they could bear
the yoke of single life, and if they could not, they had leave to marry. For
although the Canons in Trullo had permitted them only to stay with the wives
they had married before Orders, and commanded that they should take none after;
yet the Canon prevailed not, but the contrary custom of two years probation
lasted till the time of the Emperor Leo the sixth, as appears in his third
Novel constitution before cited. The words are these, Consuetudo quae in
praesenti obtinet, iis qui in Matrimonio conjungi in animo est concedit, ut
antequam Uxorem duxerint, Sacerdotes fieri possint, and deinde biennium ad
perficiendam voluntatem jungi Matrimonio volenti praestituit. They took their
Orders first, and then had two years time to consider whether they would marry
or no. Now this being the custom of the whole Greek Church, in which the
Bishops because of the ordinations were engaged. it is evident it was not
illegal or irregular, but an approved custom of the Church; though before the
end of two hundred years after the Synod in Trullo it was decreed against by an
Imperial law. What became of it afterward I have had no opportunity to
inquire; but I find contrary relations by several persons. That which I most
rely upon is the relation of Erasmus, who in his Apology against the Parisians
says that in Venice he saw a Greek Priest marry a wife: and in the history of
Johannes Magnus I find these words, Wilhelmi Cardinalis prima cura and intentio
fuit revocare Suecos and Gothos a schismate Graecorum in quod Presbyteri and
Sacerdotes ductis public uxoribus consensisse videbantur, Cardinal William
endeavored to recover the Suedes and Goths from the schism of the Greeks, to
which they seemed to adhere when their Priests and Bishops did marry wives
publicly. By which it appears the Greeks did so, since the others by so doing
complied with them. And the Metropolitan of Russia in Sigismundus Baro calls it
a great error and sin in the Roman Church, that they reject the Priests who
marry wives according to the laws. But the matter is not great; for the Church
might do what they saw cause for.

But in the Latin Church it will be harder to find examples of Priests
marrying after Orders. 28.
Not but that there were very many that did; but that they durst not be known
to do it. But yet some notices we have even of this also. For Pope Innocentius
the second observed that every where Bishops and Priests, 27. q. 1. cap. ut lex.
and the Religious professed did marry wives after they had purposed the
contrary, and by a Decretal restrains it. And Ivo Bishop of Chartres tells of a
Prelate that had two harlots; Epist. 200.
but (as it should seem) being weary of that life, he prepared Matrimonial
Tables for a third: and he tells also of a Canon in the Church at Paris who did
actually contract marriage, Epist. 201.
and the Bishop held it rate and firm, that it was good and could not be
dissolved: Epist. 321. ad Johan. Fontem.
and we find that Aeneas Sylvius being consulted by a Priest that was in the
snare, he advised him actually to take a wife and marry. For what should
hinder? The law of the Church was an evil law, made by an authority violent and
usurped, insufficient as to that charge, it was not a law of God, it was
against the rights and against the necessities of nature, it was unnatural and
unreasonable, it was not for edification of the Church, it was no advantage to
spiritual life: it is a law that is therefore against public honesty because it
did openly and secretly introduce dishonesty; it had nothing of the requisites
of a good law, it had no consideration of humane frailty nor of humane
comforts, it was neither necessary nor profitable nor innocent, neither fitted
to time nor place nor person; it was not accepted by them that could not bear
it, it was complained of by them that could; it was never admitted in the East,
it was fought against and declaimed and railed at in the West, and at last is
laid aside in the Churches (especially) of the North, as the most intolerable
and most unreasonable tyranny in the world; for it was not to be endured, that
upon the pretense of an unseasonable perfection, so much impurity should be
brought into the Church, and so many souls thrust down to hell. And therefore
when the Latin Priests saw themselves so horribly ensnared, they did secretly
corrode the net, which openly they durst not tear in pieces. Lib. 7. de Just.
and jure q. 6. art. 2.
And the case is clear. Dominicus a Soto observing that the Church did not for
a long time permit Priests to marry after Orders, argues thus. The Church
admitted married men to be Priests, but did not admit Priests to be married
men, meaning afterward: which thing (says he) relies upon no other reason but
this, Because they supposed the use of the marriage bed to be inconsistent with
the office and dignity of a Priest or Bishop. For if they who were Bishops and
Priests might use marriage, what hinders them but that they might after Orders
enter upon marriage?] That Is his argument. To which I reply, That it is true,
the Church, which was aemula continentiae, desirous to promote continence, did
set it forwards where she thought she might with safety, and therefore enjoined
her Priests, which anciently could not be ordained till they were almost 40.
years of age, Justinian. Nov. 123. cap. 13.
to remain in that state in which their ordination found them: though even this
was a snare also, and could not be observed, and was not (as I have proved) yet
this was not because they disapproved the conjugal society; for besides that
the Scripture gives it a title of honor, and calls it purity; it was also
declared to be chastity in the Nicene Council, who did therefore leave married
Priests and Bishops to the use of it: and they who spoke against the use of
marriage in Priests and refused to pray with married Priests, were
anathematized in the Council of Gangra. And it is evident that those who were
admitted in the state of marriage to holy Orders did (...) beget children. S.
Gregory the Divine tells it of his Father, Gregory Nazianzen, (...), Carm. de
sua vita.

(...)
(...)
(...).
That he said he had been in holy Orders longer then the age of his son, and
yet he had also a younger son then this Gregory; for Caesarius was his younger
brother. Baronius contends fiercely against this instance to convince the son
of a Poetical fiction, or an hyperbole, or some other civil word for a lie. But
let it be as it was; yet the thing it self was infinitely evident: for as
Fabianus said, Bishops and Priests did for a thousand years together in the
Church live with their wives, nulla lege prohibente, no law forbidding it, that
is, no law in force; Habetur 1. Did. 3. c. Quoniam.
and the Council of C P. decreed, Si quis praesumpserit contra Apostolicos
Canones aliquos Presbyterorum and Diaconorum privare a contactu and communione
legalis uxoris suae, deponatur. It is against the Canons Apostolical to forbid
a Priest or Deacon the contact and society of his lawful wife; and he that
shall presume to do it, let him be deposed. Now then the argument of Dominicus
a Soto is very good. If Bishops and Priests might use marriage, what hinders
them from contracting marriage? There is no undecency in the thing, therefore
no inconsistency with Orders. Since therefore it is certain that the married
Bishops and Priests not only in the Greek Church, but even in the Latin, in
Germany, in France, in England, where they kept their wives in despite of the
Pope for a long time, did retain the liberties and societies of marriage; there
can be nothing in the thing that can make it unfit for them to contract
marriages, to whom it is fit to use them.

There is but one thing more which I think fit to be considered in this
affair, 29.
and that is, that there is a pretense of a vow of Continence annexed to holy
Orders; and that therefore it is not lawful for Bishops and Priests to marry,
when they have vowed the contrary. * This indeed concerns them who have made
such a vow; but not them that have not. But who made it necessary that persons
to be ordained should make such a vow? even they only that made laws against
the Clergies marriage; and because they durst not trust the laws which they
made, they took order that men should become a law unto themselves, Alexand. 3.
cap. sane de Cler. Conjug. Vide Cajetan. opusc. tom. 1. tract. 27.
that they might be ensnared to purpose. This vow was only introduced in the
Latin Church, and enjoined to all her Clergy. Enjoined, I say, against the
nature of a vow, which if it be not voluntary, is no vow; which includes desire
in its very name and nature. But Orders do not include this vow in their
nature, and it were intolerable that men should be forced from their wives
against both their wills: that is a persecution, not an ordination, and it is so
far from being for the advantage of the Church, that it is expressly against a
Commandment of God, that what he has joined, any man should separate: and yet
we find many in the primitive Churches by force made Priests and Bishops
against their wills. S. Augustine was taken at Tagasta and made Priest whether
he would or no, but he was not married; but another good man was. Pinianus, the
husband of Melania, was ordained against his will and the tears of his wife.
Paulinianus, the brother of S. Hierom, was first made Deacon by Epiphanius, and
then made Priest, and they were forced to stop his mouth that he might not deny
it. And can it be thought that these men did in this violence make a vow of
single life? or can these be fitting circumstances for a vow? But I shall not
insist upon the particulars of this: because if they should make such a vow,
yet if they found it to be a snare, and impossible to be kept, they had not
only leave, but a necessity to break it. If the vow was constrained and proved
impossible, it was the less sin in the taking, and none in the breach of it.
But if it was voluntary, it was rash, unless they had been sure the thing had
been in their power; and then if it proves not to be so, the fault is not in
the breach but in the undertaking. Lib. 1. ep. 11.
Quod si perseverare nolunt, vel non possunt, melius est ut nubant, quam ut in
ignem deliciis suis cadant; certe nullum fratribus aut sororibus scandalum
faciant. So S. Cyprian advises the professed Virgins. If they will not, or
cannot persevere, it is better that they marry, then fall into the fire and
into burning; only let them give no scandal, Haeres. 60, and Haeres. 61.
meaning by their unchaste lives. And Epiphanius expressly, Melius est lapsum a
cursu palam sibi uxorem accipere secundum leges. If a man have undertaken a
load too heavy, and falls with it, it is better to lay it aside, and openly to
take a wife. Epist. ad Demetriad. Lib. de Bono conjugal. and habetur did. 27.
c. quidam.
The same counsel is given by S. Hierom, by S. Austin, and by Alfonsus
Virvesius a Divine of the Roman Church. To which I shall add nothing of my own
but this, That if the holy vow of marriage, appointed and confirmed and
accepted by God, may yet be dispensed with and annulled, much more may the vow
of virginity and single life. If the adultery of the wife makes the husbands
vow and promise to be void; much more may his own adultery or fornication make
void his vow of single life. If for the dishonor of his house, and the
introduction of bastards into his temporal possessions, he is absolved from his
vows of wedlock which God certainly did approve and appoint; much more may his
vow be null when there is danger or ruin to his soul. A man may lawfully live
with an adulterous wife; and yet he may choose, and his vow does not oblige him:
but he cannot safely live with burnings, he cannot lawfully abide in
fornication and uncleanness. For Who can dwell with the everlasting burning?

It were not unseasonable to consider the Ecclesiastical law against the second
marriages of Priests, or the ordaining them who have married the second time.
But this also relying upon the humor of men, who will be more pure then God,
and more righteous then the law of Christ, and more wise then the Apostle, it
may be determined by the same considerations. The law is a snare, * it is in an
incompetent matter, * it is a restraint of that liberty which Christ has left,
* it cannot be fitted to time and place, and yet remain a law; because there
are so many necessities to be served, and so many favorable cases to be
considered, that the exceptions may be more then the Rule. * It may also be
considered that to make second marriages a cause of irregularity, or incapacity
of receiving holy Order, is nothing but a secret accusation and an open
reproach to marriage; * that it was not of use and avail in the primitive
Church, De Monogam.
Tertullian witnessing, apud vos digami ubique praesident, in the Catholic
Church Bishops twice married do every where govern; that Cauterius a Spanish
Bishop was twice married; that S. Hierom affirms that all the world was full of
such or dinations, not only of Deacons and Priests, Epist. ad Ocean.
but of Bishops, and that he could reckon so many as would excel the number of
the Bishops convened in the Council of Ariminum; * that S. Augustine had
fornicated with two several women, and yet he was made Priest and Bishop for
all that; * and to deny that to holy marriages which is not denied to unholy
fornications, will be a doctrine unfit for the honor of Christian Glossa in
Did. 34. can. Fraternitas hanrem exhorruit. Ecce casus, ubi plus juris habet
luxuria quam castitas: quia castus repelleretur, si contraxisset cum secunda;
sed fornicator non. Vide etiam S. August. Epist. 64.
schools; * that the second marriage is as holy as the first; * that it may be
as necessary * and as useful; * that it is always as lawful; * that the Canon
of the Apostle, that a Bishop should be the husband of one wife, is intended
against plurality of wives at once, and marrying after divorces, both which
were usual amongst the Jews and Greeks and Romans, and could not at first be
taken away from the new-converted Christians; * that it was so expounded by S.
Chrysostom, in locum Apost. 1 Timothy 3.
Theodoret, ad Ocean. tom. 2. Lib. 3. cap. 2.
S. Hierom, and diverse others, but especially by the Greek Fathers; * that not
only the first marriages are blessed by God, but the second and the third, as
S. Austin observes; * that S. Clemens of Alexandria affirmed, that (...),
Digamy after a vow to the contrary is an irregularity, not for the contact and
conjunction, but for the lie; * that the Church of Rome does without scruple
frequently ordain them that have been twice married, if they will pay the price
appointed in the Chancery tax, Spalat. l. 2. cap. 10. n. 75.
as is witnessed by one that knew very well; * that if the Apostle had
forbidden it by a Canon, yet that Canon did no more oblige the descending ages
of the Church then the other Canons which we see broken in every Church,
according to their reason or their liberty; * that in the Primitive Church they
were not very sollicitous about the affairs of marriage, because they supposed
the end of all things was at hand: Tertull. ubi supra.
Crescite and multiplicamini evacuavit extremitas temporis; * that it was a
blot in the face of the Primitive Church that they would not bless second
marriages; * that it was most rationally and elegantly complained of by S.
Sermon. 66. in Cantica.
Bernard; * that second marriages are not a sign of incontinence but the cure,
* or if they were a sign of an incontinent body, they are a sure sign of a
continent mind, that will at no hand admit any uncleanness; * that a great
liberty permitted is infinitely to be preferred before a little prevarication
of a Divine law, * and therefore that second marriages are to be permitted to
the Clergy, rather then evil thoughts, or the circles of an inward fire; * that
the prohibition of the ordination of persons after the second marriages did
rely upon the opinions of holiness that was in the Ecclesiastical order above
the lay purity, and the unholinesse of marriage in respect of single life; *
that in whatsoever sense the former can be true, yet the latter is a branch of
Montanisme, and a product of the heresy of Tatianus; * that Theodoret did
ordain Irenaeus that was twice married; * that he defends the fact by the
consent and suffrages of the Bishops of Phoenicia, * and says that he insisted
in the footsteps of his Ancestors, * and produces for his precedent, Alexander
of Constantinople, Acacius of Beroea, and Praylus of Caesarea, who ordained
Domnus after his second marriage; * that the chief of the Diocese of Pontus did
so, * and all the Bishops of Palestine; * that they accounted it holy according
to the opinion and doctrine of their Nation, * for so we read in Maimonides,
Although a man have fulfilled the precept concerning the multiplication of
mankind, Halach I sho^^. cap. 15.
yet nevertheless it is prescribed in the sayings of the Scribes, that no man
should cease from the multiplication of his kind, so long as he can well
continue it; for whosoever shall add a soul to Israel. is like him that
builds up the world. And it is moreover in the sayings of the wise men, that
a man should not keep a house without a wife, lest he be provoked by lust. * It
may also be considered that he that burns had better marry, though he have been
already married, and though he be a Bishop; * that the virgin or widow estate
is no where commanded, but that in some cases marriage is, as in that of
burning; * that in Scripture no chastity or continence is required of a Bishop
but the Matrimonial; * that Abraham the Father of the faithful was married
again after the death of Sarah; * that S. Joseph the supposed Father of our B.
Lord was by the Ancients said to be twice married; * and lastly, that it is
confessed that the forbidding second marriages to the Clergy, and refusing to
ordain such as have been twice married, is neither of the law of nature, nor
any article of faith, nor any necessity of the Sacrament; it is only a
constitution of the Church, which as the Pope binds on, so he may take off as
he please, as is affirmed by Quodl. 4. Art. 13.
Aquinas, in Sent. 4. did. 27. q. 4.
Durandus, in 3. part. tom. 3. disp. 24. cap. 5.
Gabriel Vasquez and others: and therefore this law also ought to be cancelled;
but if it be not annulled by express revocation, it is unjust, and
unreasonable, and unnecessary, and a snare to consciences, and is not the
circumstance of a thing commanded, but of that which ought to be left at
liberty, and therefore is no measure or proper band of conscience; but to us it
is an obligation neither in conscience nor in law. But Haec ideo volui nostris
intexere chartis, Mantuan.

Ut quoties Patres....coeunt
Sint memores, magno ad leges opus esse ferendas
Ingenio, multis oculis, examine recto.
I have given these instances not only to fix the Conscience in these great
inquiries, but by these to explicate the measures of the Rule.

. V. Of Ecclesiastical Laws of FAITH, or Articles of confession.
RULE XXI. The Catholic Church is a witness of Faith, and a record of all
necessary truths; but not the Mistress and Ruler of our Creed; that is, cannot
make any laws of Faith.
IN our inquiries of faith we do not run to the Catholic Church desiring her
to judge our questions; 1.
for she can never meet together; and she is too great a body to do single
acts and make particular sentences: but to her we run for conduct, by inquiring
what she believes, what she has received from Christ and his Apostles. So that
the Authority of the Catholic Church is resolved into Catholic tradition.
Whatsoever can be made to appear to have been by the Apostles taught, and
consigned to the Church, that is a law of faith. But of this I have already
given accounts. lib. 2. Chap. 3. Rule 14.
The Catholic Church, taking in the Apostolical, that is, the Church of all
ages, is a witness beyond exception. For if she have the Spirit of God, if she
love truth, and if she do not consent to deceive her self, she cannot be
deceived in giving testimony concerning matter of fact and actual tradition: or
if she could, yet we are excused in following that testimony, because we have
no better, we have no other. Better then our best, and better then all we have,
we cannot be obliged to use: but therefore we have the justice and the
goodness, our own necessity and the veracity of God for our security, that
this is a sure way for us to walk in. But then when this is reduced to practice
in matters of belief, it will come to this only, That she bears witness to
the Scriptures, that they are the word of God; but beyond what is contained in
Scripture, she has no article of faith.

The consequent of this which I have largely proved and explicated in the place
above cited, 2.
is, that all her Sermons and all her explications of doctrines must be by that
measure. If it be agreeable to Scripture, it is that which she has received:
but if she has not received it, she cannot make a doctrine, nor deliver a
proposition with authority, nor oblige the conscience.

But this Rule if it be understood of the Catholic Church of this or any one
present age, 3.
will not signify so much: for unless the Tradition be delivered in a constant
succession from the Apostles, the Church is not a certain witness, but makes
her self a Judge of truth; which she can never do, but by relating to the
Scriptures, by showing there it is, in the Code which she has received. But
when any doubt does arise concerning any matter of belief, the Catholic Church
has no solemn Court of judicature or place of resort where a single person may
go for determination. And if a question be between Church and Church, as
between Rome and England, the question is, which is the Catholic Church; for
indeed neither of them is: and there is no such thing then as a Catholic Church
to determine the question: as when the head and the belly, the mouth and the
arms fell out, the whole body could not be judge of the controversy; but if
they had had a rule, thither they might go to be guided. And if it be asked,
who shall expound the rule, there is no other answer to be given, but to desire
men to be good and humble, to pray to God, and without partiality to desire
truth; and then every man will be able to answer his own question. For if the
Rule be hard, it is hard to them that are not willing and soft and compliant;
but not to the gentle and the humble, to them that follow God in simplicity and
whithersoever he will lead them.

But it is to be considered that the Church is a Net that has in it ^ishes
good and bad, 4.
it is a field of corn and tares; and but that the Apostles were guided by an
infallible spirit, there could have been no certainty: bu^ then after them
there was no more to be looked for; what they left we were to use, but to look
for no more. For the Catholic Church never was since the Apostles time without
error. By Catholic Church, I do not mean the right believing part of the
Church, (for in questions of faith the dispute was which was the right
believing part) but I mean all that profess the faith of Christ, who when they
are divided will never allow the opposite party to be their Judge: and
therefore it cannot be supposed that God should appoint one to be the Judge,
who must always be supposed a party, and will never be accepted by the other,
unless he had given infallibility to that one part, and we had all known it.
To the Apostles he did, and they were the fountains of tradition: but when they
were gone, the only way that was left was to see what they left, and to that
every part was to conform; but neither part was Judge, except only for
themselves: and in this every part ought to be trusted, because they only had
the biggest concern to take care that they be not deceived. No man or company
of men was charged with them; every Government was charged with it is own care
and conduct.

But I shall not insist upon this, 5.
because it can be of no use in the conduct of conscience. Because if ever
there be a dispute in the Church, there is no Catholic Church to which we can
go: and if we call that the Catholic Church which is the greater part, that
may deceive us; for in the days of Elias almost all Israel had corrupted
himself, and in the time of the Arrians almost all the world was Arrian; and at
this day a very great part of the Catholic Church is stained with the horrible
errors and follies of Popery: and besides our notices are so little and narrow
of the belief of Christendom, our entercourses so small, our relations so
false, our informations so partial, that it is not possible for us to know what
is the belief of the major part. It is not known at this day by the Doctors of
the Roman Church what is the practice of the Greek Churches in the Marriage of
their Priests, nor what is their doctrine of Purgatory, nor of the procession
of the holy Ghost, as appears in their disputes and contrary narratives of
these particulars. We cannot tell in England at this day whether the Lutheran
Churches have right Ordinations and perfect succession of Bishops in their
Churches. I have endeavored very much to inform my self in the particular, and
am not yet arrived to any certain notice of it. This therefore, to appeal to
the sense of the major part of the Church in a question, will signify nothing
at all as to our conscience.

Especially if to this we add, 6.
that the Churches have got a trick of Empire and imposing their sometimes
false, and always unnecessary articles upon all of their communion; and then
the faith of the Church will depend upon the opinion of the chief and
principals: and then their belief will be like a rumor spread from a few
mouths into the ears of millions, who, though they all tell the same story, yet
are no more credible for their multitude then the first reporters were for
their authority. Nay in most places men dare not speak what they think, and
dare not believe what they find dangerous, and dare not inquire into what they
dare not disbelieve; so that if you had been at Trent and asked the Fathers, it
would have signified nothing: for whatever their belief was, they were born
down by the Congregations, and the Congregations by the Legates, and the
Legates by the Pope; and that is the Catholic Church.

It remains therefore that we are from the Catholic Church to expect no other
determination of our questions, 7.
but by conveying to us notice of the doctrines Apostolical. And this is often
and largely discoursed and taught by Lib. 3. cap. 40. and lib. 5. c. 20. lib.
4. cap. 63, and 43.
S. Irenaeus, by S. Clement Lib. 3. cap. 12.
in Eusebius, by de Praescript. and contr. Marcion. l. 4.
Tertullian, by In prooem. l. 1. (...).
Origin, Epist. ad Pompei.
S. Cyprian, Ad S^rap. de Spir. S.
S. Athanasius, Sermon. cont. Sab. and Arrium.
S. Basil, Haeres. 31.
Epiphanius, Adv. Lucifer.
S. Hierom, Contr. Faust. Manich. lib. 11. cap. 2.
S. Austin, and Cap. antepenult.
Vincentius Lirinensis: what they could derive from the fountains Apostolical
by a clear chanel and conduit, that was first, and that was true, and that was
in the rule, and that was the measure of faith. And therefore when in the
Council of Ephesus the Epistle of Capreolus the Bishop of Carthage was read for
the establishment of antiquity, and the reproof of the new doctrines, all the
Bishops cried out, Hae omnium voces sunt, haec omnes dicimus, hoc omnium votum
est. This was the voice of them all, they all said the same thing: and what was
that which they all affirmed, nisi ut quod erat antiquitus traditum, teneretur?
quod adinventum nuper, exploderetur? says Vincentius, that what is ancient and
at first delivered, that should be held; that which is lately invented should
be exploded. For the Church cannot determine questions by way of judgment and
authority, but by way of attestation, and as a witness only of the doctrine
Apostolical. There is nothing else necessary, and nothing else is practicable.

RULE XXII. The Decrees of General Councils are of great use in the Conduct of
Conscience, but not the proper measure, or last determination of matters of
belief.
I Before Rule 14.
considered Councils as they had acquired an accidental authority by the
veneration of their age, 1.
and their advantage of having been held in the elder ages of the Church: Now I
consider them in their own proper and immediate pretense. I then considered
them in order to Government, but now in order to faith: for Councils
Ecclesiastical have pretended to a power over the conscience, so as to require
both the obedience of the will, and the obedience of the understanding.
Concerning which I am to say, that Nothing can oblige to Divine faith but a
Divine authority: to which Councils can no more pretend for being General, then
for being Provincial; and to which great assemblies have no other title or
pretense of promise then the private congregations of the faithful, who though
but two or three, yet shall be assisted by the Divine presence. But General
Councils are so wholly of humane institution, that though by the dictate of
right reason and natural wisdom they are to be convened; yet to make them a
formal judicatory, and to give them a legislative power or a dominion and
magistery in faith, there are so many conditions required both to their
indiction and convention, to their constitution and integrity, to their conduct
and proceeding, to their conclusion and determination, that men are not to this
day agreed about any one of them; and therefore they cannot be a legal
judicatory obliging any but them that do consent, and so oblige themselves.

But yet they are of great use for inquiry and consultation: 2.
and therefore Eusebius speaking of Constantine the Emperor, lib. 3. de vi^a
Constant. c. 6.
says of him, Concilium generale tanquam Dei exercitum instruens, in unum locum
coegit. A General Council is God's army; and being a representative of the
Church in the same degree as it is General and rightly called, and rightly
ordered, and rightly proceeding, it partakes of the Churches appellation; it is
acies ordinata, terrible as an army with banners. Let them be as many as it
happens, in the multitude of Counselors there is safety; that is, they are
more likely to understand truth then single persons, for they are not so soon
prejudiced and corrupted: as a river is harder to be poisoned or to be turned
aside, then a pail of water or a dish-full; but if it be, it is so much the
worse. But if they proceed rightly they are excellent helps, and some of them
have done great good to the Church, and some have done great mischief; and
which have, and which have not, we are to inquire by other instruments: so that
we are to judge concerning them, and then they are to be guides to us; that is,
we consider which are fittest to be followed, of which we judge by General and
extrinsic considerations, and then we follow them in the particular inquiry;
that is, we follow them because we think they followed the Apostles, and were
faithful witnesses of their doctrine. Which indeed is an excellent benefit
which we may receive by the first and most Ancient Councils, which were near
the fountains: they could trace all the new pretenses up to their original,
they discussed the doctrines in their provinces, they heard what any one could
say, they carried it to the General assembly, they compared it with the
tradition and doctrine of other Churches, and all together were able very well
to tell how the Apostles had taught the Churches of their foundation. And
because the four first General Councils did, or are supposed to have done so,
therefore they have acquired a great, but an accidental authority, and are
accepted by the most part of Christendom, and made into humane laws of faith,
and the measures of heresy. Such use as this the conscience can make of the
Ancient Councils; but beyond this or some such good use as this the conscience
is at no hand obliged to follow their determinations as the sentence of a
competent judge, but as of an authentic witness, when it can appear or be
credible that it can be so, and is so. And this was the very thing that S.
Athanasius affirmed of the Nicene Council, de Synod.
Siquidem Nicaena Synodus non temere habita est, ut quae habeat gravissimos
usus and legitimam rationem. The Nicene Synod was of great use. They met about
the question of Easter and the Arian heresy. Sed in negotio Paschatis non
abhorruerunt ab istiusmodi appendice. Ibi enim placuit ut adderetur, Visum est
ut omnes obtemperarent. De Fide vero non scripserunt, Visum est; sed ad istum
modum, Credit Catholica Ecclesia: and statim confessio ipsa credendi adjuncta
est, ut ostenderent eam non esse novam sententiam, sed Apostolicam, and quae
ipsi scripsissent non esse sua inventa, sed Apostolorum documenta. But in the
matter of Easter, because it was a ritual, and the circumstance of time and the
unity of order, they decreed, that every one should obey. But in the matter of
Faith they did not write so, that they appointed every one to obey, but in this
manner, The Catholic Church believes: and then they adjoined the confession of
Faith, to show that the doctrine was not new, but that it was Apostolical, it
was that which they wrote, but nothing of a later birth. To any other purpose
neither the Council of Nice nor the Council of Ariminum is of any use or
authority: save only it is the sentence of so many men, and is to be received
according to the credibility of the men, or the reasonableness of the article.

But then let it be considered, 3.
to what the authority of a Council will amount according to the sentence of
most men. The Doctors of the Church of Rome (a few only expected) say that a
Council, if it be not confirmed by the Pope, has no authority. Upon this
account, if they say true, every Council is fallible, and therefore no rule or
guide of faith: for unless it can be deceived, why should it be submitted to
the judgment of the Pope? and if it can be deceived, it cannot bind, because it
cannot secure the conscience. But the others that are not of the Roman party
say, a Council is then not deceived, when it delivers the doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, and speaks consonantly to Scriptures: and if a single Doctor
does so, he is to be believed. What then? where is the difference? This only is
it, That it is more likely a Council shall find out the truth, and report the
tradition; and if we be to choose our faith by guess and probability, a Council
is better then a single Doctor, by so much as there are many more then one
Doctor in it. But this will only serve the turn till men are willing or at
leisure to inquire: this only excepted; because few men can judge, and most
men are ruled by others, all such persons can have nothing better to rule and
determine them then a General Council: but then it is an argument of reason,
and not of authority; it is not because they are bound, but because it is most
reasonable in their circumstances.

I should here have considered of what authority the writings of the 4.
Fathers are to the interpretation of Scripture and the conduct of conscience:
but because I find only the same use of them as of other learned men in all
ages of the Church, save only in those things where they are witnesses of the
Apostolical doctrines, to which they best can give testimony who are the most
Ancient, S. August. Epist. 48. and Epist. 111. Vide Gratian. did. 9. Cyril.
Hier. Catech. 4. S. Hieron. Ep. 19. and Ep. 76.
and because themselves disclaim any authority in matters of faith, and call to
be tried by the word of God; I had rather this thing should be read in others
then in my self: because it is matter of envy and reproach to tell why they
cannot be relied upon; and to add more reputation to that authority which they
have acquired by many intervening causes, by reason, and by unreasonablenesse,
would be matter of danger, and sometimes the causes of error, and very often of
a deceitful confidence. But who please may see this uncertainly disputed, and
never concluded to any certaintly, by Praefat. in comment. de Locis com. l. 7.
c. 3. concl. 3, and 4.
Cajetan on one side, and Melchior Canus on the other. He may also consider the
saying of the Concion. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 14. page 606.
Bishop of Bitonto, that he preferred the sentence of one Pope before a
thousand Hieroms, and a thousand Augustines and Gregory's; and that every side
declines their arbitration when they speak against them: by which it appears
that no side supposes themselves to be bound in conscience to follow them.

But the best use of them is that which the Church of England has described in
one of her ancient Canons, 5.
that her Bishops and Priests should teach nothing nisi quod ex doctrina
Veteris and Novi Testamenti veteres Patres and Ecclesiae Episcopi collegerint,
but what the Fathers and ancient Bishops of the Church have gathered out of the
doctrine of the Old and New Testament: which Canon gives a very good answer to
this inquiry if we should enter into it. For it declares that the Fathers are
so far to be followed as they follow Scripture, and that their writings are of
great use for the reproof of new doctrines: and certainly if Preachers were
confined to this measure, possibly we might miss some truths which now it may
be we find; but it is certain we should escape very many errors. For the rest,
I refer my reader to the Archbp. of Spalato de rep. Eccles. lib. 7. c. 6. to
Rivet's Prolegomena to his Criticus Sacer, to Daniel Tossanus his Synopsis de
legendis Patribus, to Gregory de Valentia his analysis fidei, to Bishop Morton
his Catholic Apology, and to D Whittaker de Script, authoritate. In this whole
affair the conscience is at liberty, and therefore I am here to inquire no
further.

RULE XXIII. Subscription to articles and forms of confession in any
particular Church, is wholly of Political consideration.
WHen forms of confession are made, 1.
and public articles established, it is of great concernment not only to the
reputation of the Government, but to the unity and peace of that Christian
community, that they be not publicly opposed. To this purpose we find so many
subscriptions to the Decrees of Councils, by Princes and Prelates and Priests
and Deacons, by Prefects of Cities and Governors of Countries; it was an
instrument of unity and peace, a declaration of their consent, and at no hand
to be reproved, unless it be in a false article, or with tyranny to
consciences, or to maintain a faction. But that which the Government looks
after is, that no new Religions be introduced to the public disturbance; of
which the Romans were so impatient, that they put to death a Noble Lady,
Pomponia Graecina, lib. 3. cap. 7.
utpote novae cujusdam religionis ream, says Tacitus, as being guilty of a new
religion. Now to prevent this, Subscription is invented, that is, an
attestation of our consent; which if it be required by the supreme authority,
it may be exacted in order to peace and unity: and Tacitus tells that Apudius
Muraena was degraded from the dignity of a Senator because he refused to
subscribe to the laws of Augustus. This is the same case, for subscription
serves no other end but that which is necessary in Government. We find in
Polydore Virgil that the Ancient Kings of England at their inauguration, de
Rerum inventor. l. 4. cap. 12.
Silicem tenebant juraturi per Jovem, se religionem and ritus Patrios
retenturos, haec verba loquentes, Si sciens fallo, tunc me Diespiter salva urbe
arceque bonis omnibus ejiciat; They swore by Jupiter that they would keep the
religion and their Country rites, and cursed themselves if they did not. This
was more then Ecclesiastical subscription: for that bound them to it for ever;
this only gives witness of our present consent, but according to it is design
and purpose, for the future it binds us only to the conservation of peace and
unity.

For though it may be very fitting to subscribe a confession of articles, 2.
yet it may be very unfit that we swear always to be of the same mind; for that
is either a profession of infallibility in the authority, or in the article, or
else a direct shutting our heart against all further clarity and manifestations
of the truths of God. And therefore subscription ought to be so intended, that
he who has subscribed may not perceive himself taken in a snare: but yet he
that subscribes must do it to those purposes and in that sense and
signification of things which the supreme power intends in his commanding it;
that is, at least, that he who subscribes does actually approve the articles
over-written; that he does at that time believe them to be such as it is said
they are; true, if they only say they are true, useful, if they pretend to
usefulness, necessary, if it be affirmed that they are necessary. For if the
subscriber believes not this, he by hypocrisy serves the ends of public peace
and his own preferment.

But this whole affair is to be conducted with some wariness, 3.
lest there come more evil by it then there can come good. And therefore
although when articles are framed, the Sons of the Church ought to subscribe
them for public peace, in case they do heartily approve them; yet such
articles ought not to be made and imposed, unless they of themselves be
necessary, and plain by a Divine Commandment. And this was the advice of
Melanchthon. in Epist. and Consiliis theologicis.
Ut sit igitur discordiarum finis, recte facit potestas obligans homines ut
obtemperent, quando alioqui parere est necesse, The supreme power may then
command men to subscribe to such articles, which it is necessary that they
should believe. But if God have not commanded us to believe them, no humane
power can command us to profess them.

Beyond what is necessary or very useful, 4.
unless peace be concerned in the publication of the article and it is
establishment, it is but weakly and impertinently concerned in the
subscription. For if the peace of the Church be safe without the article, how
can it be concerned in the consent to it and profession of it, excepting only
by an accidental and a necessity superinduced by themselves and their own
imprudent forwardness, or itch of Empire over consciences? If an article be
contested publicly, and is grown into parties and factions, and these factions
cannot be appeased without decision of the question, then the conformity is as
useful to peace as the sentence and determination was; and then there is
nothing else to be considered, but that the article be true, or believed to be
so. But to them that are so persuaded, it is necessary they obey, if they be
required to subscribe; and the supreme power has authority to require it,
because it is one of their greatest duties, to govern and to rule in peace. But
these things can seldom happen thus without our own fault: but when they do,
there is inconvenience on all sides; but that which is least must be chosen.

When articles are established without necessity, 5.
subscription must be required without tyranny and imperiousness. That is, it
must be left to the liberty of the subject to profess or not to profess that
doctrine. The reason is plain. In things not certain in themselves no man can
give a law to the conscience, because all such laws must clearly be Divine
Commandments: but if the conscience cannot be bound to the article, and the
profession serves no necessary end of the Commonwealth, then God does not
bind, and man cannot: and therefore to bring evil upon men that do not believe
the article, and dare not profess to believe what they do not, is injustice
and oppression, it is a law of iniquity; and therefore it is not obligatory to
conscience, and no humane authority is sufficient for the sanction and
imposition. Socrates was wont to say, apud Stobaeum
Sacramentum oblatum duabus de causis fide firmandum: vel ut teipsum a turpi
suspicione liberes, vel ut amicos ex magnis periculis eripias. When you are
required to give faith and security by a sacrament, oath or subscription, there
are two cases in which you must not refuse: when thou thy self art suspected,
and can no otherwise purge thy self; and when any of thy relations is in
danger, that is, when it is for good to thy self or thy friends. But when there
is no necessity of faith, and no public need to be served, the causes that
besides these enjoin subscription are fond persuasions, and indiscreet zeal,
and usurped Empire over consciences: in which cases the Ecclesiastic state has
no power to give Commandments; and if the Civil state does, they oblige to
suffering calamity, but not to any other conformity, and then it is a direct
state of persecution.

Upon the account of this Rule it has been of late inquired, 6.
whether it can be lawful for any man to subscribe what he does not believe to
be true, giving his hand to public peace, and keeping his conscience for God.

But to this the answer is easy, 7.
if subscription does signify approbation; for in that case it is hypocrisy,
and a denying to confess with the mouth, what we believe with the heart. But
if subscription were no more then the office of the Clerk of the Signet or of a
Council, who in form of law is to sign all the acts of Council, then the
consideration were different. For he that is a public officer, and interposes
the signature of the Court, not as the account of his own opinion, but as a
formality of the Court, all the world looks upon it as none of his personal
act, but as a solennity of law, or an attestation of the act of the Council.
But in subscription to articles of confession, or censure of Propositions as
heretical, every Ecclesiastic that subscribes does it for himself, and not for
the Court. Lubens and ex animo subscripsi: that is our form in the Church of
England. Consentiens subscripsi: so it was in the ancient Councils, Epist. 124.
ad Alipium.
as S. Austin reports; I consent to the thing, My mind goes along with it. But
in this case the whole affair is put to issue in this one particular, which I
touched upon before. If the intention of the Superior be to require our assent
to be testified by subscription, he that subscribes does profess his assent,
and whatever he thinks himself, it is the intention of the imposer that
qualifies the subscription. S. Austin tells of a Senator that upon his parol
went to treat for his ransom or exchange, ubi supra.
and promised to return to them again in case he could not effect it. But he
going from the army pretended to have forgot something, and came back
presently, and then departed. But telling his story to the Roman Senate, and
pretending himself quit of his promise because he went back presently, they
drove him out of the Senate; because they regarded not what he had in his head,
but that which the enemy intended when they made him swear to return.

But the effect of these considerations will be this, 8.
That no particular Church ought with rigor to require subscriptions to
articles which are not evidently true, and necessary to be professed; because
in the division of hearts that is in the world, it is certain that some good
men may dissent, and then either they shall be afflicted, or be tempted to
hypocrisy: of either of which if Ecclesiastic laws be guilty, they are not for
edification, they are neither just nor pious, and therefore oblige not.

But if for temporal regards the supreme power do require subscription, 9.
those temporal regards must be complied with, so that the spiritual interest
of souls and truth be secured. And therefore the next good thing to the not
imposing uncertain and unnecessary articles is, that great regard be had, and
great ease be done to wise and peaceable dissenters.

And at last, 10.
in such cases, let the articles be made with as great latitude of sense as
they can; and so that subscriptions be made to the form of words, let the
subscribers understand them in what sense they please which the truth of God
will suffer, and the words can be capable of. This is the last remedy, but it
is the worst; it has in it something of craft, but very little of ingenuity;
and if it can serve the ends of peace, or of external charity, or of a
phantastic concord, yet it cannot serve the ends of truth and holiness, and
Christian simplicity.

CHAP. Vth. Of Laws Domestic: or the power which Fathers of Families have to
bind the Consciences of their Relatives.
RULE I. Children are bound to obey the laws and Commandments of their Parents
in all things domestical, and in all actions personal relating to the family,
or done within it.
THE word of the Commandment is (...), which signifies to be or to make
weighty; 1.
but in Piel it signifies to honor, that is, Honor your Parents, and do not
lightly account of them: But in Levit. 19. 3. the word is (...) fear thy Mother
and thy Father. They signify the same event of things, for a reverential fear
is honor, and they both imply obedience. And there are three great endearments
of this which make it necessary, and make it as absolute as it can be. The one
is that our Parents are to us in the place of God: (...) said the Greek Comedy,
Hugo de S. Victore lib. 1. de Sacram. c. 7.
Suppose your Parents to be to you as God. Haec enim paternitas est nobis
Sacramentum and imago Divinae paternitatis, ut discat cor humanum in eo
principio quod videt, quid debeat illi principio a quo est, and quod non videt.
For the Fathers power is a Sacrament and image of the Divine Paternity, that a
man may learn by the principle of his Being which he sees, what he owes to the
principle of his Being which he sees not: and Plato says there is no image by
which we can worship God so well as our Fathers, lib. 2. de Legib.
our Grandfathers and our Mothers. And therefore it is impiety to dishonor or
disobey our Parents, and it is piety when we pay our duty to them. The same
word signifies religion to God, which expresses this duty. Parents not amare,
Seneca l. 3. de Benef. c. 1.
impietas est; non agnoscere, insaniae. For as there are two great crimes which
we commit properly against God, Impiety or Irreligion, and Atheism: so there
are these two crimes against our Parents. He that does not honor and revere
them is impious or irreligious; and he that will not acknowledge them is
Atheistical, that is, like the Atheists, he denies the principle of his Being.
And therefore upon that of Virgil, Huc Pater O Lenaee veni -- in lib. 2. Georg.
Servius observes that the Heathens called all their Gods by the name of
Fathers: and an injury done to our Father is said to be done to God, according
to that of Menander, (...),
(...).
He that reviles and speaks evil of his Father In verbis per totam vitam
parents venerari maxim decet, levium enim volatiliumque verborum gravissima
imminet poena. Plato. l. 4. de repub.
, does blaspheme God; for (...).
God is the Great Father of the world, and therefore he has by greatest
religion immured the Fathers honor. Et Jovis imperium and chari praecepta
parentis, Edocet.... Next to God is our duty to our Father.

2. The second endearment of our duty, 2.
obedience and regard to parents, is gratitude; which here has the greatest
obligation, and is to this purpose remarked by all laws and by all wise men of
the World. Omnis in Ascanio chari stat cura Parentis. All their love and all
their care is for their dear boy. The child is a part of his parents, a tender
part, but under custody and a guard; and the state of descent and succession
from parents or children is called Suitas in the law: and there is so much of a
Father in his child, that if a Father and a Son be partners in a crime, and
refuse to confess it before torments, the law commands the Son first to be
tormented; Charles the second, the Emperor, did so; as knowing that the Father
will confess rather then endure to see his son tormented: and when the Father
does confess upon the torment of his son, l. 1. in fi. C. si rect. provi. in
2. lec.
the Father is said to be confessus in tormentis, said Baldus, he confessed in
his own torments. And as long as the Son is in prison, the Father is not
accounted free in law: and the Fathers sins are then punished, when the child
is made sick, or unfortunate. So that the government of children is no
otherwise then as a man's will governs his own hand and foot; over which, always
supposing him to abide within the limits and inclinations of nature, that is,
to love and cherish them, and in no sense to hate them, in all other he has an
entire power of command.

3. The third endearment of childrens obedience is the power of blessing and
cursing which God has given to Parents, 3.
and which himself by his providence and great Economy will verify. The
Fathers blessing establishes the houses of children Ecclus. 3. 10.
but the curse of the Mother rooteth out foundations, says Ben-Sirach. And S.
Paul exhorting children to obey their parents, Ephesians. 6. 2, 3.
says it is the first Commandment with promise, that is, the first to which
any special promise is annexed, the promise of longaevity in the land of
promise. Benedictio merces obedientiae est, says Elias Cretensis, The Fathers
blessing is the reward of the sons obedience. But it is observable that the
original word in the fifth Commandment is of active signification, Honor thy
Father and thy Mother that they may prolong thy days upon the Earth; that is,
says Paulus Fagius, thy parents are Gods ministers and instruments, the
channels and conveyances of the Divine blessing: for God hears the prayers of
Fathers and Mothers blessing their obedient children, or cursing their
disobedience; Ezekiel. 22. 7.
insomuch that Ezekiel reckons their disobedience to their parents to be to the
Jews the cause of their banishment from their own Country. Suidas tells that
Leontius the Bishop of Tripolis in Lydia seeing his only son of an ill nature
and apt to mischief, prayed to God that his son might die young, lest he should
fall into impiety: and God heard the Fathers prayer. (...), The curses of
parents are grievous upon the earth. Orpheus. Plato lib. 11. de Leg.
And this was observed among the Heathens in the sad examples of the children
of O Edipus, Amintor and Theseus, who grew miserable upon their Fathers curses;
and therefore Telemachus was afraid to cast his Mother out of Ulysses house,
lest she should curse him. And this was it that brought servitude or slavery
into the world; God having in one of the fountains of mankind, in the great
Patriarch of the world, consigned a sad example that for ever children should
be afraid to dishonor their parents, and discover their nakedness, or reveal
their turpitude, their follies and dishonours.

To these I need not add their natural necessity, 4.
their disability to help themselves, their obnoxiousnesse to every evil, their
defencelesse condition, the miseries and calamities and infirmities by their
want of wisdom, all which at first do infinitely endeare obedience, and make
it necessary: but I remember that this very thing was of great value amongst
the Ancients, and they did use to tell this fable to their children to teach
them to obey their parents. An old Lion, amongst other precepts that he gave
his son, charged him that he should never fight with a Man, because if he was
not too strong, he would at least be too crafty. The young Lion heard him, but
regarded him not, but therefore as soon as ever he was full grown, hastens
abroad to seek a man to be his enemy. He came into a field, and saw a yoke of
oxen standing ready furnished to plow, and asking them if they were men, they
said, No, but that a man had put those yokes upon them. He left them and went
aside, and espying a horse bridled and tied to a tree, asked if he were a man.
He was answered, No, but a man had bridled him, and would by and by come to
ride him, for a man was his Master. At last he finds a man cleaving wood, and
asked him: and finding him to be so, told him he must then prepare to fight
with him. The man told him, With all his heart, but first desired him to help
to draw the wedge out of that tree, and then he would. The young Lion thrusts in
his paws, and a little opens the tree till the wedge fell out, and the tree
closed upon his feet by it is returning violence. The man seeing the lion
fastened, and the lion seeing himself entrap'd, the man cried out to his
Neighbors to come to his help; and the lion to escape his danger tore his feet
from the tree, and left his nails and blood behind him, and returning with
shame and smart to his old Father said to him, Mi Pater, si paruissem monitis
tuis ungulas non amisissem, I had not lost my nails if I had obeyed my Fathers
commandment. For the commandments of parents being for the good of their
children, he cannot be prosperous that will not obey his Father. That was their
meaning.

But concerning the duty it self there is no question; 5.
nothing is plainer, nothing is easier: but concerning the limits and
administration of this power there is very great difficulty; the Scripture
speaking either indefinitely or universally, either of which does equally need
a limit and specification. Children, obey your parents in all things, says S.
Paul: and if that all were absolutely all, there were no difficulty in the
understanding it; but infinitely difficult it would be to observe it, and
reconcile it with our other duties and just interests. And just so is that law
which by the consent of all the world is represented as universally, Liberi
quacunque in re parentibus dicto audientes sunto; Trinum. Act. 3.
and he in the Comedy, Pater adsum, Impera quodvis, neque tibi ero in mora,
Here am I my Father, Command me any thing, neither will I resist. But this any
thing and this every thing, is but any thing and every thing of a certain kind;
which if we can establish upon certain measures, we have one great line more
for the conduct of conscience. The Divines and Lawyers reduce the issues of
this relation to three heads, 1. Reverence, 2. Animadversion, 3. Piety.

Of Reverence to Parents.
And first it is certain whatever can be signified by honor and fear and
reverence is the duty of children; 6.
that is, so far as to think honorably of them, to speak well of them, to
conceal their faults, to excuse them to others, to comport themselves with
reverence and great regard before them. (...), Above all things have your
parents in honor: and this is to be expressed according as the parents shall
require, and according to the customs of the nation and the most pious and
obedient in it; for vultu quoque laedi pietatem, was an old rule, A child may
be rude and undutifull in his very looks; and he deserves to be punished with
blindness, qui parentum vultus torvo visu despexerit, and elatis oculis
laeserit pietatem, says S. Hierom, who by proud looks and scornful eyes is
impious to his parents. But this duty is well described by Theophilus to
Autolycus, Sanctum and laudabile censetur, non solum apud Deum sed and apud
homines, videlicet ut in simplicitate and absque omni malitia subjiciamur
parentibus. Children must be subject to their parents without all malice
perverseness, and in all simplicity, that is, ^ngenuity of words and manners.
And when Ptolemy asked one of the 72 translators of the Bible how a son should
pay due thankfulness to his parents, he was answered, Si nulla re illos
tristitia affeceris, If you grieve them in nothing. That Is the surest measure.

The next thing that is also certain in this is, 7.
that all the good Counsels and precepts of holiness and wisdom which the
parents give, it is necessary the children should observe; and besides that the
not observing them is a sin against the special Commandments, it is also a sin
of disobedience, and a rebellion against the Fathers authority. So the Father
in the Comedy urges his authority, Feceris par tuis caeteris factis, Plaut.
Trinum. Act. 3.
Patrem
Tuum si percoles per pietatem. Nolo ego cum improbis te viris,
Gnate mi, neque in via, neque in foro ullum sermonem exequi.
Haec noctes diesque tibi canto ut caveas
.....meo modo, and moribus vivito antiquis:
Quae ego tibi praecipio, haec facito: haec tibi
Si mea Imperia capesses, multa bona in pectore consident.
Keep good company, avoid the debaucheries of the present times, live as I
command, and as your forefathers did live; and if to these purposes you submit
to my government, good things shall dwell within you.

But we find amongst the Ancients some little instances of this honor and
reverence besides obedience specified. 8.
The Ancients would not without leave go from the presence of their Father: so
he in the Comedy, -- neque latebrose me abs tuo
Conspectu occultabo -- Trinum. ubi supr.

* They would not conceal from their parents the entercourses and accidents of
their youth, their amors, their mistresses, their designs of marriage, their
little plots, and advantages or disadvantages. Quae fert adolescentia
Ea ne me celet consuefeci filium:
that is, they accounted it part of the honor due to their parents, to tell
them truth in all things where they were interrogated, or suspected. Nam qui
mentiri aut fallere insuerit Patrem, Terent. Adelph Act. 1. Scen. 1.
aut
Audebit, tanto magis audebit caeteros.
He that lies before his Father dishonours him, and commits two sins; he
transgresses two commandments. * Add to this, they counted it impiety to
steal any thing from their parents. ibid.
Egon' Patri surripere possim quidquam tam cauto seni?
Atque adeo si facere possem, pietas prohibet.
That is, whatever was a single injury if done to a stranger, Prove. 28. 24.
was double if committed against their parents: for as to do good to them was
piety as well as charity, it was religion and justice too; so to do any evil
to them is to do them dishonor, and expressly against the fifth
Commandment. These are the first general measures, and the indication of very
many particulars.

But there is one great measure more, 9.
and that is, that specification of the duties of this Commandment which we
find in the laws of Nations and the consent of all wise men, and particularly
of those with whom we do converse, and by whom we are governed. For our
parents have a double power over us, one by the law of Nature, and the other by
the Civil law; that is, there are some duties which children do owe to their
parents, which are primely and indispensably necessary, others which are
specifications and instances of a general duty, but such which may suffer
increase and diminution, but are necessary by virtue of a Divine Commandment
when they are bound upon us by the laws of our Country; because these are of
the nature of those things whose natures can be changed by becoming laws, and
are reduced under the Category of their proper virtues. The particulars I shall
draw out of the laws of Nations, from the Civil and Canon laws, reducing them
to distinct rules shall describe their several obligations of the conscience:
and they relate to the other two parts of parental power, signified by
Castigation and Piety.

Of Castigation, or the Coercitive power of Parents. RULE II. Fathers have a
power to chastise their offending children, but not a power of life and death.
IN the laws of Romulus and Numa, 1.
Fathers had a power three times to sell their children, and a power to put
them to death in certain cases: and they attribute much of the prosperity of
their city to this permission, nothing being a better instrument to make good
citizens, then by making them good sons: it being very unlikely that ever he
should command well abroad, that knows not well how to obey at home. Quicunque
patrem timet ac reveretur,
Hic in bonum civem evadet proculdubio,
said Timocles, He that fears and obeys his Father, without a good citizen Si
quis in^^^^^ fuerit in parente (...) Magistratuum s^^ incapax Xenoph. l. 2.
(...) and fact. (...)
. And therefore it was observed by Dionysius Halicarnasseus that amongst the
Greeks, Contumacy, Impiety and Parricide were very common; and he gives this
reason, because Charondas, Pittacus and Solon did by their laws give the
Fathers no great power over their children. But I said that the Romans did, and
those great examples of Titus Manlius, C. Flaminius, C. Cassius, who put their
sons to death, were indeed very severe, but did imprint great terrors upon all
the Roman youth. Bodinus thinks this to be a natural and unalterable power; and
Aerodius supposes that God would not have commanded Abraham to kill his son,
but that it was a part of his ordinary and inherent power; and when Judah
commanded his daughter in law Thamar to be brought forth and burned for her
adultery, it gave indication that he by his supreme paternal power in the
family had power of life and death. And of this there is no question in the
heads of families, where the Father is a Patriarch, the fountain of his nation,
or of his society, and under the command of no superior: for the paternal power
is the fountain of the Royal; and Abimelech was nothing but the King my Father.

But when families were multiplied, 2.
though Fathers were fitter to be trusted with the severest power then any
other sort of interested persons, yet because this might fall into disorder,
God was pleased in the law of Moses so to order this affair, that the Fathers
power should not be diminished, and yet the execution of it and the declaration
of the sentence should be trusted to the Judge. For if a Father found his son
stubborn, rebellious, disobedient, a glutton or a drunkard, all which are
personal crimes, and against the private authority and counsel of the Father,
Deater. 21. 18.
the Father and the Mother might delate him to the Judge, and without further
proof but their own testimony he was to be stoned to death. Drunkenness and
gluttony were in no other cases capital in the law of Moses, but when joined
with rebellion or disobedience to their parents. And like to this proceeding in
Moses law was the process in the Persian Monarchy. For Aelian tells that when
Rhaco the Mardian brought Cartomes his son with his hands bound behind him to
Artaxerxes, desiring that the Prince would command him to be slain, because he
was impudent, he was naught, he was a villain; the Persian King asked him if he
could find in his heart to see his son die with violence. The Father replied, I
have in my garden a goodly lettice, fat and wanton and full of leaves. When I
find any of them luxuriant, proud and exorbitant, though it be a part of the
body I cut it off; and so I do to whatsoever is bitter and superfluous, and my
lettice is the sweeter for it, it does not bewail the loss of it is bad leaves,
but thrives the better. Think the same of me, O King; for though he be pared
away that hurts my family, that gives ill example to his Brothers, my stock
will be the more thriving, florid and fruitful in all good things.] By this
instance we perceive that when Fathers had not power to put to death their
rebellious children, they could require it of the Prince, who was to proceed
summarily and merely upon the Fathers instance. And we find in the French
Annals that Stephen Boslee the President of Paris impaled a young fellow because
his Mother said that she could by no arts or labor keep him from being a thief.

But this went off very much in the manners of men; and children were by other
means restrained ordinarily, 3.
before things were brought to that extremity; final. inst. de noxa. l. Divus.
ff. ad leg. Pomp. de parricid. and toto tit. C. de his qui Parent. vel fill.
occid.
and in the Civil law parents were forbidden to kill their children, and this
law has prevailed in all Christendom, excepting that a man is in some places
permitted to kill his daughter if he sees her in unchaste Embraces. But in stead
of these great excesses of power, there is left to Christian parents nothing
but a decent castigation in the lesser and single faults, and disinherison in
case of great and persevering. That children are to submit to the
animadversions and chastisements of their Fathers is the voice of nature, and
of all Nations, of Scripture and right Reason. So S. Paul, Hebr. 12. 9.
We have had Fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence: and Ben-Sirach teaches us, In opere and sermon and omni patientia
honora Patrem tuum, Ecclus. 3. 8.
Honor thy Father in thy work and in thy word, and in all patience, so the
Vulgar Latin reads it; that is, suffer what he imposes upon you: and this was
it which the young Greek that Plutarch speaks of had learned in Zeno's school,
Didici Patris iram far; I have learned (says he) patiently to bear my
Fathers anger. The authority is plain; the measures of it are only, that it be
done for amendment; that is, that it be discipline, not anger and revenge, and
that it be done with charity and moderation, which is signified by S. Ephesians. 6.
4.
Paul, Parents, provoke not your children to wrath; which precept he repeats,
(...), Coloss. 3. 21.
give them no opprobrious words, no contumelious and provoking language, and
therefore much less any cruel and undecent castigations. Pudore and
liberalitate liberos
Retinere satius esse credo, Adelph. Act* 1. Sc. 1.
quam metu.
Hoc patrium est, potius consuefacere filium
Sua sponte recte facere, quam alieno metu.
Hoc Pater ac Dominus interest: hoc qui nequit,
Fateatur se nescire imperare liberis.
A Master governs by fear, and a Father by love, and both by their authority:
but the gentle way is the Fathers method; but if he will use the severe, he
has authority to do it, and right or wrong he must be suffered, till the evil
be insufferable, and then he may decline it, but ever with reverence to his
Fathers honor; for indeed against a Fathers tyranny there is no aid, no
remedy, no intercession, but by an appeal to the common Father, the chief of
all the tribes and all the families. This only I am to add, That as Fathers
have not a power of life and death over their children; so neither are they
lightly to use that power which they have, and is next to this, that is, that I
may use S. lib. 5. Epist. 20.
Ambrose his expression, ne laesa pietas Patris ulciscatur se exhaeredatione
vel abdicatione contumacis generis, a power of disinherison is not to be used
for every great offense, much less for a litte. Pater, nisi magnae and multae
injuriae patientiam evicerint, lib. 1. c. 14. de Clement.
nisi plus est quod timet quam quod damnat, non facile accedit ad decretorium
stylum, said Seneca, A Father will not easily proceed to an exterminating
sentence, unless great and many injuries have quite overcome his patience. Nor
then neither, unless he fear worse things then those which he already blames.
For, as Quintilian observed well, this power was not given to Fathers but when
their sons are incorrigible. Declam. 259.
Fulmen istud Patrum adversus ferociam adolescentiae datum est, adversus filios
qui peccare plus possunt. If they will sin yet more, and will not be corrected,
then they may unwillingly use this thunderbolt. It is like the sentence of
excommunication, never to be used but when nothing else will cure the man, and
nothing at all will make the mischief tolerable: that is, a son may not be
disinherited, but when he may be hated, which may never be, Orat. pro Rosc.
Amer.
sine causis multis, magnis and necessariis (as Cicero affirms) The causes must
be great and many, and intolerable, and without remedy. But of these things
because the Fathers are judges, they must judge according to the permissions of
law, and the analogies of Christian prudence and charity; for if they do
amiss, the Child is miserable by the Fathers passion, and the Father by his
own.

Of Piety to Parents. RULE III. A Father has power over the goods and persons
of his Children, so as to be maintained by them.
THe Lawyers define the Paternal power to be jus moribus legibusque
constitutum, 1.
quo Patri in filium bonaque ipsius plenum jus olim tributum fuit; Sebast.
Monticul. de Patria potest.
a full right upon his son and his sons goods introduced by laws and customs.
Now this full right is alterable by the Civil law of any nation: that is,
whereas amongst the Romans whatsoever the son acquired, he acquired it not for
himself, but for his Father; this may determine sooner or last longer,
according to the appointments of law, for the heir so long as he is a child
differs nothing from a servant, and therefore if the law please, may be used
accordingly; and when the law has so appointed, the Conscience is bound by it.

But that which is not alterable by laws is that which is the natural and
necessary duty, 2.
that parents be maintained by their children if they need it: for this is in
the Commandment, this is a part of the honor that is due to them. For so our
Blessed Savior remarks the (...): the Pharisees that taught the children to
cry Corban, it is a gift, and therefore out of it the parents must not be
profited, * Matthew. 15. 6.
he calls it a not honoring the Father and Mother; 1 Timothy 5. 17.
and the double honor which S. Paul commands to be given to the Elders that
rule well is instanced in the matter of maintenance. And this the Heathens had.
So Hierocles, (...), Let us greatly honor our parents, affording them the
ministry of our bodies and the use of our wealth most cheerfully. Offic. 1.
But this Cicero limits to the necessaria vitae praesidia, quae debentur his
maxim, the necessary aides of life; that is, what is for their support, to
keep them from need and shame, according to the quality of the parent and
ability of the child: in l. Si libertis:. manumissis: ff. de alim.
so that this be first respected, In Luc. 18.
and then that, says Bartolus. To this purpose is that of S. Ambrose, If the
contumely of the Father and the reproaching or vilifying of the Mother be
punished so severely, what shall their starving or their beggary be? This the
Romans did resent so deeply, that they made a law that if a son that was
emancipated or quitted from his Fathers government did deny aliment to his
indigent Father, l. Unic. C. de ingrat. liber.
he was to be reduced under his Fathers power, and so to abide for ever. But by
this instance it is apparent that this is no part of the Fathers power, but is
an office of the sons piety. For between the Father and the son there is a
threefold chord or tie, as I have already observed, the band of Reverence, of
Castigation, and Piety; the two first are the Fathers authority, this last
gives the Father properly no right, but obliges the son directly. But then this
is to be added, that this obligation is only confirmed by the Civil laws, but
it is immediately tied upon him by the Natural: for a son is bound to keep his
Father from starving though he be a Bandito, or an Outlaw, that is, though he
have lost all civil rights, because no Civil power can prejudice a Divine
Commandment. in vita Solon^
Plutarch tells that by Solon's law the son was not bound to give his Father
aliment, if his Father caused him to learn no trade, or taught him nothing
whereby he might get his living. Indeed if the Father neither did give him
whereon to live, nor teach him whereby he might get it himself, the son is the
less obliged; but yet sufficiently for this, because it is by a law of Nature
that he is obliged, and all such obligations are before such conditions can
intervene. (...), said Aristotle. Something else is to be considered besides
the advantages of education: the Father was the principle of his Being, and in
that he can never be requited in kind, and therefore let him be paid by duty.

But if the case be such as divides the duty, 3.
and the money cannot be divided, what shall then be done? Marco Tomaso a
tradesman in Venice had a Father and a Son, both lame, both in great necessity.
The Father lost all his goods to the Turks, and the son had rowed in the
Galleys till all his strength and health was gone: but the poor Cutler (for
Tomaso was no more) was not able to relieve them both: what shall he do? The
case here is hard. But love descends, and ascends not: therefore Tomaso's
bowels yern upon his son; and he cannot have that tenderness for his Father,
and he were unnatural if he should let his son perish. It is true, but
therefore he ought not to neglect his Father and feed his son, because his son
does not, cannot love him so well as his Father does; and therefore he is
obliged by gratitude to his Father, and by tenderness to his son; to this
there is more natural inclination, but to the other there is more natural duty.
And therefore the Lawyers say that amor descendit, non ascendit, is to be
understood quoad ordinem dilectionis, non quoad effectum obligationis. Love
does descend, but it should not in some cases. And therefore when the law gives
leave that a Son may by his Father be sold to keep the Father from starving, it
shows plainly that the Father is in cases of necessity to be preferred.

And this indeed by the help of the Civil laws brings this rule to an instance
of Paternal power; 4.
for a Father in this law has a right over his son, and can deliver him to
labor and service for the necessary support of his helpless Father. This we
find done frequently, -- Et tandem demissa in viscera censu
Filia restabat non isto digna parente: Metamorph. 8.

Hanc quoque vendit inops.
And Eusebius tells it was done in the time of Maximianus the Emperor; and the
Prophet Jeremy brings in the people complaining in a time of famine, Our sons
and our daughters are too many, let us take corn for their price, that we may
eat and live. But this being only in the case of extreme necessity is not to
be drawn to any thing else, for this power is only just when it is
unavoidable: and therefore it is permitted in laws, which do therefore so
comply with the necessity, and endeavor to find a remedy, or to make it
tolerable, that in such cases the judges, if there be a contest in the
particular, are tied to proceed summarily: and if a son should pretend causes
of excuse from giving aliment to his Father, during the whole contestation, and
till the proof be made, the Son is tied to maintain his Father in the interval;
so careful are the laws to secure the performance of this duty, for the
omission of which all the world has observed great marks of the Divine
displeasure, expressed in judgments, and particularly of immature deaths;
Iliad. 4.
so Homer observes of Semoisius -- (...)
(...),
He refused to nourish his loving parents, and therefore he lived but a short
life.

One particular more is to be added, 5.
and that is, if an indigent Father have a rich Father living and a rich Son,
although both are obliged to nourish him, yet it is in the Fathers power to
burden the Son and to excuse the Grandfather; that is, the power which the
Father has over the Son can require this duty: The Grandfather is equally
obliged, but the Son has no power over him, the law has. For as for the thing
it self there is no other difference in it. But if the rich Father refuses he
is worse then an Infidel, if the rich Son refuses he is impious; the first is
unnatural, and the second is ungodly; the first is a heathen, and the other is
no Christian; the Grandfather has no bowels, and the Grandchild no gratitude;
the first has no humanity, and the other no Religion; so that is an even lay
between them which is the worst: but the necessitous Father may put the duty
actually upon the Son by reason of his Paternal power, that is, he may so order
it, that if the Son refuses he is not only uncharitable, but undutifull also,
he commits two great sins; whereas the refusing Grandfather commits but one,
though that also be enough to bring him an extreme damnation.

RULE IV. The Fathers power does not extend to matter of Religion, and
persuasions of Faith.
IN the law of the XII Tables it was written, 1.
Sacra privata perpetua manento, that the private Religion of a family should
not be altered: which Cicero expounds to mean that all those to whom the care
of the Father of the family did appertain were tied to the celebration of the
same rites; lib. 2. de Legib.
and the lawyers say, Alciat. lib. 1. praeterm. in verb. sacra.
that Filii sunt in sacris parentum dum sunt in eorum potestate, Children are
within the holy rites of their parents while they are in their power. And
indeed this is very true in the Court of Conscience so long as their
understanding is in their Fathers power; but that is of all things first
emancipated: when a Son can choose for himself, when he is capable of malice and
perverseness, when he is judicable by external and public laws, then he is
emancipated and set free, so as he can choose his religion, and for that the
Father has no other power over him but persuasion and instruction. For it is
very observable that as it was said of the law of Moses, it was a schoolmaster
to bring us unto Christ, so it is true of the Imperium domesticum, the Fathers
government, it is a pedagogy to bring us to the obedience of the laws both of
God and Man: the Fathers commands are exacted before the laws of God or Princes
do require obedience; because the Government of children is like the
Government of the sick and the madmen, it is a protection of them from harm,
and an institution of them to obedience of God and of Kings; and therefore the
Father is to rule the Understanding of his child, till it be fit to be ruled by
the laws of God; that is, the child must believe and learn, that he may choose
and obey; for so we see it in the baptising infants, the Fathers and Susceptors
first choose the child's religion, and then teach it him, and then he must choose
it himself. For the Fathers authority to the understanding of the child is but
like a false arch or temporary supporter, put under the building till it can
stand alone: and it only has this advantage, that the Father has the
prerogative of education, the priority of possession, which how great it is all
the experience of the world can tell. But that this is part of the Paternal
power is evident, because no child is to be baptized without his Fathers will.
A Turk, a Jew, a Heathen can reckon their children in ^acris Parentum Panormit.
in cap. 2. de convers. infid. and Baldus in l. item in potestate. ff. de
juperson.
, they have power, a natural and proper power to breed up their children in
what religion they please, but not to keep them in it; for then when they can
choose they are under no power of man, God only is the Lord of the
understanding: and therefore it is no disobedience if a Son changes his Fathers
religion, or refuses to follow his Fathers change, for he cannot be injured in
that where he has no right and no authority.

But this is so to be understood that the religion of the Son must at no hand
prejudice the Fathers Civil rights, 2.
so that he must not quit his Fathers house, if he be under his Fathers power,
and by the laws o^ his country be obliged under that government. Vigoreus in
his Sermon of S. Martin, tells that S. Martin being but a Catechumen and yet
unbaptiz'd did still abide with his Father and Mother though they were
heathens, and he nevertheless did all the offices of a Christian. And there is
in this great duty, because one right must not destroy another; and a man may
be of what religion he please without doing wrong to any man, for a man cannot
be hindered in his persuasion, for though he dies, he is of that religion; but
no good religion does warrant the Son to do wrong to his Fathers legal rights.
Tit. 3. Comment. in Genesin.
And therefore Marius Victor observes of Abraham, Verum mente Deum venerans,
Gentilia Sacra
Aversatus erat --
He was a great hater of his Fathers idolatry and the impious rites of his
family, yet he did not leave his Fathers house till after his Fathers death.
Linqueret ut seeds patrias, terramque nocentem
Pollutamque domum, nisi postquam morte parentis
Jussa sequi jam posse Dei sine fraud licebat.
He might do it justly when he had no just power over him to restrain him by
the cords of another justice and a differing duty.

There is only this variety to be added, 3.
that when either of the parents is Christian, and the other Infidel, the Son
is to be reckoned to the believing parent: the effect whereof can be this, that
he or she that believes has a right to educate the children in Christianity
without injury to the other, and the Church may baptize the children against
the will of the unbeliever: and the reason of this is, the prerogative of God,
and of Christ who is head of the Church, and the Sovereign of all the world;
for if the child is sanctified and made holy by the believing parent, then it
may be brought to Christ; that sanctification of it is Christ's seizure of it,
it is his right, because he has made a Covenant with the parents for
themselves and for their children.

This is practiced in the Countries of the Roman Communion to evil purposes; 4.
and if the Father be a heretic in their account, they teach their children to
disobey their parents, and suppose heresy to destroy the Fathers right of power
and government. Between Christian and Christian there is no difference as to
matter of Civil rights; no law allows that: but between Heathen and Christian,
so far as the soul is concerned, the right of Christ is indubitable; for we are
sure Christianity is the true religion: but amongst the Sects of Christians the
case is wholly differing, for they may both have enough to secure the souls of
pious persons, and yet may both be deceived in their question, and unnecessary
article.

RULE V. The Fathers power over the children can remit an injury done to them,
without their leave or consent.
THe reason of this depends upon the former considerations, 1.
and is to have it is understanding accordingly. So long as the Son is within
the Civil power of the Father, so long as he lives in his house, is subject to
his command, is nourished by his Fathers charge, has no distinct rights of his
own, he is in his Fathers possession, and to be reckoned by his measures, and
therefore cannot have any actions of injury for his own amendment.

But this is to be limited only to the effects of law and external Courts and
trials of right, 2.
or external actions of injury. For although a Son cannot repeat what the
Father has legally acquitted, yet if it be a personal action, in which charity
and peace are concerned, the injurious person is bound in conscience to ask the
Son forgiveness, upon the account of S. Paul's words, Follow peace with all
men and holiness, and, for as much as is possible live peaceably with all men;
which no man can be said to do who has done wrong to a person, to whom he
will not do right. For besides the relation and the communication of it is
effect between Father and Son, the Son is a person too, and in personal actions
has an interest naturally and unalterably, which no fiction of law, no
supposition of case can take off. So that all the legal and external obligation
the Father may remit; but in the personal there is something of proper
concernment.

This is also to be limited to an intercourse with extraneous persons, 3.
and is not true in actions between the Son and a conjunct person to him. As if
the injury be done by a wife, or a spouse, or a freed man, or a person endeared
and obliged by the Son, the Father cannot remit any such injury. The reason is,
because although by the force of the Civil or Municipal laws the Son be
supposed to be still in the Fathers power, yet in such things he has some
peculiarity, and is as to those things free and in his own power. If the Sons
wife commit adultery, the Father cannot forgive it, though the Son be under his
Fathers power by law; because as to all personal actions the Son has a
personal right, and such things have great dependence upon the law of God and
Nature, and these things to some great purposes do not at all communicate with
the Civil laws.

Lastly, 4.
this Rule is so to be understood and practiced, that it be no prejudice to the
just interests of any other: and therefore a Father cannot so forgive an injury
done to his Son, that he shall be tied not to witness it in public, when he is
required by the Civil power; for it may concern the Commonwealth that the
Criminal be punished, when it may become the Father to pardon his and his Sons
share. He may remit all with which he has to do, but not that which may pass
into the Exchequer. But in such cases the Judge may inquire, but the Son
without the Fathers leave may be no voluntary accuser.

RULE VI. A Fathers authority cannot abide after his death, but the Sons piety
to his Father must, and may pass upon him some indirect obligations.
THe Son after his Fathers death is as much lord of his person and his estate
as his Father was: 1.
and therefore although all the actions which the living Father did, which by
law or the nature of the thing have a permanent effect, still do abide as they
were left; yet those things which are of an alterable nature, and to be
administered by new Counsels, and to be determined by emergencies and proper
circumstances, or are directly subject to Empire, or are personal concernments,
these are in the power of the Son after his Fathers death. A Father cannot by
his power command a Son to marry a person whom the Father does, but the Son
does not love: He cannot command the Son by a just and a sufficient authority
never to be a Priest, or Bishop, or a Magistrate: for in those things in which
his own mere interest is concerned, his own understanding must be his guide,
and his will his Ruler, for he alone does lie at stake whether it be good or
bad; and it is not reasonable that he should govern who neither gets, nor
looses, nor knows.

But though the Fathers authority be extinct, 2.
yet his memory is not, and there is piety toward the dead, and to parents
much more; and of this the Heathens gave some worthy examples. lib. 10.
Herodotus tells that the Issionides, a people of Scythia, did use to embalm
their Fathers head, and then to cover it with gold, and use it for a Divine
image, and pay to it the veneration of a yearly sacrifice. This they intended
for an honor to their dead Father: but in this there were no signs of
obedience. Nearer to this was that which Tertullian tells of the Nasamones, de
Anima c. 57.
that they took their oracles at the graves of their Fathers, as supposing the
souls of their Progenitors to have some right or care to conduct their
children. But it was a pretty story that AElian says the Brachmanes tell of a
certain King of the Indians that had many Sons, lib. 16. c. 5.
who being all of them (the youngest only excepted) immorigerous and
rebellious, at last drove their Father and Mother from their Kingdom; and they
with their youngest Son wandering in strange places were quickly consumed with
age and weariness and inconvenience. The young Son seeing his parents dead,
burnt their bodies, and striking his head with a sword, put the ashes into the
wound, by that act of piety giving his parents the most honorable sepulture,
but with it also emblematically representing that his parents even after death
had power upon his head, and that his head ought to be submitted to them. And
it was well; if piety goes before, whatever duteousnesse or observance comes
afterward it cannot easily be amiss.

Piety sometimes does more then Authority can. 3.
Plus potest patria potestas in liberos quam lex, legi^ve, aut summa Dictatura,
say the lawyers; A Father or a Mother can prevail, when a Consul or a Prince
cannot. Cum Martius Coriolanus pergebat infesto agmine adversus Patriam, quis
illi arma succussit e manibus nisi una Veturia? says the Roman story.
Coriolanus took up arms in rage against his Country; and no authority could
disarme him but his piety to his Mother Veturia. Now this principle is a good
one; but it has no limits of it self, but only what we give to it our selves
by prudence, and necessity, and the nature of the things that are to be done.
But in things that are pious and prudent, or that are innocent and indifferent,
a dying Fathers desire, or a living Fathers counsel ought to be esteemed
sacred: and though they make no law, yet they pass an indirect obligation;
that is, if they be transgressed without reason, they cannot be transgressed
without impiety. It is certain, God is pleased with this obedience of piety, as
is apparent in the case of the Rechabites; and such actions are exemplar in a
family, and make the name of Father venerable and sacred; and sometimes the
neglect of a dying Fathers charge has met with a sad event; and a petulant
disobedience has been a rebellion against the greatest reason, which sometimes
is the greater by how much it ought the more to be concealed. Philotimus of
Athens having observed his Son given to amors and wandering fancies, upon his
deathbed charged him by all that was Sacred and Profane, that however he did
resolve to please his fancy and satisfy his impotent desires, he should be sure
not to court or to fall in love with Paegnium. Philotimus dies, and Philodectes
his Son having quickly dried up his tears which were caused by the smoke of
the funeral pile, has a great curiosity to visit this pretty Greek that his
Father had so forbidden to him. He sees her, likes her, courts her and lies
with her; and in the first night of their congresse, she being over-pleas'd,
told him that she infinitely preferred his kindness before the dull embraces
of his Father Philotimus which had so often tired her. Upon this the young man
starts and trembles, and finds his sin and shame, the rewards of an impious
disobedience. His want of piety to his dead Father made him incestuous in his
mixtures and impious in his lusts. lib. 10.
And Pausanias telling of a Father who meeting his Son in Charon's boat did
then attempt to strangle him, to revenge his impiety and disobedience, by this
does represent what their sentence was concerning the resentment of rebellion
of Sons and their undecent stubbornness even after death.

And this is of so much the greater regard, 4.
if the Father charges it upon the Son upon his blessing, and with great
imprecations: for then unless the Father be evidently a light or trifling
person, there is to be supposed some great reason for the imposition, and then
nothing can warrant the laying it aside, but a great necessity, or a very
great, good, and certain reason to the contrary; that is, such a cause as may
make the contrary effect to be infinitely unlike any image of impiety or
disregard. But of this parents also must be very cautious, and not to put a
load of duty upon a trifle that ought not to bear it. For he is foolish that
upon his blessing will command his Son to make much of his Sparrow or his
Monkey; and that Son is prodigal of his Fathers blessing, that will venture it
all to please his humor, and his itch of liberty.

RULE VII. Neither the Father's authority, nor the Sons piety can oblige them
to do an action against the laws of God, or of the Father's and our just
Superior.
THis Rule although it seems to contain in it nothing but what is ordinary and
confessed, 1.
because God is rather to be obeyed then Man, and amongst men the supreme
rather then the superior; yet I have here described it, because the explication
of it will not only contain one great measure of our duty and conduct of
conscience, but it will give the full general proportion of the Fathers power
and the Sons piety, and also very much endear the obedience and piety of
children.

When Bias had discoursed well and wisely that God was present in every place,
2.
he soon after argued weakly; If God dwells in all places, his presence makes
all places holy, for it is his presence that hallows a Temple, and then there
can be no such thing as sacrilege; for a thief that robs a Temple cannot carry
it out of a Temple, but by carrying it into another. lib. 2. cap. 7.
And upon such a trick as this some in A. Gellius did argue that we were not to
obey our parents. For either they command that which is good, or that which is
not good: If of it self it be good, then for it is own sake we are to do it,
not for their command; but if it be not good, then though they do command it,
it is not to be done at all. For these men supposed, there is necessity and
holiness in every lawful action, as the other did suppose there was holiness
in every place of Gods abode. But this Sophistry is quickly discovered. For
besides that every thing is not necessary to be done because it is good, but
many are left to our choice to do or not to do them, there are many things
also which are not good in themselves, but only become so when they are
commanded. In both these cases the authority of our parents is competent. For
if they be in themselves good but not necessary, by the command of our parents
they are made necessary and pass into a law. But if they be not good of
themselves, but when they are commanded become good, then also they become
necessary. A. Gellius instances, in militiam ire, rus colere, honores
capescere, causas defendere, uxorem ducere, uti jussum proficisci, accersitum
venire, to go into the country or to stay in the city, to live at court or to
live in your farm, to take up arms or to be a merchant, to marry a wife, and
to come when you are called, and to work in the vineyard, these things of
themselves are innocent and harmless, idem ibid
but not necessary of themselves; propterea in ejusmodi omnium rerum generibus
patri parendum esse, In all things of this nature we are to obey our Father.
But add this also, that if it be of it self a duty, and of that nature that it
ought to be done sive imperet Pater, sive non imperet, whether his Father
command or no, yet even here also the Fathers command is of great authority and
great effect; for it adds a new law to the old commandment, and therefore the
disobedience is guilty of a new sin.

But in things dishonest and impious the Father has no authority to give a
commandment; 3.
and if he does, the children are bound not to obey. If the Father commands the
Son to marry a wife, to plead a cause for the guilty, obsequendum est; there is
no more to be said, the Father must be obeyed. But if he command the Son to
marry a harlot, an impudent woman, a drunkard, or to be an advocate for
Catiline or Clodius, for Ravillas or Guido Faux, A. Gell. ibid.
he is not to be obeyed, quoniam accedente aliquo turpitudinis numero, desinunt
esse per sese haec media and indifferentia, When any turpitude is mingled with
the action, it is no longer indifferent, or subject to command. And therefore
we find Acrotatus commended among the ancients because when his parents had
required of him to do an unjust thing, he answered, I know that you are
willing I should do that which is just, for so you taught me to do. I will
do therefore that which you desire I should, but what you bid me I will not
do.

And yet if a Father commands an unjust thing, 4.
his Authority is not wholly nothing. For first, though it must not be obeyed,
yet it must not be dishonored, nor yet rejected but with great regard. Quaedam
esse parendum, quaedam non obsequendum, said some in A. Gellius. Sed ea tamen
quae obsequi non oportet, leniter and verecunde, ac sine detestatione nimia,
sine opprobratione acerba reprehensionis declinanda sensim, and relinquenda
esse dicunt, quam respuenda. What is not fit to be obeyed, must be declined and
avoided rather then railed at and rejected with reproach. Etiam in bona causa
filii apud parents debet humilis esse oration, said Salvian. When a Son denies
his Father he must do it with the language of obedience. Such as was the
answer of Agesilaus to his Father when he would have had him to give judgment
against the laws, Plutarch. lib. de Vitios. verecund.
A te, Pater, a puero didici parere legibus, quamobrem nunc quoque tibi
obtempero, cavens nequid faciam praeter leges, Thou have from my childhood, O
Father, taught me to observe the laws; therefore even now also I obey your
command, because I take care not to break them. For whatsoever the command be,
yet the authority is venerable; if the command be unholy, yet the person is
sacred. Liberto and filio semper honesta and sancta persona Patris and Patroni
videri debet, said Ulpian, The person of a Father is always honest and
venerable to the Son, and so is that of a Patron to his freed man.

2. Though the command is not to be obeyed in things dishonest, 5.
yet that then also the Fathers authority has in it some regard appears by
this, that if a Son transgresses the law by the command of his Father, his
punishment is something the more easy upon that account, though the offense be
great, l. fin. de bon. damn. But if the offense be little, he is wholly excused
says the law, l. liberorum.. fin. and seq. de his qui no. infam. Thus if a Son
by the command of his Father marries a widow within the year of mourning, he
does not incur infamy by the law, say the Doctors. Velle enim non creditur
qui obsequitur Imperio Patris vel Domini, says the law; and Venia dignus est
qui obtemperavit, says Ulpian: If he did obey the command of his Father, he is
to be pardoned, it was not his own will; that is, not his absolutely, but in a
certain regard, and in a degree of diminution.

3. 6.
The Fathers authority has this effect also upon children, that if the Father
does wrong, the Son must bear it as long as it can be born: and therefore the
Son may not go to law with the Father, and complain of him to the Judge,
without leave from both their Superiors. For if by any means the Son can make
the Father less then he is, it will destroy all duty, and dispark the
enclosure which Nature and the laws have made with fear and reverence. But this
has a double consideration, the one in Religion, and the other in Laws.

1. In Religion we are to consider not only what is lawful in the precise
question, 7.
but what is to be done in the whole complication and practice of it. For if
the Supreme can give leave in some case for a Son to complain of his Father to
a Judge, then in some cases it may be lawful to do it, that is, in those
cases in which the law has specified and restrained the Paternal power, in
those things which the laws call excesses and injuries, and which indeed in
themselves are cruel and intolerable. For in such cases the laws are a guard
and defense to the oppressed Son; concerning whom although it is supposed that
the Father takes sufficient care to keep him harmless, yet if the Father does
not, the law does: and the law does indeed allow the greatest power to Fathers,
because it presumes it will be for the child's good; but because there are some
persons whom no presumption can measure, who are wicked beyond all the usual
temptations and infirmities of mankind, therefore even in extraordinary cases
there must be some provision; and therefore it is not to be supposed that it
shall for ever be unlawful for Sons to complain of their Fathers to the
Prince. But what those cases are we can be taught by nothing but by the laws
themselves, and by our own natural necessities. We must cry out when we cannot
forbear, and we must throw off the burden under which we cannot stand; only we
must not throw it off as a wild horse does his load, and kick it with our feet,
but we must lay it as gently down as we can. Thus if a Father refuses to give
alimony to his Son who cannot be otherwise provided for, the aid of the Prince
or any superior that can rightly give us remedy may be implored. If a Father
beats his child till he lame or dismember him, or endanger his life, the Son
can be remedied, and without breach of duty can implore it. So long as a child
is in his Fathers house, and under his Fathers power, these are the only
causes in which he can be allowed legally to complain: because in all other
things he is entirely under his Fathers power. But when he is emancipated, and
quit from his direct authority, which the Lawyers signify by the power of
Castigation, then the Son has distinct rights, and in them because he can be
injured, there are more causes of difference. To this therefore the answer is,

That in matters of contract, 8.
in little injustices, in any thing that is tolerable, in such things the
suffering of which can consist with charity to our selves and piety to our
relatives, if a Son does contest with his Father at law, it may be it is no
proper act of disobedience, and there is nothing of rebellion in it against his
just authority; but there is also as little of piety; especially if we consider
that such contests at law are extremely seldom managed with ordinary charity,
and never without the greatest reproach on one side, and scandal on both: and
if the Son can secure that on his own part, yet whether that seeming
undutifulnesse, and more then seeming want of pious and loving regard, may not
exasperate the Father into angry cursings and evil thoughts, is a consideration
of religion which ought to be taken care of by all that would be Innocent.
There is not one of a thousand that goes to law at all but he runs into so many
temptations that it is very hard for him to do right and to do nothing that
is wrong: but not one in ten thousand can justify his cause and his person too,
if he goes to law with a Father. And he will for no cause suffer wrong at any
man's hands that will take no wrong of his Father; and he that does so, will
give but an ill account of his Christianity.

2. 9.
And these things appear the more by reason of the open dislikes which the Law
professes against such proceedings. For look at this thing in Law, and we find
that the laws express the Sons obedience in universal terms; Omnibus quae
Pater imperat parendum, Sons must be obedient to their Parents in all things.
Now if the dispute be betwixt our obedience to God or to our parents, it is an
ill case; we know whom we are to obey, but the dispute it self is not good; and
the very making a question of either is a disadvantage to the honor of both:
and therefore the Law, which never supposes a question to be between God and
our Father, does not think it fit to make this to be any exception to her
indefinite terms; and therefore Tiberius said it without a limitation, Filium
non posse detrectare jussa Patris; and Turnus against Tarquin said summarily
and clearly, Nullam breviorem esse cognitionem quam quae inter Patrem and
Filium, paucisque verbis transigi posse; Ni pareat Patri, habendum infortunium,
Between a Father and a Son the proceeding is short, and the case quickly summed
up; Either let the Son obey, or let him be punished. And the law accounts it a
diminution of such supreme authorities, to have exceptions and reservations
expressed in the first provisions of the law; and the very making God and the
Father to be the opposite and compared persons in the question, is to lessen
them both. In comparatione personarum inest laesio and injuria, say the
Lawyers; There is some wrong done when you compare two Eminencies. Therefore in
this case, if ever any such thing does happen, without dispute we know what we
are to do: but it is not good that the laws should take public notice of it
beforehand. * But if the question be between the Father and the Son, the law is
so great an enemy to all such questions, right or wrong, that the law judges
for the person of the Father, even when it does not like the cause. It does so
in the case of all Superiors in some degree, and therefore much more in the
case of Fathers. Jus quod deprimitur, aufertur; if you lessen the authority,
you take it away; and then you do injury, though by doing of right. When Accia
Variola questioned her Fathers Testament, because he had left immoderate
Legacies to her Mother in law, the Fathers of rich families were present in
great numbers, and the Sons of those families attended for the sentence in
great and anxious expectations, looking which interest should get the
advantage. But the Judges very wisely left the case undetermined, because it
was hard on the Fathers side; but they were resolved never to leave a precedent
in which the children should be in any thing superior to their Fathers: or that
as Death and Love changed their quivers, so old age should be reckoned as void
of Counsel, and wisdom and prudence should be the portion of young men.

RULE VIII. It is not lawful for Children to enter into any lasting Course of
life against the will or approbation of their Parents.
THis Rule contains two great Cases. 1.
The first is concerning the states of Religion; the other is concerning the
states of Civil life.

1. It is not lawful for children to take them any religious vows, 2.
or enter into any of those which are called states of Religion, viz. to take
upon them the state of single life, to be Priests, Monks, Friars, Hermits, or
any thing of the like nature, without the consent of their Parents.

Thomas Aquinas entered into the Dominican Order, 3.
and became a Friar without the consent of his parents: and that unjustifiable
action begat a more unjustifiable doctrine, Post annos pubertatis posse liberos
se voto religionis obligare, absque voluntate parentum, 2. 2^. qu. 88. art. 9.
That afer 14 years of age or the first ripeness, it is lawful for children
to take upon them the vows of Religion, whether their parents be willing or
unwilling. And after his time it grew into a common doctrine and frequent
practice; and if a Monk could persuade a young heir, Bellar. l. 2. de Monachis,
c. 36.
or a pregnant youth into their cloisters, they pretended to serve God, though
certainly they served themselves, and disserv'd a family. The ground they went
upon was, the pretense of the great sanctity of the state Monastical; that it
was for God and for religion; that to serve God no man that can choose has need
to ask leave; that if the Father be superior, yet God is the supreme; that it
is Corban; that if the young man or maiden be given to God, he is given to him
that has more right to him or her then his parents; that religion in all
things is to be preferred; and that although the parents have a right over the
bodies of their children, yet of their souls they are themselves to dispose,
because theirs is the biggest interest and concern: and whereas God has
commanded to Honor our Father and Mother, we know that God is our Father, and
the Church is our Mother; and what does accrue to these, is no diminution to
the others right.

Against all these fair pretenses it is sufficient to oppose this one truth, 4.
That Religion and Piety cannot of themselves cross each other, but may very
well stand together, and nothing is better then to do a necessary duty. And
there needs not much consideration to tell which is better, to make our love to
God and our love to our Parents, and our duty to them both to stand together,
or to fight one with another. God intends the first, that is certain, for he is
not the author of division, nor has he made one good contrary to another. For
if one be set up against another they are both spoiled. For that duty that goes
away is lost; and that duty which thrust it away has done evil, and therefore
is not good. If therefore it be possible to do our duty to our parents and to
love God greatly at the same time, there needs no more to be said in this
affair, but that we are to remember that a man may greatly serve God, and yet
never be a Friar or a Priest; and that allowing or supposing that these are
great advantages, or rather engagements of duty, yet it is certain that no
state of perfection can be set forward by doing evil; and he enters ill into
the state of perfection that passes into it by the door of Undutifulnesse.

Now then, 5.
we are certain of this, that Parents have the first right, and the first
possession, and that to dispossess any one of his rights against his will is
great injustice, and therefore that no end can sanctify it; and that it would
be a strange religion which teaches impiety for pious considerations: and
therefore without further inquiry, it follows that a Son may not upon any
pretenses of a religious manner and circumstances of life subduct himself from
his Fathers power, and put himself under other governments with which his
Father shall have nothing to do. A Son has no power over himself, for he
belongs to and is under the power of another; and therefore if he does subduct
himself, he is undutifull, and impious, and unjust, and does not Honor his
Father and his Mother. But he that does persuade the Son from his Fathers house
into a Monastery, is reus Plagii, he is a Man-stealer. advers. Marcion.
Qui Patri eripit filium, educatori alumnum, Domino servum, Deo efficit impium,
educatori ingratum, Domino nequam, said Tertullian, He that debauches a Son, a
Pupil, or a Servant, and snatches them from their Father, their Guardian, or
their Lord, makes them impious, ungrateful and vile. And because this was done
by some upon pretense of piety, the Council of Gangra forbad it upon a curse.
Can. 16.
Quicunque fil^^ a parentibus pratextu Divini cultus abscedunt, nec debitam
reverentiam impendunt illis....anathema sint. Pretense of the Divine service is
no good warranty for disobedience to parents; and they who so neglect their
Fathers blessing, will meet with the curse of their Mother. And this Canon
(...) cited and renewed in the sixth Council of Constantinople. * The Council
of Tribur forbids expressly a young maiden before twelve years of age ^o enter
into a Monastery without the consent of her Guardian. Gratian citing this
Decree, adds something of his own; for it is not known whence he had it,
except from the degenerous and corrupt practices of his own times. Si vero in
fortiori aetate adolescens vel adolescentula servire Deo elegerit, non est
potestas parentibus prohibendi, If the young man or maiden be of greater age,
the parents have no power to forbid him: which ^s a clause which is not to be
found in the Codes of Councils, in any editions old or new. But when Monastical
life had reputation and secular advantages upon religious pretenses, then the
advocates and promoters of it were willing by right and wrong to set it
forward. But the corruption is plain, and apparently against the doctrine and
practices of the Fathers of the Church.

S. 6.
lib. 1. de Virgin.
Ambrose and S. Epist. 109. 110.
Austin say that a Father or Mother ought not to hinder a son or daughter from
entering to a Monastery. But the* things were so ordered that the entry thither
was not a perpetual bond, but a going thither as to a Christian School, a place
for institution and holy practice, and from thence they might return when they
would, they might serve God and their Parents too: the profession of a Monk was
then nothing else but priscae liberaeque vitae ac pure Christianae meditatio, a
meditation and institution of a Christian life according to the rate of the
Primitive simplicity, ^ Aug. Epist. ^d Bonifac. Commit.
liberty and devotion. But besides this, though they exhort parents not to
hinder their children, yet they affirm that they have power to do it* and they
may if they will; as appears amply in S. Austin's Epistle to Ecdicia, and in
his 233. Epistle to Benenatus. But most plainly and dogmatically it is affirmed
by S. Basil, in quaest. fuse explic. q. 15.
liberos non esse recipiendos in Monasteriis, nisi a parentibus suis
offerantur, Children are not to be received into Monasteries unless their
parents present them: and when S. Gregory Nazianzen had against his Fathers
commandment run into a Monastery, he began to bethink himself what he had
done, and found that without impiety he could not be contumacious against his
Father, and therefore left his solitude and returned home. Et hoc facio (says
he) jussu Dei magis quam hominum metu. Itaque, O pataer, dicto jam audienti
praeb^ benedictionem. This he did in obedience to God, and not for the fear of
men; and therefore upon the account of his obedience and return, he begged his
Fathers blessing. But besides this, there were two remarkable examples which
abundantly conclude this duty. * The one was of Heliodorus, who together with
S. Hierom had undertaken a Monastical life by vow; but finding that by Piety
and Nature he was to regard his only sister and her son, he returned to her
house, and took upon him the habit of the Clergy, and left that of Monks.
Against him S. Hierom, who was then a young man, newly come from the University
and the schools of Rhetoric, storms very much, and says some things which when
he was older and wiser he changes and revokes, as appears in his Epistle to
Nepotian, where he imputes his former sayings to his juvenile years and
learning. Now though Heliodorus had no parents when he undertook a Monastical
life, and therefore had his liberty; yet it is therefore certain he believed he
ought not to have done it without the consent of parents if they had been
living, because he did suppose a less Piety, even to his Sister and his
Nephew, to be a sufficient reason for him to leave his solitude and show Piety
at home. * But the other instance is more material. Stagirius was made a Monk,
not against his Fathers commandment, but against his Counsel. The Father was
very unwilling, but durst not expressly forbid it, upon some scruples which
were put into his head by the humors which were then beginning. But because he
had neglected his Fathers Counsel, and caused trouble to him, Stagirius was
vexed with the Devil, libr. de Providentia.
and S. Chrysostom took great pains to comfort him. But afterward the manners
of men grew worse, and all religion was enclosed in a Friars habit, and it grew
to be esteemed excellent to enter into a Monastery, and whatsoever did hinder
it was to be despised, or used like a temptation; and the Orders of Religion
grew potent and prevailed over private interests and private religion, and by
degrees it entered into unsufferable mischiefs and impiety. It was sometimes
restrained by good laws, so that it could not grow so fast, lib. 5. cap. 95.
Charles the Great made a law concerning it: De pueris vero sine voluntate
parentum ut tonsurentur, vel puellae velentur, modis omnibus inhibitum est,
Boys must not be shorn nor maidens veiled without the consent of their parents.
And to the transgressors of this law a fine was imposed, the same with that
which was appointed in the Salic law tit. de iis qui pueros vel puellas
occiderint, vel totonderint.
; which did equally forbid them to be slain and to be shorn. For by religious
pretenses not to do kindness to their parents our Blessed Savior called
hypocrisy in the Pharisees; and therefore upon the like pretenses to do them
wrong, to take their right from them, to dispossess them of their dearest
pledges, must needs be so mcuh the worse. It is that which our Blessed Savior
calls Hypocrisy, and dishonouring our parents: It is that which the Church does
call an anathema, which the Laws call plagium, or manstealing: It is homicide
in the account of the Imperial laws: and S. Bernard calls them wolves that do
it, in his first Epistle, which, as the story runs, was not written without a
Miracle.

The other great case is in the Marriage of their Children, 7.
concerning which the sentence is ready and acknowledged in the greatest part
of it. 2. It is unlawful for Children to marry without and against the consent
of their Parents.

That such marriages are not licitae is confessed on all hands; that is, the
son or daughter sin against God and the laws, by marrying against his Fathers
Commandment. Adeone impotenti animo esse, Terent.
ut praeter civium
Morem atque legem, and sui voluntatem patris,
Tamen hanc habere studeat, cum summo probro?
said he in the Comedy. It is dishonorable, and a shame to take a wise against
the will of his Father; it is against the manners and the laws of all
Republics. But whether they be legitimae or no is a great question; that is,
whether they be wholly invalid and null in law, or in case they be valid,
whether or no they suffer any diminution, and what it is.

Amongst the Ancients, 8.
and for a long time in the Civil law, such marriages were esteemed
illegitimate, and no better then a mere Concubinate. So Ovid intimates in the
marriage of Pyramus and Thisbe; -- Tedae quoque jure coissent,
Sed vetuere patres --
If the parents had not forbidden, the marriage had been legitimate; but
therefore not then when they are forbidden: and therefore as incestuous
marriages were not only Impious but Null, they are not only sinful in the
entry, but all the way; so are these, alike evil in all the progression, though
as yet they have not a proper name in law, as the other have. But Apulcius is
more express; lib. 6. de Asino a^reo.
Impares nuptiae, and praeterea in villa sine testibus and Patre non
consentiente factae, legitima non possunt videri, ac per hoc spurius iste
nascetur. Unequal marriages, clandestine, and made without the Fathers consent
can never seem legitimate, and therefore the children that are born will be
illegitimate. And Musaeus observes in the marriage of Leander, that it was
ominous and unlucky upon this reason, because (...), The Father and the Mother
did not sing the Hymenaeal or Marriage song The same thing was observed also by
the Christians; ad Uxotem.
for when Tertullian is recounting the auspicious signs and causes of a
blessed marriage, he puts this in, Unde sufficiam ad enarrandam felicitatem
ejus Matrimonii quod Ecclesia conciliat, and confirmat oblatio, and obsignatum
Angeli renunciant, Pater rato habet? That marriage will be very prosperous
which is blessed by the Church, made solemn by publication and the rituals of
religion, and establishe'd by the consent of the Father. For without it it is
not only inauspicious and unlucky, but illegal, Ibid. l. 2. in fi.
unfirm and insufficient. Nam nec in terris filii sine consensu Patrum rite and
jure nubent, says he. For he lived in a time when the law pronounced such
marriages illegal, and the children bastards. For as some contracts are invalid
unless the solemnity of the law be observed, and Testaments are ineffective
without such a number of witnesses; so the law requires the consent of Parents
to make the espousals to be a legal and valid contract. ff. de statu hominum.
Non videri justum filium qui ex eo Matrimonio natus est cui Pater non
consensit, said Paulus the Lawyer: and this went so far, that if a daughter
were exposed by her Father like a child of the people, and no care of her
education or alimony taken, yet before the time of Constantine, that daughter
might not marry without the leave even of that unnatural Father. And amongst
the children of Abraham this was so sacredly observed, that even there where by
the event of things we perceive that the marriage was designed by God, yet it
was not to be acted but by the Fathers willingness; Genes. 24.
as appears in the cases of Isaac and Rebecca, Sampson and his wife at Timnath.
Judges 14. 2, 4.
Thus Agar took a wife for her son Ishmael, and Jacob went into Mesopotamia for
a wife by the consent of his Father and Mother; and Sichem asked of his Father
Hemor that he would get him the daughter of Jacob to wife. Exodus 34. 16.
Deuter. 7. 3.
And the words of the Law were directed to the Father, 1 Cor. 7.
not to the Son; Non accipies Uxorem filiis tuis de filiabus eorum, and filiam
tuam non dabis filio ejus: and in the New Testament, He that gives his Virgin
in marriage does well: still it is the Parent that has the right and the
power; it is the Parent that can make the contract; Andromach. Eurip.
he is the person supposed only competent in law. (...)
(...),
said Hermione in Euripides, My Father is to take care of my espousals; that is
no part of my care or determination. lib. de Patriarch.
And S. Ambrose, by the example of Rebecca, said that the choice of a husband
for his daughter is to be permitted to the Father.

And indeed by these instances and the perpetual practice and persuasion of the
old world we cannot suppose it to be less then a Natural law, 9.
or a natural reason, of great effect, or of great necessity. When the daughter
of Cyaxarus was asked whom she would marry, she answered, Cyrus; for when they
were children together he had delighted her with pretty songs and conversation:
And when she was offered to him with a royal robe, Jewels and a crown of gold,
and all Media for her dowry, Cyrus answered, Xenoph. lib. 8. in Stich.
Et genus and puellam and dotalia laudo, I like the Lady, her dowry and her
family, but I must have these agree with the mind of my Father and my Mother,
and then I will marry her. For (as Panaegyris in Plautus told his sister) in
Patris potestate esse situm liberorum matrimonium, quibus faciendum hac in
part sit quod Patres imperant, Childrens marriage is in the power of their
Father, and they must do what their Father commands: and Simo would not allow
Pamphilus to call him Father, Andria, Act. 5. Scen. 3.
when he disobeyed him in this particular, Quid, mi Pater? quasi tu hujus
indigeas Patris.
Domus, Uxor, liberi inventi invito Patre.
But Pamphilus in despite of his passion, suffered his duty to prevail, Tibi,
Pater, me dedo: quidvis oneris impone, impera.
Vis me Uxorem ducere? hanc vis amittere? ut potero feram.
Pamphilus offered to quit Glycerium if his Father pleased, and yet he had been
contracted to her, and had a Son by her. Certain it is, these contracts were to
all purposes invalid by the Civil law both of the Greeks and Romans. Nuptias
consistere non posse nisi consentiant omnes, hoc est, qui coeunt, quorumque in
potestate sunt, says the Law, Inst. de Nuptiis. ff. de ritu nuptiarum. in
respons. Matrimon. Matthew. Monachi.
And in the Jus Graeco-Romanum there is an express Canon, Qui in aliena
potestate sunt eorum pacta nihil habent firmi: propterea quae citra voluntatem
nuptiae fiunt eorum penes quos potestas est, pro scortationibus habentur. This
is peremptory. Such marriages are fornications, and therefore the children are
Bastards. And of this Justinian gives this account, Just^^^. nuptias inter se
contrahunt qui secundum praecepta legum coeunt, Those marriages are true which
are confederated according to the precepts of laws, when the contractors are of
fitting age, whether they be the chief, or the sons of families. Only if they
be sons of families, they must have their consent in whose power they are. Nam
hoc fieri debere, and civilis and naturalis ratio suadet, in tantum ut jussus
parentum praecedere debeat. For that this ought to be done, that the Fathers
consent must be before the marriage, not only is concluded by civil or
political reason, but also by the natural.

Thus it was in the Natural and in the Civil law; 10.
and at first, and for a long time after, it was no otherwise in the Canon law.
To this purpose is that famous Decree of Pope Euaristus; and habetur 30 q. 5.
Aliter legitimum non sit conjugium nisi ab iis qui super ipsam foeminam
dominationem habere videntur, and a quibus custoditur, uxor petatur, and a
parentibus and propinquioribus sponsetur, and legibus dotetur. Euaristus had
enumerated a great many things which were fit (as he thought) and much for the
honesty and decency, the blessing and prosperity of the marriage; as attending
to solemn prayers for two or three days, oblations and bridemen, and some other
things which are now out of use: he proceeds to that which was essential to
the contract, the consent of parents; and aliter legitimum non sit, it cannot
otherwise be legitimate: and he adds, aliter vero praesumpta non conjugia, sed
adulteria, vel contubernia, vel stupra aut fornicationes potius quam legitima
conjugia esse non dubitatur, Marriages without the consent of parents are
adulteries and ravishments, fornications and concubinate, any thing rather then
marriages. Can. 38. in Can. Patrum. in Graecor. Nomocan.
To this accords that Canon of S. Basil, Puellis quae praeter Patris sententiam
fornicatores secutae sunt reconciliatis parentibus videtur res remedium
accipere: sed non protinus ad communionem restituentur, sed triennio punientur.
If Fathers will pardon their daughters that without their leave run after
wanton persons, their crime as to him seems to be taken off; yet let them be
put for three years into the station of Penitents. Upon this Canon Theodorus
Balsamon says, that by [ Puellis] or Girls, S. Basil means those that are
under their Fathers power: and that if any such give themselves up to their
lovers without their Fathers consent and are dishonored, although they to
themselves seem to be married, yet such marriages are not valid, they cannot
stand: and for this there is no remedy but being reconciled to their Fathers.
But S. Basil is also as express himself in his text as Balsamon in his
Commentary, for in his 40^h Canon he says that marriages without the consent
of them in whose power they are, are fornications and not marriages. And
therefore the Council of Carthage requires that when the bridegroom and his
bride are to be blessed by the Priest, that is, solemnly married, they should
be presented to the Priest by their parents or their deputies; which thing is
carefully to this day observed in the Church of England. For according to the
saying of S. Leo, et habetur 32. q. 2.
Paterno arbitrio foeminae viris junctae carent culpa; If maidens be joined to
their Husbands by the consent of their parents, there is then nothing but
innocence, no body has cause to complain. But that is not all. For Gratian
expounding these words, says that from hence [ datur intelligi quod Paternus
consensus desideratur in nuptiis, nec sine eo legitimae nuptiae habeantur] we
are given to understand that the Fathers consent is required, and without it
the marriages are not to be accounted legitimate: and for it he quotes the
words of Euaristus before mentioned. But the Council of Aquisgrane did not
only separate such marriages when the maiden was stolen away without her
parents leave, but would not allow that ever after they should be man and wife,
in tit. de foemin. non consecrat. cap. 33, 36. q. 2. placuit.
as we find in Burchard; and the same was verified in the Council of Melda,
which for it is warrant quotes a synodal definition of S. Gregory to the same
purpose.

The Church was indeed very severe against such undutifull proceedings and
rebellions against the supreme natural power; 11.
and therefore the Council in Paris and diverse others did anathematize them
that so married, Ibid. Vide etiam Council. Paris. 36. q. 2. 27. q. 2. nullus.
and even when they were reconciled to their parents did impose on them severe
penances. But because when things were once come to that pass, Fathers
perceived that the reputation of their children was lost, and that it was not
easy to get other honest Matches for their children, and especially when
Marriage began to be called a Sacrament, and some scruples were by the Clergy
cast into this affair, and because men were willing to make the best of a bad
Market; the Fathers gave over making use of this power given them by the laws,
and thought the public penances were castigation sufficient. But then according
to the nature of all good laws and manners running down the hill, this thing
never left running till children had leave to despise their parents, and marry
where and when they pleased; and though it was said to be a fault, yet factum
valet, fieri non debuit, it was decreed in the Council of Trent to be valid and
effectual.

But now this sentence which indeed relies upon some reason and very great
authority, 12.
and is wise and fit to prevent much evil in families, is yet very severe, and
ought to receive some allay; which when I have represented upon the general
consideration, I shall endeavor to give it a right understanding, and describe
the truth that lies between the two extremes, and was yet never affirmed and
described by any one that I know of, but is determinable by a just weighing of
all that which very many wise men have said, being put together.

First therefore I consider what Quintilian said: 13.
If it be lawful at any time for a son to do an action otherwise unreprovable
without the consent of parents, Declam. 257, and 376.
certainly liberty is in nothing so necessary as in marriage. Ego eligam cum
qua victurus sum, ego comitem laborum, sollicitudinum, curarum ipse perpendam.
Quis enim amare alieno animo potest? It is fit that I should choose her or him
with whom I must always live, the partner of my joys and sorrows, the companion
of my cares, the Father or the Mother of my own children: for it is impossible
that a man should love with any affections but his own. And if Pamphilus can
love none but Glycerium, it will be hard for Simo, whose fires are extinct by
age, lib. 3. in Laconic.
to command his son to burn and pine away without remedy and pity. It was
better which Pausanias tells of Danaus, that he gave his daughters leave to
choose their husbands; and Herodotus tells that Callias the Athenian was much
commended by the Greeks because he permitted to his daughters to choose what
husbands, in Erato, l. 6.
not he, but themselves liked best.

But the case is to be determined by these three Propositions.

1. When sons or daughters are of competent years and have the use of reason,
14.
they can naturally contract marriages; that is, there is nothing naturally
required but that they can consent, and be of a marriageable strength.
Sufficiat solus consensus illorum de quorum, quarumque conjunctionibus agitur,
said Clement the third, c. tuae. de Spons. extr.
Consent alone makes marriage; that is, it makes a marriage naturally valid, if
it be done by those persons who naturally can consent. For that the consent of
parents is not essentially necessary to the validity of the contract naturally,
appears in many instances. 1. Because children can contract when their parents
are dead. 2. Because if their Father be dead, and their Mother living, the son
that is of years of discretion is not under his Mothers power as to that, but
that upon great and good reason he may marry by his own choice. 3. A son may
marry at the command of a Prince, when it is for the public good, though his
Father at the same time regard nothing but his private. 4. If a Father say
nothing to hinder it, though he be secretly unwilling, or owns the
unwillingnesse, but behaves himself negatively as to any cooperation, yet the
son may marry: which demonstrates that the Fathers consent is no active
principle, ingredient into the marriage, but a privative or a negative only;
that is, he can forbid it, and so hinder it, but it is not therefore naturally
invalid; that is, he can legally prevent it, but not naturally annul it. 5. If
the marriage of the son be not only of regard and advantage to the son, but so
far from doing injury to the Father, that it does him honor; the laws declare
that such a marriage is valid, though the Father out of humor disagree. And
therefore when the law says that the son cannot contract marriage but with his
Fathers consent, the Doctors limit it amongst other cases to this especially,
vide Ascanium Clement. Amerin. de patria potest. cap. 6. effect. 6.
quando filius duceret uxorem turpem and indignam, when the son marries
dishonorably; for then (say Bartolus and Decius) there is injury done to the
Father: so that the prohibition lying for this reason, when the case is
contrary to the reason, the extraordinary effect must be contrary to the
ordinary law. 6. Whatever the law decrees in detestation of childrens
disobedience, yet the marriage though to some civil effects it is nulled, yet
that it is naturally valid appears in this, because the son that is born of
that marriage is the Grandfathers own, and if the Father die before the
Grandfather, l. Divi fratres. ff. de jure patron.
the Grandchild must inherit. So that the punishment is but personally on the
Son, and is not a perfect invalidating of the marriage. And this very case was
determined in the Parliament of Harlay in behalf of Marguerite de Nesdes her
children, the Nephews of her husbands Father, in the year 1584. 7. If the
Father be unreasonable, and offers to his son or daughter an ugly, a deformed,
a vicious or a base person, and gives him no other choice, and the son cannot
contain and live a single life, by the consent of all men the son may refuse,
and he cannot but choose another. l. Filius 25. ff. de ritu Nuptiarum. l. 3..
Emancipatus. ff. de cont. tab.
8. The same is the case, if the Father be negligent; then by the law a son
sooner and a maiden after 25. years of age can choose for her self. Phalar.
Epist. 143. cap. 9.
An sedere oportuit domi virginem tam grandem? said Phalaris. (...) For it is
intolerable that a maid should be suffered to pass the flower of her age at
home. Cap. 9.
And when the Gemara Sanhedrin had said [Doe not prostitute thy daughter, to
make her a harlot] Rabbi Eliezer said this was spoken to him that marries his
daughter to an old man. R. Akiba says, it was meant of him qui domi retinet
filiam nubilem, that keeps his daughter at home too long. Which two last cases
relying upon the same reason produce the same effect, That the Fathers consent,
though highly to be required, yet is not essentially necessary; it may be a
valid marriage without it. 9. And this is true also in case of Emancipation
Ulpian. l. 3.. si emancipatus. ff. de bonor. possess. contr. tabulas. Hoc
observant Giaeci ad l. 10. de sponsal. l. 28. (...). tit. 1.
, or quitting the Son from the Fathers power; he is sui juris, and can marry
where he will, and yet he owes to his Father all the obedience to which by the
law of Nature he was obliged. 10. If a Son marries without his Fathers consent,
the law says it is void; but yet it is not so void, but that the Fathers
approbation makes it valid without marrying again: which could not be if it
were naturally invalid, but therefore it is both naturally and Ecclesiastically
good. in Can. Pasil. 38. in Can. PP.
Quod enim ab initio male factum est, parentum postea consensus reparare
videtur, said Balsamon: it was ill done at first, and the Fathers consent
repairs the damage; but if it was invalid and null at first, nothing can make
it alive upon the first stock. Quod enim ab initio non valuit, progressu
temporis valere non debet, says the law. 11. Servants or slaves in the Civil
law were as much in the power of their lords as sons in the power of their
Fathers; as much I say, though not for so many reasons; and yet the marriage of
servants was valid in law though contracted without the consent of their Lords;
C. 1. extra. de conjug. servor.
as Pope Alexander the third wrote in a decretal Epistle to the Archbishop of
Canterbury: and therefore that the marriage of sons and daughters may be so
too, that is, not to be dissolved, not to be declared null in conscience, I can
find no reason to the contrary. 12. We find in Scripture that Esau's marriages
were valid and went on, though contracted against the interest of that family,
the pleasure of the parents and, as Lyra says, without their consent. It is
true indeed that the Jerusalem Thargum says that they were a grief to Isaac
and Rebecca because they were undutifull, and proud, and idolatrous, refusing
to be taught by their Husbands Father or Mother. But when I consider that it is
not only affirmed by Rebecca that they were an affliction to her, Genesis 26. 35.
but observed at the very first taking of them in, that they were a grief to
both of them, and that Esau afterward to gratify his Father did marry his
Cosen german, the daughter of his Uncle Ishmael; the opinion of Lyra seems most
probable, and that Isaac and Rebecca did not consent, and were not pleased with
those first marriages. But if this should fail, there are arguments enough
besides to evince that naturally such marriages are valid, though at no hand
they ought to be done.

But what then shall we say to all the former discourse, 15.
which proved that those marriages were illegitimate, and the conjunctions no
better then concubinate? Does all that heap of things, and sayings of wise men,
and laws Ecclesiastical and Civil and Natural, effect nothing? or do they
prevail entirely? That they effect something their own strength does evidence;
that they do not prevail to effect a natural nullity in marriage, the contrary
arguments described in the former Number do sufficiently prove. What then is
the conclusion?

From hence we may learn it. 16.
2. Although the marriage is naturally valid, yet that natural validity can
have this effect only, that it can for ever bind the conscience of the engaged
parties to faith and mutual love, and to cohabitation when it is not hindered;
and it is, even when it is most of all forbidden, yet potentially legitimate,
that is, it wants no features and lineaments, nor life, but it wants solennity
and publication; that is, it is like an Embryo in his Mothers womb, there it
must stay till the law gives it name and birth. * For it is to be considered,
that although the young folks can contract even against their parents will, yet
they can be hindered from possession: Not only because natural rights can be
impeded in their use and challenge by the Supreme Civil power; but because
there is in marriage something that is wholly in the power of the Civil law.
For in marriage there are three things, Unity, and Society, and Mystery. This
last is not of present consideration, because it is wholly of spiritual nature,
and therefore of Ecclesiastical cognizance. But of the other two, the first is
in the power of the Contractors, the latter is in the power of the
Commonwealth. From union of minds, and obligation of mutual duties and
affections, and perpetuity of relations they cannot be kept by their dissenting
parents, or by the Civil law. But from being a society, from beginning a legal
family, from rights of succession, from reckoning descents in their line, and
from cohabitation they can be kept by that power which is the Supreme in the
establishment and conduct of all societies. And the consequent of this will be,
not only that such persons shall loose all civil benefits and profits of
inheritance, that is, all that can come from Society, but even their very Unity
will be disparaged, so as it shall be esteemed no better then fornication; not
that it is so before God, or is against the virtue of Chastity, but that it is
so in the Civil account, and is against the laws of Marriage. It is in this as
it is in the case of Raptus or Ravishment. In the Civil law, he that takes away
a man's daughter without the consent of her parents rapuisse dicitur is a
Ravisher: but it is not so in the Canon law, it is not so in Nature or
Conscience. Raptus ibi dicitur admitti ubi nihil ante de nuptiis dicitur: If
there was no treaty of marriage, it is a rape; but if the man was secretly
betrothed, to carry her away and lie with her is no rape, licet parents
reclamarent, C. cum causam. de rapt. extra.
although the parents were against it, said Pope Lucius the third. Now to call
this a rape, and to punish it as if it were, is in the power of law: just as
the stealing of a knife out of a Church, or a Chalice out of the Clercs house,
may by law be called Sacrilege; and then it is so to all the purposes of law;
though before God it may not differ from simple theft. So for young lovers to
lie together before publication is by the Canon law called Antenuptialis
fornicatio, and is punished as if it were so indeed: and yet though it be evil
in the eye of men, and upon that account is so in it self, yet in the eyes of
God it is not fornication; God himself having expressly called a Betrothed
woman by the name of wife, Deuter. 22.
and punished her falsehood to her husband before marriage with the same evil as
adultery. And thus it is in the present inquiry: Marriage of persons in
minority is naturally invalid, because they are naturally unable to make a
contract for their good, they understand it not; but if they be of good years,
though under their Fathers power, they are naturally able, but politically
unable, and therefore are inevitably engaged in an evil condition, and they
have sinned, and it is a miracle if they do not sin again, and abide in it
upon this account. For the marriage is good within doors, but it is not good
abroad: they are both obliged, and yet cannot pay their obligation: this
marriage is not good in law, and yet they cannot choose another in conscience:
it was by their own fault, and therefore they must bear their own burden: they
are guilty of fornication, but it is not a sin against the seventh
Commandment: they have not dishonored their own bodies between themselves,
but they have dishonored them before all the world besides. And as
covetousness is idolatry, and rebellion is witchcraft, so this disobedience is
unchastity, it is uncleanness against the fifth Commandment: and therefore it
is no legal marriage, but unlawful at first, and remains so all the way, till
a legal remedy be found out. For this things is rightly stated by Paulus the
Lawyer: lib. Sentent. 2. tit. 19. Idem dixitvetus Scholiastes ad Paulum.
Matrimonia haec jure non contrahi, sed tamen contracta non solvi, Such
marriages ought not to be made, but being made they cannot be dissolved. And he
gives an excellent reason for it; contemplationem enim publicae utilitatis
privatorum commodis anteferri. It is of public concern that marriages naturally
valid be not rescinded; but it is but of private emolument that the Father
should be pleased in his daughter in law: and therefore although the Exodus 22.
16, 17.
Law of God and man do their several shares for the securing of every interest
and concern, yet that regard which is greatest and more public is to be
preferred. Now for the understanding of the full effect of this, and for the
verification of it, it is to be considered, that laws are called Perfect, or
Imperfect. A perfect law is that which either in it self or by the Magistrate
rescinds whatsoever was done against her prescript. l. Non dubium, C. de legib.
The imperfect law is that which does not indeed rescind the thing, but inflicts
a punishment upon the transgressors: such as was the lex Furia Testamentaria,
and such as is the law concerning these forbidden marriages against their
Fathers will; the Marriage must stand, and the married must lie under the
punishment O sententiam necessitate confusam^ parcit and s^vit, dissimulat and
animadver^it. Tertull. 18, 9, 10, 11.
: they in the civil law were reckoned as Concubines, and their Children
bastards, and there was neither dowry nor marriage allowed. And upon this
account, all those sayings which I brought in the former numbers are true: the
marriages were then civilly null, that is, in estimation of law and to all
intents and purposes of law were outlawed, and made incapable of civil benefits
and advantages; but the law could not make them naturally null: Exodus 22.
and in the Law of Moses, although a maiden that had been humbled was to become
the wife of him that did it, and to have her dowry accordingly, if her Father
pleased, and he might choose whether he would or no; yet there is no footstep or
sign, that if he had betrothed himself to her, and lain with her, that then
she was not his wife, or that her dissenting Father could make it null. Indeed
divorces were so easily granted then, that even in this case they had a remedy
at hand: but we are tied up by stricter and more holy bands; and since Christ
reduced it to the first institution, and that it was made to represent the
union of the Church unto him, it is not so easy to untie this knot. So much as
is in the power of law, so much is fit to be done for the securing the Fathers
authority and his rights according to the interests of religion and the public:
but the laws themselves have a limit; and though they can verify all their own
acts, yet they cannot annul the Act of God: Quae Deus conjunxit, nemo separet.
Conjunction of marriages is by a law of God and Nature, and to it nothing is
required but a natural capacity and an explicit consent, and therefore this no
man can separate. But yet,

3. The Father has over his children a double power; 17.
a natural power and a political. His Natural power is entire, absolute, and
unlimited, except where the Law of God or of Nations does intervene; but then
it lasts but till the children are able to understand and choose, and shift for
themselves. For there are some natural and personal rights relating to duty, to
the perpetuating the kind, to defending and providing for themselves, which are
not to be taken from us, unless they be as well or better supplied otherwhere;
for some can, and some cannot. The desires relating to marriage have in them so
much natural necessity, and so much relation to personal duties, that either
they must be in our own powers, or else our salvation must depend on other men.
Quintilian. declam. 376.
Nescis nostri arbitrii esse Matrimonia? Affectus nostri nobis non serviunt.
Non potes efficere Imperio ut vel amen quam velis, vel oderim. Matrimonium vero
tum perpetuum est, si mutua voluntate jungitur. Cum ergo quaeratur mihi uxor,
socia thori, vitae consors, in omne seculum mihi eligenda est. My wife is to
dwell with me for ever, the half of my self, my lasting joy or my lasting
sorrow, and if I do not love her we cannot live comfortably, and to love I
cannot be commanded, for my affections are not at my own command, much less at
another: and therefore the conduct of this belongs to my self, and to none
else, for so much of the interest as the union and conjunction comes to; and in
this I am no man's subject, when I am a man my self.

But the Father has a political power. 18.
Patria potestas est jus quoddam quod habent qui sunt de Imperio Romano in
liberos Naturales and legitimos, ^jus autem potestatis. Inst. de potest. Patr.
and l. nam in civium. and l. item in potestate. ff. de his qui sant sui and
alieni juris.
say the Lawyers. The paternal power is defined by the measures of the Roman
law; and so it is in all Countries by their own measures. Now in most
Countries, especially of old, the Father had so much power given to him over
his children that they were a part of his possessions; they acquired what they
did acquire for their Father, not for themselves; they might be pawned, they
might be sold three times for their Fathers profit; they must last and abide
under this power till they were dismissed or emancipated by their Father. Now
whatsoever rights were consequent to these powers were so wholly to be disposed
of by the Fathers, that whatsoever actions of the sons did destroy those rights
were so far, and in relation to those rights, null and invalid. When therefore
the Father had by the Civil law a power over the person of his son, so as to
have the profit of his labors, the issues of his marriage, his children to
succeed, the sons wife to be partner of his goods and his holy rites, and to
perpetuate his family, he had by the Civil law power to dispose of him so far
as concerned these things, but no further. And therefore the Father had power
to disinherit the son that married without his Fathers leave; and all the
Emperors and all the Lawyers till the time of Constantine did allow it: but
then it felt variety and change, and it was limited to the case of the sons
marrying dishonourably.

The result of these three Propositions is this, 19.
That every Commonwealth has power to extend or to streighten the Fathers
political power, and to give sentences and judgments upon the actions that
relate to such power: and if the law does declare the children of marriages
against the parents will to be bastards, they are so; and the Son not to
succeed in his Fathers estate, it must be so; and the marriage to be a
concubinate, it must be accounted so; and the conjunction to be uncleanness,
it must be called dishonorable, and may be punished as if it were so: and this
must last so long till the son be by the same law declared not to be under his
Fathers power as to that particular; and when it is so, he can then choose for
himself without fraud or detriment; though even then also he has upon him two
bands, Reverence and Piety, from which the son can never be emancipated as long
as he lives, and as long as he can be obliged to be a thankful person, ever
remembering what the old Sibyll said, that they deserve damnation... quive
parents
In senio linquunt, neque praemia digna rependunt
Pro Nutricatu, vel qui parere recusant,
Aspera vel contra dixerunt verba parents,
who leave their parents in their old age, who speak words against them, who
do not pay their thankful duty for their alimony and education, and who
refuse to obey them, viz. according to the laws, and according to the exigence
of reverence and piety which must be for ever.

Of exemption from the power of Fathers.
For by this means we shall the shortest and truest answer the inquiry, 20.
when a Son is free from his Fathers power, and how long he is (...), as
Demosthenes his expression is, in Encomio.
subject to the necessity of the Fathers laws. I answer that, in those things
which are parts of natural power and relate to personal duties, the Father has
always a power of Counsel, which must be regarded by the ties and analogies of
reverence and piety, and the reasons of the things themselves. But in those
powers which the law has given him, he is to abide in them as long as the law
permits; for in this there is no other measure but the law. But in these and
all other things whatsoever, when by nature and the laws we are quit from the
Empire of the Father, and that power which is called Castigation, or the power
of command and coercion, we are still tied to fear him with a reverential fear,
and to obey him with the readiness of piety in all things where Reverence and
Piety are to have regard and prevail, that is, wherever it is possible and
reasonable to obey. Quae praerogativa ex beneficentia acquiritur perpetuo
durat, said Aristotle, The authority that is acquired by bounty is perpetual.

And therefore even Marriage it self does not quit the children from their
duty: 21.
Not only by force of Civil laws, in which sense the sons wife was in the
Fathers power as well as the son himself till he was emancipated; but I mean it
in respect of reverence and pious regards, and natural duty, Homil. 11. in
Levit.
and humble observation. For Nomen Patris grande Mysterium est, and nomen
Matris arcana Reverentia, said Origin; there is Reverence, and there is
mystery, and all sacredness in the Names of Father and Mother; and that
dignity lasts for ever. The Ancients tell that when Danaus, who had given
liberty to his fifty daughters to marry according to their own liking, was
compelled to give them to the fifty Grandchildren of Aegisthus, he gave to each
of them a sword, and commanded them to kill their husbands the first night
before their congresse: and they thought themselves, though married, obliged to
obey their Father, and all did so but Hypermnestra, who for her disobedience
was questioned upon her life, and was by the equally-divided sentences of the
Judges acquitted. The like story to this is told by Chalcondylas, that a
daughter of a Florentine Physician being by the public request and necessity of
the Town given to Lantislaus an amorous Prince, who to get her besieged the
Town, her Father gave her a poisoned handkerchief which he commanded her to use
upon the Prince; and she did so, and upon her self, and both died. These indeed
were excesses of power and obedience: but I noted them to show that the sense
of the world is to suppose children obliged to their parents even when they are
in the power of a husband, or in necessitude and conjunction with a wife. And
this is extended also to daughters that are Widows, if they be in minority,
that is under 25 years; for so it was in the Roman law; or, if under any other
number of years which the law calls minority in any Government. (...), If she
will marry again, In Basi^ico.
let her marry by the consent of her Father.

2. If a Son be a Magistrate, 22.
the Magistrate is exempted, but not the Son. That is, in those things which
concern his office and dignity the Father has nothing to do with him: but in
things Oeconomical the Fathers power stands, and his person is capable of the
same regards as formerly; of all the same, Salvo honor Magistratus. But yet
the reverence of such a Son to a Father ought to be no otherwise exacted then
by the measures of prudence and custom, and the common usages of the place.
When Fabius Maximus came to his Son who was then Consul, and sat upon his
horse, otherwise then he ought, his Son sent the Lictors to him to call him to
descend and come to him: Vale. Max. l. 2. c. 2.
and the old Man gladly obeyed, and told him, Non ego Imperium tuum, mi Fili,
contempsi, I did not despise thy authority, but I tried if you knew how to be a
Consul: nec ignoro quid Patriae venerationi debeatur; verum publica instituta
privata pietate potiora judico, I know what veneration is due to a Father; but
the private regard must give place to the public laws. And yet even in things
of public nature, if a Father be wise, his Counsel ought to have some force
besides the reason. When the Tribunes of the people, who sometime had Consular
dignity, contended which of them should go to the War against the Lavicani
(for they all would fain have gone, but none would stay at home to take care of
the city) Quintus Servilius commanded his Son to stay, and do his duty at
home; and he did so, for it was for the public interest that one should, and
the power of his Father determined him when they all refused at first.

3. If a Son enters into holy Orders, 23.
it does not quit him from his duty and obedience to his Father, unless the
law declare it so; that is, in such things wherein the Fathers political power
did consist. And we find in that collection of Canons which is called
Apostolical, Cap. 81.
it is decreed that if a servant take on him holy Orders against the will of
his lord, there was a redhibition allowed; he was to return to his service,
till he was freed by his lord. The case is the same in Princes and in Fathers.

There are four little Queres more for the finishing this Rule; the answers to
which will be short, because they depend upon the former discourses.

1. Whether if the Grandfather be alive, 24.
and the Son be in his power, it be sufficient to legitimate the marriage of
the Nephew if the Grandfather consent, though the Father be not asked.

To this the Lawyers answer with a distinction: 25.
If the Nephew marry a wife, l. oratione 16.. 1. ff. de rit^ nuptiar. l. 3. D.
eod.
the consent of the Son must be asked; but if the Niece marry, the consent of
the Grandfather is sufficient: and so it is if the Nephew marry in the same
family, that is, the Niece by another son. The reason of the last is, because
the Fathers are supposed willing to do advantage to their own family, and
therefore it may be sufficient that he who is in actual possession of the
Government should explicitly consent, and the other implicitly. But why to the
marriage of the Niece the Grandfathers consent should be enough, but to the
Nephew's marriage the Fathers consent also be required, the reason that is
pretended is only this, Because no man ought to have his heir provided for him
against his will, of which there is no danger in the marriage of a daughter.
But in short, though this was thus in the Civil law of the Romans, and was no
more reasonable then we see; yet now that it is a case of Conscience I am to
answer otherwise. For it is against Natural and Divine reason and laws that the
Father should in either of the cases be neglected, who ought rather to be
preferred, as he that is most and longest like to be concerned in the good and
evil of the marriage.

2. Whether if the parents have consented and authorized the treaty of marriage
till the affections of the children are irrevocably engaged, 26.
and afterward retract that consent, the children are bound to obey their
parents, and quit their loves.

This I find in an elegant case related by Gentian Hervet in his oration to the
Council. 27.
Damoiselle Vitrou was espoused to a Cavalier by her parents; de clandest.
Matrim. impress. Paris. 1556.
but when he would have married her and carried her home to his friends, her
parents, I know not upon what account, changed their minds and refused to let
her go. But the Soldier carries her away by force and marries her and lies
with her, but used her ill; of which she being quickly weary, flies into a
Monastery; and that she might not be drawn thence and forced to return under
her bondage, she pretends that he was not her husband by law, because he forced
her from her Fathers house against the will of her parents. To this it was
answered in behalf of the husband, that she who was espoused legally, might be
carried away by the spouse lawfully, in Burchard. and in decretis.
according to that of Gregory, and Eusebius, Si quis virginem aut viduam
furatus fuerit, nisi fuerit a se desponsata, anathema sit. If she was not
espoused, it is Plagium and raptus, a rape and stealth; but if she was, it was
no fraud to him. Idem dixit Lucius 3. in C. cum causam de rapt. extra.
Now if this was no ravishment, as it is plain, because she was espoused, and
she was willing, though her parents were not, then she was his wife, says the
Law; and if so, then the revocation or dissent of the Father hindered not but
that she might proceed thither where she was engaged. Now this case went far
indeed: But if it be not gone so far, yet if it be gone thither from whence
they cannot honestly or decently recede, the Fathers dissent ought not to be a
prejudice to the consummation: for it began from an honest and a competent
cause, it was a fire kindled from the Sun, and it proceeds to that which is
honest in it self; and therefore there is no evil done. But if the parties are
unengag'd, or be indifferent, or can well retire, the first liberty did not let
them loose from duty, but that they are to abide therewhere they were, unless
(I say) by that first leave they are passed beyond a fair return. For the
affections and the great content of children is not to be played with, as with a
tennis-ball; and it is in this as in his children, if he have begotten the
affection unto life, he must maintain it at his own charge.

3. 28.
Whether Mothers have the same authority over their children as the Fathers
have.

To this I answer, that in the Civil law sons were not in their Mothers power,
but in their Fathers: Seneca controv. l. 3. c. 5. (...).
Appellare de nuptiis debui Patrem; and Eustathius upon Homer, (...). He that
gives the dowry, it is fit that by his will the marriage be contracted. This is
well enough, that the Father should do it: but it becomes the piety of
children to endeavor that their Mother be pleased; for to her also there is
the same natural relation, obligation and minority, and in all things they are
equal, abating the privilege of the sex; and therefore though the same duty is
owing to them both, yet their authority is severally expressed, Ismeniae and
Ismen. 5.
which to my sense is well intimated by Eustathius: (...), Not the power of my
Father, nor the persuasion of my Mother, should make me marry even Venus her
self. Where the Mother is allowed only the power of persuasion. But that also
implies all her power, only that is the most proper way for her exercise of
it. Epist. ad Paulum.
And it is the most forcible. Jussum erat, quodque est potentissimum Imperandi
genus, rogabat, qui jubere poterat, said Ausonius. (...), said Julian the
Emperor. Orat. 2.
For they that can if they please compel, ought most of all to prevail when
they counsel and entreat. But however things were in the law of the Romans, yet
by the laws of nature Mothers, who have so great an affection to their
children, and so great an interest in the good and evil respectively of their
Son in law's or their Daughters manners, must with duty and tenderness be
regarded like the Fathers. (...), said S. in Genes. l. 4.
Cyril of Alexandria: Consonantly to the law of Nature he commanded his son to
abstain from such marriages as were displeasing to his Mother. Isaac did so to
Jacob. And to this purpose Catullus elegantly presses this obligation. At tu ne
pugna cum tali conjuge, virgo.
Non aequum est pugnare, Pater cui tradidit ipse,
Ipse Pater cum Matre, quibus parere necesse est.
Virginitas non tota tua est: ex part parentum est.
Tertia pars Matri data, pars data tertia Patri,
Tertia sola tua est. --
Her Father and her Mother and her self had in her self equal share.

But if the Father be dead, 29.
then the question is greater, because if the Mother have any power, she has
it alone: when her Husband lived she had power as the Moon has light by the
aspect of the Sun; but now that her light is extinguished, has she any natural
and proper power of her own? To this S. Austin answers clearly, Epist. 233.
Fortassis enim quae nunc non apparet, apparebit and Matter, cujus voluntatem in
tradenda filia omnibus ut arbitror Natura praeponit: nisi eadem puella in ea
jam aetate fuerit, ut jure licentiore sibi eligat ipsa quod velit. From which
words of S. Austin it is plain, that in the disposing of her daughter in
marriage by the voice of Nature the Mother has a power; and this is rather,
and more, and longer then in the disposal of her son. The reason of both is the
same, because by the advantage of the sex and breeding, the son will be fit to
govern in the family; and at the same time the daughter has the weaknesses of
feminine spirit upon her as much as the Mother, and more by reason of her
tender age and want of experience. To which may be added, that if the Father be
dead, the estate is descended upon the Son, and then he is put by law under the
power of Tutors and Guardians, and then is to marry, (...), says the law, by
the consent of his Kindred and Guardians; that is, if he be not come to
maturity: but if he be, the rule is, l. filia. 20. C. de inoffic. testam. and
(...). lib. 28. c. 4. Constanti^n. Harm^nopul. Epitom. l. 4. tit. 7.. 12.
Filius quidem pubes nullius expectat arbitrium, filia vero Matris and
propinquorum, A son that is of a marriageable age if his Father be dead is
wholly in his own power, but a daughter is under the power of her Mother. And
yet this also lasts no longer but to a certain age, which is determined by the
laws of every Nation respectively. And yet both the Son and the Daughter are to
show piety to their Mother, and not to grieve her. Pulchre Deo obtemperat qui
tristis est Parenti, for he does ill serve God, that brings sorrow to his
parent. And therefore the Ancient laws of the Romans were ever favorable to
that part of the marriage which the Mother chose. Postulatu audito Matris
Tutorumque, Magistratus secundum parentis arbitrium dant jus Nuptiarum, Live.
lib. 4.
says Livy. But the Wisigoths by their law were more kind to the Mothers
interst, lib. 3. tit. 1.. 7.
for Patre mortuo utriusque sexus filiorum conjunctio in Matris potestate
consistat; Both son and daughter if their Father was dead were in the power of
their Mother, and were to marry by her appointment and counsel. in Abramio.
And therefore Simeon Metaphrastes commends Abraham for taking a wife at the
command of his parents, (...), as knowing it to be one of the Divine
Commandments to obey his Father and his Mother. But these things were varied
by laws and particular considerations. That which is of universal truth is this
only, That in their natural minority children are equally under the power of
their Mother, as of their Father when he was alive; but when they can choose,
they are sooner quit from the Castigation or legal coercitive powers of their
Mother, then of their Father if he had lived. And this relies upon the practice
and consent of all the world, and has this reason, because women are not by
laws supposed very fit to govern lasting interests. But lastly, they are never
quit from their reverence and duty, piety and greatest and kindest regards: but
the Mothers dissenting does not annul the marriage of her sons that are of age;
and it is so far from that, that their not complying with their Mother in this
affair is only then a sin when it is done with unregarding circumstances, or
has not in it a great weight of reason. But every child should do well to
remember their obligation to their Mothers; lib. 1. de Sacerdot.
and as S. Chrysostom said in his own case, when he had a mind to enter into a
Monastery his Mother recalled him, or rather the voice of God crying, Fili
colito Anthusam, Son remember thy Mother Anthusa, and grieve her not as long as
she lives. Origin. ubi supra.
For Nomen Matris, arcana reverentia, There is a secret veneration due to the
very Name of a Mother.

4. Although a Fathers authority is such that against it a Son may not marry;
30.
yet whether or no is the power of the parents such that they can compel a son
or a daughter to marry whom or when they will?

To this I answer, 31.
that in the matters of marriage especially, and proportionably to the probable
event of things in other lasting states of life, that of Aristotle is very
true, (...), The Fathers authority has in it no necessity, no constraint Which
Heliodorus Prusaeensis thus paraphrases, The commandments of Fathers of their
children (...), have not in them such force that they can compel their
children. And therefore Pamphilus in the Comedy complains passionately, and yet
reasonably, Proh Deum atque hominum fidem! quid est, Andria, Act. 1. Scen. 5.
si non haec contumelia'st?
Uxorem decrerat sese dare mihi hodie: nonne oportuit
Praescisse me ante? nonne prius communicatum oportuit?
Upon which place Donatus said well, quia nuptiarum non omnis potestas in Patre
est, All the entire power of marriages is not in the Fathers. It may not be
done against their wills, but neither is their will alone sufficient. The
Fathers have a negative, but the children must also like. Constat enim circa
nuptias esse filiis liberam voluntatem: ideo servata ratione pietatis
communicatum oportuit, said Eugraphius. For it is certain they have the power
of choice, and therefore in piety the Father ought to have acquainted the Son
with it. And the same also is the case of the daughter, she is not to be forced
to marry against her inclination and affections. Eustathius upon that of Homer,
ad (...)
(...), it was spoken according to the exactest political measures, that the
Father should choose an husband for his daughter ^enelope, and yet that his
daughter should like the young Prince Ulysses; (...). For there is difference
between a servant and a child; the Father may choose for his daughter, so that
at the same time she may choose for her self: and therefore (says he) when
Homer said (...), he says it in respect of the Father, that he may give her to
whom he please; but when he says (...), he says it in respect of the
Daughter, that the man whom the Father chooses must be gracious in her eyes:
(...), said Priscus, in Eclogis legationum.
It is impious to marry a daughter against her will.

But this is to be understood with some restraint. 32.
For if a Father may choose, and the daughter may choose too, how if it happens
that they fancy several persons? shall the Fathers authority, or the daughters
liking prevail? both cannot prevail at once: but the question is, which shall,
and when, and how long, or in what cases. To this I answer that if the matter
be indifferent, or the person be fit, the Father ought to prevail. Patris
quippe jussa non potuisse filium detrectare, Tacit. Annal. 3.
A son may not refuse his Fathers commandment. For the Fathers authority is
certainly a very great thing; (...), Manuel Palaeolog. orat. 7.
A Father is by Nature to his child both a Lord and a Prince: and therefore
Theophilus calls the Paternal power (...), a ^.. 1. de his qui sui vel alien.
jur. Dec^am. 10.
which is the title of the Royal Majesty: and though the old name for
disobedience in the Scripture is Witchcraft, yet Ennodius would fain have found
a new name for this kind of it. Non invenio qua novum facinoris genus explicem
novitate sermonum, quibus fuit Sacrilegium non parere. It is Sacrilege at least
not to obey our parents. Now although this be spoken generally and
indefinitely, yet it must have it is effect in such commandments which have no
great reason against them: and therefore if a Father offers a wife to a son, or
a husband to a daughter, such as a wise or a good man may offer without folly
and injury, the child is not to dispute at all, but to obey, if the Father
urges and insists upon the precept.

But there are some cases in which the Father ought not to urge the children.
33.
1. If the children be not capable or able for marriage, if it be destructive
of their health, or against his nature; and this excuse was allowed amongst the
Romans even where the Paternal power was at the highest. Senec. controv. 1. 6.
Solent qui coguntur a Patribus ut Uxores ducant, illa dicere, Non sumus etiam
nunc apti nuptiis. It is not fit to require them to marry that hate, or are
unable to do the offices of that state. 2. If the Father offer to his child a
dishonest or filthy person, unequal, or unfit; that is, when it is notoriously
or scandalously so: when the person is intolerably and irreconcileably
displeasing, then the command is tyranny. The Son is bound to obey his Father
commanding him to marry; Sed enim si imperet uxorem ducere infamem,
propudiosam, criminosam, non scilicet parendum, lib. 2. c. 7.
said A. Gellius; But not if he offers to his child an infamous, a dishonest
person. And so the law provides in behalf of the daughter, that she ought not
to be compelled to marry an infamous man; l. sed quae Patris, ff. de Sponsal.
and so Harmenopulus renders it, (...) Matthaus Monachus legit (...), ut filiu^
etiam compre^ (...) male, quia eo loci JC. (...) quitur de filio and filia, and
de filio controversia non erat. Harm^nopalo a. conscntiunt (...) lib. 28. tit.
1.
(...), She that is under her Fathers power can then only refuse her Fathers
command, when he chooses for her a man that is unworthy in his manners, and a
filthy person: and indeed in this case she has leave to refuse the most
Imperious command of an angry Father. Son and daughter in this have equal
right: (...): so Lucian. in dial. Meretr.
Though his Father would have compelled and forced him to marry a wife, yet he
refused it: and he might lawfully, when he offered him a strumpet.

But there is another sort of persons which are called Turpes filthy or
hateful; 34.
and that is, such as are deformed and intolerably ugly. (...), says Lucian,
in Charidemo.
We call them filthy that are not fair or comely. But in this sense, if the
Father offers a husband to his daughter, she has not liberty to dissent, but
only to petition for liberty: for beauty is not the praise of a man, and he
may be a worthy person, though of an ill shape, and his wit and manners may be
better then his countenance. And there is no exception in this, but that if the
daughter has used all means she can to endure him, and cannot obtain it, she
can only then refuse when she can be sure that with him she can never do her
duty; of which because she cannot be sure beforehand, because his worthiness
may overcome the air and follies of her fancy, therefore the unhandsomenesse
of a man is not alone a sufficient cause for a daughter to refuse her Fathers
earnest commands. But yet in this case though a Father have authority, yet a
good Father will never use it, when it is very much against his Daughter,
unless it be also very much more for her good. But a Son has in this some
more liberty, because he is to be the head of a family, and he is more easily
tempted, and can sooner be drawn aside to wander, and beauty or comeliness is
the proper praise of a woman; comeliness and good humor, forma uxoria, and a
meek and quiet spirit are her best dressings, and all that she can be good for
in her self; and therefore the ugliness of a woman will sooner pass into an
incapacity of person, then it can do in a man. But in these cases, as children
should not be too forward to dispute the limits of their Fathers power, lest
they mistake their own leave or their Fathers authority; so Fathers also should
remember what the Lawyers say, l. D. Adrianus. ff. ad legem Pompeian. de
partic. Advers. Marcion.
Patria potestas in pietate debet, non in atrocitate consistere, The Fathers
power consists not in the surliest part of Empire, but in the sunshine side, in
the gentlest and warmest part. Quis enim non magis filiorum salutem quam suam
curat? says Tertullian. He is an ill Father that will not take more care for
the good of his child, then his own humor.

The like is to be said in case the Father offers to his child a person of a
condition much inferior. 35.
For though this difference is introduced principally by pride and vanity in
all the last ages of the world, and Nobility is not the reward of virtue, but
the adornment of fortune, or the effect of Princes humors, unless it be in
some rare cases; yet now that it is in the humors and manners of men, it is to
be regarded, and a Diamond is really of so much value as men will give for it:
and therefore a son or daughter may justly refuse to marry a person whose
conjunction will be very dishonorable and shameful: but at little differences
children must not start. If the Nobility marries into the family of a Merchant,
the difference is not so great, but that portion makes up the want of great
extraction. For a husband or a wife may be (...), Noble by their wealth; so the
Greek proverb means: and old Ennius translating of Euripides his Hecuba, makes
wealth to be Nobility, Haec ita etsi perverse dicas, apud A. Gell. lib. 11. c.
4.
facile Achivos flexeris.
Nam cum opulenti loquuntur pariter atque ignobiles,
Eadem dicta, eademque oration aequa, non aequa valet.
When the rich and the ignoble speak the same things, the rich man shall
prevail when the ignoble shall not. -- (...)
(...). Eurip. in Archelao.

Wealth makes nobility. And therefore in such cases, if the sons or daughters
refuse the command of their Father, it is to be accounted rebellion and
disobedience. But this whole inquiry is well summed up in those excellent words
of Heliodorus, (...). If the Fathers will use the utmost power of law, it is
enough for them to say, It is their will. And it is to no purpose to ask, where
they have power to compel. But when there is a marriage to be contracted, it is
fit that they both consent.

There are some inquiries relating to the title of this Chapter, which would be
seasonable enough here to be considered, concerning the powers of Husbands over
their Wives: But because the Matrimonial questions and cases of Conscience are
very Material and very Numerous, and of all things have been most injured by
evil and imperfect principles and worse conduct; I though it better to leave
this to fall into the heap of Matrimonial cases, which I design in a book by it
self, if God shall give me opportunity, and fit me with circumstances
accordingly.

CHAP. VI. Of the Interpretation, Diminution and Abrogation of Humane laws.
THERE are seven ways of the changing of humane laws so, that the obligation of
Conscience is also changed: 1. Equity, 2. Judicial interpretation, 3. A
contrary, or a ceasing reason, 4. Dispensation, 5. Commutation, 6. Contrary
Custom, 7. Direct revocation or abrogation. Of these I am to give account in
this Chapter, that the Conscience having already seen her obligation, may also
discern when she enters into liberty.

. 1. Of Equity.
RULE I. When the letter of the law is burdensome and unjust, the meaning and
charity of the law does only oblige the Conscience.
SCire leges non est verba earum tenere, 1.
sed vim ac potestatem; quia prior atque potentior est quam vox men's dicentis,
say the Lawyers, The mind of the lawgiver is more to be regarded then his
words. For words change, and things change; and our expressions sometimes the
more literal they are, the more obscure they are, because there are more words
then things, and the circumstances and appendages are the best commentary.
Leges perquam egregia res sunt; sed is qui legibus utitur
Nimium exact, videtur esse Sycophanta, said Menander.
It is not the office of a Judge or Prince, but of a Sycophant, to be exact in
the use of his laws: but there is abatement and allay to the words by the
purpose of him that spoke them. Cicero lib. 2. de Invent.
For Nullam rem neque legibus, neque scriptura ulla, denique ne in sermon
quidem quotidiano atque Imperiis domesticis recte posse administrari, si
unusquisque velit verba spectare, and non ad voluntatem ejus qui verba habuerit
accedere, For nothing can be rightly administered either in laws, or common
talk, in public or domestic Governments, if we regard the words more then the
mind of him that spoke them. There are some tacit exceptions in all laws that
would not be tyrannical. Quaedam etiamsi nulla significatione legis comprehensa
sint, natura tamen excipiuntur, says Quintilian; Natural reason excepts some
things which are not excepted in the law. And it was counted a fierce and cruel
piece of importune justice in Basilius Macedo the Emperor: when a stagge
fastened his horn in the Princes belt and tossed him up with very much danger,
one of his guard with a faucheon cut the Princes girdle and rescued him from
his sad calamity; but he caused the poor man to be put to death, because by the
law it was capital to draw a sword upon the Prince. The law could never intend
to make it death to save the Princes life. Here was a necessity in this case;
and if it had been like a fault, yet here it had been excusable; for necessity
excuses whatever it compels to.

Now this happens in the matter of penal laws principally; 2.
for those equities which are alleviations of duty, I shall consider under the
other heads: but in penalties it is not only the charity but the justice of
the law, that the subject should neither be shared by an unwary or obscure
letter, nor oppressed by an unequal punishment. Quid tristes querimoniae,
Horat. l. 3. od. 24.

Si non supplicio culpa reciditur?
Laws intend not to cut away the life or to pare away the goods of the subject,
but to cut off his crimes, to restrain him from that which the law would not
have him to do. This in propriety of speaking is justice: but equity although
it signifies all that reasonableness by which the burden of laws is
alleviated, and so will comprehend the six first heads; yet here I mean it in
the particular sense, that is, the easing of punishments; and the giving gentle
sentences; not by remission of what is justly incurred, for that is Clemency,
but by declaring the delated person not to be involved in the curse of the law,
or not so deeply; not to punish any man more then the law compells us; that is
equity. And to this many rules in the law do minister.

1. 3.
Non debet aliquis considerare verba, Cap. in his. de verb. signif.
sed voluntatem, cum non intentio verbis, sed verba intentioni debeant
deservire, said the law. Which is thus to be understood; not that we are
blindly to aim at some secret purpose of the lawgiver, for the intention of
man is to be judged by his words, and not the words by his intention. But the
meaning is, that if some words be obscure, l. 4. ff. de legib.
they are to be made intelligible by others. Incivile enim esse nisi tot^ lege
perspecta una aliqua ejus particula proposita judicare, says the law. We must
in discerning the sense of the law take in all together, the antecedents and
the consequences; and if darkness be over all the face of the law, th^n the
intention is to be judged by circumstances, by the matter and the occasion, by
the story and by use. Intelligentia dictorum ex causis dicendi assumenda est,
lib. 4. de Trinit.
said S. Hilary, By the causes of the law we may judge of the intention of the
lawgiver.

2. When the first sense of the words inferres any absurdity, 4.
contradiction, injustice, or unreasonablenesse, the mind of the lawgiver is
to be supposed to be otherwise, and the words are not to be adhered unto. In
ambigua voce legis ea potius accipienda est significatio quae vitio caret, l.
19. ff. de legibus.
praesertim cum voluntas legis ex hoc colligi possit. The laws are supposed to
be good, and therefore no evil can come from them, and if there does, that was
not their mind; Orat. pro Gaecin.
for, as Cicero said rarely well, Verba reperta sunt, non quae impedirent, sed
quae indicarent voluntatem, Words were not invented to obscure, but to declare
the will, and therefore not the words but the will is to prevail; for if we
could otherwise certainly and easily understand the Princes will, we should
never use words. When Leo Isaurus was in expectation of the Greek Empire, Zonar.
he dealt with two Astrologers that were Jews: they promised that the sum of
affairs would fall into his hands, and he promised them to grant them any one
petition they should ask. When he had obtained his desires, they desired, that
all the images of Saints might be demolished: he granted their request, but put
them to death who put it in execution. This was against that mind of the
promise which the Prince had or ought to have had, and he did not keep his
promise though he kept his word; for it is not to be supposed that he promised
or intended to reward them with a mischief. So it is in laws, if an evil be
consequent to the observation of the letter, the intention is then wholly to be
regarded; for fraudem legi facit, l. contra. ff. de legib. and l. Non dubium.
C. de legib.
qui salvis verbis legis, mentem ejus circumvenit, says the law, The law is
then abused, when you keep the words of the law and prevaricate in the sense
and meaning.

3. If the intention be gathered by circumstances, 5.
by comparing of laws, by the matter and by appendages, and yet but obscurely,
the obscure words are rather to be chosen then the obscure intention. The
reason is, because words are the first and principal sign of the intention,
and therefore ever to be preferred, and we are to seek no other, but when by
accident these are hindered to signify: when the intention and the words do
differ, by what means soever the intention can rightly be found out, that must
be stood to. l. Nominis. ff. de verb. signif.
Ex lege esse tam quod est ex sententia legis, quam quod ex verbis; for that is
law which is signified by the words, or by the causes and matter and
circumstances. But when in respect of the obscurity on all hands the case is
indifferent, we must stand to the words; for there is equity in that, that what
is first in every kind, should be preferred and be the measure of the rest.

4. Add to this, 6.
that unless it be manifest that the words do not represent the intention of
the lawgiver, the conscience of the subject is to obey the words of the law:
so the law it self says expressly, Non aliter a significatione verborum ejus
recedi, l. non aliter. ff. de legate.
quam cum manifestum est aliud ipsum sensisse. For if this rule were not our
measure, every witty Advocate might turn laws to what purpose he please, and
every subject would take liberty to serve his Prince not by the Princes law,
but by his own glosses; and then our Conscience could have no measure of duty,
and therefore no ground of peace.

5. 7.
When there is and ought to be a little deflexion from the natural or
Grammatical sense, and this deflexion is evident and perceived, we must stand
to that sense without any further deflexion, as strictly as to the first
natural sense. That is, when a word in law signifies many things by proportion
and analogy, but one is the principal, we must stand to that principal. As if a
law says, He that steals a Chalice from a Church, let him die the death; the
word death must signify naturally, for the separation of soul and body. But if
by any other indication it appear not to signify in the first natural sense,
then it must signify in that sense that stands next to it; it must stand, as
the Logicians say, pro famosiori analogato, and therefore must signify a Civil
death, that is, banishment, or the diminution of his head by loss of liberty,
according to the usage of the laws. And when it is said, The son must inherit,
it is meant, not the natural but the legitimate; or if not this, yet not the
adopted but the natural, not the youngest but the eldest.

6. If words used in law have a civil signification, 8.
by parity, by extension, by fiction of law, it is then to be followed and
chosen, and the natural to be left, when the circumstances; the matter and the
appendages do enforce it, else not: but yet the legal sense of a word though
it prevails not against the natural, yet it must prevail in the common sense of
law, against the sense of privilege and exception. Among the Romans they who
had three children had a right not to be sent to the wars. But if by the
common use and signification of the law, the word [children] had signified
Nephews, or adopted children, although this sense could not have prejudiced the
first and natural sense of the word; yet when the Emperor gave the same
privilege to them that had children in no sense, but to such as made three
books, children of the brain, the second sense could not prevail against the
first, yet it might against the last.

7. 9.
Words that are of civil or legal signification must not signify according to
Grammar, but according to Law. Suspension must not signify hanging of the man,
but a temporary laying aside his office or emolument: and Sacrament must not in
Theology signify an oath, but a religious ceremony of Christ's institution. For
whatsoever is a word of art must be understood by the measures of that art; and
therefore if it be a law-term, though that word be used also in common among
the people, yet not this sense but that is to be followed in the understanding
of the law Dialecticorum verba nulla sunt publica; suis utuntur: and id quidem
commune omnium fere est artium. Cice^. lib. 1. Acad.
. But if the law has no propriety of use or interpretation in the word, but
takes it up from the common usages of the Country, not the best lawyers, but
the best Masters of language are the best interpreters. To which this is to be
added, that if a word in law be taken from the common use, and this use change,
and the law abide, the word in the law must abide the same as does the law, and
must not change with the common use: and in this case, not the best Lawyers,
nor the best Grammarians, but the best Historians are the best measures of our
Conscience. The word Censeo in the law of the Romans at first did signify to
appoint, afterward to estimate, and then to censure, and at last to counsel or
to suppose. Now when the word censere is used l. ult. ff. de suis and legit.
haered. it must not be expounded by Cicero in his oration pro Cluentio, where
it stands for liquet, for in this law it stands for consulere: and therefore in
such cases we are to inquire what the word signified when the law was made, for
the word in the old use is not the measure of the present use; nei^ther if it
were clear what it meant in the ancient laws, could that be the mea^sure of
expounding contracts or humane acts or obligations at present; not yet can that
word in that old law receive an interpretation by the differen^e which it has
got by time.

But it may be some of these rules will be but seldom useful to our cases of
conscience; 10.
possibly they may often: but then to reduce these things to the intentions of
the present Rule, and to become a measure of practice, there are three great
rules which are the best and most general measures of finding out the meaning
of the words of laws in order to equity and conscience, when the Grammar or the
common use of the words themselves is not sufficient.

1. 11.
That is the meaning of the words of the law that does the work of the law. And
this is the first rule of equity. For it is but conscience to suppose that he
that makes a contract does it bona fide, and he that makes a Will would have it
executed, and he that leaves a Legacy would have it do good, and he that
appoints a guardian would have one that should be fit for the employment, that
the thing in hand may not perish and come to nothing. And therefore Brasidas
did cavil, not treat like a Prince, when having agreed with the Greeks that he
would quit his claim to the Boeotian fields, he afterward told them that those
were not the Boeotian fields but his own where he encamped his army. Thucyd. l.
4.
Which thing if it had been true, they all had treated about nothing. And when
the laws of Sicily forbad their priests to resign their Benefices to their
sons, the two priests of Panormo that agreed together interchangeably to resign
their's to the son of each other, did keep the words of the Canon well enough;
but they took a course that the law should not acquire it is end, and therefore
they sinned against it is meaning. And this Rule is of great use in all
doubtful and amphibological expressions, according to that rule in the law, l.
67. ff. de reg. jur.
Quoties idem sermo duas sententias exprimit, ea potissimum excipiatur quae rei
gerendae aptior est. Thus in the discerning contracts and other entercourses,
the substance of the thing and the present employment is more to be considered
then any improper or aequivocal expression, or quirk in the words of the law or
intercourse. Antonio Casulano a poor Piemontane having a sad vintage and
harvest one year by reason of the early rains running from the hills before he
had gathered his fruits, comes and complains to his landlord Signior Vitaldo,
and tells him his sad condition, and how unable he was to pay his rent. Vitaldo
pitying his poor tenant, told him he would never exact any thing of his tenants
that were ruined by the hand of heaven, and therefore for his rent he bid him
be at rest and let it alone. Casulano makes his leg and thanks his lord, and
goes home. But the next year he had so brave a harvest and so full a vintage,
that it was greater then two years before. He comes and brings this years rent:
but Vitaldo asks him where was the rent of the former year. The tenant says it
was forgiven him. Here then is the question, what was meant by, let it alone,
and he would not exact his rent of his disabled tenants; that is, while they
were not able he would forbear them: for there all the entercouse was about
forbearing the rent, and he never thought to ask his lord to forgive it him.
But this sense of the words was rei gerendae aptior, it was agreeable to both
their interests in conjunction, and therefore Casulano is bound in conscience
to pay his rent. So the Lawyers say, l. ex conducto.. Papinianus. ff. de usur.
l. 66. de Judiciis.
Si ambigua sit intentio seu actio, quod utilius sit actori accipiendum est.
The landlord is to have the advantage of the ambiguity; for besides that he
knew his own meaning best, the right was his, and no man is to be presumed to
part with his right against his will. And thus it is in the law, as well as in
Contracts, Amphiboliae enim omnis in his erit quaestio: aliquando uter sit
secundum naturam magis sermo; semper utrum sit aequius, utrum is qui sic
scripsit ac dixit, sic voluerit. lib. 7. cap. 9. Orat.
So Quintilian draws into a compendium all the rules of expounding doubtful
words. First, see whether it be agreeable to the thing in hand, for no man is
willing his own act should perish: for this sometimes will do it; but if it
will not, then equity must intervene: but if by any other way we know the mind
of the lawgiver, that is of all things to be preferred. For though the case be
hard, yet if it was the mind of the lawgiver and be not unjust, l. perspexit.
ff. Qui and a quibus.
it must stand. Quod quidem perquam durum est, sed ita lex scripta est, It is
hard, but so the law is written. That is, if the mind of the lawgiver be
certain and clear, no equity is to intervene; but when the mind is not known,
equity is the best meaning. But of this by and by. This is of great use in
Religion as well as in justice. For when God gives a command and uses mystical
expressions, metaphors, ritual or typical representments, or signifies his
pleasure by the outside and crust of services, though this is not to be
despised or omitted, yet the spiritual and moral sense and internal service is
the principal, that is rei gerendae aptior, more to God's purposes, and more to
ours. When God commands us to repent, and to serve him, he that asks the
question, when God would have us to repent, whether it will not serve the turn
if we repent at all, if we repent upon our deathbed, because the words of the
commandment do indifferently signify any time; here we are rightly determined
by this Rule, That was God's meaning which does God's work, that without which
the work would perish, and God would not be served: for God's intention being
that we should glorify him by a free obedience, and serve him in a holy life,
that which makes God to loose his purpose, cannot be the meaning of his words.
Thus when God commands us to come into his Courts, to fall down upon our knees
before his footstool; it must mean that we must worship God with the lowest
adoration of our souls, with the prostration of our mind: for the body without
the mind being nothing, unless this commandment for bodily worship be
expounded to signify the worship of the spirit, God is injured, his intention
is defeated: and therefore the law has taken care of this. l. cum filiofam,
ff. de legate.
Improprie verba regulariter non accipiuntur, nisi aliter actus vel periret,
vel elusorius redderetur, Words are not to be taken improperly, unless the
proper acception of it does elude the purpose of the lawgiver, and makes his
law vain. Thus the very Gentiles understood the mind of God: when he commanded
men to offer sacrifices and oblations to him, his meaning was, they should kill
their lusts, and sacrifice themselves to God. To this purpose are those
excellent words of Menander, (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
He that offers to God the sacrifices of bulls and goats, or of any other
beast, gold or rich garments, Ivory or precious stones, and thinks by this
means to reconcile God to him, is deceived, and is a fool. When God commanded
these things he intended to be understood to other purposes. (...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
For the sacrificer must be a spiritual man, dead unto sin and living unto
righteousness; he must be chaste and charitable, just and true, a despiser of
the world, and must not desire so much as another man's pin; and he must be the
same in private as in public, walking ever as in the presence of God. This is
an excellent sum of religion, and the best interpreter of the spiritual sense
of Moses law, next to the Sermons of the Gospel: but without this the work of
God had perished, and religion it self had been elusory. And this is a
sufficient warrant for a sense beyond the letter of a Commandment.

2. In all laws and obligations of conscience by contract, 12.
when any doubt arises, we are to consider what is most likely and what is most
usual, and rest upon that. l. cum quid. ff. de reb. credit.
In contrahendo quod agitur pro cauto habendum, says the law. We must suppose
that the contractor did intend that sense that is the wariest, because that is
the most likely; nothing being so reasonable as to think the man intended that
which all the world does, that is, to buy cheap and to sell dear. If this will
not do it, then we must run to the custom of the country; because the things
and manners of custom, though they were not in the contract, yet veniunt in
bonae fidei judiciis, they are to be of weight in judgments, as being a
reasonable decision of questions and obscurities. But if nothing of all this
will do, then comes in the principal rule of equity and remissions: l. 9. ff.
de regul. jur.
Semper in obscuris quod minimum est sequimur, In all things of burden the
least is to be chosen. This is of use in Contracts, in Testaments, and in
infliction of punishments.

* In Contracts. 13.
He that promises to give a man an hundred or two hundred pound, cannot be
challenged nor obliged but for a hundred. In summis semper quod minus est
promitti videtur. l. inter stipulantem. and l. si ita. ff. de ve^b. signif.
The reason is, because when two things of burden are expressed, he that
promised must so far be his own judge as to determine himself in the event,
when he did not in the stipulation; and therefore it is to be presumed that he
would be bound but to the less. For as in the Canon law, when a Bishop had
obtained leave to resign or quit his little Bishopric, of his superior, it is
not granted that he shall be translated to another in the grant of cession; and
the reason given in the law is this, cap. 2.. sed neque. de translat. Episc.
Nam si circa translationem idem fieri voluisset, quod de cessione dixerat, and
de translatione poterat expressisse, Because he that granted a cession, could
as easily have said translation if he had so intended: so here also it is
presumed that he intended to give the least, because if he had intended the
biggest, he might as easily have said so, as to have named a less; and if he
intended the greater, he may perform it yet if he please. Thus if Titius
promise to pay his debt within a year or two, Caius cannot by virtue of that
promise force him to pay it till the two years be out.

* In Testaments also the case is the same. 14.
Maevius makes his Will, and leaves Lucius his heir of all, but gives his
sister as much as one of his sons. The heir is tied to pay his Aunt but so much
as that son has whose portion is the least. Thus when Regulus left to his wife
Quintilla the field that was next to the Campus Martius, the Praetor
understanding that he had two fields next to the Campus Martius, l. cum
servus,. scio. ff. de legate. and l. unum ex familia,. si rem tuam. ff. cod.
gave her the least of the two: the reason is, because the Father is supposed
to put upon the Heir that burden which is the lighter.

But this holds not in all cases: 15.
the rule is the same, and ease and remission is to be done, and the gentler
sentence is to be followed, and the least burden to be imposed, and the
smallest legacy to be pai'd and received, or the most advantageous sense of
favor is to be pursued: but all the difficulty will be to whom the ease or the
advantage is to be done; for sometimes one, and sometimes another is to have
the benefit of the Chancery. 1. For the heir is to be favored against the
Legatees, unless God and religion be the Legatee, for the Church is to be
favored against the heir. And therefore Scaevola said, that if a Roman in his
Testament appointed an image to be set up in a Temple in which there were
marble and brass and silver statues, the legacy was to be performed in the
most costly material; l. Titia. 38.. fin. sup. de auro and argent. leg.
idque favore Dei and religionis, says the law; because in doubts it is fit
that God should have the preeminence, and it is also to be presumed that the
Testator intended to give the best unto the best. Let the instance be changed
and it is a good measure for conscience in the causes and questions of
Christians. 2. The heir or the Donor is to be eased and to be understood in the
least sense, unless that least sense makes the gift unprofitable and good for
nothing. Aruns dying left a servant to his Brother for a legacy. Canidius who
was the heir offers to give to his Uncle his man Spinax, who was the veriest
rogue in all the Empire. But his Uncle answered, My Brother did not intend to
give me a mischief. Then he offers him Lentillus who was little better then a
fool. To this his Uncle answered, My Brother did not intend to give me nothing.
And at last the Uncle demanded Aretius, who was his Brothers Physician: but
that Canidius refused, and he might very well; but he gave him Merula that was
a very good Baker, and both were indifferently pleased: but such a one that was
not the best, and yet was good for something, was due by justice. 3. Causes of
repetition are to be favored more then causes of gain. He that desires but to
save himself, or to get his own, is to have the advantage of him that if he
prevails gets gain: and the reason is, because it is better to save a main
stake, then to get an accession; it is better to have one preserved then
another increased: and it is more to be presumed that he who demands
restitution seeks but his own, then that the others gain is justly his. 4. He
that buys in doubts of conscience and law, is to be preferred before him that
sells, and the interpretation ought to be on the behalf of the first. The
reason of this is, because he that sel^s cannot so easily be deceived as he
that (...), for every man is justly presumed to know the price of his own
goo^^, and be cunning in his own trade. 5. Libertas omnibus rebus favorabilior
est. l. 38. ff. de re judicat.
For dowries and 6. for liberty and 7. possession sentences are to be given in
the favorable sense, because the cases themselves are full of charity and
mercy; and they that complain in these cases are commonly the oppressed party.

* This Rule also is intended and that principally in punishments and penal
sentences of law. 16.
Where if the law be obscure, it is on all hands confessed, that the sense of
equity is an excellent interpretation and declares the mind of the lawgiver:
l. interpretatione. ff. de poenis.
and it is also true that if several pen^lties be expressed in the law,
ordinarily the judge is to impose the least; and the reason is, because he does
at once the actions of two virtues; it is justice and it is charity at the same
time. I say ordinarily, for sometimes there are great examples to be made, and
in them there is very often Aliquid iniqui Habet aliquid (...) iniquo omne
^agnum exemplum, quod cont^a singulos util^^^te publica re^enditur, dix^^ C.
Cassius apu^ Tacitum.
, nothing of equity, but something that was very hard: and the Hebrew Kings
(say the Rabbis) had a power of causing the malefactor to hang all day and all
night upon the accursed tree; though the law was more gentle, and commanded the
body to be taken down before the Sun set; but if the public necessity required
it, the Jewish Doctors say that their Kings had power.

But the great difficulty is, 17.
when the words of the law are express, and name the punishment, whether or no
can there be any remission by equity or interpretation? Titius being cited to
appear in Court, came not, and was fined: but he came immediately. The question
is, whether he ought in conscience to be relieved. It is certain that in law
the sentence against him is just; for let the cause be never so odious, the law
must be understood according to the propriety of the words, unless the
intention of the lawgiver can otherwise be certainly known. But if by any ways
he can be relieved, he ought to be, if there be evident equity on his side. But
because this equity is against the solemnity of law, it must be introduced as
solemnly, that is, by a law, or a solemn decree according to the disposition of
law. But this latter part is matter of prudence more then of conscience; and
concerning this conflict of law and equity Cicero has spoken excellent things,
as who please may see in his Oration pro Caecina and in his lib. 2. Vet. Rhet.
But for the practice of it both in law and conscience it is an excellent rule
of law, l. 168. ff. de reg. jur.
Capienda est occasio quae praebet benignius responsum; An occasion must not be
forced against law, but if any can be found it must be used in the behalf of
equity. And therefore Celsus, Marcellus and Ulpian are noted with a fair memory
for being studious of equity in the sentences of law: Philipp. 9.
and for this very thing Cicero commends Servius: but Scaevola, Paulus,
Julianus and the Sabiniani and some others were more propense to rigor and
subtilty, and were less beloved. Turpe rigor nimius: Claudian.
Torquati despue mores. Titus Manlius was to blame in putting his son to death
for a glorious victory gotten by a little offense. But all good laws were ever
desirous of easy interpretation when the matter it self was a burden: and it
was well said of Gattinara to the Emperor Charles the 5th, apud Guicciard. l.
16. Gall. Proverb. Qui trop embrasse, mal estreint.
Chi vuole troppo abbracciare, va a pericolo di non strignere cosa alcuna, He
that strains the cord too hard, breaks it and can bind nothing. Periculosum est
praegrave Imperium: and difficile est continere quod capere non possis, said
lib. 4.
Curtius. He that fills his hand too full, lets go more then he should. There
is a measure in laws, which must not take in every thing, but let some things
pass gently; for a government that is too heavy is dangerous: and therefore
without all peradventure when the punishments are general, the least special
ought to be taken. Thus Gentlemen are not to be punished with the punishment of
slaves and vagabonds. If bodily punishment by law be commanded, scourging is to
be understood, or such as is in use in the nation, and not the cutting off a
member, ad l. pen. ff. de poenis.
or putting to death, say the Greek lawyers. And there is no exception to this,
but this only, That this is to be understood in lighter offenses, not in
greater; for in these it may be of as much concernment to justice that the
severer part be taken, as it is to charity that lighter offenses should carry
the lighter load. And therefore the S. C. Syllanianum decreed that if a slave
had killed his lord, all the slaves in the house should die for it. It was a
hard and a severe law; but it was a great crime, and by great examples the
lives of masters were to be secured: and to this purpose C. Cassius the Lawyer
defended it with great reason, apud Tacit. l. 14.
as is to be seen in his oration in Tacitus.

3. In matters of favor and matters of piety, 18.
the sense of the law is to be extended by interpretation. Things odious and
correctory are called strictae in the law, and that which is favorable is
called res ampla; because as the matter of that is to be made as little as it
may be, so the matter of this may be enlarged. Thus if any thing be done in the
favor of the children, the adoptive and the natural are included, when it is
not to the prejudice of the legitimate. And that which is made legitimate is to
be reckoned as that which is so of it self; and he that is naturalized is to be
reckoned as a Native; and a freed man, as he that was born free; and the
privileges granted to a city are to be extended to the suburbs. But this Rule
is to be estimated as the former, there being the same reason of Contraries,
save only that there is in the matters of favor something of particular
consideration. For although it is by the former measures set down who are the
persons, and which are the causes to be favored and eased; yet those persons
are not in all cases to receive the advantage; that is they are in all cases
which the words of the law can bear, except that by that favor the whole
process be evacuated, or the thing be lost. Therefore although the guilty
person is favored in all the methods and solennities of law, where the law can
proceed; yet where the favor would hinder the proceeding, the accuser and not
the guilty person is to receive it. For the accuser has the advantage of
taking his oath in law, which the guilty person has not; because the law
supposes he will deny the fact, right or wrong. And thus we are also to proceed
in our private entercourses of justice and charity, we are rather to believe
the accuser swearing, then the accused. But if the accusation be not sworn, or
if the guilty person be brought into judgment upon suspicion only, and a
public fame, we are rather to believe the accused swearing his innocence, then
the voice of fame, or uncertain accusers.

. 2. Judicial Interpretation.
RULE II. When the power that made the law does interpret the law, the
interpretation is authentical, and obliges the Conscience as much as the law;
and can release the bond of Conscience so far as the interpretation extends, as
much as if the law were abrogated.
WHen the law is interpreted by the Emperor, 1.
ratam and indubitatam habendam esse say the Lawyers. The reason is plain and
easy. The law is nothing but the solemn and declared will of the lawgiver; and
he that speaks, best knows his own mind; and he that can take away the law, can
alter it; and he that can cut off the hands, may certainly pare the nails: and
since the legislative power never dies, and from this power the law has it is
perpetual force, and can live no longer then he please, by what method of law
soever he signify his mind, whether it be by declaring the meaning of the law,
or by abating the rigor of it, or dispensing in the case, or enlarging the
favor, or restraining the severity; it is all one as to the event and
obligation of conscience. The interpretation is to the law, as the Echo to the
voice; it comes from the same principle; and though it speaks less, yet it
speaks oftener, and it speaks enough, so much as is then to be the measure of
the Conscience in good and evil.

For when the lawgiver does interpret his law, 2.
he does not take off the obligation of the law, but declares that in such a
case it was not intended to oblige. Tacitus tells of a Roman Knight who having
sworn to his wife that he would never be divorced from her, was by Tiberius
dispensed with when he had taken her in the unchaste embraces of his son in law.
The Emperor then declared that the Knight had only obliged himself not to be
divorced, unless a great cause should intervene. Thus we find that P. Lucius
c. cum quidam.. illi vero de jure.
the 3d did absolve those from their oath that swear they would not speak to
their Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, or show them any kindness: but this
absolution quitted them not from the sin of a rash and impious oath, but
declared that they were not bound to keep it. c. authoritatem. 15. q. 6. Gloss.
magn. verb. absolvimus.
Absolvit, i. e. absolutum ostendit, as Pope Nicholas did in the Case of the
Archbishop of Triers, he declared him to be at liberty; and the Gloss derives
a warranty for this use of the word out of the Prophet Isaiah.

It was ill said of Brutus, 3.
that a Prince might not be more severe, nor yet more gentle then the law. For
there are many things quae natura videntur honesta esse, lib. 3. de Offic.
temporibus sunt inhonesta, says Cicero, which at first sanction of the law
and in their own Nature are honest, but in the change of times and by new
relations become unjust and intolerable: and therefore the Civil law allows to
Princes a power juvare, l. jus a.. de just. and jure.
supplere, corrigere, to help, to supply, to correct the laws. For those are
but precarious Princes who when they see a case that needs a remedy, cannot
command it, but like the Tribunes of Rome, when they offered to intercede and
interpose between Fabius and the sentence of Papyrius the Dictator by which
Fabius was condemned, could effect nothing till they went upon their knees in
his behalf. But it is worse that the laws of a nation should bind the Prince as
Jupiter in Homer was bound by the laws of Fate, so that he could not help his
son Sarpedon, but sat weeping like a chidden girl. But of this I have already
given sufficient accounts. The Supreme power is Dominus legum, Canon animatus
in terris, lex animata, fons justitiae, supra jus dispensare potens, as
Innocentius said of himself; c. proposuit. de. concess. praebend.
and therefore of this there can be no question. Inter aequitatem jusque
interpositam interpretationem nobis solis and oportet, and licet inspicere,
says the Emperor, C. de leg. and constable. Princ. The Prince alone has power to
intervene between equity and strict law by his interpretation. This is now to
be reduced to practice.

First this power must be administered with nobleness and ingenuity; 4.
not fraudulenty, or to oppress any one, which Cicero calls calumniam, and
nimis callidam, lib. 1. de Offic.
sed malitiosam juris interpretationem, a crafty and malicious commentary. Such
as was that act of Solomon, who after he had sworn never to take from Ibrahim
Bassa his life, killed him when he was asleep, because Talisman the Priest
declared that sleep is death. Thus the Triumviri in Rome having a mind to kill
a boy, which by the force of law they could not do, they gave him the Toga
Virilis, and forced him to be a man in estimation of law, that by law they
might oppress him: and Mithridates King of Armenia thought himself secure when
Radamistus the son of Pharasmanes the Iberian King had promised he would
neither stab nor poison him; but the young Tyrant interpreted his promise
maliciously, when he oppressed him with pillows and featherbeds: and all Europe
hates the memory of the Archbishop of Mentz, who having promised to Atto Adel
a Palatine of Franconia that he should safely return out of his Castle, did
indeed perform the letter of his word; but pretending kindness as well as
justice, when he had brought him forth of the Castle, passionately invited him
to breakfast, and then killed him when he reentred. The power of Princes to
give senses to their laws must be to do justice and to give ease to the
pitiable and oppressed.

2ly, 5.
This power is not to be administered but upon grave and just causes: for to be
easy and forward in bending the laws by unnecessary interpretations is but a
diminution of justice, and a looseness in government; as was well observed by
Livy, lib. 3.
speaking of those brave ages in which the Roman honesty and justice was the
beginning of the greatest Empire of the world, Sed nondum haec quae nunc tenet
seculum negligentia Divum venerat, nec interpretando sibi quisque jusjurandum
and leges aptas faciebat, sed suos potius mores ad ea accommodabat, The neglect
of the Gods and the laws was not gone so far as to bend the laws to the
manners of men, but men measured their manners by the laws: and then no man can
deny to a Prince leave to derogate from his laws by such interpretations. lib.
3. Confess. c. 8.
Licet enim Regi in civitate cui regnat, jubere aliquid quod neque ante illum
quisquam, neque ipse unquam jusserat, says S. Austin; A King in his own
dominions may command that which neither any man before him, or himself before
that time commanded: meaning that although he must govern by his laws, yet when
there is a favorable case, he may give a new sense to them, that he may do
his old duty by new measures. Thus Solomon absolved Abiathar from the sentence
of death which by law he had incurred, because he had formerly done worthily to
the interests of his Father David. Thus when Cato Censor had turned L.
Quinctius Flaminius out of the Senate, the Majesty of the Roman people restored
him; and though they had no cause to do it, yet they had power. Now this power
though it may be done by interpretation, yet when it is administered by the
Prince it is most commonly by way of pardon, absolute power and prerogative.
Thus Princes can restore a man in blood. Cassiodor. lib. 3. var. ep 46. l. Cum
salutatus. C. de sent. pass.
Fas est cuivis Principi maculosas notas vitiatae opinionis abstergere. So
Antony the Emperor restored Julianus Licinianus whom Ulpian the President had
banished. When a law determins that under such an age a person shall be
incapable of being the General of an army, the Supreme power can declare the
meaning of the law to be, unless a great excellency of courage and maturity of
judgment supply the want of years: in which very case Scipio Africanus said
wisely, when he desired to be employed in the Punic war, se sat annorum
habiturum si populus Romanus voluerit, he should quickly be old enough if the
Roman people pleased. Thus Tiberius put Nero into the Senate at fifteen years
of age, and so did Augustus the like to Tiberius and his Brother; and the
people declared or dispensed the law in Pompey's case, and allowed him a
Triumph before he had been Consul or Praetor.

But to this there is not much to be said; 6.
for he that can make a New law, may by interpretation change the Old into a
New; that is, any interpretation of his is valid, if it be just, naturally
just, though it be not according to the Grammar or first intention of the Civil
or Municipal law: quia si leges condere soli Imperatori concessum est, l. ult.
C. de legib.
etiam leges interpretari solo dignum impero esse oportet. He that can do the
greater can do the less; and he that has power of cutting off the head, can
dispose of the tongue as he please, so that if it will not speak what he would
have it, he can take a course it shall speak nothing against him. But the case
is otherwise in Judges.

For the interpretation of laws made by Judges is matter of fidelity 7.
and wise dispensation, but nothing of Empire and power; and it is a good
probable warranty of Conscience, but no final determination in case any cause
of doubt happens to oppose it. And this was well observed by Cicero: pro
Ligario.
Nemo apud Judices ita solet causam agere; Ignoscite Judices, Lapsus est, Non
putavi, Si unquam posthac. In Senatu vero, and apud populum, and apud
Principem, and ubicunque juris clementia est, habet locum deprecatio. No man is
to ask any favor of the Judges but what the law allows him, but of the Prince
he may; A quo saepe rei, Gunther. lib. 4.
nullo licet aere redempti,
Accipiunt propriam donato crimine vitam.
For what is wanting in the provisions of law he can make up by the fullness of
his power: and if there be no injury to any, let there be what favor or
indulgence he please, his interpretation is good law, and can bring peace to
the conscience in the particular. According to this is that of the Lawyers, l.
ult. ff. qui satisd. cog.
Qui jurato promisit judicio sisti, non videtur pejerasse, si ex concessa causa
hoc deseruit, He that has sworn to appear in judgment, is not perjured if he
have leave given him not to appear: meaning, from him that can interpret the
law, or dispense, declare the man not bound, or give leave to break it. But
when the Judges interpret a law, they either expound it by customs of the
Court or Country, or else by learning and wise conjectures. Interpretations by
prevailing and allowed customs are good law and sure measures of action
according to the doctrine of customs; of which in part I have given account,
and shall yet add something in the 6.. of this Chapter, and therefore I shall
add nothing here. But if the Judges interpretation be only doctrinal, it is
sufficient to us that it is not introductive of a law, and it cannot of it self
be a resolution of conscience; but is to be made use of according to the
doctrine of probabilities lib. 1. Chap. 4.
. This only is to be added, that if the authorized Judges do consent, and by
a delegation of power, or the customs of the Nation, or the disposition of the
law the sentence does pass in rem judicatam into a legal sentence, then it
obliges as a law; for it is a warranted interpretation and declares the sense
of the law, and consequently does bind the Conscience.

. 3. A contrary or ceasing reason.
RULE III. A law made for a particular reason, when the reason wholly ceases,
does no longer oblige the Conscience.
THe title of this. implies a distinction of reasons considerable in this 1.
particular. For sometimes it happens that only one reason dies, and there is
no other change, but that the efficient cause of the law, from whence it had
it is being, is dead. But sometimes it is more then so; for not only the reason
of the law is gone, but a nettle is risen up in the place of it, and that which
was once profitable is become intolerable, and that which was just is now
dishonest, and that which was righteous will not be righteous still, but
against the public interest. * Now when a contrary reason does arise there is
no peradventure but the law ceases: and this is to be extended not only to the
case of injustice or impossiblity, but of trouble or of uselesnesse; that is,
if the contrary reason makes things so that the law could not justly have been
imposed, or if it had been de facto imposed, it could not oblige the
conscience, then the conscience is restored to liberty and disobligation. * But
then this case must be manifest: for if it be doubtful, the law retains her
power; for it is in possession, and the justice of it is presumed.

But if the reason of the law ceases only, 2.
and no more, there is some more difficulty, for it may be the will of the
Prince does not cease, and he intends the law should last for the support of
his authority; and that will be reason enough to keep up a law that once was
good and now has no harm in it: and there ought to be a great reason that
shall change a custom, though it be good for nothing; and where there was a
law, a custom will easily be supposed, especially if the law was useful and
reasonable, as we suppose in the present case. And if the law did prevail unto
a custom, and that it be not safe to change a custom, then though the proper
reason of the law be ceased, there is another reason arisen in the place of it
that will be enough to bind the conscience to obedience. For the stating of
this question, it is still necessary that we yet first distinguish, and then
define.

1. Some laws have in them a natural rectitude or usefulness in order to moral
ends, 3.
by reason of the subject matter of the law, or by reason that the instance of
the law is made an instrument of virtue by the appointment of law. 2. Others
have only an acquired rectitude, and an extrinsic end; that is, it was by the
lawgiver commanded in order to a certain purpose, and beyond that purpose it
serves for nothing. Thus when a Prince imposes a tribute upon a Country for the
building of certain bridges, when the work is done, the tribute is of no public
emolument. But if he imposes a fast upon Wednesdays and Fridays for six months
to obtain of God to remove the plague from a City or a Country, though the
plague be gone before the end of four months, yet the fast may serve many other
good ends.

Another distinction to be considered is concerning the cessation of 4.
the reason of the law, whether the reason be intrinsecal or extrinsecal. For
sometimes the reason ceases universally. Sometimes it remains as to the
generality, but is altered in the particular cases. So if a Superior commands
that none of his subjects shall enter into such a family where there are many
fair women amorous and young, lest such a conversation should tempt them to
wantonness; the general reason of the law remains, although Alexis be an
Eunuch, and old Palaemon have a dead palsy upon him and cannot be warmed by
such fires. The reason ceases in the particular, but abides still in the
general.

A third thing is also to be observed, 5.
which has in it some difference of case. Sometimes there are many parts of a
law, and sometimes it is uniform and has in it but one duty. That which has
parts and is a combination of particulars may cease in one or more of them, and
the rest abide in their full usefulness and advantage. And these and all the
former may be useless, or their reason may cease for a time, and be
interrupted, and a while after return: and in all these the reason may cease
negatively, or contrarily; that is, the first cause may cease, or another quite
contrary may come.

According to these distinctions, the cases and the answers are several.

1. If there be two ends in the law, 6.
an extrinsecal and an intrinsecal, though the extrinsecal be wholly and
generally ceased, yet the law obliges for it is intrinsic reason, that is, when
it commands an act of it self honest and virtuous. Thus if a Prelate, or a
Prince, commands women in Churches to sit apart, and to wear vailes that they
may not be occasion of quarrels and duels amongst young Gentlemen; if it happen
that the Duelling of Gallants be out of fashion, and that it be counted
dishonorable to fight a duel, then that end of the law ceases; and yet
because it is of it self honest that women should have a vail on their head for
modesty sake, and because of the Angels, this law is not to cease, but to stand
as well upon one leg, as it did before upon two. But this can only be when
Divine and humane laws are complicated, or at least when humane laws are mixed
with a matter of perfection and Counsel Evangelical, or of some worthiness,
which collaterally induces an obligation distinct from the humane law.

2. If a law be appointed for an extrinsecal end, 7.
when that reason ceases universally, though there be an inherent and remaining
worthiness in the action, and an aptness to minister to a moral end, yet that
law binds not unless that moral end was also intended by the lawgiver. For
that which was no ingredient into the constitution of the law, can have no
power to support the law, for it has nothing to do with the law; it never
helped to make it, and therefore by it cannot be a law, unless by the
legislative power it be made anew. So that such actions which can be good for
something of their own, and are not good at all for the end of the lawgiver,
can only be lawful to be done, but they are not necessary. Therefore when a
law is made that every Thursday the subjects should go to Church to Morning
prayer, that they might in the public offices pray for the life of the Prince,
if the Prince be dead that law obliges not; for although going to Morning
prayer is of it self good, yet if the Prince had no consideration of that good,
but of his own, that good entered not into the law, and had no causality in it,
and therefore was no part of the duty of the subject in relation to that law.

3. If the action commanded by law be in it self indifferent, 8.
when the reason of the law ceases extrinsecally, the whole obligation is taken
away, because the act is good for nothing in it self, and good for nothing to
the Commonwealth, and therefore cannot be a law. Thus there was an oath framed
in the Universities that no Professor should teach Logic publicly any where but
there, meaning that it should not be taught in Stamford, whether the Scholars
made so long a recesse that it had almost grown into an University. But when
the danger of that was over, the oath was needless, and could not oblige, and
ought not to have been imposed. In Spain a law was made that no man should cut
any timber trees: in a few years the province grew so full of wood that the
reason and fear of the law was over; and it was more likely to pass into
inconvenience by abundance then by scarcity, and therefore then it was lawful
for any man to cut some of his own. So if a law were made for ten years to
forbid hunting of wild beasts, that some royal game which was almost destroyed
might be preserved for the Prince, if in five years the wolves and lions were
grown so numerous that there were more danger then game, the law were no longer
obligatory. For as Modestinus said well, l. nulla. ff. de legibas.
Nulla ratio aut juris benignitas patitur, ut quae salubriter pro hominum
commodis statuta sunt, nos duriore interpretatione contra ipsorum commodum
producamus ad severitatem; It is against reason that what the law decreed for
the good of men, should be severely and rigorously expounded to their damage.
And this is to be understood to be true though the reason of the law ceases
only negatively; that is, though the act do still remain indifferent, and
there be no reason to the contrary. To which this is to be added, that when the
reason of a law commanding an action otherwise indifferent does cease
universally, the very Negative ceasing passes into the contrary of it self: not
that it does so in the matter of the action, for the action is still
indifferent and harmless, but that it does so in the power of legislation: it
does not so to the subject, but it does so to the Prince; that is, the subject
may still do it without sin, but without sin the Prince cannot command it to
be done, when it is to no purpose. Thus we find in the Legends of the Roman
later Saints that some foolish Priors and Superiors of Convents would exercise
the obedience of their Monks by commanding them to scrape a pibble, to fill a
bottomless tub, and such ridiculous instances; which were so wholly to no
purpose, that though the Monk might suffer himself to be made a fool of, yet he
was not tied to it in virtue of his obedience, and the Prior did sin in
commanding it. This ought to be observed strictly, because although it looks
like a subtilty, yet it is of use in the conduct of this Rule of conscience,
and has not been at all observed exactly.

4. When the intrinsecal reason of a law does cease universally, 9.
the negative ceasing of the reason passes into a contrary; and if the action
be not necessary, it is not lawful. For actions which have in them an internal
rectitude have it so always, unless the case be wholly changed, and then it is
become very evil. To restore that which is deposited with us is commanded
because of the natural justice that is in the action; but when the reason of
this ceases, that is, that it is not just to do it, it is unjust, or
uncharitable: and therefore if you restore to a madman his sword to kill an
innocent, you are unjust to innocence, and but aequivocally just to madness
and folly.

5. When a law has many parts, 10.
and is a conjugation of duties for several reasons, when one of the parts of
the law does loose the reason of it wholly, though it be tied in the same
bundle, and by the same tie, yet that part is slackened and obliges not, though
included in a law which does oblige. The reason of this is the same with the
former; only this is to be added, that in this case it is not one law, but a
conjugation of laws; it is not a single star, but like a constellation, and
particularly as the Pleiades, where one of the seven has almost no light or
visibility, though knit in the same confederation with those which half the
world do at one time see. * And the same also is the case in the suspension of
a law, that is when the reason ceases universally and wholly, but not for ever:
while the reason is absent, the conscience is not tied to attend; but when it
returns to verify the law, the duty returns to bind the conscience. But in this
there is no difficulty.

These are the measures of conscience when the reason of a law ceases wholly
and universally, that is, as to the public interest; but that which is more
difficult, is when the reason of the law remains in the general, but it fails
in some particular cases, and to particular persons: and what then is our duty,
or our liberty?

The reason of the difficulty is, 11.
because laws are not to regard particulars, but that quod plerumque accidit,
says Theophrastus; and therefore the private damage is supplied by the public
emolument: and the particular pretenses are not to be regarded, though they be
just, lest others make excuses, and the whole band of discipline and laws be
broken, Satius erat a paucis justam excusationem non accipi, quam ab omnibus
aliquam tentari, said Seneca; It is better to reject the just exception of a
few, then to encourage the unjust pretensions of all. And therefore subjects
should for the public interest sit quietly under their own burden. For lex
nulla satis commoda est; id modo quaritur, si majori parti and in summa
prodest, said Cato. It is a just law if it does good to the generality and in
the sum of affairs. And therefore if Cajus or Titius be pinched in the yoke,
they may endure it well, when they consider the public profit.

But this were very true only in case there were no other remedy; 12.
but our inquiry here being only a question of conscience, which is to be
judged by him that commands justly in general, and will do no injustice in
particular, and can govern all things without suffering them to entangle each
other, the case will prove easy enough: for if God does not require obedience
to the laws, when the reason of the law ceases in particular, of them I say in
whose particular case the reason ceases, it is all that is looked for. Now for
this the conclusions are plain.

1. If the extrinsic reason of the law ceases in a particular case only
negatively, 13.
that is, so as no evil, grievous burden, sin, or danger be incumbent upon his
person, the law retains her obligation and is to be obeyed; because in that
case, although there be no reason in the subject matter, yet there is reason
enough in the reverence of the law, and in a conformity to the public manners
of the Nation. Thus when the law forbids a citizen to bear arms in the night
because of frequent murders that have been done or are apt to be done by armed
night-walkers; he that knows himself a peaceable man and that is resolved to
offend no body is not bound by the reason of that law in his own particular,
but he is bound by the law as long as the public is bound whereof he is a part:
for if he have no reason to the contrary, but only there is no reason for it
in his case, it is reason enough that there is a law in the case, which is
useful to the public, and of great interest as to the communities of men. And
therefore he that disobeys in these circumstances cannot be excused from
contempt of the law: because though his obedience be causeless, yet so is his
disobedience, and this cannot be innocent, though that can; especially because
though the obedience be causeless in his own particular in relation to that
matter, yet it has cause enough in it in relation to example and the
veneration of the laws.

2. If the reason of the law ceases contrarily, 14.
that is, turns into mischief; then though it ceases only in a particular, in
that particular the subject whose case it is, is free (from the law I mean, but
not free to obey it.) Whatever we have vowed to religion or the Temple we are
bound to perform: but if in the interval of the solution my Father or my
nearest relative, or any to whom I am bound to show piety, be fallen into want,
or needs my ministry, I am bound to do this first, and let that alone till
both can be done: and the reason is, because I could not bind my self by vow to
omit any duty to which I am naturally obliged: and therefore though the law
that commands payment of vows be just, yet it must be always with exception of
preceding obligations; so that if it be certainly a sin which is consequent to
the obedience of any law, it is certainly no sin to disobey it.

3. If the general reason of the law remaining, 15.
in some particular cases it ceases contrarily, but not so as to introduce a
sin, but a great evil, or such a one which the law would not have commanded,
and the lawgiver is supposed not to have intended, the law does not oblige the
conscience of the subject in that case. For here is the proper place for
equity. In the former case it is duty not to obey the law. Either then there is
no equity but what is necessary and unavoidable; or if there can be any shown
or used by prudence and great probability, and in mercy, it follows that then
it is to be used when the yoke pinches the person, though it does not invade
the Conscience. And it is not to be supposed that a superior would have his
laws burdensome to any one beyond the public necessity; it being as certainly
in his duty to be willing to ease single persons in their private burdens, as
to provide for the common interest in their great and little political
advantage. Ethic. l. 5. c. 10.
(...), Equity is as much law as the law it self, it is as just as justice,
only that it is a better justice, says Aristotle: it is not (...) the legal
justice, but (...), a rectification and an amendment of it. -- Bonum jus dicis;

Impetrare oportet, ^^aut. Stich.
quia aequum postulat, said he in the Comedy; It is fit that you prevail, you
ask reason and equity. That Is bonum jus; it is justice and mercy in a knot.
Thus if a Church commands such ceremonies to be used, such orders, such
prayers, they are to be observed when they may; but if I fall into the hands of
an enemy to that manner of worship, who will kill or afflict me greatly for
using it, I am in that case disobliged. For though this case be not excepted in
the law, yet it is supplied by the equity and correction of the law: (...), it
is fit that when the lawgiver has commanded absolutely and indefinitely, he
should in cases of particular evil make provision and correct what was amiss
or omitted by the law. ubi supra.
For (...), says Aristotle; if he had known of it before he would have
provided for it beforehand: and because he did not, (...), if the lawgiver
were present, he would use equity and give leave to the grieved subject to ease
himself. And therefore since it is reasonable to suppose that if it had been
thought of, this very case would have been provided for in the law; and if the
lawgiver were present he would declare the law in that case not to oblige; it
follows undeniably, that the law binds not any man to a great inconvenience in
his own person, though otherwise, and as to the public, it be a just and a good
law, of a remaining reason and a remaining obligation. In order to this
consideration, that is useful which has been already said in the first
Chapter of this book, in the second and third Rules.

4. If the reason of the law ceases in a particular, 16.
so that without sin it may be obeyed, and without any great and intolerable
evil to the obedient, yet sometimes the law does not intend to oblige in the
particular case, even when there is a little inconvenience, or but a probable
reason to the contrary; and this is in things of small concernment. I should
instance in rituals and little circumstances of Ecclesiastical Offices and
forms of worship, in the punctualities of Rubrics, in the order of Collects, in
the number of prayers, and fullness of the Office upon a reasonable cause or
inducement to the omission or alteration: for these things are so little, and
so fit to be entrusted to the conduct of these sober, obedient and grave
persons, who are thought fit to be trusted with the cure of souls; and these
things are always of so little concernment, and so apt to yield to any wise
man's reasons and sudden occasions and accidents, and little and great causes,
that these were the fittest instances of this rule, if Superiors, for want of
great manifestations of their power, would not make too much of little things.
But the purpose and declared intention of all just laws and just governments is
in these things to give the largest interpretation to persons of a peaceable
mind and an obedient spirit, that such circumstances of ministeries may not
pass into a solemn religion, and the zeal of good men, their caution and their
curiosity, may not be spent in that which does not profit. But the measures of
practice in this particular must be taken from the manner and circumstances of
the government, and the usual disposition of the law. In many cases an equity
may be presumed; but if it be explicitly denied, it must not be used.

Question.

But upon the instance of these particular rules it is to be inquired, 17.
whether in these cases the subject is so quitted from the obligation of the
law, that without further leave he may use his liberty, or must he require it
of his Superior?

To this I answer, 18.
that if the case be evident, the subject may use his liberty: for if he should
be tied to go to his Superior, it is either to ask of him that the law should
not bind him, or that he may declare that the law in his case does not bind, or
to promulgate and publish the law in that particular. Not to ask leave that the
law shall not bind, for of it self it ceases, and it was never intended to bind
against equity and reason. Not for declaration, because the case is here
supposed to be evident. Nor yet lastly for promulgation, because that is only
necessary in the sanction and revocation of laws which depend upon the will of
the Prince; whereas in this case the law ceases by natural justice and the
nature of thing, and the reasons of equity.

2. But if the case be doubtful, 19.
and it is not evident whether the particular case ought to be excepted in the
general law, then we are to consider whether it be a doubt of fear only or a
doubt of reason, that is, whether it be nothing but an unjust fear, or relies
upon just grounds; for some men may easily perceive in themselves a diffidence
in any thing, not that they have reason to cause their fear, but because they
dare not trust the greatest reason that they either have or hear. If it be
only a doubt of fear, then it is to be conducted by the rules given concerning
a scrupulous Conscience: Vide lib. 1. cap. 5, and 6
If it be a fear of reason, we are to manage it by the measures of a doubting
Conscience. But if he supposes upon probable inducements that he is not
obliged, then according to the nature of the probability we are to proceed. For
if he believes it as probable that such a case ought not to be comprehended in
the law, as supposing it to be a sin that in his case would be commanded, or
too great a burden imposed, and so to be beyond the power of the lawgiver,
then the subject may of himself be free, without recourse to his superior. The
reason is, because to avoid a sin, or to do a great charity to our selves, a
probable reason is a sufficient inducement, provided a more probable reason be
not opposed against it, we being commanded, to avoid all appearance of evil.
Now if this opinion be the more probable that by obeying the letter of the law
in my case I should sin, it must needs appear to be an evil to do it, and not
to obey the law in this case does not appear to be an evil, as being the less
probable: for if the opinions be equally probable, then the conscience is in
doubt, and is to proceed by measures fitted to a doubting conscience: but when
I say there is a greater probability and a less, the greater must carry it;
and therefore the law is not to be obeyed, it being here supposed to be the
more probable opinion that the obedience would produce a sin. So also in the
case of a great burden or intolerable pressure, the presumption is for ease;
and the lawgiver is to be supposed good and gentle and reasonable; and
besides, it is supposed as the more probable opinion that the lawgiver has
not power to make a law or to oblige to so much inconvenience, and then the
case is the same.

* But if he believes it as probable that to oblige in the present case was not
in his will, but it is certain that it was in his power, then the case is so
that the subject may without injustice or violence obey it; and therefore ought
not to use his liberty by his own opinion, but by recourse to his superior that
has power to declare the intention of the law.

In the first case if it be easy and convenient to go to the Superior, 20.
or that there is time enough and all things fitted, it were the surer way to
require his sentence. But if there be not time, and the action urges by
hastiness, or necessity, or present opportunity, the liberty is as present as
his need. But in the second case, (which is oftentimes harder to know then the
first, it being more difficult to pronounce definitively concerning the will of
the lawgiver which is free, then concerning his power which is not free,) when
it is only probable that the lawgiver is willing, it is not safe to venture
upon the not-obeying, without recourse to the Superior. Because our innocence
depending wholly upon his will, and there being no sin in keeping the law, we
may safely do this; but we cannot safely disobey without being more assured of
his leave: and therefore if it be opportune and easy to have recourse to our
competent Superior, it is worth our pains to go and inquire; if it be not
opportune, it is worth our stay till it be; for the securing our duty and the
peace of conscience are interests much greater then the using of an unnecessary
liberty.

3. But in these cases of uncertainty, 21.
when we are not confident of a just liberty by the force of reason and the
nature of the thing, we may justly presume that the Superior does not intend to
oblige in all those cases in which he usually and of course dispenses; that is,
when his dispensation is not of special favor, but of ordinary concession;
because as in the first case it is supposed a gift, so in this latter it is
supposed a justice. For example, A law is made to keep so many fasting-days.
Maevius is a hard student, and feels himself something ill after fasting, and
believes it will not be for his health; but yet things are so with him, that he
can obey the law without great or apparent mischief, but yet he probably
believes that the lawgiver would not have him bound in this case. If he
perceives that they that have recourse to the Superior in less needs then his,
are ordinarily dispensed with, then he has reason enough not to go to his
Superior; for it is already declared that he does not intend to bind in his and
the like cases. This is evident, and the best measure that I know in such
cases. It is the surest, and the largest, and the easiest.

4. When the recourse to a Superior for declaration of the case has in it
great difficulty or inconvenience, 22.
though the cause of exception from the law be not very great, yet if together
with the inconvenience of address to the Superior it make up an unequal
burden, and so that the particular case seem very probable to be excepted, and
that in it the legislator did not intend to bind; it is sufficient to consult
with wise men and good, and by their advice and answers, as by extrinsecal
causes of probability, or by any other just and probable cause of
determination, to use our liberty, or to obey. The reason of this is plain
necessity. Because we have no other way of proceeding, but either we must in
this, as in almost all the other cases of our life, be content with the way
which to us seems the more probable; or else if we were tied to make it secure,
our lives and conditions would be burdensome and intolerable, and the whole
process would be a snare and torment to a conscience: the Superior, who is to
be consulted, it may be, not being within 40 miles of us; or when we come, it
may be he is of difficult access, or otherwise employed, and it will be
impossible for many to be heard by him, if all in the like cases were bound to
consult him; or it may be when we go, we shall not be admitted, or if we be,
it may be we shall not be eased unless we carry along with us the rewards of
Divination in our hands, and we are poor; or it may be the matter requires
have, and cannot stay the leisure of the Oracle; and besides all this, the
greatest part of the actions of our lives are not so well conducted as to be
determined by the consultation of a wise man, but we do them of our own head,
and it may be of our own heart, without consideration; and therefore it is a
prudent course to proceed this way: and he that in such cases ties the
consciences to proceed more then prudently, and thinks that prudence is not a
sufficient warrant, does not consider the condition of humane nature, nor the
necessities of a man's life, nor the circumstances of his condition, nor the
danger of an unquiet and a restless conscience.

Upon occasion of this subject, 23.
viz. the alteration of humane laws by the interpretation and equity of reason,
it is very seasonable, and very useful to conscience, to inquire whether by
the similitude of reason the law may not as well receive advantage and
extension, as well as the subject can receive liberty and ease. That is,

Question.

Whether the obligation of the law does extend it self to all cases that have
the same or an equal reason, though the case be not comprehended directly in
the law.

To this the answer is by several Propositions.

1. In laws declarative of natural right or obligation, 24.
the obligation extends to all things of equal reason, though they be not
comprehended under the law. Thus because we are bound by the laws to pay honor
and gratitude to our parents for their nourishing of us and giving us
education, the same duty is to be extended to those persons who took care of us
when our parents were dead, or that took us in when we were exposed; and
children are to pay a proportionable regard even to their Nurses; and Moses was
for ever obliged to Pharaohs daughter, because she rescued him from drowning,
and became as a Mother to him. And the reason of this is, because in these
things there is a natural rectitude, and a just proportion between the reason
and the event; the reason of the thing is the cause why it was commanded. But
in laws dispositive or introductive of a new obligation there is some
difference. Therefore,

2. In odious cases, 25.
and especially in penal laws, the extension of the reason does neither extend
the obligation nor the punishment; according to that gloss in the Canon law,
Gloss. in cap. in poenis. 49. de reg. jur. in 6.
In poenis non arguimus ad similia, quia poenae non excedunt proprium casum.
Punishments and odious burdens must not exceed the very case set down in the
law: for if in the cases set down the Judges are to give the gentlest measure,
it is not to be supposed that they can be more severe then the letter of the
law, which it self requires an abatement and allay when it is capable: and as
it is with Judges in the punishments appointed by law, so it is with all the
subjects in the obligation of the law. For in both these cases, it is to be
presumed that the mind of the lawgiver was not to oblige or to punish more and
in more cases; for si voluisset, expressisset, is a good presumption in these
things, he could as easily have spoken that as this, if he had intended both
alike; and he would, because he knows that in odious things every one is
willing to take the easiest part: and therefore that is a good warranty to
presume of the mind of the lawgiver; especially since the apportioning such a
punishment to such a fact has in it no natural necessity, but depends upon the
will of the lawgiver, and therefore is not to be extended by a participation
of the reason, but by a declaration of the will.

3. When there is a defect in the law, 26.
and the public necessity or utility requires a supply, it may be supplied, and
the obligation and the judgments even in matters of burden can be extended by
the similitude and parity of reason; for in this sense it is true which the
lawyers say, Casus similis expresso non censetur omissus. If it was omitted
only in the law, by the imperfection of it is sanction, or want of
consideration, the Commonwealth must not suffer detriment, and therefore is to
be helped by the parity of reason. But then it is to be observed, that this is
not wholly for the force and consequence of the reason of the law, but for the
necessity and profit of the republic, and therefore the supply is to be made by
jurisdiction rather then by interpretation: l. non possunt. ff. deleg.
so says the law, Is qui jurisdictioni praeest, ad similia procedere, atque
ita jus dicere debet, The Prefect that has jurisdiction must do right by
proceeding to the like cases: so that the jurisdiction and power is the
sufficient and indeed the adequate efficient of this supply; only by the
similitude of reason he that has jurisdiction can take occasion to do right.
l. nam. ff. eod.
Quando lex in uno disponit, bonam esse occasionem caetera quae tendunt ad
eandem utilitatem vel interpretatione vel certa jurisdictione supplendi; The
Law having made provision in one case, it is a good occasion to supply other
cases which tend to the same advantage; but this supply is to be made either by
interpretation, if it can, or if it cannot, then by certain jurisdiction and
authority. So that here are three things to be considered in this extension of
obligation. The one is, that the law be defective and need supply. The second
is, that the supply be for the same utility and advantage which is in the
expressed case of the law. And the third is, that if it cannot be by
interpretation, that is, if it cannot be done by force of something contained
in the law, but that there be a very defect in the law, it be done by the force
of authority: for the similitude of reason is not enough, and therefore either
the supreme, or a jurisdiction delegate with this power in special, is
necessary. But where there is such a power, the way of doing it is procedendo
de similibus ad similia, Glossa in legem praedict.
the occasion of supply must be taken from the similitude of the reason. But
this I say is to be done either in cases of public necessity, or great equity
and questions of favor. In other cases there are yet more restraints.

4. 27.
A similitude of reason (except in the cases now expressed) does not extend the
law to cases not comprehended in the words and first meaning of the law.
Albertus Bologneti Bonon. in Tract. DD.
For ratio legis non est lex, sed quod ratione constituitur, say the Lawyers,
Every thing that is reasonable is not presently a law, but that is the law
which for that reason is decreed. And when a thing is propounded to a Prince,
it is in the body politic as in the body natural, though the Understanding
propound a thing as reasonable, the Will still has power to choose or to reject
it; and there may be reason for the thing in one regard, and reason against it
in another; and if the reason in both cases only be alike, they are also
unlike. Omne simile est etiam dissimile. For Titius contracts friendship with
Callinicus because their Fathers were Fellow Soldiers in the Parthian war,
and they loved well: but Titius refuses to contract the same league with
Catulus, although the like reason was for him, his Father having been in the
same legion in the same war: but Catulus was an ill-natured man, and not fit
to be entertained into such societies.

5. The Conscience is not bound to a greater duty then is expressed 28.
in the words and first meaning of the law by the proportion and communication
of the reason, unless the reason be not only alike, but be absolutely the
same in both cases; and not only so, but that the reason was adequate to the
law, that is, was the reason which actually and alone did procure the sanction
of the law. When Caesar took in a town in Gallia Narbonensis, he destroyed the
walls, and commanded they should not build any more walls: they consented, but
cast up a great trench of earth; and he came and fired their Town, because
although a trench of earth was ^ot in the words of the contract or prohibition,
yet because Caesar forbad the rebuilding of the walls for no other reason but
because he would not have it fortified, the law against walls was to be
extended to trenches also for the identity of an adequate reason. in declam.
Patris.
To the same purpose is that of Quintilian, Caedes videtur significare
sanguinem and ferrum: si quis alio genere homo fuerit occisus, ad illam legem
revertemur. A law against murder does commonly signify shedding of his blood;
but if a man have his neck broken, or be smothered with pillows, or strangled
with a bow-string, he shall be avenged by the same law that forbad he should be
killed with a knife or dagger: for it was not the instrument or the manner
which the law regarded, but it wholly intended to secure the lives of the
subjects.

6. Now this identity of reason must be clear and evident, 29.
or else it effects nothing; for in matters of doubt the presumption is for
liberty and freedom. But it commonly is best judged by one or more of these
following cases. 1. The relative and the correlative are to be judged by the
same reason when the reason of the law does equally concern them, though only
one be named in the provision of the law. If the husband must love the wife,
the wife must love the husband, though she were not named in the law. For here
they are equal. But in superior and inferior the reason cannot be equal, but
therefore is only to be extended to the proportion of the reason. A Son must
maintain his Father that is fallen into poverty, and so must a Father a Son:
but they are not tied to equal obedience; to equal duty they are, but not to
equal significations and instances of it. A husband must be true to his wives
bed, and so must she to his; but she may not be admitted to an equal liberty of
divorce as he is: the reason is, because the duty is equal, but the power is
unequal; and therefore the consequents of this must differ, though the
consequents of the other be the same. 2. The identity of the reason is then
sufficient for the extension of the law when one thing is contained under
another, a particular under a general, an imperfect under a perfect, a part
under the whole.

3. When the cases are made alike by the effort of other laws. 4. When the law
specifies but one case for example sake, the rest also of the same nature and
effect are comprehended. 5. When the cases are radicated in the same principle,
and are equally concerned.

7. What is here said concerning cases and actions is also to be understood not
only of persons, 30.
which cannot be separated from the consideration of actions which are always
personal, but of places and times, when the analogy and force of the reason or
the words require it. Only each of these is to observe their proper caution.
See Chapter 1. Rule 8. of this book.
Places are equally included in the meaning of the law, though they be not
expressed in the words of the law, if they be within the jurisdiction of the
lawgiver, that is, within the capacity of the law See Chapter 1. Rule 8. of
this book.
. See Chapter 1. Rule 8. of this book.
But the caution concerning time is this, That although in laws declarative
there is no difference of time, because there the present law is not the
measure of our duty, but supposes the duty limited and prescribed before (nihil
enim nunc dat, l. haeredes.. 1. ff. de Testam.
sed datam significat, says the law in this case;) yet laws constitutive or
introductive of a new right or obligation never of themselves regard or can be
extended to what is past, because this is not in our power, and is not capable
of Counsel or Authority; but they can only be extended to the future: but the
allay is this, for this is to be understood only in precepts and prohibitions,
but not in matters of indulgence and favor; for in this it is quite contrary:
what the law has forbidden in time past or present, and what she has or does
command is to be extended to the future; l. Cum lex. ff. de legib.
but Cum lex in praeteritum quid indulget, in futurum vetat, When the law gives
a pardon for what is past, and this pardon relies upon a proper reason, there
is no leave given for the future to do so though the same reason shall
occur; for the pardon of what went before is a prohibition of what is to come
hereafter.

8. When a law is made to take away an evil, 31.
it is to be understood also, and to be extended to all cases of prevention,
and from an actual evil passes on to a probability. When Antiochus agreed that
Ptolemy should not bring an army into Syria, he did not only intend to remove
the present hostility that he feared, but he intended also that he should not
bring any at all, though for passage only through his Country; because if his
army were at all in Syria, he was in danger of suffering what by his treaty he
desired to prevent.

9. Whatsoever is said in laws is also true in promises and contracts: 32.
for these are laws to the contractors and interested persons, and to be
measured by the same proportions. For when the adequate reason of a promise or
contract is evidently extended to another instance though not named in the
contract, it must be performed and supposed as included in the stipulation, and
so still in succeeding and new-arising instances; and the state of things is
not changed so long as that adequate reason remains for which the obligation
was first contracted, though the thing be varied in a thousand other
circumstances and accidents. But of this I shall have better opportunity to
speak in the last book.

33. I only add this one thing, 33.
That there is great caution to be used in determining our cases of Conscience
by the measures of the reason of a law. For Non omnium quae a Majoribus
constituta sunt ratio reddi potest, said Julian. It will be hard to find out
what was the reason of the laws made by our forefathers; and unless the reason
be expressed in the law, our conjectures are very often so wild and far amiss,
that they will be very ill measures of conscience or obedience. ff. de leg.
Et ideo rations eorum quae constituuntur inquiri non oportet, alioquin multa
ex iis quae certa sunt subvertentur. We must obey the law, and never inquire
after the reason, unless the law of it self declares it: it is not good to
examine, for by this means many clear laws are made obscure and intricate.
Delicata est illa obedientia quae causas quaerit. The lawgiver is moved to the
sanction of the law by the reason of the thing, but the sanction of the law is
to be the only reason of our obedience.

. 4. Dispensation.
RULE IV. The Legislator has authority to dispense in his own laws for any
cause that himself prudently shall judge to be reasonable, so that no distinct
interest be prejudiced or injured.
DIspensation differs from interpretation of laws, 1.
because this does declare the law in certain cases not to bind; but
dispensation supposes the law in actual obligation, not only in general, but
in this case, and to this person; and it is but like the old man in the fable
his laying aside his burden of sticks, which he is bound to carry with him to
his long home unless some friendly person come to help him. But Dispensation
differs from diminution of laws by a ceasing or a contrary reason, because the
law ceases of it self in this case, but in dispensation wholly by the will of
the Prince. And lastly it differs from equity, because equity is law, melior
lex, but dispensation is a remission of the law; and the cases of equity are
such as by justice must be eased, but in dispensations there is nothing but
benignity and favor. So that Dispensation is a voluntary act of the Princes
grace and favor, releasing to any single person or community of men the
obligation of the law, others at the same time remaining bound, not only in
other cases, but in the same and in the like. For although the same and the
like cases of equity do procure remission to all alike, yet in dispensations
it is not so. One may be eased, and another not eased in the very same case.
And the not understanding or not considering this great and material difference
has caused so great errors both in the understanding and in the ministeries of
dispensation.

For if we use the word improperly, 2.
Dispensation can signify a declaration made by the superior that the subject
in certain cases is not obliged, that the lawgiver did not intend it: but this
is interpretation of laws, or a declaration of the equitable part of the law,
and is not properly an act of authority, but of doctrine and wisdom; save
only that that doctrine and that wisdom shall be esteemed authentical, and a
warranty in doubtful cases: but if the subject did know the meaning of the
law, as in most cases he may, his conscience is of it self and by the intention
of the law at liberty without any such declaration; for that liberty is from an
intrinsic cause, that is, from the natural equity and reasonableness of the
case, and therefore claims nothing but what the law intends and ought to intend
in its very sanction. Now in these cases to require dispensation, is to ask
more then is needful; it is as if one should desire his friend to untie his
girdle when his cloths hang loose about him: he needs it not; but that the
wisdom and charity of the law is made an artifice to get money, and to put the
subject to scruples and trouble that he may get his ease.

But when Dispensation signifies properly, 3.
it means an act of mere grace and favor, proceeding from an extrinsic cause;
that is, not the nature of the thing, or the merit of the cause, but either the
merit of the person, or some degrees of reasonableness in the thing; which not
being of it self enough to procure the favor of the law, is of it self enough
to make a man capable of the favor of the Prince; and if this be authority
enough, that is reason enough. For since dispensation is an act of mere
jurisdiction, and not of doctrine or skill and wisdom and law, that is, it is
not declarative of something already in being, but effective of a leave which
is neither unreasonable nor yet due, so that it is not an act of justice, but
of mercy and favor upon a fair and worthy occasion; it must follow that the
reason and causes of dispensation must be such as are not necessary: but
probable and fit to move a Prince they must be, lest he do an unreasonable act.

All those disputes therefore amongst the Civil and Canon Lawyers and the
Divines, 4.
Whether the Prince sins in dispensing without just cause, or the subject in
desiring it or using it without just cause; Whether if the cause be not that
which they are pleased to call just, the dispensation be valid, and very many
more, are inquiries relying upon weak grounds, and tending to no real purpose.
For since the cause need not be necessary, but probable, it will be very hard
if the Prince can find out no probable reason for what he does, and harder yet
to imagine that he should do it at all, if he have not so much as a probable
reason why he does it; and since the reason of dispensation is extrinsic to the
cause or matter in hand very often, or else is but occasioned by the matter in
hand, as most commonly it is in wise and good governments, it will be
impossible but that the Prince will have reason enough to do an act of
kindness in his own affairs and matters of his own disposing: the Princes will
being enough to satisfy us, and any good reason within or without being
sufficient for him if it does move and determine his will, the consequent will
be, that the Conscience ought to be at rest, without curious inquiry into the
cause, if it have a dispensation from a just and competent authority.

And indeed it is not easy that the Prince can be reproved for the
insufficiency of the cause of dispensation: 5.
for a dispensation is not necessary to the conscience at all, when the cause
it self is great and sufficient for equity; but then it is necessary for the
avoiding of scandal or civil punishments in some cases, that there be a
declaration of liberty and equity: but to dispense is only then proper and a
fitting ministry 1. when the law is still useful and reasonable to one or
more good purposes, but accidentally becomes an impediment of a greater good;
or 2ly, when it is doubtful whether the cause of equity and legal remission
without asking leave be sufficient, for in this case, if the superior
dispenses, he supplies by favor what is wanting in the merit of the cause, and
makes the conscience sure when the question it self was not sure; or 3ly, to
reward a virtue, or the service of a worthy person, or to do honor or favor,
mercy and benignity upon the occasion of any reasonable consideration. These
being all the causes of proper dispensations, it will be hard that every thing
of this should be wanting, or that what moves a prudent Prince to do it,
should by the subject not be thought sufficient, especially since no man is
judge of it but he that does it: and therefore he that says the dispensation
was for an insufficient cause, has no sufficient cause to say it; it may be
evil in the manner, or in the excess, or in the event, but not in the moving
cause, because a little cause is sufficient, and therefore a little cause
cannot suffice to blame it. Nullius sensus esse praesumitur qui sensum vincat
principalem. l. fin. C. de legib.
The subjects opinion can never overcome the opinion of the Prince in those
things where the Prince is Judge.

There is only this to be added, 6.
That he that dispenses with a law to particular persons be careful that it be
in a matter wholly in his own power, and make no intrecnhment upon religion so
much as collaterally, so far as he can perceive, nor yet that any man be
injured by it. And therefore if a Prince dispenses with any one in the matter
of tribute, he must abate it from his own rights, and not lay it upon others,
to their considerable and heavy pressure. If it be inconsiderable, no man is to
complain, but to indulge so much to the Princes reason and to the man whom the
King will honor; but if it be considerable and great, the Prince ought not to
do it, but upon such a reason which may repay the private burden by the public
advantage: and the reason of this is not, because the Supreme power cannot
dispense with his own laws without great cause, but becasue he cannot dispense
with other men's rights. And therefore when by the laws of Christendom the
Tiths were given to the Curates of souls of all the fruits arising in their
parishes, it was unjustly done of the Pope to exempt the lands of the
Cistertians and some other Orders from paying that due to the Parish Priest:
for though he that has a just power may use it for the benefit of his
subjects, yet he may not use the rights of others and give away that which is
none of his own, to ease one and burden another. In cases of public necessity
this may be done, but not for pleasure, or a little reason. And therefore
dispensations must be sparingly granted, because if they be easy and frequent,
they will oppress by their very numbers. 1. q 7.
Dispensationum modus nulli sapientum displicuit, said the Canon law. That
which is but seldom and in small things, or in little degrees, will be of no
evil effect, and that which may greatly profit one or two will be no burden to
a Commonwealth; but if it be often done, and to many, it may be of evil
consequent, and therefore ought not to be done, but upon a cause so weighty,
that the good effect of the cause may prevail above the pressure of the
dispensation: for though this may be favor to one or to a few, yet it is
justice to all. But if the dispensations be in matters of government, or
censures, or favors and mere graces, where some are benefited and no man is
injured, as in taking off irregularities, personal burdens which return to no
man's shoulders, in giving graces beyond the usual measures of laws,
dispensations in time, in solennities of law, giving what by law could not be
claimed; in these and the like the Prince as he has supreme power, so his good
will being moved by any reasonable inducement is warrant enough for him that
gives it, and for him that uses it.

. 5. Commutation.
RULE V. The same power that can dispense, can also commute a duty; and as in
the first it eases, so in the latter it binds the Conscience.
COmmutation is nothing but a kind, 1.
or rather a particular manner of dispensation; and therefore has in it no
particular consideration differing from the former, but only such prudential
advices as are useful to the ministry and conduct of it.

For Commutation is a changing of the burden of the law into an act of, 2.
it may be, a greater usefulness but a less trouble. Thus when a public
penance is enjoined to a lapsed person, who by a public shame would be hardened
or oppressed, the Church sometimes dispenses in the obligation, and changes it
into alms, ut solvat in aere, quod non luit in corpore, that the fruit of his
labors may go for the sin of his soul, and an expensive alms may be taken in
recompense of his exterior humiliation.

1. But this must be done so as may be no diminution to religion, 3.
or to add confidence to the vices of great persons, who spend much more in
the purchases of their lust then in the redemption of their shame, and
therefore think they escape with their sin, when they enjoy it at a price.

2. It must be done never but upon considerations of piety and great regard; 4.
not because the sinner is powerful or rich: for though in matters of
commutative justice neither the rich man is to be regarded for his riches, nor
the poor man for his poverty; yet in matters criminal and of distributive
justice the rich man is less to be eased, when the indulgence makes the crime
more popular and imitable by the greatness of the evil example; but he is more
to be eased, when the punishment will by reason of his greatness of honor be
too unequal a diminution to him, and cause a contempt greater then the
intention of the law.

3. The commutation of the punishment imposed by law must at no hand be done at
a set price beforehand, 5.
or taxed in penitentiary tables, and be a matter of course, or indifferent
dispensation: for when men know the worst of the evil, which they fear, to be
very tolerable and easy, it is an invitation, and does tempt to the sin. But
therefore this must be done by particular dispensation; not easily, not to all,
not to many, not at all for the price, but to relieve the needs of him who is
in danger of being swallowed by too great a sorrow.

4. Commutations are not to be imposed but when the dispensation is something
of ease in a law of burden; 6.
for then to change it into a less burden is a dispensation by a commutation
of which it is properly capable. Thus when abstinence from flesh is enjoined by
a law, it may be upon good ground dispensed withal and changed into an
abstinence from wine or strong drink, or society, or into alms. But when laws
are made which contain in them no burden, but are in order to some end of
personal or public advantage, some end of virtue, or caution, or defense, then
either the dispensation (when it is reasonable to be required) must be without
commutation; or if it be not, the commutation must be made into something that
shall contribute to the end intended in the law. Thus if any one has reason to
desire to be dispensed with in the publication or trine denunciation of an
intended marriage, it is not reasonable, nor according to the intention and
wisdom of the law, to change that law into a tax of money, though for alms
and religion; but it may be done by commanding them to abs^^^ in from mutual
congresse till the secret marriage can prudently be man public; because this
commutation does in some degree secure the end of the law, and makes some
amends for want of publication of the bannes. If a Deacon have reason to desire
to receive the Order of Priesthood from one that is not his own Diocesan, the
Bishop that dispenses with him cannot prudently or justly require of him to
give a sum of money for the reparation a Church, because that, though it be a
good work, yet it is not in the same matter, nor does it cooperate toward the
wise end of the law: but he does well, if he enjoins him to procure and carry
along with him greater testimonials of his conversation and worthiness, and
that he publish his intention to all his own neighborhood, that they may, if
they see cause, object against him; and he may not be promoted by a clancular
ordination.

5. I might add here, that in commutations the pretenses of charity 7.
and alms and religion must not be the cover of avaritious practices and
designs; but that this, although it be useful in respect of the corrupted
manners of men, yet it is nothing to the explication of this Rule.

. 6. Contrary Custom.
RULE VI. A Custom can interpret a law, but can never abrogate it without the
consent of the Supreme power.
THe doctrine of Customs both in divine laws and in humane, 1.
I have already explicated, Book. 2. Chap. 3. Rule 29. and Book 3. Chap. 4.
Rule 15.
so far as concerns their positive power, and the power of binding the
Conscience to obedience and complying. That which now is to be inquired is
concerning their power to disoblige and set at liberty: and even this also may
very well be estimated by those positive measures, and has in it not very much
of special consideration, save this only, that there is very great reason of
dissenting from the commonly-received doctrine of the power of customs in this
very particular.

For although by the consent of all the world custom can introduce a law, 2.
according to that saying of Tertullian, de Coron. milit.
Consuetudo in rebus civilibus pro lege suscipitur, cum deficit lex, When there
is no law, it is supplied by custom; and this is so far to be extended, that
if the custom be reasonable, and antecedent to a law, it shall remain after
the making of a law in that very matter, c. 1. de constitut. in 6.
nisi express caveatur in ipsa, unless the law does expressly cancel it by
particular caution: yet when a law is established and is good, the force of
custom is not sufficient of it self to annul it, and to cancel the obligation
of Conscience.

A custom can interpret a law. 3.
Si de interpretatione legis quaeratur, inprimis inspiciendum est, l. si de
interpret. ff. de legibus.
quo jure civitas retro in hujusmodi casibus uteretur, says the law. For it is
to be supposed that the law was obeyed, and in that sense in which the
lawgiver intended it; and that the people do their duty in things of public
concern is a just and a legal presumption: and therefore nothing is more
reasonable in questions concerning the interpretation of a law, then to inquire
how the practice of the people was in times bygone, because what they did when
the reason and sense of the law was best perceived, and what the lawgiver
allowed them to do in the obedience of it, may best be supposed to be that
which he intended. Upon this account, the judged cases in law are the best
indication of the meaning of the law; because the sentence of the Judges does
most solemnly convey the notice of a custom, and allow it reasonable, and by
those customs does interpret the law, so that they give aid each to other; the
custom gives assistance to the Judges in understanding the meaning of the law,
and the Judges giving sentence according to the custom declare that custom to
be reasonable; according to that in the Spanish laws, Vide Burgos de Paz. in l.
1. Tauri, number. 247.
That custom is for ever hereafter to be observed, si secundum eam bis
judicatum fuerit, if there have been two sentences pronounced according to the
custom. But this use of custom is expressed both in the Civil and Canon law.
l. nam Imperator. ff. cod.
In ambiguitatibus quae ex legibus proficiscuntur, consuetudinem aut rerum
perpetuo similiter judicatarum authoritatem vim legis obtinere debere. Custom
and precedents of law are as good as law in all questions of law and of
doubtful interpretation: and therefore the Presidents of Provinces were
commanded to judge by the measures of custom: l. 1. C. quae sit longa consuet.
probatis iis quae in oppido frequenter in eodem controversiarum genere servata
sunt, causa cagnita statuat; see what is the custom of the place, and by the
measures of that let the decree pass. And so it is in the Canon law, where a
certain Bishop is commanded to inquire what is the custom of the Metropolitan
Church and the Churches in the neighborhood, cap. super eo. de cognat. spirit.
and diligentius imitari, to follow it diligently, meaning both in practice and
in sentences. Now in this, if the Conscience can be relieved and the rigor of
the law abated by the aides of custom, it is safe to use it, and to proceed
according to the rules of equity, described in the beginning of this Chapter.

But all this is therefore reasonable because it is consuetudo secundum legem,
4.
it is according to law; all the ease and abatements of which that are
reasonable the Conscience may safely use. But if a custom be against a law,
the law, and not the custom ought to prevail; for a custom cannot take off
from us the duty and obedience we owe to the just laws of our superiors.
Consuetudo nec rationem vincit nec legem. l. 2. C. quae sit long. consuet.
As in Divine laws reason and truth can never be prejudiced by contrary
customs; so in humane laws, the authority and obligation cannot be annulled by
desuetude alone. For although a man may get impunity and save his skin whole
under the protection of contrary custom; yet our inquiry is for the indemnity
of Conscience: and as to this, it is considerable that when a custom contrary
to law does enter, it enters by neglect or disobedience, by rebellion or
contempt, it proceeds all the way in the paths of iniquity; for still men go
qua itur, non qua eundum est, they go, like frighted or wandering sheep, there
where the gap is open, not where the way lies: and it will be impossible that
such customs should be a warranty to the conscience, and that it should be
lawful to break a law, because the law is broken; that disobedience should
warrant rebellion Non posseprascribi contra obedientiam. cap. cum non liceat.
de praescript.
; and that it be innocent to follow the multitude to sin. So that so long as
the custom is alone and walks by it self, it walks amiss: but if by any means
this custom pass into lawful, as a traveller that goes so far westward and
still goes on till at last he comes to the rising of the sun, then it is not by
any force of the custom, but by first obtaining pardon and then procuring
leave.

For it is observable that in law, 5.
customs themselves are esteemed illegal and reprobate if they be against law.
cap. cum causa. de re judicata.
Licet usus consuetudinis non minima sit authoritas, nunquam tamen veritati aut
legi praejudicat; Use and custom has great authority, but nothing against
truth or law: and Non valet consuetudo contra canonicam institutionem; glos. in
cap. ad nostram. de consuet. verb. canonicis.
for the custom is unreasonable if it be against law: for illam dico
rationabilem quam non improbant jura, says the Gloss in cap. ult. de consuet.
verbo rationabilis; and the Lateran Council defines those customs to be
reasonable, quae ratione juvantur and sacris congruunt institutis, which are
assisted by reason and are agreeable to the holy Canons. Now because a custom
is by no law admitted unless it be reasonable, and that by all laws those
customs are judged unreasonable which are against law; we have reason to
withdraw our selves from the practice of such customs though they be never so
general and long, unless they be by some other means allowed.

And therefore there is wholly a mistake in this doctrine, 6.
upon the account of ^n (...) and some antinomies in law: for it is certain
that in the Civil law, and in the laws of many nations anciently, the custom
of the people was esteemed sufficient to abrogate a law; but it began first,
and continued long only in those Commonwealths where the people had power to
make a law, or had some pretensions and colors of that power which were not
wholly to be taken from them: and therefore, Rectissime receptum est ut leges
non solum suffragio legislatoris, l. de quibus. ff. de legib.
sed etiam tacito consensu omnium per desuetudinem abrogentur, Laws are
abrogated not only by the express revocation of the lawgiver, but by the
secret consent of all. And the reason of this is well expressed by Julianus the
Lawyer, ibid.
Quid interest suffragio populus voluntatem suam declaret, an rebus ipsis and
factis? It is all one how the people signify their will, by suffrages or by
actions: meaning that so long as the legislative power was in them, they had
power to revoke their own law by custom as well as by voice, at long running
as well as at one convention. But when the people are not their own subjects
and their own Princes (for so they are in all popular governments) but that the
Prince or the Senate has the legislative power, they cannot introduce a
custom but by rebellion and disobedience. In Democracies, when the people did
otherwise then their own laws required, they disobeyed themselves, and so were
innocent and out of danger; but now they cannot disobey but they sin, and a sin
can never of it self lead a man to innocence, nor a lie to truth, unless it be
by the help of some other intervening cause, of it self alone it cannot. But
this affair relies upon the same ground which I formerly discoursed of in this
book; Chap. 1. Rule 7.
for the mistake of men is alike in both. The obligation of a law does not
depend upon the acceptance of the people; and as a law has not it is beginning
so neither can it have it is perpetuity dependantly upon them; and no man thinks
it has, but he who supposes the supreme power to be originally in the people,
and in the King by trust; and there are too many that think that, for there
have been so many Democratical governments that many wise men have said so,
because then they had reason: but so many popular governments have also
produced popular opinions, which being too much received even by wise men, have
still given the people occasion to talk so still, and to very many to believe
them.

But if a contrary custom could justly abrogate a law, 7.
then it were no matter who had the legislative power, for whatever the Prince
please, the people shall choose whether it be a law or no; which because it is a
perfect destruction to all government, must needs proceed from an intolerable
principle. To which I add this consideration, that whatever effect in law and
external regiment a custom may be admitted to have, of which I am not
concerned to give accounts, yet if the custom be against law, it is certain
the conscience can have no safety, and no peace but in the obedience to the
law. For besides that there are so many difficult and indeterminable questions
in the conduct of the matter of customs, as whether the custom be reasonable,
and who is to judge of that, and by what measures; what are the sufficient
causes of custom, whether there must be some inequality or pressure or
iniquity in the matter, or is it sufficient that the multitude is willing to
introduce a custom against law? what time and continuance is required to
prescribe a custom, and when it begins to be innocent, and how long it is
disobedience; how many must concur to the making of it, and whether the
dissent of a few does interrupt it is coalition and growing into a custom, and
how shall we know whether all or no do consent? or how are we sure that a
greater part is sufficient, and that we have the greater part with us? whether
for the abrogation of the law a mere desuetude or omission is sufficient, or
must the custom be contrary to the law and matter of fact? and if that be
sufficient to annul an affirmative precept, how many things and circumstances
of things will be further required for the removing the obligation of a
negative commandment? and very many more to the same purposes, that is, to no
purposes: besides this, I say, the conscience can never be warranted in any
thing but obedience, because it is impossible to tell the precise time in which
the law is actually abrogated by the custom; and therefore a man can never
know by all that is before him in this affair, whether he be worthy of love or
hatred.

There is only one case that can set this right, 8.
and give warranty to the conscience, and that is when the Prince or the
supreme power allows the custom and annuls his own law; for he only that made
it can give it a period: and therefore our inquiry can be only this, how we
shall know when the Prince is willing the law shall go for nothing. Concerning
which there are but two ways of our knowing it, or his doing it. The one is by
tacit consent or secret approbation of the custom, as by not punishing, by not
complaining, and by silence; and the other is by direct revocation. The former
will be very hard to know so well as to be able to bring peace to an inquiring
and curious conscience; but I shall give accounts of the best ways of knowing
it in the next book, in the explication of this Rule, Qui tacet consentire
videtur: of the latter I am to speak in the next Rule. In the mean time there
is nothing sure for the conscience but to obey the laws, only that we can
understand that the custom is then approved when it passes in rem judicatam,
when the Kings Judges have given sentence in a cause against an old law, for a
later custom; which when they have reason to do, the Princes will is
sufficiently declared; till then, if we cannot sufficiently know that the
Prince does secretly approve the custom against the law, we must stay till the
law be expressly abrogated, and then the custom may safely be complied with,
because then we are sure it is not against law. For, as Panormitan said well,
Oportet ut duae parts sint scientes consuetudinis quae introducitur. Not only
the people, but the Prince too must consent before the custom be approved. For
there must be two words to this bargain.

. 7. Abrogation.
RULE VII. Abrogation of a law by a competent, that is, by the Supreme power,
may be just and reasonable, though the law it self be neither unreasonable nor
unjust.
THe causes of abrogating a law are all those which are sufficient to make a
good and a wise man change his mind. 1.
The alteration of the cause of the law, new emergencies, unfit circumstances,
public dislike, a greater good: for it is no otherwise in the public then in
the private will; there where a man is master of his will and ruler of his own
affairs, there is nothing to be considered, but that what he does be done
wisely and justly and charitably. The same power that makes the law, the same
can annul it, and the same reason which introduced the law, can also change it:
and there is no difference but this only, that a law may not be imposed
unless the matter of it be honest, or holy, or profitable; but it may be
abrogated though it be all this, provided it be not necessary. For to the
making of a law all the conditions are required, a competent authority, and
just matter, and fitting promulgation; but to the abrogation of it, the defect
of any one cause is sufficient. And therefore if the law be unjust, it ceases
of it self; if it be useless, it falls into just neglect; if it be not
published, it is not born; if it be generally disliked, it is supposed to be
uncharitable, and therefore is as good as if it were not born, for it will be
starved at Nurse. But when it is made it must continue and be maintained by all
these things together; and therefore when any one fails, the whole structure
descends into dissolution and a heap. But therefore if the will of the Prince
changes, and that he will not have it to be a law, it looses the spirit, though
the body and the external causes of life remain. For though an action must not
be done unless it be good and innocent, yet it is not necessary that it be
done, though it be so. Every thing that is good is not necessary, and many good
things are let alone, and at the same time others as good as they are done, and
sometimes better: and because there are many good provisions and counsels which
are not taken, and are not made into laws, many such things which are well
enough may be laid aside, either for the procuring a greater good, or for the
avoiding of some appendant inconvenience. But in these cases, unless the
Prince be obliged by oath or promise to preserve this law, his abrogating even
of a good law is no question of justice, but of prudence and charity, both
which also may be preserved, if the good be changed, or improved, or
recompensed. But whether it be right or wrong on the Princes part, yet if the
law be annulled, the conscience of the subject is no longer bound. The Prince
cannot bind the conscience, unless the law be good; but the conscience is at
liberty, though the abrogation be not good. Because the goodness of the matter
cannot make it into a law without the Prince's will, but the Prince's will can
alone make it cease to be.

Upon this account, 2.
it is not unseasonable to inquire whether, that a thing has been abused may
be accounted a just and a prudent cause to take it quite away.

That it may be a just, 3.
that is, a sufficient cause, is out of all question, because it is not unjust;
for then in this case it is just enough, though it be not necessary. But
whether it be prudent for the Prince to do it, and whether it be necessary
that it be done, is another consideration. But to this the precedent of
Hezekiah King of Judah is a good guide. For he brake in pieces the brazen
serpent, because the people made it an idol; and he did prudently, because the
people who were too apt to that crime could not easily be kept from doing it so
long as that great memorial of the divine power did remain. It is like removing
a beautiful woman from the greedy eyes of a young person; he cannot behold her
and be safe: and thus it is in all cases, if the evil be incumbent, and not
remediable, nor to be cleans'd from mischief or just suspicion and actual
danger, then whatsoever is so abused not only may, but ought to be removed.
But if that which was abused be now quitted from the abuse, then it may be
kept, if it be good for any thing: and if it were not, I suppose there would be
no question about it.

But in the change of laws, 4.
or reformation of prevailing evil customs, prudence is good always, and zeal
sometimes: but certainly the contrary and the exterminating way of reformation
is not always the best, because he that opposes a vice too fiercely may pass
into a contrary vice as readily as into a contrary virtue. If a Church happens
to command some rituals and forms of worship in a superstitious manner or to
superstitious purposes, or if men do observe them with a curiosity great as to
the niceness of superstition, it is not good to oppose them superstitiously.
If the obedient do keep the rituals as if they were the Commandments of God,
they are to blame: but if the disobedient will reject them as if they were of
themselves against God's Commandments they are more to blame, because a
superstitious obedience is better then a superstitious rebellion; that has
piety and error in an evil mixture, but this has error and impiety.

But as to the subject matter and inquiry of the Rule; 5.
That a thing has been abused, and a law has been made the occasion of evil,
it does not make the law of it self to cease, unless that abuse and deception
be not to be cured without abrogation of the law. So that if a subject sees the
abuse and is offended at it, and is not tempted to comply with it, he is still
tied to observe the law, and in his own practice separate it from the abuse.
Thus in the Primitive Church, the observation of Vigils and Wakes was a holy
custom, and yet it afterward grew into such abuse, that the Ecclesiastic
authority thought it fit to abrogate it; because the custom in the declining
piety and corrupted manners of the world was a ready temptation to the evil.
But till the Vigils were taken away by authority, the laws of the Church did
still oblige, and did not cease of themselves: and therefore where with
innocence and without active scandal they could be observed, the subject was
obliged. But then this was cause enough why the Rulers of Churches should annul
that law or custom. If they could easily have quitted those meetings from
corruption, they might if they pleased retain them or annul them, as they
listed; only they were bound to annul them when the evil could find no other
remedy. The abuse even so long as it was curable was yet cause enough why the
Supreme power might abrogate the law, but not sufficient to make the abrogation
necessary, nor yet for the subject to disobey it. For the inferior cannot
lawfully withdraw his obedience, till the superior cannot lawfully retain the
law: but when to abrogate it is necessary, then to disobey it is no sin.

I conclude these numerous inquiries and large accounts of the obligation of
Conscience by Humane laws, 6.
with the Apologue taken out of Nicolaus Damascenus his Politics. (...). Laws
are like the girdles of the Iberian women: if any man's belly or his heart is
too big for those circles, he is a dissolute and a dishonored person.

The end of the Third Book. Non nobis Domine.
OF THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF Good and Evil, THEIR Limits and Circumstances,
THEIR AGGRAVATIONS and DIMINUTIONS. The Fourth Book.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivy-lane. 1660.

The Fourth Book.
HE that intends to consider any thing fully and entirely, must consider it in
all the four kinds of causes. The Formal cause, or the essentiality of good and
evil is the doing it with or against Conscience, true of false, right or wrong,
confident or doubtful, probable or certain; and this I have explicated in the
First book. The Material cause of good and evil is derived from the object or
the Rule, which is the laws of God and Man, by a conformity to which the action
is good; and if it disagrees, it is materially evil. And this I have largely
represented in the Second and Third Books.

But because it is not enough that any thing be in its own nature honest and
just, unless it be also honestly and justly done, according to that saying of
the wise man, Qui sanctitatem sancte custodiunt judicabuntur sancti, They that
keep holiness holily shall be adjudged holy; to make up the Rule of Conscience
complete, it is necessary that it be considered by what Rules and measures a
good action may be rightly conducted, and how all may be rightly judged, that
we pass on to emendation, either by repentance or ^^provement, that a good
action may not be spoiled, and an evil may not be allowed, but that according
to the words of the Apostle we may be (...) prepared for every good work: which
will be done by considering the efficient and the final causes of all humane
actions; the nature and rules of which when we understand and consider, as we
have the measure of humane actions in all the four kinds of causes, so there
will be nothing deficient to the fullness of a general or universal Rule of
Conscience.

CHAP. I. Of the efficient causes of all Humane actions good or evil.
. 1. Of Choice and Election, voluntary and involuntary.
RULE I. An action is neither good nor evil, unless it be voluntary, and
chosen.
THis Rule is taken from the doctrine of S. Austin, 1.
who makes freedom and election to be of the constitution and definition of
sin. habetur 15. qu. 1. in princip. lib. De duabu^ animabus cap. 11.
Peccatum est voluntas retinendi vel consequendi quod justitia vetat, and unde
liberum est abstinere. The will is the mistress of all our actions, of all but
such as are necessary and natural; and therefore to her it is to be imputed
whatsoever is done. The action it self is good or bad by it is conformity to, or
difformity from the Rule of Conscience; but the Man is good or bad by the will.
Nemo nostrum tenetur ad culpam, ibid. ubi supra. cap. non est.
nisi propria voluntate deflexerit, said S. Ambrose. If the actions be natural
and under no command of the will, they are good by creation and the act of God;
but if it be a moral action it is to be conducted by another Economy. For in
these it is true which the Wise man said, Deus posuit hominem in manu consilii
sui: God intending to be glorified by our free obedience has set before us
good and evil: we may put our hand to which we will; only what we choose that
shall be our portion: for all things of this nature he has left us to our
selves; not to our natural strengths, but to our one choice; he has instructed
us how to choose; he has opened to us not only the nature of things, but the
event also of all actions, and invited the will with excellent amabilities and
glorious objects; and by all the aides of the Spirit of Grace has enabled it
to do it is own work well. Just as Nature is by Physic enabled to proceed in
her own work of nutriment and increase by a removing of all impediments, so
does the Spirit of God in us, and to us, and for us: and after all the will is
to choose by it is own concreated power.

I shall not here enter into the philosophy of this question, 2.
but consider it only as it is to be felt and handled. Let the will of man be
enabled by what means it please God to choose for it, without God's grace we are
sure it cannot do it is work; but we are sure also that we can do our work
that God requires of us, and we can let it alone: and therefore as sure as
God's grace and help is necessary, so sure it is that we have that help that is
necessary; for if we had not, we could not be commanded to work, and there were
no need of arguments or of reason, of deliberation or inquiry, according to the
words of S. Austin, lib. de fide contra Manichaeos cap. 10.
Quis non clamet stultum esse praecepta dare ei, cui liberum non est quod
praecipitur facere; and iniquum esse eum damnare, cui non fuit potestas jussa
complere? for if in humane actions, that is actions of morality, there be a
fate, then there is no contingency, and then all deliberation were the greatest
folly in the world; because since only one part is possible (that being
impossible to come to pass which God has inevitably decreed shall never be)
the other part is but a chimaera, and therefore not subject to consultation.
Add to this, if all our actions were predetermin'd, then one man were not
better then another, and there could be no difference of rewards in heaven or
earth; God might give what he please, but he shall reward none, not in any
sense whatsoever; and Christian Princes may as well hang a true man as a thief,
because this man no more breaks his law then the other, for neither of them do
obey or disobey, but it is fortune that is hanged, and fortune that is
advanced: Ille erucem [sortis] pretium tulit, hic diadema; and there is no such
thing as virtue, no praise, and no law. But in all this there is nothing new.
For these were long since the discourses of S. Austin against the Manichees,
and S. Hierom against the Pelagians; and S. Leo by these very Mediums confutes
the Priscillianists, as appears in his 19th Epistle to Turibius the Bishop. But
certainly that is a strange proposition which affirms that nothing is possible
but what is done; and to what purpose is repentance? No man repents that he
could not speak as soon as he was born, and no man repents that he was begotten
into the world by the ordinary way of all the earth. He that repents is
troubled for doing what he ought not, and what he need not. But I will go on
no further in this particular; not because I cannot choose, for I could add
very many more things, but because if a man has not a power to will or nill,
it is to no purpose to write cases of Conscience, or indeed to do any thing as
wise men should. A fool and a wise man differ not, a lazy man and a diligent, a
good man and a bad, save only one has a better star; they differ as a
strong man and a weak: but though one be the better thing, he is not the better
man. But I am not here to dispute, yet I shall observe a few things which may
be useful to the question as the question can minister to practice.

1. That whereas all men granting liberty of will in actions of natural life
and common intercourse, 3.
many of them deny it in moral actions, and many more deny it in actions
spiritual, they consider not that they evacuate and destroy the very nature and
purpose of liberty and choice. For besides that the case of moral actions and
spiritual is all one, for that action is moral which is done in obedience or
disobedience to a law, and spiritual is no more, save only it relates to
another law, to the Evangelical or Spiritual law of liberty, but in the nature
of the thing it is the same, and can as well be chosen one as the other, when
they are equally taught, and alike commanded, and propounded under the same
proportionable amability, and till they be so they are not equally laws;
besides this, the denying liberty in all moral things, that is in all things of
manners, in all things of obedience to the laws of God and Man, and the
allowing it in things under no law, is a destruction of the very nature and
purpose of liberty. For the only end of liberty is to make us capable of laws,
of virtue and reward, and to distinguish us from beasts by a distinct manner of
approach to God, and a way of conformity to him proper to us; and except in the
matter of Divine and humane laws, except in the matter of virtue and vice,
except in order to reward or punishment, liberty and choice were good for
nothing: for to keep our selves from harm, and poison, and enemies, a natural
instinct, and lower appetites, and more brutish faculties would serve our needs
as well as the needs of birds and beasts. And therefore to allow it where it is
good for nothing, and to deny it where only it can be useful and reasonable
and fit to be done, and given by the wise Father of all his creatures, must
needs be amiss.

2. Liberty of choice in moral actions, 4.
that is, in all that can be good or bad, is agreeable to the whole method and
purpose, the Economy and design of humane nature and being. For we are a
creature between Angel and beast, and we understand something, and are ignorant
of much, and the things that are before us are mixed of good and evil, and our
duty has much good and some evil, and sin has some good and much evil, and
therefore these things are and they are not to be pursued; Omne voluntarium est
etiam involuntarium, and there is a weight on both sides, and our propositions
are probable, not true and false, but for several reasons seeming both to
several persons. Now if to all this there were not a faculty that should
proportionably, and in even measures, and by a symbolical progression tend to
these things, we could not understand, we could not see, we could not admire
the numbers and music and proportions of the Divine wisdom in our creation in
relation to this order of things. For since in our objects there is good and
evil in confusion or imperfect mixture, if our faculties tending to these
objects were natural, and not deliberative and elective, they must take all in,
or thrust all out, and either they must receive no good, or admit every evil.
It is natural for every thing to love it is good and to avoid it is evil: now
when the good and evil are simple and unmixt or not discerned, an instinct and
a natural tendency to the object is sufficient to invest it in the possession.
But when they are mixed, and we are commanded to choose the good and eschew the
evil, if to an indifferent object there be not an indifferent faculty, what
Symmetry and proportion is in this creation? If there be two amabilities
propounded, and only one is to be followed, and the other avoided, since the
hand has five, the soul must at least have two fingers, the one to take, the
other to put away. And this is so in all species or kinds of moral actions,
even that kind which we call spiritual; for with that also there is mingled so
much difficulty and displeasure, that is, so much evil, so much that we
naturally and reasonably desire to avoid, and the avoiding of this evil does so
stand against the choosing of the other good, that a natural and unchusing
faculty can do nothing at all in the question. But upon this account God has
commanded industry, diligence, toleration, patience, longanimity,
mortification; that is, he has set before us several eligibilities in order to
several ends, which must either be wholly to no purpose, or an art of vexation
and instrument of torment to evil purpose, or else the means of a reward, and
the way of felicity by the advantage of a free and a wise choice, and this is
to very good purpose. Materiamque tuis tristem virtutibus imple: Ovid. Trist.
lib. 4. El. 3.

Ardua per praeceps gloria vadit iter.
Hectora quis nosset, si felix Troja fuisset?
Publica virtutis per mala facta via est.
It is difficulty and the mixture of several amabilities that presupposes
choice and makes virtue. But if events and actions were equally predetermin'd,
idleness would be as good as labor, and peevishness as good as patience; but
then a man could never come to God. It was well said of Eusebius, (...). As
idleness is to the body, so is carelessness and inconsideration to the soul,
but exercise and difficulty and mortification bring us unto God: but these
things cannot be understood but where there is liberty and election, and yet
without these there is no virtue. -- Nam virtus futile Nomen
Ni decus adfuerit patiendo, Sil. Ital. l. 9.
ubi tempora lethi
Proxima sint, pulchramque petat per vulnera laudem.
Difficulty makes virtue, and the contrariety of objects makes difficulty, and
the various ends and amabilities make the contrariety, and liberty is the hand
and fingers of the soul by which she picks and chooses, and if she gathers
flowers she makes her self a garland of immortality.

3. All this state of things thus represented must needs signify a state much
more perfect then that of beasts, 5.
but very imperfect in respect of that of Angels, and of that which we our
selves expect hereafter; and therefore that liberty which is made in just
proportion to fit this imperfection must also of it self needs be imperfect,
and need not be envied to mankind as if it were a jewel of the celestial crown.
Alas it is an imperfection, fit to humble us, not to make us proud; it is not
too much to be given us, it is a portion of our imperfect condition; it only
sets us higher then a Tulip, and enlarges our border beyond the folds of sheep
or the Oxens stall, but it keeps us in our just station, servants to God,
inferior to Angels, and in possibility of becoming Saints. For in moral or
spiritual things liberty and indetermination is weakness, and supposes a great
infirmity of our reason and a great want of love. For if we understood all the
degrees of amability in the service of God, and if we could love God as he
deserves, we could not deliberate concerning his service, and we could not
possibly choose or be in love with disobedience, we should have no liberty left,
nothing concerning which we could deliberate; for there is no deliberation but
when something is to be refused, and something is to be preferred, which could
not be but that we understand good but little, and love it less. For the
Saints and Angels in heaven and God himself love good and cannot choose evil,
because to do so were imperfection and infelicity; and the Devils and accursed
souls hate all good, without liberty and indifferency: but between these is the
state of Man in the days of his pilgrimage, until he comes to a confirmation
in one of the opposite terms. Liberty of will is like the motion of a Magnetic
needle toward the North, full of trembling and uncertainty till it be fixed in
the beloved point: It wavers as long as it is free, and is at rest when it can
choose no more. It is humility and truth to allow to man this liberty; and
therefore for this we may lay our faces in the dust, and confess that our
dignity and excellence supposes misery and is imperfection, but the instrument
and capacity of all duty and all virtue.

4. In the inquiries concerning the efficient cause of moral actions men do
deny one truth for fear of loosing another, 6.
and will not allow ^o man a liberty of choice in spiritual actions and moral
effects, for fear of disparaging the grace of God; whereas it is by the grace
of God that we have this liberty. S. Augusti(...) lib. 2. de peccator. merit.
cap. 18. Vide etiam Prosper. lib. 1. de vocat. g^^tium cap. 8. and ad capitula
Gallor^^^ Sent. 6. and contra Collatorem, cap. ^^. and carmen d^ ingratis capp.
26, 2^. and ult. Vide etiam and Fulgent. lib. de incarnat. and gratia Christi.
cap. 20. Gregorii lib. 18. moral cap. 21. and lib. 33. cap. 25. and V. B^^^m in
Genesis 4. super verbis Domini ad Cain. Sed super omnes videatur (...). Bernardi
liber de gratia and liber^ arbitrio: vide eundem sermon. 81. in Canti^a.
Ipsa ratio quemlibet nostrum quaerentem vehementer angustat, ne sic defendamus
gratiam ut liberum arbitrium auferre videamur: rursus nec liberum sic asseramus
arbitrium, ut superba impietate ingrati Dei gratiae judicemur. It is very easy
to reconcile God's grace with our liberty, because by this grace it is that we
have this liberty. For no man can choose what he does not know, and no man can
love that which has in it no amability. Now because we have all notices
spiritual and the arguments of invitation to obedience in duties Evangelical
from revelation and the grace of God, therefore to this we owe the liberty of
our will, that is, a power to choose spiritual things. Grace and truth come by
Jesus Christ, and liberty of will comes from him; for if the Son makes us free,
then are we free indeed: but this is not by giving us new faculties, but new
strengths and new instruments to these faculties we have already. But let it be
this way or any other, we cannot work till we have powers to work, and we
cannot choose till we have liberty, and we cannot be under a law, and promises
and threatenings, if we cannot choose: and therefore it matters not as to our
present inquiry, the explication and manner of speaking of which school of
learning we or any man shall please to follow: this only we are to rely upon,
that the man cannot be a good man, if he do not choose the good and decline the
evil; and there is no such thing as Conscience, and there is no need of it, and
no use (except it be merely to torment us,) unless it be to guide us into the
choice of good, and to deter us from doing evil.

But lastly, 7.
It will yet be sufficient to the verification of this Rule, that whether we
affirm or deny the liberty of the will, yet that there be in every action good
or bad the action of the will; and if that be not necessary to be admitted as
the cause of morality, then he that kills a man against his will is as bad as
he that did it with his will, and he that receives the holy Sacrament by
constraint does as well as he that chooses it, and to confess Christ against
our Conscience is as good as if we confess him according to it: for when the
material actions are the same, there is nothing can distinguish the men that
do them, but something within that can do this, or let it alone. Now because
a good understanding, and a good fancy, and a great reason, and a great
resolution, and a strong heart, and a healthful body may be in a reprobate or
vicious person, but a good will and the choice of virtue is only in a good
man, it follows that all morality depends on the action of the will; and
therefore that all other faculties are natural and necessary and obedient, this
only is the Empress, and is free, and Mistress of the action.

And yet beyond this heap of things, 8.
there is another reason why a man can be good or bad only by the act of his
will, and not of any other faculty, because the act of the will produces
material and permanent events; it is acquisitive and effective, or recusative
and destructive, otherwise then it is in any other faculties. For the other
faculties are like the eye and ear, they can see or hear foul things and be
never the worse, and good things and be never the better: but the will of a man
is like the hand and the mouth and the belly, if they touch foul things they
are defiled, and if they eat poison they die; so is the will of man, it becomes
all one with it is object. For it works only by love or hatred, and therefore
changes by the variety of the object it entertains. He that loves a lie is a
liar; but he that only understands it, is never the worse. Facti sunt
abominabiles sicut ea quae dilexerunt, Hose. 9. 10.
says the Prophet, They are made abominable according as they loved; [as the
things are which they loved] so the Vulgar Latin: and so it is in good things,
1 Cor. 6. 17.
(...), He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit: love makes the faculty
like to the object, and therefore as the object of the will is, whose action is
love, so is the man good or bad accordingly.

Now this is not so to be understood as if the actions of other faculties could
not be sins; 9.
for a sin may be in the memory, in the fancy, in the understanding, in the
eye, and in the members of the body: but then in these is only the material
part of the sin; if the actions subjected in them be involuntary they are not
criminal, they may be irregular, but not sinful; only as the will commands
them and they obey, so they are to stand or fall in judgment. For so ignorance
is a sin when it is voluntary. Qui dixerunt Deo, Job 21. Psalm. 35.
Recede a nobis; scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus. The wicked say unto God, We
will not understand thy ways. So the Psalmist complains, Noluit intelligere ut
been ageret, He refused understanding. Now since in all the faculties the will
of man has a dominion, and is the cause of all moral actions, from thence they
have their estimate, and are acquitted or condemned accordingly; according to
that of S. Bernard, Nihil ardet in inferno nisi propria voluntas, Nothing makes
fuel for the flames of hell, but the will of man, and evil actions that are
voluntary and chosen.

The consequent of this discourse in order to Conscience is, 10.
that no man loose his peace concerning the controverted articles and disputes
of Christendom. If he inquires after truth earnestly as after things of great
concernment; if he prays to God to assist, and uses those means which are in
his hand and are his best for the finding it; if he be indifferent to any
proposition, and loves it not for any consideration but because he thinks it
true; if he will quit any interest rather then loose a truth; if he dares own
what he has found and believed; and if he loves it so much the more by how
much he believes it more conducing to piety and the honor of God, he has done
what a good and a wise man should do; he needs not regard what any man
threatens, nor fear God's anger when a man of another sect threatens him with
damnation: for he that heartily endeavors to please God, and searches what his
will is that he may obey it, certainly loves God; and nothing that loves God
can perish.

2. It follows also from hence that no unavoidable calamity, 11.
no being born of evil parents, no being born from illegitimate embraces, no
unjust sentences of men can irreconcile us to God, or prejudice our Eternal
interest. God will judge us according to our works, not according to his, or
any man's else, or by any measures but by his own law and our obedience.

3. Let no man think that either God will, 12.
or that the Devil can make us sin. God loves not sin, or that we should die;
and therefore will not divide his own kingdom, or set up that by his effective
power which by his legislative and his persuasive, and his natural and eternal,
he intends to destroy. And as for the Devil, he can tempt indeed, but unless
we please, he cannot prevail; it is our consent and willingness that makes him
conqueror. And if we be really persuaded of these plain and evident truths,
there is a plain way made to encourage our industry, to actuate our caution, to
glorify God, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, to walk humbly
with our God, to divest our selves of all excuses, to lay the burden where it
ought; that is, to walk in the right way, in the way of duty and the paths of
the Divine commandments, without tempting our selves, or being fooled and
cosen'd out of our duty, or hindering our repentance and humiliation, if we have
done amiss.

These are the material events, 13.
and that proper usefulness of this proposition which can do benefit to us in
the conduct of Conscience. Our own will and choice is all that upon which we
are to make judgment of our actions. For the further declaration of which we
are to inquire into diverse particulars, in order to the institution and
regulating of Conscience.

Question I.
Whether every action of our life ought to be directed by a right conscience,
or a well-persuaded will: or, Are not some actions not only in their whole
kind, but in their circumstances and limitations also, merely indifferent?

To this I answer, 14.
that actions, if they be considered in their Physical or natural capacity, are
all negatively indifferent; that is, neither good nor bad: the going into a
house, the entering into a field, the striking of a blow, the act of generation,
eating or drinking, as they are taken in their natural capacity, are not moral
actions, that is, by all that they are in nature are nothing at all in manners:
even homicide it self and adultery, in their natural capacity, differ nothing
from justice and the permissions of marriage; and the giving of alms is no
better naturally then giving money to Mercury, or to an Image.

2. Omissions of acts are oftentimes indifferent, 15.
even always when the omission is not of a thing commanded or morally good from
some law, or sufficient principle of morality, as perfection, counsel, praise
and fame, worthiness and charity. The reason is, because omissions may come in
upon a dead stock, and proceed from a negative principle, from sleep and
forgetfulness, from a lethargy or dullness, from differing business and
divertisements. And that which is nothing can produce nothing, and neither good
nor evil can come from that which is not; they both must have a positive cause,
if they have in them any morality. Even not to commit adultery is not
commendable, unless that omission be chosen. * And this is very remarkable in
order to Conscience. For the whole duty of man consists in eschewing evil and
doing good: but to will and to choose good is so necessary, and if we can, to
do it is so required of us, that the very avoiding evil is exacted in that
manner, that unless it be a doing good, it is a doing nothing at all, it is
good for nothing, it will go for nothing. To eschew evil is a labor and a
mighty work, it is a running from temptation, a shutting the doors against it,
a praying against it, it is a flying from it when we can, and a resisting of it
when we cannot. A porter cannot be said to eschew ambition, nor does he do
well by not commencing of a proud war, when he can think of nothing but how
to fill his belly by breaking of his back; and the poor shepherd shall never be
thanked for not contending for the Arch-bishopric of Toledo, or not fighting
against his Prince, when nothing enters into his armory but his bottle and his
hook, and nothing into his head, but that his sheep may wander in wholesome and
pleasant pastures, and his lambs be free from dogs and foxes. A mere negative
does nothing in God's service. The avoiding evil is neither good nor bad,
unless it be by a positive act, unless the will be in it: and indeed as
things are ordered it is many times harder to decline evil then to do good;
and therefore the eschewing evil is a contention and a war, it is a heap of
severe actions, a state of mortification, it is a resisting of temptations. For
he that was never tempted may be innocent; but he is not virtuous, and shall
have no reward.

* This is to be understood to be true in all cases; unless his not acting a
sin, and his not being tempted now, be the effect of a long prayer, and a
former contention; and that either the temptation by his preceding piety be
turned aside, or made impotent by mortification, or by his chosen and beloved
state of life be made impossible; that is, unless by the arts of the spirit he
has made it vain, or by his frequent victories he has made the Devil flee
away, and so bought his peace at the price of a mighty war, and his rest at
the charge of a pertinacious labor. In all these cases the omission is
negative as to the present state of things; and yet it is virtuous, because it
had a positive and a virtuous cause, which now it may be lies still, because it
has produced a permanent and perpetual effect.

And upon this account we also can hope for the reward even of those graces
which we never exercise. 16.
The Prince that refuses the offer of a crown or the possibilities of Empire
because they do not belong to him, shall certainly have a great reward,
because upon the noblest account he avoids a very great evil. But the poor
herdsman that dwells upon his own acre, and feeds his little yokes and couples
of sheep on high ways and mountains, and looks not ambitiously on his
neighbors farm, nor covets the next cottage, which yet he likes well, and
thinks it excellent because it has a chimny, nor would do an act of falsehood
to get his own tenement rentfree, this man shall have a reward in proportion
great as that just Prince who refuses to oppress his brother when his state is
broken by rebellion and disadvantages. For there is no virtue but may be loved
and courted, delighted in and commended in every state and circumstance of
life: and though it be not exercised in noble temptations and trials proper to
the most excellent and remarked persons; yet the very images and little records
of trial may express a love and choice which may be equal to that which is
prosperous by the greatest exercise and indication. For there are little envies
and ambitions even in cottages, and therefore there may be the choice and
volition of humility and peaceful thoughts and acts of charity: and there may
be unchastity even in marriage; and therefore though the contention is easier,
and the temptations but inconsiderable, yet they also when they are immured by
their Sacramental defensatives and securities may delight in chastity, and
therefore rejoice in that state because it secures them from uncleanenesse; and
therefore for this love, and act of choice, even for delighting in that safety,
may find a reward of chastity: and there may be covetousness amongst them that
are full of plenty, and therefore even the richest person can be employed in
securing the grace of contentedness, though he have but little temptation to
the contrary. * Indeed if a beggar were tempted with the offer of 20000, the
temptation would be too big for him, if he understood the sum; and possibly
if he be a virtuous man, and would not be tempted to tell a lie for 20s, or for
one of his own possible and likely sums, yet for so vast a heap of gold
bigger then his thoughts, he might be put beyond his virtue. But therefore God
in his goodness to mankind does seldom permit such trials and unequal
hazards, and to our not being so tempted (without disparagement to our virtue
and our choice) we may well confess we owe our innocence. But because God
suffers our temptations to be by accidents happening in our own condition, and
we are commonly tried by that which is before us, or next above us; every one
can either exercise or choose the worthiness of every grace, and may hope for
the reward of the whole virtue by resisting the most inconsiderable temptation
to it is contrary, if in case he have no bigger, he equally chooses the virtue
and rejoices in his innocence. And he that does resist, or by any means
expedite himself from his own temptation, shall be rewarded equally to him, to
whom the greatest is but his next best. * For our virtue is not to be estimated
by the instance, but the willingness and the courage, the readiness of mind
and alacrity of choice, by the proportion of the man and the methods of his
labor, the resolution of the will, and the preparation of the heart; and we
must account our omissions or eschewings of evil to be virtuous, by what we
have done against it, by our prayer and our watchfulness, our fear and
caution, not by an unactive life, and a dull peace, and a negative omission:
for he does not eschew evil that does not do evil, but he that will not do it.

3. All acts that pass without any consent of the will are indifferent; 17.
that is, they are natural, or unavoidable, or the productions of fancy, or
some other unchusing faculty, or they are the first motions of a passion, or
the emotions of some exterior violence; as the sudden motion of an eye, the
head or heart, the hands or feet. Now that these are as indifferent as to grow,
or to yawn, to cough or to sneeze, appears because they are of the same nature,
and partake equally of the same reason. But these instances can be made to
differ. For those which are so natural that the whole effect also is natural,
and cannot pass on to morality or be subject to a command, are always
indifferent in their whole kind, and in all their degrees and in all their
circumstances. Thus to grow taller, to digest meat, to wink with the eye in the
face of the Sun, are not capable of morality. But those things which are at
first only natural, and afterward are nursed by the will and discourse, they
are only at first indifferent, because they then only are unavoidable. To
look upon a woman is no sin, if she suddenly comes into our presence, though
every such look by reason of the man's weakness were a temptation: for at first
there was no time to deliberate, and therefore we could not be bound not to
look, and if we had not seen her, it had not been good at all, nor evil. But to
look upon her so long till we lust after her, to look upon her but to the
entertainment of any faculty that ministers to lust, to observe that which is
precious in her but so long that the will do consent to that which is, or is
likely to be vile, that corrupts the manners and prevaricates the law.

4. No action of the will is indifferent, 18.
but is either lawful or unlawful, and therefore good or bad. For although
there is in many actions that which the School calls indifferentiam secundum
speciem, an indifference in the kind of action, or in respect of the object;
yet when such actions come under deliberation and to be invested with
circumstances, they cannot be considered at all, but that first they must be
understood to be lawful or unlawful; for that very objective or specific
indifference supposes the action lawful: and he that does a thing though but
with that deliberation and precaution, does do well, unless there be
something else also to be considered, and then it may be he does better, or it
may be ill; but when it is come as far as to be chosen and considered, it must
be good or bad. For whatsoever that is about which we deliberate, we do it for
a reason that to us cannot seem indifferent; it is for an innocent and a good
end, for good to our selves or others: and nothing can come under the
consideration of being an end of humane actions, but is directed by the words
or by the reason, by the design or the proportion of some law. For even our
profit or our pleasure are to be conducted by the measures of the spirit: and
there is nothing else besides profit and pleasure that is good, or can become
the end of an action, excepting only what is honest: and therefore every thing
that is good or can be the reason of an action is under a law, and consequently
cannot be indifferent, according to the doctrine of S. Austin, Quanquam
voluntas, de Peccator. merit. and remiss. c. 18.
mirum, si potest in medio quodam ita consistere, ut nec bona nec mala sit: aut
enim justitiam diligimus, and bona est, and si magis diligimus, magis bona, si
minus, minus bona; aut si omnino non diligimus, non bona est. Quis vero dubitet
dicere voluntatem nullo modo justitiam diligentem non modo esse malam, sed
pessimam voluntatem? Ergo voluntas aut bona est aut mala, etc. Whatsoever we
do, we do it for a good end or an evil; for if we do it for no end, we do
not work like men: and according as the reason is which moves the action so is
the will, either good or bad: for though virtue oftentimes is in the midst
between two evils; yet the will of man is never so in the middle as to be
between good and evil; for every thing that can move the will is good, or it
seems so, and accordingly so is the will.

Indeed every action we do is not in an immediate order to Eternal blessing or
infelicity; 19.
but yet mediately and by consequence, and in the whole disposition of affairs
it adds great moments to it. Bonum est continentia, malum est luxuria; inter
utrumque indifferens, ambulare, capitis naribus purgamenta projicere, sputis
rheumata jacere. Hoc nec bonum, nec malum: sive enim feceris, sive non, nec
justitiam habebis nec injustitiam, said S. Hierom. Epist. 11. ad Augustine.
Continence is good, and luxury is evil; but between these it is indifferent to
walk, to blow the nose, to spit. These things are neither good nor bad, for
whether you do them or do them not, you are by them neither just nor unjust.
For besides that S. Hierom instances in things of a specific and objective
indifference, of which I have already spoken, that which he says is true in
respect of the supernatural end of man, to which these things (concerning which
oftentimes we do not deliberate at all, and even then when we do deliberate,
they) operate but little. But because the instances are in natural things,
where the will has very little to do, we shall best understand this
proposition by the instance of S. Gregory; homil. 27. in Evang.
Nonnulli diligunt proximos, sed per affectionem cognationis and carnis, quibus
in hac dilectione sacra eloquia non contradicunt. Our natural love to our
kindred is a thing so indifferent, not in it is own nature, but of so little
concern to eternity if it be only upon the stock of Nature, that all that can
be said of it is, that the Scripture do not forbid it. That is, whatsoever is
natural is not considerable in morality. But because this which first enters by
nature is commanded by God, and can be confirmed and improved by the will,
therefore it can become spiritual: but that which is natural is first, and then
that which is spiritual: so that although at the first and when it is only the
product of nature, it is but a disposition and a facility toward a spiritual
or moral duty; yet as soon as ever the will handles it, it puts on it is upper
garment of morality, and may come to be invested with a robe of glory. And this
was very well discoursed of by the Author of the (...) in S. Austin; tom. 7. l.
3.
Esse fatemur liberum arbitrium omnibus hominibus, habens quidem judicium
rationis, non per quod sit idoneum quae ad Deum pertinent sine Deo aut
inchoare, aut certe peragere, sed tantum in operibus vitae praesentis, tam
bonis quam etiam malis. Bonis dico quae de bono naturae oriuntur, id est, velle
laborare in agro, velle manducare and bibere, In things pertaining to God we
cannot begin, or at least we cannot finish any thing without God and his grace.
But in the things of this life we have a free choice, whether the things be
good or evil. For those I call good which do natural good, as to be willing to
work in the field, to will to eat or to drink. Now even these things are always
good or bad when they are once chosen by the will, and to these very things the
Divine grace does give assistance. So the same author, Velle quicquid bonum ad
praesentem pertinet vitam, non sine Divino gubernaculo subsistunt, A man cannot
choose well even in things belonging to this life, without the Divine
assistance. And therefore in things of great concernment we pray to God to
conduct and direct our choice. And since the order and perfection of every
creature is to do actions agreeable to the end and perfection of his nature,
it is a pursuance of the end of God and of his own felicity. Although to do so
is not virtue in beasts, because they are directed by an external principle,
and themselves choose it not; yet in men it is virtue, and it is obedience: and
although it is natural to do so, and it is unnatural to do otherwise; yet
because it is also chosen in many instances, in them it is a virtue or a vice
respectively: and though it be no eminent virtue to do so, yet it is a
prodigious sin to do otherwise; for sins against nature are ordinarily and in
most instances the worst; which does demonstrate, that even things of nature
and the actions of our prime appetites, when they can be considered and chosen,
never can be indifferent; and for other things which are not of nature, there
is less question. Thus to walk, to eat, to drink, to rest, to take physic for
the procuring health, or the ease of our labors, or any end of charity to our
selves or others, to talk, to tell stories, or any other thing that is good or
can minister good to nature or society is good, not only naturally, but
morally, and may also be spiritually so: for it being a duty to God to preserve
our selves, and against a commandment to destroy our selves; it being a duty
to be affable and courteous in our deportment, to be gentle and kind and
charitable; it being charity to make our own lives and the lives of others
pleasant, and their condition not only tolerable but eligible; there is no
peradventure but every thing of our lives can be good or bad, because if it can
minister to good or evil ends, it can be chosen for those ends, and therefore
must partake of good or evil accordingly. How these ends are to be considered,
and with what intention and actual or habitual intuition, I am afterward to
consider: for the present it suffices that upon this account the actions
themselves are not indifferent.

And this doctrine is to great and severe purposes taught by our Blessed
Savior, 20.
Of every idle word that a man shall speak, Matthew. 12. 36.
he shall give account in that day. It was a known saying among the Jews,
Cavebit vir ne cum uxore lequatur turpia, quia etiam propter sermonem levem
viri cum uxore adducetur ille in judicium, in libr. Timoris.
said Rabbi Jonah; Even the looseness of a man's talk with his wife shall be
brought into judgment: and Maimonides said, Pleraque verba sunt otiosa and
causam praebent iniquitatis, Most words are such which some way or other
minister to iniquity, and therefore shall certainly pass the fiery trial.
(...), so it is in some Greek copies, every wicked word: for an idle word is
not indifferent; it may have in it some degree of wickedness, and therefore
may be fit to be forbidden, and consequently shall be judged. Otiosum verbum
est quod sine utilitate and loquentis dicitur and audientis, si omissis seriis
de rebus frivolis loquamur, and fabulas narremus antiquas. Caeterum qui
scurrilia explicat, and cachinuis ora dissolvit, and aliquid profert
turpitudinis, In comment ad hunc locum.
hic non otiosi verbi, sed criminosi tenebitur reus, said S. Hierom, That which
neither profits him that speaks nor him that hears, is an idle word; any thing
that is not serious, but frivolous and like an old tale. But if it be dissolute
or wanton, it is not idle but criminal. S. Chrysostom expounds the words to
the same purpose, calling that an idle word, which is spoken without just
inducement in some kind or order of good things, in Regul, brevior. resp. ad
interr. 23.
and that which is mixed with lying or slander. Omne verbum quod non conducit ad
propositam in Domino utilitatem vanum and otiosum est, said S. Basil; That word
which is not for edification, that is, that which does no good at all, must
needs be evil: Nay further yet, Verbum otiosum est quod, etiamsi bonum sit, ad
aedificationem fidei tamen non aptatur. Et si ejusmodi verba in celeberrimo
illo totius orbis conventu examinabuntur, quid scurrilibus, and detrahentibus,
and obscoenis verbis fiet? That is an idle word, which although it be good, yet
does not tend to the edification of faith: and if such words as these shall be
examined in the great assembly of all mankind, what shall be done to
detracting, scurrilous and lascivious talkings? I suppose, S. Basil's meaning
is that all those propositions which being built upon the foundation are not
fit for the promotion of it, they are not silver or gold, but a superstructure
of wood or hay or stubble: even these and those shall be examined in the
eternal scrutiny; nothing shall escape there; if it will not endure the fire,
it shall be consumed. For if the action here have any material end, it shall
hereafter have a material reward: if it have no end, yet the man that did it
was sent hither to a better end then to do foolish and useless things. The
very doing or speaking that which is good for nothing, is evil, and shall be
discerned and judged. We see it even in the judgments of men. Martial tells of
a good man that had got a trick to invite his friends to walk, to bath, to eat,
to drink with him, and in all his enterviews he would be perpetually reading of
his verses: one would have thought the thing it self were innocent, if the
question had been asked concerning the thing alone; but they that felt the
folly and the tediousness of it, were afraid to see him. Vir probus, justus,
innocens timeris. And Sidonius tells of some idle persons, Epist. 20. lib. 5
quos execrabilis popularitias agit; civium maximos manu prensant, eque
consessu publico abducunt, ac sequestratis oscula impingunt, operam suam
spondent, sed non petiti. Utque videantur in negotii communis assertione
legari, evectionem refundunt, ipsosque sumptus ultro recusant, and ab ambitu
clam rogant singulos, ut ab omnibus palam rogentur, etc. their very civility is
troublesome, their idleness is hugely busy, and their employment signifies
nothing. Ardelionum natio, occupata in otio,
Gratis anhelans, Phaedr. fab. l. 2. 36.
multa agendo nihil agens,
Sibi molesta and aliis odiosissima.
They do nothing, and yet never stand still, and are very troublesome to
themselves and others. Such an idleness as this, whether in words or deeds, if
it can be considered and observed here, shall not escape a stricter
consideration hereafter. For none of these things in the event of affairs shall
prove to be indifferent.

The effect of this question is very great; 21.
for it ingages us upon a strict watchfulness over all our words and actions,
and to a wise inquiry when they are done, and scatters that incuriousnesse and
inadvertency of spirit which seizes upon most men while they do actions which
they consider not whether they be right or wrong, and supposing actions, many
more then there are, to be in their whole kind indifferent, would fain make
them so in their individual, and by never disputing the particulars, detain the
action in a neutrality as to the Conscience, never representing it either as
lawful or unlawful, much less as good and evil. But our actions shall be
judged by Gods measures, not by our wilful and ignorant mistakes. 2. Every
thing we do must twice pass through the Conscience; once when it is to be
done, and again when it is done: And not only whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, so that we sin if we are not persuaded it is lawful; but it becomes a
sin, when we are careless and consider not at all, either actually or
habitually, either openly or by involution, as it is alone or (...) it is in
conjunction with something else, by direct intuition or consequent deduction,
by express notices or by reasonable presumptions, by rule or by fame, by our
own reason or by the reason of others whom we may fairly trust.

Question II.
Whether is it necessary for the doing of good that we have an express act of
Volition? 22.
or is it not sufficient in some cases that we are not unwilling? Is it not
enough that we do not oppose it? but must we also promote it? That is,
Although actions of themselves be not indifferent when they are chosen; may not
the will be allowed to be indifferent to some good things that are laid before
her? and what kind or degrees of indifference to good can be lawful, and in
what cases?

This is not a question of single actions principally, 23.
but of states of life and being* and of single actions only by consequence
and involution in the whole: But of great usefulness in the conduct of
Conscience and making judgments concerning the state of our souls; and it is a
great endearment of the actions, the zeal and forwardnesses of the will and an
active piety. First therefore in general I answer, then more particularly.

In the Law of Moses the righteousness commanded was a design for Innocence,
24.
their great Religion was Rest, their Decalogue was a systeme especially of
Negative commandments, the sanction of the Law was fear and terror, which
affrights all men, but invites none, it makes them afraid, but never willing;
their offices were purifications and cleansings away: but so little of good was
to be done, that God was more careful that the people should not commit
idolatry, then severe in calling them to admire his beauties; that they should
learn no evil, then that they should learn much good. Now to this negative
state of duty, a will doing nothing, an understanding not considering, a
forgetfulness of the question, and a sitting still might in many cases
minister; and then the will is accidentally indifferent, when the action never
stands before it, either as good or evil. But now under the Gospel we are
unclean unless we have active purities, and we are covetous unless we despise
the world, and we are malicious by interpretation of law, unless we take what
opportunities we have of doing good to them that have used us ill, and even to
be lukewarm is abominable to God, and our tongues may sin with silence, and we
are to keep holy days not by rest, but by religious labor, and we dishonor
the holy Name of God not only by cursed swearing, and false oaths, and evil
covenants, but if we do not do him honor; if we do not advance his kingdom
we are rebels, if we do not set his glory forward we have profaned his holy
name that is called upon us.

And this is with some mysteriousnesse intimated in the several senses of those
words of Scripture [ Therefore let my Name be called upon them. 25.
] So Jacob's name was called upon Rebeccah, Genesis 48. 16.
and Uriah's name upon Bathsheba; Rebecca Jacobi, and Uriae Bathsheba: and upon
Ephraim and Manasseh when Jacob's name was called, the purpose was that they
should be reckoned not as if they had been sons of Joseph, but the sons of
Jacob, having an equal portion in the divisions of Israel. So in the Prophet
Isai. 4. 1.
, Only let thy Name be called upon us, that is, let us be reckoned in thy
portion, accounted to be thy people, thou our Father, and we Sons and Daughters
unto God. Now in these instances of the Old Testament, it signifies honor and
privilege, security of title and advantage of relation, something that on their
part was passive all the way. But in the New Testament we find the same
expression rendered to such purposes as will signify something on our parts
also, some emanation of our will and choice, even an active duty. (...), James
2. 7.
They blaspheme that holy Name which is invocated upon you, that is, they
blaspheme the Name of Jesus Christ which was put upon them in baptism, by
invocation and solemn sacramental prayer. The Name of Christ was then put upon
us in that manner which teaches us how to wear it for ever after: it was called
upon and so put upon us; it must be called upon, and so worn by us. Here is
invocation relative to two terms, both active and passive. And since it is
evident and clear in the Scriptures of the New Testament that calling on the
Name of the Lord is used for being Disciples and servants of the Lord, as
appears in those words, Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be
saved, that is, all that have given up their names to Christ, all that have
taken his Name and live accordingly; it follows that all we who bear the name
of Christians must not be content with the glorious appelation, or the
excellency of the relation, but we must by our holy lives, by our active
obedience, by an operative faith, and a busy love do honor to Christ, and
glorify that Name by which we are called and made illustrious.

And this is rarely well taught us by a proverbial saying used by our Blessed
Lord, 26.
He that is not with us is against us; Matthew. 12. 30. Luk^ 11. 23.
and he that gathers not, scatters abroad: that is, it is not enough that
our will do not choose evil, or oppose it self against God, and his holy laws
and sermons. For many unconverted Gentiles, children and strangers, the
lukewarm and the indifferent, the deaf and the dumb, the stones of the street
and the gold of the Temple, the starers and the talkers, the Skeptic and the
careless, these have a negative indifference of will; they do not take part
against Christ, but neither do they fight of his side, and therefore are not
populus voluntarius, their will and choice is not on Christ's side. But the
particulars are these, which determine the cases of Conscience which can arise
from this inquiry.

There are in the Gospels two proverbial sayings, 27.
each of them twice used. He that is not with us is against us] and, Marc. 9.
40. Luke 9. 50.
He that is not against us is with us.] The sayings are of contrary purpose and
effect. For as the first injoyns us to the labor of love, and an active will,
and an effective zeal, and a religion productive of permanent effects; so the
latter seems to be content with negative measures, to approve of an indifferent
will, to allow a neutrality, and that not only many single actions, but that a
whole state of life may have a negative indifference and indetermination. Now
because both the propositions must needs be true, they must have distinct
measures, and proper significations. Therefore

1. When Christ said, 28.
He that is not against us is with us, he meant it principally of strangers and
aliens, persons not admitted into the strictures of the Covenant Evangelical.
For when the Princes of the nations conspire against the Lords Christ, he that
refuses to join with them, declares that he will not be Christ's enemy; and est
quiddam prodire tenus, this little is more then nothing. Thus Gamaliel was on
Christ's side, when he gave a gentle counsel in a case of the Apostles, with
whom although he did not join, yet because he would not join against them, he
was so far with them, that he was not esteemed an enemy: and it was noted of
Joseph of Arimathea, that he was not consenting to the sentence of the high
Priests in putting our Blessed Lord to death, and therefore he was a good man.
His not doing that evil was a great indication of a friendly mind.

2. This is also true in questions of religion of difficult understanding, 29.
and less necessary knowledge, or not of immediate concernment to salvation.
He that does not disbelieve the miracles of Christ, he that does not stop his
ears against the voice of Christ, he that does not run after a strangers voice,
is not far from the kingdom of heaven: though the man knows little, yet if he
believes nothing against any word of Christ, though many words of Christ were
delivered of which he knows nothing, he has put his head into the folds of
Christ. For in articles of belief which are not of the foundation, an implicit
belief in God and his Christ is sufficient, when there is no vicious positive
cause of the not knowing them explicitly: and if this were not true, ignorant
and unlettered persons were tied to as great learning and explicit knowledge
as the profoundest Clercs; which because it is no where commanded, and is very
often impossible, and always unreasonable to be exacted, it must follow that it
will in most cases be enough for the idiot or unlearned that they do not
oppose what they do not understand, but humbly submit themselves to God and
their superiors, by a confident confession of what they understand, and a
modest conformity to those other articles in which public peace is more
concerned then public truth, or their private duty. In this case a negative
indifference of the will by reason of the ignorance of the understanding, that
is, a not opposing what they understand not, and cannot understand, is their
security and their innocence.

3. He that is not against Christ is with him, 30.
is true in the preparations and dispositions to conversion. For he that makes
use of a little grace shall have more; and he that well uses the laws of his
country, and keeps the justice of his nation, and observes the principles of
reason, and walks according to the light he has, though he has not the broad
noonday of the Gospel, yet he is so far on Christ's side, that Christ will
join himself to his, and draw him nearer, and advance his Nature, and promote
his excellent dispositions, and by the methods of the spirit bring him to God.
Upon this stock it was that God sent S. Peter to Cornelius, and that so many of
the Jewish Proselytes were converted to Christianity, and so many wise
Heathens, who had just and ingenuous souls and lived good lives, were brought
into the schools of Christ.

4. This is true also in the habits or actions of any one virtue when it is
alone, 31.
or when it comes in upon the stock of nature, or education, or passion, or
humane laws. He that does one good act for Christ, though he do no more, by
that one action declares himself to be no-enemy, and therefore he shall not
loose his reward; though he give but a cup of cold water to a thirsty disciple,
in that capacity of his being a disciple; nay if it be but in the consideration
of his being thirsty, if it be but by a natural pity and tenderness, by the
emotions of humanity, by the meltings of a worthy disposition and of tender
bowels: and therefore much more shall every worthy habit, though it be alone,
though entering from a less perfect principle then a spiritual and Christian
grace. The chastity of Lucretia, the honesty of Decianus, the truth of Rutiius,
the bravery of Scaevola, the repentance of Ahab, the humiliation of Manasses,
the zeal of Jehu, the compassion of Titus over Jerusalem, these things and
these persons are considered by God, and have their portion of reward. And he
is not wholly against Christ that does any thing for him: for our Blessed Lord
is so gracious, that no man shall speak a word for him, or relieve any of his
servants, or keep a memorial, but as far as that action goes, according to the
proportion of the choice and the good will, Christ will reckon him to be on his
side, and allot him a portion of his blessing, a younger Brothers part, though
not the inheritance.

5. This is true of those who being secretly convinced cannot yet shake off
their prejudices and their pitiable fears, 32.
who own Christ in their hearts, whose faith is weak and their doubts are
strong, who fear God heartily, and yet cannot quite shake off the fear of men;
they also are reckoned on Christ's side so far, that they are not present and
actual enemies, but actual friends, and but potential professors and Disciples.
Thus Nicodemus was on Christ's side by not being against him. He owned as much
as he durst; he spoke in behalf of Christ, but professed him not; he believed
in him, but feared the Jews. This was not enough to adopt him into the
kingdom, but this brought him from the enemies side, like the Kenites and the
sons of Rechab in the land of Israel.

6. To be with Christ has many parts and degrees of progression and avail. 33.
Every man that professes Christ is with him; he that is baptized, he that is
called Christian, he that delights in the name, he that is in the external
communion of the Church is in some sense with Christ, because he is not against
him. For whoever is a member of the Church, whosoever retains his baptismal
right, he that has not renounced Christianity, lost his faith, defied Christ,
or turned Apostate, he is still within the covenant of mercy, within the limits
of grace and the power of the spirit; that is, he has a right to the privilege
and grace of being admitted to repentance and the consequent grace of pardon:
for baptism is for the remission of sins, and as long as that is not
renounced, we have a perpetual title to remission of sins, the Sacrament as to
this purpose being of perpetual effect. Every such person is yet a member of
Christ, though barren and unfruitful: his leaf does not prosper and his fruit
springs not, yet there is a root remaining. For thus the Gospel is compared to
a net with fishes good and bad, to a field of corn and tares. For no man is
thrown from grace and mercy but the open, professed, irreconcilable enemies of
Christ, voluntary and malicious Apostates; for they are cut off from the root,
and have no portion in it, as S. Paul largely discourses in the sixth and tenth
Chapters to the Hebrews. But those who sin against Christ, and dishonor and
grieve the holy Spirit of Christ, who sin and repent and yet sin and repent
again, being always sorrowful, and always have cause, these men have hopes, and
time, and helps, and arguments, and probabilities of life, which they could not
have but by being members of Christ's mystical body. They are with Christ in
Covenant and desire, in title and adoption, because they are not against him in
profession and voluntary hostility: but they must go further, or they die.

For all this effects nothing else, 34.
but that we are tied to treat such persons not as enemies but as brethren; it
exposes such to be chastis'd and guided by the rod of Ecclesiastical
discipline, but not to be cut off by the sword of excision and anathema, and
sentences of despair; it does manifest the goodness of God, the glorious
mercies of our Redeemer, his aptness to pardon, his readiness to receive us,
his desires to have us saved, his passion for our felicity, and the presence of
his preventing and auxiliary grace. But this was but the Proverb of strangers
and beginners, of infants and babes in Christ.

7. But when we are entered into the Covenant of Grace, 35.
when we have declared, when the question is concerning final pardon and the
hopes of glory, then the other Proverb is only true. It is not enough that we
are not against Christ, but we must be with him and for him, earnest and
zealous, passionate and obedient, diligent and true, industrious and
inquisitive; then it is, He that is not with Christ, is against him. For it is
not enough that we are in the root, that is, in preparation and disposition,
but we must also bear fruit in the root; John 15. 1, 2.
for so says our Blessed Savior, I am the Vine; my Father is the Husbandman:
Every branch in me that bears not fruit shall be cut off. First they are in
Christ as in the vine, before they can bear fruit; and there he suffers them to
be in expectation of fruit; of which if they fail in their season, they shall
be cut off. * For the case between Christ and the world is as it was between
Caesar and Pompey. Pompey had the possession and the right: and therefore as
Cicero in his Oration pro Ligario affirms, Pompey's party acknowledged none but
his certain and professed friends; adversarios autem putare nisi qui nobiscum
essent, and all to be against them that were not with them: Te autem (says he
to Caesar) qui contra te non essent, tuos. For Caesar was but entering upon his
new fortune, and all that he could get to himself, and all that would not
assist his enemy, were his purchase or security. So it is with Christ in the
beginnings of our Conversion; it is a degree of victory to arrest our thoughts,
and our not consentings to the world and it is fond affections, is an approach
and an accession to Christ. But when our Lord has gotten the first victories,
when he has acquired possession as well as right to a soul, and has a title
to rule alone, then the proposition is changed. Christ will not be satisfied
with neutrality and an indifferent undetermined will, but he will have our love
and active choice, and he will be honored by all our services: and then the
Christian philosophy relies upon these principles: * He that does not love God
is his enemy; * Not to go forward is to go backward; * Not to do good is a
doing evil, and luke-warmnesse is an evil state; and * We must not only not
resist the word of truth, but we must contend earnestly for it; and * We must
confess with our mouth, what we believe with the heart; * To be a Christian is
to hurt no man, and to do good to every man; and * We must not only proceed
when we are not hindered, but we must take care that we be not hindered, we must
remove every impediment, and pare away that which is useless; Quintil. l. 8. 6.
for obstat quicquid non adjuvat, if it does no good, it does hurt: and when
the talent is entrusted to us it must not only not be spent riotously, S.
Greg. Homil. 7. in Evang.
but it must not be laid up in a napkin. Pensemus quod lucrum Dei fecimus nos
qui accepto talento ad negotium missi sumus. Unless we gain and put something
to God's heap, we are unprofitable servants.

By the proportion of this truth in the state of our life, 36.
we are to account concerning our single actions; not that every single action
must be effective of a real, discernible event of piety, but that is be fitted
to the general design of a Christians life; nothing of evil, but ministering to
good some way or other, or at least in some good order of things; good for
edification, or good in charitable society, or good for example, or useful to
some purpose that is fit to be designed, and fit to be chosen.

RULE II. The virtual and interpretative consent of the Will is imputed to Good
or Evil.
THis Rule is intended to explicate the Nature of Social Crimes, 1.
in which a man's will is deeper then his hand, though the action of the will is
often indirect and collateral, consequent or distant; but if by any means it
has a portion into the effect, it is entire in the guilt. And this happens
many ways.

1. 2.
By Ratihabition and Confirmation.

In maleficio Ratihabitio mandato comparatur, ff. de reg. ju. l. 152.
says the law: To command another to do violence is imputed to him that
commands it more then him that does it. So Ulpian interpreting the interdict
Unde tu illum vi dejecisti, affirms eum quoque dejicere qui alteri mandavit vel
jussit: and therefore Ptolemy was guilty of the blood of Pompey when he sent
Pothinus to kill him, Hic factum Domino praestitit.... Now because ratihabition
is by presumption of law esteemed as a Commandment, therefore Ulpian affirms
of both alike, Dejicit and qui mandat, and dejicit qui ratum habet. He that
commands, and he that consents after it is done are equally responsible. Now
though the law particularly affirms this only In maleficio in criminal and
injurious actions, yet in the edition of Holoander that clause is not inserted;
and it is also certain that it holds and is true in contracts and civil
affairs. Thus what a servant or a son employed by his Father or his Master
shall contract for, is the Father's act if he accounts it valid. If the son
borrows money in the Father's name, the Father is the debtor. But in matters
Criminal and Civil there is a real difference as to this particular.

For in matters Criminal, 3.
ratihabition or approving of the act does always make the approver guilty. The
Jews crucified their Lord and King: he that says it was well done, is guilty
of that intolerable murder, and for an ineffective malice and spite, procures
to himself a real and effective damnation. But in actions Criminal there is
this difference to be observed. Some actions are done by the lust and appetite
of the Criminal agent only, as adultery, rape, fornication; and if this be the
state of that affair, that sin is wholly imputed to him that acted it, not to
him that approves it. He that approves it is indeed guilty of the same kind of
sin, because he has applied his will to that which God forbids, and for his
lustful disposition approved and consented to by his will commits a sin like
it, but is not guilty of that. 2. But if such approbation become an
encouragement to the Criminal to do so again, if it fortifies his heart in
sin, or hardens his forehead, or makes it pleasant, he that approved the first
is not only guilty of a sin like the first, but partakes with the Criminal
really in the guilt of the sins that follow upon that account. 3. But there are
other sins which are, as the law speaks, ratihabentis nomine gesta, which are
done in another Name, and either partly or wholly for his interest; and
therefore if by him they be approved, the ratihabition is valid to all evil
purposes, and is therefore all one as if the actions were by him commanded for
whose interest they were acted, and by whose will they are approved. And thus
it is also in the former sins which serve the lust of him that acts them, if
besides the serving of his lust they are designed to serve another interest;
as if Titius steal Sempronia and run away with her, or lie with Maevia the
daughter of Amilius to do a spite to the Father for the injury he did to
Tubero, not only Titius but Tubero is guilty of the crime, if Tubero approves
what Titius did for his sake.

But now if it be inquired what real event as to Conscience this nice
distinction without greater difference can have, 4.
that in one case he that approves the sin is not guilty of the same but
another like it, and in the other cases he is partner of the same fault; I
answer, First, in humane laws the difference of effect is very great. For to
approve an act of sin done not in my name introduces no punishment upon the
approver; but if it be done in my name and for my interest, by a fiction or
presumption of law it is supposed I gave command or warranty, and therefore I
also shall partake of the punishment, unless by the consideration of other
circumstances I be relieved in equity, and the presumption be found to fail.
But in the court of Conscience the difference depends not upon presumption; but
upon what it is in the truth of the thing, which shall be judged well enough by
him that knows the secret. For whether the crime was done for me or not, I
shall be judged according to that influence which I would have upon the effect.
If I willed it directly and caused it to be done knowingly, or by some
causality which I at any time used to that purpose, I am liable to all the evil
that can be consequent to that sin: but if I be guilty only by ratihabition,
that is, if really I did not command it, or effect it, or cause it to be
effected, but only rejoice in it and use it when it is done, then my
ratihabition is ordinarily (though very evil) yet much less then the other's
action. I say ordinarily, that is in all cases where craft and machination,
plots and contrivances, intermedial violences and deceivings, and other evil
things of the retinue of the sin are previous to the crime. For in all these
things he that only approves the act has commonly no interest, or care, or
notice, or consideration. If it happens that he considers and approves them
too, then the case is altered: but it is not always so. This case will
explicate the Rule. Ventidius was married to Romanella; but growing rich, and
being made a Roman Knight, grows weary of his first bedfellow, because he
hopes now to get a richer wife if she were gone. While he tumbled this often in
his head, it happened that a slave of Ventidius upon some trifling occasion, but
in a great passion, flings something at Romanella, which caused her to
miscarry, and to die. Ventidius observing his good fortune, secretly puts away
his servant that he may escape the hand of justice, and promises him liberty,
making what pretenses he found convenient to his purpose. He went presently to
get him a new wife, but was arrested in his design, because he was told that
he that was guilty of his wives death was to loose the privilege of a second
marriage; but because he confirmed it and rejoiced in it, it was esteemed in
law as a Commandment. Upon this he takes advice, and was told, that though in
Conscience he was guilty of murder, because he delighted in and approved it,
yet mere ratihabition in such things which must be judged not by the effect but
by the previous machination and design, did not produce that punishment of
impeding his future marriage. And there is reason for it; because though
Ventidius was so base as to wish his wife dead or killed, yet he would not do
it himself, nor procure it to be done, his covetousness had not prevailed so
far with him; and therefore neither ought the punishment go to the extremity
of the law. 2. In Divine laws and in the direct obligation of Conscience there
is this great difference. If a crime be done in my name, and I approve it, I am
not only guilty before God of the crime, and liable to an equal share of the
punishment (according to the foregoing measure) but I contract a new necessity
of duty; I am bound to restore the man that sinned for my interest to his
former state of justice and integrity as far as I can, by disallowing the act,
by discountenancing it, by professing my own repentance, by inviting him to the
like: which obligation is not at all upon me by a simple and mere ratihabition
of an act in which I have no interest, and to which I had no previous concurse,
directly, nor by interpretation. This is the state of this question in relation
to matters Criminal.

But in matters Civil, 5.
as in contracts, debts, pledges, provisions for pupils, the law is to
determine the whole affair, and to account the ratihabition at what rate she
please, and upon what conditions; and therefore we are to be determined by our
own laws in all such inquiries. That which can be a general measure and relates
any way to Conscience is this; Where the law does require an express command
pro forma, the after-ratification is of no effect in law, nor conscience, if
the law impedes the effect. Thus if a Minor makes a contract without the
consent of his Guardian, though afterward the Guardian allow it, the contract
is invalid: because the law required in the very form and solennity of the
contract that the authority of the Guardian should be interposed; and ea quae
pertinent ad solennitatem contractus, a contractu dividi non possunt, say the
lawyers; and ubi forma actus deficit, corruit actus, l. Julianus. 9.. si quis.
ff. ad exhib. If there be an essential defect of what is by law required to the
validity of the act, the act is null and invalid, and therefore is also invalid
and effects nothing in Conscience, unless where the law of Nature intervenes;
of which I have already given accounts lib. 2. Chap. 1. Rule 5.
. Thus also it is in punishments which are not to be incurred but in cases
named in the law, and therefore are not to be imposed in cases of presumption
or fiction of law, amongst which is this, of the equivalence of ratihabition to
a command. Vide Petrum Peckium ad c. 10. Ratihabitionem. de regul. jur. in 6^0.
If the son marries a widow within the year of mourning, he is legally
infamous; but so is not the Father, though he approves it, unless he did
consent in the beginning; because these effects being wholly depending upon
positive laws, can have no other measures but what the laws put upon them. But
in the Court of Conscience the matter is not so easy.

But since ratihabition is at the worst but an interpretative command, 6.
and yet is so very bad as to imprint the guilt of the whole action upon him
that so has influence into the effect by interpretation, it must needs be that
a direct command is more evidently criminal, and in greater degrees; which I
needed not to have observed but in order to a further inquiry, and that is,

Question.

Upon whom does the greater portion of the Guilt lie; upon him that commands a
sin, or him that sins in obedience?

Although the question of degrees may here be useful to some purposes of
Conscience, yet it is just to condemn them both with a downright sentence. For
so the wise Ape in Esop judged the question between the wolf and the fox about
a piece of flesh which the fox had stolen from the village, and the wolf had
stolen from the fox, who now complained of the wrong. The judicious ape
answered, Tu non videris perdidisse quod petis: Phaedr. fab. 10.

Te credo subripuisse quod pulchre negas.
The fox says he has lost it, but he lies; and the wolf says he has not
stolen it, and he lies too. They were both in the wrong, and it was hard to say
which was the worse. But because although they were equally wicked in their
nature and their manners, yet in this cause there might be some difference, and
in the partners and confederates in a crime some have more causality then
others, though both of them are in a sad condemnation; therefore

To this I answer by a distinction known in the Civil law, 7.
of Mandatum and Jussio. Mandatum is amongst equals, by bidding, encouraging,
warranting and setting on; and in this case, they are both equally guilty,
except what difference can be made by the degrees of confidence and
earnestness, and by wit and folly, by the advantage and reputation of the man
that bids, and the weakness of him that is bidden. But Jussio is from Superior
to Inferior; Father to Son, Master to Servant, Prince to Subjects. In this case
and amongst these persons the efficiency is unequal, and has it is estimate
from the grandeur and sacredness of the authority, and the degree of the fear
which can be the instrument of prevailing and determining. And therefore when
Attilius had spoken gently with Cracchus ut Patriae parceret, seeming to have
discovered his design, Gracchus looking terribly upon him, one of his servants,
non expectato signo, ex solo vultu conjectans adesse tempus, ratusque initurum
se gratiam apud Patronum si primus rem aggrederetur, stricto ferro trajecit
Attilium, de Bello civil* l. 1.
says Appian, stayed neither for command nor sign, but supposing by his
forwardness he should please his Patron, and guessing by his cruel aspect it
would not be displeasing to him, he kills Attilius upon the place. Now such an
influence as this from a superior to an inferior is so little, that the servant
is much more to blame then the Master. But when Henry the second in a rage
complained that none about him would rid him of that peevish man, meaning
Archbishop Becket, it was more then the frown of Gracchus, but yet not so much
as to lessen the fault of the sacrilegious homicides; because there was no
violence done to their choice, but the crime entered upon the account of lust
and ambition, and that was as bad as if it had begun and ended upon the stock
of their own anger or revenge. But when a Prince or a Lord commands his subject
to sin, as Domitius the Father of Nero commanded his freed man to drink to
drunkenness, so earnestly that he killed him for refusing it, and as Cambyses
did to Praxaspes; then it is evident that the Prince is so much more guilty
then he that obeys, by how much it is evident that the subject sins with less
delight, and a more imperfect choice, and with a will which in it is actions
suffers diminution: and therefore in such cases servants are very much excused
from punishment in exterior courts, as knowing that such actions proceed from
an excusable principle, from a regardfull obedience, and an undiscerning
subjection; which because in most things it ought not to dispute, they not
discerning their utmost limit, being born to serve, not to rule and distinguish
by their reason, and besides this, having all their fortune bound up in their
Masters frown or favor, are very much to be pitied if they obey too much;
Avian. fab.
etenim quod imperante te servus tuus Faciebat, abs te id esse factum existimo.
And this the law it self observes in the commands of some superiors: l. 167..
1. Qui ju^^u.
Qui jussu judicis aliquid facit, non videtur dolo malo facere, cui parere
necesse habet; The command of such a superior whom we esteem it necessary to
obey, exempts our obedience from being Criminal. And though this of Judges be a
particular case, l. 207. ff. de reg. jur. and Ulpian. lib. 1. ad segem Juliam
and Papiam. lib. 3.
because Res judicata pro veritate accipitur, says the law, they declare law
by their sentence and commands; yet the Romans observed it in the case of
Clients and freed men to their Patrons, as Livy reports it in the case of the
freed man of Appius the Decemvir; and the old books of Philosophers observed it
in the obedience of children to their parents, lib. 2. c. 7.
as Aulus Gellius recites out of them.

But then this also admits of one distinction more, 8.
which the law thus expresses; l. 157.. ad ea quae.
Ad ea quae non habent atrocitatem sceleris vel facinoris, ignoscitur servis,
si vel Dominis vel his qui vice Dominorum sunt, velut Tutoribus and
Curatoribus, obtemperaverint, Servants and inferiors are excused if they
transgress at the command of their superiors in a small matter, but not in a
great. This is observed by the Sages of our Common law. If a Feme covert does
steal goods by the commandment of her husband (without other constraint) this
has been holden to be felony in her, says Sr Richard Bolton the L. Chancellor
of Ireland: and for this he quotes Bracton, and adds this reason out of him;
For licet Uxor obedire debeat viro, in atrocioribus tamen non est ei
obediendum, In great matters, and sins of high nature, a wife is not to be
excused for her obedience. But if the husband not only commands, but uses
compulsion, then it is so far excused, that in the wife the theft is not
felony; but murder is, because the greatness of the horror in such a fact is
sufficient to prevail against the husbands threatenings and her own fear, l. 11.
is qui in puteum.. 6. si Tutoris jussu. ff. quod vi a^clam. l. 17. sed si
unius.. si jussu Domini. ff. de injuriis.
unless there were in her some evil principle. If a servant defending his
lords right do some injury, he is excused in law, but not if he kills a man;
if he speaks a rude word he may be born with, but not if he steals a horse. And
this also has some proportions of truth in the Court of Conscience, that if
the superior be great, and the command be urgent, and the instance not very
considerable, the fault is by every of these considerations very much lessened,
but the man is not totally excused; his excuse is upon the stock of fear or a
great temptation: so far as they intervene in the present case, and so far as
they can excuse in any (which I am afterward to consider) so far the guilt
suffers diminution. But the advice of the son of Sirach is the great rule in
this question, Ecclus. 4. 22.
Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the reverence of any man cause
thee to fall.

But all this is to be understood of those actions which are Criminal both in
the Commandment and in the obedience, 9.
in the sanction and in the execution, such as are adultery, murder, treason,
blasphemy, and all the prevarications of the natural law, in all moral
precepts, the transgression of which can by no intention become legitimate. But
in the positive and temporary laws of God which enjoin no moral, natural
rectitude, but simple and just obedience during the abode of that law, the
subject, the son or the servant if he be commanded by his just superior to an
external ministry in the sin of the superior, if he consents not to the sin,
and declares against it according as he can be required, sins not at all in the
obedience. Thus when Joab and the Captains numbered the people against their
wills upon the peremptory command of David their King, 2 Samuel 24.
they had no part in the sin, because they explicitly dissented all the way,
and the execution and obedience did not implicitly and by interpretation
involve them in it. The reason is, because the act of numbering the people was
of it self innocent, and made criminal only by David's circumstances; of which
when they had advertised their King, and disclaimed the malice and
irregularity, they interested themselves in nothing but the material part:
which when it can be separated from the evil heart, as in this it was, and in
all the like it may, the obedience is innocent, though the commandment be
impious; and therefore David wholly takes the fault upon himself, -- mea fraus
omnis, nihil iste nec ausus,
Nec potuit....
I have sinned and done wickedly, but what have these sheep done? * To this
also is to be added, that even in the case of positive precepts our obedience
must be wholly passive, and in no sense active; that is, it must be wholly an
act of obedience, without any promoting or advancing the sin in him that
commands, no way increasing, or encouraging, or confirming the sin or the
sinner.

2. Under this head is reduced the praising of an action: Which if it be done
with a design to promote it, is first a sin in the approving it secretly, and
is another sin in setting it forward publicly. According to this is that saying
of the Arabians, Qui laudat obscoenum perpetrat illud, He that praises an
unclean action is himself an unclean person. And therefore it was good Counsel,
Qualem commendes etiam atque etiam aspice... Horat.
for by our words we shall be judged: but, as Salust said of Caesar and Cato,
Alius alia via, some one way, and some another get great names. Cato was famous
for discountenancing, Caesar for being a patron of evil men; but Cato was the
better man: and upon this account Pliny commends one, or navit virtutes,
Insectatus est vitia, he adorned virtues with a fair character, but reproached
vicious persons: and he that by praises and dispraises respectively does not
distinguish virtue and vice cannot be a good man. Ne laudet dignos, Martial.
laudat Callistratus omnes.
Cui malus est nemo, qui bonus esse potest?
For in vain do laws make a distinction between good and bad, if they be all
blended in a common reward. Male pereas qui Gratias virgins, meretrices
effecisti, said Democritus to one that gave large gifts to all men alike. Sermon.
8. de Benef.
Concerning which it was excellently said by Maximus Tyrius, Qui largiuntur
indignis ea quae dignis conferenda essent, tria praestant absurda: Nam and ipsi
jacturam faciunt, in bonos sunt injuriosi, malosque roborant segete ac materia
vitiorum suppeditata To give to vice any of the treatments or rewards of virtue
is a treble mischief: The gift or reward is lost, and injury is done to virtue,
and evil men are encouraged in their evil courses.

3. By consent, 10.
silent and implicit, we are partakers of the fact of others: by not
contradicting we are sometimes adjudged willing.

Of the main part of the proposition there is no doubt, but that a consenting
to evil is a sin; a consenting to any action gives it as much authority, being
and warranty as his consent can effect: but the question here is what are the
signs of consent when it is not expressed, and when the man that is silent is
justly presumed willing. This inquiry is of use in the matter of presumptive
dispensations, and in the participation of good and evil actions and rewards.
But it has in it but little difficulty.

For 1. It is evident that then silence is an implicit consent, 11.
when the superior or the interested person, whose consent can verify the act,
and whose power can easily hinder it, and who is bound to hinder it if it be
unlawful, does yet hold his peace, and forbids it not. The reason of this is,
because every man is supposed to do his duty, unless the contrary be known:
and therefore when a Prince sees his subjects doing what the law forbids, and
which he can easily hinder, it is to be presumed that he dispenses with them in
that case, because he knows that they will expound his silence to be a license;
and therefore he also intends it so, so long as he is silent, or else he does
unreasonably, and to no good purpose holds his peace.

But this is not true in those things which to their stabiliment or warranty
require a positive act. 12.
For sometimes a silence is but an indifference and neutrality, l. 142. ff. de
reg. Jur.
according to that of the law, Qui tacet non utique fatetur, sed tamen verum
est eum non negare; He that holds his peace neither confesses nor denies: c.
super eo. de cognat. spirituali.
and in the Canon law, Id in tua Ecclesia dissimulare poteris, ita quod nec
contradicere, nec tuum videaris praestare assensum; The Bishop's dissembling or
taking no notice in some cases, is expounded neither to be a contradiction nor
consent: and the gloss in cap. cum jamdudum de praeben, affirms, Multa per
patientiam tolerantur, quae si deducta fuerint in judicium, exigente justitia
non debent tolerari, Some things are patiently suffered, which if they were
publicly complained of, ought not to be suffered. But these seeming antinomies
are both very reasonable in their own senses, and therefore are easy to be
reconciled.

For if the act about which the superior is patient be connvi'd at, 13.
it is either because for some reasonable cause he pardons the Criminal; or
else because his patience is necessary and by constraint, he cannot help
himself. For no silence is esteemed a ratihabition of a past act: because when
the thing is done without the leave of the superior, his silence or speaking
cannot alter it, or legitimate the action if it was evil; at the most it does
but pardon what is past, which is no allowance of any future action of the same
nature. Indeed in the Court of Conscience, such a silence, or not reproving of
a past fault, may be want of duty and discipline, and a criminal omission of
what we are obliged to; but has no legal or natural causality upon that action
which is past, and can be but an accidental cause or occasion of a future.

But then silence is an interpretative consent, 14.
when it is 1. a silence of a thing observed, and 2. at present, and 3. that
can be hindered: and then indeed in law it is a great presumption, but not
always in Conscience; because it may proceed from a neglect of duty that the
superior takes no notice of the action, or from many other causes, as
pusillanimity, just fear, or weakness, which because they cannot always be
proved or observed, they may conclude legally from silence to consent or
dispensation: yet the process of Conscience must be upon more wary grounds,
and where there is so much fallibility in the presumption, the conscience must
proceed to action upon more certain accounts, and must strictly follow her
rule, or must have greater causes to justify her liberty.

And therefore though the superior be silent, 15.
and does observe the action, and can hinder me; yet I am not to presume that
he dispenses, or consents, or gives me leave to go besides the law, unless
there be in the state of my affairs a just cause of dispensation, and yet a
reasonable cause of hindering me from asking, or him from expressing his leave;
then silence may be presumed to be leave, though the cause of dispensation be
probable only, and not very necessary.

In the reducing this to practice three cautions are to be attended. 16.


1. When a subject proceeds to action upon the presumption of leave, or a tacit
dispensation, this presumption or supposition must be made use of before the
action be done, not afterward. For it can never be honest to do an act in
hope to get leave afterward; for until the leave be actually given or
reasonably presumed, it is prohibited, and consequently unlawful; and if a
dispensation were afterward given and obtained, it were nothing but a pardon,
which is so far from making the past action to be innocent, that it supposes it
to be Criminal, for else there were no need of pardon. He that sins in hope of
pardon, fears nothing of the sin but the smart, he thinks there is no evil but
punishment; and therefore has nothing toward virtue but the fear. If
therefore before the action be undertaken the dispensation be not presumed,
nothing that comes after can change the action.

2. This presumption is not to be extended beyond that very action that is done
in the presence, 17.
or within the notice and observation of the superior. For although it should
be true that he does give tacit consent or leave to this particular, yet it
follows not that therefore he does so to any or all of the same kind. For that
may be just or tolerable once, which if repeated may be changed in
circumstances, or become evil example, or of intolerable effect by the very
repetition; or the mind of the superior may change, or the causes of
dispensation may cease: and after all, since this dispensation wholly depends
upon the consent of the superior, and this consent is then only justly
presumed when he observes the action and forbids it not, the presumption is
wholly at an end when he does not see it; and therefore a tacit consent or
leave to an observed action can at no hand be extended to a consent or leave to
others that are not observed by him.

3. If the tacit dispensation be of such nature that it cannot give leave to a
present observed action, 18.
but by introducing a faculty, or state, or potentiality of doing the like,
then it is certain that if the present action be tacitly dispensed withal or
consented to, it may be extended to all of the like kind; but it is also as
certain, that such a tacit consent is not so easily to be presumed. The Bishop
of Bitonto for his exercise was flinging of a leaden weight, and by chance
killed his servant who unfortunately crossed the way as the lead was
irrecoverably passing from his hand, and for this misfortune in the chance of
blood is made irregular. Afterward in the presence of his superior seeing a
young Turk dying who had expressed some inclinations to Christianity, baptizes
him in the instant before his death, and was observed and connived at by his
superior, and therefore had a presumptive leave or dispensation for his
irregularity. But because this single action could not have been dispensed
withal but by taking off his irregularity, it took away all that which could
hinder his future doing his Episcopal office; and therefore he has the same
presumptive leave for the future actions which will not be observed, as for the
present which was. But then the first presumption must be very reasonable and
sure: for although a probable presumption may suffice to conclude for leave in
a single present action whose effects determine with it self; yet if it have
influence upon the future (as in the case before cited) it ought to be better
considered, and more warily conducted by the superior, and therefore not readiy
presumed by the subject. These are the measures of guessing at a consent by
silence. There is also one way more of implicit or secret consent, viz.

2. He does implicitly consent to an action, who consents or commands any
thing to be done, 19.
from whence such an action or leave must necessarily follow: and the reason
is, because he ought not to do things repugnant to each other. He that makes
it necessary for me to do a thing, is the cause of my doing it, as much as if
he commanded it. And this is more then a tacit consent or dispensation
respectively, for it is a virtual. He that collates the order of Priesthood
upon me, intends I should do the whole office. l. quidam. ff. de re judic. and
l. Barbarius. ff. de offic. praetor.
Princeps enim qui illi dignitatem dedit, omnia gerere decrevit, says the law.
Thus he that dispenses in the irregularity, consents to all the actions which
he does by virtue of the removing that impediment, who is so dispensed with.
Which proposition is only so to be understood, when there is nothing wanting
to the effecting such an action but the removing that impediment: but it is
supposed that he that is dispensed with, will use his liberty; and the
dispensation if it be at all is directed so, and is in order to it. But if the
superior does an action which is not in order to an end, neither in order of
nature or of intention, but yet it can be consequent to it, that consequent
action is not to be imputed to him who did something precedent, without which
that action could not have been done. Thus if a Prince pardons a thief, or a
friend begs his pardon that killed a man, although he could not have stolen any
more without that pardon, yet that after-theft or murder is not imputable to
him that gave or to him that begged the pardon, unless they did it with that
very intention; for the pardon is not in any natural order to any such
consequent action, and therefore without his own actual or designed conjunction
and intuition, cannot convey the crime and guiltiness.

Question.

Upon the occasion of this, 20.
it is seasonable to inquire how far it may be lawful, and can be innocent to
permit a sin.

The case is this. See Book 1. Chapt. 5. Rule 8. Numb. 17, 18.
Pancirone an Italian Gentleman invites a German Ambassador to dinner, feasts
him nobly, sets before him plenty of delicious wine, enough to exhilarate him
and all his company; but the German after his country fashion thinks it no
entertainment unless he be drunk. The question is whether Pancirone sins in
setting before him so much more as will fill the utmost capacity of his
intemperance. Is it lawful to suffer him to be drunk?

If this Question had been asked in the Primitive Church, 21.
the answer would have been a reproof to the inquirer, as one who no better
understood the laws of sobriety and hospitality, and the measures of the
Christian feastings. Posidonius tells of S. Austin, Usus est frugali mensa and
sobria, quae quidem inter olera and legumina etiam carnes aliquando propter
hospites and quosque inferiores continebat. Semper autem vinum habebat, quod
tamen moderatissime bibebat, quia noverat and docebat, ut Apostolus dicit, quod
omnis creatura Dei bona sit, and nihil abjiciendum quod cum gratiarum action
percipitur. He had that which was good and useful for himself according to his
own measures, and something better for strangers. He always had wine, but it
was drank very sparingly; because every creature of God is good, if it be
received with thanksgiving. But if the guests be permitted to drink to
drunkenness, who shall say Amen at thy giving of thanks? or how shall thou
give thanks at the spoiling of the gifts of God? There is no peradventure but
as a feast is the enlargement of our ordinary diet, so the entertainment of
guests is a freer use of our liberty, so it be within the limits and capacities
of sobriety. But though the guests meal may be larger then our ordinary, yet we
must secure our own duty more then we can secure theirs. When the Greeks whom
Lucullus feasted wondered why for their sakes he should be so large in his
expenses, Plutarch. in apoph. Romans
he answered, Nonnihil, O Hospites, vestri causa, sed maxima pars Luculli
gratia, Something of this, O Guests, is for your sakes, but the most of it is
for my own magnificence. We should take care to do so, that though for our
guests we do something more then ordinary, yet our greatest care should be for
our selves, that we do nothing that may misbecome the house of one of Christ's
servants. Would Pancirone suffer the German Ambassador to lie with his women
when he entertains him, and make his chambers a scene of lust? Certainly he
would esteem it infinitely dishonest, if to an honest family he should offer so
great an injury; and why may not his chambers minister to lust, as well as his
dining room or cellars to beastly drunkenness? and is it not as honorable that
the family should be accounted sober, as to be esteemed chaste? or is not
drunkenness dishonesty as well as lust? and why may not Panicrone as well bid
his servants keep the door to wantonness, as hold the chalice to beastly
vomitings? In these things there is no other difference, but that as cloths, so
vices also are in and out of fashion as it happens. He that means to be a
servant of God, must for himself and all his house take care that God be not
there dishonored. I and my house will serve the Lord, said Joshuah: and when
God gave to the Israelites the law of the sabbath, he gave it for themselves
and their families and the strangers within their gates. * But so corrupt and
degenerous are the manners of Christians, that our feasts are ministeries of
sin, and every guest has leave to command the house even when he cannot
command himself: but this is not (...), the Christian sobriety has other laws.
Does any man when he relieves the poor at his gate give them leave to drink
till they be drunk? and yet what they give to the poor is given for God's sake:
but when they minister to the rich man within, for whose sake is that excess
given? If Codrus asks an alms, we refuse him, if we suppose he will make
himself drunk with it, and we think we are bound to refuse him: and can it be
lawful to give to a guest within what it is unlawful to give to a guest
without? If it be unlawful, it is certain it is not unavoidable: but if there
be difficulty in declining it to some men, then besides that which is
principally intended by our Blessed Savior, we see also there is very great
reason in those words, When thou make a feast, call not the rich, but call
the poor: These will not tempt you to make them drunk, it may be the others
will. If our Guest makes himself drunk with the usual provisions which must be
indistinctly ministered at feasts, that cannot be helped, but by refusing to
receive such persons again to our Table: but he that knowingly and observingly
espies the meeting turn to God's dishonor, and does not put a limit to that
sea of drink, and place a shore and a strand to the inundation, will find that
God is departed from that meeting, and the pleasing of his drunken guests will
not make him recompense for the loss of such an inhabitant. A man must at no
hand consent to his brothers sin: and he that can and ought to hinder it, and
does not, by interpretation does consent. For he that gives a man a goblet of
intemperance, with which he sees him about to drown his soul, is just as
innocent as he that lends him a knife to cut his own throat. But this is to be
understood when the case is evident and notorious; for in the approaches and
accesses to drunkenness the matter is less then in the lending of a knife,
because it is yet disputable whether he will finish his intemperance: but if it
be plain that drunkenness is designed, the case is all one; and if it be not
perfectly designed, yet as it steals on discernably, so the sin of him that
ministers to the crime increases up to the same proportion of effect and
guiltiness. Hospitality is one of the kinds of charity: and that is but an ill
welcome which first procures a fever, and it may be after it an irrevocable
damnation.

3. He that gives Counsel or aid to an action good or evil, 22.
consents to it, cap. si quis viduam. 50. distinct. c. 2. de cler. pug. in
duello. c. sicut dignum ^. clericos. de homici.
and it is imputed to him as a product of his will and choice.

This is expressly affirmed by all laws Civil and Canon, and the Municipal
laws of all those Nations of which I have seen any records concerning this
matter: and the interpreters universally consent, with this proviso, that the
counsel be so much cause of the action, that without it it would not have been
done. For if the action would have been done however, then he that counsels to
it is guilty in Conscience always; but unless it be in great crimes, and in
detestationem facti, it is not always punished in law. But if it were it would
be very just, so that a difference were made in the degree of punishment: For
he whose counsel is wholly author of the fact is guilty of more evil then he
who only adds hardness to him who was resolved upon the crime. But in the
Court of Conscience he stands guilty that gives evil counsel, whether the
Criminal would have done it with or without his counsel: and therefore the laws
do very well also to punish evil counselors. Quam been dispositum terris,
Claudian. lib. 1. in Eutrop.
ut dignus iniqui
Fructus consilii primis authoribus instet?
Sic multos fluvio Vates arente per annos,
Hospite qui caeso monuit placare Tonantem
Inventas primum Busyridis imbuit aras,
Et cecidit saevi, quo dixerat, hostia sacri.
So Claudian. The evil counselor is first to feel the evil effect of his own
pernicious counsel; that is, if his counsel persuade to sin, not if it prove
unfortunate: not but that even counsel that is given with purpose to do a
mischief is highly to be punished not only by the degree of the evil effect,
but by the degree of the malice that advised it; but that those events which
were not foreseen or designed cannot be imputed to him that gave the best
advice he could, but could not help it if he were deceived in his judgment. But
if the counsel be to a sin or an unworthy action, there is no need to expect
the event to make a judgment of the counsel.

The same also is affirmed in the case of giving aides to an action good or
bad; 23.
in which there is no variety, but of degrees only: for when they are (...) in
combination, it is mischief with a witness. Non caret effectu quod voluere
duo. It is an aggravation of the impiety when the zeal of malice is so potent,
that it is greater then the power, and therefore calls in aid to secure the
mischief. But he that so assists, that he is the great effective cause of the
evil which without his aid would not have been done at all, is entirely
guilty. Sic opifex Tauri, Claud. ibid.
tormentorumque repertor,
Qui funesta novo fabricaverat era dolori,
Primus inexpertum Siculo cogente Tyranno
Sensit opus, docuitque suum mugire juvencum.
Perillus invented and made witty instruments of cruelty, to invite Phalaris to
a witty mischief; but the Tyrant was just that once, and made him teach his own
brazen bull to roar. * But if the aid do but facilitate the work, the
assistant is punishable according to the efficacy of his aid, in humane laws;
but in Conscience he is guilty according to the secret malice of the principle:
and therefore when Lucius Carpentus killed Nicanor, his page that hated Nicanor
mortally, and did nothing but thrust his Masters sword further into his heart,
to show his ill will, though Carpentus had sufficiently killed him, was as much
a Murderer as his Master was. In humane laws there is great difference in these
things.

1. For if many by joined counsel set upon a man and kill him together, though
one only gave him a deadly wound, yet all are guilty of the murder, because
they all intended it, and did something toward it.

2. But if in heat of blood and by the surprise of passion this be done, he
only that gave the deadly wound is the homicide, and the rest are injurious,
and are punished accordingly.

3. If one give the deadly wound, and the other knock him on the head and so
speed him, they are both murderers alike.

4. If many strike a man, and of all these wounds together he dies, they are
equally guilty; for the law justly presumes that their malice is equal, by
their conjunct attempt, and there being nothing in the event to distinguish
them, the presumption is reasonable and ought to pass into effect.

5. If the man be dead but with one wound, and it be not known which of the
assistants did it, they are all alike accounted homicides; for every of them is
justly supposed to have had malice enough to have done it, and which of them
had the hap to do it is not known; therefore there can be nothing to
distinguish them in the punishment, because the guilt is alike, and the event
not discernably any ones peculiar. But although in external judicatories the
proceedings are various, and considering there is no other way of judging what
is secret and indistinguishable, this way is necessary and unavoidable of
proceeding by the most reasonable and probable methods of justice; yet in the
Court of Conscience there is a more certain proceeding, and the answer is
regular, and one; according to the degree of the will and choice, and the
tendency of our affections to the event, so we shall be judged: and therefore
concerning this, our own conscience is the only measure of our expectations;
and the will is the measure of reward. But these things only two can know, the
Spirit of God, and the spirit of a man; and that is enough to finish the
process at the day of judgment.

Question.

Whether or no is the making and providing the instruments which usually
minister to sin, 24.
by interpretation such an aid to the sin, as to involve our will and consent
to the sin, and make us partakers of the guilt?

To this I answer, first in general, that all those arts and trades of life
which minister only to vanity and trifling pleasures are of ill fame, such as
are Juglers, Ephesians. 4. 28.
Tumblers, Players, Fencers and the like; it being an injunction of the Apostle
that every Christian should labor with his hands (...) that which is good,
that is, something profitable to the Commonwealth, and acceptable to God: and
to the same purpose it is that all that a Christian does must be apt to be
reckoned amongst one of these heads, Phil. 4. 8.
(...), either the true or the honest, the just or the pure, the lovely or of
good report; and it will be hard to reduce some of those trades to any of these
heads. But I cannot see reason enough to say that if any man sins by the using
of these arts^ and their productions, that the artist is partaker of the crime;
because he designing only to maintain himself, and to please the eyes and ears
and youthful passions of others, may possibly not communicate in their sin,
who over-act their liberty and their vanity. But because such persons are not
so wise or discerning as to be able to discern so nicely one formality from
another, but desire upon any terms to get as much money as they can, and that
if they were so wise as to be able to discern the measures of their duty, they
would employ themselves better, therefore in the whole such persons are to be
reproved, though the arts themselves might otherwise be tolerated. They are not
unlawful because they are directly evil, but because they do but little or no
good, such as are jesters, and buffoons, and juglers; at the best they are but
(...) vain arts, and if they be not directly punishable, they can have no
reward at all. But Alexander did very well to a fellow who made it his trade
and livelihood to stand at distance and throw little pease in at the eye of a
needle made on purpose just so big as would receive them: the fellow seeing the
Prince admire his dexterous aim expected a great reward; and the Prince
observing the fellows expectation, rewarded him with a whole Bushel of pease.
It was a reward worthy of such an employment. A man cannot be blamed for having
such an art, but he that makes that to be his trade, cannot be otherwise then
an idle person: and therefore although he may be tolerated in the Commonwealth
where there live many persons more idle and useless then himself, and
although, if other things were well, the man could not be directly condemned
for this, and said to be in a state of damnation; yet because if other things
were well he would quickly employ himself better, therefore such persons when
they come near a spiritual guide are to be called off from that which at the
best is good for nothing, and stands too near a sin to be endured in the
scrutinies after life eternal.

But some inquire whether the trade of Card-makers and Dice-makers be lawful:
25.
and the reason of their doubt is, because these things are used by the worst
of men, and to very vile purposes; to which these arts do minister, and
therefore are reasonably suspected as guilty of a participation of the
consequent crimes.

To which I answer, 26.
that some things minister to sin immediately, others mediately only and by
the intervention of something else; some minister to sin inevitably and by
their design and institution, others by the fault of them that use them ill;
and lastly, some things minister to evil and to no good, others to good and
evil promiscuously. These three distinctions make but one difference of things,
but give several reasons of that difference. Those things which minister to sin
immediately, by their very nature and design, and therefore minister to no
good unless it be accidentally and by the virtue of something else nothing
appertaining to them, are certainly unlawful: and of this there is no
question, and that for all those reasons contained in their description, they
are of evil, and they are evil, and they tend to evil. But if they can minister
to good, if they of themselves are innocent, if they can be used without doing
hurt, although they are generally abused, yet he that makes them in order only
to such uses to which of themselves they can and ought to minister, partakes
not of the sin of them that abuse the productions of his art and labor. And
this is remarkable in the case of pictures and images: concerning the making of
which there was a great question in the Primitive Church; but the case of
Conscience they thus determined: It was unlawful to make pictures or images
for heathen Temples, or for any use of religion: imo tu colis, qui facis ut
coli possint; He that makes them that they may be worshipped, is a worshipper
of them, that is, he partakes of his sin that does worship. But because the art
statuary and of painting might be used to better purposes, therefore they were
advised to do so, but to separate them from all approaches toward religion;
See lib. 2. Chap. 2. Rule 6. Numb. 31.
of which I have already given accounts out of Tertullian De spectaculis c. 23.
And the same is the answer concerning the trades of making cards and dice. But
although this be but an instance of this Rule; yet because it relates to the
practice of so great a part of mankind, it may deserve to be considered alone
in order to that relation and that practice. For it wholly depends upon this,
If it be innocent, if it can be good to play at cards and dice, then the trade
of making the instruments of playing is also innocent. If not, that which
ministers to nothing but sin, must be of the kindred of sin, and in the same
condemnation.

Question.

Whether it be lawful to play at Cards or Dice.

S. Chrysostom affirms, 27.
Homil. 6. in Matthew.
Non Deum invenisse ludum, sed Diabolum, Not God, but the Devil Quem Deum hujus
mundi vocat Apostolus: quem Deum scil. hujusmodi ludorum auth^rem indigitat
Hieronymus.

Vida Cremonensis, Poeta non incelebris,
Mox vero gratum ludum mortalibus ipse
Ostendit Deus, and morem certaminis hujus.
Namque olim, ut perhibent, dilectam Scacc^ida, qua non
Inter Serialas praestantior altera Nymphas,
Compressit ripa^ errantem, and nil tale putantem,
Dum pascit niveos herbosa ad flumina olores.
Tum bicolor^m buxum dedit, atque pudoris
Amissi pretium, vario ordine picturatum
Argentique auriq^c gravem tabulam addit, usumque
Edocuit; Nymphaeque etiam nunc servat honorem
Et Nomen Ludus, celebrat quem maxim, Roma,
Extremaeque hominum diversa ad littora gentes.

found out play. It may be he alluded to that of in Phaedro.
Plato, who says that the spirit Theuth invented tables and dice; but then he
says that the same spirit found out Arithmetic, Geometry and Astronomy; and
therefore from hence we can make no conjecture. S. de alcatoribus
Cyprian says that, quidam studio literarum been eruditus, multum meditando
hoc malum and perniciosum studium adinvenit, instinctu solius Zabuli qui eum
artibus suis repleverat. Hanc ergo artem ostendit, quam and colendam sculpturis
cum sua imagine fabricavit, Some very learned person inspired and filled with
the arts of the spirit Zabulus taught the art of dice and tables: and he adds,
that he so ordered it, that no man might touch the tables till he had first
sacrificed to Zabulus. And therefore M. Mantua affirmed it to be very unlawful
to play at dice or tables, upon this very reason; Non tantum aleae lusum crimen
esse, sed malorum daemonum inventum, It must needs be unlawful when it is more
then so, as being the very invention of the devil. And this fierce declamation
has prevailed amongst many wise men to the condemnation of it. Sermon. de S.
Mattkia.
Vincentius says, Manus Diaboli est ludus taxillorum: and Bodinus is yet more
particular, he tells us how; lib. 1. de Daemonol.
for, says he, in alea and fortuito illius jactu geomantiam artemque
diabolicam sitam esse, The chance and luck of it is a kind of geomancy or
diabolicat art. Indeed if he had meant that the art of conducting the fall of
the contingent die had been diabolical and a juggling art, he had spoken reason
and truth: but that there is a diabolical art in the contingency and chance of
it, is little better then a contradiction; unless he could make it appear that
the fall of the dice was by God committed to the Devils conduct: which truly is
not very improbable in some cases to be admitted; but because it is uncertain,
Apherdianus calls it diabolical or found out by the Devil, by reason of the
craft used in it, and the evils consequent to it. Daemonis instinctu sibi quod
reperere maligni
Cum variis homines in sua damna dolis.
And indeed this is almost the whole state of the question; for there are so
many evils in the use of these sports, they are made trades of fraud and
livelihood, they are accompanied so with drinking and swearing, they are so
scandalous by blasphemies and quarrels, so infamous by the mispending our
precious time, and the ruin of many families, they so often make wise men
fools and slaves of passion, that we may say of them that use these
inordinately, (...) Eurip.

(...),
they are in an ocean of mischiefs, and can hardly swim to shore without
perishing. And therefore it is no wonder that holy men and wise Commonweaths,
observing the great evil of them, and having not skill or experience enough to
tell of any good that is in them, have forbidden them utterly. This is the
observation of S. Isidore; lib. 1. Origin. c. 67.
Ab hac art autem fraus and mendacium atque perjurium nunquam abest, postremo
and odium and damna rerum. Unde and aliquando propter haec scelera interdicta
legibus fuit, Fraud and lying and perjury are the inseparable attendants upon
cards and dice, and hatred and great losses follow; and therefore because of
this appendant wickedness, sometimes these are wholly forbidden by the laws.

For so we find it forbidden in the Civil laws of Princes and Republics. 28.
M. Mantua tells that by an old law of Egypt, every man was easily admitted to
the accusation of a gamester or dice-player; Polymath. l. 8. c. 3. De prob.
vol. 2. conc. 13. 6.
and if he were convicted of it, he was condemned to the quarries: and Josephus
Mascardus tells that those who were remarked as daily and common gamesters were
infamous, and not admitted to give testimony in a cause of law. It is certain
it was forbidden by the laws; Seu mavis vetita legibus alea. Horat.
The lex Roscia punished those persons with banishment who lost any
considerable portions of their estates by playing at dice; and sometimes the
laws did condemn them that lost money, to pay four times so much to the Fiscus,
as Asconius Paedianus tells in his observations upon Cicero's second book de
Divinatione. Justinian the Emperor made an express law against it, lib. 3.
Cod. Justin. tit. 43. and in Authentic. tit. de Sacrosanctis Episcopis..
interdicimus.
forbidding it both in public and private houses. Magnus Sfortia forbad dice
and tables to be used in his camp: Philippus Adeodatus severely prohibited it
in the Commonwealth; so did Charles the seventh of France: For in the perpetual
and daily abuse of such sports the Commonwealth has much incommodity, and
consequently many interests in the prohibition. Ludus enim genuit trepidum
certamen and Horat. Ep. 1.
iram;
Ira truces inimicitias and funebre bellum.
The public peace cannot be kept where public dicing-houses are permitted, and
therefore the Romans were so severe against such public houses and scenes of
debauchery, that the Praetor said, Si quis eum apud quem alea lusum esse
dicetur, ff. l. 11. tit. 5. de alcator. vide etiam Wesenbech. ibid.
verberaverit, damnumve ei dederit, sive quid eo tempore domo ejus subtractum
erit, judicium non dabo, If the Gentlemen beat the Master of such
gaming-houses, or stole any thing from his house at that time, he should have
no remedy. For these were houses of public hatred, and therefore outlawed. And
therefore Seneca calls them loca aedilem metuentia, houses afraid of the
Magistrate. de Vita beara c. 7.
Virtutem in Templo invenies, in foro, in Curia, pro muris stantem,
pulverulentam, coloratam, callosas habentem manus; Voluptatem latitantem
saepius ac tenebras captantem, circa balnea ac sudatoria, ac loca aedilem
metuentia, You may find Virtue standing in Courts, and Temples, and upon the
walls of a city, dusty and discolored, and with brawny hands; but Pleasure
sneaks up and down to baths, and sweating-houses, and places that fear the
presence of the Aedile; that is, gaming-houses, which we learn from Martial,
Arcana modo raptus e popina
Aedilem rogat udus aleator,
The Dice-player half drunk newly snatched from his Tavern or Ordinary beseeches
the Aedile for mercy. But in the Civil law the punishments of the Gamesters,
and especially the keepers of the gaming-houses, by the confiscation of the
house, nay the destruction of it, that no man may dwell in it for ever, in that
place where God has been so many times dishonored and blasphemed, are
sufficient indication of that just detestation in which the laws had them: and
who please may see them largely described in de Alea.
Danaeus and praxis. p. 507. c. 126. and alibi.
Jodocus Damhouderius. But I observe that the especial remarks that the Civil
laws of Princes and republics put upon this kind of ga^^ing is that it causes
many quarrels; -- dum vitreo peraguntur milite bella: the contention for the
victory begets a more cruel war: but this is especially upon the account of
money which is then lost, and which the laws most regard, as the cause of all
the mischief.

But when this question and these observations fell into ^he hands of the
Church, 29.
that is, of Christian and pious Princes and Prelates, and they that were and
ought to be zealous for souls had observed that God was exceedingly
dishonored, that his name was infinitely blasphemed, that much of that
precious time which God had allowed to us for the working out our salvation
with fear and trembling was spent in luxury, and swearing, and passion, and
lying and cursing, and covetousness, and fraud, and quarrels, and intemperance
of all sorts, and that (...) d^inking and gaming are joined so frequently that
they are knit in a proverb, and that these together baffle the spirit of a man
and drive away the spirit of God, Aleaque and Ovid. de r^med.
multo tempora quassa mero
Eripiunt omnes animo sine vulnere vires,
they disarme and weaken the mind of a man without a wound; it is, I say, no
wonder that they forbad it so fiercely, and censured it so severely. Aleator
quicunque es, lib. de Al^^^ribus.
Christianum te dicis, quod non es, said S. Cyprian, A common gamester or
dice-player may call himself Christian, but indeed he is not: and S. Clemens
Alexandrinus says, inconsideratum luxuriae amorem otiofis isthaec ^^eae
oblectamina suppeditare, desidiamque in causa esse, idleness and wantonness
provides these games for the lazy and useless people of the world. And
therefore S. Bernard said that the pious and Christian soldiers that inhabit
Jerusalem, de Christian. milite.
aleas detestantur, mimos, and magos, and fabulatores, scurrilesque cantilenas,
tanquam vanitates aut insanias respuunt and abominantur; they hate dice, and
abominate jesters, and juglers, and players, and idle songs like vanities and
madness. Upon these or the like accounts the Fathers of the Council of
Eliberis separated these gamesters from the Communion. Si quis fidelis alea,
Can. 79. Vide etiam can. 41, and 42. Apostol.
id est, tabula luserit, placuit eum abstinere. Et si emendatus cessaverit post
annum poterit reconciliari; A Christian playing at dice or tables is not to be
admitted to the Holy Communion, but after a years penance and abstention, de
vita and honestate Clericor. cap. Cleric. L. 6. c. 200.
and his total amendment: and the Canon law forbids a Clergyman either to play
at tables, or to be present at those places where they do. But the Capitular
of Charles the Great joins dicing and drunkenness together, as being usual
companions, and forbids them both alike to Bishops, Priests and Deacons. And
indeed when the case is thus, I may say as Schonaeus said in the case of Saul,
-- quae potest esse in tanti sceleris
Immanitate coercenda crudelitas?
No laws are too severe, Vide etiam Decretum did. 35. c. 8. Episcop. and de
excessu praelatorum, cap. inter dilectos.
no sentence is too rigid for it is sentence and condemnation.

But if the case can be otherwise, 30.
if playing at dice and tables can become an innocent recreation, then all
these terrible and true sentences will not reach them that so use it. And
indeed even amongst those places and republics where such gaming was so highly
condemned and severely punished, some of their braver men did use it, but
without the vile appendages, and therefore without scandal and reproach. For
first in general, it cannot misbecome a wise and a good man to unbend his bow,
and to relaxe the severities, the strictures and more earnest tendences of his
mind. Quin ubi se a vulgo and scena in secreta remorant Horat. l. 2. Sat. 1.

Virtus Scipiadae and mitis sapientia Laeli,
Nugari cum illo, and discincti ludere, donec
Decoqueretur olus, soliti. --
Laelius and Scipio would play till they had digested their meal. And of
Archias of Tarentum it was said, (...), He was an old and a wise man in public
Counsels and employments, but he would play like a young man. And concerning
very many wise Princes and Philosophers you shall find many stories of their
confident using lighter but innocent sports for the refreshment of their
spirits 'tir'd with study and labor, lib. 3. c. 21. l. 8. c. 8.
collected by Alexander ab Alexandro. But in particular concerning dice and
tables we find in Valerius Maximus related of Q. Mucius, Aleae quoque and
calculis vacasse interdum dicitur, cum been ac diu jura civium ac caeremonias
deorum ordinasst: Ut enim in rebus seriis Scaevolam, ita and in scurrilibus
Janus Rutgersius legit [in scnilibus] non [in scurrilibus] Pontanus [in
serotinis lusibus] Scriverius [inheroicis] alii [inseriis] unico verbo.
lusibus hominem agebat: that sometimes he would play at dice and tables, when
he had first dispatched the business of the Commonwealth prosperously, and the
affairs of religion wisely: In serious things doing as Scaevola should, in his
recreations doing as a man: qua quidem alea Porcius Cato lusisse fertur animi
laxandi causa, and Porcius Cato himself, wise and severe though he was, yet
played at tables to refresh and relaxe his mind. And if cards or tables have in
their own nature nothing that is evil, provided it can be also separated from
all the evil appendages, Alex. ab Alex.
from the crimes and from the reproach, from the danger and from the scandal,
that which only remains is, that they as well as other innocent recreations
and divertisements may be used. In the case so stated we suppose them only to
be recreations and relaxations of the mind: (...), said Julian, in Caesarib.
such little employments are like the pauses of music, they are rests to the
spirit and intervals of labor. And therefore Johannes Sarisburiensis allows of
every game, Polyc. lib. 1. c. 5.
quae absque vitio curarum gravium pondus allevat, and sine virtutis dispendio
jucundam interpolationem gaudiorum affert, if it can ease our griefs, or
alleviate our burdens without the loss of our innocence.

Now that cards and dice are of themselves lawful I do not know any reason to
doubt. 31.
For if they be unlawful, it is because they are forbidden, or because there
is in them something that is forbidden. They are no where of themselves
forbidden: and what is in them that is criminal or suspicious? Is it because
there is chance and contingency in them? There is so in all humane affairs; in
Merchandise, in laying wagers, in all consultations and wars, in journeys and
agriculture, in teaching and learning, in putting children to school or keeping
them at home, in the price of the market, and the vendibility of commodities.
And if it be said that there is in all these things an overruling providence;
though no man can tell in what manner or by what means the Divine providence
brings such things to a determinate event, yet it is certain that every little
thing as well as every great thing is under God's government, and our
recreations as well as our wagers. But what if it be and what if it be not? He
can never be suspected in any Criminal sense to tempt the Divine providence,
who by contingent things recreates his labor, and having acquired his
refreshment, has no other end to serve, and no desires to engage the Divine
providence to any other purpose: and this end is sufficiently secured by
whatsoever happens. I know nothing else that can be pretended to render the
nature of these things suspicious; and this is perfectly nothing: and as for
the evil appendages which are so frequently attending upon these kinds of
games, besides that they also are as near to other exercises as to these, as to
bowling, horse-racing, cock-fighting, the fight of quails and of partridges,
bulbaiting, pall mall, billiards, and all other games for money and victory, to
some more and to some less, besides this, I say, the evil appendages are all
separable from these games, and till they be separated they are not law ^ull:
but they may be separated by the following advices.

Rules of conducting our Sports and Recreations.
1. Let no man's affections be immoderately addicted to them. 32.
And this requires a great diligence and caution. For as Petrarch said well,
Hoc est in regno stultitiae commune, ut quarum rerum minor est fructus, and
cupiditas and delectatio major sit, In the kingdom of folly we are most
pleased with those things by which we have the least profit. And the want of
doing us good, is supplied by doing us pleasure. But the moderation of our
affections to our sports is best expressed, by using them according to those
measures which wise and severe men use in their recreations, that is, not to be
frequent or long in them. For it is in these as in meat and drink, which are
then good when they are necessary and useful to the purposes of our nature and
employment. Sleep is necessary, and so long it is good: but a man must not
therefore spend the best of his time in sleep, but that time that is allowed to
it, and without which he cannot well do his business. The limits of these
things are not so straight as necessity, nor yet so large as humor or desire;
but as a man may drink to quench his thirst, and he may yet drink more to
refresh his sorrow, and to alleviate his spirits, and to ease his grief,
provided that he turn not his liberty into a snare, so he may in his recreation
and his sports. Cito rumpes arcum semper si tensum habueris: Phaedrus. LIII

At si laxaris, cum voles, erit utilis.
Sic lusus animo debent aliquando dari,
Ad cogitandum melior ut redeat tibi.
Within this bound he must keep, * that he loose none of his business for his
sport; * that he make his other time more useful; * that this be the less
principal; * that it be taken as Physic, * or as wine at most: * and the
minutes and little points of this measure are no otherwise to be weighed and
considered, but that we take those proportions which our selves think we need
to good purposes, or which we are advised to by a wise guide. To this purpose
was that saying of Plato reported by Laertius; Parum est alea ludere, at non
parum est assuescere, It is no great matter to play at dice or tables, but to
be accustomed to it is a great matter; that is, to make it a portion of our
business, an expense of our time due to worthy employments: and therefore in
the laws, not the action it self, but the abuse, and particularly the
frequency, Petrus Follerius. Senec. de Brevit. vitae c. 13.
is noted and forbidden. Ludentes quotidie ad aleam, and tabernarum
frequentatores inter infames habentur, says the constitution. Quorum aut
latrunculi, aut excoquendi in sole corporis cura consumpsere vitam, Men that
spend their lives in cards and dice, and making much of themselves, Haunters of
drinking and gaming-houses. A man may innocently and to good purposes go to a
Tavern; but they that frequent them have no excuse, unless their innocent
business does frequently engage, and their severe religion bring them off
safely. And so it is in these sports, with this only difference, that there
can be no just cause to frequent these sports: there is only one cause of
using them, and that comes but seldom, the refreshment I mean of my self or my
friend, to which I minister in justice or in charity; but when our sports come
to that excess that we long and seek for opportunities, when we tempt others,
are weary of our business, and not weary of our game,....Cum mediae nequeant
te frangere noctes,
Nec tua sit talos mittere lassa manus,
when we sit up till midnight, and spend half days, and that often too; then we
have spoiled the sport, it is not a recreation but a sin.

2. He that means to make his games lawful must not play for money, 33.
but for refreshment. This, though (it may be) few will believe, yet it is the
most considerable thing to be amended in the games of civil and sober persons.
For the gaining of money can have no influence into the game to make it the
more recreative, unless convetousnesse hold the box. The recreation is to
divert the mind or body from labors by attending to something that pleases and
gives no trouble; now this is in the conduct of your game, in the managing a
prosperous chance to advantage, and removing the unprosperous from detriment
and loss of victory, so to cross the proverb, (...), and that by wit he may
relieve his adverse chance, and by a symbol learn to make good and virtuous use
of every cross accident. But when money is at stake, either the sum is
trifling, or it is considerable. If trifling, it can be of no purpose unless
to serve the ends of some little hospitable entertainment or love-feast, and
then there is nothing amiss; but if it be considerable, there is a wide door
open to temptation, and a man cannot be indifferent to win or loose a great
sum of money, though he can easily pretend it. If a man be willing or
indifferent to loose his own money, and not at all desirous to get another, to
what purpose is it that he plays for it? if he be not indifferent, then he is
covetous, or he is a fool; he covets that which is not his own, or unreasonably
ventures that which is. If without the money he cannot mind his game, then the
game is no divertisement, no recreation, but the money is all the sport, and
therefore covetousness is all the design: but if he can be recreated by the
game alone, the money does but change it from lawful to unlawful, and the man
from being weary to become covetous, and from the trouble of labor or study
remove him to the worse trouble of fear and anger and impatient desires. But
here indeed begins the mischief, here men begin for the money to use vile arts,
Quaerit compositos manus improba mittere talos, here cards and dice begin to be
a diabolical art, and men are witty to undo or defraud one another,.....Neque
enim loculis comitantibus itur
Ad casum tabulae, posita sed luditur arca.
Men venture their estates at it, and make their families sad not poor, because
the dice turn up an unlucky chance: and what sport is it for me to loose my
money if it be at all valuable? and if it be not, what is it to my game? But
sure the pleasure is in winning the money. That is it certainly. But Hoccine
credibile est aut memorabile, Teren. Andria.

Tanta vecordia innata cuiquam ut siet
Ut malis gaudeant, atque ex incommodis
Alterius sua comparent ut commoda? ah!
Idne est verum? Imo id genus hominum
Est pessimum.....
Nothing is more base then to get advantages by the loss of others; they that
do so, and make the loss of their neighbor their game and pastime, are the
worst of men, said the Comedy. But concerning the loss of our money, let a man
pretend what he please, that he plays for no more then he is willing to loose;
it is certain, he is not to be believed: for if that sum be so indifferent to
him, why is not he easy to be tempted to give such a sum to the poor? to give
that sum? his sport will not be the less if that be all he designs. S.
Hieron. ep. ad Gaudent.
Posita dum luditur arca, stat pauper nudus atque esuriens ante fores,
Christusque in paupere moritur, Whilst men play for great sums of money, a
poor man at the door, redeemed by the blood of Christ, wants a shilling, and
begs it for Christ's sake, and goes without it. Whenever the case is this or
like this, he sins that plays at cards or dice or any other game for money. It
is alike in all games, for I know no difference; Money is the way to abuse them
all: and cards and dice, if there be no money at stake, will make as good sport
and please the mind as well as any the sports of boys, and are as innocent as
push-pin. For if we consider it rightly, from hence is taken the great
objection against cards and tables, because men at these venture their money,
and expose their money to hazard for no good end, and therefore tempt God; and
certainly to do so is unlawful, and that for the reason alleged: but when we
play only for recreation, we expose nothing of considerable interest to
hazard, and therefore it cannot be a criminal tempting of God, as it is in
gaming for money, Ubi centuplex murus rebus servandis parum est, Plaut. Persa.

where no wit, no observation, no caution, can save our stake: for Adversis
punctis doctum se nemo fatetur;
Vulnera plus crescunt punctis quam bella sagittis,
says the Epigram, No man is crafty enough to play against an ill hand; and
therefore to put a considerable interest, to the hazard of the ruin of a
family, or at least more then we find in our hearts to give to Christ, is a
great tempting of God. And in these cases, as I have heard from them that have
skill in such things, there are such strange chances, such promoting of a hand
by fancy and little arts of Geomancy, such constant winning on one side, such
unreasonable losses on the other, and these strange contingencies produce such
horrible effects, that it is not improbable that God has permitted the conduct
of such games of chance to the Devil, who will order them so where he can do
most mischief; but without the instrumentality of money he could do nothing at
all.

There are two little cases pretended to lessen this evil, 34.
and bring it from unlawful to lawful. The one is, that when a man has lost
his money, he desires to play on for no other reason but to recover his own:
the question is whether that be lawful or no. To this I can give no direct
answer, for no man can at first tell whether it be or no: but at the best it is
very suspicious, for it engages him upon more loss of time, and he tempts God
in a further hazard, and gives himself the lie by making it appear that,
whatever he pretended, he did play for more then he was willing to loose. Sic
ne perdiderit, Ovid.
non cessat perdere lusor,
Et revocat cupidas alea saepe manus.
He plays on that he may give over, and looses more that he may not loose so
much, and is vexed with covetousness, and chides his fortune, and reproves he
knows not what: so that by this time I can tell whether he sinned or no; for
though it was hard to say whether he did well or ill to desire the recovery of
his money, yet when we see upon what terms it is designed and acted, the
question is very easy to be resolved, and the man had better sit down with that
loss then venture a greater, and commit more sins.

The other case is this; 35.
If I can without covetousness of the money play, is it then lawful? and to
show that I am not covetous, I will give the money I win to the standers by, or
to my servants, or to the poor. When Theodoric King of the Goths did win at
dice or tables he was very bountiful to his servants, and being over-pleas'd
with his own good fortune, would grant them any thing. apud Sucton.
But Augustus Caesar did use to do this thing bravely. He gives this account
of himself in a letter of his to Tiberius; Ego perdidi viginti millia nummum
meo nomine: sed cum effuse in lusu liberalis fuissem, ut soleo plerumque. Nam
si quas manus remisi cuique exegissem, ant retinuissem quod cuique donavi,
vicissem vel quinquaginta millia: sed hoc malo. Benignitas enim mea me ad
coelestem gloriam efferet. He lost (suppose) 20000 Crowns; but it was not his
ill fortune or his ill conduct, but his excessive liberality: he forgave to
many what he had wone, and other sums which he took, he gave to the standers
by, and chose this bounty as the way to immortality. Now it is true this is a
fair indication that convetousnesse is not the prevailing ingredient; but to
him that considers it wisely it will appear to be but a splendid nothing. For
what kind of sport is that to bring it into my power to oblige my play-fellow
with his own money? and what bounty is that by which I reward my friends and
servants with another man's estate? Parysatis did it yet more innocently, when
playing with her young son Artaxerxes, she on purpose lost a thousand Darics at
a throw, to help the young Prince to money. Thus far it was well enough; for I
doubt not but it is as lawful to loose my money as to give it away, if there
be nothing else in it: but besides that it is not so honorable, it may be, he
that plays against me is not of my mind, or of my ability, and I correspond to
him in an action in which he is not so innocent as I should be, if I did not
something minister to his evi: so that though I play that I may oblige him, yet
there are so many circumstances required to keep my self and him innocent, that
it is a thousand times better in some cases to give him something, and in all
cases to play for nothing.

3. For it is a worthy inquiry, 36.
if we ask whether it be lawful for a man to possess what he gains by play.
For if it be unlawful, then when he has wone he has got nothing, but is
bound to make restitution, and cannot give alms of that; and then it can be
good for nothing, but on all sides pierces his hand that holds it like a
handful of thorns. But in answer to this question, if I shall speak what I
think, I am like to prevail but little, because the whole world practices the
contrary;.....Et nunc in hacce publica
Contage morum, congreges inter malos
Malum esse jus est. Nam nunc
Leges nihil faciunt quod licet, nisi quod lubet,
Nothing prevails but evil manners and evil propositions: and in such things as
these it is easy to confute a good counsel or a severe reproof, by saying, The
man is angry, or too strict, and all men are not of his mind. Therefore in this
inquiry I shall only tell what I have learned in the schools of wisdom, in
the laws of wise people, and the sayings of holy men. In the Civil laws of the
Romans, lib. 3. Cod. tit. 43. Vide ibi Cujacium, and Wesenbech. ff. l. 11. tit.
5. Cicer. ad Atticum. Ep. 13. l. 1.
all the money that these gamesters wone was taken from them and spent upon
public works; and he that lost and paid the money was punishable, for the
Senate forbad to play for money, or to make any promise or give any pledge for
payment. The same has been forbidden by the laws of many republics, ut quod
ille in alea perdiderat, beneficio legis dissolveret, that the law should pay
what the fool and the prodigal had lost. An old Epigrammatist affirms that
such gains will never thrive, Per scelus immensas quid opes cumulare juvabit?
Turpiter e manibus res male parta fluit.
And no wonder if such gains be the purchaces of a thief, and no better then
robbery. ib. 4. Ethic. c. 1.
Aristotle joins them together in the same kind of dishonorable crime, (...),
He that plays at dice for money, and the thief are illiberal gamesters, for
they are guilty of filthy lucre: and Seneca says, -- immensas opes
Jampridem avaris manibus, ut perdat, rapit.
He is greedy, and gets nothing; he wins much, and looses more; he snatches
from his neighbor what belongs to him, and looses that and his own beside.
Pascasius Justus observes that the Spaniards call such gamesters Tahur, which
is the Metathesis of Hurta, a thief; for to cast the dice for money what is it
but to desire to take another man's money against his will? and that is theft.
Specul. anim. c. 2. and in Sent. lib. 1. did. 25. part. 2. art. 2. q. 1. in
conclus. ad 4.
S. Bonaventure says that which is gotten by play is possessed by no good
title, and cannot be lawfully retained: he that lost it, has indeed for his
folly deserved to loose it; but he that has it, does not deserve to keep it,
and therefore he must not, nor yet must he restore it to him that lost it,
unless he persuaded or compelled him to play; but therefore the money is to be
given to the poor: and the same also is expressly affirmed by S. Austin.
Epist. 54. ad Macedon.
Now if it be not lawful to retain such purchaces, they are not our own when
we have wone them, and therefore it is no thanks to us if we give them away.
Aleatoris eleemosyna invalida est and nihili apud Deum, ibid.
says S. Bonaventure. Oblatio enim de rapina reprobatur* says the Canon law,
and eleemosynae and sacrificium non placent Deo quae offeruntur ex scelere. The
money is gotten by an equivocal contract, and an indirect rapine, and therefore
can never become a pleasing sacrifice to God; it is a giving our good to the
poor without charity, and that profits not, says S. Paul. But at last, 1 Cor.
13.
although he that looses his money, deserves to loose it; yet because by laws
such purchaces and acquisitions are forbidden, and we have no right to give
alms of what is not our own, and as God will not accept it when it is done by
us, so he has no where commanded that it should be done at all, therefore it
is certain that all such money is to be restored, if the looser please. ubi
supra.
Bona alea amissa tanquam furto ablata [veteres] restituenda putabant. S.
Austin said, that the Ancients did affirm, money wone by dice and tables ought
to be restored, like the money that was stolen. But if the owner will not, let
it ascend to pious uses. And if this be the state of this affair, it cannot be
lawful to play at cards or dice for money. For the love of money is the root
of all evil, which some having coveted, have pierced themselves through with
many sorrows. And this appears yet more in the next advice.

3. No man can play lawfully at such games but those who are dispassionate, 37.
and of sober spirits, under the command of reason and religion; and therefore
to play for money will be quickly criminal, for Ploratur lachrymis amissa
pecunia veris; Juven. sat. 13.

Et majore domus gemitu, majore tumultu
Planguntur nummi quam funera.
Men may weep solemnly for the dead, but they will be heartily troubled when
their money is departed; and therefore there is but little sport in such games.
And this Alexander the Great rightly observed, when he set a fine upon some
friends of his, Plutarch. in Reg. and Imperapoph.
quod in ludo aleae sensisset eos non ludere, sed velut in re maxim seria
versari, fortunas suas omnes aleae permittentes arbitrio, because they did not
play at dice, but contend as in a matter of greatest concernment. And certainly
so it is. For do not all the nations of the world think the defense of their
money and estates a just cause of taking up arms and venturing their lives? He
that plays at games of fortune should put nothing to fortunes conduct, but what
he can perfectly subject to reason every minute. Seneca tells that Julius Canus
was playing at tables, when the Centurion being sent upon a desperate service,
and went out leading agmen hominum periturorum a troup of men to death, happened
to call him out to march in that service. Julius Canus knew the danger well
enough, but being summoned, called to his play-fellow to tell the men upon the
tables; and now, says he, do not say when I am dead that you had the better
of the game; and desired the Centurion to bear him witness that he had one man
more then the other. He that is thus even and serene may fairly play; but he
that would be so, must not venture considerable portions of his estate, nor any
thing, the loss of which displeases him and shakes him into passion. Not that
every displeasure, though for a trifle, is criminal; but that every degree of
it tends to evil, and the use of it is not safe, and the effect may be
intolerable. Ludit cum multis Vatanas, sed ludere nescit:
Et putat imperio currere puncta suo.
If the chances will not run as we would have them, or if our passions will
not, then it is at no hand safe to play; unless to fret, and vex secretly for
trifles, to swear and lie, to blaspheme and curse, to cheat and forswear, to
covet and to hate can be innocent.

4. 38.
Upon these accounts it is that wise men advise that young men be at no hand
permitted to play at dice or the like games. Ab isto lusu arcendi sunt pueri,
Anton Gu^vata. horol. Prine.
tum propter pecunias quas perdunt, tum propter vitia quae colligunt, and mores
pravos quos inde addiscunt: Young men and boys loose their money and learn evil
manners at such games, they have great passions, fierce desires and quick
angers, and their flames are stirred perpetually with chance. It is a sad story
that is told of the young Prince, per Anton. Guevata.
the only son of Claudius the Emperor, who when he had lost all his money at
dice, and had tired out all his invention for the getting more, and could not
do it fairly, being impatient of his loss, and desirous of new hopes and
ventures, he stole a rich jewel from his Fathers closet, the Princes Tutor
knowing and concealing the theft. But it came to the Emperors ear, and produced
this tragedy. He disinherited his son, he banished all the Princes
play-fellows, and put the Tutor to death. Young men are not to be trusted to
play with such aspics. And therefore Sidonius says, Alea est oblectamentum
senum, ut pila juvenum, Tables for old men, and the Ball for young men. Cato
allows to young men, arms, horses and bows, and such like sports; but would
have dice and tables permitted to old men, whose minds are more to be refreshed
with diversion then their bodies by laborious exercise. And in allusion to
this, Augustus in his letter to Tiberius mentioned by Suetonius has these
words, Inter coenam lusimus (...) and heri and hodie, Yesterday and to day we
played like old men; that is, at tables. But this is matter of prudence, and
not of Conscience; save only that old men are more masters of reason and
rulers of their passion, and a sedentary exercise being fittest for them, they
who cannot but remember that they are every day dying, though possibly they
need some divertisement to their busied and weary spirits, yet they do more
need to remember their later end, and take care to redeem their time, and above
all things not to play for any considerable money, not for any money the loss
whereof is bigger then a jest: and they that do thus, will not easily do
amiss. But better then all these permissions is that resolution of Cicero,
orat. pro A^chia ^o^t.
Quantum alii tribuunt intempestivis conviviis, quantum denique aleae, quantum
pilae, tantum mihi egomet ad haec studia recolenda sumpsero, What time other
men spend in feasting and revellings, in dice and gaming, all that I spend in
my studies: and that is very well. For though there is good charity in
preserving our health, yet there is a greater necessity upon us that we do not
loose our time.

5. That our games may be innocent, 39.
we must take care they be not scandalous, that is, not with evil company, not
with suspicious company. Ciceroni nequissimorum hominum in ludo talario
consessus? ad Attic. ep. 13. l. 1.
shall Cicero suffer base persons to sit and play at tables in his house?
That Is not well: and therefore he objected it as a great crime to Marc Anthony,
domum ejus plenam ebriorum aleatorumque, in 2a Philippic.
his house was frequented with gamesters and drunkards. We must neither do
evil, nor seem to do evil: We must not converse with evil persons, nor use our
liberty to our brothers prejudice or grief: we must not do any thing which he
with probability or with innocent weakness thinks to be amiss, until he be
instructed rightly; and if he be, yet if he will be an adversary and apt to
take opportunities to reproach you, we must give him no occasion. In these
cases, it is fit we abstain: where nothing of these things does intervene, and
nothing of the former evils is appendant, we may use our liberty with reason
and sobriety. * And then, if this liberty can be so used, and such recreations
can be innocent, there is no further question, but those trades which minister
to these divertisements are innocent and lawful.

RULE III. The act of the Will alone, although no external action or event do
follow, is imputed to good or evil by God and men.
THe will of man in the production and perfecting of a sin has six steps or
degrees of volition, 1.
in all which the sin is actual, excepting the first only. 1. The inclination
of the will is the first; and that so far as it is natural, so far it is
innocent. Sin oftentimes enters in at that door, but the door was placed there
in the first creation; it was a part of that building which God made and not
man, and in which every stone and stick was good. It was not made for sin, but
for virtue; but it was made so, that if we would bring sin in that way, it was
in our choice, and at our peril. But although this be the case of our natural
inclination, yet if our inclinations be acquired, or increased, or habitual,
that is, if they become facilities and promptitudes to sin, they are not
innocent: for this state is a state of sin and death, it is the effect of many
vile actions and vile desires, it is an aversion from and an enmity against
God; it is a bed of desires which are sometimes asleep, and then do no more
mischief then a sleeping wolf, but when they are awake they do all the evil
they can. Vide Unum necessar. cap. 5. of Habitual sins.
And therefore the case of an habitual sinner is such, that even his first
inclinations to any forbidden action in the instance of his own habit are
criminal as the external effect. But in natural inclinations the case is
different. 2. The first beginning of the sin is when the will stops and arrests
it self upon the tempting object, and consents only so far that it will have
it considered and disputed. Then the will is come too far, not when it is
willing a thing should be disputed whether it be lawful or unlawful, good or
evil; but when it is willing it be considered which is to be followed, Reason
or Sense, wise counsels or sensual pleasures: for when the will is gone so far
it is past beyond what is natural, and come so far toward choice and
guiltiness, that it is yet no more friend to virtue then to vice, and knows
not which to choose. 3. The next step the will makes is when it is pleased with
the thought of it, and tastes the honey with the top of a rod, a little
phantastic pleasure beforehand in the meditation of the sin. This prelibation
is but the antepast of the action, and as the twilight to the dark night, it is
too near an approach to a deed of darkness. 4. When the will is gone thus far
and is beyond the white lines of innocence, the next step toward a perfect sin
is a desire to do the action; not clearly and distinctly, but upon certain
conditions, if it were lawful, and if it were convenient, and if it were not
for something that lies cross in the way. Here our love to virtue is lost,
only fear and God's restraining grace remains still for the revocation of the
man to wisdom and security. 5. But when this obstacle is removed, and that
the heart consents to the sin, then the Spirit is departed, and then there
remains nothing but that the sin be [6] contrived within, and [7.] committed to
the faculties and members to go about their new and unhappy employment; and
then both the outward and the inward man have combined and made up the body of
a sin. But the sin begins within, and the guilt is contracted by what is done
at home, by that which is in our own power, by that which nothing from without
can hinder. For as for the external act, God for ends of his own providence
does often hinder it; and yet he that fain would, but cannot bring his evil
purposes to pass, is not at all excused, or the less a Criminal before God.

Question.

But is it not a mercy for a man to be recalled from acting his adultery? 2.
is it not charity to two persons to keep Autolycus from killing the steward of
Stratocles? and if so, then there is sin in the action as well as in the
affection, and the hand sins distinctly from the heart: but then it will be
found untrue to say that all our good and evil comes from the will and choice,
and yet it will not be possible to tell from what principle the evil of the
hand is derived, if not from the evil will. This brings a necessity of
inquiring into the union, or difference of the actions internal and external,
and the influence the will has upon the external act, and whether it can have
any aggravation or degree beyond what it receives from the inward principle.

To this therefore I answer, 3.
That all the morality of any action depends wholly on the will, and is seated
in the inner man; and the eye is not adulterous, but it is the instrument of an
adulterous heart; and the hand is not the thief before God, but the covetous
desire is guilty: and this appears in this, because if a man takes the goods of
his neighbor, which he would not have taken if he had supposed they had been
his neighbors, he is innocent before God. And yet it cannot be denied but it
is worse to steal then to covet, it is worse to humble and dishonor our
neighbors wife then to lust after her. But the reason is, because the doing of
the action supposes a great many precedent acts of lust, even the whole method
and economy of sin: for every act of the will, every degree of desire is
lusting or covetousness; and the external act which supposes them all, is
worse then all them except the last. The natural inclination of the will is but
a capacity or readiness and disposition of the faculty, and is no act. But the
arrest and stop of the will, the delight in fancying, the desire of action, the
consent of the heart, and the deliberation and resolution, these are the acts
and products of the will; and the second is worse then the first, and the third
worse then the second, and so till we come to the immediate address to the
action: but that action is not worse then the last resolution and deliberate
purpose of the will; and therefore when it is charity to hinder the man from
acting his lust, it is therefore charity, because in the acting of the sin
externally there are more acts of the will, even the whole method of death is
completed, and the same acts of will are repeated, or confirmed, and there is
mischief done to some person or to some interest, to something besides the
sinning man, and there are some contingencies and some circumstances to which
new actions of the will must be consenting and give their influence and renew
their acts: but still, if we compare every consent and deliberate purpose of
the will with the action, or that part of the action which is immediately
produced in it, there is in that event no morality, and no good, and no evil
but what is first within. So that he who hinders a man from acting of his lust,
does hinder him not from sins distinct from those of his will, but from more
sins of the will, from repetition, or confirmation, or abiding in the same
chosen folly.

Upon this account it will be easy to answer whether is the greater sin, 4.
the wishing and desiring a very great evil, and willingly doing but a little
one, or the doing a very great evil and an intolerable mischief with a little
malice. For it is certain that the sin is much more increased by the malice of
the action and effect then by the malice of the will, if the malice of the will
be little, and the evil of the event be great and intolerable. For at first to
desire a very great mischief, and then to act but a little one, supposes that
the great malice went not to it is utmost period; it was desired, but not
resolved on, and deliberately determined: and then that malice though in it
self great, yet it was ineffective, and was retracted before it was consummate
by the will, and acted by her subjects the other faculties and members. But
now, if a great mischief be done by a little malice, to that little malice all
that event is to be imputed: though not to it alone, yet to that malice managed
by ignorance, carelessenesse and folly; which being no excuses, but of
themselves criminal appendages, the man shall be judged by his action, not by
his ignorant and imperfect choice; because though the choice was naturally
imperfect, yet morally and in the whole conjunction of it is circumstances it
was completely Criminal. If this thing happens to be otherwise in any
particular, God will discern it, and not man; for the greatness of the
mischief in humane laws and accounts supposes the greatness of the malice, if
malice at all, and not chance wholly was the principle. But if the question be
in the acting of a great mischief where the sin most lies, in the will or in
the event, I say it is originally in the will; and it is equally in the event,
if all that event was foreseen and known, although it was not principally or at
all designed. He that steals a cow from a widow, and does verily believe that
the loss of her cow will not only undo her, but break her heart, though he
does not design this, yet because he knows it, all that event is to be imputed
to him. They that abuse their own bodies by abominable and unclean contacts,
and the sin of Onan, though they design only the pleasing of their lust, yet
if they consider what they do, and what will be the event, they secondarily
choose all that event, and are as guilty of it as of that which they principally
designed. -- quod pellice laeva Mart. Ep. 42. l. 9.

Uteris, and Veneri servit amica manus,
Hoc nihil esse putas? scelus est, mihi creed, sed ingens,
Quantum vix animo concipis ipse tuo.
Ipsam creed tibi naturam dicere rerum,
Istud quod digitis, Pontice, perdis, homo est.
For the internal act of the will and the external act of the man are but one
act, unless the instrument and the efficient cause produce two distinct
effects in every concourse; and whatsoever is done without is first consented
to within, and is but the ministry and execution of the sin within. For the
act of choosing is the foundation of all morality: and therefore when not only
the first design, but the appendages and other consequents are foreseen, and
yet the action is chosen, the will is guilty of so many evils as it chooses
directly and indirectly, principally and consequently.

But to reduce this doctrine to more minute and particular considerations 5.
and order.

Of the identity and diversity respectively of actions internal and external,
and the multiplications of sins by them.
1. Every external act proceeding from the internal makes but one moral act,
whether it be good or bad. The election and choice is the foundation: and as
they are many houses which are built upon many foundations, but many chambers
and galleries built upon one foundation is but one house, though there be many
rooms; so the internal and external relying upon one basis operating to the
same end, effecting the same work, having the same cause, and being but several
lengths of the same third, do not make two acts; as the soul seeing by the eye
has but one vision, and the will acting by the hand does but her own act by
her own instrument: and therefore although they are Physically or Naturally
several actions, because elicite and acted by several faculties, yet morally
they are but one; for what the hand or eye alone does, is neither good nor
evil, but it is made so by the mind and will.

2. If there be two acts of will in one external act, 6.
there is a double malice or goodness respectively. A Prince commands his
Almoner to give much alms to the poor; the almoner being also a good man loves
the employment, and does it very often: the external act is but the one
ministry of alms, but the internal is both obedience and charity.

3. The external act is the occasion of the intending or extending the
internal, 7.
but directly and of it self increases not the goodness or the badnesse of it.
For the external act is not properly and formally good or bad, but only
objectively and materially; just as a wall cannot increase the whiteness,
unless the quality it self be intended by it is own principle. But as heat in
iron is more intense then it is in straw; so may the goodness or the badnesse
of an internal act be increased by the external: but this is only by accident.
By instances of these several assertions, they will be more intelligible. When
John surnamed the Almoner commanded his boy to carry an alms to a poor man
that was sick in the next village, the boy sometimes would detain it and
reserve it for his own vanity; but S. John lost not the reward of his charity,
for his internal act was good, but it was no cause of the outward event at all.
And on the other side, when Maevius lay with his wife Petronilla, supposing she
had been Nicostrata, he was an adulterer before God, though by the laws of men
he was harmless. And if a man steals a horse in the night from his neighbors
field, and carries him away secretly, and by the morning perceives it to be his
own, he is no less guilty before God and his Confesssor then if he had indeed
stolen his neighbors. The reason is, because the external act has another
cause, which is or may be innocent, but the internal act was of it self
completely evil and malicious. In these cases, where the internal volition is
not the cause of the external event, the sin is terminated within, and that to
him who is to be our Judge is as visible as any thing. But when the internal
volition is properly the cause of the action external, there more is done then
it could do alone. For in a good work the will finds the difficulties which it
could not perceive while it was only in purpose; and it is easy to resolve to
be patient in sickness when we feel nothing of it, but only discourse it, and
cast about in our easy minds what we suppose it will be: but Tu si hic esses,
aliter sentires, said the sick man; it may be when it comes to be acted, the
will shall find new work, new difficulties, and will need new fortifications,
and renewed resolutions, and the repetition of acts, and fresh aids of reason:
so that although all the good or evil that is in all this, is the good or evil
of the will; yet this is it which I said, that the external action has in it
the materiality of good and evil, and by accident the external act is better
then the internal, that is, the will does better when she reduces her purposes
to act very often, then when she does only resolve. And for this very reason

4. The external act does superadde new obligations beyond those 8.
which are consequent to the mere internal volition though never so perfect and
complete. For the external act is exemplar in virtue, or scandalous in evil; it
obliges to restitution, to Ecclesiastical censures and legal penalties, in
which there are active and passive duties incumbent on us (as I have
represented in the third book.) Thus also in good things; the external
participation of the Sacraments has in it some advantages beyond the internal:
but these things are accidental to the action, and nothing of the nature of it;
they are nothing of the direct morality, but the consequent of it; which the
sinner ought indeed to have considered beforehand, and to act or to omit
accordingly.

5. If the course and continuance of the outward act be interrupted, 9.
and then proceeded in again, when the cause of the intercision is over, that
action seeming but one, is more then one sin, or virtuous act respectively. He
that resolves to bring up a poor orphan in learning and capacities of doing and
receiving worthy benefit, does often sleep and often not think of it, and has
many occasions to renew his resolution: although his obligation be still
permanent, yet if he delights in it, and again chooses, so often is the alms
imputed to him, he does so many acts of charity. Titius intends to give to
Codrus a new gown at the next Calends, but forgets his intention; but yet at
the Calends does upon a new intention give him a gown. This act is but one, but
has no morality from the first intention, but from the second, though there
were two internal acts of volition to the same external; because the first did
cease to be, and therefore could have no influence into the effect. But this
multiplication of actions and imputations cannot be by every sudden and
physical interruption, but by such an interruption only where the first
intention is not sufficient to finish the external act. Thus if a man against
his will nod at his prayers, and awakening himself by his nodding proceed in
his devotion, he does not pray twice, but once, because the first intention is
sufficient to finish his prayer. But if he falls asleep overnight and sleeps
till morning, his morning-prayer is upon a new account, and his will must renew
her act, or nothing is done. But in instances of good this part of the Rule
has but little use; for no man will dare to call God to a strict and minute
reckoning, and require his reward by number and weight. But in sinful actions
there is more consideration; and if we be not strict in our weights and
measures, God will; and if we will not be sure to put enough into the balance
of repentance, there will be too much in that of judgment and condemnation: and
therefore it concerns us as much as we can, to tell the number of our sins.
Therefore

6. 10.
External actions in order to one end, though produced by one internal act or
resolution of the will, yet do not make one external act, unless the end be
at the same time acquired. Thus if the man resolves to lay wait for his enemy
till he have destroyed him, and therefore lays wait to day and to morrow, and
prevails not until the third day, his sin is more then one, though his
resolution was but one. The reason is, because there must of necessity be a
repetition of the same resolution, or at least of some ministering acts toward
the perfecting that resolution; and although the resolution and the end were
one, yet to every ministering intermedial act there is also some internal act
proportionate. Thus every impure contact in order to impure embraces are sins
distinct from the final adultery, and so is the joyful remembrance of it
afterward. But because these things have in them some little intricacy,
therefore I add this which is plain and useful: Every renewing of an external
action subordinate to a sinful end is either a repeating of the sin, or, which
is all one, it is an aggravation of it; it extends it, or intends it. He that
calls a man fool three times together either commits three sins, or one as
great as three: and he that strikes seven blows to kill a man, has so many
times lift up his hand against God; and though he has killed the man but once,
yet he shall be avenged seven times. But if after any notable interruption of
the act, the intention be renewed, so often is the sin repeated, though it be
but one external event afterward. He that resolves every day of the week to be
absent from Divine service the Sunday following, is to estimate his sin by the
number of his internal actions, and not by the singularity of that omission.

7. 11.
Internal acts of the will are then multiplied, when they proceed after an
express revocation, or a deliberate intermission, or a considerable physical
interruption, or by an actual attendance to things incompossible and
inconsistent with the first resolution. There is no difficulty in these
particulars, save only that in making judgments concerning them we proceed by
prudent and moral proportions, by the usual measures of laws, and the accounts
of wise men; only the extremes are evident and notorious. For he that being
upon his knees looses his attention for a minute and then recalls it, does not
pray twice, or so often as he again thinks actually of what he is doing; and we
are sure that he who says a Pater noster to day, and another to morrow, does
pray twice: and between these no certain rule can be given but what is measured
and divided by prudence and similitude with the unity of natural and artificial
compositions. But he only does well who secures his cases of conscience in
this inquiry, by interrupting his evil acts as soon as they begin, and gives
them quite over as soon as they are interrupted, and when he has chosen well,
perseveres as long as nature and exterior accidents will give him leave, and
renews that choice as soon as his divertisement can cease.

Question.

In the pursuit of the matter of this Rule, 12.
it is seasonable to inquire concerning [what degrees of guiltiness are
contracted by the beginnings and desires of wickedness which are imperfect and
unfinished.]

I have already Lib. 3. Chap. 1. Rule 4.
given account that the inward acts of will are very often punishable by humane
laws, and from thence some light may be reflected to this inquiry, which is
concerning the estimate which God and the Conscience are to make of imperfect
actions: for though in humane accounts and the estimate of our laws, that a
thing is secret or public is a great difference and concernment; yet in this
question, and in relation to God and the conscience immediately, it is nothing
at all, for nothing here is secret, every thing is visible, and it is always
day here. But now the inquiry is concerning those things which are imperfect,
and so sometimes are secret as to men because they are only in desires, and
sometimes they are public, but yet not finished and completed: Quintil.
And here the rule is, Nunquam men's exitu aestimanda est. God judges not by the
event, but by the mind, by the good or ill will: so Apuleius, In maleficiis
etiam cogitata scelera, non perfecta adhuc, vindicantur, cruenta mente, pura
manu. He that thinks it, that is, that resolves it perfectly, putting the last
hand of the will to it, his mind is bloody, though his hand be pure, and shall
find an equal vengeance. But this is to be understood of the last act of the
will, and that which is immediate to the external action; if it be in counsel,
that is, not whether it shall be done or no, but how it shall be done, it is as
bad and hateful in the eyes of God as the external violence. Sententiar. 5.
To this purpose is that of Paulus the Lawyer, Consilium uniuscujusque, non
factum puniendum est, Not the fact; but the Counsel is to be punished: by
Counsel meaning the design and resolution, the perfect and complete volition,
which is then without all question come to the perfection of its malice and
evil heart, when it is gone as far as to the beginning of action. Insidiatus
civi etiamsi non effecerit scelus, poenas tamen legibus solvet, said
Quintilian, He that lays a snare for a man's life shall smart for it, though the
man escape; the laws shall punish him: but if they do not, it is all one in
Conscience. in Andria, act. 1. sc. 4.
For as Donatus said well, Non perficere, sed conari velle aliquid ad scelus,
effectio est, etiamsi non potest fieri. It is nothing to the sinner that God
defends the innocent and rescues him from his fraud or violence, or slander; he
has done his work when he resolved and endeavored it. For there is no degrees
of morality beyond the last act of the will: the sin or virtue may be extended
by multiplication or confirmation of the same acts, but no way intended beyond
that act of the will which commands execution.

But this distinction ought to be observed not only in order to punishments
inflicted by humane laws upon Criminals accused of imperfect acts, 13.
but in order to conscience. For though the whole morality of the act depends
upon the last purpose of the will, and is before God the fullness of the sin in
respect of degrees of any simple sin; yet when it passes on to execution the
will may grow worse by repetition of her acts, or abiding in them, she may sin
more sins. For the acts themselves about which there are endeavors made, are
not always perfect, so as the criminal can perfect them; for it is not to all
purposes perfect when the will has commanded the resolution to be acted, no
nor when something is done toward it by the sinning man, but something else
may be added, and till it be, there is some difference in the case. The
examples will clear it. Priscus Merula resolves to kill his brother Taurinus,
and in order to it, buys a dagger, way-lays him as he goes to Augustus, set
upon him, throws him down; but as he is lifting up his hand to strike, hears a
noise behind the hedge, and being affrighted, curses his brother and wished him
dead, and runs away. Merula is in the sight of God guilty of murder, and if he
had killed him effectively, there had been no greater malice, but more
mischief, and more acts of malice; and therefore the judges are to diminish
something of his punishment, not only because the life of a citizen was not
lost, but because Merula had not done all his part of the murder, that is, his
brother could not have died, unless he had done something beyond what he did.
But when the Egyptian nobility being weary of a dull melancholy Prince, who by
his healthlesse spirit was good for nothing, gave him a brisk poison to
dispatch him; that which would have burnt to ashes any person that had any fire
within him, did but heighten him to the ordinary temper of another man, it
only warmed him into an active spirit, and he became a wise Prince. Here the
murder was not effected, but there was on the traitors part nothing wanting to
the completing of the wickedness: and therefore as in humane laws they are to
have no abatement of sentence extraordinary, so in the Court of Conscience they
are to think of no excuse, no diminution, but every thing is present that can
make all that greatness which can be in the nature of that sin: and in the
first case there may be an alteration so timely as to change the mind before it
was at the utmost end of the line of wickedness; but in the second case,
whether the effect follow or no, there is place left for nothing, unless
peradventure for repentance. That part which concerns humane laws is alterable
as men please, and in Christendom (unless it be in the greatest crimes)
custom has against the purpose of laws given impunity to them who without
effect have attempted to commit vile actions; yet in the Court of Conscience
and by the measures of religion the matter is unchangeable.

There are some other ways of imperfect acts, 14.
which are to be regulated by the proportion of these measures. 1. He that
kills a child in his Mothers womb is as guilty of murder as he that kills a
man in the field, if he did equally intend it. In this it is true that the
Lawyers and Physicians distinguish the time of the abortion. If the child was
efform'd into a humane shape it is capital by the laws; but not if it was
inform and unshapen. But in order to Conscience I perfectly consent to the
doctrine of the old Christians, in Apologet. and in Exhortat. castit. and de
Virg. velandis.
recorded by Tertullian, Etiam conceptum utero, dum adhuc sanguis in hominem
deliberatur, dissolvere non licet. Homicidii festinatio est prohibere nasci.
Nec refert natam quis eripiat animam an nascentem disturbet. Homo est, and qui
futurus est: etiam fructus omnis jam in semine est. While the blood is in
deliberation whether it shall be male or female, it is not lawful to dissolve
it; and he that intends to hinder it from life is but a hasty murderer. He is
guilty of inferring death who prevents that to have life to which God and
nature did design it. But this is owing to the choice and design of the will,
for the effect of one is much less then the effect of the other upon many
considerations: but if the malice was not less, the difference of the effect
makes no diminution.

The other case is, 15.
If a man smite his neighbor that he die, he shall surely be put to death,
Exodus 21. 12.
says God to Moses. That is, if he purpose to smite him, though he did not
purpose to kill him, but wound him only, he has sinned unto death. The Vulgar
Latin reads it, Qui percusserit hominem volens occidere] He that smites a man,
willing to kill him. But this last clause is neither in the Hebrew nor the
Greek. And though it is something less to intend to wound him grievously, then
to kill him; yet he that willingly gives that wound which he would have do him
a mischief, and gives it so that it does give him his death, had a malice so
great that it could not well discern between wounds and death. But in this case
though it is certain God will judge righteously, and make abatement if there be
any cause; yet in humane laws, and in the measures of his own repentance he
will not and ought not to find gentle sentences, but the whole perfect event
will be imputed to the imperfect act of his will. For it was too much that he
was willing to do any mischief; and ex toto noluisse debet qui imprudentia
defenditur, said Seneca: He cannot pretend that the evil event was against his
will, when it is certain he did perfectly consent to a great part of it.

RULE IV. An involuntary effect proceeding from a voluntary cause is imputed to
the agent, as if it were voluntary and directly chosen.
HE that is Husband of the wife is justly presumed to be the Father of the
child, 1.
and he that chooses the cause must own all those which are the effects and
proper productions of it; and all causes are not immediate and contiguous to
the effect. He that drinks himself drunk that without fear and shame he may
fornicate, though when he fornicates he has not the use of his reason any more
then of his modesty, and cannot deliberate, and therefore cannot choose, yet he
is guilty of fornication as well as drunkenness. He that eats high and drinks
deep that in his sleep he may procure pollution, is guilty of that uncleanness
as well as of that excess, which S. Paul intimates in those words, Make not
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; that is, what you design
as the purpose of your intemperance, is your crime, though it be a natural
effect when things are by your choice so disposed: Luke 21. 34.
and when our Blessed Savior commanded us to take heed of surfeting and
drunkenness, he forewarned us as well of the effect as of the cause; for
(...), surfeting has it is name from the event, because it causes dissolutions
of the nerves and dilutions of the brain, and consequently palsies, which when
we have contracted, we are by our own fault disabled in the service of God.
(...), surfeting is the product of yesterdayes debauchery: and since the effect
is also forbidden, he that chooses it by delighting in the cause, chooses also
what is forbidden, and therefore that which will be imputed to him. Unum
necessar. cap. 5.
But this I have largely proved upon a distinct account, by making it appear
that even a vicious habit, the facility and promptness to sin is an aversion
from God, and makes us hateful by a malignity distinct from that which is
inherent in all the single actions. Thus he sins that swears by custom, though
he have no advertency to what he says, and knows nothing of it: he chose those
actions which introduced the habit, and he can derive no impunity from his
first crime: and he that is the greatest sinner can never come to that state of
things that he shall take God's name in vain, and yet be held guiltless.

But this Rule is to be understood with these Cautions. 2.


1. The involuntary effect is imputed to the voluntary cause, if that effect
was foreseen, or if it was designed, though when it be acted, the foolish man
knows but little of it, no more then a beast does of his own acts of pleasure,
which he perceives by sense, but does not by Counsel enter into it. Of this
there is no question, because he put his hand to a hook of iron, and that being
fastened upon the rich vessels in the house draws forth what the man it may be
knows not to be there; but his hand willingly moved the iron hook, and
therefore his hand and his will is the thief.

2. The involuntary effect is not imputed to the voluntary cause, 3.
if after it is chosen by the will in one act, it is revoked by another before
the mischief be effected. Thus if Maevius shoot an arrow to kill Paternus, and
in the instant of it is egression nollet factum, repents of the intended evil,
that mischief which is then done shall not be imputed to him. This indeed is
generally said both by the Divines and Lawyers; but it has no effect at all
that is material and considerable, save only this, that the repentance does
wash away the guilt: but in true speaking the whole guilt was contracted,
because the act of the will was completed up to action and execution, beyond
which there can be no intension of the evil; but then the effect is therefore
not imputed because the cause also is pardoned by the means of repentance, and
so it is even after the mischief is done. He that by repentance recalls the
mischief, shall by pardon be cleared from guiltiness, whether that repentance
be before or after.

3. But that which we can rely upon in this particular, 4.
and of which great use is to be made, is this, That though all the evil events
which are foreseen, or ought to have been considered, are imputed even then
when they are not in our power, to him who willingly brought in the cause of
those evils; yet whatsoever was not foreseen, and therefore not designed, nor
yet chosen, by consequence and implication is not imputed to him that brought
that foolish necessity upon himself. Consonant to this is the doctrine of S.
Austin, lib. 22. contr. Faust. cap. 44.
Culpandus est Loath non quantum incestus in ebrietate admissus, sed quantum
ebrietas meretur, Lot was answerable for his drunkenness, but not for his
incest caused by his drunkennnesse, which he foresaw not and designed not. But
this case also suffers alteration. For if Lot had been warned of the evils of
his first nights drunkenness, and yet would be drunk the next night, he is not
so innocent of the effect, the incest lies nearer to him. Only if after that
monition he suspected as little as at first, he was not indeed guilty of the
incest directly, but of a more intolerable drunkenness and a careless spirit,
who by the first sad event did not consider and was not affrighted from the
intolerable cause. But thus if a servant throws himself into a pit, and breaks
a leg or an arm that he might not work, his not working is as much imputed to
him as his uncharitable injury to himself: but if afterward, as Pyrrho saw his
Master fallen into a ditch, and by reason of that first fall he cannot help his
Master out, that is not to be imputed to him; for he willed it not, it was not
included virtually in any act of his will or understanding. And thus it is also
in the Divine judgments, which if we procure by our own vilenesses, all that
impotency and disability of obeying God in external religion which is
consequent to the suffering that judgment which himself procured, and by which
he is fallen sick or mad or lame, is not imputed to him; because to make himself
guilty of a thing, it is not sufficient that he be the meritorious cause of
that which procured it, but he must be the voluntary and discerning cause. That
evil of which a man is only the meritorious cause depends upon another will
besides his own, and is indeed an effect deserved by him, but not willingly
consented to, but very much against him; and therefore can never be imputed to
him to any other purpose but to upbraid his infelicity, who justly suffers what
he would not foresee, and now cannot avoid.

4. When a man falls into a state or condition in which he cannot choose, 5.
those acts which are done in that state are imputed to him, if they be such
acts to which no new consent is required, but that it be sufficient that he do
not dissent, and if those acts be consonant to his former will, all such
effects are imputed to the will. Thus if Titius being a Catechumen desired to
be baptized, and then falls into madness, or stupidity, or a lethargy he is
capable of being baptized, because nothing is in some persons required but a
mere susceptibility, and that there be no just impediment; the grace of the
Sacrament being so mere a favor, that it is the first grace to which nothing
on our parts is previous but that all impediments be removed. Since therefore
in this a man is passive, his present indisposition of making new acts of
election renders him not incapable of receiving a favor; always provided that
there was in him no indisposition and impediment before his present accident,
but that he did desire it and was capable before: that volition has the same
effect in the present state of madness or stupidity as it could have if he had
been well. But when this comes to be reduced to practice, I know of no material
change it works upon the man in case he dies in that sad affliction, but what
was by the mercies of God laid up for him upon the account of his own goodness
and the man's former desire. But if he does live, that susception of the
Sacrament of baptism is sufficient for him for his whole life, and the days
of his recovery; that is, all that which he could be bound to in the
susception, is performed effectively in that state in which he could not
presently choose. But I shall resume this consideration and inquiry upon
occasion of something to be explicated in the sixth Rule of this Chapter.

5. But in matter of punishment the case is something different. 6.
The case is this; Mizaldus a Florentine smote an Officer of the Great Duke in
the Court, and apprehending that he was in great danger of suffering a great
punishment, grew sad and impatient, and at last distracted ^ the question upon
the case is,

Question.

Whether or no Mizaldus may, being mad, be punished by death, or the abscission
of his hand, for a fact he did in his health and the days of understanding. To
this the answers are various by reason of the several cases that may arise.

1. If the punishment cannot be inflicted without legal process, 7.
trial, conviction and sentence, the mad man cannot be punished, because he is
not capable of passing through the solennities of law: but if the sentence was
passed before his madness, then the evil may be inflicted, that is, it is just
if it be; and it may be done unless some other consideration interpose to
hinder it.

2. In punishments where no judicial process is required, 8.
a man that is mad may be punished for what he did when he was sober. If a son
strikes his Father, Bartol. in l. ex facto. in princip. ff. de vulg. and
pupilla substit.
and then falls mad, the Father may disinherit him for all his madness,
because the Father may proceed summarily and upon sense of the crime; and he
that by his own voluntary act did deserve it, is not by madness made incapable
of the punishment, to which in this case nothing but a passivenesse is required.

3. This also holds in cases of punishments ipso facto incurred, that is, 9.
which a man is fallen into as soon as ever the crime is committed. And of this
there is a double reason; the one is because the punishment is actually
incurred before he is actually mad, for the very crime it self is to him as a
Judge and sentence, and the sanction of the law is all the solennity: and
that is the other reason, consequent to the former; in this case there needs no
process, and therefore the sinners indisposition cannot make him incapable of
passing into punishment.

4. In punishments Emendatory, 10.
that is, such which besides the exemplar justice, intend to reform the
Criminal, he that is fallen into madness ought not to suffer them, whether the
sentence be to be passed by the law or by the Judge, whether it be solemn or
summary, whether it be passed before his calamity or after. The reason of this
is plain, because such punishments being in order to an end which cannot be
acquired, are wholly to no purpose, and therefore are tyrannical and
unreasonable; the man is not capable of amendment, and therefore not of such
punishments which are emendatory.

But after all this, 11.
the moderation of charity in Christian Judicatories is such, as that they
refuse to inflict corporal penalties on distracted people, it being enough that
they are already but too miserable. Solus te jam praestare potest
Furor insontem: Senec. Herc. Fur.
proxima puris
Sors est manibus, nescire nefas.
He that knows not what he does, or what he has done, is next to him that is
innocent. And when the man is civilly dead, it is to little purpose to make him
sink further under the civil sword. That Is a dreadful justice and security
that would kill a man twice over. Only when any thing of example, or public
interest, or detestation of the fact is concerned, it may be done according to
the former measures, and for the present considerations; just as it is in some
cases lawful to punish a man after he is dead, by denying him an honorable or
Christian sepulture: where although there be something particular in the case,
the nature of this punishment being such, that because we do not bury them
before they be dead, this evil must be inflicted upon him that feels it not, or
not all be inflicted; yet indeed it is true that it ought not at all to be
inflicted upon any direct account of justice, but upon collateral
considerations, as for terror and exemplarity; and so it may be in the case of
the present question.

. 2. Of the Diminutions of voluntary actions: and first of Ignorance, and it is
influence into the morality of Humane actions.
RULE V. Nothing is good or bad, but what we know, or concerning which we can
deliberate.
1. THe great measures of morality are, 1.
Choose the good, and eschew the evil: before these can be chosen or avoided
they must be considered and discerned. And therefore those things concerning
which there can be no deliberation are neither morally good nor bad, and those
persons who cannot deliberate, can neither be virtuous nor vicious; but the
things may be lawful, and the persons be innocent, but both of them
negatively, that is, the things are not evil, and the persons are not criminal.
And therefore S. Paul celebrating the immense love of God to mankind, 1 Timoth.
4.
says that God would have all men to be saved; and in order to this, he adds,
he would have all men come to the knowledge of the truth, as knowing this to be
the only way: no man can be saved unless he knows saving truth, but every man
may be saved unless it be his own fault; and therefore there is to every man
revealed so much truth as is sufficient to his salvation. It may be this saving
truth is revealed by degrees, and so that he who has the first general
propositions of nature and reason, and uses them well, shall have more, even so
much as is necessary until he comes to all sufficient knowledge. He that comes
to God (says S. Paul) must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. This is the Gentiles Creed, but such as at first
will be sufficient to bring them unto God; whether when they are come he will
give them his Holy Spirit, and teach them whatsoever is yet necessary. I am not
here to dispute what is likely to be the condition of Heathens in the other
world: it concerns not us, it is not a case of Conscience: but we are sure that
all me have the Law of God written in their hearts; that God is so manifested
in the creatures, and so communicates himself to mankind in benefits and
blessings, that no man has just cause to say he knows not God. We see also
that the Heathens are not fools, that they understand arts and sciences, that
they discourse rarely well of the works of God, of good and evil, of punishment
and reward: and it were strange that it should be impossible for them to know
what is necessary, and stranger yet that God should exact that of them which is
not possible for them to know. But yet on the other side, we see infinite
numbers of Christians that know very little of God, and very many for whom
there is no course taken that they should know him; and what shall be the event
of these things is hard to tell. But it is very certain that without a man's own
fault, no man shall eternally perish: and therefore it is also certain that
every man that will use what diligence he can and ought in his circumstances,
he shall know all that in his circumstances is necessary; and therefore Justin
Martyr said well, voluntate ignorare illos, qui res ad cognitionem ducentes
hebent, nec de scientia laborant. Every man has enough of knowledge to make
him good if he please: and it is infinitely culpable and criminal that men by
their industry shall become so wise in the affairs of the world, and so
ignorant in that which is their Eternal interest; it is because they love it
not. Non aurum in viridi quaeritis arbore, Bo^th. lib. 3. de Consol. Philos.

Nec vite gemmas carpitis:
Non altis laqueos montibus abditis
Ut pisce ditetis dapes,
No man looks for Emeralds in a tree, nor cuts his vines hoping that they will
bleed rubies or weep pearls. Which of all the Heathens or Christians ever went
to take goats in the Tyrrhene waters, or looked for Crystal in a furnace? Many
know what pits have the best Oysters, and where the fattest Tortoise feeds. Sed
quonam lateat quod cupiunt bonum
Nescire caeci sustinent:
Et quod stelliferum trans abiit polum
Tellure demersi petunt,
and yet they look for immortality in money, and dig deep into the earth,
hoping there to find that blessedness which their reason tells them dwells
beyond the stars. Men have enough of reason and law put into their hearts by
which they read the will of God; and therefore no man can in the universal
lines and measures of salvation pretend ignorance: I am sure we cannot, and
that is all that concerns us. And therefore ignorance in the Law of God, in
that which concerns our necessary duty, is so far from excusing any thing it
causes, that it self is very criminal. Non est levius omnino nescire quod
liceat, Seneca.
quam facere aliquid quod scias non licere, To do somethings that we know to
be unlawful, is not so great a crime, as to be wholly ignorant of what is and
what is not lawful. So that since the great end why God has given us liberty
and election, reason and understanding, is that by these we should serve him
and partake of his felicities, it follows that in all that is of necessity to
our salvation God is not wanting to give us sufficient notice; and of good and
evil in general every man that has the use of reason does or may understand
the rules and differences.

But if we descend to particular rules and laws, 2.
the case is different. So Gregory Nyssen said, lib. 5. de Philosoph. cap. 2.
Universalium secundum electionem non esse involuntariam ignorantiam, sed
particularium, A man cannot against his will be ignorant of the universal
precepts that concern our life Eternal and Election, but of particulars a man
may. That a man must not oppress his brother by cruel or crafty bargains every
man ought to know: but there are many that do not know whether all usury be a
cruelty or oppression, or in any sense criminal. But concerning these things we
may better take an estimate by the following measures.

Of what things a man may or may not be innocently ignorant.
1. No man can be innocently ignorant of that which all the Nations of the
world have ever believed and publicly professed; 3.
as that there is a God; that God is good and just and true; that he is to be
worshipped; that we must do no more wrong then we are willing to receive or
suffer. Because these things and the like are so conveyed to us in our creation
that we know them without an external Teacher; and yet they are so every where
taught, that we cannot but know them, if we never consulted with our natural
reason.

2. No Christian can be innocently ignorant of that which the Catholic Church
teaches to be necessary to salvation. 4.
The reason of this is, because every one that knows any thing of God, and of
heaven and hell, as every Christian is supposed to do, cannot but know it is
necessary he learn something or other in order to it; and if any thing, then
certainly that which is necessary: and of that nothing can so well judge,
nothing can teach so readily as the whole Church; for if the whole Church
teaches it as necessary, then it is taught every where, and at all times, and
therefore to be ignorant of such things can never be supposed innocent.

3. Of that which is by several Churches and societies of wise and good men
disputed, 5.
a man may be innocently ignorant; for there is supposed difficulty, and
obscurity, and every degree of these is the greatest indication that there is
not of them any absolute necessity. What God has made necessary to be known,
he has given sufficient means by which it can be known. But because every man
cannot dispute, and of them that can, very many do it to very little purpose,
and they had better let it alone, and by disputing men often make more
intrigues, but seldom more manifestations of what is obscure; it is certain
that which cannot be known but with some difficulty and more uncertainty, may
be unknown with very much innocence.

4. Those things which do not concern good life, 6.
and the necessities of this world and of the other, are not of necessity to be
known by every one; because there is beyond these no common and universal
necessity. But beyond these.

5. Whatsoever concerns every man's duty in special, 7.
to which he is specially obliged, of that he cannot innocently be ignorant,
because he has brought upon himself a special obligation of a new duty, to
which he must take care that sufficient aides and notices be procured. Thus
must a Bishop understand not only the articles of faith, but the rules of
manners, not only for himself, but for those which are under his charge; he
must be able to instruct others in the mysteries of religion, and to convince
the gainsayers; that is, he must have knowledge sufficient to do what God
requires of him, and what himself has undertaken. * But then as there is in
the duty of every Christian, so there is in the charge of every office, some
things that are primely necessary, some things that are only useful, and some
for ornament, and some for excellency and perfection. So that as of every
Christian so much knowledge is required, that he be not ignorant of what is
necessary for his great calling, but of other things less necessary there is
less knowledge required; so it is in every special calling. For although a
Bishop must know how to teach sound doctrine, and to reprove evil manners; and
if he knows not these things, his ignorance is criminal: yet a Bishop may be
innocent and laudable though he be not so learned as S. Gregory Nyssen.
Valerius the Bishop of Hippo was a good man and a good Bishop, yet he was not
so instructed and able as his successor S. Austin; and Nectarius of
Constantinople was accounted a good Patriarch, yet he was very far short of S.
Chrysostom. Of what is more then of simple necessity, some may be innocently
ignorant, but yet very few are. Because God has not confined his providence
and his spirit to the ministry only of what is merely and indispensably
necessary: and therefore when God has largely dispensed and opened the
treasures of his wisdom and heavenly notices, we should do well not to
content our selves with so much only as will keep us from perishing. Therefore
that the Conscience may be directed how far it is obligation of inquiry does
extend, and may be at peace when it inquires wisely whether the duty be done,
these are the best measures whereby we can take account.

What diligence is necessary that our ignorance may be innocent.
1. Our inquiry after things necessary must have no abatement or diminution, 8.
nothing less then that it be so great and diligent as that the work be done.
Because whatsoever is necessary is sufficiently communicated, and without that
we cannot do our duty, or receive the felicity designed for us; and in that
where God's part is done, if the event answer not, it is because we have not
done our part, and then we are not innocent. So that in these inquiries we are
no otherwise to make a judgment of our diligence then by the event: whatsoever
is less then that, is less then duty.

2. But in things not absolutely necessary, 9.
such which are of convenience and ornament, of advantage and perfection, it is
certain we are not tied to all diligence that is naturally possible: and the
reason is, because these things are not simply necessary, and therefore not of
necessity to be acquired by all means. Add to this, if a man were bound to use
all diligence to acquire all notices that can be useful to him in his general
or in his special calling, he should fall under a perpetual rack of Conscience.
For considering that a man's life were not sufficient to do this in some
callings, and it is necessary in this world that a man do many things more
then the works of his office, he could never be suffered to attend to any
necessity but what is mere and indispensable and indivisible, and never use any
divertisement, recreation, variety or ease, but he must first be tied upon the
wheel, and feel the pains of a doubting and tormenting Conscience, by reason of
the impossibility of knowing whether we have done all that we can.

3. In acquiring notices concerning doing any work with advantages a moral
diligence is necessary: 10.
for he that stops at the gate of simple necessity has some love to himself,
and great dread of God, but no love to him; for love cannot consist with a
resolution of knowing no more then we must needs; to get so much and no more
will well enough serve the ends and the design of fear, but not of love: and
therefore although the man that does so is innocent as long as he is in that
state, and as long as that state is acceptable; yet because the state of fear
is but the state of infancy and imperfection, it must proceed further, or be
imperfect for ever; that state will not be accepted long. For if a man does his
duty in that state, he shall be enabled to go further; and then he must, or
else he sins by despising the spirit of grace. But if he does not do his duty
in the first state, then he must not in that state of carelessness and neglect
of using moral diligence pretend that he is innocent. A man that has been
blessed in his first attempts must still follow the method and Economy of the
Divine spirit; that is, as God increases in aides, so the man must increase in
diligence and labor, and must use what means are before him to do still
better and better.

4. In acquiring notices not simply necessary, 11.
a moral diligence is sufficient. This is an immediate consequent of the second
Rule, and therefore needs not particular confirmation, but explication rather.

Therefore by Moral diligence is to be understood such a diligence in acquiring
notices as can * 1. consist with our other affairs, and the requisites of our
calling and necessities; * 2. such as is usual by our selves in the obtaining
things which we value; * 3. such which is allowed by wise men, such which a
spiritual guide will approve; * 4. and such as we our selves do perceive to be
the effects of a real desire. For there ought to be nothing of scruple or
vexation in the acts of this diligence, nor in the inquiries concerning it. And
therefore if we are sure we desire to know what we can, and do toward it such
like things as we do in the purchase of other things which we greatly value,
we may be at peace. For this thing does not consist in an indivisible point, it
is not just thus much, neither more nor less; but it is more or less
according as our love is and our leisure, our opportunities and abilities: and
if we cannot judge concerning our selves so well as to rest in peace, let us
ask a spiritual guide, having first declared to him the narrative of our life
and actions whereby he shall be enabled to make a judgment.

What is a probable ignorance?
Upon this account we can also give the measures and definitions of a probable
ignorance, 12.
that is, such an ignorance which is next to an invincible or an irremediable
ignorance: this the Schools call probable. For as the invincible ignorance is a
mere nescience, and is either of such things which we are not bound to know,
because God requires them of no man; or of such things which we cannot know,
because we never heard of them, and are not taught sufficiently, and so God
will not require them of us: so next to this stands the probable ignorance,
that is, when the things are propounded to be known, and can be known if we
would use all our natural and possible diligence; but yet because God has not
placed them in a necessary order to salvation, he has not tied us to use all
our natural diligence, but some diligence he does require, which when we have
used, and yet miss, the ignorance is probable. Now when that is so, we shall
learn by the proportions to the description of the parts and requisites of a
moral diligence, and by these following measures.

1. Then our ignorance is probable, 13.
when we enter upon the action without temerity, and yet without doubt or
trepidation; that is, when our address is with consideration, but we find no
reluctance against the action, nor remorse after it. For then it must be that
we have faith, and do it with a good mind, not against our Conscience; and yet
having no fierceness of passion or fancy, and a mind wary enough to discern
any objection that is near, it will be very probable that there is none at all
but what stands a great way off, and therefore far enough from disturbing the
innocence of the action.

2. But this is to be understood only in the ordinary accidents and traverses
of our lives. 14.
But if it be in matters of great concernment, such as are above our ordinary
employments, as if it be in the actions and duties of an eminent office, it is
not sufficient that we have no regret or remorse, but we must have an actual
consideration, a plain perceived deliberation and counsel, and then no regret.
It is not here enough that we have nothing against it, but we must have
something for it, because in such persons and in such accidents the process
ought to be more then ordinary; that as there are greater abilities required to
the performance of that office, so there may be a proper use and exercise of
those abilities. And there is in this a great evidence of truth. For in
ordinary things, it is very often so that they are well enough if they have not
evidently any evil in them. But in the actions of public employments things are
not so indifferent; they do hurt unless they do good, they are scandalous if
they be suspicious; they are designed always to do benefit, and if they do
not they cannot be justified, and therefore they must be looked on with an
actual consideration: in which state of things it is certain that every thing
will occur that is obvious to be considered; and what it not obvious to such
persons is indeed very difficult, and may well be supposed to leave a probable
and very excusable ignorance.

3. This also is to be extended to the case of confident asseverations, 15.
and confirming any proposition with an oath, in which no man can have a
probable ignorance, but he that has used a diligence of inquiry so great as to
give confidence great enough to an oath, which must be of a thing so sure, that
nothing can be a cause of doubt, unless some secret and undiscerned thing, to
which a great and proportionable diligence has not arrived and made discovery,
do accidentally intervene. No man must swear a thing is so, and yet at last
say, I did bona fide suppose it so: but I examined it, I searched as well as I
could, I entered into all the corners of it, I had great reasons to believe, I
had fair assurances it was so, and I every day am assured of many things of
which I had less testimony. If beyond this any thing escapes him, the
ignorance is probable and excusable. But the rule is the same as at first: He
is sufficiently and innocently confident, who has no distrust, and upon
inquiry finds no cause of distrust; always provided that the inquiry be in
proportion to the dignity, and difficulty, and duty of the occasion and subject
matter.

By the use of these premises it will be easy to determine Plato's Case of
Conscience which he propounded to Hippias the Sophister. 16.
Whether is the better or worse, l. de Mendacio.
he that sins willingly, or he that sins by folly and ignorance? of them that
wrestle, whether is the more inglorious, he that falls willingly, or he that is
thrown in despite of himself and all his strength? whether foot is better, that
which halts upon design, or that which halts with lamenesse? whether were it
better for a man to have a fool or a knave to his servant? But this discourse
of Plato concerns arts only and sciences. But Hippias answered well, It was
not so in virtues; the differences of which Plato did not seem to discern, lib.
6. Ethic. cap. 5.
but Aristotle afterward very well explicated. The sense of which in order to
the purpose of the present Rule is well expressed by Seneca; Epist. 98.
Vis scire quam dissimilis est altarum artium cognitio and hujus? In illis
excusatius est voluntate peccare quam [casu,] ignorantia: in hac maxim culpa
est, sponte delinquere. If a Grammarian speaks a soloecisme on purpose, he
blushes not; but if ignorantly, he has reason to be ashamed. If the Physician
knows not what his patient ailes, it is more shame to him then if he on purpose
names a wrong disease. At in hac part vivendi, turpior volentium culpa est;
But in manners to err willingly is the more intolerable. The reason of these
things is plain, which who please may read in in l. 6. Eth. c. 5.
Gifanius the interpreter of Aristotle, and in Hippia minor.
Marsilius Ficinus the expositor of Plato: for indeed it is evident that to
moral actions the rectitude of the appetite is required, not so to arts and
sciences and the virtues intellectual. It is enough to art that the work be
well done, though with what mind it matters not as to that: and when the
Italian painter, who was to depict a Crucifix, hired a slave to be tied to a
Cross, that he might lively represent a body so hanging and so extended, did
afterward stab him to the heart, that he might see and perceive every posture
and accent and little convulsion of a dying man, he was very much the worse man
for it, but no whit the worse Painter; as appeared by the incomparable
excellency of that piece; and the principles of Art cannot be corrupted with
the evil manners of the Man: but because evil desires pollute the manners, the
will is to be taken care of, as the principle of all morality. To which we may
add that he who in arts erres willingly, can mend it when he please; but so
cannot he that erres ignorantly. Ignorance is the only disparagement of his
art, and malice is the only disparagement of our manners.

But this, though disputed to little purpose amongst the Philosophers, 17.
may be of good use in Cases of Conscience. Sleidan. lib. 4.
Cardinal Campegius having wickedly said to the Senate at Norimberg, that it
was worse for a Priest to marry then to fornicate, offered in justification of
it a reason that could less be justified. For (says he) the Priest that
fornicates knows he does amiss, and therefore may in time repent; but the
Priest that marries thinks he does well, and therefore will never change his
mind, he will never repent. It is true, he needs not, because he believes he
does well; and he is not deceived. But suppose he were deceived, and abused by
error, what man before him was ever so impious as to say that he that knows he
does evil is in a better condition then he that erres with a good mind, and
supposes he does very well? For the present, the state is infinitely different:
and for the time to come, which is the more likely to obtain mercy, he that
does a thing ignorantly, or he that does it maliciously, we shall not need to
appeal any whether but to all the notices of virtue and vice which are in
mankind.

Indeed there are some sins of ignorance, 18.
that is, such which are subjected in the understanding, which are worse then
some sins of malice, or such which are subjected wholly in the will and the
faculties which obey it. Thus to be ignorant of the fundamental articles of
faith is a worse state of things then to have committed an act of gluttony, or
to have entertained a wanton thought, or to have omitted Divine service upon a
Festival. They Jews had an opinion that thoughts were free, and God did not
require them of us with severity; but a thought against faith, that was highly
criminal. Cogitationem pravam Deus non habet vice facti, nisi concepta fuerit
in Dei fidem atque religionem, in Psalm. 66. v. 18.
said R. David Kimchi; meaning that no sin was greater then heresy, or an error
in faith. But the reason of this is, not only because the effect of heresy is,
like the plague, infectious and disseminative; but because by how much the
articles of faith are more necessary to be believed, by so much is the
ignorance of them more criminal, and more voluntary, and therefore less
excusable. But even in matters of faith, where there is less of malice or
wilful negligence ingredient into the ignorance of them, there the crime is
less then any thing else, be the instance what it will. But this will be more
explicit in the sequel.

RULE VI. Ignorance does always excuse the fact, or diminish the malignity of
it, or change the kind and nature of the sin.
IGnorance according to it is several capacities, 1.
and the several methods of art and ways of speaking, has several divisions.
But all are reducible to this in order to Conscience. Ignorance is either
voluntary or involuntary. It is vincible or invincible, that is, it can be
helped or it can not. It is the cause of an action, or it only goes along with
it. And of these several ignorances there are many degrees, but no more kinds
that are here fit to be considered.

1. The first sort of ignorance, 2.
which is involuntary, invincible, and antecedent, that is, is the cause of an
action, so that the thing would not be done but by that ignorance, does
certainly make the action also it self involuntary, and consequently not
criminal. In this sense is that of the law, l. 9. ff. de jur. and fact. ignor.
and l. 20. ff. de aqua and aquae pluvi.
Errantis nulla voluntas, nullus consensus, They that know nothing of it,
consent not. This is meant of ignorance that is involuntary in all regards,
that is, such as is neither chosen directly nor indirectly, but is involuntary
both in the effect and in the cause. Thus what fools and madmen and infants
do is not at all imputed to them, because they have no understanding to
discern good from evil, and therefore their appetite is not depraved or
malicious which part soever they take. l. 3.. 2. ff. de injur.
(...), says the law, according to the interpretation of the Greeks. Injury
proceeds from the affection, and consequently we say that a madman or an
infant if they strike or reproach anyone they are not criminal, they have done
no injury because they perceived it not. Nec reputantur infantiae anni qui
sensu carent, says Pliny; The years of infancy come not under the notice of
laws and judges, of right or wrong, for they have no reason, that is, de
Hippocrat. and Platon. placit.
they use none. So Galen, (...), All the scholars of Chrysippus constantly
affirm that beasts and babies have no use of reason. And Iamblichus supposed
that the rational soul was not infused into children before the tenth year of
their age. apud Stobaeu^^ in Physicis Eclogis.
But that is more reasonable which almost all wise men (excepting the Stoics)
affirm, and is thus expressed by de Anima.
Gregory Nyssen, and his contemporary de Not. Hom. cap. 2.
Nemesius in the very same words; (...), Although in infants there is no action
or motion of reason, yet we say that they have a reasonable soul, for they
manifest the use of it when they are growing up.

But this occasions a difficulty in this subject. 3.
For we see the rational soul exercising it is operations in some sooner in some
later; and as the body grows in strength and grandeur, so does the soul in the
use of reason and powers of deliberation and choice. Nam velut infirmo pueri
teneroque vagantur
Lucret. l. 3.
Corpore, sic animi sequitur sententia tenuis.
Inde ubi robustis adolevit viribus aetas,
Consilium quoque majus, and auctior est animi vis.
And Hippocrates adds that the soul does always grow, (...), A man's soul is
born every day of a man's life, it always receives some increment. Now the
question is How long shall infant ignorance or childshnesse excuse so far as
that the actions they do shall be reckoned neither to virtue nor to vice?

To this it will not be possible to give a strict and definite answer, 4.
but a rule and a measure may be given. Possidonius said, (...), The rational
faculty is at first very weak, but it is great and strong about the age of
fourteen years: de Placit. philos. 5. c. 24.
and Plutarch says that the Stoics affirmed (...), about the second septenary,
or the fourteenth year, Diog. Laert. in Zenone.
they begin to be perfect: but Zeno said that from that year complete, (...) it
is perfect, that is, as to all capacities of reward and punishment. But in this
there was great variety. For some laws would punish boys after twelve years,
not before: so the Salic law, tit. 26.
Si quis puer infra duodecim annos aliquam culpam commiserit, fredus ei non
requiratur, A boy before he is twelve years old, committing a fault is not tied
to make amends or composition. in 8. Eclog. Virgil.
Servius upon that of Virgil, Alter ab undecimo tum me jam ceperat annus,
says, the thirteenth year is meant, because that was next to puberty; for,
says, he, the law judges of maturity not only by years but by the habit and
strength of the body. But though this be less by one year then that of the
Stoical account, and more by one year then that of the Salic law; yet we find
in the law of the Greeks and Romans that after seven years complete boys were
punishable; so the lib. 60. tit. 39.
Basilica, tit. 71.
Michael Attaliotes and some others.

But this variety was not wholly arbitrary, 5.
but it was commonly established upon reason; for the differences were made by
the different nature of the crimes of which boys were not equally capable in
every year: but although in every crime some were forwarder then others, yet
all were capable of some sooner then of others. Spite and malice comes sooner
then lust: and therefore if a boy after seven years old killed a man, he was
liable to the lex Cornelia de Sicariis; Vide (...). ubi supra. in Epit. leg.
tit. ult. number. 21.
but not so if he were a pathic and a correspondent in unnatural lusts, as
appears in Matthaeus Blastares and Leo; if he were under twelve years, he had
impunity, quum aetas ipsa argumento sit nescire eum quid patiatur, said the
Emperor, His age is an argument of his ignorance, that he knows not what he
suffers. For in these things it was reasonable that Galen said of Hippocrates,
(...), infancy is to be reckoned until youth, or a power of generation: and
that was it which I observed before out of Servius, Been cum annis jungit
habitum corporis. Nam and in jure pubertas ex utroque colligitur. The strength
of body must be supposed before you allow them strength of reason, that is, a
power to deliberate and choose those sins to which they cannot be tempted before
they have natural capacities. But this, I say, relates only to the crime of
uncleanness. Now because this was commonly the first of our youthful sins,
malice in infancy being prodigious and unnatural, which caused that advice of
S. Paul, In malice be children; therefore wise men and the laws did usually
reckon that age to be the first beginning of their choice as well as of their
strength. But this rule is very far from being certain, and therefore S. Austin
blames those that do not impute any sins to boys before the age of fourteen;
lib. 10. de Genes. ad liter. cap. 13.
Merito crederemus (says he) si nulla essent peccata nisi quae membris
genitalibus admittuntur, We might well do so if there were no sins but the
sins of lust: but they can steal sooner, and they can lie, and, as unnatural
and as unusual as it is, they can be malicious, some sooner, some later,
according to the baseness of their disposition, their pregnancy and education.
lib. 11. cap. 18.
A. Gellius tells that the Decemviri, who wrote the laws of the XII Tables, ex
caeteris manifestis furibus liberos verberari, addicique jusserunt ei cui
factum furtum esset, They caused thieving boys to be whipped and given up to
them from whom they had stolen; and if they cut corn by night and stole it, they
were to be chastis'd by the discretion of the Praetor; which also Pliny notes.
lib. 18. cap. 3.
But then this also is to be added, that even in these things although they did
not esteem them innocent, yet because their understanding was but little, and
their choice proportionable, they inflicted but easy punishments: l. 1..
impuberi, ff. de Senate. Silan. habena.
which Theophanes expressed by (...), they were beaten with thongs, or rods, or
ferula's.

From hence we may take an estimate how it is in this affair as to the question
and relation of Conscience. 6.
For then these wise men and wise lawgivers did declare them punishable when
they did suppose them criminal; though in the Sanction of laws they were to
proceed by rule, and determine (...) as things were most commonly. But then it
is to be considered, that since they being to make a rule could not at all take
in extraordinaries, and there would many particulars and hasty instances be
passed before it could come to a just measure and regular establishment, we
must therefore proceed something otherwise in the Court of Conscience. For,
Declamat. 21.
as Libanius speaking concerning boys, said, (...), this is not a name of age
that cannot sin and cannot be punished. But Anastasius Sinaita says that
sometimes God imputes sins to boys from twelve year old and upwards. But S.
Austin confessed the sins of his first years, Quaest. 84.
the peevishness of his infancy, his wrangling with his nurses, his very
envying for the nurses milk and fondnesses: this was indeed a greater piety
then reason. But when he was a boy and robbed an Orchyard, he had reason then
to be troubled for it. The sins of children are but little, Epist. 57.
but they are sins. Puerorum sensus in qualiacunque verba prorumpens, qui certe
ad ea quae majores sapiunt pene nullus est. When boys give evil words, it is
almost nothing. But because it is but almost and comparatively nothing, it is
of it self and absolutely something; and we know not at what period of time any
child first comes to the use of reason, and therefore neither can we tell when
God will impute their follies; and when he does not impute their follies to
damnation, it may be he will impute them so far as to cause a sickness or an
immature and a hasty death. And therefore Parents and Tutors can never
discharge their duty but by a coercion and strict restraint of children, from
the very first beginning of their being capable of laws, of the laws I mean of
their parents, and even before that to restrain them from the material parts of
any evil, even from evil words which they understand not. For when they once
have learnt the sound they will quickly perceive the sense: and although we
account their infant malices pretty and sportive, yet because we know not from
what an early principle they come, nor how soon God will impute them, nor
whether they will tend, nor what impression they leave, we should betimes
exercise our legislative; and it is God's great mercy to children that they can
understand fear as soon as they can learn to sin, that their evil company and
evil inclinations may not prevent the discipline of the parents, but that God
and the good things of his law may get the first possession. And he that will
let his children alone till they have (...), animum consilio ac ratione
firmatum, Cicer. pro Cluent.
a fixed and settled judgment, shall find evil habits fixed and permanent as
the foot of a rock, and that good counsel will be too late, too easy a remedy.
The sum is this; So long as they are ignorant, that is, so ignorant that they
know not how to deliberate sufficiently to avoid a sin, so long their evil is
not imputed, but together with their reason begins their virtue or their vice.

2. The second sort of ignorance is concomitant, 7.
that is, such which is really and actually conjoined with the cause of the
action, but it self is not the cause; for if the man were not ignorant, he
would do the thing nevertheless. Thus the boy that flung a stone at a bird,
and hit his cruel stepmother whom he knew not to be there, said he did not then
design it, but the stone was well thrown. He that shoots an arrow at a stag and
hits his enemy whom he resolved to kill when he could well do it, but knew not
at all that he was in the bush, has an ignorance and a malice at the same
time; and here the question is which prevails, the ignorance to excuse, or the
malice to condemn. To this I answer, that the ignorance excuses that action,
but not that man. He is not a murderer in that shooting, nor in the counsels
and deliberation of that action; but for his mind and his malice distinct from
that action, he is proportionably guilty. But if the man have no malice to the
unfortunate man that is killed, then he is entirely innocent, if his ignorance
be innocent. The mind of the man is, and the action is; and if the ignorance
were invincible and irremediable, then there is innocence on all parts. l. 15.
ff. de juris. l. Divus. ff. ad leg. Cornel.
Non consentiunt qui errant, says the law. For there is in this concomitant
ignorance the same reason as in the antecedent, so far as relates to that
event, though not as to that action: the action was indeed voluntary and not
procured by ignorance, but that event was; and that being the thing only in
question, is to be accounted for, just as those actions which are wholly
produced by ignorance antecedent.

I deny not but the laws of wise Republics have principally regarded the mind
and Counsel of him that sinned, 8.
and that therefore the laws of the Romans under their Christian Princes did
profess to follow the law of God in the matter of involuntary murder, and so
did the Lombards and the Visigoths; yet sometimes this chance-medly was
punished by a lesser punishment: so we find in the laws of the Thuringians, Qui
nolens sed casu quodam hominem vulneraverit vel occiderit, compositionem
legitimam solvat. If a man unwittingly wounds or kills a man, l. 5. Epist.
si telum fugit potius quam jecerit, as Cicero expresses the instance, if his
arrow or weapon slipped from him, rather then was flung, he shall not be put to
death; but yet neither shall he wholly escape, but must pay a fine appointed by
law. And there is some reason for this. 1. Because the law must require the
life and blood of every of her citizens from whom it is taken, and the external
event, of which she is the most competent judge, must as well as it may be
repaired. But 2. although it may appear that the event was not intended, yet it
cannot so well appear whether the man did use all that diligence and precaution
which wise and good men ought to do to prevent mischiefs. And 3. something is
to be indulged to the injured person, some consideration had of the grief and
loss and the passion of the relatives of the slain person. And upon these
considerations God was pleased to appoint sanctuaries for such persons; which
in true speaking is but a just remedy for an unjust calamity, and supposes that
something was permitted in favor of the relatives of the unhappy man that
died, something, I say, which yet was not always deserved of him that was in
danger to suffer it.

3. The third sort of ignorance is the worst, 9.
it is that which is vincible and voluntary, that is, procured by the will, is
not the prime cause of it is actions but the effect, brought in on purpose to
make way for an easy mischief with a color and excuse. Of this there are two
noted and discernible degrees: An ignorance crasse and dull, and introduced by
negligence voluntary and observed more or less; and an ignorance affected,
that is, chosen and delighted in, to serve evil purposes. Now concerning these
degrees of this criminal ignorance it is true of them both that they bring
guilt upon the head of the ignorant, according to their several proportions:
but concerning the actions themselves which are acted by men in that state of
ignorance and disorder, there is something of particular consideration. For we
find our Blessed Savior praying for pardon for his persecutors upon this very
inducement: Luke 23. 34. Acts 3. 17.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do; that is, they do not
now know, for they are blinded and are in a state of ignorance: but that it was
vincible and voluntary appears by those words of Christ, John 9. 41.
If ye were blind, ye had not sinned; but now ye say that you see, therefore
your sin remains; and having eyes they see not, that is, they would not see,
they did it ignorantly, and they would not cure their ignorance, for it was
evident that Christ said and did enough infinitely to convince them that he was
the Messiah. 1 Timothy 1. Gal. 1.
So also S. Paul's ignorance was very culpable, when in zeal and rage he
persecuted the Church of God; but yet this ignorance lessened the malice of the
effect, and disposed him greatly toward pardon. Upon these considerations, it
is a worthy inquiry into that effect or influence which proceeds even from a
criminal ignorance and undiscerning estate, and what it can operate toward
pardon. The question then is, whether what is done by persons that know not
what they do, when that disability to know is procured by themselves, either
by voluntary negligence, or malicious purpose, is a sin as great as if it were
done knowingly.

Question.

The case is this, 10.
Marcus Bibulus falls frequently into drunkenness; when he is drunk he fights,
and fornicates, and steals, and does (as it happens) all manner of impiety.
Does his drunkenness excuse, or does it extenuate, or does it aggravate his
fault?

The Greeks called these things (...), 11.
that is (...), Contention and every mischief that comes from wine, says
Hesychius; which when a man has observed to be consequent to his intemperance,
or has been foretold of it by laws and wise persons, he may justly fall under
the sentence not only of drunkenness, but of homicide, or incest, or whatever
happens to be the vile daughter of so disgraced a Mother. Drunkards are very
often proud and quarrelsome: and therefore to that of Solomon, Look not upon
the wine when it is red, Rabba says, Ne spectes vinum cujus finis est sanguis,
Gemara Sanhed^in cap. 8. Ad Iliad. (...).
Look not upon the wine whose end is blood: and Eustathius says that the
nurses of Bacchus were painted (...), having snakes and daggers in their hands,
to show that drunkards were beastly and bloody. And therefore if such persons
could have impunity, there were no safety for the lives of innocent men, or the
chastity of modest women. But they neither have, nor have they reason why they
should (...), Moral. l. 1. ad Eudem. c. 34. and Ethic. ad Nicom. l. 3. c. 3,
and 4. Vide etiam Politic. 2. cap. ult. and Rhetor. 2. cap. 27.
said Aristotle; They that being drunk do evil, are guilty of the injury.
Because they are causes of their own ignorance: for they might have abstained
from that excess which caused them ignorantly to smite their Father. Pittacus
by a law caused a double punishment to be inflicted upon drunkards, one for the
cause, and the other for the evil effect. The same also seems to be the sense
of Plato both in his first and in his sixth book of Laws: but generally all the
interpreters of Aristotle, Averroes in l. 3. Ethic. c. 5.
the old Philosophers, the Mahumetans and the Christians and the Heathens, are
perfectly of this persuasion, that the sins they do in their drunken fit are
perfectly to be imputed to them. To this purpose is that of Cicero, ad
Herennium 2.
Nam qui se propter vinum aut amorem aut iracundiam fugisse rationem dicet, is
animi vitio videbitur nescisse, non imprudentia. Quare non imprudentia se
defendet, sed culpa contaminabit, He that with wine or anger or lust looses his
reason, cannot pretend ignorance or want of knowledge for his excuse, for by
his own fault he is polluted. And this is the sense of the Doctors of the
Church. S. Basil says drunkenness is (...), so S. Chrysostom; voluntaria
insania, so S. Austin; (...), so Isidore Pelusiot: A voluntary Devil, a chosen
madness, a spontaneous fury. And the very same words are used by Seneca and
Ammianus Marcellinus. And therefore the sinning man must not excuse him by his
stupidity, and blame the wine, but himself only; Tr^cul. Act. 4. Sc^n. 2.
as Callicles in the Comedy convinced Dinarchus when he prayed him to give him
pardon, Quod animi impos vini vitio fecerim; he was not himself when he did it,
it was his wine not he. The old man answered him, -- non placet
In mutum quippiam conferri quod loqui non potest. Nam vinum si
Fabulari possit, se defenderet: non vinum moderari,
Sed vino solent qui quidem probi sunt: verum
Qui improbus est, sive subbibit, sive adeo caret temeto,
Tamen ab ingenio est improbus.
Blame not the wine; for wine does not govern a good man, but a good man the
wine: But he that is wicked is wicked from within, whether he drinks or no. By
these sayings of wise men we perceive that they held not the drunkard innocent
even in those vilenesses which he did in his drunkenness; and their reason was
Philosophical, The effect from a voluntary cause is to be imputed to the first
principle.

But Commonwealths have another interest to serve; 12.
they are to secure the lives and good things of their citizens, and therefore
they are by all means to effect what is necessary: and if drunken mischiefs
were unpunished, men might pretend drunkenness for an excuse, and make it
really to be the warrant of their licentiousness, their rapine, their lust or
their revenge. Nam si isthuc jus est, Aulul. Act. 4. Scen. 10.
ut tu isthuc excusare possies,
Luce clara diripiamus aurum Matronis palam;
Post id si prensi simus excusemus ebrios
Nos fecisse amoris causa: nimis vile'st vinum atque amor,
Si ebrio atque amanti impune facere quod lubeat, licet,
said old Euclio to Lyconides. If drunkenness may be our excuse, let us go
and drink drunk that we may rob the Matrons in the streets. And Manuel
Palaeologus tells of one that had a mind to be revenged and put some affront
upon a great man; Orat. 3.
and because he durst not when he was sober, he drank himself into an impudent
fierceness, that he might first have boldness and then, as he hoped,
impunity. And therefore there may be great reason why the Civil laws of any
Nation should punish the evil effects of drunkenness not only for the evil
mothers sake, but for the security of the citizens.

But in Theology and in the just estimate of things in order to Conscience we
are to speak and to proceed with some little difference. 13.
For if it be asked concerning the drunkenness, or concerning the man, there
is no peradventure but he is for these evil effects the worse man, and the
drunkenness is also the greater crime. The drunkenness makes the injury or
the murder less criminal then if it were done with actual reason and choice,
but these make the drunkenness more intolerable and criminal. The man in
choosing drunkenness with or for these effects is much the worse man; but the
crime is the voluntary drunkenness, not the involuntary rage and injury. And
this appears upon these reasons.

1. Because by how much more the sense and reason is depraved, 14.
by so much the less the man has pleasure in his sin. For if he be wholly mad
or senseless, his sin is wholly useless to him, it does him no present
delight, any more then to a beast to push with his horns; which therefore is
not criminal because he cannot reflect upon his own act, he cannot choose it for
a reasonable consideration, he has no will to entertain it. But if he be not
so far gone, then there is some proportion of guilt, because there is of choice
in the shipwracks of his reason and his will: and therefore Theodoret said, qu.
59. in Genes.
(...), Drunkenness has some reproof, and some pity; some punishment, and
some pardon. And Arrius Menander said that per vinum aut lasciviam lapsis
capitalis poena remittenda est, in l. 6. de R^ milit.
They that sin by drunkenness or passion may be punished, but not capitally;
the same with that in Stobaeus, (...). Even in the follies and stupidities of
drunkenness there is something amiss besides the material part. But this is
when there is something left by which he can understand and choose something of
the crime.

2. The mischiefs consequent to drunkenness are therefore less moral evils,
15.
because they do less moral mischief. For no man by his lust acted in his
drunkenness is made more lustful, or by any act then done is promoted toward
a vicious habit; for he knew not what he did, and remembers it not: it is like
Lot's incest, no more known after then before, and therefore it leaves no
sediment or lees behind it; which shows it to have more natural vileness then
moral, and therefore is nearer to pardon. Et causa justa est, Aulul. Act. 4.
Scen. 7.
siquidem ita est ut praedicas,
Te eam compressisse vinolentum virginem.
If the young man was drunk when he lay with her, he has some excuse, that is,
as to his lust; but that is an aggravation of his drunkenness, and he is not
the more acquitted, when the aggravation of his sin and punishment is only
placed upon the right cause.

3. If the consequent mischiefs of drunkenness were formally those sins which
materially they are, 16.
that is, if they were properly guilty of all that they ignorantly do, then it
would follow that because murder is worse then drunkenness, and yet that
murder was involuntary, some action that is involuntary would be more malicious
then that which is chosen. If it be replied that those consequent acts are
chosen because the cause of them is chosen, according to what is discoursed in
the 4th Rule of this Chapter; I answer, that this is true if drunkenness were
not an accidental cause of them: but these effects being but contingent to
drunkenness, and the effect of some other evil principle, which then prevails
when by drunkenness the man's guards are called off, therefore they cannot be
entirely attributed to drunkenness; and therefore if a man be surprised with
drink, or is advised to it as to a medicine, if he falls into such consequent
disorders, it would be hard to damn this man as a murderer or as an incestuous
person, when he is so neither by his present, nor his antecedent choice.
Therefore it is that Libanius says that one who has grievously offended
another (...), Declamat. 22.
oftentimes is not punished when wine was his excuse; and the Scholiast upon
the (...) says that he that kills a man (...); with deliberation is (...) not
to be pardoned: If he does it by chance, he is free; but if by drunkenness, he
was by the Roman law banished for five years: and thus justice is preserved on
all hands, that the drunkenness should be punished more then drunkenness, and
the murder less then murder. For that is the worse for having such a daughter,
but this is more pardonable for having such a Mother.

But if the drunkenness be but imperfect, 17.
if the consequent crimes be remembered and delighted in afterward, (for that
is a certain indication the stupidity was not extreme, nor equal to an excuse)
then (...) such a drunkard is also all that which he acts and professes in his
folly: a remembering drunkard, as he is but an ill companion, so if he falls
into the horrid consequents which too often are the punishments of
intemperance, has no excuse. But if he chose drunkenness on purpose that he
might have impudence enough to do a mischief, he committed the sin beforehand,
and was before he acted it guilty before God; and when he has acted it, he is
also guilty before men See Rule 4. of this Chap. Number. 2.
. But unless it be in these cases, the actions done by him that understands
not what he does are as the actions of a mad man or a fool. The sin was done
before, and the mischief and the punishment do follow: but the guilt is in the
cause, not in the effect that is involuntary; though proceeding from a cause
that was indeed voluntary, but not univocal and proper.

The sense of this question thus explicated agrees with the doctrine of the
Fathers, 18.
who in the instance of Lot declare him criminal only as to his drunkenness,
Homil. 5. in Genes. Homil. 44. in Genes. lib. 2. contr. Faust. Manic. cap. 44.
not to his incest. So Origin, S. Chrysostom, S. Austin: and S. Ambrose gives
this account of the whole question; Sane discimus vitandam ebrietatem, etc. We
learn that drunkenness is to be avoided, by which we are brought to that evil
state of things, that we cannot beware of crimes. For those things which being
sober we avoid, when we are drunk we ignorantly commit. And a little after;
They who have been too free in drinking wine, know not what they speak, they
are like men dead and buried: ideoque siqua per vinum deliquerint, lib. de
Patriarch. cap. 6.
apud sapientes Judices venia quidem facta donantur, sed levitatis damnatur
authors, Therefore what vilenesses they commit in their wine (meaning when
they know not what they do) for the deeds themselves so ignorantly committed
they find pardon amongst wise Judges, but for their temulency a condemnation.

The result of these discourses is this. 19.
The vilenesses which are done by drunken and stupid persons unwittingly, are
not of the same kind of which naturally they are and would be if the actors
were sober: they are not the crimes of murder or lust or incest respectively,
but circumstances of great horror aggravating the drunkenness, and deeply
condemning the man. And yet, if the drunkenness be not extreme, I mean the
stupidity and ignorance, if that be not such as to take away wholly the use of
reason and moral choice, all the remaining portions of reason do in their
proper degree make the imperfect drunkard guilty of other perfect crimes, even
of whatsoever he then shall act; and they shall for their own degrees of
remaining choice be imputed to him as certainly as the drunkenness.

The same is the case of Inconsideration and Oblivion, 20.
whose effects are innocent upon the same accounts and no other. If they come
in upon a negative principle, that is, begin and proceed upon a natural
deficiency and an unavoidable cause, that which is forgotten, or that which is
done by forgetfulness must be amended and repaired as well as we can; but by a
preceding morally-diligent care, and an after-revocation, nolition or amends,
it may be kept innocent. This only thing is to be interposed, that if by the
precontract of a vicious habit there is ingenerated in our spirits and
exterior faculties such a promptness and facility of sinning, that many of
the acts of such a habit are done without advertency, as in vile and habitual
swearing, every such action though passing without notice is criminal, because
it is the product of the will habitually depraved; and there is no other cause
why the actual consent of the will is not at it, but because it was not
required, but presumed, and taken without dispute. A young Lutenist disputes and
contends for every single touch of a string: but when he has made it easy and
habitual, he resolves to play a set of lessons, and every stroke is voluntary,
though every one is not now actually considered.

Question.

To this. 21.
of Ignorance belongs the question concerning Fraud and Guile. For if another
man cosens and abuses my understanding, he places me in ignorance; and then it
is worth our inquiry, What morality or what obligation there is in those
actions which are done by us so abused, so deceived, so made ignorant, and
incapable of judging rightly.

The answer relies upon the same grounds as formerly, 22.
with this advantage, that he who is deceived by the crafts of another, has
most commonly an ignorance that is very innocent; and then if that ignorance be
wholly the cause of any action, the cause is innocent and so is the production.
And upon the same accounts we are to judge concerning the obligation of
promises and contracts made by persons in error and deception. 1. If the error
be concerning the substance of the thing contracted for, the contract is
naturally invalid, and obliges not at all. If Titius buy a horse, and Caius
send him a Mule or an Ox, there is nothing done, Titius has made no bargain
at all. If I buy a manservant, and the Merchant sells me a maiden dressed in
man's apparel, this makes the contract invalid; I made no bargain for a
maidservant, but for a man. When Jacob married Rachel, and lay with Leah, that
Concumbency made no marriage between them; for the substitution of another
person was such an injury as made the contract to be none at all: and unless
Jacob had afterward consented, Leah had been none of his wife. 2. If the error
and ignorance be not in the substance of the contract, whatever else the error
be, the contract is naturally valid, that is, without a new contract and
renewed consent it can stand; but if that error was the cause of the contract,
which if the error had not been would not have been at all, then it is in the
power of the abused person to rescind the contract, and the fraudulent
contractor is in Conscience bound to recede from all his ill-acquir'd
advantages. The reason is, because he did injury to his neighbor, and placed
him in evil dispositions and unaptnesse to choose wisely, otherwise then God and
the laws of nations and the common intention of contractors do intend: and
therefore although there was so much of the substantial requisites as could
make a contract naturally valid, l. Dolo. 5. C. de inutilib. stipulat. and
instit. de exceptionib. in initio.
yet it was so ill, that all laws and intentions and tacit conditions of
contractors have thought fit to relieve the abused person, Dolo vel metu
adhibito, actio quidem nascitur, si subdita stipulatio sit: per doli mali tamen
vel metus exceptionem submoveri petitio debet: and the reason is given l. si
dolo. 5. C. de rescindenda venditione; Si dolo adversarii deceptum venditionem
praedii te fecisse Praeses provinciae aditus animadverterit, sciens contrarium
esse dolum bonae fidei (quae in huju smodi contractibus maxim exigitur)
rescindi venditionem jubebit. In Contracts the honesty of the contractors is
principally to be regarded, and fraud is destructive of all honest intentions;
and therefore the Praetor shall rescind such fraudulent bargains. 3. But if the
error was not the entire cause of the contract, but that upon other accounts we
would have bargained, only we would not have paid so great a price, then the
bargain is valid, and the Praetor cannot rescind it, nor the injured person
revoke it; but the Civil law in this case did permit actionem quanti minoris,
that is, an amends for so much detriment as I suffer apparently by the fraud.
l. 13. ff. de actionibus empti. in princ.
If Caius sells to Maevius sheep which he affirms to be sound, but they are
indeed rotten, the law permits not rescission of the bargain, but forces Caius
to restore so much of the price as the sheep were overvalued. And this is also
the measure in the Court of Conscience. But this is to be understood in such
cases where the fault of the vendible commodity cannot be discerned by the
buyer, and where the seller did deceive voluntarily. For in other cases Caveat
emptor is the rule of the law, let the buyer look to it, and it is also the
rule in Conscience. The seller must not affirm the thing to be without fault,
if he knows it vicious and faulty. But neither is he bound to proclaim the
faults of his goods, if they be discernible. And of this Cicero discourses
reasonably, lib. 3. Offic.
Number te emere coegit, qui ne hortatus quidem est? Ille quod non placebat
proscripsit; quod placebat emisti. Quod si qui proscribunt villam bonam beneque
aedificatam, non existimantur fefellisse, etiamsi illa nec bona est, nec
aedificata ratione; multo minus qui domum non laudarunt: ubi enim judicium
emptoris est, ibi fraus venditoris quae potest esse? Sin autem dictum non omne
praestandum est, quod dictum non est, id praestandum putas? Quid vero est
stultius quam venditorem ejus rei quam vendat vitia narrare? Quid autem tam
absurdum, quam si Domini jussu ita praeco praedicet, Domum vendo pestilentem?
Who compelled thee to buy? The man that sold it did not (it may be) so much as
desire thee. He sold it because it did not please him; and because it did
please thee, thou have bought it. He that sets up a bill of sale and proclaims
a house fair, and well built and well-seated, has not deceived thee, though it
be neither well built, nor well-seated; because if it be entire for thee to
make a judgment, he has not deceived thee. Much less if he has not praised
it. For if all that is spoken in the bill is not of necessity (viz. in order to
the bargain or thy choice) to be verified, much less must that be performed or
required which was not spoken. But does ever any man cry stinking fish to be
sold, or say, Come and buy a house that has the plague in it? All this is
great reason: Only this is to be added, that such faults as cannot be
discerned by the buyer, must be declared, or must be allowed for in the price:
and the case is the same, if the buyer be a child, or a fool, or an ignorant
undiscerning person; l. in causae.. Idem Pomp. ff. de minor. and l. item si..
ult. ff. loc.
for no man must be made richer by the injury and folly of his Brother. I know
that in all the public contracts of mankind, that which all men consent in is,
to buy cheap and to sell dear: but Christian religion, and the contempt of the
world, and the love of spiritual interests, l. si voluntate. C. de rescind.
vend.
are sent from heaven, to cause merchandise to be an instance of society, and
not a craft and robbery. 4. If the buyer be deceived, but not by the seller,
but by a third person, and that deception be the cause of the contract, the
buyer may rescind the contract if he can; that is, he is not in Conscience
obliged to stand to it, if he can be quit in law: but he that deceived him is
bound to repair his injury if he have suffered any, or to break the bargain, if
the goods be unaltered. These things have no particular reason, but are evident
upon the former accounts.

. 3. Of Fear and Violence, and how these can make an action involuntary.
RULE VII. Fear that makes our reason useless, and suffers us not to consider,
leaves the actions it produces free from crime, even though it self be culpable.
THe case is this; 1.
Roberto Mangone a poor Neapolitan traveling upon the Mountains to his own
house, is seized on by the Banditi, a pistol is put to his breast, and he
threatened to be killed unless he will be their guide to the house of Signior
Seguiri his Landlord, whom he knows they intend to rob and murder. The poor
Mangone did so: his Lord was murdered, his goods rifled and his house burned.
The question is, whether Mangone be guilty of his Lords death.

To this the answer is easy, 2.
that Mangone is not innocent; and though he did not consent clearly and
delightingly to Seguiri's death, yet rather then die himself he was willing the
other should. No man is desirous in a storm to throw his goods into the sea, if
he could help it, and save his life; but rather then loose his goods and his
life too, he heaves them overboard. (...), Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 1.
said Aristotle, These kind of actions are mixed, but they have more of
spontaneity and election in them then of constraint. No Christian remaining a
Christian is willing to offer sacrifice to Demons, or to abjure Christ, if he
be let alone: but he that in time of persecution falls away, not changing his
heart, but denying his profession, this man is not excused by his fear, but
betrayed by it. ibid.
(...), There are some things to which a man must not suffer himself to be
compelled by any force, but he must rather die then do them. And because there
are some things (...), which are insufferable to humane Nature, and therefore
there is in laws assigned a certain allowance of fear qui potest cadere in
fortem and constantem virum, that is, in the case of danger of suffering the
extremest evils, and our obedience to humane laws is excused in such cases,
because no man is ordinarily bound by the laws to suffer a greater evil in
keeping the law, then is threatened by the law it self to him that breaks them;
therefore the law allows an omission of obedience in the fear of the greatest
evils, as I have already explicated lib. 3. Chap. 1. Rule 2.
. But in Divine laws it is otherwise, because no man can threaten or inflict
on another an evil comparably so great as God does on them that break his laws;
and therefore the less fear cannot be a reasonable excuse against a greater;
and in all cases, the fear of man must yield to the fear of God. And therefore
in the matter of a Divine Commandment, no fear of temporal evil is an excuse
or warranty. Because we are taught to despise poverty and pain and death, and
to do all this cheerfully and gloriously. And therefore this case of
Conscience and it is whole dimensions are quickly measured.

But this is only in Negative commandments, 3.
for they can never be broken with innocence upon what pretended necessity or
violence soever. But in positive Commandments the case is not so clear, but
fit to be more considered: But it will quickly also come to an issue, if we
distinguish omissions from commissions. For no man may upon any pretense do
anything against a positive Commandment. He may omit to visit a Christian in
prison, if he fears he shall loose his life in the visitation, or be threatened
with any great calamity; but he may not do him any injury or oppression to
save his life and liberty. ubi supra. and lib. 2. Chap. 3. Rule 11.
But I have to this also given particular answer upon another occasion. That
which I am to add here is this; There is no peradventure but the obedience to
a positive commandment, till it be placed in it is own circumstances and
required here and now and so, will give place to so just a cause of deference
and stay as is the securing our selves against a great fear. For where God has
not required us in particular manner to do a duty, he has required it in a
very particular manner to preserve our selves. But when the case is so, that
the particular is required, no fear of man can hinder us. For in all things God
is to be preferred. And therefore it is so rarely well ordered that unless it
be in extraordinary cases, as the Apostles preaching the Gospel, their open
confessions of faith, their declaring against the religions of the world at
that time, for which they had special commands, and were to do them and not to
fear the fear of men, there is scarce any positive law of God but either it may
be performed by an internal suppletory, by a desire and willingness and
endeavor, or else will be sufficient to be done in the article of death, that
is, then when we need not fear the worst that man can do unto us. Thus it is
in the susception of the Sacraments; from the actual susception of which by a
great and just fear if we be frighted, we cannot be hindered from the desire and
spiritual and most effective susception of them: and from the actual if we be
by a just fear delayed (though the case cannot often happen) yet it is
generally supposed that if they be done before our death, the commandment is
obeyed, if the delay was not on our part; and at our death no new fear of death
can be a just excuse. However, if it or any thing else be positively and
determinately required in circumstances, we must not be afraid of them that can
only kill the body; or if we be, the fear and the omission are both criminal,
and this is not excused by that.

But if in these or any other cases the fear be a surprise, 4.
sudden, and violent, and impetuous, that is, such that our reason is invaded
and made useless, such as by a natural effort disorders all our faculties,
such as that of Arachne in Ovid, Quid mihi tunc animi misera fuit? anne quod
agnae est
Siqua lupos audit circum stabula alta frementes?
Aut lepori, qui vepre latens hostilia cernit
Ora canum, nullos audet dare corpore motus?
such a fright as a hare or lamb are in when they are pursued by dogs and
^oxes, Occupat obsessos sudor mihi frigidus artus, lib. 3 Metam

Caerule aeque cadunt toto de corpore guttae,
when nature is in a lipothymie, and our strengths are made extravagant, when
we can do any thing in flying and nothing at all to consider; then our
understanding cannot deliberate, and then our will does not consent, and then
the effect is pityable but not criminal, but the fear it self possibly may be
both. For sometimes our fear may be so great, that it fills all our faculties,
and then there cannot be any deliberation; for that must be at leisure, and
must look upon two objects. Statius well describes this kind of fear in the
similitude of a hunted stagge......qualis cum cerva cruentis
Circumventa lupis, lib. 5. Thebais.
nullum cui pectore molli
Robur, and in volucri tenuis fiducia cursu,
Praecipitat suspensa fugam, jam jamque teneri
Credit, and illusos audit concurrere morsus:
she has no courage, no confidence, no hope of any thing; she dies if she
stays, but she cannot stay to consider so long; and when she runs, she dies
too, and she hears the wolf at her ear, and sees him with her eye, and feels
the teeth in her heart, and dies with fear. In such cases as these we are as
men without reason, and therefore to be judged accordingly. I have heard of a
Trouper who in the late sad wars of England being alarmed, was so affrighted
that he bridled his Comerade instead of his horse: and in the last inroad which
the Turks made into the Empire, a German carrier was so affrighted with the
noise of Turkish horses coming, that he knew not how to make use of his own to
fly away, but deploring his condition that his horse being laden could not run
fast, had not the reason left him, though he had time, to throw off his pack,
but staid in that amazement, till the prisoner of fear became a slave to the
Turks. What a man does in such a case, no equal estimator of things will impute
to choice or malice. He that flies from a lion pursuing him, and in his
affrightment runs into a River, is not criminally guilty of his own death. He
runs into one death before another, but prefers it not: for if he were in the
same fear of drowning, he would leap ashore though a Lion did stand there
expecting of a prey.

Concerning degrees of fear which are less, 5.
such which leave us in a power to consider and deliberate, they may lessen the
malice of the crime to which they drive, but cannot make the fact innocent. He
that is taken by a Tyrant and an unjust power and put amongst the troops, is
not innocent though in that fear and against his will he fight against his
Prince. (...), said Dio Cocceius, They went willingly to war, if at least
they may be said to be willing who are constrained by fear. It is an unwilling
willingness, and therefore it is a sin almost against their will. For in
despite of such a constraint, Dial. Me^etrie.
a man may use his liberty; as Lucian says of the young man, (...), He did not
marry, but though his Father forced and compell^d him, yet he refused.

The same is the case of Superstition, 6.
which is an excessive and inordinate fear in the matter of religion. If the
fear be supreme and distracting, the effects of it are very pityable; but
criminal only in that degree in which it is vincible and can be subdued by
reason. When Michael Stifelius a German in Luther's time had affrighted the
people with a confident and terrible prediction of the day of Judgment within
a few days to be revealed, the poor affrighted people left off their daily
labors, and took care of no duty for this life. This omission at another time
would have been very criminal; but now their superstitious fear did alleviate
it, if not wholly take it away. But in this there is nothing particular, save
only that the causes of fear in this case are worse then in other things; but
the effects themselves are not commonly very bad.

But this passion of fear has in it yet more difficulty in relation to humane
contracts and obligations, 7.
which can be evacuated and declared never to have obliged if they commenced
with fear. For upon this account some pretend contracts of marriages,
absolutions from Ecclesiastical censures, testimonies in testamentary causes,
vows, donations, sentences, resignations of Benefices, constitutions of
Proctors, election to offices, and oaths of obligation to men, and promises,
not to oblige, if the promiser or contractor was constrained by fear.

But to all these the answer will be the same, 8.
for they are all discernable by the same reason. If the fear was such that it
might affright a wise and a constant person, the law judges the contract to be
null, and not to oblige in law, which is the measure of contracts and legal
obligations. But although the law declares many particular cases, in which the
fear does annul the contract, and in such cases ordinarily there needs no
further inquiry; yet because many cases happen in which the law has not
regularly declared her sentence, by that measure which the law goes by, we may
without trouble determine our selves. The rule therefore is this; When any evil
threatened is so great, that to suffer it is more intolerable then to do the
thing to which you are compelled, there the fear is supposed great enough to
nullify the contract. If a rich person be threatened, that he shall be forced to
pay a hundred pound, or marry the oppressors daughter; if he promises to marry
her he is obliged, and that fear and that threatening shall not prevail to
evacuate his promise. Because he that so threatens intending but an evil that
is very tolerable, if the marriage be of worse mischief, he did not choose it
out of fear; for he that does so, chooses the less evil to avoid a greater, not
a greater to avoid a less: lib^. singul. ad Marcellin. de Spir. and liter.
so S. Austin observes, Neque enim dici solet quispiam voluntate fecisse,
siquid fecit invitus; quanquam si subtilius advertamus, etiam quod quisque
invitus facere cogitur, si facit, voluntate fecit: sed quia malit aliud, in
Epicte^um.
ideo invitus, hoc est, nolens, facere dicitur; and Simplicius to the same
purpose, quia licet inviti agamus, tamen sic agere eligimus, It is indeed
against our will; but when things are in an evil state, we choose the least. If
therefore he chooses that which he says is a worse evil, he cannot pretend it
is for that fear; and consequently it must be upon some other motive, something
of his own; and if it be, it will verify the contract. Titius finds Caius at an
advantage with a Watch and a Ring about him of no great value; he threatens to
take them from him, unless Caius will promise the next day to bring him twenty
talents. Caius promises it, and therefore is obliged, for he cannot say, he was
compelled. For no less violence can constrain us to suffer a greater, because
that is far more eligible then this. And therefore the law calls nothing a just
cause of fear, but the fear of the greatest evils, as death, torment,
dismembring, intolerable disgrace; that is, such things which to avoid a man
would suffer any evil that is less. Now because in contracts we intend some
advantage to our selves, real or imaginary, and in contracts effected by a
great fear we can design none but the avoiding of a greater mischief, the law
and right reason wholly attribute it to fear, and therefore annul the contract.
Martial's case is pertinent to this inquiry, Quod si me tonsor, lib. 11. Ep. 59.
cum stricta novacula supra est,
Tunc libertatem divitiasque roget,
Promittam: nec enim rogat illo tempore tonsor;
Latro rogat: res est imperiosa timor.
Sed fuerit curva cum tuta novacula theca,
Frangam tonsori crura manusque simul.
If a Barber when the rasor is upon my throat contracts with me for twenty
pound, if I fear he will cut my throat if he be denied, I promise to him as to
a thief, with whom whatsoever contract I make in my intolerable fear, no law of
man does verify it. But Martial as to his instance was no good Casuist.

For if it be inquired whether I am obliged in Conscience to keep my promise to
a thief or a bandito, 9.
which I made to save my life; I answer that I am. Because he being an outlaw
and rebel against all Civil laws, and in a state of war, whatever you
promise to him, you are to understand it according to that law under which then
you are, which is the law of Nature and Force together. So that you cannot be
guarded by the defensative of the Civil laws, nor is your contract under it is
guard and conditions. In contracts under the protection of Civil laws, we are
to go by it is measures, and the contract is good or bad accordingly. But when
we have no measures but what we can get of our selves, our contracts are to
begin and end between our selves, and by our own proportions. But in law no man
is supposed to have consented, but he in whose power it is to dissent. Si vis
scire ut velim, Seneca.
effice ut possim nolle: and every contract must have (...), as Damascen calls
it, a desire free from all bond. (...). If there be force and a sad necessity
in it, it is a calamity rather then a contract; and therefore the laws intend
to defend and rescue us from the oppression.

I am to add one caution, 10.
That no reverential fear, let it be never so great, and the person never so
timorous, so that the use and ministeries of reason be left, can excuse a sin,
or nullify a contract. The reason is given by Aristotle, Ethic. lib. 10. c. ult.
(...), The Fathers Empire has in it no violence and no coaction. And
Heliodorus Prusaeus in his paraphrase says the same thing, that the commands
of Parents, or such whom we reverence and fear, (...), have not such force as
to compel: not but that we are to obey; but that what we do out of reverential
fear to them is not compelled, but voluntary and chosen.

What is said of Fear, 11.
is not true of other passions, lust and anger, or whatever else is productive
of those effects which use to make men ashamed, and disorder all their
interests. 1. Because these passions are seldom of that nature and degree of
violence as to take away all powers of deliberation, and therefore they are but
seldom fit to be pretended in excuse of any action. 2. They are commonly the
true Mothers, the univocal parents of their productions, otherwise then it is
in fear and drunkenness and ignorance; for these produce things of a nature
different from their immediate principles, as drunkenness produces effects of
anger, of lust, etc. that is, it is the occasion of them, not the proper
Mother. But lust produces lust, and anger sends forth angry words, and
spiteful actions, and resolutions of revenge. 3. The products which come from
these passions are so very far from being rendered involuntary, that by these
passions they are made most delightful, and without them they could not please
at all. 4. Whenever they prevail to any violence or extremity of degree, it is
by an increasing will; not by weakness and natural infirmity, but by a moral
state of infirmity, that is, a state of sinfulness. 5. It is not in these as
it is in fear, or vincible ignorance, that what is voluntary in the cause may
be involuntary in the effect: but in these passions and temptations, the Mother
and the daughter are chosen; not the one directly and the other by
interpretation, but both of them properly, directly and immediately. For these
reasons the case of these passions is curiously to be distinguished from the
precedent. But when these passions do come to extremity, although their proper
acts are not the less sins but the greater, as an act of anger is the more
devilish by how much the passion is the more extreme; yet if any aequivocal and
contingent effects be produced, as if in the violence of lust a child be run
over and hurt, or any thing that is not natrual to that passion, nor intended
by the man, then according to the degree of the ecstasy and transport by the
passion, the contingent effect may be lessened in it is malignity. And in this
sense is that of Libanius to be understood; Declamat. 22.
or else it is not true, that injuries are very often to be remitted if the man
has drunkenness for his excuse, (...), or anger, or forgetfullnesse, or
arrogance, or any such like thing. Like to this is that of Arrius Menander, ubi
supra.
Capital punishments are not to be inflicted per vinum aut lasciviam lapsis, to
them that offend by the follies of drunkenness or the violence of lust. -- Et
vino tortus, and ira: Wine and rage are like two racks, and compel men to open
secrets. Now when the case is so that the effect is aequivocal, as it is in
drunkenness in many instances, and in other passions sometimes, there only
there is some diminution or excusing of the crime. But the Ancients gave too
much liberty, and an indifferent sentence in these cases, because wanting the
Christian measures they understood no better.

CHAP. II. Of the Final Cause of Humane actions; and it is influence or
Causality of Good and Evil.
RULE I. In every good action the means and the end must be Symbolical: so
that, 1. a good action done for an evil end, and 2. an evil action done for a
good end, are alike Criminal.
THE first part of this Rule is in the express words of our Blessed Lord, 1.
Take heed that you give not your alms before men to be seen of them. Matthew. 6.
1.
Even alms, which are our righteousness, and so rendered both by the Arabic and
the Vulgar Latin, yet if done to vainglorious purposes, are good for nothing,
but are directly acts of vainglory. (...), says S. Basil, The noise of a
trumpet spoils our alms. For from the end every action is qualified; and an
indifferent action is made good and bad by the end; and that which is so
already, is made more so by a participation of that to which it is designed.
For the end changes the nature as well as the morality of the action. Lib. 5.
Ethic. cap. 2.
So Aristotle, (...). He that commits adultery for gain is covetous, not
lascivious: but he that spends his money and suffers loss for his lusts sake,
he is the wanton. And therefore God and all wise men regard not the exterior
action in their accounts of virtue, but the manner and purpose of doing it.
Quoniam quidem non in facto laus est, sed in eo quemadmodum fiat. Eadem res si
gulae datur, turpis est: si honori, reprehensionem effugit. Amico aegro aliquis
assidet? probamus: at hoc si haereditatis causa facit, vultur est, cadaver
expectat. So Seneca. The praise and virtue is not in the thing done, but in the
manner of doing it. If we spend great sums of money in our Kitchen, it is
sordid: but if upon public works, on Colleges and Hospitals, on the Poor or
upon Religion, it is brave and noble. He that visits his sick friend in
charity, does well; but he that sits by him and watches with him in hope to get
a legacy, is a vultur, and watches for the Carcass and the Prey.

Now concerning this, 2.
the best Compendium of all the Cases of Conscience which can relate hither,
is, that with hearty simplicity we pursue that rule of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Whether ye eat or drink, and whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God:
the same with those other words of his, for the one illustrates and explicates
the other, Coloss. 3. 17.
Whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God even the Father by him. Concerning the obligation
and full sense of these precepts, the following measures are our Rule.

1. He that in every action that is considerable, 3.
and fit to be noted and discerned, and is distinguished by counsels and
consultations, by deliberation and observation, does actually design the glory
of God, does his work most perfectly. It will shame the tepidity and
incuriousness of Christians, if I tell them that this advice is given to us by
some wise Heathens. When Marcus Brutus had given many excellent precepts to
parents, and children, and brethren, he adds, Haec nemo faciet quemadmodum
debet nisi habuerit quo referat. Proponamus oportet finem summi boni, ad quem
nitamur, ad quem omne factum nostrum dictumque respiciat, veluti navigantibus
ad aliquid sidus dirigendus est cursus. No man can do these things as he
ought, unless he direct them to some proper end. We must propose to our selves
the chiefest good for our end, to which every word and every deed of ours must
have regard; as mariners in their sailing look to a star for conduct. This is
not so to be understood as if we were to make acutal directions and dedications
of every single word, or little minute action we do, to the glory of God: this
is a snare to Consciences, and an Hypochondriacal devotion which some Friars
have invented, and attributed to S. Gertrude, of whom they report that Christ
admonished her that she should consecrate every little part of action and word
unto him; not only every writing, and every discourse, and every meal, and
every prayer, but every bit she put into her head, and every letter she did
write, every single step she did tread: just as if a man that were to receive a
thousand pound should tell it over by so many single Maravides, and not be
content to tell every shilling, but reckon how many farthings are in the whole
sum; this would sound great as the Spanish Cobblers portion to his daughter, but
certainly a wise man will find something else to do, which may be more really
for God's glory, then so to tell his little minutes and particles of actions.
It is a great piety if we dedicate to God all our states of life, and all our
great actions in every state, and all changes, and every day, and every night,
and every meal, and every beginning of labor, and give God thanks at every
end, and invocate his help in every progression; for so doing, we shall
consecrate our whole life to God. Hist. Lausiac. c. 20.
And this counsel S. Macarius of Alexandria gave to Palladius Bishop of
Helenopolis; who when he was a young man was much troubled in Conscience
concerning his unprofitable life, and supposed that he did nothing that was
good, nothing that was profitable, but all he did was vain and trifling.
Macarius told him, Dic tu tuis cogitationibus, Propter Christum custodio
parietes, when such afflictive thoughts do intervene, say unto them, For
Christ's sake I keep the walls. Nothing could be a meaner imploiment, nothing
could be less useful; for the walls were not likely to run away. His meaning
was, whatsoever the imploiment of a man's day or a man's life be, though never so
mean, yet if it be done with a single eye, and with an intuition to Christ, it
is a holy imploiment.

2. Although our intentions by how much the more they are actual, 4.
by so much they are the better, yet it is not necessary that they be always
actual; but they are right if they be virtually and habitually directed unto
God: that is, that by some general designation of our actions, by the renewing
of our intentions actually in certain periods of time, as in the morning of
every day, or at evening, or both, or in every change of imploiment, we have an
actual intuition on God and God's glory; and then, though we only attend to the
work without any more actual consideration of the end, the intention may be
right, and the action sanctified.

3. 5.
But because thousands of words and actions may pass wise and good men in which
they do not actually reflect upon the end of God's glory, and that possibly the
thinking of it, and saying, I design this to God's glory, is of no more value
then if a man says, I love God; which if it be only an act of fancy, or of
ineffective affection, is no sure indication of the true love of God, but must
be expressed by something that is more material and properly significative of
love according to the Commands of God and the manner of Men; therefore we
cannot better judge of the goodness of our intentions, or that we do our
actions for the glory of God, then when we are in all things careful that we
do nothing against any of the laws of God. For this is that charity which is
the singleness of a Christian eye: Ut noverimus omnia opera nostra tunc esse
munda, and placere in conspectu Dei, si fiant simplici cord, id est,
intention superna, fine illo charitatis, quia and plenitudo legis charitas
est. Oculum ergo hic accipere debemus ipsam intentionem qua facimus quicquid
facimus: quae si munda fuerit and recta, and illud aspiciens quod aspiciendum
est, omnia opera nostra quae secundum eam operamur, necesse est bona sint. So
S. Austin. He does all to the glory of God, that does all his works, and speaks
all his words in charity; just as he works for a reward, who does that good
thing which shall be rewarded, though it may be he thought not of it since his
first beginning of his Undertaking. To do all things by the rule of God's
will, is to do all things for the end of God's glory. For he that walks with
his eye upon the rule, is all the way careful that he may not dishonor God;
and that is a great matter toward it: Plin. lib. 3. ep. 11.
and he may at least say of himself, Non ideo tamen eximiam gloriam meruisse me
credo, sed tamen effugisse flagitium; if God has acquired no honor by my
action, I am glad I have not dishonored him: and yet he that actually takes
care that God be not dishonored, does obey God, and that is our best love to
God, and in this world our greatest glorification of him; it is more then all
songs and thanksgivings expressed in words or transports of fancy. If we take
care that all our actions be obedience, and nothing be against God's will, we
glorify God rightly. Adjice nunc, quod nihil honest fit, Seneca ep. 82.
nisi cui totus animus incubuit atque affuit, cui nulla part sui repugnavit.
That is done honestly that is done with an honest and a whole heart, and is all
of a piece, nothing at all repugnant to the Rule.

4. He does all things for the glory of God, 6.
that does nothing for an evil or a forbidden end: that is, if we take care
that there be no foulness or any unlawful thing in our purposes. For if a man
does things wisely, he must design some end; and therefore if his end be not
evil, then it is a lawful end: and if he studiously declines every end that is
evil, he is careful that God be not displeased, that God be not dishonored,
and whatever ends can be besides all ends that are evil, are certainly good,
that is, eligible for some good purpose; it comes from God, and to him it
returns. The first of these ways is a doing all things to the glory of God
actually. The second does it virtually, or habitually. The third is a
glorifying of God interpretative, by equivalence and interpretation: and this
fourth does it consecutive, by way of consequence and acceptance.

5. There is yet another way of doing it, 7.
which is so perfect an indication of the designing God's glory, that unless
our hearts deceive us, the sign will not; and that is, a beginning all our
actions and changes with prayer, Ubi supra.
and ending them with thanksgiving: this is that which S. Paul calls a doing all
things in the name of the Lord Jesus; giving thanks to God the Father by him.
For to do things in the Name of Christ can signify nothing but a doing them
at his word, and by his aid; which when we pray for of God in his Name, and
then return thanks to God by him, we have evidently directed that action to the
Divine glory. And this is the full meaning of those words of the Apostle, Every
creature is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. That is, whatsoever is
taken according to God's word, and upon whatsoever so taken we pray for the
Divine blessing, it is sanctified, and ministers to the good pleasure and glory
of God. So that if God be at any end of the action, and be at no end of it
displeased, we have secured our intentions: and there will be the less need by
scrupulous fears to afflict our selves concerning actual remembrances and
intuitions of the end; since there are so many ways of supply and equivalent
performances. For

6. He that does all that he does because he supposes God commands him or
allows him, 8.
and abstains from all things from which he does abstain only because God has
forbidden those things, this man's intentions are right, and his actions pointed
to a proper end. For then every act is an act of obedience, and that is love,
and that is the great instrument of the glorification of God.

The second part of this Rule, viz. An evil action done for a good end is
Unlawful, is plainly enough taught us by S. Paul, Romans 3. 8. and I have
already Book 1. chapter 5. rule 8.
given account of such particulars as are under the general Consideration. This
only is to be added; that an evil done for a good end merely and entirely, is
less then that which is not so alleviated; according to that saying of S.
Austin, Pejor est qui concupiscendo quam qui miserando furatur, He that steals
that he may give alms is not so bad as he that steals in Covetousness and for
his own increase.

RULE II. To do an action of it self lawful, for temporal regards, for ends
of profit, pleasure or honor, is not unlawful, except it be accidentally.
THE Arabians have an excellent Proverb, 1.
Anima boni operis bona est intentio, A good intention, or a good Mind, is the
Soul of a good work. Now by how much the more noble that end is which is the
design and purpose of the agent, by so much the more excellent is the action.
We ought therefore to consider that every thing that God has made is good, and
every desire of man which is Natural is also good; and God made amabilities in
several objects, and inclinations and tendencies toward them in several
faculties; and he that gave us desires to them, intended also that we should
obtain and use them, and therefore he also fitted us with means to acquire
them. It follows therefore that those actions which proceed from those desires
as those desires proceed from God, and tend toward those ends whether God
himself by the measures and laws of Creation has directed them, must needs be
very innocent and lawful. If God gives Riches as a blessing and a reward of
piety, it is lawful to desire riches, and to labor for them. If Honor be a
gift of heaven to them that honor God, then to desire honor and to do
actions for that end cannot be criminal. If Pleasure be created by God as an
instrument to serve many ends of Nature and Grace it self, then to desire
pleasure, and to do actions in order to it, is not against the end of God's
glory, because it is not against his will. These things are as evident as a
demonstration. All that remains is, that in these we also glorify God; that
is, so use them, so desire them, so design them, that they be still left in
that place and in that order where God appointed them: that is, that they
entertain our intermedial desires, and satisfy the needs of our journey and
travel, and please our ministering appetites in order to their service to their
Superior: that as this life is but a passage to a better, so these desires may
minister to higher, and by the comforts and satisfactions of this world promote
our affections and purchases of the other. The particulars of which are briefly
these.

1. These temporal ends must not fill our affections and divert them from
things better and more excellent. 2.
Si ipsa cordis intentio qua facis quod facis, quae tibi nota est, sordidatur
appetitu rerum terrenarum and temporalium, atque caecatur, quanto magis ipsum
factum, cujus incertus est exitus, sordidum and tenebrosum est? said S. Austin.
Our appetites must not be polluted with earthly affections. Which S. Basil
expresses well in answer to that question, In reg. brevior. reg. 196.
How in eating and drinking can we glorify God? Mensam accedas animo non
nimium soluto, and in solum cibum hiante, Come not to the table with a
dissolute mind and a greedy desire. Say not, Bring me, bring me, the meat is
mine own, I lick my own plate, I live of mine own provisions; and therefore I
will please my self, that I may feel my self to live. You must not so speak,
and you must not so eat: but rather revolve in thy mind, Inspectorem habeo
Deum, God beholds me; I will therefore so eat that no man may be offended, nor
God's glory lessened. I will not be the slave of my own belly, or follow it is
pleasures alone; neither will I live to eat, but eat that I may live, and be
enabled to bear the burdens of my life and duty. Plainly thus; He that observes
the measures of Temperance, the limits and ends of Nature, and materially
serves those ends which he is bound to take care of; he eats and drinks to
God's glory: although he do not formally design by actual intuition this meal
to God's glory. Let him so eat that he may be fit to serve God, and that he
neither desire, nor actually do serve his lust; let his pleasure extend no
further then to serve his health and natural and religious ends, that is, let
it be intermedial to that end whether the eating it self is designed; and the
intention is innocent. For he that chooses this dish rather then another,
because it is pleasant, has not corrupted his intention; if this pleasure
serves no more but that intermedial end which is in a natural or proper order
to a further end of God's appointing. That he eats this and not that, his end
is pleasure; but because that he eats at all has another end, even to enable
him to live in duty to God and his Neighbor, and to preserve his life
according to the measures of charity and duty, this end of pleasure is
innocent, because it is Natural, and produced by God, and goes on further
toward the other ends of God. So that the result is this; Actions may be done
innocently for temporal ends, if those temporal ends be but intermedial, and be
carried on further according to the purposes of God.

2. We may serve our temporal ends according to our Natural or Political
desires, 3.
always provided that we observe those measures which God has prescribed; for
then we are sure they will bear us on to the glory of God; for that is their
purpose, and that must be ours. A man may seek to be honored, but he must not
seek it by ill means; * he must not make the service of God to give way to
that; * his affections must not dwell in that purchase; * it must leave no
vanity upon his spirit; * it must not serve the end of pride; * it must be some
way or other for God, in the beginning or in the latter end: that is, if it be
not actually or virtually designed for Gods glory and service, that is, for the
good of our Neighbor or our own Soul, by that means to encourage us in virtue;
it must at last be referred to God, Vide Reginald. prax. lib. 12. cap. 3. n. 27.
and passing through us rest upon him. Cajetan, Navarre and Reginaldus from
this instance except two cases; saying that if the honor be our due, as if we
receive it from our Subjects and inferiors; or if it be matter of favor and
grace, indulged to us by our Superiors, it is lawful to receive it without
either actually or habitually referring it unto God: that is, we may take
honor to our selves without referring it to God, when that honor is our due,
and when it is not our due; when it is paid us in justice, or when it is given
us in kindness; which are almost all the cases in the world of receiving
honor. But this doctrine ought not to be received, as being infinitely
unreasonable and very impious; since in the case of Herod God declared his
anger mightily because he received honor from his Subjects, and did not in so
doing glorify God.

3. All designs of profit, 4.
pleasure and honor, must be the less principal; that is, ever subordinate to
duty and religion: for although the profit or the pleasure swim uppermost, and
be the actual mover to the particular instance, and be more perceived then any
actual consideration of the last and noblest end; yet this is not sufficient to
condemn the intention, unless it be made the principal; that is, that it be not
only more delighted in by the contacts of sense, but preferred also in our
understanding part, and our abused reason. Concerning which we may take
accounts by the proportions I have formerly described. See Book 1. chapter 2. Rule
5.
But in General, Our best measure we can take in the regulating this Case of
Conscience is, that we enquire whether we prefer the ultimate or the
intermediall end; which trial we may easily make when they cross one another,
as it often happens they do in the very instance, and very often in their
proportions, circumstances and degrees. If we will not receive our profit or
our pleasure without innocence, our purposes and our hearts are right; only
then we are to take care that the love of our profit do not hinder us in
making right judgments concerning Lawful and Unlawful. For very often we
think our affections and our purposes are right, when there is no other cause
to think so but because our understandings are not right.

But for the fuller understanding of our measures in this inquiry, there are
some particular Cases of Conscience to be resolved.

1. Whether it be lawful to serve God for any end less then himself; 5.
for riches, for honor, for defense and security of our lives, for health and
secular satisfactions: that is, Whether it be lawful to make God and his
service to be intermedial to the things of the world, the ultimate end to be
intermedial, and this to be the ultimate.

I answer; 6.
It is at no hand lawful to do so, if the meaning be such, that if these ends
should fail, we would no longer serve God; for then these temporal ends are
principal, when without them the service would not be done, and with them alone
it would. But it is lawful to serve God for temporal ends, provided that these
being but some or all the first incentives of duty, they bear us on indeed to
the service of God. For he that serves God for temporal ends does well; and it
matters not where the service of God begins; whether by fear or hope, whether
for temporal regards or upon wise discourses: the more imperfect motives are
more usual with beginners. But then although it matters not where we begin, yet
it is a very great matter whether these beginnings carry us: for if upon these
first incentives we do indeed serve God, then our love to God begins from them;
and if these imperfect principles be the beginning of our love, they will
certainly end in God. But if the question be concerning a single action,
whether it be lawful to be done only for a temporal regard, as to get fame or
money; I answer, that a single action done alone for any such consideration
with actual rejection, or positive neglect of all other considerations, is in
it is whole constitution criminal: and in this sense those words of Publius
Mimus are true, Malus est vocandus qui sua causa est bonus, He is no good man
that does good only for his own sake. For it is a direct preferring the world
before God, and is not a serving God for temporal ends, but wholly a serving
our selves by actions which in those circumstances are no serving of God, but a
doing of some material actions of religion in mere hypocrisy. But to serve God
for temporal ends is very lawful, 1. when these temporal ends are either the
incentive and argument used by God to move us to his service; especially if no
other be used, and if the Covenant be founded upon temporal promises, as the
Law of Moses was; 2. or when these temporal ends are but the first and
beginning motive, and lead us on to other and better; 3. or when they do
actually consist and are conjunct with others; 4. or when they are in true
estimate and value subordinate and less principal; or 5. when the temporal end
is first served, and the service is a return of gratitude, and the effect of
preceding obligation.

The first of these was the case of them in the old Law. The second is the
ordinary case of beginners in religion. The third was the case of Moses, who
despised to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, because he had an eye to
the recompense of reward: which reward was both temporal and eternal. The
fourth is the case of all them who follow after godliness because it has the
promises of the world that now is, and of that which is to come; and that seek
the Kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, knowing that all these
things (which they need here) shall be added to them; added ex abundanti,
besides those greater and more glorious promises belonging to the Kingdom of
grace. And the last was the Case of Job. Does Job serve God for naught? No, he
had received many blessings which had endeared and obliged his services. But as
in all cases God gives us temporal blessings in order to his service and the
communication of Eternal; so must our intentions and designs be, ever
subordinate, ever apt to yield in case of opposition, but always ministering in
case of compatibility and consistency.

2. The second inquiry is, 7.
In what sense it is true that God must be served purely for his own sake; and
virtue pursued for virtues sake, and not for low regards, for fear or hope, or
secular considerations.

To this I answer, 8.
that this question has it is principal effect in discourse and contemplation,
and but little in practice and in the real events of actions. For the first
thing that any man knows of God is, that he is, and is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: and no man does choose to serve God but he really is
assured and believes he shall have a very great reward: See Book II. chap. 1.
rule 4.
and all the laws of God are established upon promises and arguments of
amability and desire. So that to serve God for his own sake, is nothing but an
ecstasy of love used by some excellent and contemplative persons, in which they
only actually consider the excellencies and perfections of God; being built up
in the love of God by the instruments of fear and hope and experience, and the
spirit of God: and to serve God without reward, can never be any more then a
fiction of law or fancy, a supposition, and a case put, which can never be
reduced to act. But even as the serving of God with intuition of the reward is
virtually a serving God for love of him; so serving God out of mere love of
him, is virtually a serving God for reward. Diligeris populo non propter
praemia, Caesar: Epigr. l. 8. 54.

Propter te populus praemia, Caesar, amat.
For as no man can wisely hope for the reward but he that does love God; so no
man loves God purely and for himself but he knows also that he is most sure of
his reward. It is like S. Paul's wishing himself anathema for his Brethren: the
greater charity he had in so wishing, the further that thing was from being
effected.

2. But yet there is something more material in the answer to this question. 9.
For by God and wise men it is intended we should love God purely and for
himself; but so he does who loves God above every thing else; for all that
supereminent love by which God is more loved then all the world, all that love
is pure and for himself. He that loves God only for riches or health, loves
these better then God: but he that loves God above these, loves him for these
and for himself too; for the good that he is, as well as for the good which he
does.

3. He is understood to love God for himself, 10.
who abstains from sin not only because it is forbidden, or because it will
bring him to mischief, but because he hates it; though it may be the
prohibition and the fear first brought in that hatred. For this they usually
called the love of virtue and honesty; Lib. 4. epist. 20.
but the other is necessity. Neque enim minus apud nos honestas, quam apud
alios necessitas valet, said Pliny. And of this we still receive the greater
evidence, by how much the less we are moved with any of the lesser appendages
of virtue. Lib. 5. ep. 14.
Quam me juvat (said Secundus) quod in causis agendis non modo pactione, dono,
munere, verum etiam Xeniis semper abstinui. Oportet siquidem quae sunt
inhonesta, non quia illicita, sed quasi pudenda vitare. Jucundum tamen, si
prohiberi public videas quod nunquam tibi ipsi permiseris. I am pleased that
in the administration of justice I did not only abstain from bribes and
presents, but even from new years gifts and gratuities. For we ought to abstain
from dishonest things not only because they are unlawful, but because they are
shameful. But when a man had rather do a base action then suffer trouble,
then he gives in evidence, that he loves not God and virtue in any sense
principally. So he in the Comedy, Pol pudere quam pigere praestat totidem
literis. Trinum.
It is better to blush then to be hungry, to be ashamed then to smart. Lucrum
pudori praestat. That Is the intention and design of these men: they serve
virtue as long as virtue will serve their ends of pleasure and profit, and no
more: and this is therefore infinitely against the will and glory of God,
because it destroies the noblest conjugation of graces that are in
Christianity; it makes that there shall be no such thing as self-denial and
Christian fortitude, and the greatest love in giving our lives for God, and
Martyrdom. But the surest conjecture we can make of our intentions when they
are complicated is by the actual cession of one to the other. Theodoric advised
well to Marcellus the Advocate of his Exchequer, [in Cassiodore] Non quoties
superes, sed quemadmodum vincas inquirimus. Non quaeras de potestate nostra,
sed potius de jure victoriae: quando laudabilius a part fisci perditur, cum
justitia non habetur. I have always power on my side, but do you take care
that I have right. I am willing my revenue be increased, but at no hand would I
have justice violated. Such men as these and in these cases do love God for
himself, therefore because they love good actions for other considerations then
the temporal reward; they love God and serve him whether it does them hurt or
good, pleasure or displeasure: and that is the true meaning of the old brave
Philosophers and Poets, of loving virtue for virtues sake; they loved it when
it was discountenanced, when it was the Enemy of their temporal ends and
prosperities; and what they called loving virtue for virtues sake, the
Christian calls loving God purely, or for God's sake.

4. But if we search the Scriptures, 11.
we shall but seldom see footsteps of any such Metaphysical love, as to love
God or do our duty without considerations of hope or fear: and amongst the
braver Gentiles, and amongst the better Christians in imitation and contentions
to excel them, it is further observable, that when they speak of loving virtue
for virtues sake, they only mean to exclude all considerations of sordid ends,
of slavish fear of laws, or the acquist of money. But even in their greatest
bravery, some of them designed to themselves the reward of Honor and an
immortal Name; and the best of them did rest in the peace of their minds, and
that satisfaction which uses to reward a good action even in this life: but by
both these they were by God secretly conducted to an expectation of a reward
hereafter: and there was no love of God ever so abstracted by any command or
expressed intention of God, as to lay aside all intuition of that reward;
because in the receiving of that reward we are most united unto God, and shall
in the best manner and measures glorify him for ever.

RULE III. The end and intention of a Law is under the Commandment, as much as
the action it self commanded in order to the end.
THIS Rule is meant principally of the Laws of God: Vide lib. 2. chapter 3. rule 4.
Because the end of all these laws is that which is simply and absolutely good,
and nearer to the chief end which is primarily designed: and this is an
endearment of our services and a Monitor to our duty in many particulars not
expressed. God has commanded us to honor our Parents; his end is, that we may
receive the fruits of Government, provision and order, defense and maintenance
respectively. Upon this account, since we are more bound to comply with the
purpose and end of God then with the means to that end when it is evident and
known, because the end is greater in God's account then the means; we are
taught that it is the will of God so to expound the words of that Commandment,
as may best promote that end: and by Honor is understood all those duties
whereby the Parent is confessed Honorable; and by Parents is meant all that
are in the place of Parents, and who minister to the ends of Government.

Now this must not be understood as if God did design the end, 2.
and cared not for the means; for he is the best chuser of the instruments also
of his own service and his own glory: and though the end is better then the
means, yet those are the best means which God has appointed: but if we cannot
obtain the means, then it will suffice that the end be acquired as well as we
can by other instruments Symbolical. Thus we are bound to profess the faith of
Christ in the susception of baptism: but if we cannot obtain baptism, which is
the usual and appointed publication of our faith, yet we are obliged still to
pursue the end, and confess the faith of Christ by profession, by holy living,
by declaring our desires of baptism, by dying for Christ if it be required.

This also has effect upon the instances of our duty so as to enforce the
sincerity and ingenuity of them, 3.
and to make them really useful in order to their proper ends. Thus we must
confess our sins, because we will forsake them; pray to God for his grace,
because we intend to make use of it; not resting in forms of godliness, but
living in the power of it. Diodorus lent to Caius ten Attic talents; but Caius
is not able to pay a dram, and therefore Diodorus forgives him; that he may
be thanked indeed for nothing. Condones aut sustineas, Diodore, necesse est:
Nam tibi quod solvat non habet arca mea.
But if Diodorus will be truly charitable let him lend to Caius so much more;
for he serves no end of charity that lets that alone which he knows he can
never get. Ridicule hac homines, Avian. fab.
nequeunt quae vendere, donant. I deny not but it may accidentally serve the
ends of charity to forgive him that is insolvent; it may free him from fear of
trouble, and make his life comfortable; and he that does it upon these
considerations serves the end of the Commandment. But he that forgives it for
no other reason but because he cannot have it, he does nothing at all; for
though he perform the instance of the law, yet he does nothing toward the end
of it.

But in humane laws the case is something different; 4.
for we are only obliged to do nothing against the end of the law: for in this
sense is that of the law to be understood, Fines mandati sunt diligenter
custodiendi. l. diligenter, ff. mandati. The ends of the law are with diligence
to be kept. But we are no otherwise bound to promote that end then by observing
of such means as are appointed; that is, if the end be only civil and humane,
and do not also include a duty of religion commanded by God. If the Church
command a fasting-day in order to a corporal affliction of our selves and an
external ministry of repentance, we are bound to obey it; and though that
fasting-day should accidentally be no affliction, yet by virtue of that law we
are no further obliged to afflict our selves. But we are indeed obliged to do
nothing that shall be against the end of that law. Finem certum respicientia
non debent contrarium operari. l. quod favore. C. de legibus. We must not
caress our selves with delicious juice of fishes and costly wines upon a
fish-day. The reason of these things is briefly this. In humane laws the end is
not always good; or if it be, it is not always necessary; or if it were in
any degree necessary, yet the necessity of it is to be judged by the Supreme,
and is no otherwise to be estimated necessary by the Subject, then by the
conjecture, the proportion and efficacy of the means or instrument appointed by
the Supreme to effect that end: and therefore we are bound to restrain our
liberties no more then the law restrains them; and we need not be wiser then
the laws: but he that goes against the mind of the law, upbraids the
insufficiency of her provisions, and shows that he obeys with an ill will.

But the laws of God have it in their intention to regulate all the purposes
and whole intention of the Subject; 5.
and therefore our obedience cannot be measured only by the instance of the
precept, but by the purpose of it: and because we must serve God with all our
heart and all our skill, our duty must be coextended with all the holiness and
designs of God in every Commandment; that is, we must do all that which we
really suppose God would have to be done in every of his laws, whether it be
expressed or only implied. For he that intends the just end of all humane
actions, that is, the glory of God, can be assured that his purposes are right,
when he measures them by their tendency to the end, better then by their
commensuration with the expressed means.

(...), 6.
said Philostratus. That Is the sum of all; we must take care that the end of
our actions be all of gold. Eu^t^th. in Iliad. 4.
If they be designed well, they are likely to end well; for this is truly (...)
for in the service of God, a Golden head shall never have the feet of clay.

The End.
Nomini tuo da gloriam.
THE TABLE.
A.
Aequivocation.
IT was disowned by the Roman Senate. l. 3. c. 4. r. 23. n. 7. p. 358. is
allowed for great charity. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 35. p. 100. but not to evil
ends. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 39. p. 102. is allowable in more cases then lying.
ibid. n. 40. p. 103. is then only a crime, when it is against Justice and
Charity. ibid.
Advocate.
in a good cause must not use evil arts. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 14. p. 90. may
not tell a lie. ibid. p. 91. against those of them that are evil and rapacious.
l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 20. p. 116.
Abraham.
concerning his offering his Son. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 8. p. 266. whether Sarah
were his Sister. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 32. p. 300. and n. 45. p. 305.
Act.
when and how the internal acts alone do multiply the sin. l. 4. c. 1. r. 3.
n. 11. p. 486. and n. 9, 10. the omissions of them are oftentimes indifferent.
l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 15, 16. p. 444. the external act of it self increases not
the goodness or badness of the internal, but accidentally it may. l. 4. c. 1.
r. 3. n. 7. p. 484. the external act inferrs obligations distinct and greater
then the internal. l. 4. c. 1. r. 3. n. 8. p. 484. every renewing of an
external Act serving to a sinful end is either a repeating of the sin or an
aggravation of it. ibid. n. 10. p. 485. the goodness or badness of an Act is
made by the Object. l. 1. c. 2. r. 9. n. 4. p. 95. but accidentally good or
bad, by the Conscience. ibid. n. 7. p. 96. Acts of virtue are to be prefer^ed
before the Instruments of virtue, and inward Acts before the outward, when Laws
interfere. l. 2. c. 3. r. 5. n. 10. p. 410. Acts of virtue Elicit and Imperate
what they signify. l. 2. c. 3. r. 6. n. 1. p. 411. The Elicit acts of several
virtues can never be contrary to each other. ibid. n. 2. p. 411. The Imperate
acts of one virtue may ^ontradict the Imperate acts of another. ibid. n. 3. p.
411. the Imperate acts of one virtue must not hinder the Elicit of another.
ibid. n. 6. p. 413.
Actions.
what guilt is contracted by imperfect actions. l. 4. c. 1. r. 3. n. 12. p.
486. of the morality of actions that are involuntary in the effect, but
voluntary in respect of the cause. l. 4. c. 1. r. 4. p. 489. to begin all
actions with prayer and end them with thanksgiving. l. 4. c. 2. r. 1. r. 7.
actions in their physical capacity are negatively indifferent. l. 4. c. 1. r.
1. n. 14. p. 444. of the morality of negative actions. ibid. n. 15, 16. p. 445.
every action of our lives is either good or bad. ibid. n. 19. p. 448. we should
be watchful over our words and actions. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 21. p. 450. to
praise an ill action how far sinful. ibid. r. 2. n. 9. p. 460. of the identity
and diversity of actions internal and external, and the multiplication of sins
by them. ibid. r. 3. n. 5. p. 483. an action receives the denomination of good
or bad from the end. l. 4. c. 2. r. 1. n. 1. how it is to be understood that a
man should make the glory of God the end of every action. l. 4. c. 2. r. 1. n.
3. we must not judge of the goodness of actions by the event. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4.
n. 5. p. 162. how far a secular end may be admitted to be the reason of a good
action, and what diminution it makes of the worthiness of the act. l. 1. c. 2.
r. 5. n. 2. p. 65. but if the secular end be or be not under a promise it much
alters the case. ibid. n. 2, 3. p. 65. the difference of outward actions. l. 2.
c. 3. r. 6. n. 8. p. 413. what are elicit actions. ibid.
Abrogation of laws.
of the abrogation of laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 7. p. 431. to the making a Law many
conditions are required, but the defect of any one is sufficient to the
abrogating. l. 3. c. 6. r. 7. n. 1. p. 431.
Adam.
the six precepts given to him. l. 2. c. 2. r. 2. n. 3. p. 281.
Admonition.
of brotherly admonition. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 6. p. 108.
Accessory.
it follows the nature of the principal. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4. n. 4. p. 227. what
is an Accessory. ib. n. 7. p. 227.
Adultery.
a subject of England taking in Spain his daughter in adultery may not kill
her, though it be the Law there. l. 3. c. 1. r. 8. n. 3. p. 50. it may be very
pious and charitable for a woman to cohabit with an adulterous husband. l. 1.
c. 5. r. 8. n. 9. p. 193. but she is not bound to do so. ib. n. 10. the
falsehood of a betrothed woman is in Scripture punished as Adultery. l. 3. c. 5.
r. 8. n. 16. p. 387.
Affirmative.
affirmative duties follow from the negative not in contraries but in
contradictiories. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 10. p. 392. affirmative precepts bind
semper, not ad semper; negative semper and ad semper. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 13.
p. 393.
Amor
descendit non ascendit, the meaning of it. l. 3. c. 5. r. 3. n. 3. p. 367.
Angels.
upon what false reason the Gnostics commanded the worship of Angels. l. 2. c.
3. r. 13. n. 22. p. 464.
Apostles.
their Canons were at first observed by more Churches then those they did
oblige. l. 3. c. 4. r. 11. n. 2. p. 266. how far those orders made in the
Church by them do bind others. ibid. n. 3. p. 267. they gave no laws to oblige
all ages of the Church, but such as they received in commandment from Christ.
ibid. n. 4. p. 267. apostolical institutions may be changed. ibid. Cassander
affirms, those laws that enjoin single life to Bishops and Priests ought to be
relaxed, though they were Canons Apostolical. ibid. Canons Apostolical not
observed. ibid. n. 6. p. 268. the Apostles institutions concerning the
Sacrament oblige all Christendom. l. 3. c. 4. r. 12. n. 1, 2. p. 269. the
Apostles did not prescribe to the Church in any thing that is matter of order
or decency. ibid. n. 4. p. 270. the ancient Church did differ in their
practices from the Apostles. ibid. n. 5. p. 270. the Apostles in those things
they received from Christ were ministers to all ages, in other things only to
their own. ibid. n. 9. p. 271. the Lords day is an Apostolical institution.
ibid. r. 13. n. 1. p. 272. the constitutions of the Apostles are to be
retained, where the change of times has brought in a contrary unreasonableness.
ibid. n. 2. p. 273. the Apostles in their Laws complied much with the Jews.
ibid. r. 20. n. 2. p. 323. what power Christ gave to his Apostles. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 1. n. 3. p. 212. it was without coaction. ibid. n. 4. p. 212. they did
exercise jurisdiction, but it was in an extraordinary and miraculous way. ibid.
n. 9. p. 216. under their names and the names of Apostolical men diverse books
falsely put forth. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 35. p. 492. whatsoever the Apostles
taught we must equally believe, but it is not equally necessary to be known.
ibid. n. 63. p. 509. the foundation of Faith laid by Christ and his Apostles
was plain and easy, and consisted but of a few articles. ibid. r. 14. n. 64.
p. 509.
Apostles Creed.
the Fathers gave to that Creed those names of honor and excellence, which in
the Scripture are attributed to the whole faith. ibid. r. 14. n. 71. p. 514.
the ancient Church in the Creed made at Nice and Constantinople added no new
articles, only new explications against some Heretics. ibid. r. 14. n. 73. p.
515. the Apostles Creed were useless if any thing necessary to be believed in
order to salvation could be added to it. ibid. r. 14. n. 77. p. 516. none ought
to add to it but they that are as infallible as the Apostles were. ibid. the
danger and trouble that will follow from the insufficiency of that Creed, if
granted. ibid. 78. p. 516. the practice of the Church of Rome in enlarging that
Creed. ib. n. 79. p. 517. the Apostles themselves could not make a proposition
to be an article of faith, but only declare it. ibid. n. 80. p. 517. the
Apostles intended the Creed to be a remedy against heresy, which could not be,
unless it contained the whole faith. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 81. p. 517.
Amability.
all the causes of amability are reduced to two. l. 2. c. 1. r. 4. n. 6. p.
249.
Anathema,
and Anathema Maranatha. l. 3. c. 4. r. 8. n. 16. p. 253.
Angaria.
what it is, and whether it be lawful. l. 3. c. 2. r. 8. n. 3. p. 125.
(...)
(...), was Judas his manner of death. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 9. p. ^5.
Apologue,
told by Jo. Nider. l. 1. c. 1. r. 3. n. 5. p. 28.
Aquinas.
Th. Aquinas entered into the Dominican order without his Fathers leave. l. 3.
c. 5. r. 8. n. 3. p. 378.
Articles of religion.
the ancient Church in the Creed at Nice and Constantinople added no new
articles. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 73. p. 515. An expedient for peace of
Conscience in relation to the controverted articles of religion. l. 4. p. 443.
to subscribe to Articles of religion is only for the conservation of peace and
unity. l. 3. c. 4. r. 23. n. 1. p. 356. where the Articles are not necessary
the Subjects should be invited to subscribe, not forced. l. 3. c. 4. r. 23. n.
5. p. 357.
Arrians
were accounted Idolaters because they gave divine worship to Christ, whom they
affirmed to be a mere man. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 27. p. 341.
Atheism.
it is a kind of atheism to disobey Parents. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 1. p. 359.
none can be an Atheist, but who thinks that he has either more learning then he
has, or who has not so much as he should have. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 66. p. 61.
(...).
the Hebrews expressed dying by a word equivalent to it. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n.
10. p. 76.
S. Augustine.
the reason of that Thesis of his, Satius est fame mori, quam Idolothytis
vesci. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n. 14. p. 30.
Arguments.
it is lawful to use those kind of reasons, that are argumenta ad hominem,
with reasons to prove it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 10. p. 75. every argument is not
false to which a satisfactory answer can be given. ibid. one must not choose
always such arguments as prevail with the understanding, but the fancy, will
or appetite. ibid. p. 76. the force of many probable arguments amassed
together. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n. 1, 2. p. 121.
Astrology.
of Judicial Astrology. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 67. p. 61.
Authors.
multitude of them is not to prevail against a strong reason. l. 1. c. 4. r. 9.
n. 2. p. 156. when a multitude of them may be reduced to one single person as
their leader, their testimony is to be accounted but single. ibid. n. 3. p.
157. multitude of them has only a presumptive authority, and can never make a
conscience sure. l. 1. c. 4. r. 9. n. 5. p. 157. a comparison between the
authority of the ancient and modern writers. l. 1. c. 4. r. 10. n. 2. p. 163.
B.
Baal.
OF Elias his sacrificing to him. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 28. p. 200.
Baptism.
baptism for the dead. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 11. p. 77. baptizing of infants.
l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 57. p. 506. it is not well to defer baptism till death.
l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 1. p. 521. upon whom the necessity lies, upon the Infants
or their Parents. l. 2. c. 3. r. 18. n. 1. p. 546. some afflicted with evil
spirits, cured at their baptism, and upon the apostasy relapsed into the same
affliction, out of S. Cyprian. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 9. p. 216. Midwives may not
baptize. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 2. p. 287. of Godfathers and Godmothers at
baptism. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 5. p. 289. of dipping in baptism. ibid. n. 6.
p. 290. and n. 12. p. 295. the custom of the ancient Church was not to
sprinkle in baptism. ibid. those that were only sprinkled in baptism the
ancient Church would not admit into holy orders, and made a question whether
they were rightly baptized. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 12. p. 295. sprinkling was
sometime used by the Ancients, and is lawful in case of necessity. ibid.
baptism should be performed with a trine immersion. ibid. n. 13. p. 296. of
the Cross in baptism. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 8. p. 327. a child is not to be
baptized without his Fathers leave. l. 3. c. 5. r. 4. n. 1. p. 369. if either
of the Parents is Christian, the child may be baptized against the will of the
other who is infidel. ibid. n. 3. p. 370.
Betrothed.
a betrothed woman in Scripture before marriage is styled a wife, and her
falsehood punished as adultery. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 16. p. 387.
Bishop.
there were two Bishops of Rome, one of the Circumcision the other of the
Uncircumcision, at one time in Rome. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 12. p. 444. if a
person incapable be chosen Bishop, whether the Bishop that ordains, or he that
is ordained, or they that choose him sin. l. 2. c. 3. r. 18. n. 1. p. 547. S.
Timothy was made Bishop at the age of twenty five years. ibid. to avoid a
Bishopric Synesius uses unlawful arts. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 18. p. 93. the
Canons of the Popes and Bishops were made into Laws by the Emperor Justinian.
l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 4. p. 175. Eusebius Bishop of Samosata obeyed the
Emperors decree concerning his banishment, against the persuasion of the
people. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. ^. p. 178. the Bishops are subject to the Imperial
power. ibid. n. 21. p. 190. the Emperor is to be obeyed even against the will
of the Bishop. ibid. n. 22. p. 191. what is to be done when the command of the
King and Bishop enterfere. ibid. n. 26. p. 192. S. Chrysostom proves the
office of a Bishop more difficult then a King, because it has no jurisdiction.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 7. p. 214. all the power of making Church laws is in the
Pastors and Bishops. l. 3. c. 4. r. 2. n. 2. p. 221. A Bishop is distinct from,
and above a Presbyter. ibid. the distinction of Bishops from Presbyters was a
law made by the Apostles to oblige all Christendom. l. 3. c. 4. r. 12. n. 10.
p. 272. a Bishop has supreme and legislative power within his own Diocese
intra limits Disciplinae. l. 3. c. 4. r. 2. n. 3. p. 222. a Bishop and his
charge is an entire Society or Commonwealth. ibid. n. 3, 4. p. 222. the
authority of a Bishop. ibid. r. 3. n. 1. p. 224. to disobey the Bishop in an
action of duty adds a new formality to the sin. l. 3. c. 4. r. 3. n. 2. p. 224.
the Bishops can give no Laws that properly and immediately bind the
transgressors under sin. ibid. r. 4. n. 23. p. 233. how Bishops should carry
themselves in teaching Kings their duty. ibid. r. 7. n. 18. p. 246. in what
cases it is lawful for the people to separate from their Bishop or Priest. l.
3. c. 4. r. 8. n. 9. p. 250. that none but the Bishop or Priest should
consecrate the Sacrament is an Apostolical Canon. l. 3. c. 4. r. 12. n. 6. p.
270. by the Law of Christ one Bishop is not superior to another. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 16. n. 6. p. 300. Bishops were permitted in the ancient Church to marry
after ordination. ibid. r. 20. n. 27. p. 344. Gregory Nazianzen had sons born
to him after he was consecrated Bishop. ibid. n. 28. p. 347.
Bless.
Fathers Bless their children. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 3. p. 360.
Black.
of Clergymen wearing black. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 7. p. 290.
Blood.
of eating blood, whether forbidden, and why. l. 2. c. 2. r. 2. n. 2. p. 281.
abstinence from blood is not a Law of nature. l. 2. c. 2. r. 2. n. 3. p. 281.
the Heathen used to consummate their contracts and covenants by blood or wine.
l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 31. p. 431.
Bind.
the use of the words bind and loose. l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. n. 10. p. 264.
Body.
in criminal causes, where bodily punishment is inflicted no man can be surety
for another, quia nemo membrorum suorum Dominus videtur. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n.
2. p. 117. of bowing the body at the name of Jesus. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 4. p.
289.
Bonum
ex integra causa, Malum ex qualibet particulari. l. 2. c. 3. r. 2. n. 2. p.
395.
Brothers.
of the marriage of Brothers and Sisters. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 24. p. 296.
reasons why they ought not to marry their sisters. ibid. n. 27. p. 298.
Buy.
in doubts of Conscience or Law he that buys is to be favored before him that
sells. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 15. p. 405.
Bury.
A Roman Philosopher was in his dream warned not to bury the corpse of a
Persian, who had married his Mother. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 23. p. 296.
C.
Cards.
WHether the trade of Cardmakers be lawful. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 25. p. 468.
whether it be lawful to play at Cards. ibid. n. 27. p. 469. in what cases it
may be lawful to do so. ibid. n. 28. p. 470. rules to be used in those kind of
recreations. ibid. n. 32. p. 473. Vide Gaming in the letter G.
Canon.
the Canon and Civil Law differ in their account of Rapes. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n.
15. p. 387. diverse laws in the Canon law were the edicts of Kings. l. 3. c. 3.
r. 5. n. 4. p. 175. the Canons of the Church. l. 3. c. 4. r. 11. p. 266. how
binding the Canons of an ancient council are. l. 3. c. 4. r. 14. n. 2. p. 286.
the body of the Canon law was made by the worst Popes. l. 3. c. 4. r. 16. n. 4.
p. 299.
(...).
the definition of it out of Varinus. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 10. p. 482.
Cases.
arising from the necessity of restitution. l. 2. c. 3. r. 10. n. 8. p. 435.
concerning contracts. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 22. p. 510.
Ceremonies.
I am not bound to observe the Ceremonies of the Church, if I must do it with
danger of my life. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 15. p. 416. they may be the accidents
of worship, but nothing of the Substance. l. 2. c. 3. r. 5. n. 5. p. 407.
Ceremonies and customs ought to be borrowed from the Heathen with great
caution. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 14. p. 553. Ceremonies and gestures may become
obedience, but not religion. l. 3. c. 4. r. 18. n. 5. p. 314. Church cannot
impose Ceremonies by a law. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 4, 5. p. 325. the Primitive
Church did borrow some Ceremonies from the Heathen. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 13.
p. 552. against multitude of Ceremonies. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 7, 8. p. 326.
Ecclesiastical laws of Ceremonies bind only in public, not in private. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 18. n. 1, 6. p. 313, 314.
Church.
the Church in Legacies is to be favored against the heir. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1.
n. 15. p. 405. the primitive Church did borrow some ceremonies from the
heathen. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 13. p. 552. the Christian Churches and
Commonweals ought to be better ordered then were the Jewish. ibid. r. 20. n. 5.
p. 555. of the honor due to Churchmen. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 18. p. 187. In
external actions the command of the Prince is to be obeyed before the command
of the Church. ibid. n. 27. p. 193. Princes are not bound to execute the
decrees of the Church. ibid. r. 8. n. 5. p. 209. The Church has no
jurisdiction. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 5. p. 213. it has no dominion but a
ministerial power. ibid. n. 6. p. 214. which is proved by the Testimony of the
Fathers. ibid. S. Chrysostom proves the Episcopal office more difficult then
the Kingly, because it has no jurisdiction. ibid. the Hig^ priest under the
old Testament had a proper formal jurisdiction, which the Christian Church had
not. ibid. n. 8. p. 215. the Church has an analogical Jurisdiction. ibid. n.
11. p. 217. what is that power of remitting sins given to the Church. ibid. r.
13. ^. 218. rightly to understand the power of the Church very useful. ibid.
n. 17. p. 220. the Government of the Church like that of the Jews before they
had a King. ibid. all the power of making Church laws is in the Pastor or
Bishop. l. 3. c. 4. r. 2. n. 2. p. 221. what obedience we owe to the Church. l.
3. c. 4. r. 3. n. 3, 4, 5. p. 225. the Church has power to make laws in things
that are helps of duty. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4. por tot. p. 226. God in several
manners governed his Church. ibid. r. 5. n. 1. p. 234. never any Ecclesiastical
Laws in the primitive Church did oblige the people, unless established by the
Prince or Emperor. ibid. n. 4. p. 236. Kings obey the Laws of the Church.
ibid. r. 6. n. 1. p. 237. Privileges made to the Church may be taken away
again. ib. n. 3. p. 238. the Apostles intended not by any Laws to oblige all
the ages of the Church, but such Laws as they received from Christ. ib. r. 11.
n. 4. p. 267. the Canons of the Church. ib. r. 11. p. 266. the authority of
customs of the Church. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 1. p. 287. a Christian must not
practice the different Customs of his own Church to the scandal of another.
ibid. n. 4. p. 288. a man may comply with the differing customs of several
Churches. ibid. a custom of the Church obliges not the Conscience against a
Law of the Church. ibid. n. 6. p. 289. a custom of the Church obliges not the
Conscience, unless it be reasonable, or to avoid scandal. ibid. n. 7. p. 290. a
custom Ecclesiastical that is but of a legal and presumed reasonableness binds
us to conformity. ibid. n. 11. p. 293. the Character of those that quarrelled
with the customs of our Church. ibid. p. 294. Laws of the Church must not be
perpetual. ibid. r. 17. n. 7. p. 303. the Church of the Jews made laws with
another authority then does the Christian. ibid. n. 24. p. 311. Laws made by a
particular Church, may not by one Church be imposed on another. ibid. n. 25. p.
311. they may be continued by any authority so long as that authority lasts.
ibid. n. 26. p. 311. In the matter of meats and drin^s and days their Laws must
be wholly relative to religion, not have regard to themselves. ibid. n. 27. p.
312. they must be imposed with liberty of the whole Church, not of each
Subject. ibid. n. 28. they must serve religion, but never pretend to be
religion. ib. n. 29. they must not be taught for doctrines and commandments of
God. ibid. n. 30. the difference between the obligation that Laws of the Church
and Civil Laws leave on the Subject. ibid. r. 18. n. 6. p. 315. the Legislative
power of the Church is wholly a ministry of grace and godliness, not of empire
and dominion. ibid. Laws of the Church must be easy and charitable. l. 3. c.
4. r. 19. n. 1. p. 316. Edification and Charity ought to be the end of all
Laws made by the Church, beyond this she has no Legislative power. ibid. r.
20. n. 3. p. 324. When the Church in making such laws acts beyond her
Commission, she obliges not. ibid. the Church has not power to bring into a
Law whatsoever is for edification. ibid. n. 5. p. 325. the Church cannot impose
ceremonies by a law. ibid. n. 4, 5. p. 325. Laws of the Church are not for
edification when they give offense to wise and good men. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n.
9. p. 328. how the Rulers of the Church and their Subjects must behave
themselves if their Laws give offense. ibid.
Catholic Church.
the Catholic Church cannot alone give sufficient authority to tradition. l. 2.
c. 3. r. 14. n. 40, 41. p. 498, 499. the universal Church is to be our Guide in
interpreting some precepts. l. 2. c. 3. r. 17. n. 7. p. 544. a custom of the
Catholic Church obliges not the Conscience, unless it be of present
observation. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 5. p. 289. the Catholic Church is a good
Witness, but not a competent Judge in matters of Faith. ibid. r. 21. n. 1. p.
350. this is not true of the Catholic Church of any one age, but of all. ibid.
n. 3. p. 351. the Catholic Church cannot be a Judge in controversies, because
if there be a difference it is not Catholic. ib. n. 4. we know not where to
find it. n. 5. the sentence of those that call themselves Catholic depends on a
few that prescribe to others. ibid. n. 6. of the power of the Church in making
Laws. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 32. p. 22.
Church of Rome.
Instances wherein the Roman Church do advance the Commandments of men above
those of God. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 16, 17, 18. p. 306, and 307. the Reasons
that move those of the Church of Rome to make the two first Commandments to be
one. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 6. p. 327. what evil Doctrines concerning Conscience
the Roman Doctors teach. Preface, page 2, 3.
Conscience.
In things not certain no man can give a Law to the Conscience. l. 3. c. 4. r.
23. n. 5. p. 357. in articles not necessary the subjects should be invited to
subscribe, not forced. ibid. the Conscience cannot rely upon customs because
of the many difficulties. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 7. p. 430. Humane Laws bind the
Conscience. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. Rules to know what humane Laws bind to a greater
and what to a lesser sin. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 16. p. 10. an expedient for the
attaining peace of Conscience in relation to the controverted articles of
Christendom. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 10. p. 443. Every thing we do must twice
pass through the Conscience, when it is to be done, and when done. l. 4. c. 1.
r. 1. n. 21. p. 450. Customs against Law cannot indemnifie the Conscience. l.
3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 4. p. 429. Conscience defined. l. ^. c. 1. r. 1. n. 1. p. 1.
what Conscience is in its use and power. ibid. n. 1, 2. it is a result of the
understanding, will and memory. ibid. it proves that there is a God. ib. n. 4.
the word distinguished. ibid. n. 6. how it is, men do things against their
Conscience. ibid. n. 7. Conscience is the mind guided and furnished with a holy
rule. ibid. n. 8. the Hebrew has no word for Conscience but what signifies
principally the heart. ibid. n. 8. p. 4. God reigns in our mind by Faith and
Conscience, their difference. ibid. n. 10. p. 5. S. Bernards comparison between
the Conscience and a house in the parts of both, examined. ibid. n. 11, 12. p.
5. what force the will has upon the Conscience. ibid. n. 13. p. 9. what is the
adequate measure of Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1. n. 21. p. 8. what Conscience
is. ibid. n. 23. p. 9. the word Conscience explained. ibid. the full process of
Conscience. ibid. n. 24. p. 10. Conscientia distinguished from Prudentia. ibid.
n. 26. p. 10. all the dictates of Conscience are not equally certain. l. 1. c.
1. r. 2. n. 2. p. 12. the offices of Conscience. ibid. p. 11. to dictate. n. 1.
p. 11. to witness. n. 3. to accuse or excuse. n. 5. to loose or bind. n. 8. the
evils that are felt by a troubled Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 10. p. 15.
the torments of a troubled Conscience. ibid. p. 16. Shame, the attendant of a
troubled Conscience. ibid. n. 11. p. 17. Distraction of mind the effect of a
troubled Conscience. ibid. n. 12. p. 17. Impudence is sometimes the effect of a
troubled Conscience. ibid. n. 13. p. 18. A troubled Conscience disquieted with
Fear. ibid. n. 14. p. 19. the pains of a troubled Conscience described out of
the book of the Wisdom of Solomon. ibid. a perpetual restlesness accompanies a
troubled Conscience. ibid. n. 16. p. 19. the torments of Conscience increase at
death and after. ibid. n. 17. p. 20. by what instrument or power the Conscience
inflicteth torment. ibid. n. 18. p. 20. the reason why Conscience is more
afraid in some sins then others, though they are all damnable. ibid. n. 22. p.
21. Of the act of Absolution in the Conscience. ibid. n. 24. p. 23. the
pleasures of a quiet good Conscience. ibid. the signs of true peace of
Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 25. p. 24. Conscience does sometimes only
counsel. ibid. n. 27. p. 25. men cover all their open sins with the pretense
of Conscience. ibid. r. 3. n. 1. p. 26. Conscience binds though it be in an
error. ibid. p. 27. how to know when the office of Conscience is usurped by
something like it. ibid. r. 3. n. 3. p. 27. that Conscience that is not willing
to bear a search is not right. ibid. the Division of Conscience. ibid. r. 7.
per tot. p. 35. the Conscience judges of actions by a double act, a direct and
reflex. l. 1. c. 2. r. 2. n. 2. p. 39. Propositions naturally and
philosophically known and not theologically sometimes are the rule in a sure
Conscience ibid. r. 3. n. 5. p. 41. the more sure the Conscience is the greater
is the sin that is against it. ibid. r. 8. n. 1. p. 81. the Conscience if it
declares, obliges whether it be right or wrong (with some cautions.) ibid. r.
9. n. 3. p. 95. whatsoever is expressly commanded by God cannot by Conscience be
changed into evil ibid. n. 8. p. 96. where the rule is so obscure or the duty
so intricate, that the Conscience may inculpably err, there the Conscience may
change the object. ibid. n. 9. p. 97. when the act is materially evil,
believing it to be good does not make a perfect change, but leaves an allay
only. ibid. r. 9. n. 10. p. 97. if the Conscience dictate a thing to be
necessary, the thing is by no means to be declined. ibid. n. 11. p. 97.
Conscience makes no essential alterations in the thing, but only personal
obligations to the man. ibid. n. 11. p. 98. the Conscience can make a change
between necessary and unnecessary, but not between good and bad. ibid. n. 12.
p. 98. If the Conscience determine that for necessary to be done which ought
not to be done, the man cannot escape a sin. l. 1. c. 2. r. 9. n. 11. p. 98. If
the Conscience dictate a thing to be lawful but not necessary, if the contrary
be a duty, it is not safe to follow the Conscience, because it allows only and
commands not. ibid. n. 13. p. 99. what manner of obligation is passed upon us
by an erring Conscience. l. 1. c. 3. r. 2. n. 26. p. 107. the measures of
obedience due to an erring Conscience. ibid. n. 28. p. 107. of a perplexed
Conscience. l. 1. c. 6. r. 2. n. 6. p. 212. the strong and violent persuasions
of Conscience in single persons or in some communities of men is not a
sufficient indication of a moral Law. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 73. p. 371. Nemo,
in Conscientia donec condemnetur, ad poenam exolvendam tenetur. l. 2. c. 3. r.
16. n. 9. p. 523. the Conscience may be free, when the will is not. l. 3. c. 1.
r. 1. n. 29. p. 20. all humane Laws prescribing to the Conscience or
restraining the thoughts are null. l. 3. c. 1. r. 3. n. 4. p. 33. in matter of
burden the Conscience of the guilty person is to be favored as much as may be
in the interpretation of Laws. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 31. p. 70. they do ill
that make no Conscience of purloining from the Custom-houses. l. 3. c. 2. r. 8.
n. 3. p. 125. General Councils are of great use in determining cases of
Conscience. l. 3. c. 4. r. 22. n. 2. p. 353. Against a doubting Conscience a
man may not act, but against a scrupulous he may. l. 1. c. 6. r. 2. n. 2. p.
211.
Candles.
of lighting Candles by dead bodies. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 18. p. 12.
Charity.
religion yields to it. l. 1. c. 1. r. 8. n. 28. p. 201. the precept of Charity
and forgiveness is not inconsistent with humane punishments. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1.
n. 3. p. 54. whatsoever is against Charity is not the effect of Justice. ibid.
n. 5. p. 54. duties of Charity in several persons may be mutually contrary. ib.
n. 7. p. 55
Children.
they ought to obey their Parents. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 1. p. 359. reasons to
enforce that duty. ibid. n. 1, 2, 3. p. 359, 360. they must honor and
reverence their Parents. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 6. p. 362. it is a sin for
Children to disobey the holy precepts and counsels their Fathers instruct them
with. ibid. n. 7. p. 362. they must maintain their Parents. l. 3. c. 5. r. 3.
n. 2. p. 366. they should be under strict tutelage betimes. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6.
n. 6. p. 503. at what age Children are capable of Laws. ibid. n. 4. p. 501.
Compliance with weak Consciences.
the Council of Auxerre did appoint Letanies and austerities three days within
the twelve Festivals of Christmas, to rebuke the too-great compliance with the
Heathen. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 15. p. 553. No sin is to be permitted in
compliance with weak Consciences. ibid. r. 10. n. 8. p. 434. of compliance with
weak Consciences. ibid. n. 12. p. 437. A custom in the administration of a
Sacrament brought in against the analogy and purpose of the mystery ought not
to be complied with. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 12. p. 295.
Christ.
the divinity of his person. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. a n. 13. ad n. ^8. p. 130. of
his Doctrine. ibid. a n. 18. ad. n. 21. his Instruments. n. 22. of his
praedictions. ibid. n. 26. considered in opposition to the Jewish religion.
ibid. n. 29. Heathen. ibid. n. 30. Mohammedan. ibid. n. 31. If Christ has not
taught us some new Laws, he has taught some new Excellencies and perfections
of Morality in the old instances. l. 2. c. 2. r. 4. n. 2. p. 319. of the
Example of, Christ, as it is to be imitated by us. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 33. p.
383.
Christian.
wherein the Christian righteousness differs from the Mosaic. l. 4. c. 1. r.
1. n. 24. p. 450. why the Christian Law contains somethings contrary to the Law
of nature. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 31. p. 50. A discourse proving that the
CHRISTIAN RELIGION is from God. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n. 12. p. 124. the Christian
Religion if it were embraced rightly would prevent all war. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7.
n. 20. p. 378. A character of the Christians obedience. l. 2. c. 3. r. 5. n. 1.
p. 405. the difference between the Christian ceremonies and those of Moses Law.
ib. n. 5. p 406. the righteousness of the Christians must exceed that of the
Jews. l. 2. c. 3. r. 20. n. 2. p. 555. the Christian Churches and Commonweals
ought to be better ordered then were the Jewish. ib. n. 3. p. 555. wherein the
Christian obedience must exceed the Jewish. l. 2. c. 3. r. 20. n. 2. ad fin.
cap. p. 556, 557 how far every single Christian is bound to exceed the measures
of obedience practiced under the Law of Moses. l. 2. c. 3. r. 20. n. 12. p.
558. Humane Laws can impose ceremonies upon us notwithstanding Christian
Liberty. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 28. p. 18. Christians must not go to Law but
upon very great cause. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 18. p. 615.
Cicero
was too amorous to his own daughter. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 78. p. 315.
Civil.
the Civil power is enabled in the law of Moses to punish with death crimes
committed against the private authority of the Father upon his single
testimony. l. 3. c. 5. r. 2. n. 2. p. 364. the Civil and Canon Law differ in
their account of Rapes. ibid. r. 8. n. 15. p. 387. wherein the Civil Law can
change the Natural Law. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10. n. 7. p. 271. the Civil Law can add
to the Law of Nature. ibid. n. 9. p. 272. Cautions to be used in civil
permissions of an unlawful act. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 7. p. 374. the difference
between the obligation that Laws of the Church and Civil Laws leave on the
Subject. l. 3. c. 4. r. 18. n. 6. p. 315.
Circumstances.
of the Circumstances of time and place in relation to Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3.
n. 30. p. 422.
Certainty.
a twofold certainty in the Conscience. l. 1. c. 2. r. 2. n. 2. p. 39. what
kind of certainty is to be looked for in moral actions. ibid. n. 3. p. 39. an
opinion may be practically certain when the knowledge of it in speculation is
only probable. l. 1. c. 4. r. 1. n. 1. p. 120.
Clemency.
It is a great virtue in a Prince. l. 3. c. 3. r. 2. n. 18. p. 146.
Commandment, etc.
In interpreting Gods commands we must choose that sense that most promotes the
ends of the Commandment. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 10. p. 403. he that commands is
more guilty then be that in obedience executes. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 1. p. 455.
In maleficio, Ratihabitio mandato comparatur. ibid. In all prime necessary
Commandments the most obvious sense is the best and principally intended. l. 1.
c. 1. r. 6. n. 1. p. 34. whatsoever is expressly commanded by God cannot by
Conscience be changed into evil. l. 1. c. 2. r. 9. n. 8. p. 96. when a
Commandment is given with a reason, it does not follow, that where the reason
continues not, that the Commandment does not. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 8. p. 192.
the breach of a Commadment is a surer rule to judge of the quality of sins then
their being against a natural reason. l. 2. c. 1. r. 6. n. 4. p. 259. To kill
ones self is against the sixth Commandment. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n. 7. p. 75.
whatsoever is forbidden by the natural law or commanded by it cannot be
permitted or forbidden. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10. n. 3. p. 270. The Jewish Doctors
taught that at the command of a Prophet, it was lawful to break any
Commandment, that only excepted, which concerns the worship of God. l. 2. c. 2.
r. 1. n. 1. p. 276. the reasons that move those of the Church of Rome to make
the two first Commandments to be one. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 6. p. 327. the
reasons that move the Lutherans to do it. ibid. p. 329. the second Commandment
is moral, not only positive. ibid. n. 23. p. 338. the Primitive Christians were
haters of Image Worship. ibid. n. 33. p. 349. Many of the Ancients affirm that
both the tables of Moses are moral in all except the precept of the Sabbath.
ibid. n. 41. p. 355. Reasons why all Commandments but the Fifth are
affirmative. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 2. p. 389. that parts of some precepts are
Counsels ibid. n. 14. p. 394. more is forbidden and commanded then is in the
words of the Commandmandment. ibid. r. 3. n. 1. p. 396. whatsoever action is of
the same specification with an action expressly commanded or forbidden is of the
same obligation. ibid. n. 3. p. 398. if the Relative be under the Commandment,
then also the Correlative is ibid. n. 6. p. 399. In what sense it is said, He
that breaks one Commandment is guilty of all. ibid. r. 11. n. 17. p. 447. there
is in every Commandment a negative and an affirmative part. ibid. r. 12. n. 2.
p. 449. In matters of counsel God does invite us to some actions, which to
omit is no sin, but it is never so in matters of Commandment. ib. r. 16. n. 21.
p. 529. Of Commandments and Counsels. ib. r. 17. n. 11. p. 545. A flying or
ambulatory Commandment, il mandato volante. ibid. r. 18. n. 1. p. 547. when it
is unlawful to teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17.
n. 10. p. 304. Instances wherein the Roman Church do advance the Commandments
of men above those of God. ibid. n. 16, 17, 18. p. 306, 307. Laws made by a
particular Church must not be taught for doctrines and Commandments of God.
ibid. n. 30. Customs are to be tried by the rule or commandment. l. 2. c. 3. r.
19. n. 5. p. 550.
Commission.
Sins of commission are greater then sins of omission. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 12.
p. 393.
Commutation.
of commutation of Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 5. p. 426. rules of administering it.
ibid.
Consent.
in what cases Consent is indicated by silence. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 11. p.
461. Cautions to be observed in the presumption of leave upon the silence of a
Superior. l. 4. c. 1. n. 16. p. 462. it is no argument, when it is nothing but
imitation. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 74. p. 371. In matters criminal the consent
contracts guilt. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 3. p. 456.
Contract.
In all obligations of Conscience by contract, when any doubt arises in the
Interpretation, we are to rest upon that which is most likely and most usual.
l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 12. p. 404. Rules of extending or diminution of contracts
the same as of extending or diminution of Laws. ibid. r. 3. n. 32. p. 422. In
matters of Fraud, if an error be in the substance of things contracted for, it
is invalid. l. 4. p. 509. Cases concerning contracts. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 22.
p. 510. of contracts with minors. l. 2. c. 1. r. 5. n. 2, 3. p. 252. A Contract
made by him that had no power is invalid. ibid. r. 7. n. 3. p. 261.
Clergy.
Of Clergymen wearing black. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 7. p. 290. of the marriage
of the Clergy. ibid. r. 20. n. 15. p. 332. Some Councils have subjected the
Clergy to the secular Judge. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 4. p. 180.
Communion.
Of Communion with erroneous persons. l. 3. c. 4. r. 8. n. 5, 6. p. 249. We may
not communicate with those that are justly excommunicate. ibid. r. 10. p. 261.
Compel.
Princes may compel their Subjects to serve God. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 3. p.
174.
Confessions of Faith.
Subscription to them is only for the conservation of peace and unity. l. 3. c.
4. r. 23. n. 1. p. 356. Such subscription does not bind a man for ever. ibid.
n. 2. should be required to Articles otherwise necessary in themselves. ibid.
n. 3. p. 357. or for the preserving of peace. ib. n. 4.
Controversies.
Of the Judge of Controversies. l. 3. c. 4. r. 21. n. 3. p. 351. The Catholic
Church cannot be a Judge in Controversies, because if there be a difference it
is not Catholic. ibid. n. 4. an expedient for the attaining peace of
Conscience in relation to the Controversies that trouble Christendom. l. 4. c.
1. r. 1. n. 10. p. 443.
Contempt.
Of Contempt of Laws. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 22. p. 15. Causelessly and
contemptuously are all one. ibid. In Comparatione personarum inest lasio and
injuria. l. 3. c. 5. r. 7. n. 9. p. 377.
Counsel.
He that gives counsel or aid to an action good or evil, to him it is imputed
as the effect of his choice. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 22. p. 466. of the guilt of
those that assist at murders, either by counsel, company or presence. ibid.
n. 23. p. 467. the parts of some precepts are Counsels. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n.
14. p. 394. the difference between Counsels and Laws. ibid. r. 12. n. 4. p.
450. the measures and notes of their difference ibid. n. 10. p. 452. In matter
of Counsels God does invite us to some actions, which to omit is no sin. ibid.
r. 16. n. 21. p. 529. Of Counsels, ib. r. 17. n. 11. p. 545. Evangelical
Counsels may not be made into Laws. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 12. p. 330.
Counsels Evangelical when they are not left at liberty become a snare. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 20. n. 13. p. 331.
Council.
A Council cannot alone give sufficient authority to tradition. l. 2. c. 3. r.
14. n. 42. p. 499. The Council of Auxerre did appoint Letanies and Austerities
three days within the twelve festivals of Christmas, to rebuke the too-great
compliance with the Heathen. ibid. r. 19. n. 14. p. 553. Some Councils have
subjected the Clergy to the Secular Judge. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 4. p. 180. The
first Councils were called by the Emperors. ibid. r. 7. n. 10. p. 204. the
Emperor had the primacy in eight General Councils. ibid. the Emperor did
dismiss the Councils ibid. n. 11. p. 205. Of a General Council and its
authority. l. 3. c. 4. r. 14. n. 1. p. 285. Several Councils rejected by
several Catholic Princes. ibid. n. 2. p. 286. How binding the Canons of an
ancient Council are. ibid. n. 3. p. 286. General Councils are not the proper
measure of matters of faith. ibid. r. 22. n. 1. p. 353. yet are of great use in
determining cases of Conscience. ibid. n. 2. what is the authority of a
Council. ibid. n. 3. p. 354. Of Counterfeiting old Medals, Manuscripts and
Beauty, etc. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 44. p. 104.
Criminal.
In matters criminal the consent contracts guilt. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 3. p.
456. in what cases the Criminal is to be his own Executioner. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2.
n. 14. p. 63. A Criminal condemned may be pardoned by the King. l. 3. c. 3. r.
2. n. 18. p. 146. In what cases he may do it. ibid. n. 19. p. 147. Death must
not be inflicted on Criminals upon trifling causes. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 17. p.
58.
Condemned.
Condemned persons are not bound to put themselves to death. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2.
n. 18. p. 65. One condemned by an unlawful Judge or Power, may resist the
Executioner in some cases. ibid. Signs by which to know when the Law condemns
the Offender ipso facto. ibid. p. 68. whether it be lawful to kill a man's self
when he stands condemned to dye. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n. 4. p. 72. An Offender
condemned may be pardoned by the King. l. 3. c. 3. r. 2. n. 18. p. 146. In what
cases he may do it. ibid. n. 19. p. 147. Of the Cross used in Baptism. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 20. n. 8. p. 327. Of the marriage of Cosen-Germans. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3.
n. 34. p. 301. P. Gregory affirmed that if Cosen-Germans marry they would have
no children. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 79. p. 316.
Custom.
Where a Law is established and good, Custom of it self cannot annull it. l.
3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 2. p. 428. When there is no Law, Custom suplies the place.
ibid. A Custom can interpret a Law. ibid. n. 3. p. 428. Customs are as good
as Laws in the doubtful interpretation of Laws. ibid. n. 3. p. 428. That
Custom, by the Laws of Spain, is forever to be observed, according to which
the Judge has twice pronounced sentence. ibid. Custom alone cannot abrogate
Laws. ibid. n. 4. p. 428. Consuetudo nec rationem vincit nec legem. ibid. p.
429. Customs against law cannot inde^nifie the Conscience. ibid. That mistake
that Custom can abrogate a Law, ^egan in those nations where the legislative
power was in the people. ib. n. 6. p. 429. Custom cannot abrogate a Law under
a Monarchy ibid. p. 430. The Conscience cannot rely upon Customs, because of
the many difficulties. ibid. n. 7. p. 430. What receives all its warrant from
Custom cannot be of divine authority. l. 2. c. 3. ^. 19. n. 1. p. 548. Custom
may expound the sense of Law or Doctrine, but not make one. ibid. n. 2. p. 549.
A weak reason is to be preferred before a long prevailing custom. ibid. n. 3.
p. 549. Customs are to be examined and tried by the Rule or Commandment. ibid.
n. 5. p. 550. When Custom may safely be relied upon. ibid. n. 6. p. 550. The
Customs of the world are but an ill Commentary on the Commandments of our B.
Lord. ibid. n. 7. p. 550. Customs ought to be borrowed from the Heathen with
great caution. ibid. n. 14. p. 553. Such customs as are built upon any point
of heathen doctrine we may not borrow. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 15. p. 553. Ex
consuetudine indici praesumptionem contemptus, licet ipsa contemptus non fit.
l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 22. p. 15. The authority of customs of the Church. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 15. n. 1. p. 287. A Christian must not practice the different customs
of his own Church to the scandal of another. ibid. n. 4. p. 288. A man may
comply with the differing customs of several Churches. ibid. A custom of the
Catholic Church obliges not the Conscience, unless it be of present
observation. ibid. n. 5. p. 289. A custom of the Church obliges not the
Conscience against a Law of the Church. ibid. n. 6. p. 289. A custom of the
Church obliges not the Conscience, unless it be reasonable, or to avoid
scandal. ibid. n. 7. p. 290. The measures by which good customs are known.
ibid. n. 8. p. 291. A custom whose reason is not known, if it be of immemorial
time, is not lightly to be laid aside. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 10. p. 292.
Consu^tudo cujus initii memoria non sit in contrarium, praesumitur
rationabilis. ibid. n. 10. p. 293. A custom Ecclesiastical that is but of a
legal and presumed reasonableness binds us to conformity. ibid. n. 11. p. 293.
The Character of those that quarrelled with the customs of our Church. ibid.
n. 11. p. 294. A custom in the administration of a Sacrament brought up
against the analogy and purpose of the mystery ought not to be complied with.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 12. p. 295. The Judges by their sentences best convey the
notice of a Custom. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 3. p. 428.
Custom, or tribute.
They do ill that make no conscience of purloining from the Custom House. l.
3. c. 2. r. 8. n. 3. p. 125. It is not lawful to deny custom, though to the
Farmer and not to the Prince. l. 3. c. 2. r. 10. n. 5. p. 128. Of (...) and
(...) l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 19. p. 172. In Corporal punishments the Law does not
proceed without the sentence of the Judge. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 17. p. 64.
Qualis Causa talis Effectus. Pref. page 12.
D.
THE Daughter that is marriageable, when her Father is dead, is under the power
of her Mother. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 29. p. 394.
Death.
What things are requisite to make the sentence of Death just upon an accused
person. l. 1. c. 2. r. 8. n. 18. p. 88. Deathbed repentance. l. 2. c. 3. r.
16. n. 9. p. 523. The Laws of God in precepts purely affirmative do not oblige
to an actual obedience in danger of death. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n. 8. p. 27. An
Humane Law made under the penalty of death binds to obedience, though death
certainly follow. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n. 12. p. 29. Whether it be lawful to kill
a man's self when he stands condemned to dye. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n. 4. p. 72.
Among the Romans they that killed themselves might make their wills. ibid. The
Stoics held it lawful to kill ones self in five cases. ibid. n. 4. p. 73.
Aristotle will not allow it to be gallant for the avoiding any evil to kill
ones self. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n. 6. p. 74. When a Tyrant power threatens death
to make the obedient Subject contemn the Law, the Subject ought rather to die
then disobey the Law. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n. 13. p. 29. Death must not be
inflicted on Criminals upon trifling causes. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 17. p. 58.
Some Princes required malefactors to be Executioners of death upon themselves.
l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 17. p. 65. It is an act of Despair to procure ones own
death to prevent worse usage from the hands of Enemies. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n. 8.
p. 75. To kill ones self is against the sixth Commandment. ibid. n. 7. p. 75.
It is no more lawful to kill ones self, then ones neighbor, because our love
to our selves is the measure of our love to our neighbor. ibid. n. 9. p. 76.
To kill ones self is against the Doctrines of the Fathers. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n.
6, 9. p. 76. is rebellion against God. n. 10. p. 76. is against nature. n. 11.
p. 77. Of Sampsons killing himself. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n. 13. p. 77. Of
arresting dead bodies for debt. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 10. p. 120.
Debt.
A man is not bound to pay his debts, when to do so will take away from him his
natural support. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 28. p. 201. Of imprisoning insolvent
Debtors. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 5. p. 118. Debtors were free from their
Crediditors, if they did ejurare bonim copiam. ibid. n. 7. p. 118. The several
Laws of the Romans concerning insolvent Debtors. ibid. n. 5, 6, 7, 8. p. 118.
Christian religion takes off all rigid inflictions from isolvent Debtors. ibid.
n. 9. p. 120. Of Delight in an evil action when it is passed. l. 1. c. 3. r.
5. per tot. p. 112.
Dice.
Whether the Dicemakers trade be lawful. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 25. p. 468.
Whether it be lawful to play at Dice. ibid. n. 27. p. 469. Those that lost any
considerable part of their estate at Dice the Roman Law banished. ibid. n. 28.
p. 470. In what instances Dice may be lawful. ibid. Rules to be used in the
managing that kind of recreation. ibid. n. 32. p. 473. Vide Gaming in the
letter G. (...). l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 20. p. 460.
Dispensation.
The ground and measure of the Dispensation of Laws. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 35.
p. 205. God can dispense with the Law of Nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 3. p.
264. A Dispensation is not necessary for Conscience, but for avoiding scandal
or punishment. l. 3. p. 424. The causes of proper dispensations. ibid. p. 425.
He that dispenses must not injure religion nor any right not subject to him.
l. 3. p. 425. Every matter from whence the ratio Debiti can be taken, is
dispensable. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 11. p. 268. The Pope has not power to
dispense with the law of Nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10. n. 9. p. 272. No humane
power can dispense with the positive Laws of Jesus Christ. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11.
n. 1. p. 440. Dispensation is twofold. ibid. n. 13. p. 445. No man can dispense
with those Laws that follow by immediate consequence from the positive Laws of
Christ. ibid. n. 15. p. 446. When any condition intrinsecal to the duty of an
affirmative precept can neither be had nor supplied, the duty falls without the
need of Dispensation. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 15. p. 446. A duty whose necessary
condition cannot be supplied is dispensed with in the nature of the thing, not
by any act of Jurisdiction. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 15. p. 446. Of the power of
Dispensation. l. 3. c. 6. r. 4. n. 1. p. 423. It is twofold, proper and
improper. ibid. n. 2, 3. p. 423. Men have made many needless disputes about the
power of Princes in dispensing with Laws. ibid. n. 4. p. 424. All Dissembling
from an evil principle and to evil purposes is unlawful. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5.
n. 44. p. 104.
Divine.
When the authority of Divines is to be followed. l. 1. c. 4. r. 10. n. 5. p.
165. The Ancients sometimes affirm a thing is of Divine right, if they have in
Scripture but an authentic example. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 8. p. 275.
Divorce.
It was the opinion of S. Hierome and some others, that it was not lawful for
the Husband or wife to live with her or him that was notoriously guilty of
adultery. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 7. p. 191.
Duty.
Concerning the supply of Duty. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 17. p. 447. The external
actions of a Duty are determined by something without, and things which are not
in our power, and sometimes by our own will. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 4. p. 522.
In what manner an intrinsecal condition being wanting, the Duty is released. l.
2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 15. p. 446. No man is to answer for an accidental evil
effect, that is consequent to his duty. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 6. p. 55. That
which is necessary to be done is not against any man's duty. ib. n. 10. p. 56.
The Distinction of (...) and (...) l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 27, 28. p. 342.
Doubt.
A negative doubt what it is. l. 1. c. 5. r. 1. n. 5. p. 175. a negative doubt
binds not to action. l. 1. c. 5. r. 2. n. 1. p. 176. what is a privative Doubt.
ibid. n. 7. p. 177. Against a doubting Conscience a man may not act, but
against a scrupulous he may. l. 1. c. 6. r. 2. n. 2. p. 211. In all matters of
doubt when the Case on either hand is equal, so that the Conscientia cannot
determine, there the Examples of good men are of great use to determine it. l.
2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 43. p. 387. The Doctors of the Church cannot give sufficient
authority to a tradition. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 41. p. 499. Concerning Durandus
his distinction, Ligat Conscientia Erronea, sed non obligat. l. 1. c. 3. r. 2.
n. 26. p. 107.
Duel.
Of the way of proving ones innocence by Duel. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 12. p.
112. In what cases judicial Duells are lawful. ibid. n. 13. p. 113.
Drunkenness.
Of those that permit it in their houses at feasts. l. 4. c. 1. n. 21. p. 465.
Whether and in what manner it may lessen a Crime. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 14. p.
506. Of the Crimes done in drunken distempers. ibid. n. 10. p. 505. What
difference there is in the obligation of a Law of Christ in respect of the
outward and inward action. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 4. p. 522.
E.
Easter.
EAster was not instituted by command of the Apostles. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n.
13. p. 278. It is no dishonor to that feast, to affirm the Apostles did not
intend to make laws concerning it. l. 3. c. 4. ^. 13. n. 13. p. 279. Easter
festival was in use, though not commanded in the Apostles time. ibid. The
measures of Eating and drinking. l. 4. c. 2. r. 2. n. 2.
Ecclesiastics.
Rules concerning the residency of Ecclesiastics or their translation. l. 1. c.
2. r. 5. n. 22. p. 69. A Decretal of Pope Evatristus concerning Ecclesiastics
leaving their Churches, dissallowing it upon any pretense. ibid. n. 23. p. 69.
An act of the Nicene Creed concerning the same, out of S. Hierome. ibid. An
explication of the Decretal of Evatristus. ibid. n. 24. An explication of the
allegation, out of S. Hierome. ibid. n. 25. p. 71. Some instances of Kings and
Priests driven from their thrones by an exorbitant Ecclesiastical power. l. 3.
c. 3. r. 4. n. 11. p. 166. Ecclesiastical power differs much from the Civil. l.
3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 19. p. 171. Diverse Ecclesiastical Laws made by Emperors. l.
3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 5. p. 175. Baronius answered, who affirms, those
Ecclesiastical Laws made by Emperors were unjust. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 7. p.
176. Donatus said, What has the Emperor to do with the Church? l. 3. c. 3.
r. 5. n. 6. p. 176. S. Chrysostom teaches that an Ecclesiastical person though
an Apostle must be subject to the civil power. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 1. p. 178.
Instances to prove that the civil power has a power of coercion over
Ecclesiastics. ibid. n. 3. p. 179. Wherein consists the honor of an
Ecclesiastic. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 18. p. 187. Ecclesiastics have not a
temporal power in order to a spiritual end. l. 3. c. 3. r. 7. n. 2. p. 200.
That saying. Ecclesia est in republica, non Respublica in Ecclesia, explained.
ibid. n. 8. p. 203. The distinct parts and measures of the Ecclesiastical and
Civil power. l. 3. c. 4. r. 5. n. 3. p. 235. the difference of the
Ecclesiastical from the Civil power. l. 3. c. 4. r. 9. n. 1. p. 255. See more
in C. word Church. Of the Hebrews lying to Egyptians. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 7.
p. 84. The Council of Eliberis decreed against pictures in Churches. l. 2. c.
2. r. 6. n. 35. p. 350.
Emperor.
they made diverse Ecclesiastical Laws. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 5. p. 175. Honorius
the Emperor made a Law concerning the election of the Pope. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5.
n. 5. p. 176. Donatus said, What has the Emperor to do with the Church?
ibid. n. 6. p. 176. Boronius affirms those Ecclesiastical Laws were unjust that
the Emperor made, an answer to it. ibid. n. 7. p. 176. Pope Gregory the Great
submitted to Mauritius the Emperor in an Ecclesiastical Law. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5.
n. 7. p. 176. Eusebius Bishop of Samosata yielded to be banished by the
Emperor, though the people offered to defend him. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 2. p.
178. The Archimandrites of Constantinople writing to the Pope, mentioned the
Emperor as head of the Church. ibid. n. 19. p. 189. The Emperor has power
over Bishops. ibid. n. 21. p. 190. Emperor is to be obeyed against the will of
the Bishop. ibid. n. 22. p. 191. He is to be obeyed against the will of the
Bishop in actions that by empire are changed into good or bad respectively.
ibid. n. 23. p. 191. The Bishops of Rome destroyed the Roman Empire. l. 3. c.
3. r. 7. n. 4. p. 201. The first Councils were called by the Emperors. ibid.
n. 10. p. 204. He had the primacy in eight General Councils. ibid. n. 10. p.
204. The Emperors did dismiss the Councils. l. 3. c. 3. r. 7. n. 11. p. 205.
S. Hierome disputing against Ruffinus, disproves a certain Synod, because
Ruffinus could not show what Emperor called it. ibid. n. 11. p. 205. Decrees
made by the Emperors concerning matters of Faith. ibid. n. 13, 14. p. 206.
Empire is included in Jurisdiction. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 5. p. 212. There is no
Empire in preaching. ibid. n. 12. p. 217. Never any Canons of the primitive
Church did oblige the people, unless established by the Emperor. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 5. n. 4. p. 236. Of. S. Ambrose excommunicating Theodosius: Babylas
excommunicating the Emperor Decius: Athanasius, the Prefect of Lybia:
Chrysostom, the Empress Eudoxia. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 8, 9. p. 242. See more
in the title King and Prince, etc. Hildebrand did ill to excommunicate the
Emperor Henry. l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. n. 12. p. 264. Of Elias his sacrificing to
Baal. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 28. p. 200. and n. 37. p. 205.
End.
An action receives the denomination of good or bad from the end. l. 4. c. 1.
r. 1. n. 1. How the Glory of God is to be reconciled with those other lower
ends which we set for our actions. l. 4. c. 2. r. 2. n. 1. How temporal ends
are to be subordinate to spiritual. ibid. n. 2. Temporal ends must not fill our
affections and keep out better things. ib. n. 2. We may serve inferior ends so
they carry us not beyond due measures. ib. n. 3. All temporal ends must be less
principal and subordinate to religion. ib. n. 4. Fines mandati sunt diligenter
custodiendi. l. 4. c. 2. r. 3. n. 4.
England.
There is not article in the faith of the Church of England, but is possible to
be effected by the ordinary power of God. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 50. p. 56. In
England no Council is of authority but the first four general Councils. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 14. n. 2. p. 283. The Church of England retains in all her Offices but
one ceremony, that is not of divine institution or Apostolical. l. 3. c. 4. r.
20. r. 8. p. 327. The reformation made in England by Henry the eighth was never
the worse because he proposed to himself (possibly) an evil end. l. 3. c. 1. r.
3. n. 5. p. 33. (...). l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 53. p. 307, 317.
Equity.
Of Equity in interpreting penal Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. r. 2. p. 399. Of
Equity in punishments. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 16. p. 405. it is to be practiced
for the ends of charity and justice, not oppression. ibid. r. 2. n. 4. p. 408.
(...). l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 9. p. 458.
Error.
The causes of it. l. 1. c. 3. r. ^. n. 2, 3. p. 100. The measures of obedience
due to an erring Conscience. l. 1. c. 3. r. 2. n. 28. p. 107. If the thing
which it commands be indifferent we may follow it without sin. ibid. If an
Erring Conscience dictate a thing to be good, which is not good, not to follow
that dictate and not to do that thing is no sin. ibid. n. 29. p. 108. If an
Erring Conscience affirm that which is good or indifferent to be evil, it is no
sin to omit that action. ibid. n. 30. p. 108. If an Erring Conscience say that
such an action is lawful only, when of it self it is good, we sin not whether
we do it or not do it. ibid. n. 31. p. 108. If an Erring Conscience commands
what is simply evil, or forbids that which is absolutely commanded, the man
sins whether he obeys or obeys not. ibid. n. 32. How the Error of an abused
Conscience must be removed. l. 1. c. 3. r. 7. p. 116.
Example.
An Example out of the Old Testament is not in all things sufficient warrant
for us. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 26. p. 380. The actions of good men in Scripture
are not a competent warrant for our imitation, not only when they are reproved,
but even when they are set down without a censure. ibid. n. 27. p. 380. The
actions of men in the Old Testament though attested and brought to effect by
the providence of God, are not to be made examples always by us. l. 2. c. 2.
r. 7. n. 28. p. 381, and p. 557. Examples in matters of war are ever most
dangerous precedents. ibid. n. 31. p. 382. A Law being changed, Examples which
were never given in proportion to that Law are not to be imitated. ibid. n. 32.
p. 382. Examples are instead of a Rule, when there is none. ibid. n. 40. p.
386. The greatest use of Examples is in the interpretation of Laws, when the
letter is equivocal or the Example doubtful. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 44. p. 387.
what Examples may be safely followed. ibid. n. 47. p. 387. That Example is
safe, where we find upon the Action the mark of Gods blessing. ibid. n. 48. p.
387. In all matters of doubt, when the case on either hand is equal, so that
the Conscience cannot determine, there the Examples of good men are of great
use to determine it. ibid. n. 43. p. 386.
Evil.
Instances of holy and great men that have done evil to the end that good might
come of it. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 28. p. 200. When the Evils are subordinate and
relative, the less may be done to prevent the greater. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 33.
p. 203. the natures, causes and measures of Evil. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 34. p.
204. He that makes use of a material part of a sin already prepared, to which
he gives no consent, and which he cannot help, does not evil for a good end. l.
1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 37. p. 205. It is falsely said by some, that some things are
by God forbidden, because they were before that act of God's unlawful. l. 2. c.
1. r. 1. n. 58. p. 242. of toleration of Evil. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 11, 12. p.
376. To have a power of choosing Evil is an imperfection and infelicity. l. 4.
c. 1. r. 1. n. 5. p. 441. He does not eschew Evil that does not do it, but he
that chooses not to do it. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 16. p. 445.
Everlasting.
That word among the Jews does not always fignifie eternal. l. 2. c. 2. r. 1.
n. 11. p. 279.
Executioner.
An Executioner is not to refuse to do his office, if he know the prisoner
unjustly condemned. l. 1. c. 2. r. 8. n. 25. p. 91. and p. 82. n. 7. In what
case the Criminal is to be Executioner against himself. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. p.
63. Exceptio ^irmat regulam in non exceptis. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 31. p. 346.
Concerning the Excellency of things, and how to be estimated. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6.
n. 7. p. 181. Excess, reasons against it. l. 3. c. 2. r. 9. p. 127.
Excommunication.
Concerning it. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 19. p. 14. and l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 14,
15, 16. p. 63. what are the effects of it. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 15, 16. p. 219.
See the title Keys, in K. A King cannot be excommunicated. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n.
4, 5. p. 241. the Primitive Bishops never durst think of Excommunicating Kings.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 7. p. 242. Of S. Ambrose Excommunicating Theodosius:
Babylas, the Emperor Decius: Athanasius, the Prefect of Lybia: Chrysostom,
the Emperess Eudoxia, etc. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 8, 9. p. 242. but the Church
may deny the Sacrament to evil Princes. ibid. n. 10. p. 243. Excommunication
the greater and the lesser. ibid. r. 8. n. 1. p. 247. Excommunication
improperly so called, when we refuse to communicate with one that is not
excommunicated. ibid. n. 3. p. 248. this is not warrantable. ib. n. 4. Neither
the People or King are to be excommunicated. ib. n. 7. p. 250. In what cases it
is lawful for the people to separate from their Bishops or Priests. l. 3. c.
4. r. 8. n. 9. p. 250. of the lesser Excommunication. ibid. n. 12. p. 251. The
Bishop cannot Excommunicate any of the Princes servants without his leave.
ibid. n. 14. p. 252. In the lesser Excommunication the internal and spiritual
part depends not upon the Princes consent, but the external does. ibid. of the
greater Excommunication. l. 3. c. 4. r. 8. n. 18. p. 254. The Bishop in
inflicting the greater Excommunication depends not upon the Civil power. ibid.
n. 18. p. 254. The reason why the Bishop depends upon the consent of the Civil
power in the exercise of the lesser Excommunication and not of the greater ib.
n. 19. p. 254. Excommunication for an unjust cause binds not. l. 3. c. 4. r. 9.
n. 2. p. 256. for a light cause binds before men but not before God. ibid. n.
3. p. 256. In what cases Excommunication may be inflicted. l. 3. c. 4. r. 9. n.
6. p. 257. It should be the last remedy. l. 3. c. 4. r. 9. n. 7. p. 258.
Unlawful to Excommunicate any man for not paying the fees of Courts. ibid. n.
9. p. 258. Spiritual censures must not be inflicted for temporal causes. ibid.
n. 10. p. 259. Excommunication ipso facto in a Law is not to be understood of
the greater Excommunication. ibid. n. 11. p. 259. n. 13. p. 260. We may not
communicate with those that are justly Excommunicated. l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. p.
261. When the Church excommunicates those that communicate with the
excommunicated, she only inflicts the lesser Excommunication, and binds only
externally. l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. n. 4. p. 261. The Church by Excommunication
intends not to forbid any such intercourse or communion to which we stand
preoblig'd by the Law of Nature, God, or the supreme Civil power. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 10. n. 5. p. 262. We may lawfully converse with an Excommunicate person. ib.
n. 7. p. 263. To what restraint of conversation Excommunication does oblige.
ibid. n. 9. p. 263. What usage Excommunicated persons are to have from us.
ibid. n. 10. p. 264. What is the design of the Church when she inflicts
censures on those that communicate with the excommunicated. ibid. n. 12. p.
264. Hildebrand did ill to Excommunicate the Emperor Henry and his Subjects.
ibid. It is dangerous to communicate with those that are Excommunicated. ibid.
n. 13. p. 265.
F.
OF Fables and fictions, whether lawful. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 19. p. 94.
Fast.
In the first ages of the Christian Church they kept their Fasts with liberty.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 15. p. 280. Fasts observed by the Ancients were diverse.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 17. p. 281. Concerning the weekly Fasts, Saturday and
Friday. ibid. n. 23. p. 284. The Rogation Fast and Ember-week. ibid. n. 23. p.
284. and ibid. r. 15. n. 11. p. 294. Fasting, of its necessity and abuse. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 17. n. 18. p. 307. It is not to be offered to God for good works, but
with them. ibid. The Roman Fasts superstitious. ibid. n. 19. p. 308. The
niceties of the Roman Church about Fasting. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 21. p. 310.
In what cases, and what person are tied to the observation of Ecclesiastical
Fasts. l. 3. c. 4. r. 19. n. 4. p. 317. The sick and weak are exempted from the
Laws of Fasting. ibid. n. 5. p. 317. Laws of Fasting are sparingly to be
imposed. ibid. n. 7. p. 318. and 322. Needless scruples about fasting. ibid. n.
8. p. 318, 319. The usefulness of Fasting. ibid. n. 9. p. 321. The Canon Law
forbids a fast of two or three days, or that is beyond our strength. ibid.
Little use of the Flesh Fast. ibid. n. 10. p. 322. Fish as delicious and
luxurious as flesh. ibid. Fasts of many days continuance ought not to be
imposed severely. l. 3. c. 4. r. 19. n. 12. p. 322. Unless it be by the Civil
power. ibid. n. 13. p. 323. Too much abstinence in Fasting brings sometimes
madness. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 17. p. 336. Of Fasting. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n.
55. p. 505. and l. 2. c. 3. r. 8. n. 1, 2. etc. p. 417. Reasons proving it to
be a duty. l. 2. c. 3. r. 8. n. 3. p. 418. Of the manner of its obligation
different from other duties. l. 2. c. 3. r. 8. n. 6. p. 419. The words of S.
Chrysostom concerning Fasting explained. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 18. p. 13. Words
of S. Basil concerning Fasting explained. ibid. The Ecclesiastical Laws
concerning Fasting do not oblige in case of sickness or the like. l. 3. c. 1.
r. 2. n. 8. p. 28. The Primitive Church did appoint Fasting days. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 4. n. 3. p. 226. Of the Fast of Lent and the weekly Fasting days. l. 3. c.
4. r. 13. n. 4. p. 273. Testimonies of the Fathers showing that the Church had
no Fasts but voluntary. ibid. n. 9. p. 276, 278. Of breaking Fasting days. l.
3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 18. p. 13. and ibid. n. 29. p. 20.
Faith.
It is not lawful to declare those things that are proved out of Scripture by
probable arguments to be articles of Faith. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 10, 11, 12.
p. 305. The Catholic Church in matters of Faith is a Witness, not a Judge. l.
3. c. 4. r. 21. n. 1. p. 356. Religion and Faith are not within the power of a
Father. l. 3. c. 5. r. 4. n. 1. p. 369. The Jews believed God would not punish
the sin of the thoughts, unless it were against the Faith. l. 4. c. 1. r. 5. n.
18. p. 500. Faith and reason are not opposite. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 20. p. 46.
What Faith is. ibid. Faith is in other Sciences besides Theology. ibid. n. 21.
Faith it self is an act of reason. ibid. n. 24. p. 47. What, Faith infused by
God, is. ibid. n. 25. p. 48. How Faith and Reason serve one another. l. 1. c.
2. r. 3. n. 52. p. 57. The foundation of Faith laid by Christ and his Apostles
is plain and easy and has but a few articles. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 64. p.
509. The Symbols of Faith in the New Testament are short. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n.
65. p. 510. The Apostles baptized Proselytes upon the confession of a very few
Articles. ibid. n. 66. p. 511. Justin Martyr affirms, that if any man should
even then (in his times) live according to the Law of Moses, so that he
believes in Jesus Christ crucified, he shall be saved. ibid. n. 67. p. 512. The
Primitive Father required the belief of a few Articles. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n.
67, 68. p. 512. It was the sense of the first ages, that the Creeds should not
be enlarged. ibid. n. 69. p. 513. The Ancient Church in the Creed of
Constantinople and Nice added only new explications, no new Articles. ibid. n.
73. p. 515. Every Conclusion drawn from a believed truth is certain but not
necessary. ibid. n. 74. p. 515. Many things are necessary to be believed upon
the account of obedience more then upon the account of Faith. ibid. n. 76. p.
516. About matters of Faith no man's Conscience ought to be pressed with any
authority, but of Christ enjoining or the Apostles declaring what is necessary.
ibid. n. 83. p. 518. Faith is to be kept even with an Enemy. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5.
n. 19. p. 94. but not if the person engaging had not competent power. ibid. n.
19. p. 95. decrees made by the Emperors concerning matters of Faith. l. 3. c.
3. r. 7. n. 14. p. 206.
Father.
Children ought to obey their Parents or Fathers. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 1. p.
359. three reasons to enforce the Duty. ibid. n. 1, 2, 3. p. 359, 360. If a
Father and Son being partners in a Crime be to endure torment to for^^
confession, the Law commands the Son to be tormented first. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1.
n. 2. p. 360. Fathers are to us in the place of God. ibid. n. 1. p. 359.
Fathers bless their children. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 3. p. 360. The Curses of
Fathers are Ominous. ibid. n. 3. p. 361. A Fable teaching children to obey
their Fathers commands. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 4. p. 361. It is a sin for
Children to reject the Counsels or holy precepts which their Fathers give them.
ibid. n. 7. p. 362. The power of Fathers over their children. l. 3. c. 5. r. 2.
n. 1. p. 364. An instrument of political peace. ib. The Fathers power the
fountain of the Royal. ibid. The Judge is authorized in the Law of Moses to
punish with death crimes committed against the private authority of a Fathers
upon his single testimony. ibid. n. 2. p. 364. A Father Anger must be such as
must have Discipline for his end, not revenge. ibid. n. 3. p. 365. Against a
Fathers tyranny there is no remedy but in the civil power. ibid. n. 3. A Father
must use moderation in chastising. ibid. Children must maintain their Parents
and Fathers. l. 3. c. 5. r. 3. n. 1. p. 366. Maintenance is a part of that
honor that is due to Fathers. ib. n. 2. p. 367. A Son is bound to maintain his
indigent Father, though the Father be outlawed. ibid. The indigent Father is to
be relieved rather then the Son. ibid. n. 3. p. 367. The Civil law permits the
Father to sell his Son for his necessary support. l. 3. c. 5. r. 3. n. 4. p.
368. And if a Son deny it, the Law ties the Son to maintain his Father during
the suit. ibid. n. 5. p. 368. Religion and Faith are not within the Fathers
power. ibid. r. 4. n. 1. p. 369. A child is not to be baptized without his
Fathers leave. ibid. The religion of the Son must not prejudice the Fathers
civil rights. ib. n. 2. A Father has no authority after his death. l. 3. c. 5.
r. 6. n. 1. p. 372. When their Fathers are dead the Sons owe much to the memory
of them. l. 3. c. 5. r. 6. n. 2. p. 372. What regard we should have to our dead
Fathers. ibid. n. 3. p. 373. The Argument in A. Gellius, that proves we ought
not to obey the command of our Fathers, answered. l. 3. c. 5. r. 7. n. 2. p.
374. A Son is not to obey his Father in things impious. ibid. n. 3. p. 375.
though the Fathers command may be neglected, his authority must not. ibid. n.
4. p. 375. if the Son transgress the Law by his Fathers command, his punishment
is the more easy. ibid. n. 5. Velle non creditur, qui obscquitur imperio
Patris aut Domini. ibid. The Authority of Fathers over their children proved,
with the measures thereof. l. 3. c. 5. r. 7. n. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. p. 375, and 376.
In what case the Son may complain of his Father to the Judge. ib. n. 7. p. 376.
It is not lawful for Sons to enter into a state of religion against their
Fathers will. ibid. r. 8. n. 3. p. 378. Thomas Aquinas did. ibid. A Son cannot
withdraw himself from under his Fathers Government, and put himself under
another. ibid. n. 5. p. 379. it is forbid by the Council of Gangra. ibid. S.
Augustine and S. Ambrose affirm that a Father cannot hinder his Son from going
into a Monastery; but then it was not a perpetual bond, but only as a School
for Education. ibid. n. 6. p. 379. Instances showing that Sons may not enter
into a religious Order without their Fathers leave. ibid. n. 6. p. 380. Charles
the Great made a Law against it. ibid. Children sin, that marry against their
Fathers will. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 7. p. 381. the Ancients judged such
marriages illegitimate. ibid. n. 8. p. 381. the Law of Nature requires Sons to
ask their Fathers leave in marriage. ibid. n. 9. p. 382. Marriage made against
the will of the Father were invalid by the civil Law. ib. The Church sometime
did excommunicate those that married without the consent of their Fathers or
Parents. ibid. n. 11. p. 384. The consent of Fathers or Parents is not
essentially necessary to the validity of marriage. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 14. p.
385. though the consent of the Father or Parents being wanting cannot
invalidate the contract, yet it may hinder the possession. ibid. n. 16. p. 387.
The Fathers natural power over the Son. ibid. n. 17. p. 388. His political
power. ibid. n. 18. p. 389. this later every Commonwealth has power to extend
or streighten. ibid. n. 19. p. 389. Of Exemption from the power of Fathers.
ibid. n. 20. p. 390. A Son is never exempted from his Fathers natural power.
ibid. Of his political power the Laws determine the measure and period. ibid.
The Sons wife is in the Fathers power after marriage. ibid. n. 21. p. 390. If a
Son be a Magistrate, the Magistrate is exempted from the Fathers power, but not
the Son. ibid. n. 22. p. 391. If a Son enter into holy orders, it quits him not
from his duty to his Father. ibid. n. 23. p. 391. A Father cannot hinder the
marriage of his children, if they are far gone in love, and he at first
promoted it. ibid. n. 27. p. 392. The Civil law puts not Sons under their
Mother but their Father. ibid. n. 28. p. 393. Some cases in which a Father
ought not to force his children to marry. ibid. n. 33, 34. p. 396. A man is
bound to the duty of maintaining his Father, though he have made a vow of his
estate to the Church. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 14. p. 415. Those that do to us all
the duties of Fathers we are bound to as our Fathers. ibid. n. 24. p. 419. the
power that Fathers have over their children, and the reasons of it. l. 2. c. 2.
r. 6. n. 65. p. 367. The power of Fathers in inflicting punishments. l. 3. c.
2. r. 6. n. 7. p. 109. The fifth Commandment of honoring our Father and Mother
the Jews accounted to the first table. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 8. p. 329.
Fathers of the Church.
Of the authority of those Books that were written by the ancient Fathers. l.
3. c. 4. r. 22. n. 4, 5. p. 355. concerning their judgment in controversies. l.
1. c. 4. r. 10. n. 1. p. 162. they cannot give sufficient authority to a
tradition. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 42. p. 499. the Primitive Fathers required the
belief of a few articles. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 67, 68. p. 512.
Fear.
What influence Fear has upon the morality of our actions. l. 4. c. 1. r. 7.
p. 511. In Divine Commandments no fear of temporal evil is an excuse. l. 4. c.
1. r. 7. n. 2. p. 512. what influence Fear has upon contracts, marriages, etc.
ibid. n. 7. p. 514. The Law calls nothing a just fear, but the fear of the
greatest evils, as death, etc. ibid. n. 8. p. 514. Whether I am bound to keep
my promise, which I make, fearing to lose my life if I deny. ibid. n. 9. p.
515. No reverential Fear can excuse a sin or nullify a contract. ib. n. 10. p.
515. why Fear has upon our actions a different influence from other passions,
as lust, anger, etc. ibid. Fear is the band of all laws. l. 2. c. 1. r. 3. n.
1. p. 244. even in good men Fear is the instrument of justice. ibid. n. 6. p.
246. Fear the attendant of a guilty conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 14. p. 19.
another Fear there is always joined with true peace of Conscience. ibid. n.
25. p. 25. It is lawful to persuade fools and children by Mormo's instead of
arguments. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 19. p. 80. Fear abuses the Conscience into
error. l. 1. c. 3. r. 1. n. 4. p. 100. Of the Fears of a scrupulous
Conscience. l. 1. c. 6. r. 5. n. 9. p. 216.
Feasts.
The Apostles made no laws concerning Feasts, says Socrates. l. 3. c. 4. r.
13. n. 13. p. 279. of Feasting, and its luxury and due measures. l. 4. c. 1. r.
2. n. 21. p. 465. Of those that permit Drunkenness in their houses at Feasts.
ibid. Among the Romans works of necessity and charity were permitted on
Festivals. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 57. p. 363.
Fornication.
the congress of betrothed persons is not Fornication before God. l. 3. c. 5.
r. 8. n. 16. p. 387. Of those Commonwealths that permit fornication and public
stews. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 17. p. 195. Fines mandati sunt diligenter
custodiendi. l. 4. c. 2. r. 3. n. 4.
Free Will, and Freedom.
Of Free Will. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. p. 438, 439. and 447, 448. It is consequent to
the weakness and blindness of our nature. l. 4. c 1. r. 1. n. 5. p. 441. to
grant Frr-will does not disparage the grace of God. ibid. n. 6. p. 441. to have
a power of choosing evil is an imperfection and inselicity. ibid. n. 5. p. 441.
wherein consists that freedom which the death of Christ has put us into. l.
3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 28. p. 18. The Fifth Commandment of honoring our Father and
Mother, the Jews accounted to the first table. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. p. 8. p. 329.
What influence Fraud has upon contracts. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 22. p. 510. The
precepts of Forgiveness and charity are not against executing penal Laws. l. 3.
c. 2. r. 1. n. 3. p. 54. It is lawful to persuade Fools and children by
Mormo's instead of arguments. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 19. p. 80.
G.
THE Gallican Church is ruled by those Ecclesiastical Laws that their Kings
have made. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 7. p. 177.
Gaming.
Rules to be observed in Gaming. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 32. p. 473. Of Gaming. l.
4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 27. p. 470. Of Gaming-houses and the punishments by some Laws
inflicted. ibid. n. 28. p. 470. In what cases Gaming is lawful. ib. whether it
be lawful to play only to recover ones loss. ibid. n. 34. p. 476. whether it
be lawful to Game when I give away all I win to the poor. ibid. n. 35. p. 476.
whether a man has right of possession to what he wins by Gaming. ibid. n. 36.
p. 477. not lawful to Game for money. ibid. n. 37. p. 478. young men should
not game. ibid. n. 38. p. 479.
Gerson.
His mistake. l. 3. c. 4. r. 9. n. 12. p. 259.
God.
that there is a God, proved by Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1. n. 4. He rules in
our minds by Faith and Conscience; the difference of those two faculties. ibid.
n. 10. p. 5. Justice and Truth are the same in Us and in God. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3.
r. 3 n. 38. p. 52. God has said it, therefore it is true, is the greatest
reason in the world. ibid. n. 65. p. 61. to obey God never has an unavoidable
dilemma. l. 1. c 3. r. 3. n. 7. p. 110. It was ill said by those that affirmed
that God cannot change the Law of Nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 49. p. 239.
Nothing is unlawful antecedently to Gods Commandment. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 58.
p. 242. Our Duty to God is supreme. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 12. p. 268. the
measures of our Love toward God. l. 2. c. 3. r. 12. n. 1. p. 449. God is to be
worshipped by nothing but what himself appointed. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 7. p.
457. Plato taught that they were not to be suffered in a Commonwealth, that
said God was the Author of evil. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 10. p. 166. The grace of
God is not disparaged by the doctrine of Free Will. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 6. p.
441. In what manner it is to be understood, that a man should make the glory of
God the end of every action. l. 4. c. 2. r. 1. n. 3. It is not necessary that
all our actions be always actually directed to the glory of God. ibid. n. 4.
Rules concerning the directing all our actions to the glory of God. l. 4. c. 2.
r. 1. n. 3, 4, 5. How the Glory of God is to be reconciled with those other
inferior ends which God allows us to propose to our actions. l. 4. c. 2. r. 2.
n. 1. whether it be lawful to serve God for any end less then himself, viz.
riches, honor, etc. ibid. n. 5. It is not lawful to do a thing for temporal
regards with positive neglect of the glory of God. ibid. n. 6. Rules showing
when and how it is lawful to serve God for temporal ends. ibid. In what sense
it is true that God must be served for his own sake. ibid. n. 7. he that loves
God above all other things loves him for himself. ib. n. 9. Rules to know when
we love God for his own sake. ibid. n. 8, 9. God is the Fountain of all Laws.
l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 1. p. 372. In Gods service a mere negative action does
nothing. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 15. p. 444. Of the morality of those kind of
actions. ibid. n. 15, 16. p. 445.
Good.
No man can make the measures of Good and evil. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1. n. 20. p. 8.
Good and bad is before the act of Conscience. l. 1. c. 2. r. 9. n. 12. p. 98.
Such collateral considerations as belong to the goodness or badness of an
action. l. 1. c. 4. r. 9. n. 10. p. 160. Instances of Holy persons, that have
done evil that good may come of it. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 28. p. 200. A private
evil is not to be done for a private good, but for a public it may. l. 1. c.
5. r. 8. n. 31. p. 203. an evil in nature may be done for a good in morality.
ibid. n. 32. p. 203. every thing that is not intrinsecally evil, if it be
directed to a good end, is good, unless it be spoiled by some intervening
accident. ibid. n. 33. p. 204. all the measures of Good and evil are to be
taken by the Law of the Gospel. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 3. p. 373. whatsoever is
against the Law of the Gospel may not be permitted directly for the obtaining a
greater good, but may for the avoiding a greater evil which otherwise cannot be
avoided. ibid. n. 9. p. 375. We must not judge of the goodness of actions by
the event. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 5. p. 162. An action is good or bad by the
conformity to the rule, but a man by his own will. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 1. p.
438. Of that saying, It is lawful to do evil that Good may come of it. l. 1.
c. 5. r. 8. n. 4, 20. p. 197. and l. 4. c. 2. r. 1. n. 8. whether the lesser
e^^l in respect of the greater has the nat^^^e of Good. l. 1. ^apsn^ r. 8. n.
25. p. 199. Of Godfather^ and Godmothers at Baptism. ^^. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 5.
p. 289.
Gospel.
All the measures of good and evil are to be taken by the law of the Gospel. l.
2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 3. p. 373. whatsoever (...) against the Law of the Gospel may
no^ be permitted directly for the obtaining a greater good, but may for the
avoiding a greater evil which otherwise cannot be avoided. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n.
9. p. 375. The Commandments of the Gospel are affirmative, and why? l. 2. c. 3.
r. 1. n. 7. p. 390. The Gospel exceeds all other institutions in the manner of
its teaching. (...). 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 8. p. 327. the difference between the
Gospel and the Law. (...) 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 24. p. 450.
Government.
Nihil aliu^^ est Imperium nisi cura salutis aternae. l. 3. c. 3. r. 7. n. 6.
p. 202. the Original of Government. l. 3. c. 1. r. 7. n. 1, 2. p. 46. In their
disputations of Government the Roman and Greek writers modelled their
principles to the popular governments they lived under. l. 3. c. 1. r. 7. n. 5.
p. 47. no change of Government or alteration of sentence is to be made upon
pretense of any secret counsel of God. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 14. p. 57.
H.
HEretics and others have falsely pretended diverse books to be written by
Apostles and Apostolical men. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 35. p. 492. It is not
always lawful to hear good things and true. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 67. p. 61.
Heart.
We must take care that hardness of Heart be not mistaken for peace of
Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 25. p. 24. the Heart is principally regarded
by God in all actions of obedience. l. 2. c. 3. r. 5. n. 2. p. 405. Sin is
forbidden in the Heart. l. 2. c. 3. r. 7. n. 1. p. 414.
Heathen.
The Ceremonies which the Primitive Church borrowed from the Heathen were such
as had no relation to doctrine. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 13. p. 552. Ceremonies
ought with great caution to be taken up in imitation of the Heathen. ibid. n.
14. p. 553. In what state Heathens are after death. l. 4. c. 1. r. 5. n. 1. p.
493.
Heir.
The Heir or Donor is to be eased in doubts, unless it make the gift good for
nothing. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 15. p. 405. Haredem teneri ad poenam, ad quam
defunctus fuerat condemnatus. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 11. p. 121. In what sense
that proposition and the contrary are both true. ibid. Of King Hezekiah's
breaking the brazen Serpent. l. 3. c. 6. r. 7. n. 3. p. 432. Henry VIII. his
reformation in England was never the worse because he proposed to himself
possibly an evil end. l. 3. c. 1. r. 3. n. 5. p. 33. Hildebrand did ill in
excommunicating the Emperor Henry and his Subjects. l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. n. 12.
p. 264.
Holy days.
Of the observation of them. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 55. p. 361. The Eastern
Churches and Disciples of S. John kept Easter Day not on the day of the week on
which Christ rose, but on the full Moon, whatsoever day it fell upon. ibid.
Honor.
It comprehends maintenance. l. 3. c. 5. r. 3. n. 2. p. 367. of the Honor due
to Churchmen. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 18. p. 187. how it is lawful to strive for
Honor. l. 4. c. 2. r. 2. n. 2. all designs of Honor must be less principal
then, and subordinate to, religion. ibid. n. 4. When a thing is disputed by
good and learned men on both sides, to do either is not against public
Honesty. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 57. p. 309. Reasons why Humility and piety are
the best dispositions to the understanding the secrets of the Gospel. l. 1. c.
2. r. 3. n. 57. p. 59. Of Hushai his dealing falsely with Absalom. l. 1. c. 5.
r. 8. n. 28, 30. p. 200, 202. Hypocrites excuse all their open sins with the
pretense of Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 3. n. 1. p. 26.
I.
OF Jephthah's vow out of the Jewstory. l. 3. c. 3. r. 8. n. 1. p. 208. Of the
Custom of bowing at the name of Jesus. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 4. p. 289.
Jews.
their religion upon their Sabbaths and feasts. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 58. p.
363. The Jews in their writings against the Primitive Christians never charged
them with worshipping Images. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 37. p. 351. The
Righteousness of the Christians must exceed the Jews. l. 2. c. 3. r. 20. n. 3.
p. 555. S. Ignatius his Epistle to the Philippians is supposititious. l. 3. c.
4. r. 13. n. 12. p. 278.
Ignorance.
it abuses the Conscience into Error. l. 1. c. 3. r. 1. n. 3. p. 100. of
vincible ignorance. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 9, 10. p. 505. we cannot be ignorant
of things necessary to salvation without sin. l. 4. c. 1. r. 5. n. 1, 4. p.
493. No man can be innocently ignorant of what all Nations and men believe and
publicly profess. l. 4. c. 1. r. 5. n. 3. p. 494. of that which is by several
Churches and societies of wise and good men disputed, a man may be innocently
ignorant. l. 4. c. 1. r. 5. n. 5. p. 495. A man may not be innocently ignorant
of that which is his special duty. ibid. n. 7. p. 495. what is that diligence,
after which Ignorance is excusable. l. 4. c. 1. r. 5. n. 11. p. 497. what is
probable Ignorance. ibid. r. 12. p. 497. whether is worse, to sin willingly, or
by Ignorance. ibid. n. 16. p. 498. Some sins of ignorance worse then some sins
of malice. ibid. n. 18. p. 499. What ignorance Antecedent and Concomitant are,
and what influence they have upon our actions. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 2, 7. p.
500. how long infant ignorance or childishness can excuse, so as their actions
shall be reckoned neither to virtue nor vice. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 4. p. 501.
Illusion is hard to be distinguished from Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 3. n. 5.
p. 28.
Images and Idolatry.
The Jews were forbid to make an Image, as a (...) to the Law of Idolatry. l.
2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 42. p. 304, 313. though the making or having an Image were
unlawful to the Jews, yet not to the Christians. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 11. p.
330. it is not lawful to worship the true God by an Image. ibid. n. 21. p.
338. Idolatry is a sin against the Law of Nature. ibid. n. 23. p. 338. To
worship false gods, and to give divine worship to an Image, is one and the same
kind of formal Idolatry. ibid. n. 25. p. 339. S. John was not permitted to give
divine worship to an Angel who represented the person of God. ib. n. 27. p.
341. A Definition of Idolaters out of S. Austin. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 28. p.
343. how an Image can be an idol. ibid. n. 30. p. 344. The difference between
an Image and an Idol. ibid. n. 30. p. 345. That which forbad the Jews to make
or have Images was no moral Law. ibid. n. 31. p. 347. The worship of Images is
against the analogy of the Gospel. ibid. n. 32. p. 348. The Primitive
Christians were great haters of Image Worship. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 33. p. 349.
The Council of Eliberis decreed against pictures in Churches. ibid. n. 35. p.
350. the Jews in their writings against the Christians of the first ages never
charged them with worshipping Images, which shows then they did not worship
them. ibid. n. 37. p. 351. In the first part of the Thalmud written about A. D.
200. there is no reproof to Christians for Images: but in the second part
written about A. D. 500. they frequently charge it upon them. ibid. The
Heathens did not believe their Images to be Gods, and worshipped them with no
other but relative worship. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 38. p. 351. only the ruder
part of them. ibid. p. 352. The culpable usage of Images by modern Papists. l.
2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 39. p. 353. The worship of Images never prevailed any where
but among a degenerating people. ibid. n. 40. p. 354. The ancient Romans
worshipped their Gods 170 years without Images. ibid. Idolatry hindered by
Sacrifices. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 30. p. 476. Of the Imitation of Christ. l. 2.
c. 2. r. 7. n. 35. p. 383. Summum ejus esse Imperium, qui ordinario juri
derogare valeat. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 25. p. 192. Impudence often the attendant
of an evil Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 13. p. 19.
Incest.
Incest taught by the Devil speaking out of Fire. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 23. p.
295. the notation of the word. ibid. n. 24. p. 296. A strange case happening at
Venice of an incestuous marriage. l. 1 c. 3. r. 8. n. 3. p. 118. Of the word
Institutio. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 4. p. 421. Signs of difference, whereby we
may, in a mixed Intention, know which is the principal ingredient. l. 1. c. 2.
r. 5. n. 30. p. 71.
Indifferent.
Things indifferent may be ministeries of religion, but no parts of it. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 20. n. 12. p. 331. Actions in their physical capacity are negatively
indifferent. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 14. p. 444. Acts omitted are oftentimes
indifferent. ibid. n. 15. p. 444. all acts that pass without any consent of the
will are indifferent. ibid. n. 17. p 446. Of Indifferent actions, what are
such. ibid. n. 16, 17. p. 445. No action of the will is indifferent. ib. n. 18.
p. 446.
Interest
renders the Conscience suspected, if it be guided by it. l. 1. c. 1. r. 3. n.
6. p. 29. Interest is sometimes on the side of Truth. ibid. How to discern when
it is joined with Truth. ibid. Of Inconsideration. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. p. 508.
Interpretation.
Laws that are doubtful are rightly interpreted by examples. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7.
n. 44. p. 387. Rules of the interpretation of Laws by consequence. l. 2. c. 2.
r. 7. n. 8. p. 400. When any condition intrinsecal to the duty of an
affirmative precept is impossible or cannot be supplied, the duty it self falls
without interpretation. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 15. p. 446. Laws are to be
interpreted with respect to the mind of the Lawgiver. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 1.
p. 398. In what sense and manner. ibid. n. 3. p. 399. See more Letter L. word
Laws. In interpreting the Commandments of God, we must choose that sense which
most promotes the end of the commandment. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 10. p. 403. Of
the favorable interpretation of Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 15. p. 405. Of
favorable interpretation in inflicting punishments. ibid. n. 16. All good Laws
admit interpretation in some cases. ibid. n. 17. In matters of favor and
piety the sense of the Laws is to be extended by interpretation. ibid. n. 18.
p. 406. When the Lawgiver interprets his own Law, he does not take off, but
remove the obligation. l. 3. c. 6. r. 2. n. 2. p. 408. The power of
interpreting Laws must be used with nobleness, not fraud. ibid. n. 4. p. 408.
The Laws are not to be bended by interpretation but upon great and just causes.
ibid. n. 5. p. 409. The interpretation of Laws made by Judges is nothing of
Empire and power. ibid. n. 7. p. 410. Judged cases are the best indication of
the meaning of a Law. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 3. p. 428. In the doubtful
interpretation of Laws, Customs are as good as Laws. ibid. A King is Dominus
Legum, and therefore may intervene between Equity and strictness by
interpretation. l. 3. c. 6. r. 2. n. 3. p. 408.
Judge.
A Judge must proceed according to the process of Law, though contrary to his
own private Conscience. l. 1. c. 2. r. 8. n. 7. p. 82. A Judge may not proceed
upon the evidence of an instrument, which he produced privately, but was not
produced in Court. ibid. n. 7. p. 83. what a Judge is to do in case the
evidence upon Oath is contrary to his own private Knowledge. ibid. n. 8. p. 84.
A Judge may not do any public act against his own private Conscience. ibid. n.
9, 10. p. 85. A Judge having seen a stone in Court thrown at his brother Judge,
proceeded to sentence upon the intuition of the fact, and stayed not for the
sole^nities of the Law. ibid. n. 14. p. 86. Concerning the double capacity of a
Judge. ibid. n. 24. p. 90. Sententia a Judice non suo lata, nulla est. l. 3. c.
1. r. 3. n. 4. p. 33. The interpretation of Laws made by Judges is nothing of
Empire and Power. l. 3. c. 6. r. 2. n. 7. p. 410. Judged cases are the best
indication of the meaning of a Law. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 3. p. 428. The Judges
do by their sentences best convey the notice of a custom. ib.
Judgment.
Three degrees of practical Judgment. l. 1. c. 2. r. 4. n. 1. p. 62. The
virtual Judgment, that is a natural inclination passing forth into habit or
custom, is not a state of good, by which one is acceptable to God. ibid. n. 6.
p. 63. This disposition secures not against temptation. ibid. p. 63. A formal
Judgment, that is, delibration of the understanding and choice of the will, is
required to the constitution of a right and sure Conscience. ibid. n. 7. p. 64.
The Judicial Law of Moses is annulled. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 1. p. 286. Lex
Julis. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 7. p. 118. Jussio and Mandatum, how distinguished.
l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 7. p. 458. Whatsoever is against charity cannot be the
effect of Justice. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 5. p. 54. That saying of Justin Martyr
explicated, (...). l. 2. c. 2. r. 4. n. 10. p. 322.
Jurisdiction.
Of the word. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 5. p. 213. It includes Empire. ib. S.
Chrysostom proves the office of a Bishop to be more difficult then that of a
King, because it has no jurisdiction. ibid. n. 7. p. 214. The High priest
under the Law of Moses had a proper formal Jurisdiction, which the Christian
Church has not. ibid. n. 8. p. 215. The Apostles did exercise jurisdiction,
but it was in an extraordinary and miraculous way. ibid. n. 9. p. 216. The
Church has an analogical Jurisdiction. ibid. n. 11. p. 217. How the power of
the Keys differs from proper Jurisdiction. ibid. n. 13. p. 217. There is no
Jurisdiction in the power of the Keys. ibid. n. 14. p. 218. To deny the
Sacrament to the unworthy is not an act of Jurisdiction but Charity. l. 3. c.
4. r. 7. n. 10. p. 243. Incorporalia sunt individua. Pref. page 12.
K.
(...), what it means. l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n. 5. p. 133.
Keys.
Of the power of the Keys. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 11. p. 217. Wherein the power
of the Keys differs from proper jurisdiction. ibid. n. 13. p. 217. If they are
not rightly used they neither bind nor lose. ibid. There is no jurisdiction in
the power of the Keys. ibid. n. 14. p. 219. That power is only a suspension of
their own act by Ecclesiastics. ibid. n. 15. p. 219.
Kill.
The reason why it is lawful to kill a man in my own defense. l. 1. c. 5. r.
8. n. 38. p. 206. The Commandment that forbids to kill is not broken by the
Authors of a just war, nor execution upon Malefactors. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 18.
p. 59.
King.
The Edicts of Kings are by Gratian put among the Laws of the Church. l. 3. c.
3. r. 5. n. 4. p. 175. The Gallican Church is ruled by those Laws
Ecclesiastical that their Kings have made. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 7. p. 177.
Instances to prove that the Ecclesiastics are under the jurisdiction of the
Civil or Kingly power. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 3. p. 179. What is to be done when
the command of the King and Bishop enterfere. ibid. n. 26. p. 192. A King that
commands to the Guard is to be obeyed before a Bishop that commands to go to
Divine service. ibid. n. 27. p. 193. In external actions the command of the
King is to be obeyed before the command of the Church. ibid. The King has
jurisdiction in causes internal and spiritual. ibid. r. 7. n. 2. p. 200. The
King is by God appointed to be an Overseer, Governor, Father and Protector
over his Church. l. 3. c. 3. r. 7. n. 6. p. 202. The King ought to determine
what doctrines are to be taught the people, and what are to be forbidden. ibid.
n. 13. p. 205. Every article of Religion that the King allows is not to be
accounted a part of the true religion. ib. n. 16. p. 207. The King must govern
the Church by Churchmen. l. 3. c. 3. r. 8. n. 1, 2. p. 208. Good Kings use to
verify the judicial acts of the Church. ib. n. 3. p. 208. but freely, not by
necessity. ibid. n. 4, 6. p. 209, 210. Kings are not bound to execute the
Decrees of the Church. l. 3. c. 3. r. 8. n. 5. p. 209. The difference between
the Kingly and Ecclesiastical power. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 1. p. 211. Kings obey
the Laws of the Church. l. 3. c. 4. r. 6. n. 1. p. 237. andn. 5. p. 239. The
Example of Kings prevails much. l. 3. c. 4. r. 6. n. 4. p. 238. In what manner
Kings were bound by the Canons of the Church under the old Testament. ib. n. 6.
p. 240. A King cannot be excommunicated. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 3. p. 241. The
Primitive Bishops never durst think of excommunicating Kings. ibid. n. 7. p.
242. The Church may deny the Sacrament to evil Kings. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 10.
p. 243. The King though unworthy must not be denied the Sacrament, if he be
instant for it. ibid. A Churchman though an Apostle must be subject to the
King. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 1. p. 178. Penances cannot be inflicted on the King
against his will. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 12. p. 244. Some Kings have received
hurt by such Penances. ibid. n. 13. p. 245. Kings may not be publicly reproved.
ibid. n. 14. p. 245. The old Prophets did, but mere Priests never did reprove
Kings. ibid. n. 16. p. 246. How Bishops and Ministers should carry themselves
in the reproof of Kings. ibid. n. 18. p. 246. The King nor the people cannot be
excommunicated. l. 3. c. 4. r. 8. n. 7. p. 250. The Hebrew Kings had power to
cause the Malefactors body to hang all night on the tree, though the Laws
forbid it, say the Rabbis. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 16. p. 405. A King may be
either more severe or more gentle then the Law. ib. r. 2. n. 3. p. 408. He is
Dominus Legum, and therefore may intervene between Equity and strictness by
Interpretation. ibid. S. Chrysostom proves the office of a Bishop is more
difficult then that of a King. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 7. p. 214. Difference
between a King and Tyrant. l. 3. c. 1. r. 3. n. 5. p. 34. and l. 3. c. 3. r. 1.
n. 1. p. 130. The power of Kings. l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n. 3. p. 132. Though they
have an absolute power, they may not use it. ib. n. 4. p. 132. Their power is
absolute in doing right, not in doing wrong; their power of government is
absolute, not their power of possession. ib. n. 5. p. 133. The difference
between a King and Lord of the people. ibid. What is Jus Regium? l. 3. c. 3. r.
1. n. 7. p. 135. A consideration upon the power of Kings as it is described by
Samuel. l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n. 7, 8. p. 135. Whether Kings are subject to their
own Laws. l. 3. c. 3. r. 2. n. 1. p. 138. Kings are not under the directive
power of Laws. ibid. n. 2. p. 138. They are not under the fear of their Laws.
ibid. n. 5. p. 139. They are obliged by the Laws of God and nature. ibid. n. 6.
p. 141. A King may not command his Subjects to fight in an unjust cause. ibid.
n. 7. p. 142. Their Laws must not be neglected upon the opinion of every vain
person. ibid. n. 8. p. 142. Some Laws bind the Prince. ibid. n. 10. p. 142.
Whatsoever the King has sworn to, obliges him. ibid. n. 13. p. 143. Of the
Oath which Kings take. ibid. n. 14. p. 144. Of the Kingly prerogative. ibid. n.
16. p. 145. The King can give pardon to a Criminal condemned. ibid. n. 18. p.
146. Clemency a great virtue in a King. ibid. In what cases a King may pardon a
Criminal condemned. ibid. n. 19. p. 147. It is not lawful in any cases to
resist the King. l. 3. c. 3. r. 3. n. 1. p. 149. per tot. reg. A King, though
wicked, must not be resisted. l. 3. c. 3. r. 3. n. 13. p. 156. A King cannot be
supposed to have a desire to destroy his Kingdom. ibid. n. 15. p. 157. A
Christian must not seek revenge upon, nor resist his Father or King. ibid. n.
16. p. 158. A King must not, because no subject does, forfeit his right in his
estate by his vices. l. 3. c. 3. r. 3. n. 17. p. 159. The King has no power
over his Subjects against Law, so neither the Subject over his King. ibid.
Arguments brought to prove the Pope has power over Kings. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n.
4. p. 161. Kings are Governors of religion. ibid. n. 7. p. 163. Attalus in
making the State of Rome his Heir, together with the Kingly power bequeathed
the power over things sacred. ibid. Religion being the great band of societies
must be under the government of the King. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 8. p. 164. The
King without the conduct of religion in many exigencies cannot govern his
people. ibid. n. 9. p. 165. If the Priests rule religion, they may be superior
to the King. ib. n. 10. p. 166. Examples of Kings and Princes that have been
put out of their thrones by a pretended Ecclesiastical power. ibid. n. 11. p.
166. Ancient Kings would not endure any change in religion. ibid. n. 13. p.
167. Kings are the vicegerents of Christ. ibid. n. 19. p. 170. The Jewish Kings
were superior in power to the Priests in matter of religion. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4.
n. 20. p. 173. Christ will call Christian Kings to account for Souls. ibid. n.
21. p. 173. Kings have a Legislative power in the matters of religion. l. 3. c.
3. r. 5. n. 1. p. 174. Kings may compel their Subjects to serve God. ibid. n.
3. p. 174. Those matters are under the power of the King which God has left
under no Commandment, viz. Church Affairs. ibid. n. 4. p. 174.
Kindred.
The Canon and Civil Law account not the distance of Kindred in the same manner.
l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 67. p. 313. those reasons considered which men invent for
the restraint of those marriages which God restrains not. ibid. n. 75. p. 315.
Know.
Every Knowing faculty is the seat of Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 4. p.
13. How little certainty there is in humane discourses. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 7.
p. 74.
L.
Law.
IN what sense the mind of the Lawgiver is to be the measure of interpretation.
l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 3. p. 399. by the reasons and causes of the Law we may
judge of the intention of the Lawgiver. ibid. the Law is broken when the words
are obeyed, if you violate the end or meaning of it. ibid. n. 4. p. 400. If the
intention of the Law be collected but obscurely, the obscure words are rather
to be followed then the obscure intention. ibid. n. 5. p. 400. unless it be
manifest the words recede from the intention, the Subject is to follow the
words. ibid. n. 6. p. 400. Words of Civil and Legal signification in Laws must
not signify according to Grammar, but Law. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 8. p. 401.
That is the meaning of words in the Law, that does the work of the Law. ibid.
n. 11. p. 402. In all Laws and obligations of Conscience by contract, when any
doubt arises, we are to rest upon that which is most likely and most usual.
ibid. n. 12. p. 404. Of the favorable sense of Laws. ib. n. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. p. 404, 405. Of the favorable interpretation of Laws in inflicting
punishments. ibid. n. 16. p. 405. When a Lawgiver interprets his Law he does
not take off the obligation, but remove it. l. 3. c. 6. r. 2. n. 2. p. 408.
Rules to know when the obligation of Laws cease upon the change of reason. l.
3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 6. p. 412. How the obligation of a Law may be extended by
parity of reason. ibid. n. 26. p. 420. Ratio L^gis non est Lex. ibid. n. 27. p.
420. Laws cannot by interpretation be extended to the time past. ibid. n. 30.
p. 422. Cum Lex in praeteritum quid indulget, in futurum vetat. ibid. It is not
safe to enquire after the reason of a Law, unless the Law it self declare it.
l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 33. p. 422. Of the Abrogation of Laws. ibid. r. 7. p. 431.
Difference between Moses Law and the Gospel. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 24. p. 450.
and l. 2. c. 2. r. 5. p. 324. when the authority of Lawyers is to be followed.
l. 1. c. 4. r. 10. n. 5. p. 165. The Actions of men living under another Law
are not to be measured by Laws of a differing government. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n.
30. p. 202. Quod licitum est ex superveniente causa mutatur. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10.
n. 5. p. 270. Quod L^ge prohibitoria non vetitum est, permissum esse
intelligitur. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 45. p. 304. Fac Legi tuae sepem. l. 2. c. 2.
r. 3. n. 68. p. 313. and supra p. 304. It is a new Law, though old in the
letter, if a new degree of duty be required. l. 2. c. 2. r. 4. n. 4. p. 320. To
forbid evil and command to do good cannot be one precept. ibid. n. 8. p. 321.
whatsoever is absolutely is certainly Lawful. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 21. p. 379.
Laws that are doubtful are rightly interpreted by Example. ibid. n. 44. p.
387. A Lawgiver is not only he who gives Laws, but he that authoritatively
expounds them already given. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 1. p. 389. whatsoever is
equivalent to the instance of the Law, is also within its obligation. l. 2. c.
3. r. 3. n. 5. p. 399. whatsoever can certainly and truly be deduced from a
Law, does as certainly bind us as the instance that is named. ibid. n. 9. p.
401. The usefulness and original of Laws. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 1. p. 107.
Christians must not go to Law but upon very great cause. ibid. n. 18. p. 115.
Neminem Legem sibi dicere posse, a qua, mutata voluntate, nequeat recedere. l.
3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 25. p. 192. All Laws bind either by the natural goodness of
the action, or by its subserviencie to something else, or only by the
authority. l. 3. c. 4. r. 18. n. 6. p. 314. Laws are either perfect or
imperfect. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 16. p. 388. The meaning of Laws is to be
regarded above their words. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 1. p. 398. Counsels
Evangelical cannot be made into Laws. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 12. p. 330.
Laws Divine.
The end and Intention of a Law is under the Commandment, as much as the action
commanded in order to the end. l. 4. c. 2. r. 3. per tot. Difference between
Moses Law and the Gospel. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 24. p. 450. and l. ^. c. 2. r.
5. n. 4. p. 324. When two Laws are opposite, that which yields is not moral. l.
2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 76. p. 371. He does not always keep a good Conscience who
observes only the words of the Divine Law, and neglects the reasons and
analogies in like instances. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1. n. 20. p. 8. Some laws of God
are such, that they cannot be dispensed with. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 35. p. 204.
Affirmative Laws oblige not when they cross a Negative. ibid. p. 205. The
ground and measure of dispensing with affirmative Laws. ibid. That in the
Sanction of the Law of God, the reason binds more then the letter. l. 2. c. 1.
r. 9. n. 15. p. 268. Tertullian undertakes to find all the moral Law in the
first Commandment God gave to Adam. l. 2. c. 2. r. 4. n. 9. p. 321. Gods method
in giving of Laws. ibid. n. 10. p. 322. In all contracts of Laws the Spiritual
sense or action is to be preferred. l. 2. c. 3. r. 5. n. 9. p. 409. Difference
between Laws and Counsels. l. 2. c. 3. r. 12. n. 4. p. 450. the measures and
notes of their difference. ibid. n. 10. p. 452. In laws not only the contrary
to the duty, but the privative also is a sin. ibid. n. 12. p. 453. Whatsoever
Law or precept in Scripture relates wholly to a person, circumstance or time,
passes no obligation beyond the limits of that person, circumstance or time.
ibid. r. 17. n. 3. p. 541. Whatsoever Law or Precept was given to many, if
another succeeded it that is inconsistent with it, the former is by the latter
declared personal, temporary and expired. l. 2. c. 3. r. 17. n. 4. p. 541. A
Law that is merely temporary may be inserted without any mark of difference
among other Laws that are perpetual and moral. ibid. n. 5. p. 541. We are free
from the curse of the Law by Christ. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 28. p. 18. We are
freed from the Ceremonial Law by Christ. ibid. The Difference of Divine and
Humane Laws in their obligation. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 34. p. 23. The Laws of
God in precepts purely affirmative do not oblige to an actual obedience in
danger of death. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n. 8. p. 27. They that teach any thing is a
Law of God which is not, are guilty of teaching the Commandments of men for
doctrines. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 13. p. 305. Laws that are the (...) of duty.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 6. n. 4. p. 239.
Laws Humane. Of Equity in Penal Laws.
l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 2. p. 399. When the words of the Law are ambiguous,
unjust or absurd, the mind of the Lawgiver is to be presumed to be free from
all evil or vice. ibid. n. 4. p. 399. In all Laws and obligations of
Conscience by contract, when any doubt arises, we are to rest upon that which
is most likely and most usual. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 12. p. 404. Of the
favorable interpretation of Laws in inflicting punishments. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1.
n. 16. p. 405. When a Lawgiver interprets his Law, he does not take off the
obligation but remove it. l. 3. c. 6. r. 2. n. 2. p. 408. A Prince may be
either more severe or more gentle then the Law. ibid. n. 3. The Laws are not to
be bended by interpretation, but upon great and just causes. l. 3. c. 6. r. 2.
n. 5. p. 409. The Interpretation of Laws made by the Judges is nothing of
Empire and power. ibid. n. 7. p. 410. A Law obliges not the Conscience, when
its reason wholly cease, or a contrary reason arises. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n.
1. p. 411. Rules to know when the obligation of Laws cease upon the change of
reason. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 6. p. 412. A Law binds not to an inconvenience
greater then is the public benefit of the Law. ibid. n. 15. p. 416. In what
cases the Subject is to consult the Prince about the ceasing obligation of
Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 19. p. 417. Of commutation of Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r.
5. p. 426. A Law may be interpreted by customs. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 3. p.
428. Judged cases are a good indication of the meaning of a Law. ibid. Humane
Laws bind the Conscience. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. Rules by which may be known, what
Humane Laws are intended to bind to a greater sin and what to a less. l. 3. c.
1. r. 1. n. 16. p. 10. Humane Laws bind the Conscience in things otherwise
indifferent. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 13. p. 7. They bind without the intention of
the Lawgiver. ibid. n. 14. p. 8. But the intention of the Lawgiver is the
measure of their binding. ibid. n. 15. p. 9. Laws sometime made in England
professing not to bind the Conscience. ibid. n. 14. p. 9. Of the end and
intention of Humane Laws. l. 4. c. 2. r. 3. n. 4. The abuse of a Law does not
make it to cease. l. 3. c. 6. r. 7. n. 5. p. 433. No Humane Law is or can be
the rule of our obedience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1. n. 20. p. 8. Humane Laws make not
any action intrinsecally evil. l. 1. c. 3. r. 5. n. 6. p. 113. Of tolerating
disobedience to Laws. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 12. p. 376. Humane Laws can exact
but the outward action. l. 2. c. 3. r. 5. n. 2. p. 405. Laws of man do limit
and declare and make the instances, in which the Laws of God do bind. l. 3. c.
1. r. 1. n. 12. p. 7. The Laws of men bind the Conscience even in materia
indifferenti. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 13. p. 7. Humane Laws are neither derived
from the Divine positive Law nor that of nature. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 13. p. 8.
The obligation which Humane Laws pass upon the Conscience depend not upon the
intention of the Lawgiver. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 14. p. 9. A Law that professes
not to bind the Conscience is no Law. ibid. Though Humane Laws do not bind the
Conscience by the intention of the Prince, yet God binds them upon the
Conscience according to his intention. ibid. n. 15. The Laws of men bind the
Conscience properly and directly: not indirectly and by consequence. ibid. n.
15. p. 10. He that breaks a Humane Law established upon great penalties commits
a great sin. ibid. n. 16. p. 10. That Rule holds not, where the penalty serves
only for terror. ibid. Humana Lex non magis gravat Consciencias quam corpora.
ibid. How Humane Laws do bind where the matter in it self is great. l. 3. c. 1.
r. 1. n. 17. p. 11. Of Laws in themselves small and trifling, but by the
consequence made very considerable. ibid. n. 18. p. 11. When Law expounds an
action to be a Sin of signify one, though in it self it do not, nor in the
heart of him that does it, he that does it sins. ibid. p. 12. If the matter of
a Law be of small account, and the Legislative power set a value upon it, it is
no argument of the smallness of the sin. ibid. n. 18. p. 13. The preceptive or
prohibitive words, what they signify in Humane Laws toward a greater
obligation of the Conscience. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 20. p. 14. However Humane
Laws are established, yet Desuetude may take off the band of Conscience. ibid.
n. 21. p. 14. The contempt of any Law, be the matter never so trifling, is a
very great sin. ibid. n. 22. p. 15. To teach that Humane Laws bind the
Conscience, intrenches not upon the power of God. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 25. p.
16. Humane Laws may lay on us an obligation to observe ceremonies
notwithstanding our privilege of Christian Liberty. ibid. n. 28. p. 19. The
Difference of Divine and Humane Laws in their obligation. ibid. n. 34. p. 23.
Humane Laws bind not the understanding. ibid. n. 35. p. 23. Humane Laws must
always yield to Divine where they are opposed. ibid. n. 42. p. 24. Humane Laws
that are Defensatives of Divine bind to active obedience too. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2.
n. 1. p. 26. An Humane Law made under the penalty of Death, binds to obedience
though Death certainly follow. ibid. n. 12. p. 29. When a Tyrant power
threatens death to make the obedient Subject contemn the Law, the Subject ought
rather to die then disobey the Law. ib. p. 13. p. 29. Concerning breaking Laws
to save ones Life. ibid. n. 13. p. 30. Laws that oblige to obedience in danger
of death must be in materia gravi. ibid. n. 16. p. 3^. Upon a just cause a man
may without a Crime break a Law, when by such a transgression the end of the
Law is not hindered. ibid. n. 17. p. 31. Of Humane-Laws that are unjust, and how
many ways they be so. ibid. r. 3. n. 1. p. 32. Humane Laws are unjust, if the
matter be incompetent and undue. l. 3. c. 1. r. 3. n. 2. p. 32. Where Humane
Laws do oblige with danger of death, they oblige not but to the whole obedience
of the Law. ibid. r. 2. n. 17. p. 31. Humane Laws are unjust, when a lawful
power in a competent matter goes beyond its bounds. ibid. r. 3. n. 4. p. 33.
All Humane Laws prescribing to the Conscience or setting bounds to the thoughts
are null. ibid. Humane Laws are unjust when they do not contribute to the
public good, but wholly to his private good that made the Law. l. 3. c. 1. r.
3. n. 5. p. 33. The right end of Humane Laws is the public good. ibid. A Law
that by the change of affairs becomes contrary to the Common good is not to be
observed. l. 3. c. 1. r. 3. n. 6. p. 35. An unjust Law is not to be disobeyed
with scandal of others. ibid. n. 10. p. 36. Cautious to be observed in
disobeying Humane Laws, that are unjust. ibid. A civil Law cannot evacuate a
natural. l. 3. c. 1. r. 4. n. 3. p. 39. Of the promulgation of Humane Laws. l.
3. c. 1. r. 6. p. 45. The care of sufficient promulgation lies upon the Prince.
l. 3. c. 1. r. 6. n. 5. p. 45. Laws have not their binding power by the consent
of the people. l. 3. c. 1. r. 7. n. 4, 5. p. 47. The consent of the people
gives no authority to the Law. ibid. n. 6. p. 48. Unreasonable Laws in some
instances bind by the acceptance of the people. ibid. n. 9. p. 49. In the
Substantial matters of religion the Laws bind out of the Dominions, but not in
the Ceremonials of religion. ibid. r. 8. n. 2. p. 50. A Law does oblige beyond
the proper territory if it relate to the good or evil of it. l. 3. c. 1. r. 8.
n. 5. p. 51. How far strangers are bound by the Laws of the Country where they
are. ibid. r. 8. n. 7. p. 51. A Sentence set down in the Law in words of the
Present or Preter tense, shows the sentence is incurred ipso facto. l. 3. c. 2.
r. 2. n. 28. p. 69. What sentence those Laws are to have where the punishment
is expressed by the verb Substantive. ibid. n. 29. p. 69. When a Law passes a
sentence, which will be invalid, unless its punishment be inflicted before the
Judge take Cognizance, then the Offender is condemned ipso facto. ibid. n. 32.
p. 71. Of the distinction of Laws. First, purely penal. Secondly, mixed.
Thirdly, purely moral. l. 3. c. 2. r. 4. n. 2. p. 79. Kings are not under the
Directive power of their own Laws. l. 3. c. 3. r. 2. n. 2. p. 138. The Supreme
power is not under the power of the Laws. ibid. n. 5. p. 139. The Laws of Kings
are not to be disobeyed upon the Fancy of every vain person, pretending they
are unjust. ibid. n. 8. p. 142. Some Laws, and what they are, that bind the
Prince. ibid. n. 10. p. 142. Humane Laws can take off from an action or put
upon it the formality of sin. l. 3. c. 4. r. 18. n. 2. p. 313.
Laws of the Church.
God gave power to the Church by their Laws to bind and loose, as Princes have.
l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 16. p. 11. A Law that inflicts a Civil and Eclesiastical
punishment too, binds to a great sin. ibid. n. 19 p. 14. The Canons of the Pope
and Bishops were made into Laws by the Emperor Justinian. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n.
4. p. 175. Honorius the Emperor made a Law concerning the election of the
Pope. ibid. n. 5. p. 176. The Laws of the Church after they are ratified by the
Prince, bind him as the Civil Laws of his own making. l. 3. c. 4. r. 6. n. 2.
p. 238. A Custom of the Church binds not against a Law of it. l. 3. c. 4. r.
15. n. 6. p. 290. Laws of the Church must not be perpetual. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17.
n. 7. p. 303. An Ecclesiastical Law, by which is taught for Doctrines any
Commandments of men is void. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 13. p. 305. Ecclesiastical
Laws cannot take off or put upon an action the formality of sin. l. 3. c. 4. r.
18. n. 2. p. 313, 314. Laws of the Church must not be made to give offense. l.
3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 9. p. 318. How the Rulers of the Church and the Subject must
behave themselves in that case. ibid. Counsels Evangelical cannot be made into
Laws. ibid. n. 12. p. 330.
Leut.
Of Lent and the weekly Fasting days. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 4. p. 273. Some
Fathers affirm the Lent fast is a tradition Apostolical. ibid. n. 5. p. 273.
Some others affirm, it is an institution warranted to us from Christ. ibid. n.
7. p. 274. The Lent fast cannot be concluded from the Example of Christ. ibid.
n. 8. p. 275. The Original of the Lent fast much later then the Apostles. l. 3.
c. 4. r. 13. n. 10. p. 276. The Ancient use of the Lent fast. ibid. p. 277. It
was unknown in the Church the three first ages. ibid. n. 12. p. 277. The Lent
fast was in order to Easter, therefore could not be more ancient then it. ibid.
n. 13. p. 279. In the first ages of the Christian Church, the Fast before
Easter lasted but two or three days. ibid. n. 15. p. 280. The word Quadragesima
and (...) came from the fast of forty hours held immediately before Easter.
ibid. n. 15. p. 281. That word in the Council of Nice does not signify Lent.
ibid. n. 16. p. 281. Lents or Quadragesimal Fasts observed by the Ancients were
diverse. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 17, 18, 19. p. 282. Diverse conjectures about the
reason of the word Quadragesim^. ibid. n. 18. p. 282. In what sense S. Hierom
calls Lent an Apostolical Institution. ibid. n. 21. p. 283. Some errors of the
Roman Church about imposing the Lent fast. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 15, 16. p.
306. Bellarmine affirms, they are not Christians that eat Flesh in Lent. ibid.
n. 17. p. 306. The Primitive Christians did not abhor flesh in Lent. l. 3. c.
4. r. 17. n. 19. p. 309.
Liberty.
Libertas omnibus rebus favorabilior. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 15. p. 405.
Christian Liberty, what it is, and wherein it consists. l. 1. c. 4. r. 4. n. 3.
p. 145. and ^l. 3. p. 4, 17. It is not Liberty from sin. l. 3. c. 1. n. 5. p.
4. By Christian Liberty there is nothing gotten to us before men, but before
God there is. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 28. p. 17. We are free from the curse of the
Law by Christ. ibid. p. 18. Wherein consists that Liberty which Christ's death
has put us in. ibid. We are freed from the Ceremonial Law by Christ. ibid.
Christian Liberty at first mistaken. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 28. p. 19. and page
4. Liberty of Conscience how far it should be permitted by the Supreme power.
l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 15. p. 169. Of Christian Liberty in relation to whole
Societies. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 2. p. 302. Jus trium liberorum, what it was.
l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 37. p. 23.
Lie.
It is lawful to tell a harmeless Lie to save the life of a gallant brave man.
l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 28. p. 201. The Essence of a Lie does not consist in its
difference from the eternal truth. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 4. p. 83. Melanchthon
in his definition of a Lie, includes the hurting of ones Neighbor. ibid. Of
the Egyptians deceived by the Jews of their Jewels by a Lie. ibid. n. 7. p. 84.
It is lawful to tell a Lie to children or madmen for their benefit. ibid. n.
8. A Physician may lawfully tell a ly to some kind of Patients. ibid. To tell a
Lie for charity to save the life of a husband, public person or Prince, has
been commended by wise and good men. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 10. p. 85. Of the Lie
told by the Egyptian Midwives. ibid. It is lawful to do otherwise then we
promised, if the doing be better then the saying. ibid. n. 15. p. 91. It is not
lawful to tell a lie to save ones fame. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 16. p. 91. The
Romanists give leave to tell a Lie to save ones reputation. ibid. p. 92. That
Doctrine proved false. ibid. n. 17. p. 92. Synesius tells a Lie, to refuse a
Bishopric. ibid. n. 18. p. 93. In a just wat it is lawful to deceive the
Enemy, but not to Lie. ibid. n. 19. p. 93. It is not lawful to deceive the
Enemy when we are in treaty with him. ibid. p. 94. To use Stratagems is not to
Lie. ibid. p. 95. A Lie that serves charity must not be against Justice. l. 3.
c. 2. r. 5. n. 23. p. 97. If a man speak a downright Lie, he can hardly be
innocent. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 50. p. 106. Of the Lord Mayor of London his
slaying Wat Tiler. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 9. p. 111. The use of the word Loose.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. n. 10. p. 264.
Lord.
What is the power of a Lord. l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n. 5. p. 134. A King is not
Lord over his people. ibid.
Lords supper.
Of the Institution of the Lords supper. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 1. p. 420. The
authority of Justin Martyr against Communion in one kind. ibid. n. 7. p. 422.
The Manichees who abstained from wine, mixing themselves among the faithful,
were discovered by their refusing wine in the Sacrament. ibid. n. 16. p. 426.
P. Gelasius condemned those who abstained from the consecrated chalice. ibid.
n. 17. p. 426. The time when the Chalice was first withheld from the
Communicants. ibid. n. 20. p. 427. Against Communion in one kind. l. 2. c. 3.
r. 17. n. 6. p. 543. and n. 7. p. 544. The Apostles taught the Bishops and
Priests to consecrate the bread and wine, before they did communicate. l. 3. c.
4. r. 12. n. 2. p. 269. That none but the Bishop or Priest could consecrate, is
an Apostolical Canon. ibid. n. 6. p. 271. Of keeping the Lords day. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 17. n. 24. p. 311.
Love.
He that Loves God above all other things, loves him for his own sake. l. 4. c.
2. r. 2. n. 9. The measures of Love toward God. l. 2. c. 3. r. 12. n. 1. p.
449.
M.
A Madman in his madness may be punished for those Crimes he did when he was
in health, if to the punishment no judicial process be required. l. 4. c. 1. r.
4. n. 8. p. 491. Mandatum and Jussio how distinguished. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 7.
p. 458.
Magistrate.
The Civil Magistrate may punish the thoughts of the heart, though they never
proceed to action. l. 3. c. 1. r. 5. n. 6. p. 42 The Original of Magistracy. l.
3. c. 1. r. 7. n. 1, 2. p. 46. It is an ordinance of God. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n.
2. p. 53. If the Son be a Magistrate, the Magistrate is exempted from the
Fathers power, but not the Son. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 22. p. 391.
Marriage.
Marriage of Bishops and Priests. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 15. p. 332. Aeneas
Sylvius, Panormitan and Cassander, were against it. ibid. n. 16. p. 332.
Writers of the Roman Church against it. ibid. p. 333. It is an intolerable
burden. ibid. n. 17. p. 333. The Nicene Council is against it. ibid. p. 334.
The great difficulty some holy men found in the obeying that Law. ibid. n. 17.
p. 335. Of Marriage. l. 2. c. 3. r. 5. n. 6. p. 408. Contract and Congress do
effect as well as signify a marriage. l. 3. c. 1. r. 4. n. 1. p. 38. Cassander
affirms, that that Law which injoins single life to Bishops and Priests, ought
to have been relaxed, though it had been a Canon Apostolical. l. 3. c. 4. r.
11. n. 4. p. 267. To forbear marriage is not a means of preserving Chastity. l.
3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 17. p. 336. Is not in every man's power. ibid. n. 17. p. 337.
It does no good at all, is no service of God. ibid. n. 18. p. 338. Virginity is
not more holy then chaste Marriage. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 19. p. 338. Spiridion
a Bishop was married. ibid. n. 19. p. 339. So was the Bishop of Nazianzum.
ibid. A comparison between the Married and unmarried life. ibid. n. 20. p. 339.
Marriage does not hinder the service of God. ibid. p. 340. The Roman Senate
forbad their Soldiers to marry. ibid. p. 341. Christ and his Apostles left it
free for Priests to marry. ibid. n. 21. p. 341. The practice of the ancient
Church is for it. ibid. n. 22. p. 342. It was permitted to the Clergy the first
400 years. ibid. n. 23. p. 342. The Priests in France refused to put away their
wives at the Legates persuasion. ibid. Not forbidden in England till A. D.
1100. ibid. When the Church did allow marriage to Priests she did forbid it
after Ordination. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 24. p. 343. The Greek and Eastern
Churches did oblige their Priests to single life, if they were ordained in that
state. ibid. n. 26. p. 344. They were permitted by the Ancient Church to marry
after Ordination. ibid. n. 27. p. 344. The practice of the Latin Church about
the Marriage of their Priests. ibid. n. 28. p. 346. Gregory Nazianzen had Sons
born to him after he was consecrated Bishop. ibid. p. 347. They annexed a vow
of Continence to holy Orders. ibid. n. 29. p. 347. Concerning the second
marriages of Priests. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 29. p. 348. The Church of Rome does
without scruple frequently ordain those that have been twice married if they
will pay the mulct. Ex Spalatens. ibid. n. 29. p. 349. Children may not marry
without their Parents consent. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 7. p. 381. Isaac did not
marry without his Fathers leave, though God had designed the Marriage. ibid. n.
8. p. 382. Marriages against the Parents consent the Civil and Canon Law
pronounce invalid. ibid. n. 9, 10. p. 383. The Church did sometime anathematize
those that married without their Parents consent. ibid. n. 11. p. 384. It is
reason a Son should be left at liberty in nothing more then in Marriage. l. 3.
c. 5. r. 8. n. 13. p. 384. When Sons and Daughters are of competent years and
have the use of reason, they can of themselves contract marriage. ibid. n. 14.
p. 385. The Council of Trent declares all clandestine Marriages null. l. 2. c.
1. r. 5. n. 4. p. 253. The Church of Rome does ill to give leave to either of
the persons married to break their vow, and enter into a religious house. ibid.
n. 5. p. 253. Every Error Persona does not annual Marriage. l. 2. c. 1. r. 7.
n. 2. p. 260. Of the prohibition of Marriage in certain degrees. l. 2. c. 2. r.
3. n. 17. p. 292. The Persian Magi were begotten of the Mother and the Son. ib.
n. 23. p. 295. Of the Marriage of Mothers in Law and their husbands children.
ibid. n. 29. p. 299. God has not forbid to marry our kindred, but only the
nearest of our flesh; Propinquos, not Cognatos. ibid. n. 38. p. 303. Impari
Cognationis gradu par and idem jus statuatur, A rule of the Law about Marriage.
ibid. n. 48. p. 305. The Marriage of Parents and children forbidden by Christ.
ibid. r. 56. p. 308. The Marriage of Slaves against the consent of their Lords
is valid according to the Civil Law. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 14. p. 386. The full
effect of Marriages made against the Parents consent. ibid. n. 16. p. 387.
Three things in Marriage, one of which is in the power of the Contractors, the
other of the Domestic or Civil Ruler, the third under the power of the Church.
ibid. A Betrothed woman is in Scripture stilled a wise before Marriage, and her
falsehood punished like adultery. ibid. n. 16. p. 387. The Law makes such
marriages as are made without the consent of Parents civilly null only, not
naturally void. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 16. p. 388. A Father cannot force his
children to marry whom and when he will. ibid. n. 31. p. 395. Some cases in
which a Father ought not to force his Son to marry. ibid. n. 33, 34. p. 396.
What Men may teach to be done. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 9. p. 304. The Manichees
who abstained from wine, mixing themselves among the Orthodox, were discovered
by their refusing the Chalice in the H. Eucharist. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 16. p.
426.
Ministers.
Of the maintenance of Ministers under the Gospel. l. 2. c. 3. r. 3. n. 4. p.
398. Of their wearing Surplices. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 8. p. 291. It is lawful
to enter into the Ministry with actual design to make that calling the means of
our necessary support, with reasons proving it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 5. n. 7. p. 65.
but the principal end must be the glory of God, with reasons. ibid. n. 11. p.
66. It is not lawful to forsake the Ministry without Gods permission, because
it is not lawful to enter into it without the Divine vocation. l. 1. c. 2. r.
5. n. 21. p. 68.
Mind.
The Mind furnished with a holy rule and guided by it, is Conscience. l. 1. c.
1. r. 1. n. 8. Distraction of mind the effect of a guilty and troubled
Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 13. p. 19. Of Contracts made with Minors. l.
2. c. 1. r. 5. n. 3. p. 252. and l. 3. c. 1. r. 4. n. 2, 3. p. 39. Of the
Miracles which Christ did. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n. 14. p. 128. Custom cannot
abrogate a Law under a Monarchy. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 6. p. 430.
Money.
Majori summae negative prolatae, minorem nec naturaliter nec civiliter inesse.
l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 14. p. 90. In summis ambiguis, semper quod minus est
promitti videtur. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 13. p. 404. Mauritius the Emperor made
a Law that no Soldier should turn Monk without his leave, and forced the Pope
to own it. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 7. p. 176.
Moses, Mosaical.
The great sanction of the Law of Moses was fear of punishment, for it
consisted almost all of Negatives. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 4. p. 390. Evangelical
duties expressed in words borrowed from Mosaical rites, determined with the
rites to which they are annexed. l. 2. c. 3. r. 15. n. 2, 3, 4. p. 519, 520.
Reasons showing that the Law of Moses required the Introduction of a better
Law. l. 2. c. 2. r. 1. n. 1, 2. p. 277. In what sense the Law of Moses was an
everlasting Covenant. ibid. n. 11. p. 279. Reasons proving the actual
abrogation of Moses Law. ibid. n. 13. p. 280. What part of Moses Law was
annulled by Christ. l. 2. c. 2. r. 2. n. 1. p. 280. The Law of Moses was a
collection of the best of those Laws by which the world was governed before his
time. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 36. p. 302. The Law of Moses obliged not the
Heathen. ibid. The Law of Moses was made, say the Jews, two thousand years
before the Creation. ib. r. 4. n. 1. p. 318.
Moral,
When two Laws are opposite, that which yields is not Moral. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6.
n. 76. p. 371. Whatsoever duty in Scripture is commanded to all mankind, is
either Moral in its nature or by adoption. ibid. n. 77. p. 372. A Moral
Demonstration, what it is. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n. 5. p. 123. The advantages of
Moral Demonstration above close arguing in some Questions. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n.
8. p. 124. What is required in a Moral Demonstration to assure our Conscience.
ibid. n. 34. p. 141. When an action is forbidden only for a reason that is
transient, and that has in it no essential, natural rectitude, that
prohibition is not moral or natural, but for a time or positive. l. 2. c. 2. r.
6. n. 23. p. 338. What was for temporary reasons established, is not Moral,
cannot pass an eternal obligation. ibid. n. 44. p. 356. How to discern between
precepts Moral and not Moral in the Laws of God. ibid. n. 65. p. 367. A precept
is not Moral if no reason can be given of it. ibid. n. 66. p. 368. The
Consequents of natural reason are no indication of a Moral Commandment. ibid.
n. 67. p. 368. A Law that invades the right of nature is not always the breach
of a Moral Commandment. ibid. n. 68. p. 369. Every consonancy to natural reason
is not the sufficient proof of a Moral precept. ibid. n. 69. When God gives a
Law and adds a reason, though the reason be it self eternal, it is not always
the indication of a Moral Law. ibid. n. 70. p. 370. When God in the old
Testament did threaten the Heathen or punish them for any fact, we cannot
conclude it was against the Moral Law. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 71. p. 370. All the
instances of a Moral precept are not Moral, as the Chief duty. ibid. n. 72. p.
370. The strong and violent persuasion of any single person of or in some
Communities of men does not sufficiently prove a precept is Moral. ibid. n. 73.
p. 370. The consonant practices of the Heathen is not always an argument of a
Moral duty. ibid. n. 74. p. 371. The annexed penalty of death imposed by God
does not prove the Law to be Moral. ibid. n. 75. p. 371. The power of Mothers
over their children. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 28. p. 393. Of crimes ^^^mitted by a
Multitude, how subject ^^ey are to punishment. ^. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 13, 14. p.
123.
Murder.
Of those that assist at Murders either by co^^sel or company. l. 4. c. 1. r.
2. n. 23. p. 467. Of ^usick in the Church. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 11. p. 329.
N.
O^ changin^ and disguising Names. ^. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 41. p. 103.
Nations.
Of (...) consent of Nations. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 15. p. 225. Of the universal
customs of Nations. ibid. n. 15, 16, 17. p. 226. The diverse custom of Nations.
^bid. n. 22. p. 228. The Law of Nat^^ns cannot be the measure of war. l. 2. ^.
2. r. 7. n. 19. p. 378. Of what use the ^greement or consen^ o^ Nations can be
(...) prove a proposition. l. 2. c. ^. r. 19. n. 15. p. 554.
Na^^re.
Law of Nature, why the Christian Law commands some things contrary to it. l.
1. ^. 2. r. 3. n. 31. p. 50. The difference between Jus naturae and Lex
naturae. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 2. p. 221. Aristotle's opinion of the Law of
Nature: he was not constant to himself in it. ibid. n. 3. p. 221. The Law of
Nature is not the Law of all the world absolutely. ibid. n. 4. p. 222. Nature
makes no Laws but only prepares them. ibid. n. 8. p. 223. It is no indication
of a Law of Nature, that a thing is common to men and beasts. ibid. n. 10. p.
224. It is not possible to collect the Laws of Nature out of the customs of
Nations. ibid. n. 21, 22. p. 228. How the precepts of the Law of Nature were
made Laws and promulgated. ibid. n. 40. p. 235. There is no other System of the
particular Laws of Nature, but the Moral Law and Gospel. ibid. n. 42. p. 236.
The Laws of Nature variously enumerated by diverse. ibid. n. 46. p. 237. All the
instances of the Law of Nature are not so lasting and unalterable as the prime
precepts are. ibid. n. 48. p. 238. It was ill said, that God cannot change the
Law of Nature. ibid. n. 49. p. 239. The Law of Nature cannot be abrogated, but
it may be derogated. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 53. p. 241. Every proposition
pretended to be of the Natural Law, is not a Law, but a rule. ibid. n. 54. p.
241. Some instances of the Law of Nature have been changed. ibid. n. 55. When
any thing of the Law of Nature is twisted with the Right of Nature, the civil
constitution cannot disannul it. ibid. r. 5. n. 13. p. 255. Of the greatness of
Sins against Nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 6. n. 1. p. 258. If any Prophet or Angel
from Heaven shall teach any thing contrary to a Natural Law, he is not to be
heard. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 16. p. 269. Whatsoever is forbidden by the Law of
Nature cannot be permitted by the Civil. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10. n. 3. p. 270.
Whatsoever is commanded by the Law of Nature cannot be forbidden by the Civil.
ibid. n. 4. Wherein the Civil Law can change the Natural Law. ibid. n. 7. p.
271. The Pope has no power to dispense with the Law of Nature. ibid. n. 9. p.
272. To live according to Nature has two meanings. l. 2. c. 2. r. 4. n. 10. p.
322. A Law that invades the right of Nature is not always the breach of a
Moral Commandment. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 68. p. 369. The Consequents of Natural
Reason are no indications of a moral Commandment. ibid. n. 67. p. 368. Every
consonancy to Natural Reason is not sufficient proof of a Moral Law. ibid. n.
69. p. 369. The Law of Nature cannot have the conduct of War. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7.
n. 16. p. 377. The propositions we can learn from the dictates of Nature are
but a few. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 15. p. 554. A Civil Law cannot evacuate a
Natural. l. 3. c. 1. r. 4. n. 3. p. 39. In Laws declarative of Natural right,
the obligation extends to all things of equal reason, though they be not
mentioned in the Law. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 24. p. 419.
Necessary.
Whatsoever is absolutely necessary, is certainly lawful. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n.
21. p. 379. That which is necessary to be done, is not against any man's duty.
l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 10. p. 56. Several degrees of necessity. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4.
n. 17. p. 231. In our enquiry after things necessary, we must not rest till our
work be done. l 4. c. 1. r. 5. n. 8. p. 496.
Negative.
Why all Commandments ^^t one are negative. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n. 3. p. 389. ad
negationem non semper sequitur affirmatio oppositi. ibid. n. 9. p. 392.
affirmative duties follow from the negative not in contraries but
contradictories. ibid. From a negative duty an affirmative is not always
inferred in a particular instance. ibid. n. 11. p. 392. negative precepts
oblige semper and ad semper, affirmative semper, but not ad semper. n. 13. p.
393, and 522. n. 2. of the concluding negative precepts from affirmative, and e
contra. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. per tot. a negative precept cannot be lessened by an
affirmative. l. 2. c. 3. r. 2. n. 2. p. 395. negative precepts have no degrees
of obedience, but consist in a Mathematical point. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 17. p.
447. what is the force of negative arguments from Scripture. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14.
n. 45. and seq. p. 501. A mere negative does nothing in Gods service. l. r. 1.
4. c. 1. n. 15. p. 444. Of negative Commandments. l. 4. c. 1. r. 7. n. 3. p.
512. Of the morality of negative actions. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 15, 16. p. 445.
Dissoluta Negligentia prope dolum est. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 40. p. 24. Of the
marriage of Nicces and Uncles. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 30. p. 299. Nou^s. l. 1. c.
2. r. 3. n. 20. p. 46. Nullities do not commence from the sentence of the
Judge, but from the existence of the action. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 22. p. 67.
Nummus and Numisma the Etymon of them. l. 3. c. 2. r. 8. n. 2. p. 124. Nuptiae
nefariae, incestae and damnatae. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 24. p. 296.
O.
Orders, Ordination.
WHether they that enter into H. Orders ought principally to design the glory
of God, so that if they do not, it is unlawful to do it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 5.
n. 5. p. 65. Who does actually enter into H. Orders must take care that his
principal end be the work of God. ib. n. 11. p. 66. Rules concerning the
intention of those that enter into H. Orders. ib. n. 17. p. 67. Priests were
forbid to marry after Ordination. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 24. p. 343. By the
ancient Church they were permitted to marry after Ordination. ibid. n. 27. p.
344. The Greek Priests, after the Synod in Trullo, had allowed them two years
probation after their Ordination, to try whether they could abstain from
marriage or no. ibid. n. 27. p. 345. Gregory Nazianzen used marriage after he
was consecrated Bishop. ibid. n. 28. p. 347. A vow of continence was not
annexed to H. Orders. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 29. p. 347. The Church of Rome does
frequently without scruple ordain those that have been twice married, if they
will pay the mulct. ex Spaluens. ibid. p. 349. To enter into H. Orders quits
not the Son from his duty to his Father. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 23. p. 391. How
far Obedience to our Superiors can lessen a crime. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 7. p.
459. Obedience is due to them to whom tribute is due. l. 3. c. 2. r. 8. n. 1.
p. 124. One is more then all the numbers in the world. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 1.
p. 372. Sins of Omission are less then Sins of Commission. l. 2. c. 3. r. 1. n.
12. p. 393. Old age unfit for repentance. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 23. p. 530.
Otths. Of those a King takes at his Coronation. l. 3. c. 3. r. 2. n. 14. p.
144. of Oaths taken in the Universities. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 6. p. 290. he
that is bound by an Oath imposed must interpret the Obligation according to the
intention of the Imposer. l. 3. c. 4. r. 28. n. 7. p. 358. concerning the Oath
taken in the Universities, not to teach Logic any where but there. l. 3. c. 6.
r. 3. n. 8. p. 413. what knowledge is necessary to the taking an Oath. l. 4. c.
1. r. 5. n. 15. p. 498. The Homilies on Leviticus under the name of Origin, are
not his, nor of any authority. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 12. p. 278. Semper in
Obscuris, quod minimum est sequimur. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 12. p. 404. In those
places where it is a custom to pay Oblations at the baptizing of a child, the
Minister is Simoniacal if he refuse to baptize the child till he be secured of
his money. l. 3. c. 4. r. 15. n. 10. p. 293. Of extending the Obligation of
Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 24, 25, 26, 27. page 420. Non posse prascribi contra
Obedientiam. l. 3. c. 6. r. 6. n. 4. p. 429. what influence Oblivion can have
upon the morality of actions. l. 4. c. 1. r. 6. n. 20. p. 509.
P.
(...). l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 16. p. 484. (...). Socrates by it does not mean
Easter, but Good Friday. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 13. p. 279.
Peace.
Peace of Conscience, the signs of it. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 25. p. 24. That
Peace of Conscience cannot be true, which wicked men have. ibid. True Peace of
Conscience relies not upon the opinions of men. ibid. n. 25. p. 25. Religion is
a good instrument of Political happiness and Peace. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 8. p.
164. 165. An expedient for the attaining Peace of Conscience in Scruples
concerning the controverted articles and disputes of Christendom. l. 4. c. 1.
n. 10. p. 443.
Parents.
Children ought to obey their Parents. l. 3. c. 5. r. 1. n. 1. p. 359. Reasons
to prove it necessary. ibid. n. 1, 2, 3. p. 359. It is a kind of Atheism to
disobey Parents. ibid. Children must honor and reverence their Parents. l. 3.
c. 5. r. 1. n. 6. p. 362. S. Pelagia after her conversion lived in man's habit
to her death, to avoid temptation. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 18. p. 12. The Church
remembers her on October 8. ibid. p. 13.
Penal, Penalties, Punishment.
concerning doing good out of fear of punishment. l. 2. c. 1. r. 3. n. 3. p.
245. Penal Laws are not cassated by the precepts of charity and forgiveness. l.
3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 3. p. 54. A man may inflict punishment on himself. l. 2. c.
3. r. 2. n. 9. p. 61. He that breaks a Humane Law established on great
Penalties commits a great Sin. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 16. p. 10. That rule holds
not where the punishment serves only for terror. ibid. In Punishments
Corporal, the Law does not proceed without the sentence of the Judge. l. 3. c.
2. r. 2. n. 17. p. 64. When Punishments are principally medicinal the
Conscience is bound to a voluntary execution of the Sentence. ibid. n. 19. p.
66. In Poenis benignior interpretatio est facienda. ibid. n. 31. p. 71. Penal
sentences expressed in words that signify the time past or indefinite are to
be expounded in the most favorable sense to the offender, that is, oblige not
to Punishment before the sentence. ibid. Punishment does not satisfy the Law.
ibid. r. 4. n. 3. p. 80. Omnis Poena si justa est, peccati Poena est. S.
August. ibid. n. 5. p. 80. the use of the word Poena. ibid. n. 7. p. 81. Two
ca^^s wherein Laws oblige to punishment but not to guilt. ibid. n. 7, 8. p. 81.
It is not lawful to solicit the Magistrate to Punish the Malefactor out of a
love of revenge. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 15. p. 114. but it is lawful to do so to
prevent a future intolerable evil. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 16. p. 114. of
Punishing one for the offense of another. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7. n. 1. p. 117. Nemo
fiat deterior per quem melior factus non est. ibid. n. 11. p. 121. Nunquam unus
pro altero Poena corporis puniri potest. ibid. Penances cannot be imposed upon
the King without his consent. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 12. p. 244. of the
favorable interpretation of Laws in inflicting punishments. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1.
n. 16. p. 405. Penal Laws bind not by the extension of their reason. l. 3. c.
6. r. 3. n. 25. p. 419. In Poenis non arguimus ad similia. ib. how far the
actions of madmen are punishable. l. 4. c. 1. r. 4. n. 5, 6. p. 491.
People.
The Supreme Legislative power is not the servant of the people. l. 3. c. 1. r.
1. n. 11. p. 6. The consent of the people gives no authority to the Law. l. 3.
c. 1. r. 7. n. 8. p. 48. The Masters of Politics whom we now follow framed
their Principles according to the popular governments they then lived under. l.
3. c. 1. r. 7. n. 5. p. 47. The refusal of the greater part of the people takes
not off the obligation of a Law. ibid. n. 9. p. 49. Neither the people nor King
are to be excommunicated. l. 3. c. 4. r. 8. n. 7. p. 250. Caret Peccato, quod
ex duobus minus est. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 13. p. 88. The Persian feast called
vitiorum interitus. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 13. p. 525. Whatsoever concerns a
moral duty, and was delivered to a single person, obliges all. l. 2. c. 3. r.
17. n. 6. p. 542.
Pepin King of France.
The case of Pepin taking the Crown of France by force from Chilperic, A. D.
750. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4, n. 4. 5. p. 162. the Judgment of God upon his posterity.
ibid. n. 5. Notorius Percussor Clerici, is ipso jure excommunicate. l. 3. c. 2.
r. 2. n. 21. p. 66. Mistaken Philosophy ought not to be urged as reason, in
examining mysteries. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 51. p. 57. the heart religion has
received by it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 7. p. 42. (...). l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 20.
p. 46. Polygamy unlawful. l. 2. c. 3. r. 3. n. 7. p. 400.
Pope.
The Pope has not power to dispense with the Law of Nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 10.
n. 9. p. 272. concerning the Popes power of dispensing with the positive Laws
of Jesus Christ. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 6, 7. p. 442. that the Epistles of the
Popes were very many of them false. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 34. p. 491. The
Schoolmen of the Roman party affirm that he has power to enlarge the Creed, by
inserting new articles. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 79. p. 517. The arguments that
usually are brought to prove the Pope has power over Kings. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4.
n. 4. p. 161. the Canons of the Pope and Bishops received the authority of Laws
from the Emperor. l. 3. c. 3. r. 5. n. 4. p. 175. Honorius the Emperor made a
Law concerning the election of the Pope. ibid. n. 5. p. 176. Pope Gregory the
Great submitted to Mauritius the Emperor. ibid. n. 7. p. 176. Spiritual
persons have no temporal power. ibid. r. 6. n. 19. p. 188. The Pope disobeyed
in France and Germany. l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. n. 23. p. 342. The Pope did not well
to dispense with the Cistertians for paying tithes. l. 3. c. 6. r. 4. n. 6. p.
425.
Politic, Political.
The Masters of Politics whom we now follow, because they lived under popular
Governments, squared their principles to such governments. l. 3. c. 1. r. 7. n.
5. p. 47. Religion is a great instrument of Political happiness. l. 3. c. 3. r.
4. n. 8. p. 164, 165.
Supreme Power, Prince.
Princes must not lie for the interests of Government. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 22.
p. 96. In all Governments there must be a supreme Power. l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n.
1. p. 130. Whether a Prince may put to death a guilty person privately by
poison or strangling, etc. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 11. p. 111. The supreme
Legislative Power is not the Servant of the people. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 11. p.
6. There is in all States sometime a necessity of setting up a supreme,
absoluta Potestas. l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n. 2. p. 131. The supreme Power is much
less then a Lordship over the Subjects. l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n. 5. p. 134. It must
usurp no man's right. ib. n. 6. It is from God. l. 3. c. 3. r. 3. n. 1. p. 149.
The supreme Power is defective without the government of religion. l. 3. c. 3.
r. 4. n. 8. p. 164, 165. The inconvenience of setting up two supreme Powers,
one temporal, the other spiritual. l. 3. c. 3. r. 7. n. 2, 3. p. 200. They that
rule religion may make themselves superior to the supreme Power. l. 3. c. 3.
r. 4. n. 10. p. 166. Anciently the Priesthood was in the same hands as the
supreme Power. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 16. p. 169. The unlawful Proclamations of
a true Prince may be published by the Clergy in their several charges. l. 3. c.
4. r. 7. n. 10. p. 243. The supreme Power cannot forbid an action that is under
a divine Commandment. l. 3. c. 4. r. 10. n. 6. p. 262. The supreme secular
Power ought to determine what doctrines shall be taught the people. l. 3. c. 3.
r. 7. n. 13. p. 205.
Power.
Ecclesiastical Power differs much from the Civil. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 19. p.
171. The Power of the Keys. vide K. Spiritual persons have no temporal Power.
l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 19. p. 188. That which has a direct Power is to be obeyed
before that which has an indirect Power. ibid. n. 27. p. 193.
Priest.
A Priest may not refuse to communicate him whom he knows to be unworthily
absolved. l. 1. c. 2. r. 8. n. 7. p. 83. A Priest, if by hearing the Confession
of a Criminal he learn the guilt of another Criminal, may not upon the account
of this private information deny absolution to this latter Criminal. l. 1. c.
2. r. 8. n. 10. p. 83. The Priests if they rule religion may make themselves
superior to the supreme power. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 10. p. 166. The Priesthood
and Supreme power were anciently vested in the same person. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4.
n. 16. p. 169. Priests were forbid to marry after Ordination. l. 3. c. 4. r.
20. n. 24. p. 343. Of the Marriage of Priests. See more M. voce Marriage. The
Greek and Eastern Churches did oblige their Priests to single life, if they
were ordained in that estate. ibid. n. 26. p. 344. Priests were permitted by
the ancient Church to marry after ordination. ibid. n. 27. p. 344. The practice
of the Latin Church about the marriage of their Priests. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n.
28. p. 346. The Greek Priests had two years probation allowed to them after
their ordination, to try whether they could forbear marriage. ibid. n. 27. p.
345. concerning the second marriage of Priests. ibid. n. 29. p. 348. Tiberius
was less observant of religion, because his opinion sav^^red much of
Predestination. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n. 10. p. 166. To Praise an evil action, how
far sinful. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 9. p. 460. Almost every word of the Lords
Prayer was taken from the writings of Pious men of the Jewish nation. l. 2. c.
3. r. 15. n. 1. p. 519.
Private.
A Private evil is not to be done for a Private Good, but for a public it may.
l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 31. p. 203. Private persons may not be executioners of the
sentence of death. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 3. p. 107. but it was permitted in some
cases by the Law of Moses. ibid. In desert places, where no Law is in force but
that of Nature, a private person may be Judge and Executioner too. l. 3. c. 2.
r. 6. n. 4. p. 108. They may where the Law has passed sentence and given leave.
ibid. n. 8. p. 109. Private persons that kill Offenders, though they are
quitted by the Law, are not quitted in Conscience. ibid. n. 9. p. 110. the
measures of public Interest are not to be esteemed by Private measures. l. 1.
c. 5. r. 8. n. 31. p. 203.
Promise.
A threatening, in all Laws, leaves a greater obligation then a Promise. l. 2.
c. 3. r. 2. n. 2. p. 396. The Rules of Extention or diminution of Promises are
the same as of Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 32. p. 422.
Precept.
The positive Precepts of Christ, in respect of the inward duty, bind all
persons in all time even to present action. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 3. p. 522.
Particular Precepts of Christ bind, if they are affirmative and in special
times and certain occasions. ibid. n. 5. p. 522. Universal affirmative precepts
bind in all times and on all occasions. ibid. n. 6. p. 523. Whatsoever precept
concerns every one by the nature of the thing, though delivered to a few
persons, concerns all. l. 2. c. 3. r. 17. n. 6. p. 543. When the Universal
Church does suppose her self bound by any preceptive words, though they were
directed to particular persons, yet they are to be understood of universal
concernment. l. 2. c. 3. r. 17. n. 7. p. 544. When a precept is addressed to a
particular person, and yet has a more full and better meaning if extended to
the whole Church, then its obligation is upon all. ibid. n. 8. p. 544. When any
precept is personally addressed, and yet is enforced with the threatening of
eternal death, it is of universal concernment. ibid. n. 9. p. 545. Whatsoever
precept concerns a moral duty, though delivered to a single person, obliges
all. ibid. n. 6. p. 542.
Presumption.
There are two kinds, first, of Justice; second, of Caution. l. 3. c. 1. r. 4.
n. 2. p. 38. An Humane Law founded upon a false presumption obliges not the
conscience. l. 3. c. 1. r. 4. p. 37. but not so if it be a presumption of
caution. ibid. n. 2. p. 38. Laws, first, of favor relying upon a false
presumption oblige not the Conscience; but Laws, secondly, of duty do. l. 3.
c. 1. r. 4. n. 4. p. 39.
Promulgation.
Of promulgation of Laws. l. 3. c. 1. r. 6. p. 45. A Contract made before the
promulgation of a Law, but not performed till after, binds not. l. 3. c. 1. r.
6. n. 6. p. 45. Prudentia distinguished from Conscientia. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1. n.
26. p. 10. Prejudice or Passion, Fancy and affection, error and illusion, are
sometime mistaken for Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 3. n. 1. p. 27. How to know
when one of these usurps the office of Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 3. n. 3. p.
27. Concerning the authority of a Probable Doctor. l. 1. c. 4. r. 5. n. 12. p.
149.
Pupil.
If a Pupil in his minority make a contract with an adult to his own ruin, it
is void. l. 2. c. 1. r. 5. n. 17. p. 256. if to his advantage it is valid.
ibid. n. 18. p. ead. It is as great a sin to teach for necessary doctrines the
prohibitions of men, as their injunctions. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 20. p. 463. No
man can prescribe to truth. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 1. p. 549.
Preaching.
There is an Empire in Preaching. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 12. p. 217. The supreme
secular power ought to determine what doctrines shall be taught the people, and
what not. l. 3. c. 3. r. 7. n. 13. p. 205.
Prison.
One may escape from prison, if he can, though he stand condemned to die. l. 3.
c. 2. r. 3. n. 2, 3. p. 72. A guilty prisoner may not say, Not guilty, when he
is justly interrogated. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 14. p. 89. The case of the Kingdom
of Portugal, desiring the consecration of Bishops from Rome. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6.
n. 28. p. 195. what is the Principal, and what the Accessory. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4
n. 6. p. 227. Privileges or Concessions made to the Church by the King, may by
him be recalled. ibid. r. 6. n. 3. p. 238. Of the use of singing Psalms in the
Church. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 11. p. 329. All designs of Profit or Pleasure
must be subordinate to religion. l. 4. c. 2. r. 2. n. 4.
Q.
QVadragesima or (...) in the Council of Nice signifies not Lent. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 13. n. 17. p. 281. whence that word is taken. ibid. n. 16. p. 281.
Quadragesima or (...) used to signify Fasts longer or shorter then 40 days.
ibid. n. 17. p. 282. Diverse conjectures about the reason of the word
Quadragesima. ibid. n. 18. p. 282.
R.
Ratihabition.
HOw Ratihabition contracts guilt. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 3. p. 456. Ratihabition
does not render guilty in Foro humano. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 4. p. 457.
Reason.
A weak reason is to be preferred before a long prevailing custom. l. 2. c. 3.
r. 19. n. 3. p. 549. Of what use it may be in religion. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 8.
p. 42. It is denied in religion by Papists and Enthusiasts. ibid. n. 17, 18. p.
45. Faith and it are not opposite. ibid. n. 20. p. 46. We embrace all religion
by reason. ibid. n. 24. p. 47. Faith is an act of Reason. ibid. Right reason is
not the affirmative measure of things divine. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 27. p. 48.
and n. 31. p. 50. The reason of man is a right Judge if it be rightly informed.
ibid. n. 30. p. 50. Right reason is not the same in all constitutions of
affairs. ibid. Right reason is the negative measure of every article of Faith.
ibid. n. 33. p. 51. What things reason can discern to be certainly true or
false. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 47. p. 55. Our reason cannot discover the effects
of all the power of God, but when they are revealed can consent to them. ibid.
What is impossible or absurd to reason cannot be an article of Faith. ibid. n.
48. p. 55. Mistaken Philosophy ought not to be urged for reason in questions of
Religion. ibid. n. 51. p. 57. How reason and Faith serve one the other. ibid.
n. 52. p. 57. It is a lawful argument to prove a thing is against the word of
God, because it is against reason. ibid. n. 54. p. 58. Though natural reason
cannot teach us the things of God, yet Reason illuminated can. ibid. n. 56. p.
59. It is ratiocination that is fallible, not reason. ibid. n. 64. p. 61. In
what manner reason is the measure of religion. ibid. n. 66. p. 61. Reason is
not the same always. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 7. p. 75. Infallible reasons are not
to be required in moral actions to guide our selves by. l. 1. c. 4. r. 1. n. 1.
p. 120. The same reason will not serve all states of men. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n.
34. p. 142. Rules of prudence are not to be urged against reason and strict
discourses. ibid. n. 40. p. 143. Reason is not a meet indication of the Laws of
nature. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 30. p. 230. and l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 28. p. 467.
The uncertainty of reason. l. 2. c. 1. r. 1. n. 31. p. 231. The Consequents of
natural reason are no indication of a moral Commandment. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n.
67. p. 368. Right reason cannot be the rule of war. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 18. p.
377. Ratio Legis non est Lex, sed quod ratione constituitur. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3.
n. 27. p. 420.
Rebellion.
Rebellion against a lawful Prince is not lawful in any case. l. 3. c. 3. r.
3. per tot. p. 149. The Primitive Christians when most sharply prosecuted did
never rebel. l. 3. c. 3. r. 3. n. 8. p. 153. Natural reason forbids rebellion.
ibid. n. 11. p. 156. Of Rebellion. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 23. p. 379.
Recreations.
Rules of conducting them. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 32. p. 473. Of Atilius Regulus
sent from Carthage to Rome to get an exchange of prisoners. l. 3. c. 2. r. 7.
n. 2. p. 117.
Relative.
If the Relative be under the Commandment, then also the Correlative is. l. 2.
c. 3. r. 3. n. 6. p. 399. The Relative and Correlative are to be judged of by
the same reason of the Law, when the reason equally concerns them, though only
one be named. l. 3. c. 6. r. 3. n. 29. p. 421.
Religion.
In the substantial matters of religion the Laws of the Country bind out of the
Dominions, but not in the ritual duties. l. 3. c. 1. r. 8. n. 2. p. 59.
Religion is the great instrument of Political happiness. l. 3. c. 3. r. 4. n.
8. p. 164. Numa to establish his government first settled religion Livy, ibid.
n. 9. p. 165. They that rule religion are supreme to the King. ibid. n. 10. p.
166. Such propositions of religion as have great influence on government. ib.
Religion has influence on persons as well as actions. ibid. n. 11. p. 166.
Ancient governments would not endure any change in religion. ibid. n. 13. p.
167. It was not in ancient times lawful to dispute the religion of the
Country. ibid. n. 14. p. 168. Change of religion brings great trouble. ibid.
How far it concerns the supreme power to tolerate liberty of Religion. ibid.
n. 15. p. 169. Kings have a Legislative power in matters of Religion. l. 3. c.
3. r. 5. n. 3. p. 174. Religion and Piety cannot cross one another. l. 3. c. 5.
r. 8. n. 3. p. 378. The hurt Religion has received by the mixture of erroneous
philosophy. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 7. p. 42. Of what use reason is in religion.
l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 8. p. 42. and p. 61. we embrace all religion by reason.
ibid. n. 24. p. 47. All temporal designs must be subordinate to religion. l. 4.
c. 2. r. n. 4. Renunciatio sui juris per poenitentiam revocari non potest. l.
3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 19. p. 95. The Canon and Civil Law differ in their account of
Rapes. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 16. p. 387. Causes of Repetition are to be favored
more then causes of gain. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 15. p. 405.
Repentance.
To defer repentance proceeds from evil principles and causes. l. 2. c. 3. r.
16. n. 24. p. 531. It is against the voice and intention of Scripture. ibid. n.
25. p. 532. The danger of deferring repentance. ibid. p. 533. Delaying
repentance may turn to final impenitence. ibid. n. 26. p. 534. The example of
the Thief upon the Cross no argument against it. ibid. n. 27. p. 535. To defer
repentance is not consistent with any Christian grace. ibid. n. 28. p. 535. All
the while repentance is delayed a man is the object of the Divine Anger. ibid.
n. 29. p. 536. God has appointed no time but present for repentance. ibid. n.
31. p. 536. Reasons why our repentance for any one sin should not be limited to
one time or act. ibid. n. 34. p. 538. The measures of repentance. ibid. n. 35.
p. 538. A man is not bound to weep for his sin as often as he thinks of it. ibid.
n. 36. p. 539. Repentance must not be put off from hodie, and must continue
every day in a proportionable measure. ib. n. 37. p. 539. Repentance is a penal
duty: it is an act of repentance to inflict punishment upon ones self. l. 3. c.
2. r. 2. n. 6. p. 61. Of the measure of that sorrow that is required in
repentance. l. 2. c. 3. r. 10. n. 8. p. 434. Of deathbed repentance. l. 2. c.
3. r. 16. n. 9. p. 523. The doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning the time
of repentance. ibid. n. 10. p. 524. Their doctrine of the time of repentance
destroys holy life. ibid. n. 13. p. 525. Repentance must not be deferred after
the sin once committed. ibid. n. 15. p. 526. Repentance being deferred
increases the sin. ibid. n. 17, 18. p. 527. He that deferrs his repentance
resists the grace of God, and despises his goodness. ibid. n. 19. p. 528. He
that deferrs repentance leaves the affection to sin unmortified. ibid. n. 22.
p. 530. Old men are more unfit for repentance. ibid. n. 23. p. 530. The state
of sickness unfit for repentance. ibid. as he that deferrs taking physic if he
be sick, increases his disease. ibid. Synesius denied the article of the
Resurrection, and some other, in dissimulation, to wave a Bishopric. l. 3. c.
2. r. 5. n. 18. p. 93.
Reservations.
Mental reservations are not lawful. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 26. p. 98. It is
lawful to use them in some cases to divert the cruelty of tyrants. ibid. n.
29. p. 99. Conditional reservations are lawful. ibid. n. 30. p. 99. When words
contain a double sense, the not explicating in what sense I speak, is no lie.
ibid. n. 32. p. 100.
Revenge.
It is not lawful to pursue a man's revenge, no not by the hand of Justice. l.
3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 15. p. 114. It is lawful to require of the Magistrate to
punish him that is injurious to me, if I fear a future intolerable evil from
him. ibid. n. 16. p. 114. What is meant by Rights in the Law of Nature. l. 2.
c. 1. r. 10. n. 5. p. 270. Wherein the Mosaic Righteousness differs from the
Christian. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 24. p. 450.
Rites.
The rites which the primitive Church did borrow from the heathen were such as
had no relation to doctrine. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 13. p. 552. In the
substantial matters of religion the Laws of the Country bind out of the
Dominions, but not in the ritual duties. l. 3. c. 1. r. 8. n. 2. p. 50. The use
of Tradition in rituals. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 19. p. 486.
Rome, Roman.
Many of the rites of the Roman Church are derived from the customs of the
Heathen. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 12. p. 552. Those Ceremonies which the Primitive
Church did borrow from the Heathen had no affinity to Doctrine. ibid. n. 13.
p. 552. The Canons of the Bishop of Rome oblige only his own subjects. l. 3. c.
4. r. 16. n. 1. p. 298. It is impossible they should all oblige, because of
their contrariety to one another. ibid. n. 2. That Bishop is not a Lawgiver to
Christendom, nor superior to other Bishops. ibid. n. 5. p. 299. Instances
wherein the Roman Church does advance some of her own Commandments above those
of God. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 16, 17, 18. p. 306, 307. There were two Bishops
of Rome together in the time of S. Peter. l. 2. c. 3. r. 11. n. 12. p. 444. The
Doctrine of the Church of Rome concerning the time of Repentance. l. 2. c. 3.
r. 16. n. 10. p. 524, 525. The Roman Church for 600 years taught and practiced
the communicating of Infants, and the contrary for other 600 years. l. 2. c. 3.
r. 14. n. 39. p. 497.
Rule.
If there be no rule, we must look for examples. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 23. p.
386. Rule of Conscience is never the less one for the great difference of cases
contradictorily determined. l. 1. c. 1. r. 5. n. 3. p. 33. Of the use of
philosophical rules in Moral Theology. Pref. page 12. Of serving God for
Reward. l. 2. c. 1. r. 4. n. 3. p. 248.
S.
Sabbath.
For what ends the Sabbath was instituted. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 43. p. 356. Of
the Jewish Sabbath and the Lords day. ibid. At the first the Primitive
Christians kept both the Jewish Sabbath and the Christian. ibid. n. 50. p. 358.
The Lords day did not succeed in the place of the Sabbath. ibid. n. 51. p. 359.
What is moral in the fourth Commandment. ibid. The Primitive Christians affirm
the fourth Commandment is no part of the moral Law. ibid. n. 53. p. 361. What
honor Christ and his Apostles did to the first day of the week. ibid. n. 56.
p. 362. How we are to celebrate the Christian Sabbath. ibid. n. 57. p. 363. In
the Command of the Sabbath to distinguish the Rest from the religion of the
day. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 46. p. 357. and n. 58. p. 364. The Rest of the
Sabbath was not moral, because it was broken upon many occasions. ibid. n. 58.
p. 364. How the Primitive Christians kept the Lords day. ibid. n. 59. p. 364.
Whatsoever duty is in Scripture imposed on all mankind, is either in its own
nature moral or by adoption. ibid. n. 77. p. 371. The Lords day cannot be
changed, because it is an order Apostolical. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 1. p. 273.
Some trifling rules of the Rabbis concerning the observing the Sabbath and
other feast-days. l. 3. c. 4. r. 17. n. 14. p. 306. The Commandment of the
Jewish Sabbath is not moral. l. 2. c. 3. r. 17. n. 5. p. 542. Reasons why the
Maccabees did innocently break the Sabbath, but the Sons of Eleazar could not
lawfully yield to those that would force them to taste Swines flesh. l. 3. c. 1.
r. 2. n. 13. p. 29.
Sacrifices.
They could not be taught by the Law of Nature. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 29. p.
469. Reasons why God introduced the Law of Sacrifices. ibid. n. 30. p. 470.
Sacrifices commanded to the Jews to prevent Idolatry. ibid. Sacrifices were
penal duties. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 5. p. 60. That Spiritual persons should not
be exempt from Secular Jurisdiction. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 67. p. 368. The
Original of the sect of Saducees. l. 2. c. 1. r. 4. n. 3. p. 248.
Sacrament.
To deny the Sacrament to the unworthy is not an act of jurisdiction but
charity. l. 3. c. 4. r. 7. n. 10. p. 243. The Apostles institutions concerning
the Sacrament oblige all Christendom. l. 3. c. 4. r. 12. n. 1. p. 269. When and
in what cases it is lawful to choose the safer side in any question of choice
between two actions. l. 1. c. 5. r. 5. n. 2. p. 181.
Scandal.
Of Scandal. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 18. p. 11, 12. and p. 233. An humane Law that
is unjust is not to be obeyed with scandal of others. l. 3. c. 1. r. 3. n. 10.
p. 36.
Scripture.
Of the Interpretation of it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 50. p. 56. In the
interpreting Scripture the ordinary way caeteris paribus is to be preferred
before the extraordinary. ibid. A moral Demonstration cannot assure the
Conscience against Scripture. l. 1. c. 2. r. 4. n. 36. p. 142. The H. Scripture
is the entire guide of our Consciences. l. 2. c. 1. r. 9. n. 17. p. 269.
Whatsoever duty in Scripture is imposed on all mankind, is either in its own
nature Moral or by adoption. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 77. p. 371. The H. Scriptures
contain the whole will of God. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 2. p. 473. The first ages
of the Church did appeal to Scripture in all their questions. ibid. n. 3. p.
473. The primitive Doctors did confute all heresies from Scripture. ib. n. 6.
p. 476. They did reject all articles of faith or rules of manners that were not
in, nor could be proved from Scripture. ibid. n. 9. p. 478. They did esteem the
H. Scriptures a sufficient and perfect rule of faith and manners. l. 2. c. 3.
r. 14. n. 10. p. 479. That argument, Scripture is not perfect without
tradition, because tradition teaches us that Scripture is the word of God,
considered and answered. ibid. n. 14. p. 483. Nothing is necessary either to be
believed or done, unless it be in Scripture ibid. n. 47. p. 501. A negative
argument from Scripture is not good, if the contrary affirmative can be drawn
by consequence from any part of it. ibid. n. 48. p. 502. A negative argument
from Scripture does not conclude in Qu. of fact. ibid. n. 51. p. 504. A
negative argument out of Scripture consisting in a single word or expression
cannot be consequently deduced to deny the mystery signified in that word.
ibid. n. 49. p. 503. A negative argument from Scripture is sufficient to prove
an article not to be necessary of belief, but not sufficient to prove it to be
true. ibid. n. 50. p. 503. Whatsoever is not forbidden in Scripture directly or
by consequence, is lawful: and if not commanded, not necessary. ibid. n. 53. p.
504. A (...) negative out of Scripture is not good. ibid. n. 57. p. 506.
Scripture may lawfully be quoted to a sense besides its first meaning, if the
analogy will bear it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 6. n. 8. p. 75.
Scruple.
Of Scruple of Conscience. l. 1. c. 6. r. 1. p. 209, 210. The right course in
case of scruple is to proceed to action. l. 1. c. 6. r. 2. n. 1. p. 211.
Against a doubting Conscience a man may not act, but against a scrupulous he
may. ibid. n. 2. p. 211. Remedies against scruples of Conscience. l. 1. c. 6.
r. 5. n. 2. p. 215. Advices to the scrupulous. ibid. n. 9. p. 216. Let the
scrupulous man divert his fears upon greater sins. ibid. n. 11. p. 217. He
should avoid all excess in mortification and corporal austerities. ibid. n. 12.
p. 217. What is true in the Sciences may be false in Law. Pref. page 12.
Secret.
Humane Laws bind the Conscience in secret as well as in public. l. 3. c. 1.
r. 5. n. 1. p. 40. They have power over the Conscience in inward and secret
acts not directly but by accident. ibid. n. 6. p. 41. A secret action designed
in the thoughts only, is not punishable by man; proved by the sentence of Cato.
l. 3. c. 1. r. 5. n. 6. p. 42. In doubts of Law the buyer must be favored
before the Seller. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 15. p. 405.
Separate.
In what cases it is lawful for the people to separate from their Bishop or
Minister. l. 3. c. 4. r. 8. n. 9. p. 250. It must be done by the authority of
the Prince. ibid. n. 11. p. 251. Separation must not be made for a light cause.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 9. n. 6. p. 257.
Sentence.
Generalc Edictum accedente Facti evidentia habet vim latae sententia. l. 3. c.
2. r. 6. n. 11. p. 111. In Moses Law if the Criminal did voluntarily submit to
punishment, his sentence was gentler then if the Judge did it. l. 3. c. 2. r.
2. n. 4, 5, 6. p. 60.
Service.
De offensionibus adversus dominum non est compensatio ad servitia eidem
impensa. l. 3. c. 3. r. 2. n. 24. p. 147. The service of God does not only
comprehend actions of religion. l. 3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 7. p. 181. Of that Shame
that attends an evil Conscience. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 11. p. 16. The state of
Sickness unfit for repentance. l. 2. c. 3. r. 16. n. 23. p. 530.
Silence.
How far a silent consent makes us partakers of the guilt of others. l. 4. c.
1. r. 2. n. 10. p. 461. In what cases silence is a sign of consent. ibid. n.
11. p. 461. Sometimes it is a sign of indifferency. ibid. n. 12. p. 461. No
silence is esteemed a ratihabition of a past act. ibid. n. 13. p. 462. Of
Singing in the Church. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 11. p. 329.
Sin.
The baseness of it. l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 11. p. 17. Of the greatness of a sin
we cannot take a direct account by the measure of that horror is observed in
the Conscience of the sinner. ibid. n. 23. p. 22. It is not as great a sin to
go against the Conscience in those dictates which flow from reason, as those
that come by nature or revelation. ibid. n. 2. p. 12. We cannot conclude that
God has pardoned our sins from our peace of Conscience. ibid. n. 25. p. 24. A
proposition that directly serves a sin is not the dictate of Conscience. l. 1.
c. 1. r. 3. n. 7. p. 30. Bishops can directly give no Laws that properly and
immediately bind the transgressors under sin. l. 3. c. 4. r. 4. p. 233. Acts
mutually contradictory may be both sins to diverse persons in different
circumstances. l. 1. c. 1. r. 5. n. 1. p. 32. and reg. ead. n. 6. p. 33. A sin
against a sure Conscience though it be great, is not a double one. l. 1. c. 2.
r. 8. n. 1. p. 81. Of sins that have a double guilt. ibid. n. 2, 3. p. 81. No
man can ever be in that condition that to obey God shall become a sin to him.
l. 1. c. 3. r. 3. n. 7. p. 110. Cautions propounded to those who counsel a
lesser sin that thereby they may hinder a greater. l. 1. c. 5. r. 8. n. 4. p.
190. Sin is sometime in the material part of the action, sometime in the formal
part. ibid. n. 36. p. 205. What is that power of remitting sins given to the
Church. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1. n. 13. p. 218. All sin is voluntary. l. 4. c. 1. r.
1. p. 437. Neither God nor the Devil will or can force us to sin. ibid. n. 12.
p. 443. How far it may be lawful or innocent to permit a sin. l. 4. c. 1. r.
2. n. 20. p. 464. Of the lawfulness of those trades that minister to sin. ibid.
n. 24. p. 467. The external act of sin is worse then the same sin in the will.
l. 4. c. 1. r. 3. n. 2. p. 482. It is charity to a Malefactor to hinder him
from committing the sin he has resolved on. ibid. To him that commits a sin,
all that evil that will follow the sin, if he knows it, but not designs it, is
imputed for sin. ibid. n. 4. p. 483. To do a great evil with a little malice
is a greater sin, then to desire a great evil but act willingly a little one.
ib. n. 4. p. 482. Of the identity and diversity of actions internal and
external, and the multiplication of sins by them. ib. n. 5. p. 483. Whether is
the worse, he that sins willingly, or he that sins by folly and ignorance. l.
4. c. 1. r. 5. n. 16. p. 499. Some sins of ignorance worse then some sins of
malice. ibid. n. 18. p. 499. No effect which after a man's death happens, is
imputable to him as a new sin. l. 2. c. 3. r. 4. n. 7. p. 404. Sin, whatsoever
event depends upon the will of another, is no longer upon his account then he
actually or habitually desires or endeavors it. ibid. n. 8. p. 404. Sin is
unlawful in the mind. l. 2. c. 3. r. 7. n. 1. p. 414. Those sins whose evil
consists wholly in relation to men with whom we converse, are not sins in the
thought. ibid. n. 2. p. 415. In Laws not only the contrary to the Duty, but the
privative is sin. l. 2. c. 3. r. 12. n. 12. p. 453. In what sense we are free
from sin by Christ. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 28. p. 18. Sin in the thoughts in some
instances is punishable. l. 3. c. 1. r. 5. n. 7. p. 43. An accidental evil
effect consequent to my duty cannot make me sin. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 66. p.
55. If sinners become Judges to punish themselves, they prevent the greater
anger of God. l. 3. c. 2. r. 2. n. 6. p. 60.
Simony.
The reproof of it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 5. n. 17. p. 67. and l. 3. p. 293. It is
like the sin of Simon Magus, not the same sin. l. 2. c. 3. r. 3. n. 1. p. 397.
Of the marriage of Sisters and Brothers. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 24. p. 296.
Son.
A Son is bound to maintain his indigent Father though outlawed. l. 3. c. 5. r.
3. n. 2. p. 367. It is no disobedience of a Son to change his Fathers religion.
ib. r. 4. n. 1. p. 369. The religion of the Son must not prejudice the civil
rights of the Father. ibid. n. 2. p. 370. A Son is not to obey his Father in
things dishonest. ib. r. 7. n. 3. p. 375. If a Son transgress the Law by his
Fathers commandment, his punishment is the less. ibid. n. 5. p. 375. In what
cases a Son may complain of his Father to the Judge. ib. n. 7. p. 376. Sons
cannot lawfully enter into a state of religion without their Fathers consent.
l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 3. p. 378. A Son cannot withdraw himself from his Fathers
government, and put himself under another. ibid. n. 5. p. 379. Examples of some
holy men that left Monastical life because they had not their Parents leave.
ibid. n. 6. p. 380. Charles the Great made a Law against it. ibid. The Son or
Daughter sins that marries against the consent of his Father. ibid. n. 7. p.
381. The ancients accounted such marriages illegitimate. ib. n. 8. They were
forbid by the Natural and Civil and Canon Law. ibid. n. 8, 9, 10. p. 383. A Son
in reason should be left at liberty in nothing more then in marriage. ibid. n.
13. p. 384. Sons and Daughters when they are of competent years and have the
use of reason, may of themselves contract marriage. l. 3. c. 5. r. 8. n. 14. p.
385. A Son may marry at the command of his Prince against his Fathers leave.
ib. The marriage of Sons and Daughters is good against their Fathers consent,
because the marriage of Slaves is valid in Law against the consent of their
Lords. ibid. p. 386. A Son is never exempted from his Fathers natural power.
ib. n. 20. p. 390. Of his Political power the Laws prescribe the measure and
bounds. ibid. If the Son be a Magistrate, the Magistrate is exempted from the
Father power, but not the Son. ibid. n. 22. p. 391. If a Son enters into H.
Orders it does not quit him from his duty to his Father. ibid. n. 23. p. 391.
The Son that is marriageable, his Father being dead, is not under the power of
his mother. ibid. n. 29. p. 394. A Son may refuse to marry a Virgin much
inferior to him, if his Father offer her. ib. n. 35. p. 397. Of the measure of
that Sorrow is required in repentance. l. 2. c. 3. r. 10. n. 8. p. 434.
Justinian gave leave to any man to kill the Soldiers that came to plunder. l.
3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 8. p. 109. Socrates by (...) does not mean the day of the
Resurrection, but the Passion. Reasons to prove it. l. 3. c. 4. r. 13. n. 13.
p. 279.
Spirit, Spiritual.
What the Spirit is, and how it differs from the Soul of man. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1.
n. 8. p. 4. Temporal things must not yield to every thing that is spiritual. l.
3. c. 3. r. 6. n. 13. p. 183. In what sense it is true that temporal things are
subordinate to spiritual. ibid. n. 15. p. 184. Concerning the preeminence of
spiritual or temporal persons. ib. n. 18. p. 186. Of the honor due to
spiritual persons. ibid. n. 18. p. 187. Spiritual persons have no temporal
power. ibid. n. 19. p. 188. The spiritual power must yield to the temporal
power so long, until it appears that to forbear longer would be to neglect a
duty, and displease God, and then they must disobey only passively. ibid. n.
28. p. 195. How the secular power differs from the spiritual. l. 3. c. 4. r. 1.
n. 1. p. 212. Spiritual censures must not be inflicted for temporal causes. ib.
r. 9. n. 10. p. 259. That spiritual persons should not be exempt from secular
Jurisdiction. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 67. p. 368. Sports. Rules of conducting
them. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 32. p. 473. Stratagems. To use them is not to lie.
l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 19. p. 95. Strangers. How far they are bound by the Laws
of the Country where they are. l. 3. c. 1. r. 8. n. 7. p. 51. Of eating things
strangled. l. 2. c. 2. r. 2. n. 2. p. 281.
Subject.
Subjects sometime sin equally to those that command the sinful action,
sometime less, according to the different degrees of the authority. l. 4. c. 1.
r. 2. n. 7. p. 459. The command of a Superior excuses the Subject in small
matters, not in great. ibid. n. 8. p. 459. Otherwise in the transgression of
moral precepts then temporary and ritual. ibid. n. 9. p. 460. Of Subscribing
confessions of Churches or acts of a Council. l. 3. c. 4. r. 23. n. 7. p. 358.
It is better to suffer nobly, then to escape by a doubtful way. l. 3. c. 2. r.
5. n. 48. p. 105. (...) what it is. l. 1. c. 1. r. 1. n. 24. p. 9.
Superstition.
What influence it can have upon the morality of its effects. l. 4. c. 1. r. 7.
n. 6. p. 513. Concerning it. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 18. p. 12. and l. 2. c. 3. r.
13. n. 11. p. 459. and n. 20. p. 464. and ibid. n. 26. p. 466.
Surety.
No man can be Surety for another in obligations to capital punishment. l. 3.
c. 2. r. 7. n. 2. p. 117. but in pecuniary punishments he may. ibid. n. 4. p.
118. Stories. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 2. p. 40. Of Cain and Abel as it is in the
tradition of the Easterlings. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 31. p. 471. Of others. l.
3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 10. p. 86. and l. 3. p. 91. and Praf. p. 15. Synesim used
unlawful arts to wave a Prelacy. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 18. p. 93.
T.
Temporal.
TEmporal things ought not to yield to every thing that is Spiritual. l. 3. c.
3. r. 6. n. 12. p. 183. In what sense temporal things are subordinate to
spiritual. ibid. n. 15. p. 184. Temporal things as well as spiritual are
subordinate to the glory of God. ibid. n. 16. p. 184. Of Temptation. l. 2. c.
3. r. 7. n. 7. p. 415. Extrae Territorium jus dicenti impune non paretur. l. 3.
c. 1. r. 8. n. 1. p. 49. (...) whence taken to signify Lent. l. 3. c. 4. r.
13. n. 16. p. 281. Of the books of mystical Theology. l. 1. c. 6. r. 5. n. 16.
p. 219. The difficulty of moral Theology. Pref. p. 8, 9. An Example out of the
old Testament is not a sufficient warrant for us. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 27. p.
380.
Thief.
If a Thief make me promise to pay a Sum of money the next day, though he sin
against a natural Law in so doing, yet the promise binds me. l. 2. c. 1. r. 8.
n. 4. p. 263. The Civil Law permits a man to kill a night-thief. l. 3. c. 2. r.
6. n. 8. p. 109.
Thoughts.
The superior may punish the thoughts of the heart though they proceed not to
action. l. 3. c. 1. r. 5. n. 6. p. 42. The Jews taught that God would not
punish the sin of the thoughts unless it were against the faith. l. 4. c. 1. r.
5. n. 18. p. 500.
Tithes.
Christians ought to pay Tithes. l. 2. c. 3. r. 20. n. 8. p. 556. The Pope did
not well to dispense with the Cistertians for paying Tithes. l. 3. c. 6. r. 4.
n. 6. p. 425. Of tolerating disobedience to Laws. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 11, 12.
p. 376.
Trade.
Of the lawfullness of those Trades that minister to sin. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n.
24. p. 467. Whether the trade of Cardmakers or Dicemakers be lawful. ib. n. 25.
p. 468.
Tradition.
the reason of it. l. 1. c. 4. r. 2. n. 4. p. 123. what is the use of
Traditions. l. 2. c. 3. r. 14. n. 14. p. 483. Those prerogatives that in the
writings of the Fathers are given to Scripture under the name of Tradition, the
Papists give to Tradition as distinct from and opposite to Scripture. ib. n.
16. p. 484. The Primitive Christians had that need of Tradition that we have
not. ibid. n. 17, 18. p. 485. The use of Tradition in rituals. ibid. n. 19. p.
486. Tradition uncertain, because Heretics and other evil persons have affixed
the names of Apostles and Apostolical men to many books never writ by them,
which now are not easily to be found out and distinguished. ibid. n. 35. p.
492. Of the rules by which Tradition is tried. ib. n. 39. p. 495. Tradition
cannot receive sufficient authority either from The Catholic Church. l. 2. c.
3. r. 14. n. 40, 41. p. 498. The Doctors. ibid. n. 41. p. 499. Council. ibid.
n. 42. p. 499. Of Tradition. l. 3. c. 4. r. 21. n. 1. p. 351. It is not of use,
unless there be an uninterrupted succession from the Apostles. ibid. n. 3. p.
351.
Truth.
One truth cannot be against another. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n. 49. p. 56. No man
can prescribe to truth. l. 2. c. 3. r. 19. n. 1. p. 549. Of Truth. l. 3. c. 2.
r. 5. n. 1. p. 82. Whether truth can be practiced at all times. ibid. n. 2. To
differ from the eternal truth is not the essence of a lie. ibid. n. 4. p. 83.
Every man has a right to truth. ibid. n. 5. p. 83. That right may be taken
away by other superior rights. ibid. n. 6. p. 84. How it is that to tell truth
is an act of justice. ibid. n. 13. p. 89. Tutors, their power in inflicting
punishments. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 7. p. 109.
Types.
That opinion of some, that every rite in Moses law answers to some rite of the
Christian, is not sound. l. 2. c. 2. r. 6. n. 52. p. 360. Types and shaddows
were for the Old Testament, not the New. l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 8. p. 327.
Tyrant.
What duty is required of us toward a Tyrant. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 41. p. 386.
When a Tyrant power threatens death to make the obedient Subject contemn the
Law, the Subject ought rather to die then disobey the Law. l. 3. c. 1. r. 2. n.
13. p. 29. Difference between a Tyrant and a King. l. 3. c. 1. r. 3. n. 5. p.
34. and l. 3. c. 3. r. 1. n. 1. p. 130.
Tribute.
Of Laws made concerning it. l. 3. c. 2. r. 8. per tot. p. 124. Obedience is
due to them, that tribute is. ibid. n. 1. p. 124. Taxes are to be paid for
Conscience, though they are odious and of ill name. ibid. n. 3. p. 125. Tribute
must be imposed by none but the supreme power, unless it be penal tribute. l.
3. c. 2. r. 9. n. 1. p. 127.
V.
Virtue.
TO love virtue merely for its own sake is not the inseparable Character of a
good man. l. 2. c. 1. r. 4. n. 9. p. 250. What it is to love Virtue for Virtues
sake. ib. and l. 4. c. 2. r. 2. n. 7.
Virgin.
It is not lawful for a Virgin to kill her self to save her virginity, though
there be no other way of preserving it. l. 3. c. 2. r. 3. n. 5. p. 74. and
ibid. n. 16. p. 78. Virginity is not more holy then chaste marriage. l. 3. c. 4.
r. 20. n. 19. p. 338.
Understanding.
All that is above our understanding is not against it. l. 1. c. 2. r. 3. n.
46. p. 54. Obedience of the understanding in what particulars it consists.
ib. n. 59. p. 60. The understanding may not choose the lesser truth, though it
may innocently choose the lesser good. l. 1. c. 4. r. 5. n. 3. p. 147. Of the
marriage of uncles and Nieces. l. 2. c. 2. r. 3. n. 30. p. 299. Of usury. l. 3.
c. 3. r. 6. n. 30. p. 196. and l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 7. p. 374. Of the morality
of those actions that are involuntary in the effect, but voluntary in respect
of the cause. l. 4. c. 1. r. 4. p. 489. A vow if it be not voluntary is no vow.
l. 3. c. 4. r. 20. n. 29. p. 347.
W.
War.
OF the measures of war by Christ's law. l. 2. c. 2. r. 7. n. 15. p. 377. Right
reason cannot be the rule of war. ibid. n. 18. p. 377. War cannot be conducted
by the Laws of nature. ibid. n. 16. p. 377. The Law of Nations cannot be the
measure of war. ibid. n. 19. p. 378. The Christian Law has made no particular
provisions for the conduct of War under a proper title. ib. n. 20. p. 378. The
Christian religion if it were rightly embraced would prevent all War. ibid. Of
War Defensive. ibid. n. 21. p. 378. Offensive. ibid. n. 22. p. 379. Examples
out of the Old Testament in matter of War are dangerous precedents. ibid. n.
31. p. 382. A just war is not the breach of that Commandment that forbids
killing. l. 3. c. 2. r. 1. n. 18. p. 59. In a just War it is lawful to deceive
the Enemy, but not to lie. l. 3. c. 2. r. 5. n. 19. p. 93. Of pledges is War.
ib. r. 7. n. 2. p. 117. We should be Watchful over our actions and words. l.
4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 21. p. 450. The use of White garments in religion. l. 3. c.
4. r. 15. n. 9. p. 291, 224. Wicked men cannot have true peace of Conscience.
l. 1. c. 1. r. 2. n. 25. p. 24.
Will.
The distinction of Gods secret and revealed Will is unreasonable. l. 1. c. 2.
r. 3. n. 38. p. 52. God cannot have two Wills. ibid. n. 39. p. 53. Acts of the
will and understanding are good and bad from the Object. ibid. r. 9. n. 4. p.
95. Where the understanding is wrong and the Will wholly right, the action is
accepted and the error pardoned. ibid. n. 9. p. 97. The Will may choose the
lesser good, but not the understanding the less truth. l. 1. c. 4. r. 5. n. 3.
p. 147. A man is rendered good or bad only by his Will. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 1.
p. 438. The Will of man is free to action. ibid. n. 2. p. 438. The will is free
in actions moral and spiritual. ibid. n. 3. p. 439. Liberty of will in good
things is a piece of weakness. ibid. n. 5. p. 441. To grant liberty of Will
does not disparage the grace of God. ib. n. 6. p. 441. The Will is in every
action good or bad. ibid. n. 7, 8. p. 442. The other faculties of the Soul are
not changed by good or bad objects. ibid. n. 8. p. 442. The material part of
the sin is in them, the formal only in the will. ib. n. 9. p. 442. All acts
that pass without any consent of the Will are indifferent. ibid. n. 17. p. 446.
No action of the Will is indifferent. ibid. n. 18. p. 446. The Will has six
steps or degrees of volition. l. 4. c. 1. r. 3. n. 1. p. 480. The first
inclination of the Will is not sinful. ibid. All the morality of any action
depends wholly on the Will, and is seated in the inner man. ibid. n. 2. p. 481.
The external act of sin is more then the same sin in the Will. ibid. p. 482.
All sin is in the Will, and is there completed. ibid. n. 12. p. 486. In what
manner execution of the intention adds to the crime. ibid. n. 13. p. 487.
Wills or Testaments.
In Wills or Testaments there arising a doubt, the lesser burden is to be laid
upon the Executor. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 14. p. 404. The Heir is to be favored
against the Legatees, unless God and Religion be the Legatee. ibid. n. 15. p.
405.
Wine.
The Heathens used to complete their Covenants with drinking blood, or Wine
instead of it. l. 2. c. 3. r. 9. n. 31. p. 431. The Encratites and Manichees
sinned in abstaining from the use of Wine. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 23. p. 465.
But the Rechabites did not, and why. ibid. n. 14. p. 460. In what cases the
sentence of a good and Wise man may determine the choice. l. 1. c. 4. r. 15. n.
1. p. 174. and p. 386.
Women, Wife.
It is not well for women to baptize. l. 2. c. 1. r. 7. n. 3. p. 261. Of women
wearing men's cloths. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 18. p. 12. S. Pelagia did wear man's
cloths to avoid temptation. ibid. Women are to be admitted to the Sacrament. l.
3. c. 4. r. 12. n. 6. p. 270. Scriptura loquens in Masculino, procedit etiam in
Foeminino. ibid. In Scripture a betrothed woman is called wife before marriage,
and her falsehood to her Spouse has the same punishment as adultery. l. 3. c.
5. r. 8. n. 16. p. 387. The Wife sinning is excused by the Hubands command in
small matters, not in greater. ibid.
Words.
Of their signification in Laws. l. 3. c. 6. r. 1. n. 6, 7, 8, 9. p. 400, 401.
That is the meaning of the words of the Law, that does the work of the Law.
ibid. n. 11. p. 402. How far the words of a Law may be drawn to prove a sin
forbidden to be great or small. l. 3. c. 1. r. 1. n. 20. p. 14. We should be
watchful over our actions and words. l. 4. c. 1. r. 1. n. 21. p. 450.
Worship.
The vanity of that distinction of Relative and Terminative worship. l. 2. c.
2. r. 6. n. 27. p. 341. Will Worship. l. 2. c. 3. r. 13. n. 7. p. 457. God is
to be worshipped by nothing but what himself appoints. ibid. There can be no
Will Worship in acts internal of the Soul. ib. n. 30. p. 470. He that kills a
child in the Womb is guilty of murder. l. 4. c. 1. r. 3. n. 14. p. 488.
Y.
Young men should not be permitted to game. l. 4. c. 1. r. 2. n. 38. p. 479.
Z.
Of the Jewish Zelots. l. 3. c. 2. r. 6. n. 2. p. 107.
FINIS.
Errata sic corrige.
Vol. I.
PAge 11. l. 41. read (...) 137. l. 26. r. a few Fishermen 145. l. 33. r. to be
fit 156. l. 13. r. stronger argument 196. l. 44. r. yet then they 216. l. 24.
r. every accident 220. l. 4. dele and Humane. 227. l. 43. r. indeed 228. l. 5.
r. this than any 241. l. 8. r. particulars, made relative 244. l. 19. r. which
is served by justice. 268. l. 24. r. so wholly 290. l. 38. r. yet the arg. 291.
l. 13. r. Nations 313. l. 20. r. no more: by 314. l. 4. r. too near l. 24. r.
before) it was 319. l. 16. r. any footsteps 323. l. 40. r. is to be 334. l. 30
and 35. r. (...) 336. l. 25. after because, dele yet 339. l. 34. r. a degree
Page 344. l. 8. r. branle 345. l. 5. r. idol 348. l. 32. r. (...) 353. l. 23.
r. Prunetana 359. l. 13. r. (...) 369. l. 23. r. posture 377. l. 44. r. heard,
possibly there l. 45. r. against reason, it 383. l. 13. r. Presidents 401. l.
38. r. be not 413. l. 35. after observe, dele but 417. l. 42. r. morally 421.
l. 11. r. beginning formed with 422. l. 6. r. traditionis l. 30. r. (...) 423.
l. 45. r. Apostles ministry 429. l. 15. r. taken notice 428. l. 22. r. life
issuing 433. l. 32. after appendage, dele and 437. l. 43. r. ease of rigor
444. l. 29. dele, But I shall give an account of that inquiry in some of the
following pages. 449. l. 39. r. they oblige Page 454. l. 28. r. in it, but 502.
l. 13. r. S. Gregory 503. l. 37. r. is not an adequate 548. l. 35. r. Christ
are or ought
Vol. II.
Page 92. l. 20. r. by publishing 94. l. 15. r. as in parlies 96. l. 6. r. and
they who may 97. l. 9. after but not, dele to 99. l. 17. r. an usual 131. l.
31. r. Ne respublica 139. l. ult. r. Seres 145. l. 42. r. fuerant 155. l. 42.
r. Inviolabiliter 230. l. 20. r. 10 talents 254. l. 28. r. that; it must 256.
l. 6. r. are to be 294. l. 40. r. enter into 359. l. 33. r. non amare --
infania 368. l. 27. r. (...) 438. l. 12. r. our own 490. l. 34. r. (as Pyrrho
did) he see 513. l. r. (...)
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivy-lane, London.
Books and Sermons written by J. Tailor D. D.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. The History of the Life and Death of the
Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, the third Edition in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises
of holy living, in 12. 4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 5. The
Golden Grove, or A Manual of daily Prayers, fitted to the days of the week,
together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. A Collection of
Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol. newly reprinted. 7. A Discourse of the
Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. new. 8. A Collection of
Offices or forms of Prayer fitted to the needs of all Christians, taken out of
the Scriptures and Ancient Liturgies of several Churches, especially the Greek,
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David after the Kings Translation, in a
large octavo, newly published. 9. Ductor Dubitantium, or the Rule of
Conscience, fol. in two volumes. 10. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance,
describing the necessities of a Strict, a Holy and a Christian Life: Serving as
a necessary Supplement unto the Rule of Conscience.
Books written by the late Reverend Dr. Henry Hammond.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament, by Hen.
Hammond D. D. in fol. the second Edition enlarged. 2. A Paraphrase and
Annotations upon the Books of the Psalms, briefly explaining the Difficulties
thereof, by Hen. Hammond D. D. fol. new. 3. The Practical Catechism, with
other English Treatises, in two volumes in 4. 4. Dissertationes quatuor quibus
Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primava Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra
sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum. in 4. 5. A Letter of Resolution in six
Queries, in 12. 6. Of Schism. A defense of the Church of England against the
exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 7. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to
practice, in 12. 8. Paraenesis, or a seasonable exhortation to all true sons of
the Church of England, in 12. 9. A Collection of several Replies and
Vindications published of late, most of them in defense of the Church of
England, now put together in four volumes. Newly published, in 4. 10. The
Dispatcher Dispatched, in Answer to a Roman Catholic Book entitled Schism
Dispatched, in 4. new. 11. A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on all
the Books of the New Testament, with some additions and alterations, in 8. 12.
Some profitable directions both for Priest and people, in two Sermons, in 8.
new.

