ENIAYTOS

A COURSE OF SERMONS FOR All the Sundaies Of the Year; Fitted to the great
Necessities, and for the supplying the Wants of Preaching in many parts of this
NATION.

Together with A Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness,
and Separation of the Office Ministerial.

By JER. TAILOR D. D.

(...)
(...)
Pindar: (...). -- Commune periclum
Omnibus, Una salus. --
LONDON. Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1653.

XXV SERMONS PREACHED AT GOLDEN-GROVE: Being for the VVinter half-year,
BEGINNING ON ADVENT-SUNDAY, UNTIL WHIT-SUNDAY.

By JEREMY TAILOR, D. D.

Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. M.
D C. LIII.

To the right Honorable and truly Noble, RICHARD Lord VAUHAN, Earl of
Carbery, etc.
MY LORD,
I Have now by the assistance of God, and the advantages of your many favors,
finished a Year of Sermons; which if, like the first year of our Saviors
preaching, it may be annus acceptabilis, an acceptable year to God, and his
afflicted handmaid the Church of England, a relief to some of her new
necessities, and an institution or assistance to any soul; I shall esteem it
among those honors and blessings, with which God uses to reward those good
intentions which himself first puts into our hearts, and then recompenses upon
our heads. My Lord, They were first presented to God in the ministeries of your
family: For this is a blessing for which your Lordship is to bless God, that
your Family is like Gideons Fleece, irriguous with a dew from heaven, when much
of the voicinage is dry; for we have cause to remember that Isaac complained of
the Philistims, who filled up his wells with stones, and rubbish, and left no
beauvrage for the Flocks; and therefore they could give no milk to them that
waited upon the Flocks, and the flocks could not be gathered, nor fed, nor
defended. It was a design of ruin, and had in it the greatest hostility; and
so it has been lately;

-- undique totis
Vsque adeo turbatur agris. En! ipse capellas
Protenus aeger ago; hanc etiam vix Tityre (duco*
But, My Lord, this is not all: I would feign also complain that men feel not
their greatest evil, and are not sensible of their danger, nor covetous of
what they want, nor strive for that which is forbidden them; but that this
complaint would suppose an unnatural evil to rule in the hearts of men; For
who would have in him so little of a Man, as not to be greedy of the Word of
God, and of holy Ordinances, even therefore because they are so hard to have?
and this evil, although it can have no excuse, yet it has a great and a
certain cause; for the Word of God still creates new appetites, as it satisfies
the old; and enlarges the capacity, as it fills the first propensities of the
Spirit. For all Spiritual blessings are seeds of Immortality, and of infinite
felicities, they swell up to the comprehensions of Eternity; and the desires of
the soul can never be wearied, but when they are decayed; as the stomach will
be craving every day, unless it be sick and abused. But every man's experience
tells him now, that because men have not Preaching, they less desire it; their
long fasting makes them not to love their meat; and so we have cause to fear,
the people will fall to an Atrophy, then to a loathing of holy food, and then
Gods anger will follow the method of our sin, and send a famine of the Word
and Sacraments. This we have the greatest reason to fear, and this fear can
be relieved by nothing but by notices and experience of the greatness of the
Divine mercies and goodness.

Against this danger in future, and evil in present, as you and all good men
interpose their prayers, so have I added this little instance of my care and
services; being willing to minister in all offices and varieties of employment;
that so I may by all means save some, and confirm others; or at least, that
my self may be accepted of God in my desiring it. And I think I have some
reasons to expect a special mercy in this, because I find by the constitution
of the Divine providence, and Ecclesiastical affairs, that all the great
necessities of the Church have been served by the zeal of preaching in
public, and other holy ministeries in public or private, as they could be
had. By this the Apostles planted the Church, and the primitive Bishops
supported the faith of Martyrs, and the hardiness of Confessors, and the
austerity of the Retired. By this they confounded Heretics, and evil livers,
and taught them the ways of the Spirit, and left them without pertinacy, or
without excuse. It was Preaching that restored the splendor of the Church,
when Barbarism, and Wars, and Ignorance either sat in, or broke the Doctors
Chair in pieces: For then it was that diverse Orders of religious, and
especially of Preachers were erected; God inspiring into whole companies of men
a zeal of Preaching: And by the same instrument God restored the beauty of the
Church, when it was necessary she should be reformed; it was the assiduous and
learned preaching of those whom God chose for his Ministers in that work, that
wrought the Advantages and persuaded those Truths, which are the enamel and
beauty of our Churches. And because by the same means all things are
preserved, by which they are produced, it cannot but be certain, that the
present state of the Church requires a greater care and prudence in this
Ministry then ever; especially since by Preaching some endeavor to supplant
Preaching, and by intercepting the fruits of the flocks to dishearten the
Shepherds from their attendances.

My Lord, your great nobleness and religious charity has taken from me some
portions of that glory which I designed to my self in imitation of St. Paul
toward the Corinthian Church; who esteemed it his honor to preach to them
without a revenue; and though also like him I have a trade, by which as I can
be more useful to others, and less burdensome to you, yet to you also under
God, I owe the quiet and the opportunities and circumstances of that, as if God
had so interweaved the support of my affairs with your charity, that he would
have no advantages pass upon me, but by your interest; and that I should
expect no reward of the issues of my Calling, unless your Lordship have a
share in the blessing.

My Lord, I give God thanks that my lot is fallen so fairly, and that I can
serve your Lordship in that ministry, by which I am bound to serve God, and
that my gratitude and my duty are bound up in the same bundle; but now, that
which was yours by a right of propriety, I have made public, that it may still
be more yours, and you derive to your self a comfort, if you shall see the
necessity of others served by that which you heard so diligently, and accepted
with so much piety, and I am persuaded have entertained with that religion and
obedience, which is the duty of all those who know, that Sermons are arguments
against us, unless they make us better; and that no Sermon is received as it
ought, unless it makes us quit a vice, or be in love with virtue; unless we
suffer it in some instance or degree to do the work of God upon our souls.

My Lord, in these Sermons I have meddled with no man's interest, that only
excepted, which is Eternal; but if any man's vice was to be reproved, I have
done it with as much severitie as I ought; some cases of Conscience I have here
determined; but the special design of the whole, is to describe the greater
lines of Duty, by special arguments: and if any witty Censurer shall say,
that I tell him nothing but what he knew before; I shall be contented with it,
and rejoice that he was so well instructed, and wish also that he needed not a
Remembrancer: but if either in the first, or in the second; in the institution
of some, or the reminding of others, I can do God any service; no man ought to
be offended, that Sermons are not like curious inquiries after New-nothings,
but pursuances of Old truths. However, I have already many fair earnests that
your Lordship will be pleased with this tender of my service, and expression
of my great and dearest obligations, which you daily renew or continue upon,

My noblest Lord, Your Lordships most affectionate and most obliged Servant
JEREMY TAILOR.

Titles of the Sermons, their Order, Number, and Texts.
SErmon 1. 2. 3. Doomsday Book; or, Christ's Advent to Judgment. Folio 1. 15.
30. 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad.

Sermon 4. 5. 6. The Return of Prayers; or, The conditions of a Prevailing
Prayer. fol. 44. 57. 69. Joh. 9. 31. Now we know that God hears not sinners,
but if any man be a worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears.

Sermon 7. 8. 9. Of Godly Fear, and c. fol. 83. 95. 114. Heb. 12. part of the
28th. and 29th. verse. Let us have grace whereby we may serve God with reverence
and godly fear. For our God is a consuming Fire.

Sermon 10. 11. The Flesh and the Spirit. fol. 125. 139. Matt. 26. 41. latter
part. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

Sermon 12. 13. 14. Of Lukewarmnesse and Zeal; or, Spiritual Terror. fol. 152.
164. 179. Jer. 48. 10. first part. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully.

Sermon 15. 16. The House of Feasting; or, The Epicures Measures. fol. 191.
204. 1 Cor. 15. 32. last part. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die.

Sermon 17. 18. The Marriage Ring; or, The Mysteriousnesse and Duties of
Marriage. fol. 219. 232. Ephesians. 5. 32, 33. This is a great mystery; But I
speak concerning Christ and the Church. Nevertheless, let every one of you in
particular so love his Wife even as himself, and the Wife see that she
reverence her Husband.

Sermon 19. 20. 21. Apples of Sodom; or, The Fruits of Sin. fol. 245. 260.
273. Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.

Sermon 22. 23. 24. 25. The good and evil Tongue. Of Slander and Flattery. The
Duties of the Tongue. fol. 286. 298. 311. 323. Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.


Sermon, I. ADVENT SUNDAY. DOOMSDAY BOOK: OR, CHRIST'S Advent to Judgment.
2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of CHRIST, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad.
with glorious appellatives, encouraging it by rewards, entertaining

-- Facere omnia saeve
Non impune licet, nisi dum facis --
and innocence is oppressed, and the poor cry, and he has no helper; and he is
oppressed, and he wants a Patron: and for these and many other concurrent
causes, if you reckon all the causes that come before all the Judicatories of
the world, though the instance are intricate and numerous, yet the personal
and criminal are so few, that of 20000 sins that cry aloud to God for
vengeance, scarce two are noted by the public eye and chastis'd by the hand of
Justice; it must follow from hence, that it is but reasonable for the interest
of virtue and the necessities of the world, that the private should be judged,
and virtue should be tied upon the spirit, and the poor should be relieved, and
the oppressed should appeal, and the noise of Widows should be heard, and the
Saints should stand upright, and the Cause that was ill judged should be judged
over For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body according to that he has done, whether
it be good or bad. (...), so it is in the best copies, not (...), The things
done in the body, so we commonly read it; the things proper or due to the body;
so the expression is more apt and proper; for not only what is done (...) by
the body, but even the acts of abstracted understanding and volition, the acts
of reflection and choice, acts of self-love and admiration, and what ever else
these may be called (...), because these are the acts of the man in the state
of conjunction with the body. The words have in them no other difficulty or
variety, but contain a great truth of the biggest interest, and one of the most
material constitutive Articles of the whole Religion, and the greatest
endearment of our duty in the whole world. Things are so ordered by the great
Lord of all the creatures, that whatsoever we do or suffer shall be called to
account, and this account shall be exact,

This is that which the Apostle in the next verse calls the terror of the Lord;
it is his terror, because himself shall appear in his dress of Majesty and
robes of Justice, and it is his terror, because it is of all the things in the
World the most formidable in it self, and it is most fearful to us: where
shall be acted the interest and final sentence of the Lords terror, that we
may be afraid of sin, for the destruction of which this terror is intended. 1.
Therefore we will consider 1.
the persons that are to be judged, with the circumstances of our advantages or
our sorrows: [We must all appear.] 2. The Judge 2.
and his Judgment seat: [before the Judgment seat of Christ.] 3. The sentence
that they are to receive; the things due to the body, good or bad; according as
we now please, but then cannot alter. 3.
Every one of these are dressed with circumstances of affliction and
afrightment to those to whom such terrors shall appertain

1. The persons who are to be judged: even you, and I, and all the world: Kings
and Priests, Nobles and Learned, the Crafty and the Easy, the Wise and the
Foolish, the Rich and the Poor, the prevailing Tyrant and the oppressed Party
shall all appear to receive there Symbol; and this is so far from abating any
thing of its terror and our dear concernment, that it much increases it: the
first day of Judgment happened, that (I mean) of the universal deluge of
waters upon the old World, the calamity swelled like the flood, and every man
saw his friend perish, and the neighbors of his dwelling, and the relatives of
his house, and the sharers of his joys, and yesterdaies bride, and the new
born heir, the Priest of the Family, and the honor of the Kindred, all dying
or dead, drenched in water and the divine vengeance; and then they had no place
to flee unto,

1. Consider what an infinite multitude of Angels and Men and Women shall then
appear; it is a huge assembly when the Men of one Kingdom, the Men of one Age
in a single Province are gathered togother into heaps and confusion of
disorder; But then all Kingdoms of all ages, all the Armies that ever Augustus
Caesar taxed, all those hundreds of Millions that were slain in all the Roman
Wars from Numa's time till Italy was broken into Principalities and small
Exarchats, all these, and all that can come into numbers, and that did descend
from the loins of Adam, shall at once be represented; to which account if we
add the Armies of Heaven, the nine orders of blessed Spirits, and the infinite
numbers in every order, we may suppose the numbers fit to express the Majesty
of that God, and the terror of that Judge, who is the Lord and Father of all
that unimaginable multitude. Eritterror ingens tot simul Florus.
tantorumque populorum.

2. In this great multitude we shall meet all those who by their example and
their holy precepts have like tapers enkindled with a beam of the Sun of
righteousness enlightened us, and taught us to walk in the paths of justice.
There we shall see all those good men whom God sent to preach to us, and recall
us from humane follies and inhumane practices: and when we epsy the good man
that chid us for our last drunkenness or adulteries, it shall then also be
remembered how we mocked at counsel, and were civilly modest at the reproof,
but laughed when the man was gone, and whose work is with the Lord, and who by
their life and Doctrine endeavored to snatch the Soul of their friend or
relatives from an intolerable misery. But he that sees a crown put upon their
heads that give good counsel, and preach holy and severe Sermons with designs
of charity and piety, will also then perceive that God did not send Preachers
for nothing, on trifling errands and without regard: but that work which he
crowns in them he purposed

3. There in that great assembly shall be seen all those Converts who upon
easier terms, and fewer miracles, and a less experience, Nineveh, and they
shall stand upright in Judgment, for they at the preaching of one man in a
less space then forty days returned unto the Lord their God; but we have
heard him call all our lives, and like the deaf Adder stopped our ears against
the voice of Gods servants, charm they never so wisely. There shall appear the
men of Capernaum, and the Queen of the South, and the Men of Berea, and the
first fruits the obedience of Faith, and the labor of Love, and the
contentions of chastity, and the severities of temperance and self-denial, are
not such insuperable mountains, but that an honest and a sober person may
perform them in acceptable degrees, if he have but a ready ear, and a willing
mind, and an honest heart: and this seen of honest persons shall make the
Divine Judgment upon sinners more reasonable and apparently just,

4. But there is a worse sight then this yet, which in that great assembly
shall distract our sight and amaze our spirits. There interwoven this one
comfort relating to this, which to my Thomas Aquinas was used to beg of God
that he might never be tempted from his low fortune to Prelacies and dignities
Ecclesiastical; and that his mind might never be discomposed or polluted with
the love of any creature; and that he might by some instrument or other
understand the state of his deceased Brother; and the story says, that he was
heard in all: In him it was a great curiosity, or the passion and
impertinencies of a

5. We may consider that this infinite multitude of men and Pythagoras Tables,
but must needs have influence upon every spirit that shall there appear. For
the transactions of that court are not like Orations spoken by a Grecian Orator
in the circles of his people, heard by them that crowd nearest him, or that
sound limited by the circles of air, or the enclosure of a wall; but every
thing is represented to every person, and then let it be considered, when thy
shame and secret turpitude, thy midnight revels and secret hypocrisies, thy
lustful thoughts, and treacherous designs, thy falsehood to God and startings
from thy holy Volo servare animam meam, I am resolved by all means to save my
soul. But when he had undertaken a rule with passion, he performed it carelessly
and remifly, and was but lukewarm in his Religion, and quickly proceeded to a
melancholy and wearied spirit, and from thence to a sickness and the
neighborhood of death; but falling into an agony and a fantastic vision,
dreamed that he saw himself summoned before Gods angry throne, and from thence
hurryed into a place of torments, where espying his Mother, full of scorn she
upbraided him with his former answer, and asked him, Why he did not save his
soul, by all means, according as he undertook. But when the sick man awaked and
recovered, he made his words good indeed, and prayed frequently, and fasted
severely, and labored humbly, and conversed charitably, and mortified himself
severely, and refused such secular solaces which other good men received to
refresh and sustain their infirmities, and gave no other account to them that
asked him but this: If I could not in my ecstasy or dream endure my Mothers
upbraiding my follies and weak Religion, how shall I be able to suffer, that
God should redargue me at Doomsday, and the Angels reproach my lukewarmnesse,
Adam shall appear before God and his Christ, and all the innumerable companies
of Angels and Devils shall be there: and the wicked shall be afrighted with
every thing they see; We must appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, and
that is a new state of terrors and

2. That Is then the place and state of our appearance, Before the Judgment
seat of Christ:] For Christ shall rise from the right hand of his Father, he
shall descend toward us and ride upon a cloud, and shall make himself
illustrious by a glorious Majesty, and an innumerable retinue and circumstances
of terror and a mighty power: and this is that which Origin affirms Remalcus de
Vaux in Harpocrate divino affirms that all the Greek and Latin Fathers
consentientibus animis asseverant, hoc signo Crucem Christi significari, do
unanimously affirm that the representment of the Cross, is the sign of the Son
of Man spoken of Mat. 24. 30. And indeed they affirm it very generally, but
Origin after his manner is singular, hoc signum Crucis erit, cum Dominus ad
judicandum venerit, so the Church used to sing, and so it is in the Sibyls
verses;

O lignum felix in quo Deus ipse pependit,
Nec te terra capit, sed coeli tecta videbis
Cum renovata Dei facies ignita micabit.
The sign of the Cross is that sign of the Son of Man, when the Lord shall
come to Judgment: and from those words of Scripture [They shall look on him
whom they have pierced] it has been freely entertained at the day of
Judgment, Christ shall signify his person by something that related to his
passion, his cross, or his wounds, or both. I list not to spin this curious
cobweb; but Origen's opinion seems to me more reasonable; and it is more
agreeable to the Majesty and Power of Christ to signify himself imprinted upon
a cloud; but it is in others (...), the sign of the Son of man who is in the
heavens; not that the sign shall be imprinted on a cloud, or in any part of
the heavens, but that he who is now in the heavens, shall when he comes down,
have a sign and signification of his own, that is, proper to him, who is there
glorified, and shall return in glory; and he disparages the beauty of the Sun,
who inquires for a Rule to know when the Sun shines, or the light breaks forth
from its chambers of the East; and the Son of man shall need no other
signification, but his Paul, We shall all be Romans 4. 10.
set before the throne or place of Christ's judicature; For it is written, As I
live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God: that is, at the day of Judgment, when we are placed ready to
receive our Sentence, all knees shall bow to the holy Jesus, and confess him
to be God the Lord; meaning, that our Lords presence shall be such, as to force
obeisance from Angels, and Men, and Devils; and his address to Judgment shall
sufficiently declare his Person, and his Office, and his proper glories. This
is the greatest Scene of Majesty that shall be in that day, till the Sentence
be pronounced; But there goes much before this which prepares all the world to
the expectation and consequent reception of this mighty Judge of Men and

The Majesty of the Judge, and the terrors of the Judgment shall be spoken
aloud by the immediate forerunning accidents, which shall be so great
violences to the old constitutions of Nature, that it shall break her very
bones, and disorder her till she be destroyed. St. Hierom relates out of the
Jews books, that their Doctors use to account 15 days of prodigy immediately
before Christ's coming, and to every day assign a wonder, any one of which, if
we should chance to see in the days of our flesh, it would affright us into
the like thoughts, which the old Adria, and the Mediterranean sea, when their
houses and Cities are entering into graves, and the bowels of the earth rent
with convulsions and horrid tremblings. The sea (say they) shall rise 15 cubits
above the highest Mountains, and thence descend into hollownesse, and a
prodigious drought, and when they herds of Men or congregations of Beasts; Then
shall the Graves open, and give up their dead, and those which are alive in
nature, and dead in fear, shall be forced from the rocks, whither they went to
hide them, and from caverns of the earth, where they would fain have been
concealed; because their retirements are dismantled, and their rocks are broken
into wider ruptures, and admit a strange light into their secret bowels; and
the men being forced abroad into the theater of mighty horrors shall run up and
down distracted and at their wits end; and then some shall

These signs, although the Jewish Doctors reckon them by order and a method,
concerning which they had no revelation (that appears) nor sufficiently
credible tradition, yet for the main parts of the things themselves, the holy
Scripture records Christ's own words, and concerning the most terrible of them;
the sum of which, as Christ related them, and his Apostles recorded and
explicated, is this: The earth shall tremble, and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken, the sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood; that is, there shall be strange eclipses of the Sun, and fearful
aspects in the Moon, who when she is troubled looks red like blood; The rocks
shall rend, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. The heavens shall
be rolled up like a parchment, the earth shall be burned with fire, the hills
shall be like wax, for there shall go a fire before him, and a mighty tempest
shall be stirred round about him:

Dies irae, Dies illa
Solvet seclum in favilla,
Test David cum Sibylla.
The Trumpet of God shall sound, and the voice of the Archangell, that is, of
him who is the Prince of all that great army the sign of the Son of Man; for
the fulfilling of all these praedictions, and the preaching the Gospel to all
Nations, and the Conversion of the Jews, and these prodigies, and the Address
of Majesty make up that sign. The notice of which things some way or other
came to the very Heathen themselves, who were alarmed into caution and
sobriety by these dreadful remembrances:


Saecula tot mundt suprema coegerit hora
Antiquum repetens, iterum chaos, omnia mistis
Sidera sideribus concurrent: ignea pontum
Astra petent, tellus extendere littora nolet,
Excutietque fretum; fratri contraria Phoebe
Ibit -- Totaque discors
Machina divulsi turbabit foedera Mundi. Lucan. l. 1.

Which things when they are come to pass, it will be no wonder soberly and
temperately, chastely and justly, humbly and obediently, that is, like persons
that believe all this, and such who are not mad men or fools, but will order
their actions according to these notices. For if they excusable in a Child. He
that is youngest has not long to Christ shall be our Judge at Doomes-day.

SERMON, II. Part II.
Videbunt quem crucifixerunt, and they shall look on him whom they have pierced.
It was for thy sins that the Judge did suffer such unspeakable pains as were
enough to reconcile all the world to God: The sum and spirit of which pains
could not be better understood then by the consequence of his own words, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? meaning, that he felt such horrible,
strange unspeakable evil that attends them that are guilty of this

2. Christ may be crucified again, and upon a new account put to an open shame.
For after that Christ had done all this by the direct actions of his Priestly
Office, of sacrificing himself for us, he has also done very many things for
us which are also the fruits of his first love crucify the Lord of life again,
and put him to an open shame: that is, they, as much as in them lies, bring
Christ from his glorious joys to the labors of his life, and the shame of his
death; they advance his enemies, and refuse to advance the Kingdom of their
Lord; they put themselves in that state in which they were when Christ came to
dye for them; and now that he is in a state that he may rejoice over them, (for
he has done all his share toward it) every wicked man takes his head from the
blessing, and rather chooses that the Devil should rejoice in his destruction,
then that

3. But there is yet a third part of this consideration. As it will be inquired
at the day of Judgment concerning the dishonours to the person of Christ, so
also concerning the profession and institution of Christ, and concerning his
poor Members; for by these also we make sad reflections upon our Lord. Every man
that lives wickedly disgraces the religion and institution of Jesus, he
discourages strangers from entering into it, he weakens the hands of them that
are in already, and makes that the adversaries speak

4. To this if we add the almightinesse of the Judge, his infinite wisdom and
knowledge of all causes, and all persons, and all circumstances, that he is
infinitely just, inflexibly angry, and impartial in his sentence, there can be
nothing added either to the greatness or the requisites of a terrible and an
Almighty Judge. For who can resist him who is Almighty? Who can evade his
scrutiny that knows all things? Who can hope for pity of him that is
inflexible? Who can

1. If we remember the instances of Gods severity in this life, Nilus, still
there are mingled some storms and violences, some fearful instances of the
Divine Justice, we may more readily expect it will be worse, infinitely worse
at that day, when Judgment shall ride in triumph, and Mercy shall be the
accuser of the wicked. But so we read, and are commanded to remember, because
they are written for our example, Sodom and her sisters are set forth for an
example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Fearful it was when God
destroyed at once 23000 for fornication, and an exterminating Angel in one
night killed 185000 of the Assyrians, and the first born of all the families of
Egypt, and for the sin of David in numbering the people threescore and ten
thousand of the people dyed, and God sent ten tribes into captivity and
eternal oblivion and indistinction from a common people for their idolatry.
Did not God strike Corah and his company with fire from Heaven? and Abiram? And
is not evil come upon all the world for one sin of Adam? Did not the anger of
God break the nation of the Jews all in pieces with judgments so great, that
no nation ever suffered the like, because none ever sinned so? And at once it
was done, that God in anger destroyed all the world, and eight persons only
escaped the angry Baptism of water, and yet this world is the time of mercy;
God has opened here his Magazines, and sent his holy Son as the great channel
and fountain of it too: here he delights in mercy, and in judgment loves to
remember it, and it triumphs over all

2. We may also guess at it by this; if God upon all single instances, and in
the midst of our sins, before they are come to the full, and sometimes in the
beginning of an evil habit be so fierce in This is the Romans 2. 5.
day of wrath, and God shall reveal, or, bring forth his righteous Judgments.
The expression is taken from Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Is not this laid up in store with
me, and sealed up among my treasures? (...), I will restore it in the day of
vengeance, for the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants. For so did the Lybian Lion that was brought up under discipline, and
taught to endure blows, and eat the meat of order and regular provision, and
to suffer gentle usages, and the familiarities of societies; but once he brake
out into his own wildness, Dedidicit pacem subito feritate reversa, and killed
two Roman boys; but those that forage in the Lybian mountains tread down and
devour all that they meet or master; and when they have fasted two days, lay
up Judah shall appear upon his own mountain, the mountain of the Lord, in his
natural dress of Majesty, and that Justice shall have her chain and golden
fetters taken off, then Justice shall strike, and Mercy shall not hold her
hands; she shall strike sore strokes, and pity shall not break the blow; and
God shall account with us by minutes, and for words, and for thoughts, and then
he shall be severe to mark what is done amiss; and that Justice may reign
entirely, God shall open the wicked man's treasure, and tell the sums, and weigh
grains and scruples: Philo upon the place of Deuteronomy before quoted: As
there are treasures of good things; and God has Crowns and Scepters in store
for his Saints and servants, and Coronets for Martyrs, and Rosaries for
Virgins, and Phials full of Prayers, and bottles full of tears, and a register
of sighs and penitential groans: so God has a treasure of wrath and fury, of
scourges and scorpions, and then shall be produced the shame of lust, and the
malice of envy, and the groans of the oppressed, and the persecutions of the
Saints, and the cares of covetousness, and sanies and the intolerablenesse,
the obliquity and the unreasonablenesse, the amazement and the disorder, the
smart and the sorrow, the guilt and the punishment

3. We may guess at the severity of the Judge by the lesser strokes of that
Judgment which he is pleased to send upon sinners in this world, to make them
afraid of the horrible pains of Doomsday: I mean the torments of an unquiet
conscience, the amazement and confusions of some sins and some persons. For I
have sometimes seen persons surpised in a base action, and taken in the

hay and stubble, works of folly and false opinions, and states of
imperfection. So S. Austins Doctrine was, Hoc aget caminus, alios in sinistra
separabit, alios in In Psalm. 103.
dextra quodam modo eliquabit, The great fire at Doomsday shall throw some
into the portion of the left hand, and others shall be Origin In Ierem. hom.
13. and in Luke hom. 14. and Lactantius lib. 7. instit. c. 21. Hilarious in
Psalm. 118. octon. 3. and in Mat. can. 2.
and Lactantius; and S. Hilary thus expostulates, Since we are to give account
for every idle word, shall we long for the day of Judgment, in quo est nobis
indefessus ille ignis obeundus in quo subeunda sunt gravia illa expiandae a
peccatis animae supplicia, Wherein we must every one of us pass that unwearied
fire in which those grievous punishments for expiating the soul from sins must
be endured; for to such as have been baptized with the Holy Ghost it remains
that they be consummated with the fire of Judgment. And S. Ambrose adds, That
if any be as Peter or as John, they are baptized with this fire, and he that it
purged here had need to be purged there again: Illic quoque nos purificet
quando dicat dominus, Intrate in requiem mean, Let him also purify us, that
every one of us being burned with that flaming sword, not burned up or
consumed, we may enter into Paradise and give thanks unto the Lord In Psalm.
118. sermon. 3.
who has brought us into a place of refreshment. This opinion of theirs is, in
the main of it, very uncertain, relying upon the sense of some obscure places
of Scripture, is only apt to represent the great severity of the Judge at that
day, and it has in it this only certainty, that even the most innocent person
has great need of That if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
wicked and the sinner appear? Quid faciet virgula deserti, ubi concutretur
cedrus Paradisi? Quid faciet agnus, cumtremit aries? Si coelum fugiat, ubi
manebit terra? said S. Gregory. And if S. Paul

5. But the matter is still of more concernment. The Pharisees jeering and many
instances of wantonness, and revelling, doing petty spites, and doggednesse,
and churlishness, lying too much gentleness and slacknesse in government, or
too great severity and rigor of animadversions, bitterness in reproof of
sinners, uncivil circumstances, imprudent handlings of some criminals, and
zeal; Nay there are some vile things, which through the evil discoursings and
worse manners of men are passed into an artificial and false reputation, and
men are accounted wits for talking Atheistically, and valiant for being
murderers, and wise for deceiving and circumventing our Brothers; and many
irregularities more, for all which we are safe enough here. But when the day
omniscient and knows all things, and his tribunal takes cognizance of all
causes, and has a coercitive for all, all things are naked and open to his
eyes (says S. Paul) therefore nothing shall Heb. 4.
escape for being secret: (...) And all prejudices being laid aside it shall be
considered concerning Cum cepero tempus, ego justitias Psalm. 74.
judicabo; when I shall receive the people, I shall judge according unto right:
so we read; [When we shall receive time, I will judge justices and judgements]
so the vulgar Latin reads it; that is, in the day of the Lord, when time is put
into his hand and time shall be no more, he shall judge concerning those
judgments when men here make of things below; and the fighting man shall
perceive the noises of drunkards and fools that cried him up for daring to kill
his Brother, to have been evil principles; and then it will be declared by
strange effects, that wealth is not the greatest fortune; Paul, by Justice and
charity, by the Laws of God and the laws of wise Princes and Republics, by
the rules of Nature and the just proportions of Reason, by the examples of good
men and the proverbs of wise men, by severity and the rules of Discipline: for
then it shall be, that truth shall ride in triumph, and the holiness of
Christ's Sermons shall be manifest to all the world; that the Word of God shall
be advanced over all the discourses of men, and Wisdom shall be justified by
all her children. Then shall be heard those words of an evil and tardy
repentance, and the just rewards of folly; [We fools thought their life
madness; but behold they are justified before the throne of God, and we are
miserable for ever.] Here men think it strange if others will not run into the
same excess of riot; but there they will wonder how themselves should be so
mad and infinitely unsafe by being strangely and inexcusably unreasonable. The
sum is this; The Judge shall appear clothed with wisdom, and power, and
justice, and knowledge, and an impartial Spirit, making no separations by the
proportions of this world, but by the Non est judicium Dei sicut hominum, God
does not judge as Man judges.

6. Now that the Judge is come thus arrayed, thus prepared, so instructed, let
us next consider the circumstances of our appearing and his sentence; and first
I consider that men at the day of Judgment that belong not to the portion of
life, shall have three sorts of accusers, 1. Christ himself, who is their
Judge. 2. Their own conscience, whom they have injured and blotted with
characters

1. Christ shall be their accuser, not only upon the stock of those direct
injuries (which I before reckoned) of crucifying the Lord of life, once and
again, etc. But upon the titles of contempt and unworthiness, of unkindnesse
and ingratitude; and the accusation will be nothing else but a plain
representation of those artifices 1.
the Son gave himself for a price for us, but both gave the holy 2.
into us, a third part of a perfective constitution: we have the Spirit put
into us, to be a part of us, as properly to produce actions of a holy life, as
the soul of man in the body does produce the natural. *God has exalted humane
nature, and made it in 3.
the person of Jesus Christ, to sit above the highest seat of Angels, and the
Angels are made ministering spirits, ever since their Lord became our Brother.
*Christ has by a miraculous Sacrament 4.
given us his body to eat, and his blood to drink, he made ways that we may
become all one with him. *He has given us 5.
an easy religion, and has established our future felicity upon natural and
pleasant conditions, and we are to be happy hereafter if we suffer God to make
us happy here; and things are so ordered, that a man must take more pains to
perish, then to be happy. *God 6.
has found out rare ways to make our prayers acceptable, our weak petitions,
the desires of our imperfect souls to prevail mightily with God; and to lay a
holy violence, and an undeniable necessity upon himself; and God will deny us
nothing but when we 7.
things in heaven and earth to join toward holy and fortunate effects; for he
has appointed an Angel to present the prayers of Revel. 8. 3.
Saints, and Christ makes intercession for us, and the holy Spirit makes
intercession for us with groans unutterable; and all the holy Romans 8. 26.
men in the world pray for all and for every one; and God has instructed us
with Scriptures, and precedents, and collateral and direct assistances to
pray; and he encouraged us with diverse excellent promises, and parables, and
examples, and teaches us what to pray and how, and gives one promise to
public prayer, and

* Add to this account that God did heap blessings upon us 8.
without order, infinitely, perpetually and in all instances, when we needed,
and when we needed not. *He heard us when we prayed, 9.
giving us all and giving us more then we desired; *He desired 10.
that we should ask, and yet he has also prevented our desires; *He watched
for us, and at his own charge sent a whole order of 11.
men whose employment is to minister to our souls: and if all this had not been
enough, he had given us more also. *He promised 12.
heaven to our obedience, a Province for a dish of water, a Kingdom for a
prayer, satisfaction for desiring it, grace for receiving, and more grace for
accepting and using the first. *He 13.
invited us with gracious words and perfect entertainments; *He 14.
threatened horrible things to us if we would not be happy; *He 15.
has made strange necessities for us, making our very repentance to be a
conjugation of holy actions, and holy times, and a long succession; *He has
taken away all excuses from us, he has called 16.
us off from temptation, he bears our charges, he is always beforehand with us
in every act of favor, and perpetually slow in striking, Nathan did to David,
when he was to make the justice of the Divine 17.
that the joys of every days piety would have been a greater pleasure every
night, then the remembrance of every nights sin could have been in the morning;
*That every night, the trouble and labor of the days virtue would have been
as much passed and turned 18.
to as very a nothing, as the pleasure of that days sin; but that they would
be infinitely distinguished by the remanent effects. (...), So Musonius
expressed the sense of this inducement; and that this argument would eternity.
*The offering our selves to God every morning, and the Moses is said to accuse
the Jews; and thus also he that does accuse, is said to condemn, Verres was by
Cicero, and Claudia by Domitius her accuser, and the world of impenitent
persons by the men of Nineveh, and all, by Christ their Judge. I represent the
horror of this circumstance to consist in this, besides the reasonableness of
the Judgment, and the certainty of the condemnation, it cannot but be an
argument of an intolerable despair to perishing souls, when he that was our
Advocate all our life, shall in the day of that appearing be our Accuser and
our Judge, a party against us, an injured person in the day of his power, and
of his wrath, doing execution upon all his own foolish and malicious enemies. *

2. Our conscience shall be our accuser,] but this signifies but these two
things; 1. that we shall be condemned for the evils that we have done, and
shall then remember; God by his power wiping away the dust from the tables of
our memory, and taking off the consideration and the voluntary neglect and rude
shufflings of our cases of conscience. For then we shall see things as they
are, the evil circumstances and the crooked intentions, the adherent
unhandsomenesse and the direct crimes: for all things are laid up safely, and
though we draw a curtain of cobweb over them, and few figleaves before our
shame, yet God shall draw away the curtain, and forgetfulness secondly it
signifies this also, that not only the Justice of God shall be confessed by us
in our own shame and condemnation, but the evil of the sentence shall be
received into us, to melt our bowels and to break our heart in pieces within
us, because we are the authors of our own death, and our own inhumane hands
have torn our souls in pieces. Thus far the horrors are great, and when evil
men consider it, it is certain they must be afraid to dye. Even they that have
lived well, have some sad considerations, and the Cyprian tells of a good man
who in his agony of death saw a phantasme of a noble and angelical shape, who
frowning and angry said to him, Pati timetis, exire non vultis, Quid faciam
vobis? Ye cannot endure sickness, ye are troubled at the evils of the

3. The third sort of accusers, are the Devils; and they will do it with
malicious and evil purposes; The Prince of the Devils has (...) for one of
his chiefest appellatives: The accuser of the Brethren he is by his professed
malice, and employment; and therefore God who delights that his mercy should
triumph, and his goodness prevail over all the malice of men and Devils, has
appointed one whose office is (...) to reprove the accuser, the Brethren, that
is, the Saints and servants of God, and shall tell concerning their follies and
infirmities, the sins of their youth, and the weakness of their age, the
imperfect grace, and the long schedule of omissions of duty, their scruples and
their fears, their diffidences and pusillanimity, and all those things which
themselves by strict defender; The holy Spirit that makes intercession for us,
shall then also interpose, and against all these things shall oppose the
passion the robe of his righteousness; and the sins of their youth shall not
prevail so much as the repentance of their age; and their omissions be excused
by probable intervening causes, and their little escapes shall appear single,
and in disunion, because they were always kept asunder by penitential prayers
and sighings, and their seldom returns of sin by their daily watchfulness,
and their often infirmities by the sincerity of their souls, and their scruples
by their zeal, and their passions by their love, and all by the mercies of God
and the sacrifice which their Judge offered, and the holy But as for the
wicked, it is not so with them; for although the plain story of their life be
to them a sad condemnation, yet what will be answered when it shall be told
concerning them, that they despised Gods mercies, and feared not his angry
judgments; that they regarded not his word, and loved not his excellencies;
that they were not persuaded by the promises, nor afrighted by his threatenings;
that they neither would accept his government, nor his blessings; that all the
pleasant now he shall then say was nothing, and seeds of folly, and the harvest
is pain and sorrow, and shame eternal. * But then since this horror proceeds
upon the account of so many accusers, God has put it into our power by a
timely accusation of our selves in the tribunal of the court Christian to
prevent all the arts of aggravation which at Doomsday shall load foolish and
undiscerning souls. He that accuses himself of his crimes here, means to
forsake them, and looks upon them on all sides, and spies out his deformity,
and is taught to hate them, he is instructed and prayed for, he prevents
Patriarch of Alexandria told an old religious person in his hermitage; having
asked him what he found in that desert; he was answered, only this,
Indesinenter culpare and judicare meipsum; to judge and condemn my self
perpetually, that is the employment of my solitude. The Patriarch answered, Non
est alia via, There is no other way. By accusing our selves we shall make the
Devils malice useless, and

SERMON, III. Part, III.
3. IT remains that we consider the Sentence it self, We must receive
according to what we have done in the body, whether it be good or bad.
Judicaturo Domino lugubre mundus immugiet, and tribus ad tribum pectora
ferient. Potentissimi quondam reges nudo latere palpitabunt: so St. Hierom
meditates concerning the terror of this consideration. The whole world shall
groan when the Judge comes to give his Sentence, tribe and tribe shall knock
their sides together; and through the naked breasts of the most mighty Kings
you shall see their hearts beat with Tunc Aristotelis argumenta parum
proderunt, cum venerit filius pauperculae quaestuariae judicare orbem terra.
Nothing shall then be worth owning, or the means of obtaining mercy, but a holy
conscience; all the humane craft and trifling subtilties shall be useless,
when the Son of a poor Maid shall sit Judge over all the world. When the
Prophet Joel was describing the formidable accidents in the day of the Lords
Judgment, and the fearful Sentence of an angry Judge, he was not able to
express it, but flammered like a Child, or an amazed imperfect person, A. A.
A. diei, quia prope est Dies Domini; it Joel 1.
is not sense at first; he was so amazed, he knew not what to say, and the
Spirit of God was pleased to let that sign remain like Agamemnon's sorrow for
the death of Iphigenia, nothing could describe it but a vail; it must be hidden
and supposed; and the stammering tongue that is full of fear, can best speak
that terror which will make all the world to cry, and shriek, and speak
fearful accents, and significations of an infinite sorrow and amazement.

But so it is, there are two great days in which the fate of all the world is
transacted. This life is man's day, in which he shall speak, and no man shall
answer, he shall speak in the voice of thunder and fearful noyses, and man
shall do no more as he please, but must suffer as he has deserved. When
Zedekiah reigned in Jerusalem, and Jeremy into the Dungeon, God held his peace;
save only that he warned him of the danger, and told him of the disorder; but
it was Zedekiah's day, and he was permitted to his pleasure. But when he was
led in chains to Babylon, and his eyes were put out with burning Basins and
horrible circles of reflected fires, then was Gods day, and his voice was the
accent of a fearful anger, that broke him all in pieces. It will be all our
ca^es, unless we hear God speak now, and do his work, and serve his interest,
and bear our selves in our just proportions, as such, the very end of whose
being, and all our faculties is to serve God, and do justice, and charities to
our Brother. For if we do the work of God in our own day, we shall receive an
infinite mercy in the day of the Lord. But what that is, is now to be inquired.

What we have done in the body] But certainly this is the greatest terror of
all. The thunders and the fires, the earthquakes and the trumpets, the
brightness of holy Angels, and the horror of accursed Spirits, the voice of
the Archangel (who is the Prince of the heavenly host) and the Majesty of the
Judge, in whose Philemon said of the nature of foxes.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Every fox is crafty and mischievous, and if you gather a whole the child of
wrath, and by his manners he is the child of the Devil; we call Christian,
and we dishonor our Lord, and we are Brethren, but we oppress and murder
one another; it is a great degree of sanctity now adays not to be so wicked as
the worst of men; and we live at the rate as if the best of men did design to
themselves an easier condemnation; and as if the generality of men considered
not concerning the degrees of death, but did believe that in hell no man shall
perceive any ease or refreshment in being tormented we do in the body; 12 or
14 years pass before we choose good or bad; and of that which remains above
half is spent in sleep and the needs of Nature; for the other half it is
divided as the Stag was when the beasts went a hunting, the Lion has five
parts of six: The business of the world takes so much of our remaining
portion, that Religion and the service of God have not much time left that can
be spared; and of that which can, if we consider how much is allowed to crafty
arts of cousenage, to oppression and ambition, to greedy desires, and
avaritious prosecutions, to the vanities of Alms and Prayers are the sum of
all thy good. Were thy prayers made in fear and holiness, with passion and
desire? Were they not made unwillingly, weakly, and wandringly, and abated with
sins in the Every Mat. 12 36.
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of
Judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned; and upon this account may every one weeping and trembling
say with Job, Quid faciam cum Job 31. 14.
resurrexerit ad judicandum Deus? What shall I do when the Lord shall come to
judgment? Of every idle word] O blessed God! what shall become of them who
love to prate continually, to tell tales, to detract, to slander, to back-bite,
to praise themselves, to undervalue others, to compare, to raise divisions, to
boast? (...); Who shall be able to stand upright, not bowing the knee with the
intolerable load of the sins of his tongue? If of every idle word we must every
idle word that is, (...), so St. Paul uses it, every false Ephesians. 5. 6.
word, every lie shall be called to judgment; or as some Copies read it,
(...), every wicked word shall be called to judgment. For by [(...)] idle
words, are not meant words that are unprofitable or unwise, for fools and
silly persons speak most of those, and have the least accounts to make; but by
vain the Jews usually understood false; and to give their mind to vanity, or
to speak vanity, is all one as to mind or speak falsehoods with malicious and
evil purposes. But if every idle word, that is every vain and lying word shall
be called to judgment, what shall become of men that blaspheme God, or their
Rulers, or our own words we stand or fall, that is, as in humane Judgments the
confession of the party, and the contradiction of himself, or the failing in
the circumstances of his story, are the to be accounted for, we have enough in
this account to make us watch over our actions with a care, equal to that fear
which shall be at Doomes-day, when we are to pass our sad accounts. But I have
some considerations to interpose.

1. But (that the sadness of this may a little be relieved, and our 1.
endeavors be encouraged to a timely care and repentance) consider, that this
great sentence, although it shall pass concerning little things, yet it shall
not pass by little portions, but by general measures; not by the little
errors of one day, but by the great proportions of our life; for God takes not
notice of the infirmities of honest persons that always endeavor to avoid
every sin, but in little intervening instances are surprised; but he judges us
by single actions, if they are great, and of evil effect; and by little small
instances, if they be habitual. No man can take care concerning every minute;
and therefore concerning it Christ will not pass sentence but by the
discernible portions of our time, by humane actions, by things of choice and
deliberation, and by 2.
the proportions of an Angel, but by the measures of a Man; the first follies
are not unpardonable, but may be recovered; and the second are dangerous, and
the third are more fatal; but nothing is unpardonable but perseverance in
evil courses. 3ly. The last Judgment shall be transacted by the same 3.
Principles by which we are guided here: not by strange and secret
propositions, or by the fancies of men, or by the subtilties of useless
distinctions, or evil persuasions; not by the scruples of Whatsoever ye shall
bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye loose shall be
loosed there; that is, you shall stand or fall according to the Sermons of the
Gospel, as the 4.
but by the mercies of the Covenant; we shall be judged as Christians rather
then as men, that is, as persons to whom much is pardoned, and much is pityed,
and many things are (not accidentally, but consequently) indulged, and great
helps are ministered, 5.
intercedes; and upon souls that he loves, and in the salvation of which
himself has a great interest, and increase of joy. And now upon these premises
we may dare to consider what the sentence it self shall be, that shall never be
reversed, but shall last for ever and ever.

Whether it be good or bad.] I cannot discourse now the greatness of the good
or bad, so far (I mean) as is revealed to us; the considerations are too long
to be crowded into the end of a Sermon; only in general: 1. If it be good, it
is greater then all the good of this world, and every man's share then, in every
1.
instant of his blessed eternity is greater then all the pleasures of Mankind
in one heap.

(...),
(...).
Posidippus. 2. To which I add this one consideration, 2.
that the portion of the good at the day of sentence shall be so great, that
after all the labors of our life, and suffering persecutions, and enduring
affronts, and the labor of love, and the continual fears and cares of the
whole duration and abode, it rewards it all, and gives infinitely more; Non
sunt condignae passiones hujus saeculi; all the torments and evils of this
world are not to be estimated with the joys of the Blessed: It is the gift of
God; a donative beyond the (...), the military stipend, it is beyond our work,
and beyond our wages, and beyond the promise, and beyond our thoughts, and
above our understandings, and above the highest heavens, it is a participation
of the joys of God, and of the inheritance of the Judge himself.

(...)
(...) Xenoph.

(...).
It is a day of recompenses, in which all our sorrows shall be turned into
joys, our persecutions into a crown, the Cross into a Throne, poverty to the
riches of God, loss, and affronts, and inconveniences, and death, into
scepters, and hymns, and rejoycings, and Hallellujahs, and such great things
which are fit for us to hope, but too great for us to discourse of, while we
see as in to do an evil, rather then suffer one, shall find it but an ill
exchange, that he deferred his little to change for a great one. I remember
that a servant in the old Comedy did choose to venture the lash rather then to
feel a present inconvenience, Quia illud aderat malum, istud aberat longius:
illud erat praesens, huic erant dieculae: but this will be but an ill account,
when the rods shall for the delay be turned into Scorpions, and from easy
shall become intolerable. Better it is to suffer here, and to stay till the day
of restitution for the good and the holy portion; for it will recompense both

But how if the portion be bad? It shall be bad to the greatest part of
mankind; that is a fearful consideration; the greatest part of men and women
shall dwell in the portion of Devils to eternal ages. So that these portions
are like the Prophets figs in the vision; the good are the best that ever were,
and the worst are so bad that worse cannot be imagined. For though in hell the
accursed souls shall have no worse then they have deserved, and there are not
there overrunning measures as there are in heaven, and therefore that the joys
of heaven are infinitely greater

1. That here, all the troubles of our spirits are little participations 1.
of a disorderly passion; A man desires earnestly, but he has 1.
not, or he envies because another has something besides him, and he is
troubled at the want of one, when at the same time he has a hundred good
things; and yet ambition and envy, impatience and confusion, covetousness and
lust are all of them very great torments; but there these shall be in essence
and abstracted beings; the spirit of envy, and the spirit of sorrow; Devils,
that shall inflict all the whole nature of the evil and pour it into the minds
of accursed men; where it shall sit without abatement: for he that envies
there, envies not for the eminence of another that sits a little above him, and
excels him in some one good; but he shall envy for all; because the Saints
have all, and they have none; therefore all their passions are integral,
abstracted, perfect passions; and all the sorrow in the world at this time, is
but a portion of sorrow; every man has his share, and yet besides that which
all sad men have, there is a great deal of sorrow which they have not, and all
love; and some in which the brightest jewel is understanding; some are purity,
and some are holiness to the Lord: so in the regions of sorrow, evil and
sorrow have an essence and proper

2. The evils of this world are material and bodily; the pressing of a
shoulder, or the straining of a joint; the dislocation of a bone, or the
extending of an artery; a bruise in the flesh, or the pinching of the skin; a
hot liver, or a sickly stomach; and then the mind is troubled because its
instrument is ill at ease; but all the proper troubles of this life are nothing
but the effects of an uneasy body, or an abused fancy, and therefore can be no
bigger then a blow or a cousenage, then a wound or a dream; only then, is
nothing like a grief now, and the words of man's tongue which are fitted to the
uses of this world, are as unfit to signify the evils of the next, as person,
and nature, and hand, and motion, and passion are to represent the effects of
the Divine attributes, actions and subsistence.

3. The evil portions of the next world is so great, that God the Kingdom of
Heaven, (...), from the foundation of the world; for so it is observable, that
Christ shall say to the Sheep at his right hand, Mat. 25. 34.
Receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world; but to
the Goats and accursed spirits, he speaks of no such primitive and original
design; it was accidental and a consequent to horrid crimes, that God was
forced to invent and to after create that place of torments.

4. And when God did create and prepare that place, he did prepared for the
Divill and his Angels, so says the Judge himself, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, 41.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, (...) which my Father prepared for the
Devil, so some copies read it: God intended it not for man, but man would
imitate the Devils pride, and listen to the whispers of an evil spirit, and
follow his temptations, and rebel against his Maker; and then God also against
his first design resolved to throw such persons into that place that was
prepared for the Devil: for so great was the love of God to mankind, that he
prepared joys infinite and never

5. The evil portion shall be continual without intermission of evil; no
days of rest, no nights of sleep, no ease from labor, Rome amongst some other
strange opinions has inserted this one into her public Offices; that the
perishing souls in hell may have sometimes remission and refreshment like the
fits of an intermitting fever: for so it is in the Roman Missal printed Paris,
1626. in the Mass for the dead; Ut quia de ejus vitae qualitate diffidimus,
and si plenam veniam anima ipsius obtinere non potest, saltem vel inter ipsa
tormenta quae forsan patitur, refrigerium de abundantia miserationum tuarum
sentiat: and something like this is that of Prudentius, Sunt and spiritibus
saepe nocentibus, Hymn. 5. lib. Cath^mer.
Poenarum celebres sub Styge feriae, etc. The evil spirits have ease of their
pain, and he names their holiday, then when the Resurrection of our Lord from
the grave is celebrated:

Marcent suppliciis Tartara mitibus,
Exultatque sui carceris otio
Umbrarum populus liber ab ignibus:
Nec fervent solito flumina sulphur.
They then thought that when the Paschall taper burned, the flames Where the
worm dies not, and the fire is never quenched, and diverse others, it is
sufficient to have noted it without further consideration; the pains of hell
have no rest, no drop of water is allowed to cool the tongue, there is no
advocate to plead for them, no mercy belongs to their portion, but fearful
wrath and continual burnings.

6. And yet this is not the worst of it; for as it is continual during its
abode; so its abode is for ever, it is continual and eternal. Tertullian
speaks something otherwise, Pro magnitudine cruciatus non diuturni, verum
sempiterni; not continual, or the pains of every day, but such which shall
last for ever. But Lactantius is more plain in this affair; The same divine
fire by the same power and force shall burn the wicked, and shall repair
instantly whatsoever of the body it does consume: Ac sibi ipsi aeternum
^pabulum subministrabit, and shall make for it self an eternal fuel.

"Vermibus and flammis and discruciatibus aevum
"Immortale dedit, senio ne poena periret

So Prudentius eternal worms, and unextinguished flames, and immortal
punishment is prepared for the ever-never dying souls of wicked men. Origin is
charged by the ancient Churches for saying that after a long time the Devils
and the accursed souls shall be restored to the Kingdom of God; and that after
a long time again they shall be restored to their state; and so it was from
their fall and shall be forever; and it may be that might be the meaning of
Tertullians expression, of cruciatus non diuturni sed sempiterni. Epiphanius
charges not the opinion upon Origin, and yet he was free enough in his
animadversion and reproof of him; but S. Austin did, and confuted the opinion
in his books De civitate Dei. However, Origin was not the first that said the
pains of the damned should cease; Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Tryphon
expresses it thus. Neither do I say that all the souls do dye, for that indeed
would be to the wicked a gain unlooked for: What then? the souls of the godly
in a better place, of the wicked in a worse, do tarry the time of Judgment;
then they that are worthy shall never dye again; but those that are designed to
punishment shall abide so long as God please to have them to live and to be
punished: But I observe, that the primitive Doctors were very willing to
believe that the mercy of God would find out a period to the torment of
accursed souls; but such a period, which should be nothing but eternal
destruction, called by the Scripture the second death: only Origin (as I
observed) is charged by S. Austin to have said they shall return into joys;
and back again to hell by Hierome at the end of his Commentaries upon Isay; and
Ireneus disputes it largely, that they that are unthankful to God in this
short life and obey him not, shall never have an Lib. 2. cap. 65.
eternal duration of life in the ages to come, sed ipse se private in saeculum
saeculi perseverantia, he deprives his soul of living to eternal ages; for he
supposes an immortal duration not to be natural Adam, and restored it again
in Christ to them that believe in him and obey him: for the other, they shall
be raised again to suffer shame, and fearful torments, and according to the
degree of their sins, so shall be continued in their sorrows, and some shall
dye and some shall not dye; the Devil and the Beast, and and they that
worshipped the Beast, and they that were marked with his Character, these S.
John says shall be tormented for ever and ever; he does not say so of all; but
of some certain great criminals; (...), all, so long as God please, some
everlasting fire: it is answered, that the fire indeed is everlasting, but not
all that enters into it is everlasting; but only the Devils for whom it was
prepared and others more mighty criminals (according as S. John intimates)
though also everlasting signifies only to the end of its proper period.

Concerning this Doctrine of theirs so severe, and yet so moderated, there is
less to be objected then against the supposed fancy of Origin: for it is a
strange consideration to suppose an eternal

1. It is certain that the torments of hell shall certainly last as long as 1.
the soul lasts; for eternal and everlasting can signify no less but to the
end of that duration, to the perfect end of the period in which it signifies.
So Sodom and Gomorrah, when God rained down hell from heaven upon the earth (as
Salvian's expression is) they are said to suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire: that is, of a fire that consumed them finally, and they never were
restored: and so the accursed souls shall suffer torments till they be
consumed; who because

But 2. the generality of Christians have been taught to believe 2.
worse things yet concerning them; and the words of our blessed

Nec mortis poenas mors altera finiet hujus,
Horaque; erit tantis ultima nulla malis.
And S. John, who well knew the mind of his Lord, says; The Rev. 14. 11.
smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest
day nor night: that is, their torment is continual, and it is eternal. Their
second death shall be but a dying to all felicity, for so death is taken in
Scripture; Adam dyed when he on them the second death shall have no power; but
the wicked shall be tormented horridly death and hell be thrown into the lake
of fire, and shall be no more, which is the second death. But that they may not
Rev. 20. 14.
imagine that this second death shall be the end of their pains, S. John speaks
expressly what that is; Rev. 21. 8. The fearful and unbeleeving, the abominable
and the murderers, the whoremongers and sorcerers, the idolaters and all liars
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death; no dying there, but a being tormented, burning in a lake
of fire, that is the second death. For if life be reckoned a blessing, then to
be destitute of all blessing is to have no life, and therefore to be
intolerably death eternal.

3. And yet if God should deal with man hereafter more mercifully and
proportionably to his weak nature, then he does to Angels, and as he admits him
to repentance here, so in hell also to a period of his smart, even when he
keeps the Angels in pain for ever; yet he will never admit him to favor, he
shall be tormented beyond all the measure of humane ages, and be destroyed for
ever and ever.

It concerns us all who hear and believe these things, to do as our blessed
Lord will do before the day of his coming; he will call Conversion to God is
the best preparatory to Doomsday: and it concerns all them who are in the
neighborhood and fringes of the flames of hell, that is, in the state of sin,
quickly to arise from the danger, and shake the burning coals off our flesh,
lest it consume the marrow and the bones: Exuenda est velociter de incendio
sarcina, priusquam flammis supervenientibus concremetur. Nemo diu tutus est
periculo proximus, says S. Cyprian, No man is safe long, that is so near to
danger; for suddenly the change will come, in which the Judge shall be called
to Judgment, and no man to plead for him, unless a good conscience good or
bad, sheep and goats, blessed and accursed souls. Among the wonders of the day
of Judgment our blessed Savior reckons it, that men shall be marrying and
giving in marriage, (...) marrying and cross marrying, that is, raising
families and lasting greatness and huge estates; when the world is to end so
quickly; and the gains of a rich purchase so very a trifle, but no trifling
danger; a thing that Hierom said it, Coram coelo and terra rationem reddemus
totius nostrae vitae; and tu rides? Heaven and earth shall see all the follies
and baseness of thy life; and do thou laugh? That we may, but we have not
reason to laugh loudly and frequently, if we consider things wisely, and as we
are concerned: but if we do, yet praesentis temporis ita est agenda laetitia,
ut sequentis judicii amaritudo nunquam recedat a memoria: so laugh here that
you may not forget your danger, lest you weep for ever. He that thinks most
seriously and most Son and his mercies, his graces and his holy Spirit; and
they that do all this, have cause to complain of nothing but their own follies;
and they shall feel the accursed consequents then when they shall see the Judge
sit above them angry and severe, inexorable and terrible; under them an
intolerable hell; within them, their consciences clamorous and diseased;
without them, all the world on fire; on the right hand, those men glorified
whom they persecuted or despised; on the left hand, the Devils accusing; for
this is the day of the Lords terror, and who is able to abideat?

Seu vigilo intentus studiis, seu dormio, semper
Iudicis extremi nostras tuba personet aures.
SERMON, IV. The Return of PRAYERS. Or, The Conditions of a PREVAILING PRAYER.
John 9. 31. Now we know that God hears not sinners, but if any man be a
worshippar of God and does his will, him be hears.
IKnow not which is the greater wonder, honestly and severely, then it wills so
coldly, that God hates the prayer; fervently, it sometimes turns that into
passion, and that passion breaks into murmurs or unquietness; or if that be
avoided, the indifferency cooles into death, or the fire burns violently, and
is quickly spent; our desires are dull as a rock, or fugitive as lightening;
either we ask ill things earnestly, or Corah being partners of a schism, or
a rebellion in religion; or we bring unhallowed censers; our hearts send up to
God an unholy smoke, a cloud from the fires of lust, and either the flames of
lust or rage, wine or revenge kindle the beast that is laid upon the altar; or
we bring swines flesh, or a dogs neck; whereas God never accepts, or delights
in a prayer, unless it be for a holy thing, to a lawful end, presented unto
him upon the wings of Zeal and love, of religious sorrow or religious joy; by
sanctified lips, and pure bands, and a sincere heart. It must be the prayer of
a gracious man; and he is only gracious before God, and acceptable, and
effective in his prayer, whose life is holy, and whose prayer is holy; For both
these are necessary ingredients to the constitution of a prevailing prayer;
there is a holiness peculiar to the man, and a Jesus, in which union alone our
prayers can be prevailing.

God hears not sinners:] so the blind man in the text, and confidently [this
we know:] he had reason indeed for his confidence; it was a proverbiall saying,
and every where recorded in their Scriptures, which were read in the synagogues
every Sabbath day. For what is the hope of the hypocrite? (says Job) will God
Job 27. 9.
hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? No, he will not. For if I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me, said Ps. 6. 6. 18.
David; and so said the Spirit of the Lord by the Son of David. Prove. 1. 28.
When distress and anguish comes upon you, Then shall they call upon me, but
I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; and
Isaiah, When you spread forth your Isa. 1. 15.
hands I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when you make many prayers I will
not hear; your hands are full of blood: and again, Ier. 14. 12.
When they fast I will not hear their cry, and when they will offer burnt
offerings and oblations, I will not accept them. For they have 10.
loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord will
not accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins:
Upon these and many other authorities it grew into a proverb; Deus non exaudit
peccatores: it was a known Vide etiam Ps. 34. 6. Micah 3. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 12.
case and an established rule in the religion; Wicked persons are neither fit
to pray for themselves, nor for others.

Which proposition let us first consider in the sense of that purpose which the
blind man spoke it in, and then in the utmost extent of it, as its analogy and
equal reason goes forth upon us A false Prophet could not work true miracles;
this has received its diminution when the case was changed; for at that time
when then when he said it, yet after that the case was altered: and Sinners,
Magicians, Astrologers, Witches, Heretics, Simoniacks and wicked persons of
other instances, have

There is in this case only this difference, that they who do miracles in
opposition to Christ, do them by the power of the Devil, to whom it is
permitted to do such things which we think miracles; and that is all one as
though they were: but the proposition God hears not sinners, God does not work
those miracles; but concerning sinning Christians, God in this sense and
toward the purposes of miracles does hear them, and has wrought miracles by
them, for they do them in the name of Christ, and therefore Christ said,
cannot easily speak ill of him; and although they either prevaricate in their
lives, or in superinduced doctrines, yet because the miracles are a
verification of the Religion, not of the opinion, of the power or truth of
Christ, not of the veracity of the man, God has heard such persons many times
whom men have long since, and to this day Heretics, such were the Novatians
and Arrians; For to the Heathens they could only prove their Religion by which
they stood distinguished from them; but we find not that they wrought miracles
among the Christians, or to verify their superstructures and private opinions.
But besides this yet, we may also by such means arrest the forwardness of our
judgments and condemnations of persons disagreeing in their opinions from us;
for those persons whose faith God confirmed by miracles was an entire faith,
and although they might have false opinions, or mistaken explications of true
opinions, either inartificiall or misunderstood, yet we Palestine, Cyprus,
Cr^te, Syria, and the voicinage, that there were but very few Christians that
with hearty persuasions fell away from Christ, (...), said Galen, It is not
easy to teach anew him that has been taught by Christ: And St. Austin tells a
story of an unbeleeving man, that being troubled that his wife was a Christian,
went to the Oracle to ask by what means he should alter her persuasion; but
he was answered, it could never be done, he might as well imprint characters
upon the face of a torrent or a rapid river, or himself fly in the air, as
alter the persuasion Demas, and Simon Magus, and Ecebolius, and the lapsed
Confessors are instances of humane craft in the power of signs and wonders
able to deceive (if it were possible) even the very elect; but that was not
possible; without their faults it could not be; the elect were sufficiently
strengthened, and the evidence of Paul twice remarks in his Epistle to the
Hebrews. The result of this discourse is the first sense and explication of the
words, God hears not sinners, viz. in that in which they are sinners: a
sinner in his manners may be heard in his prayer in order to the confirmation
of his faith, but if he be a sinner in his faith God hears lifting up holy
hands without wrath and doubting.

2. That which yet concerns us more nearly is, that God hears not sinners,
that is, if we be not good men, our prayers will do us no good: we shall be
in the condition of them that never pray at all. The prayers of a wicked man
are like the breath of corrupted lungs, God turns away from such unwholesome
breathings. indices and significations by which we may make a judgment whether
God has heard our prayers or no.

1. Whosoever prays to God while he is in a state, or in the affection to sin,
his prayer is an abomination to God. This was a truth so believed by all
Nations of the world, that in all Religions Deorum Templa cum adire disponitis
ab, omni vos labe puros, lautos, castissimosque praestatis, said Arnobius to
the Gentiles: When you address your selves to the Temples of your Gods, you
keep your selves chaste, and clean, and spotless. They washed their hands, and
wore white garments, they refused to touch a dead body, they avoided a spot
upon their clothes as they avoided a wound upon their head, (...). That was the
religious ground they went upon; an impure thing ought not to Jews in their
preparatory baptismes; they washed their hands to signify that they should
cleanse them from all iniquity, and keep them pure from blood and rapine; they
washed their garments, but that intended they should not be spotted with the
flesh; and their follies consisted in this, that they did not look to the
bottom of their lavatories; they did not see through the vail of their
ceremonies. Flagitiis omnibus inquinati veniunt ad precandum, and se pie
sacrificasse opinantur, si cutem laverint, tanquam libidines intra pectus
inclusas ulla amnis abluat, aut ulla Maria purificent, said Lactantius; they
come to their prayers dressed round about with wickedness, ut quercus hedera,
and think God will accept their offering if their skin be washed; as if a river
could purify their lustful souls, or a sea take off their guilt. But David
reconciles the ceremony with the mystery, I will wash my hands, I will wash
them in innocence, and so will I go to thine altar. Hae sunt verae munditiae
(says Tertullian) non quas plerique superstitione curant ad omnem orationem,
etiam cum lavacro totius corporis aquam sumentes. This is the true
purification, And this is it which the Apostle also signifies, having
translated the Gentile and Jewish ceremony into the spirituality of the
Gospel, I will therefore that men pray every where, levantes puras manus,
lifting up clean hands, Latin, (...), so it is in the Greek, holy hands:
That Is the purity that God looks for upon them that lift up their hands to him
in prayer: and this very thing is founded upon the Natural constitution of
things, and their essential proportion to each other.

1. It is an act of profanation for any unholy person to handle holy things,
and holy offices. For if God was ever careful to put all holy things into
cancels, and immure them with acts and laws and cautions of separation; and the
very sanctification of them was nothing else but the solemn separating them
from common lawful may yet be unholy in this sense; much more are unlawful
things most unholy in all senses. If God will not admit of that which is beside
Religion, he will less endure that which is against Religion. And therefore if
a common man must not serve at the altar, how shall he abide a wicked man to
stand there? No: he will not endure him, but he will cast him and his prayer
into the separation of an Sic profanatis sacris peritura Troja perdidit primum
Deos, So Troy entered into ruin when their prayers became unholy, and they
profaned the rites of their Religion.

2. A wicked person while he remains in that condition is not the natural
object of pity: (...), said Zeno; Mercy is a sorrow or a trouble at that misery
which falls upon a person which deserved it not. And so Aristotle defines it,
it is (...), When we see the person deserves a better fortune, or is disposed
to a fairer entreaty, then Sinon pleaded for pity to the Trojans, saying,

-- Miserere animi non digna serentis. For who pityeth the tears of a base man
who has treacherously murdered his friend? or who will lend a friendly sigh
when he sees a traitor to his country pass forth through the execrable gates
of cities? and when any circumstance of baseness, that is, any thing that
takes off the excuse of infirmity, does accompany a sin (such as are
ingratitude, perjury, perseverance, delight, malice, treachery) then every man
scorns the criminal, and God delights and rejoices in, and laughs at the
calamity of such a person. When Vitellius with his hands bound behind him, his
Imperial robe rent, and with a dejected countenance and an ill name was led to
execution, every man cursed him, but no man Deformitas exitus misericordiam
abstulerat, says Tacitus, The filthiness of his life and death took away
pity. So it is with us in our prayers; while we love our sin we must nurse all
its children; and when we roar in our lustful beds, and groan with the whips
of an exterminating Angel, chastising those (...) (as Aretas calls them) the
lusts of the lower belly, wantonness, and its mother intemperance, we feel the
price of our sin, that which God foretold to be their issues, that which he
threatened us withal, and that which is the natural consequent, and its
certain expectation, that which we delighted in, and Hyaena, or clip the Lamia
about the neck, we have as certainly chosen the tail, and its venomous
embraces, as the face and lip. Every man that sins against God, and loves it,
or, which is all one, continues in it, for by interpretation that is love, has
all the circumstances of unworthiness toward God; he is unthankful, and a
breaker of his vows, and a despiser of his mercies, and impudent against his
judgments, he is false to his profession, no man pities a base person, let us
remember that no man is so base in any thing as in his unhandsome demeanor
toward God. Do we not profess our selves his servants, and yet serve the
Devil? Do we not live upon Gods provision, and yet stand or work at the
command of lust, or avarice, humane regards and little interests of the world?
We call him Father when we desire our portion, and yet spend it in the society
of all his enemies. In short: Let our actions to God You may thank your selves;
and be infinitely afraid lest at the same time we be in a condition of person
in which God will that therefore makes us miserable, and this renders us
desperate.

3. This great truth is further manifested by the necessary and convenient
appendages of prayer required, or advised, or recommended in holy Scripture.
For why is Fasting prescribed together with prayer? For neither alms are
prescribed, together with prayer, because deleteries and hindrances to our
prayers, by irreconciling the person of him that prays.

1. The first is unmercyfulnesse. (...), said one in Stobaeus, and they were
well joined together. He that takes Mercy from a Man is like him that takes an
Altar from the Temple; the Temple is of no use without Iliacall passion that so
hardens a man's bowels, that nothing proceeds Miserere mei Deus, a prayer to
God for pity upon him that will not show pity to others. We are troubled when
God through severity breaks our bones, and hardens his face against us; but we
think our poor brother is made of iron, and not of flesh and blood, as we are.
God has bound mercy upon us by the iron bands of necessity, and though Gods
mercy is the measure of his justice, yet justice is the measure of our mercy,
and as we do to others it shall be done to us, even in the matter of pardon
and of bounty, of gentleness and remission, of bearing each others burdens,
and fair Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us, so we pray. The final sentence in this affair is recorded by St. James,
He that shows no mercy shall have Iam. 2. 13.
justice with out mercy: as thy poor brother has groaned under thy cruelty and
ungentle nature without remedy, so shall thou before the throne of God; thou
shall pray, and plead, and call, and cry, and beg again, and in the midst of
thy despairing noyses be carried in the regions of sorrow, which never did, and
never shall feel a mercy. God never can hear the prayers of an unmercifull man.

Lust and uncleanness is a direct enemy to the Praying man, and an obstruction
to his prayers; for this is not only a profanation, but a direct sacrilege;
it defiles a Temple to the ground; it takes from a man all affection to
spiritual things, and mingles his very soul with the things of the world; it
makes his understanding low, and his reasonings cheap and foolish, and it
destroys his confidence, and all his manly hopes; it makes his spirit light,
Moloch, or the rites of Flora, ubi Cato spectator esse non potuit, a good man
will not endure them, much less will God entertain such reekings of the Dead
sea and clouds of Sodom. For so an impure vapor begotten of the slime of the
earth, by the fevers and adulterous heats of an intemperate Summer sun,
striving by the ladder of a mountain to climb up to heaven, and rolling into
various figures by an uneasy, unfixed revolution, and stopped at the middle
region of the air, being thrown from his pride and attempt of bitumen, and was
kindled in the dishonorable regions below, derived from hell, and contrary to
God, it cannot pass forth to the element of love, but ends in barrenness and
murmur, fantastic expectations, and trifling imaginative confidences, and they
at last end in sorrows and despair. in brimstone and fire, but never in
forgiveness, and the blessings of an eternal charity.

Henceforth therefore, never any more wonder that men pray so seldom; there
are few that feel the relish, and are enticed with the deliciousness, and
refreshed with the comforts, and instructed with the sanctity, and acquainted
with the secrets of a holy prayer: But cease also to wonder, that of those few
that say many prayers, so few find any return of any at all. To make up a good
and a lawful prayer there must be charity, with alms, forgiveness, not
judging uncharitably; there must be purity of spirit, that is, purity of
intention; and there must be purity of the body and soul, that is, the
cleanness of chastity; and there must be no vice remaining, no affection to
sin: for he that brings his body to God, and has left his will in the power of
any sin, offers to God the calves of his lips, but not a whole burnt-offering;
a lame oblation, but not a reasonable sacrifice; and therefore their portion
shall be amongst them whose prayers were never recorded in the book of life,
whose tears God never put into his bottle, whose for by them you hope to have
eternal life; and let any of you whose conscience is most religious and
tender, consider what condition that man is in, that has not said his prayers
in thirty or forty years together; and that is the true state of him who has
lived so long in the course of an unsanctified life; in all that while he never
said one prayer that did him any good; but they ought to be reckoned to him
upon the account of his sins. He that is in the affection, or in the habit, or
in the state of any one sin whatsoever, is from and contrariety to God, that he
provokes God to anger in every prayer he makes: And then add but this
consideration; that prayer is the great sum of our Religion, it is the
effect, and the exercise, and the beginning, and the promoter of all graces,
and the consummation and perfection of many; and all those persons who pretend
toward heaven, and yet are not experienced in the secrets of Religion, they
reckon their piety, and account their hopes, only upon the stock of a few
prayers; it may be they pray twice every day, it may be thrice, and blessed be
God for it; so far is very life we cannot in any sense be happy, or have the
effect of one returning and repenting sinners, God delights to hear, because he
delights to save us:

-- Si precibus, dixerunt, numina justis
Victa remollescunt --
When a man is holy, then God is gracious, and a holy life is the best, and it
is a continual prayer; and repentance is the best argument to move God to
mercy, because it is the instrument to unite our prayers to the intercession of
the Holy

SERMON, V. Part II.
The fat upon earth eat and worship: But if these men ask things hurtful and
Psalm. 22. 29.
Saul did to his Armor-bearer, Sta super me and interfice me, stand upon me
and kill me; and he that obeyed his voice did him dishonor and sinned against
the head of his King, and his own life. And the vicious persons of old prayed
to Laverna,

-- Pulchra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
the Spirit of holiness, and he that prays with the Spirit must be made like
to the Spirit, he is first sanctified and made holy, and then made fervent, and
then his prayer ascends beyond the cloud; first he is renewed in the spirit of
murderer, he has his Laverna too, by which all his desires are guided,
praecentor or the rector chori the it is anger, if it descends upon good men,
it is a curse, if upon evil men, it is a sin, and then it is a present curse,
and leads on to an eternal infelicity. Plutarch reports that the Tyrians tied
their gods with chains, because certain persons did dream that Apollo said he
would leave their City, and go to the party of Alexander, who then besieged the
town: and Apollodorus tells of some that tied the image of Saturn with bands of
wool upon his feet. So are some Christians; they think God is tied to their
sect, and bound to be of their side and the interest Nero's Mother prayed
passionately that her son might be Emperor; and many persons of James speaks,
pray to spend upon their lusts, and they are heard too: some were not; and very
many are: and some that fight against a just possessor of a country pray that
their wars may be prosperous, and sometimes they have been heard too: and
Julian the Apostate prayed, and sacrificed, and inquired of Demons, and burned
man's flesh, and operated with secret rites, and all that he might craftily and
powerfully oppose the religion of Christ, and he was heard too, and did
mischief beyond the malice and effect of his predecessors, that did swim in
Christian blood: but when we sum up the accounts at the foot of their lives, or
so soon as the thing Agrippina's prayer was, that her son murdered her; and of
those lustful petitioners, in St. James, that they were given over to the
tyranny and possession of their passions, and baser appetites; and the effect
of Julian the Apostate's prayer was, that he lived and died a professed enemy
of Christ; and the effect of the prayers of usurpers is, that they do mischief,
and reap curses, and undo mankind, and provoke God, and live hated, and die
miserable, and shall possess the fruit of their sin to eternal ages; these
will be no objections to the truth of the former discourse, but greater
instances, that if by hearing our prayers we mean, or intend a blessing, we
must also by making prayers mean, that the man first be holy and his desires
just and charitable, before he can be admitted to the throne of grace, or
converse with God by the entercourses of a prosperous prayer.

That Is the first general. 2. Many times good men pray, and their prayer is
not a sin, but yet it returns empty; because although the man be, yet the
prayer is not in proper disposition; and here I am to account to you concerning
the collateral and accidental hindrances of the prayer of a good man.

The first thing that hinders the prayers of a good man from obtaining and
often hindered, and never hasty, and is full of mercy; prayer Jesus, and smooth
like the heart of God; and then it ascends to heaven upon the wings of the holy
dove, and dwells with God till it returns like the useful Be, laden with a
blessing and the dew of heaven.

But besides this; anger is a combination of many other things every one of
which is an enemy to prayer; it is (...), and (...) and (...), and it is (...),
and it is (...), and it is (...), and (...), so it is in the several
definitions of it, and in its natural constitution. It has sorrow, and the
heats of lust, and the disease of revenge, and the boylings of a fever, and
the rashness of praecipitancy, and the disturbance of persecution; and
therefore is a certain effective enemy against prayer which ought to be a
spiritual joy, and an act of mortification; and to have in it no heats but of
charity Paul gave caution, that the sun should not go down upon our anger,
meaning, that it should not stay upon us till evening prayer; for it would
hinder our evening sacrifice; but the stopping of the first egressions of
anger, is a certain artifice of the Spirit of God to prevent unmercifulness,
which turns not only our desires into vanity, but our prayers into sin; and
remember that Elijah's anger, though it was also zeal, had so discomposed his
spirit when the two Kings came to inquire of the Lord, that could not inquire
of the Lord, till by rest and music he had gathered himself into the evennesse
of a dispassionate and recollected mind; therefore let your prayers be without
wrath. (...), for God by many significations has taught us, that when men go
to the altars to pray, or to give thanks, they must bring no sin, or violent
passion along with them to the sacrifice, said Philo.

2. Indifferency and easiness of desire is a great enemy to the success Plato
gave Diogenes a great vessel of Wine who asked but a little, and a few
Carrawaies, the Cynic thanked him with his rude expression; Cum interrogaris
quot sint duo and duo, respondes viginti; ita non secundum ea quae rogaris das,
nec ad ea quae interrogaris respondes: Thou neither answerest to the question
thou art asked, nor give according as thou art desired; but being inquired
of, how many are two and two, thou answerest twenty. So it is with God and us
in the intercourse of our prayers: we pray for health, and he gives it us, it
may be, a sickness that carries us to eternal life; we pray for necessary
indifferency and lukewarmnesse; which although it has not in See 2. Sermon of
lukewarmnesse and zeal.
lukewarmnesse or an indifferent spirit is an undervaluing of God and of
Religion, it is a separation of reason from affections, and a perfect
conviction of the understanding to the goodness of lukewarm always
understands the better way, and seldom pursues it; he has so much reason as
is sufficient, but he will not obey it; his will does not follow the dictate of
his understanding, and therefore it is unnatural. It is like the fantastic
fires of the night, where there is light and no heat, and therefore may pass
on to the real fires of hell, where there is heat and no light; and therefore
although an act of lukewarmnesse is only an undecency, and no sin; yet a state
of lukewarmnesse is criminal, and sinful state of imperfection and undecency;
an act of indifferency hinders a single prayer a state of it makes the person
ungracious and despised in the Court of heaven: and therefore S. James in his
accounts concerning an effective prayer, not only requires that he be a just
man who prays, but his prayer must be fervent; (...), an effectual fervent
prayer, so our English reads it; it must be an intent, zealous, busy,
operative prayer; for consider what a huge undeceney it is, that a man should
speak to God for a thing that he values not; or that he should not value a
thing, without which he cannot be happy; or that he should spend his religion
upon a trifle; and if it be not a trifle, that he should not spend Qui comedit
quod fuit and quod non fuit, he eat all and more then all, what was set before
him, and what was kept from him. But then for spiritual things, for the
interest of our souls, and the affairs of the Kingdom, we pray to God with
just such a zeal as a man begs of the Surgeon to cut him of the stone; or a
condemned man desires his executioner quickly to put him out of his pain, by
taking away his life; when things are come to that pass, it must be done, but
God knows with what little complacency and desire, the man makes his request:
And yet the things of religion and the spirit, are the only things that ought
to be desired vehemently, and pursued passionately, Indian hills.

He that is cold and tame in his prayers, has not tasted of the deliciousness
of Religion, and the goodness of God; he is a stranger to the secrets of the
Kingdom, and therefore he does not know what it is either to have hunger or
satiety; and therefore neither are I cried day and night before thee, O Lord;
my soul refused comfort; my throat is dry with calling upon my God, my knees
are weak through fasting; and, Let me alone, says God to Moses; and, I will
not let thee go till thou have blessed me, said Jacob to the Angel. And I
shall tell you a short character of a fervent prayer out of the practice of S.
Hierome, in his Epistle to Eustochium de custodia virginitatis. Being destitute
of all help I threw my self down at the feet of Jesus; I watered his feet with
tears, and wiped them with my hair, and mortified the lust of my flesh with the
abstinence and sang to God, We will run after thee into the smell and
deliciousness of thy precious ointments; such a prayer as this will never
return without its errand. But though your person be as gracious as David or
Job, and your desire as holy as the love of Angels, and your necessities great
as a new penitent, yet it pie^ces not the clouds, unless it be also as loud as
thunder, passionate as the cries of women, and clamorous as necessity. And we
may guess at the degrees of importunity by the insinuation of the Apostle: Let
the married abstain for a time, ut vacent orationi and jejunio, that they may
attend to Prayer; it is a great attendance, and a long diligence that is
promoted by such a separation; and supposes a devotion that tawny face of an
Indian slave: and when in order to your hopes of obtaining a great blessing,
you reckon up your prayers with which you have solicited Christ prayed (...)
with loud cryings, and S. Paul made mention of his scholars in his prayers
night and day. Fall upon your knees and grow there, and let not your desires
cool, nor your zeal remit, but renew it again and again, and let not your
offices and the custom of praying put thee in mind of thy how great a God, how
glorious a Majesty you speak to, therefore let not your devotions and addresses
be little. Remember how great a need thou have; let not your desires be less.
Remember how great the thing is you pray for; do not undervalue it with thy
indifferency. Remember that prayer is an act of Religion; let it therefore be
made thy business: and lastly, Remember that God hates a cold prayer, and
therefore will never bless it, but it shall be always ineffectuall.

3. Under this title of lukewarmnesse and tepidity may be comprised also these
Cautions: that a good man's prayers are sometimes inadvertency, sometimes by
want of perseverance. For inadvertency or want of attendance to the sense and
intention of our prayers, it is certainly an effect of lukewarmnesse, and a
certain companion and appendage to humane infirmity; and is only so remedyed as
our prayers are made zealous, and our infirmities

But concerning perseverance, the consideration is something distinct. For when
our prayer is for a great matter, and a great necessity, strictly attended to,
yet we pursue it only by chance or humor, by the strengths of fancy, and
natural disposition; or else our choice is cool as soon as hot, like the
emissions of lightning, Simon Magus, or the trembling of Felix, or the Jews
devotion for seven days of unleavened bread, during the Passover or the feast
of Tabernacles; but if we would secure the blessing of our prayers, and the
effect of our prayers, we must never leave till we have obtained what we need.

There are many that pray against a temptation for a month together, and so
long as the prayer is fervent, so long the man Israel prevailed no longer then
Moses held up his hands in prayer; and he was forced to continue his prayer,
till the going down of the Sun; that is, till the danger was over, till the
battle was done. But when our desires, and prayers are in the matter of
spiritual danger, they must never be Vult n. Deus rogari, vult cogi, vult
quadam importunitate vinci (says S. Gregory) God loves to be invited,
entreated, importuned with an unquiet, restless desire and a persevering
prayer. (...), said Proclus. That Is a holy and a religious prayer, that never
gives over, but renewes the prayer, and dwells upon the desire; for this only is
effectual. (...), God hears the persevering man, and the unwearied prayer. For
it is very considerable, that we be very curious to observe; that many times a
lust is sopita, non mortua, it is asleep; the enemy is at truce, and at quiet
for a while, but not conquered, not dead; and if we put off our armor too
soon, we lose all the benefit of our former war, and are surprised by
indiligence and a careless guard. For God sometimes binds the Devil in a
short chain, and gives his servants respite, that they may feel the short
pleasures of a peace, and the rest of innocence, and perceive what are the
eternal felicities of heaven, where it shall be so for ever; But then we must
return to our warfare again; and every second affault is more troublesome,
because it finds our spirits at ease, and without watchfulness, and delighted
with a spiritual rest, and watch thereunto with prayer and continual
diligence. And when your temptations let you alone, let not you God alone; but
lay up prayers and the blessings of a constant devotion against the day of
trial. Well may your temptation sleep, but if your prayers do so, you may
chance to be awakened with an affault that may ruin you. However, the

4. The prayers of a good man are oftentimes hindered, and destitute of their
effect for want of praying in good company; for sometimes an evil or an
obnoxious person has so secured and ascertained a mischief to himself, that he
that stays in his company or his traffic Tyrian sailers with all their vows
and prayers could not obtain a prosperous voyage so long as Jonas was within
the Bark; for in this case the interest is divided, and the public sin
prevails above the private piety. When the Philosopher asked a penny of
Antigonus, he told him it was too little for a King to give; when he asked a
talent, he told him it was too much for a Philosopher to receive; for he did
purpose to cosen his own charity, and clude the others necessity, upon
pretense of a double inequality. So it is in the case of a good man mingled in
evil company: if a curse be too severe for a good man, Absalom in the
simplicity of their heart, yet his intermediall fortune, and the event of his
present affairs may be the same with Absaloms; and it is not a light thing,
that we curiously choose the parties of our Communion. I do not say it is
necessary to avoid all the society of evil we must go out of the world; and
when we have thrown out a drunkard, possibly we have entertained an hypocrite;
or when a swearer is gone, an oppressor may stay still; or if that be remedied,
yet pride is soon discernible, but not easily judicable: but that which is of
caution in this question is, that we never mingle with those, whose very
combination is a sin; such as were Corah and his company that rebelled against
Moses their Prince; and Dathan and Abiram that made a schism in Religion
against Aaron the Priest: for so said the Spirit of the Lord, Come out from the
congregation of these men, lest ye perish in their company; and all perish in
the gainsaying of Corah. It is a sad thing to see a good man cousened by fair
pretenses, and allured into an evil snare; for besides, that he dwells in
danger, and cohabits with a dragon, and his virtue may change by evil
persuasion, into an evil disposition, from sweetness to bitterness, from
thence to evil speaking, from thence to believe a lie, and from believing to
practice it; besides this, it is a very great sadness, that such a man should
lose all his prayers to very many purposes: God will not respect the offering
of those men who assemble by a peevish spirit; and therefore although God in
pity regards keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, we cannot have
the blessing of the Spirit in the returns of a holy prayer; and all those
assemblies which meet together against God or Gods Ordinances, may pray and
call, and cry loudly, and frequently, and still they provoke God to anger; and
many times he holy assembly, that is, holy in their desires, lawful in their
authority, though the persons be of different complexion, then the prayer flies
up to God like the hymns of a Quire of Angels; for God that made body and soul
to be one man, and God and man to be one Christ, and three persons are one God,
and his praises are sung to him by Quires, and the persons are joined in
orders, and the orders into hierarchies, and all, that God may be served by
unions and communities, loves

The sum is this, If the man that makes the prayer be an unholy person, his
prayer is not the instrument of a blessing, but a curse; but when the sinner
begins to repent truly, then his desires begin to be holy. But if they be holy,
and just, and good, yet they are without profit and effect, if the prayer be
made in schism, or an Laelius (apud Cicer. de senectute) said concerning old
age, neque in summa inopia levis esse senectus potest, ne sapienti quidem, nec
insipienti etiam in summa copia non gravis; that a wise man could not bear old
age if it were extremely poor; and yet if it were very rich, it were
intolerable to a fool; we may say concerning our prayers; they are sins and
unholy, if a wicked man makes them, and yet if they be made by a good man they
are ineffective, unless they be improved by their proper dispositions. A good
man cannot prevail in his prayers, if his desires be cold, and his affections
trifling, and his industry soon weary, and his society criminal; and if all
these appendages of prayer be observed, yet they will do no good to an evil
man, for his prayer that begins in sin, shall end in sorrow.

SERMON, VI. Part, III.
with probable effect; for when the event principally depends upon that which
is not within our own election, such as are the lives and actions of others,
all that we can consider in this affair is, whether we be persons fit to pray
in the behalf of others that hinder not, but are persons within the limit
Maximinus was smitten with the wrath of God, and a sore disease for his cruel
persecuting the Christian cause, and putting so many thousand innocent and holy
persons to death, and he understood the voice of God and the accents of
thunder, and discerned that cruelty was the cause, he revoked their decrees
made against the Christians, recalled them from their caves and deserts, their
sanctuaries, and retirements, and enjoined them to pray for the life and health
of their Prince. They did so, and they who could command mountains to remove,
and were obeyed, they who could womb and the grave, of providence and rain,
could not obtain for their bloody Emperor one drop of mercy, but he must die
miserable for ever. God would not be entreated for him, and though he loved the
prayer because he loved the Advocates, yet Maximinus was not worthy to receive
the blessing. And it was threatened to the rebellious people of Israel, and by
them to all people that should sin grievously against the Lord, God would break
their staff of bread, and even the righteous should not be prevailing
intercessors; Though Noah, Job, or Daniel Ezekiel. 14. 14.
were there, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
says the Lord God: and when Abraham prevailed very far with God in the behalf
of Sodom, and the five Cities of the Plain; it had its period; If there had
been ten righteous in Sodom it should have been spared for their sakes, but
four only were found, and they only delivered their own souls too; but
neither their righteousness, nor Abraham's prayer prevailed any further; and we
If any man 1 Ioh. 5. 16.
see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask and he shall
give him life for them that sin not unto death. At his prayer the sinner shall
receive pardon; God shall give him life for them, to him that prays in their
behalf that sin; provided it be not a sin unto death. For there is a sin unto
death, but I do not say that he shall pray for it. There his Commission
expires, and his power is confined. For there are some sins of that state and
greatness that God will not pardon. S. Austin in his books de sermon Domini
in monte affirms it, concerning some one single sin of a perfect malice. Origin
and Athanasius, and is followed by venerable Bede; and whether the Apostle
means a peculiar state of sin, or some one single great crime which also
supposes a precedent and a present state of criminal condition; it is such a
thing as will hinder our prayers from prevailing in their behalf; we are
therefore not encouraged to pray, because they cannot receive the benefit of
Christ's intercession, and therefore much less of our Advocation, which only
can prevail by virtue and participation of his mediation. For whomsoever Christ
prays, for them we pray, that is, for all them that are within the covenant of
repentance, sorrow, or restitution, or recompense, or acknowledgment. However,
though it may be uncertain and disputed concerning the number of sins unto
death, and therefore to pray, or not to pray, is not matter of duty; yet it is
all one, as to the effect, whether we know them or no; for though we intend
charity when we pray for the worst of men, yet concerning the event God will
take care, and will certainly John so expresses it as if he had left the matter
of duty undetermined; because the instances are uncertain; yet the event is
certainly none at all, therefore because we are not encouraged to pray, and
because it is a sin unto death, that is, such a sin that has no portion in the
promises of life, and the state of repentance. But now, suppose the man for
whom we pray to be capable of mercy, within the covenant of repentance, and
not far from the Kingdom of heaven; yet,

2ly. No prayers of others can further prevail then to remove this person to
the next stage in order to felicity. When S. Monica prayed for her son, she did
not pray to God to save him, but to co^vert him; and when God intended to
reward the prayers and alms of Cornelius, he did not do it by giving him a
Crown, but by sending an

of an extraordinary piety, they are apt to be intercessors for others. This
appears in the case of Job: When the Chap. 42. 7, 8.
wrath of God was kindled against Eliphaz, and his two friends, God commanded
them to offer a sacrifice, but my servant Job shall prey for you, for him will
I accept: and it was so in the case of the prevaricating Israelites; God was
full of indignation against them, and smote them, Then stood up Phinehas and
prayed, and the plague ceased. For this man was a good man, and the spirit of
an extraordinary Zimri and his fair Madianite. And it was a huge blessing that
was entailed upon the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; because they had
a great Religion, a great power with God, and their extraordinary did consist
especially in the matter of prayers and devotion; for that was eminent in them
besides their obedience: for so Maimonides tells concerning them, that Abraham
first instituted Morning prayer. The affairs of Religion had not the same
constitution then as now. They worshipped God never but at their Memorials, and
in places, and seldom times of separation. The bowed the top of their staff,
and worshipped when they came to a consecrated pillar, but this was seldom;
and they knew not the secrets and the privileges of a frequent prayer, of
intercourses with God by ejaculations, and the advantages of importunity: and
the Doctors of the Jews that record the prayer of Noah, who in all reason knew
the secret best, because he was to teach it to all the world, yet have
Abraham's family, there began to be a new institution of offices, and Abraham
appointed that God should be prayed to every morning. Isaac being taught by
Abraham, made a law, or at least commended the practice, and adopted it into
the Religion, that God should be worshipped by decimation or tithing of our
goods; and he added afternoon; and Jacob to make up the office complete added
evening prayer; and God was their God, and they became fit persons to bless,
that is, of procuring blessings to their relatives; as appears in the instances
of their own families; of the King of Egypt, and the Cities of the Plain. For a
man of an ordinary piety is like Gideons fleece, wet in its own locks; but it
could not water a poor man's Garden. But so does a thirsty land drink all the
dew of heaven that wets its face, and a great shower makes no torrent, nor digs
so much as a little furrow that the drils of the water might pass into rivers,
or refresh their neighbors Nilus.

But then do but consider what a great engagement this is to a very strict and
holy life. If we chance to live in times of an extraordinary trouble, or if our
relatives can be capable of great Semper tu hoc facito ut cogites, Id optimum
esse, tute ut sis optimus; si id nequeas, saltem ut optimis sis proximus. He
that is the best man toward God, is Elijah was taken into heaven, Elisha
mourned for him because it was a loss to Israel: My Father, my father, the
chariots of Israel and horsemen thereof: But consider how useless thou art,
when thou can not by thy prayers obtain so much mercy as to prevail for the
life of a single Trooper, or in a plague beg of God for the life of a poor
Maidservant;

And yet every man that is in the state of grace, every man that can pray
without a sinful prayer, may also intercede for others; and it is a duty for
all men to do it; all men I say who can pray at all acceptably; I will
therefore that prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men; and in the same degree in which his person is
gracious. There are strange things in heaven; judgments there are made of
things and persons by the measures of Religion; and a plain promise produces
effects of wonder and miracle; and the changes that are there made are not
effected by passions, and interests, and corporal changes, and the love that
is there is not the same thing that it is here, it is more beneficial, more
reasonable, more holy, of other designs, and strange productions; and upon
that stock it is that a holy poor man that possesses no more (it may be) then
an Ewe-lambe, that eats of his bread, and drinks of his cup, and is a daughter
to him, and is all his temporal portion, this poor man is ministered to by

2ly. That we should prevail in intercessions for others, we are to regard and
to take care, that as our piety, so also must our offices be extraordinary. He
that prays to recover a family from Mamercus Bishop of Vienna, seeing his City
and all the Diocese in great danger of perishing by an earthquake, instituted
great Letanies, and solemn supplications, besides the ordinary devotions of his
usual hours of prayer; and the Church from his example took up Mark's day did
solemnly intercede with God to divert or prevent his judgments falling upon the
people, majoribus Litani is, so they are called; with the more solemn
supplications they did pray unto God in behalf of their people. And this has
in it the same consideration that is in every great necessity; for it is a
great thing for a man to be so gracious with God, as to be able to prevail for
himself and his friend, for himself and his relatives; and therefore in these
cases, as in all great needs, it is the way of prudence and security, that we
use all those greater God never refuses to hear a holy prayer, and our prayers
can never be so holy, as when they are offered up in the union of Christ's
sacrifice: For then be their greatest needs, that is their greatest advantage,
and instrument of acceptance. Therefore if you have a great need to be served,
or a great charity to serve, and a great pity to minister, and a dear friend in
a sorrow, take Christ along in thy prayers, in all thy ways thou can take
him; take him in affection, and take him in a solemnity, take him by obedience
and receive him in the Sacrament; and if thou then offerest up thy prayers and
make thy needs known; if thou nor thy friend be not relieved, in time, or
thou may trust with God, who certainly does it with viz.

That in our importunity and extraordinary offices for others, we must not make
our accounts by multitude of words, and long prayers, but by the measures of
the Spirit, by the holiness of the soul, and the justness of the desire, and
the usefulness of the request, and its order to Gods glory, and its place in
the order of providence, and the sincerity of our heart, and the charity of our
wishes, and the perseverance of our advocation. There are some (as Tertullian
observes) qui loquacitatem facundiam existimant, at impudentiam constantiam
deputant; They are praters, and they are impudent, and they call that constancy
and importunity: concerning which the advice is easy: Many words or few are
extrinsecall to the nature, and not at all considered in the effects of prayer;
but much desire and much holiness, are essential to its constitution; but we
must be very curious that our importunity do not degenerate into impudence and
a rude boldness. Capitolinus said of Antonius the Emperor and Philosopher,
sane quamvis esset constans, erat etiam verecundus; he was modest even when he
was most pertinacious in his desires. So must we; though we must not be Rebus
semper pudor absit in arctis, and in this sense it is true that Stasimus in the
Comedy said concerning Meat, Verecundari neminem apud mensam decet, Nam ibi de
divinis and humanis cernitur: Men must not be bashful so as to lose their
meat; for that is a necessity that cannot be dispensed withal: so it is in
our prayers, whatsoever our necessity calls to us for, we must call to God for;
and he is not pleased with that rusticity or fond modesty of being ashamed to
ask of God any thing that is honest and necessary; yet our importunity has
also bounds of modesty, but such as are to be expressed with Distrust of our
selves: 2. Confidence in God: 3. Humility of person: 4. Reverence of address:
and 5. Submission to Gods will: These are all, unless also you will add that
of Solomon: Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to
Eccles. 5. 2.
utter a thing before God, for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore
let thy words be few. These things being observed, let your importunity be as
great as it can, it is still the more likely to prevail, by how much it is the
more earnest

3ly. The last great advantage toward a prevailing intercession for others,
is, that the person that prays for his relatives, be a person of an
extraordinary dignity, employment or designation. For God has appointed some
persons and callings of men to pray for others, such are Fathers for their
Children, Bishops for their Dioceses, Kings for their Subjects, and the whole
Order Ecclesiast call for all the men and women in the Christian Church. And it
is well it is so; for as things are now, and have been too long, how few are
there that understand it to be their duty, or part of members one of another,
or if we did not think it a spiritual word of art, isntrumental only to a
science, but no part of duty, or real relation, sure we should pray more
earnestly one for another then we usually do. How few of us are troubled when
he sees his brother wicked, or dishonorably vicious? Who is sad and melancholy
when his neighbor is almost in hell? when he sees him grow old in iniquity?
How many days have we set apart for the public relief and interests of the
Kingdom? How earnestly have we fasted, if our Prince be sick or afflicted?
when ever we can, and in all we can, set our hands to it; and if we pity the
Orphan children, and pray for them heartily, we would also, when we could,
relieve them and all their desires. That this God has ordained and appointed,
Abraham and Abimelech: Now therefore Genesis 20. 7.
restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and he will pray for thee, and
thou shall live; and this caused confidence in Micah: Now know I that the Lord
will do me good, seeing I have a Levite Judge. 17. 13.
to my Priest: meaning, that in his Ministry, in the Ministry of Priests, God
has established the alternate returns of blessing and prayers, the entercouses
between God and his people; Ministry of Reconciliation, by their dispensing
the holy Sacraments, by the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, by Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, by binding and loosing, by the Word of God and Prayer; and
therefore says St. James, If any man be sick among you, let James 5. 14.
him send for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him: meaning
that God has appointed them especially, and will accept them in ordinary, and
extraordinary; and this is that which is meant blessing. A Father blesses his
child, and Solomon blessed his people, and Melchisedec the Priest blessed
Abraham, and Moses blessed the Sons of Israel, and God appointed the bless the
congregation; and this is more then can be done by the people; for though they
can say the same prayer, and the People pray for their Kings, and Children for
their Parents, and the Flock for the Pastor, yet they cannot bless him as he
blesses them; for the less is blessed of the greater, and not the greater of
the less; and this is without all contradiction, said S. Paul: Heb. 7. 7.
the meaning of the mystery is this, That God has appointed the Priest to
pray for the People, and because he has made it to be his ordinary office and
employment, he also intends to be seen in that way which he has appointed, and
chalked out for us; his prayer, if it be found in the way of righteousness, is
the surer way to prevail in his intercessions for the people.

But upon this stock comes in the greatest difficulty of the text: for if God
hears not sinners, there is an infinite necessity that the Ministers of
Religion should be very holy: For all their ministeries consist in preaching
and praying; to these two are reducible, all the ministeries Ecclesiastical
which are of divine institution: so the But we will give our selves Act. 6. 4.
continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word; to exhort, to
reprove, to comfort, to cast down, to determine cases of conscience, and to
rule in the Church by the word of their proper Ministry; and the very making
laws Ecclesiastical, is the ministry prayer is reduced administration of the
Sacraments: but binding and loosing, and visitation of the sick are mixed
offices, partly relating to one, partly to the other. Now although the Word of
God preached, will have a great effect, even though it be preached by an evil
Minister, a vicious person, yet it is not so well there, as from a pious man;
because by prayer also his preaching is made effectual, and by his good
example his Homilies and Sermons are made active; and therefore it is very
necessary [The preaching of Word] he be a good man; unless he be, much
perishes to the people, most of the advantages are lost. But then for the other
half; all those ministeries which are by way of prayer are rendered extremely
invalid, and ineffectuall, if they be ministered by an evil person. For upon
this very stock it was that St. Cyprian affirmed that none were to be chosen to
the Ministry but immaculati and integri antistites, holy and upright men, who
offering their sacrifices worthily to God, and holily, may be heard in their
prayers which they make for the safety of the Lords people. But he presses Lib.
1. ep. 4.
necessary to choose holy persons to these holy Ministeries for fear of losing
the advantages of a sanctified Ministry; but also that the people may not be
guilty of an evil communion, and a criminal state of society. Nec enim sibi
plebs blandiatur quasi immunis a contagione delicti esse possit cum sacerdote
peccatore communicans, the people cannot be innocent if they communicate with a
vicious priest: for so said the Lord by the Prophet Hosea, Sacrificia eorum
panis luctus; their sacrifices are like bread of sorrow, whosoever eat thereof
shall be defiled. The same also he says often and more vehemently, ibid. and
lib. 4. ep. 2. But there is yet a further degree of this evil. It is not only
a loss, and also criminal to the people to communicate with a Minister of a
notorious evil life and scandalous, but it is affirmed by the Doctors of the
Church to be wholly without effect: their prayers are sins, their Sacraments
are null and ineffective, their communions are without consecration, their hand
is (...) a dead hand, the blessings vain, their sacrifices rejected, their
ordinations imperfect, their order is vanished, their character is
extinguished, and the holy Ghost will not descend upon the mysteries when he is
invocated by unholy hands and unsanctified lips. This is a sad story,
Dionysius, by St. Hierom upon the Ad Demo.
2. chapter of Zephaniah, affirming that they do wickedly who affirm
eucharistiam imprecantis facere verba, non vitam, and necessariam esse tantum
solennem orationem and non sacerdotum merita: that the Eucharist is consecrated
by the Word and solemn prayer, and not by the life and holiness of the Priest;
and by St. Gelasius 1. q. 1. c. sacrosancta.
by the Author of the imperfect work attributed to St. Chrysostom Homil. 53.
who Apostolical Constitutions for the same Doctrine; the words of which in
the first chapter are so plain that Bovius In scholiis ad hunc locum.
and Sixtus Senensis Lib. 6, A. D. 108. Biblioth.
accuse both the Author of the Apostolical Constitutions, and St. Hierom and
the Author of these Homilies to be guilty of the Doctrine of John Hus, who for
the crude delivery of this truth was sentenced by the council of Constance. To
the same sense and signification of Doctrine is that which is generally agreed
upon by almost all persons; that he that enters into his Ministry by Simony
receives nothing but a curse, which is expressly affirmed by Petrus Damiani Ep.
16. Biblioth. pp. tom. 3. 11. 19.
and Tarasius Decret. 1. q. 1. ad c. cos qui.
the Patriarch Constantinople, by St. Gregory Lib. 6. regist. 5. in decretis
and l. 7. c. 120.
, and St. Ambrose. De dignit. sacerd. c. 6.
.

For if the holy Ghost leaves polluted Temples and unchaste bodies, if he takes
away his grace from them that abuse it, if the holy Ghost would not have
descended upon Simon Magus at the prayer of St. Peter, if St. Peter had taken
money for him: it is but reasonable to believe the holy Ghost will not descend
upon the simoniacall, unchaste Concubinaries, Schismatics and scandalous
Priests, and excommunicate. And beside the reasonableness of the Doctrine, it
is also further affirmed by the council of Neocaesarea, by St. Can. 9. orat.
4. de sacerd.
Chrysostom, 1. in ep. 20. hom. 1. part. 2. ep. 27.
Innocentius, Ep. 9. tom. 3 ad Michael. imperator. d. in 4 did. 13.
Nicolaus the first, and by the Master Malachic. 1. Maledicam benedictionibus
vestris, I will curse your blessings; upon the stock of these Scriptures,
reasons, and authorities, we may see how we are to understand this advantage of
intercession. The prayer and offices of holy Ministers are of great advantages
for the interest of the people; but if they be ministered to by evil men, by
vicious, and scandalous Ministers, this extraordinary advantage is lost, they
are left to stand alone, or to fall by their own crimes; so much as is the
action of God, and so much as is the piety of the man that attends and prays
in the holy place with the Priest, so Quoniam me peccatorem inter te and eundem
populum Medium esse voluisti, licet in me boni operis testimonium non agnoscas,
officium dispensationiis creditae non recuses, nec per me indignum famulum tuum
eorum salutis pereat pretium, pro quibus victima factus salutaris, dignatus es
fieri redemptio. For we must know that God has not put the salvation of any
man into the power of another. And although the Church of Rome by calling the
Priests actual intention simply necessary, and the Sacraments also
indispensably a fellowworker with God in the work of his salvation; and as in
our devotion, no one prayer of our own alone prevails upon God for grace and
salvation, but all the devotions of our life are upon Gods account for them; so
is the blessing of God brought upon the people by all the parts of their
religion, and by all assistances of holy people, and by the ministeries not of
one, but of all Gods persons of a great piety, of a holy calling, and by the
most solemn offices.

Lastly, I promised to consider concerning the signs of having our prayers
heard; concerning which, there is not much of particular observation; but if
our prayers be according to the warrant the thing signified; when we feel the
effect, then we are sure God has heard us; but till then we are to leave it
with God, and not to ask a sign of that, for which he has made us a promise.
And yet Cassian has named one sign, which if you give me leave I will name
unto you. It is a sign we shall prevail in our Collat. 9. cap. 32.
prayers, when the Spirit of God moves us to pray, cum fiducia and quasi
securitate impetrandi, with a confidence and a holy security of receiving not
lawful, has made an unholy prayer; if it be lawful and not profitable, we
are then heard when God denies us; and if both these he that doubts is a
sinner, and then God will not hear him; but beyond this I know no confidence is
warrantable; and if this be a sign of prevailing, then all the prudent prayers
of all holy men shall certainly be heard, and because that is certain, we need
no further inquiry into signs.

I sum up all in the words of God by the Prophet: Run Ierem. 5. 1.
to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see, and know, and seek in the
broad places thereof, if you can find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment, that seeks truth, virum quaerentem fidem, a man that seeks for
faith, and propitius ero ei, and I will pardon it. God would pardon all
Jerusalem for one good man's sake; there are such days and opportunities of
mercy when God at the prayer of one holy person will save a people; and
Ruffinus spoke a great thing, but it was hugely true: Quis dubitet mundum stare
precibus sanctorum? the world it self is established and kept from dissolution
by the prayers of Saints; and the prayers of Saints shall hasten the day of
Judgment; and we cannot easily find two effects greater. But there are many
other very great ones; for the prayers of holy men appease Gods wrath, drive
away temptations, resist and overcome the Devil: Holy prayer procures the
ministry and Prayer that can do thus much for us, can do nothing at all
without holiness; for God hears not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper
of God and does his will, him he hears.

Sermon, VII. Of godly Fear, etc. Part I.
Heb. 12. part of the 28th. and the 29th. verses. Let us have Grace whereby we
may serve God with reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming fire.
E (...), so our Testaments usually read it from the authority of Theophylact;
Let us have grace: But some copies read it in the indicative mood (...), we
have grace, by which we do serve; and it is something better consonant to the
discourse of the Apostle. For having enumerated the great advantages which the
Gospel a majori; and answers a tacit objection. The Law was delivered by
Angels, but the Gospel by the Son of God: The Law was delivered from Mount
Sinai, the Gospel from Mount Sion, from the heavenly Jerusalem: The Law was
given with terrors and noises, with amazements of the standers by, and Moses
himself the Minister did exceedingly quake and fear, and gave demonstration how
infinitely dangerous it was by breaking that Law to provoke so mighty a God,
who with his voice did shake the earth; but the Gospel was given by a meek
Prince, a gentle Savior, with a still voice, See that ye refuse not him that
speaks, for if they escaped not Verse. 25.
who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn
away from him that speaks from heaven: for as God Haggai, 2. 7.
which the Apostle quotes here, he once shook the earth. But, once more I
shake, (...), it is in the Prophecy; I will shake not the earth only, but also
heaven with a greater terror then was upon Mount Sinai, with the voice of an
Archangell, with the trump of God, with a concussion so great, that heaven and
earth shall be shaken in pieces, and new ones come in their room. This is an
unspeakable and an unimaginable terror: Mount Sinai was shaken, but it stands
to this day, but the things that are shaken shall be no more; that those things
that cannot be shaken may remain, that is, not only that the clestiall
Jerusalem may remain for ever, but that you who do not turn away from the faith
and obedience of the Lord Jesus, you who cannot be shaken nor removed from your
duty, you may remain for ever; that when the rocks rend, and the mountains fly
in pieces like the drops of a broken cloud, and the heavens shall melt, and the
Sun shall be a globe of consuming fire, and the Moon shall be dark like an
extinguished candle, then you poor men who could be made to tremble with an
ague, or shake by Moses: Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
as it was then, so it is true now, Our God is a consuming fire: He was so to
them that brake the Law, but he will be much more to them that disobey his Son,
he made great changes then, but those which remain are far greater, and his
terrors are infinitely more intolerable; and therefore although he came not in
the spirit of Elias, but with meekness and gentle insinuations, soft as the
breath of heaven, not willing to disturb the softest stalk of a violet, yet his
second coming shall be with terrors, such as shall amaze all the world, and
dissolve it into ruin, and a Chaos. This truth is of so we therefore have
grace, that is, we have such a motive to make us reverence God and fear to
offend him, that he hypothesi, and in his own ruin, which the Apostle declares
in thesi, and by way of caution, and provisior ary terror, Our God is a
consuming fire; this is the sense and design of the text.

Reverence and godly fear, they are the effects of this consideration, they are
the duties of every Christian, they are the grace of God. I shall not press
them only to purposes of awfulnesse and reverence and godly fear, are therefore
to be avoided because they are condemned in this advice of the Apostle, and are
destructive of those effects which are to be imprinted upon our spirits by the
terrors of the day of Judgment. But this fear and reverence the Apostle
intends should be a deletery to all sin whatsoever: (...), says the
Etymologicum, whatsoever is terrible is destructive of that thing for which it
is so; and if we fear the evil effects of sin, let us fly from it, we ought
to fear its alluring face too; let us be so afraid, that we may not dare to
refuse to hear him whose Throne is heaven, whose Voice he is a consuming fire,
that is, dwell in the everlasting burnings.

(...), Reverence and caution, modesty and fear, (...) (...), so it is in some
copies, with caution and fear; or if we render Hesychius (...), then the
expression is the same in both words, and it is all one with the other places
of Scripture, Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, degrees of the
same duty, and they signify all those actions and graces which are the proper
effluxes of fear; such as are reverence, prudence, caution, and diligence,
chastity and a sober spirit: (...), so also say the Grammarians; and it means
plainly this; since our God will appear so terrible at his second coming, let
us pass the time of our sojourning 1 Pet. 1. 17.
here in fear, that is, modestly without too great confidence of our selves;
soberly without bold crimes, which when a man acts he must put on
shamelessness; reverently toward God, as fearing to offend him; diligently
observing his commandments, inquiring after his will, trembling at his voice,
attending to his Word, revering his judgments, fearing to provoke him to
anger, for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
Thus far it is a duty.

Concerning which, that I may proceed orderly, I shall first consider how far
fear is a duty of Christian Religion. 2. Who

1. Fear is taken sometimes in holy Scripture for the whole duty of man, for
his whole Religion toward God. And now Israel what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
God, etc. fear is obedience, and fear is love, and fear is humility, because
it is the parent of all these, and is taken for the whole duty to which it is
an introduction. The fear of the Lord is the beginning Psalm. 111. 10.
of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do thereafter, Eccles. 12.
13.
the praise of it endures for ever; and, Fear God and keep his 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man: and thus it is also used in
the New Testament: Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. 2. Fear is sometimes taken
for worship: for so our blessed Savior expounds the words of Moses in Mat. 4.
10. taken from Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, so Moses; Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, said our blessed
Savior: and so it was used by the Prophet Jonah, I am an Hebrew, and I fear
the Jonah 1. 9.
Lord the God of Heaven, that is, I worship him; he is the Deity that I adore,
that is my worship and my Religion; and because the new Colony of Assyrians did
not do so, at the beginning of 2 King. 17. 25.
their dwelling there, they feared not the Lord, that is, they worshipped other
Gods, and not the God of Israel, therefore God fear is not a distinct duty, but
a word signifying something besides it self; and therefore cannot come into the
consideration of this text. Therefore 3. Fear as it is a religious passion is
divided as the two Testaments are; and relates to the old and new Covenant, and
accordingly has its distinction. In the Law, God used his people like
servants; in the Gospel, he has made us to be sons. In the Law he enjoined
many things, hard, intricate, various, painful, and expensive; in the Gospel
he gave commandments, not hard, but full of pleasure, necessary and profitable
to our life, and well being of single In the Law, he has exacted those many
precepts by the covenant of exact measures, grains and scruples; in the Gospel,
he makes abatement for humane infirmities, temptations, moral necessities,
mistakes, errors, for every thing that is pitiable, for every thing that is not
malicious, and voluntary. In the Law, there are many threatenings, and but few
promises, the promise of temporal prosperities branched into single instances;
in the Gospel, there are but few threatenings, and many promises: And when God
by Moses gave the 10 Commandments, only one of them was sent out with a
promise, the precept of obedience to all our parents and superiors; grace is
opposed to the Law. So that upon these differing interests, the world Mat. 5.
ad v. 10. Ioh. 1. 17. Romans 6. 14, 15.
put on the affections of Servants, and Sons: They of old feared God as a
severe Lord, much in his commands, abundant in threatenings, angry in his
executions, terrible in his name, in his Majesty, and appearance, dreadful
unto death; and this the Apostle calls (...), The spirit of bondage, or of a
servant. But we have not Romans 6. 15.
received that Spirit, (...), unto fear, not a servile fear, but the Spirit of
adoption and a filial fear we must have; God treats us like sons, he keeps us
under discipline, but designs us to the inheritance: and his government is
paternall, his disciplines are merciful, his conduct gentle, his Son is our
Brother, and our Brother is our Lord, and our Judge is our Advocate, and our
Priest has felt our infirmities, and therefore knows to pity them, and he is
our Lord, and therefore he can relieve them: and from hence we have affections
of sons; so that a fear we must not have, and yet a fear we must have; and by
these proportions we understand the difference. Malo vereri quam timeri me a
meis, said one in the Comedy, I had rather Romans 8. 15. he calls (...), 2 Timothy 1.
7. The spirit of bondage is the spirit rather of timorousness, of fearfulness
rather then fear; when we are fearful that God will use us harshly; or when we
think of the accidents that happen, worse then the things are, when they are
proportioned by Aristotle, Good men are guided by reverence, not by fear, and
they avoid not that which is afflictive, but that which is dishonest: they are
not so good whose rule is otherwise. But that we may take more exact measures,
I shall describe the proportions of Christian or godly fear by the following
propositions.

1. Godly fear is ever without despair; because Christian fear is an instrument
of duty, and that duty without hope can never go forward. Nausiclides (...);
has neither spring nor harvest, friends nor children, rewards nor hopes? A man
will very hardly be brought to deny his own pleasing appetite, when for so
doing he cannot hope to have a recompense; when the mind of a man is between
hope and fear, it is intent upon its work; at post quam adempta spes est,
lassus, cura confectus stupet, if you take away the hope the mind is weary,
spent with care, hindered by amazements; aut aliquem sumpserimus temeraria in
Deos desperatione, says Arnobius; a despair of mercy makes men to despise God;
and the damned in hell when they shall for Dionysius the Tyrant imposed
intolerable tributes upon his Sicilian subjects, it amazed them, and they
petitioned and cried for help, and flattered him, and feared and obeyed him
carefully, but he imposed still new ones, and greater, and at last left them
poor as the valleys of Vesuvius, or the top of Aetna; but then all being gone,
the people grew idle, and careless, and walked in the markets, and public
places, cursing the Tyrant, and bitterly scoffing his person and vices;
Dionysius heard, he caused his Publicans and Committees to withdraw their
impost; for now, says he, they are dangerous, because they are desperate,
(...). when men have nothing left they will despise their Rulers: and so it is
in Religion; audaces cogimur essemetu. If our fears be unreasonable, our
diligence is none at all, and from whom we hope for nothing, neither benefit
nor indemnity, we despise his command and break his yoke, and trample it under
our most miserable feet. And therefore Aeschylus calls these people (...), hot,
mad, and furious, careless of what they do, and he opposes them to pious and
holy

2. Godly fear must always be with honorable opinion of God, without
disparagements of his mercies, without quarrellings at the intrigues of his
providence, or the rough ways of his Justice, and therefore it must be ever
relative to our selves and our own failings and imperfections. (...), God never
walks perversely toward us, unless we walk crookedly toward him. And
therefore persons that only consider the greatness and power of God, and dwell
for ever in the meditations of those severe Saepius illud cogitant quid possit
is cujus in ditione sunt, quam quid debeat facere (Cicero pro Quinctio) they
remember oftener what God can do then what he will; being more afrighted at his
Judgments, then delighted with his mercy. Such as were the Lacedaemonians,
when ever they saw a man grow popu^ar, or wise, or beloved, and by consequence
powerful, they turned him out of the country: and because they were afraid of
Ismenias, and knew that Pelopidas and Pherenicus and Androclydes could hurt
them, if they listed, they banished them from Sparta, but they let Epaminondas
alone, (...), as being studious and therefore unactive, and poor and therefore
harmless; It is harder when men use God thus, and fear him as the great
Justiciar of the world, who sits in heaven, and observes all we do, and cannot
want excuse to punish all mankind. But this caution I have now inserted for
their sakes whose Schools and Pulpits raise doctrinall fears concerning God,
which if they were true, the greatest part of mankind would be tempted
Heresy; that think God will exact the duties of a man by the measures of an
Angel, or will not make abatement for all our pitiable infirmities. The
precepts of this caution are, that we remember Gods mercy to be over all his
works, that is, that he shows mercy to all his creatures that need it; that
God delights to have his mercy magnified in all

3ly. Godly fear is operative, diligent, and isntrumental to caution and
strict walking: for so fear is the mother of holy living; and the Apostle urges
it by way of upbraiding: What! do we 1 Cor. 10. 22.
provoke God to anger? are we stronger then he? meaning, that if reverent and
obedient: but that fear is unreasonable, servile, and unchristian, that ends in
bondage and servile affections, humble and devout prayers, and a strict and a
holy piety, (according to his laws) and glorifications of God, or speaking good
things of his holy Name; and then it cannot be amiss: we must be full of
confidence toward God, we must with cheerfulness rely upon Gods goodness
for the issue of our souls, and our final interest, but this expectation of
the Divine mercy must be in the ways of piety. Commit your selves 1 Pet. 4. 19
to God in well-doing as unto a faithful Creator. Alcibiades was too timorous,
who being called from banishment refused to We must, we may most safely trust
God with our souls; the stake is great, but the venture is none at all. For he
is our Creator, and he is faithful; he is our Redeemer, and he bought them at
a dear rate; he is our Lord, and they are his own; he prays for them to his
heavenly Father, an interested person. So that he is a Party, and an Advocate,
and a Judge too; and therefore there can be no greater security in the world on
Gods part: and this is our hope, and our confidence: but because we are but
earthen vessels, under a law, and assaulted by enemies, and endangered by
temptations, therefore party against us: And this brings me to the next part of
the consideration; Who and what states of men ought to fear, and for what
reasons? for as the former cautions did limit, so this will encourage; those
did direct, but this will exercise our godly Fear.

1. I shall not here insist upon the general reasons of fear, which concern
every man, though it be most certain, that every one has cause to fear, even
the most confident, and holy, because his way is dangerous and narrow,
troublesome and uneven, full Polynices said in Apud Eurip. in Phoenissis.
the Tragedy when he was unjustly thrown from his Fathers Kingdom, and
refused to treat of peace but with a sword in his hand, (...) every step is a
danger for a valiant man when he walks in his enemies country; and so it is
with us; we are espied by God, and observed by Angels, we are betrayed within,
and assaulted without, the Devil is our enemy, and we are fond of his
mischiefs; he is crafty, and we love to be abused; he is malicious, and we
are credulous; he is powerful, and we are weak; he is too

1t. Are those of whom the Apostle speaks, Let him that thinks he stands
take heed lest he fall. (...)) 1 Cor. 10. 12.
said the Greek proverb; In ordinary fish we shall never meet with thorns, and
spiny prickles: and in persons of an ordinary even course of life we find it
too often, that they have no checks of conscience, or sharp reflections upon
their conditions; they fall into no horrid crimes, and they think all is peace
round about them: But you must know, that as Grace is the improvement and
bettering of Nature, and Christian graces are the state of grace that is next
to sin; it inclines to evil and dwells with a temptation, its acts are
imperfect, and the man is within the Kingdom, but he dubiae jurisdictionis.
These men have cause to fear; These men seem to stand, but they reel indeed,
and decline toward danger and death. Let these men (says the Apostle) take
heed lest they fall, for they shake already; such are persons whom the
Scriptures call weak in faith. I do not mean new beginners in Religion, but
such who have dwelt long in its confines, and yet never enter into the heart of
the country; such whose faith is tempted, whose piety does not grow, such who
yield a little, people that do all that they can lawfully do, and study how
much is lawful, that they may lose nothing of a temporal They think they
stand, and so they do, upon one leg, that is, so long as they are untempted;
but when the Tempter comes, then they fall and bemoan themselves, that by
losing peace they lost their inheritance. There are a great many sorts of such
persons: some when they are full, are content, and rejoice in Gods providence,
but murmur and are amazed when they fall into poverty. They are chaste so long
as they are within the protection Dinah did her honor, by going into new
company. These men in these estates think they stand, but God knows they are
soon weary, and stand stiff as a Cane, which the heat of the Sirian star or
the flames of the Sun cannot bend; but one sigh of a Northern wind shakes them
into the tremblings of a palsy: In this the best advice is, that such persons
should watch their own infirmities, and see on which side they are most open,

2ly. They also have great reason to fear whose repentance is broken into
fragments, and is never a whole or entire change of life: I mean those that
resolve against a sin, and pray against it, and hate it in all the resolutions
of their understanding, till that unlucky period comes when their actions can
be reduced to an order or a method, to a rule or a certainty, that oftener hits
then fails, that sin is habitual; though it be the least habit, yet a habit it
is; every course, or order, or method of sin, every constant or periodicall
return, every return that can be regularly observed, or which a man can
foresee, or probably foretell, even then when he does not intend it, but prays
against it, every such sin That Repentance was to be but once after Baptism:
One Faith, one Lord, one Baptism; one Repentance; Heb. 6. 6. Heb. 10 26. 2
Pet. 2. 22.
all these the Scripture says; and it is true, if by repentance we mean the
entire of, and apostasy from his Religion, cannot be renewed again (as the
Apostle twice affirms in his Epistle to the Hebrews). But then, concerning this
state of Apostasy, when it happened in the case, not of Faith, but of Charity
and obedience, there were many fears and jealousies: they were therefore very
severe in their doctrines, lest men should fall into so evil a condition, they
enlarged their fear that they might be stricter in their duty; and generally
this they did believe, that every second repentance was Clemens Alexandr.
stromat. 2. (...), Those frequent and alternate repentances, that is,
repentances and sinnings interchangeably, differ not from the conditions of men
that are not within the covenant of grace, from them that are not believers,
(...), save only (says they do it more against their conscience then infidels
and unbeleevers; and therefore they do it with less honesty and excuse,
(...), I know not which is worse, either to sin knowingly or wilfully, or to
repent of our sin, and sin it over again. And the same severe doctrine is
delivered by Theodoret in his 12 book against the Greeks, so that the
repentance is every time to begin anew; and then let it be considered what
growth that repentance can make that is never above a week old, that is for
ever in its infancy, that is still in its birth, that never gets the dominion
over sin. These men, I say, ought to fear, lest God reject their persons, and
deride the folly of understanding is right and their will a slave, their reason
is for God and their affections for sin; these men (as the Apostles expression
is) walk not as wise but as fools: for we deride the folly of those men that
resolve upon the same thing a thousand times, and never keep one of those
resolutions. These men are vain and light, easy and effeminate, childish and
abused; these are they of whom our blessed Savior said those sad decretory
words, Many shall strive to enter in, and shall not be able.

SERMON, VIII. Part II.
after death comes judgment, a fearful and an intolerable judgment, it would
not have come to this pass, in which their present condition of affairs do
amaze them, and their sin has made them liable unto death, and that death is
the beginning of an eternal evil. In this case it is natural to fear; and if
men consider their condition, and know that all the felicity, and all the
security they can have, depends upon Gods mercy pardoning their sins, they
cannot choose but fear infinitely, if they have not reason to hope that their
sins are pardoned. * Now concerning this, men indeed have generally taken a
course to put this affair to a very speedy issue. God is merciful, and God
forgive me, and all is done: or it may be a few sighs, like the deep sobbings
of a man that is almost dead with laughter, that is, a trifling sorrow
returning upon a man after he is full of sin, and has pleased himself with
violence, and revolving only by a natural change from sin to sorrow, from
laughter to a groan, from sunshine to a cloudy day; or it may be the good man
has left some one sin quite, or some degrees of rectus in Cur^a, his sins are
pardoned, he was indeed in an evil condition, but now he is purged, he is
sanctified and clean. These things are very bad, but it is much worse that men
should continue in their sin, and grow old in it, and arrive at consirmation,
and the strength of habitual wickedness, and grow fond of it, and yet think
if they die, their account stands as fair in the eyes of Gods mercy, as St.
Peter's after his tears and sorrow. Our sins are not pardoned easily and
quickly; and the longer and the greater has been the iniquity, the harder and
more difficult and uncertain is the pardon; it is a great so to pardon. For
pardon stands no where but at the gates of heaven. It is a great mercy that
signifies a final and universal acquittance. God sends it out in little
scroles, and excuses you from falling by the sword of the enemy, or the secret
stroke of an Angel in the days of the plague; but these are but little
entertainments and inticings of our hopes to work on toward the great pardon
which is registered in the leaves of the Book of Life. And it is a mighty folly
glory and absolution from the eternal wrath of God; and therefore it is not to
be wondered at, that wicked men are unwilling to dye; it is a greater wonder
that many of them dye with so little resentment of their danger and their
evil. There is reason for them to tremble when the Judge summons them to
appear. When his messenger is clothed with horror, and speaks in thunder; when
their conscience is their accuser, and their accusation is great, and their
bills uncancell'd, and they have no title to the cross of Christ, no advocate,
no excuse; when God is their enemy, and Christ is the

And indeed if we consider upon how trifling and inconsiderable grounds most
men hope for pardon (if at least that may be called hope, which is nothing but
a careless boldness, and an unreasonable wilful confidence) we shall see
much cause to pity very ebb or flood; and every hearty prayer, and every
bountiful alms still enlarges the pardon, or adds a degree of probability
David had sinned but in one instance, interrupting the course of a holy life by
one sad calamity, it pleased God to pardon him; but see upon what hard terms:
He prayed long, and violently, he wept Syria and Egypt; his concubines were
desired by an incestuous mixture, in the face of the sun before all Israel, and
his child that was David's once, is too confident, if he thinks that all his
shall be pardoned at a less rate then was used to expiate that one mischief of
the religious King: The son of David died for his father David, as well as he
did for us; he was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world; and yet
that death, and that relation, and all the heap of the Divine favors which
crowned David with a circle richer then the royal diadem, could not exempt him
from the portion of sinners, when he descended into their pollutions. I pray
God we may find the sure mercies of David, and may have our portion in the
redemption wrought by the Son of David; but we are to expect it upon such terms
as are revealed, such which include time, and labor, and uncertainty, and
watchfulness, and fear, and holy living. But work out their salvation with
fear and trembling; and the wicked go to destruction with gayety and
confidence: these men think all is well, while they are in the gall of
bitterness, and good men are tossed in a tempest, crying and praying

But because there are sorrows on one side and dangers on the other, and
temptations on both sides, it will concern all sorts of men to know when their
sins are pardoned. For then when they whether or no, and when, and in what
degree your persons are pardoned.

1. I shall not consider the evils of sin by any Metaphysicall and 1.
abstracted effects, but by sensible, real, and material. He that revenges
himself of another, does something that will make his

2. Sin has obliged us to suffer many evils, even whatsoever 2.
the anger of God is pleased to inflict; sickness and dishonor, poverty and
shame, a caytive spirit, and a guilty conscience, famine and war, plague and
pestilence, sudden death and a short life, temporal death or death eternal,
according as God in the several covenants of the Law and Gospel has expressed.

3. For in the law of Moses sin bound them to nothing but temporal evils, 3.
but they were sore, and heavy, and many; but these only

4. The great evil of the Jews was their abscission and cutting off 4.
from being Gods people, to which eternal damnation answers amongst us; and as
sickness, and war, and other intermediall evils were lesser strokes in order
to the final anger of God against their Nation, so are these and spiritual
evils intermediall, in order to the Eternal destruction of sinning and
unrepenting Christians.

5. When God had visited any of the sinners of Israel with a grievous 5.
to pardon the sin is to spare the sinner: and this appears; For when Christ
had said to the man sick of the palsy, Son thy sins are forgiven Mat. 9. 2.
thee, the Pharisees accused him of blasphemy, because none had power to
forgive sins but God only; Christ to vindicate himself gives them an ocular
demonstration, and proves his words: that ye may know the Son of Man has
power on earth to forgive sins, he says to the man sick of the palsy, Arise
and walk; then easier or harder: if it be easier, then sin has not so much
evil in it as a sickness, which no Religion as yet ever taught. If it be
harder, then Christ's power to do that which was harder, could not be proved by
doing that which was easier. It remains therefore, that it is the same thing
to take the punishment away, as to procure or give the pardon; because as the
retaining the sin was an obligation to the evil of punishment, so the
remitting the sin is the disobliging to its penalty. So far then the case is

6. The next step is this, that although in the Gospel God punishes sinners
with temporal judgments, and sicknesses, and deaths, 6.
with sad accidents, and evil Angels, and messengers of wrath; yet besides
these lesser strokes, he has scorpions to chastise, and loads of worse evils
to oppress the disobedient: he punishes one sin with another, vile acts with
evil habits, these with a hard heart, and this Jews, yet we must reckon our
pardon by curing the spiritual. If I have sinned against God in the shameful
crime of Lust, then God has pardoned my sins, when upon my repentance and
prayers he has given me the grace of Chastity. My Drunkenness is forgiven,
when I have sanctification, holiness, and turning us away from our sins: So
St. Peter, Ye know that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from 1 Pet. 1. 18.
your vain conversation; that is your redemption, that is your deliverance: you
were taken from your sinful state, that was the state of death, this of life
and pardon; and therefore they are made Synonyma by the same Apostle, According
as his divine power has given us all things that pertain to life and
godliness: to live and 2 Ep. 1. 3.
to be godly, is all one; to remain in sin and abide in death, is all one; to
redeem us from sin, is to snatch us from hell; he that gives us godliness,
gives us life, and that supposes pardon, or the abolition of the rites of
eternal death: and this was the conclusion of Peter's Sermon, and the sum
total of our redemption and of Act. 3. 26.
our pardon; God having raised up his Son, sent him to bless us in turning
away every one of you from your iniquity; this is the end of Christ's passion
and bitter death, the purpose of all his and all our preaching, the effect of
baptism, purging, washing, sanctifying; led by the Spirit, all your fears
concerning your state of pardon are causeless, and afflictive without reason;
but so long as you live at the old rate of lust or intemperance, of
covetousness or vanity, of tyranny or oppression, of carelessness or
irreligion, flatter not your selves, you have no more reason to hope for pardon
then a beggar for a Crown, or a condemned criminal to be made Heir apparent to
that Prince whom he would traitorously have slain.

4. They have great reason to fear concerning their condition, who having been
in the state of grace, who having begun to lead a good grieve the holy Spirit
of God by which 1.
he was sealed to the day of redemption. For so the Antithesis is plain and
obvious; If at the conversion of a sinner there is joy before the beatified
Spirits, the Angels of God, and that is the consummation of our pardon and our
consignation to felicity, then we may imagine how great an evil it is to
grieve the Spirit of God, who is greater then the Angels. The Children of
Israel were carefully warned that they should not offend the Angel: Behold, I
send an Angel Exodus 23. 20. 21.
before thee, beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will
not pardon your transgressions, that is, he will not spare to punish you if you
grieve him: Much greater is the evil affection that is as contrary to his
felicity, as lust is to his holiness; both which are essential to him.
Tristitia enim omnium spirituum nequissima est, and pessima servis Dei, and
omnium spiritus exterminat, and cruciat Spiritum sanctum, said Hennas: Sadness
is the greatest enemy to Gods servants; if you grieve Gods Spirit, you cast Ita
enim dica (said Seneca) sacer intra nos Spiritus sedet, bonorum, malorumque
nostrorum observator and custos, hic prout a nobis tractatus est, ita nos ipse
tractat. There is a holy spirit dwells in every good man, who is the observer
and guardian of all our actions, and as we treat him, so will he treat us. Now
we Deus praecepit Spiritum sanctum, utpote pro naturae suae bono tenerum and
delicatum, tranquillitate, and lenitate, and quiet, and pace tractare, said
Tertullian de Spectaculis. The Spirit of God is a loving and a kind Spirit,
gentle and easy, chaste and pure, righteous and peaceable, and when he has done
so much for us as to wash us from our impurities, and to cleanse us from our
stains, and streighten our obliquities, and to instruct our ignorances, and to
snatch us from an intolerable death, and to consign us to the day of
redemption, that is, to the resurrection of our bodies from death, corruption,
make us free as the Sons of God, and furnished with the riches of the Kingdom,
and all this with innumerable arts, with difficulty, and in despite of our
lusts and reluctancies, with parts and interrupted steps, with waitings and
expectations, with watchfulness and stratagems, with inspirations and
collateral assistances, after all this grace, and bounty, and diligence, that
we should despite this grace, and trample upon the blessings, and scorn to
receive life at so great an expense, and love of God, this is so great a
baseness and unworthiness, that by troubling the tenderest Go and sin no
more, lest a worse thing happen to thee.

2. Falling away after we have begun to live well is a great cause of fear,
because there is added to it the circumstance of inexcuseablenesse. The man
has been taught the secrets of the Kingdom, and therefore his understanding
has been instructed; he has tasted the pleasures of the Kingdom, and
therefore his will has been sufficiently entertained. He was entered into the
state of life, and renounced the ways of death, his sin began to be pardoned,
and his lusts to be Quam vilis facta es nimis iterans vias tuas! said God to
Judah. Ier. 2. 36.


3. He that returns from virtue to his old vices, is forced to do violence to
his own reason, to make his conscience quiet: he does it so unreasonably, so
against all his fair inducements, so against his reputation, his private
retirements from virtue; or else, when I am old, this he will; and he will,
because it serves his turn: then he is entered upon his state of fear; fearful,
and the man haih (...), a reprobate mind, that is, a judgment corrupted by
lust: vice has abused his reasoning, and if God proceeds in the man's method,
and lets him alone in his course, and gives him over to believe a lie, so that
he shall call good evil, and evil good, and come to be heartily persuaded
that his excuses are reasonable and his pretenses fair, then the man is
desperately undone through the ignorance that is in him, as St. Paul describes
his condition; his heart is blind, he is past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18.
his understanding is darkened, then he may walk in the vanity of his mind, and
give himself over to lasciviousness, and shall work all uncleanness with
greediness; then he needs no greater misery: this is the state of evil which
his fear ought to have prevented, but now it is past fear, and is to be
recovered with sorrow, or else to be run through till death and hell are become
his portion; fiunt novissima illus pejora pejoribus, his latter end is worse
then his beginning. Mat. 12. 45. vide 2 Pet. 2. 20.


4. Besides all this it might easily be added, that he that falls from virtue to
vice again, adds the circumstance of ingratitude to his load of sins; he sins
against Gods mercy, and puts out his own spirit to the flesh, from honor to
dishonor, from wise principles to unthrifty practices, like one of the vainer
fellows, who grows a fool, and a prodigal, and a beggar, because he delights
in inconsideration, in the madness of

fear of servants, or the fear of sons: But the effects of fear do distinguish
the man, and are to be entertained or rejected accordingly. If a servile fear
makes us to remove our sins, and so passes us toward our pardon and the
receiving such graces which may endear our duty and oblige our affection; that
fear is imperfect, but not criminal, it is the beginning of wisdom, and the
first introduction to it; but if that fear sits still or rests in a servile
mind, or a hatred of God, or speaking evil things concerning him, or
unwillingnesse to servile fear, it cannot be a filial fear since we our selves
are not sons; but if this servile fear makes us to desire to be reconciled to
God, that he may no longer stay at enmity with us, from this fear we shall soon
pass to carfulness, from carfulness to love, from love to diligence,
diligence to perfection; and the enemies shall become servants, and the
servants shall become adopted sons, and pass into the society and the
participation of the inheritance of Jesus: for this fear is also reverence, and
then our God in stead of being a consuming fire, shall become to us the circle
of a glorious crown, and a globe of an eternal light.

SERMON, IX. Part III.
directly and abstractedly as it is a passion, but as it is subjected in
Religion, and degenerates into superstition: For so among the Greeks, fear is
the ingredient and half of the constitution of that folly; (...) said
Hesychius, it is a fear of God, (...) that is more; it is a timorousness: the
superstitious man is afraid of the gods (said the Etymologist) (...), fearing
of God as if he were a tyrant, and an unreasonable exacter of duty upon
unequal terms, and disproportionable, impossible degrees,

1. But this fear some of the old Philosophers thought unreasonable in all
cases, even toward God himself; and it was a branch of the Epicurean Doctrine,
that God meddled not any thing below, and was to be loved and admired, but not
feared at all; and therefore they taught men neither to fear death, nor to fear
punishment after death, nor any displeasure of God: His terroribus ab Epicuro
soluti Lib. de not. Dcorum.
non metuimus Deos, said Cicero; and thence came this acceptance of the word,
that superstition should signify an unreasonable fear of God: It is true, he
and all his scholars extended the case beyond superstition, and reckon it
criminal, as they did all fear; that it may be called superstition, their
authority is sufficient warrant for the grammar of the appellative; and that it
is criminal, we shall derive from better principles.

But besides this, there was another part of its definition, (...), the
superstitious man is also an Idolater, Latins according to their custom,
imitating the Greeks in all their learned notices of things, had also the same
conception of this, and by their word [Superstitio] understood the worship of
Demons or separate spirits; by which they meant, either their minores Deos, or
worship or a fear to whom it was not due; for when ever they worshipped the
great God of heaven and earth, they never called that superstition in an evil
sense, except the (...), they that believed there was no God at all. Hence came
the etymology of superstition: it was a worshipping or fearing the spirits of
their dead Heroes, quos superstites credebant, whom they thought to be alive
after their (...) or Deification; or, quos superstantes credebant, standing in
places and thrones above us; and it Solomon made beyond all the Rhetoric of
the Greeks and Romans [Also they shall Eccles. 12. 5.
be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way] intimating the
weakness of old persons, who if ever they have been religious, are apt to be
abused into superstition; They are afraid of that which is high, that is, of
spirits and separate souls, of those excellent beings which dwell in the
regions above; meaning, that then they are superstitious. However, fear is most
commonly its principle, always its ingredient. For if it enter first by
credulity and a weak persuasion, yet it becomes incorporated into the spirit of
the

1. Superstition of an undue object, is that which the Etymologist calls (...)
the worshipping of idols; the Scripture adds (...) a sacrificing to Demons 1
Cor. 10. 20.
in St. Paul and in 4. 7. 2
Baruch; where although we usually read it sacrificing to Devils, yet it was
but accidental that they were such; for those indeed were evil spirits
Pythagorean sect, pretended a more holy worship, and did their devotion to
Angels:) But whosoever shall worship Angels do the same thing; they worship
them because they are good and powerful, as the Gentiles did the Devils whom
they thought so; and the error which the Apostle reproves, was not in matter of
Judgment, in mistaking bad angels for good, but in matter of manners and
choice; they mistook the creature for the Creator; and therefore it is more
fully expressed by St. Paul in a Romans 11. 25.
general signification, they worshipped the creature, (...) besides the
Creator, so it should be read; if we worship any creature besides God,
worshipping so as the worship of him becomes a part of Religion, it is also a
direct superstition; but concerning this part of superstition, I shall not
trouble this discourse, because I know no Christians blamable in this
particular but the Church of Rome, and they that communicate with her in the
worshipping of Images, of Angels, cultus superstitum, a cultus Daemonum, and
therefore besides that they have (...), a proper reproof in Christian Religion,
are condemned by all wise men, which call superstition criminal.

But as it is superstition to worship any thing (...) besides the Creator, so
it is superstition to worship God (...), otherwise then is decent,
proportionable or described. Every inordination of Religion that is not in
defect, is properly called superstition: (...), said Maximus Tyrius, The true
worshipper is a lover of God, the superstitious man loves him not, but
flatters: To which if we add, that fear, unreasonable fear is also
superstition, and an ingredient in its definition; we are taught by this word
to signify all irregularity and inordination in actions of Religion. The sum
is this; the Atheist called all worship of God superstition; the Epicurean called
all fear of God superstition, but did not condemn his worship; the other part
of wise men called all unreasonable fear, and inordinate worship superstition,
but did not condemn all fear: But the Christian, besides this, calls every error
in worship in the manner, or excess, by this name, and condemns it.

Now because the three great actions of Religion are, to worship God, to fear
God, and to trust in him, by the inordination of these three actions, we may
reckon three sorts of this crime; the excess of fear, and the obliquity in
trust, and the errors in worship, are the superstition: the first of which is
only pertinent to our present consideration.

1. Fear is the duty we owe to God as being the God of power and Justice, the
great Judge of heaven and earth, the avenger of the cause of Widows, the Patron
of the poor, and the Advocate of the oppressed, a mighty God and terrible, and
so essential an enemy to sin, that he spared not his own Son, but gave him
over to death, and to become a sacrifice, when he took upon him our Nature, and
became a person obliged for our guilt. Fear is the great bridle of
intemperance, the modesty of the spirit, and the restraint of gaieties girdle
to the soul, and the handmaid to repentance, the arrest of sin, and the cure or
antidote to the spirit of reprobation; it preserves our apprehensions of the
divine Majesty, and hinders our single actions from combining to sinful
habits; it is the mother of consideration, and the nurse of sober counsels, and

But this so excellent grace is soon abused in the best and most tender
spirits; in those who are softened by Nature and by Religion, by infelicities or
cares, by sudden accidents or a sad soul; those fond and trifling acts of
jealousy which will make God

These persons do not believe noble things concerning God, they do not think
that he is as ready to pardon them, as they are to pardon a sinning servant;
they do not believe how much God delights in mercy, nor how wise he is to
consider and to make abatement for our unavoidable infirmities; they make
judgment of themselves by the measures of an Angel, and take the accounts of
God by the proportions of a Tyrant. The best that can be said concerning such
persons is, that they are hugely tempted, or hugely ignorance is by some
persons named the mother of devotion; yet if it falls in a hard ground, it is
the mother of Atheism, if in a soft ground, it is the parent of superstition:
but if it proceeds from evil or mean opinions of God, (as such scruples and
unreasonable fears do many times) it is an evil of a great impiety, and in
some sense, and if it were in equal degrees, is as bad as Atheism; for he
that says there was no such man as Julius Caesar, does him less displeasure,
then he that says there was, but that he was a Tyrant, and a bloody parricide.
And the Cimmerians were not esteemed impious for saying that there was no sun
in the Anaxagoras was esteemed irreligious for saying the sun was a very stone:
And though to deny there is a God is a high impiety and intolerable, yet he
says worse, who believing there is a God says, he delights in humane
sacrifices, in miseries and death, in tormenting his servants, and punishing
their very infelicities and unavoidable mischances. To be God, and to be
essentially and infinitely good, is the same thing, and therefore to deny
either is to be reckoned among the greatest crimes in the world.

Add to this, that he that is afraid of God, cannot in that disposition love
him at all; for what delight is there in that religion which Oderant quos
metuunt, sea colunt tamen: whom men fear they hate certainly, and flatter
readily, and worship timorously; and he that saw Hermolaus converse with
Alexander; and Pausanias follow Philip the Macedonian; or Chaeteas Cajus
Caligula would have observed how fordid men are made with fear, and how unhappy
and how hated Tyrants are in the midst of those acclamations, which are loud,
and forced, and unnatural, and without love or fair opinion. And therefore
although the Atheist says there is no God, the scrupulous, fearful, and
superstitious man does heartily with what the other does believe.

But that the evil may be proportionable to the folly, and the punishment to
the crime, there is no man more miserable in the world, then the man who fears
God as his enemy, and Religion as fear is certainly the worst and the most
intolerable; levity and rashness have in it some spritefulnesse, and
greatness of anger is valiant; desire is busy and apt to hope; credulity is
oftentimes entertained and pleased with images and appearances: But fear is
dull, and sluggish, and treacherous, and flattering, and dissembling, and
miserable, and foolish. Every false opinion concerning God is pernicious and
dangerous; but if it be joined with trouble of spirit, as fear, scruple or
superstition are, it is like a wound with an inflammation, or a strain of a
sinew with a contusion, or contrition of the part, painful and unsafe; it puts
on to actions when it self is driven; it urges reason, and circumscribes it,
and makes it pityable, and ridiculous in its consequent follies; which if we

Almost all ages of the world have observed many instances of fond persuasions
and foolish practices proceeding from violent fears and scruples in matter of
Religion. Diomedon and many other Captains were condemned to dye, because after
a great Naval victory they pursued the flying enemies, and did not first bury
their dead. But Chabrias in the same case first buried the dead, and by that
time the enemy rallyed, and returned and beat his Navy, and made his masters
pay the price of their importune superstition; they feared Gregorian account
began, continuing to call those unlucky days which were so signed in their
tradition or Erra pater, although the day upon this account fell 10 days
sooner; and men were transported with many other trifling contingencies and
little accidents; which when they are one entertained Aristodemas King of the
Messenians in his war against the Spartans, prevented the sword of the
enemies by a violence done upon himself, only because his dogs howled like
wolves, and the Soothsayers were afraid because the Briony grew up by the walls
of his Fathers house: and Nicias General of the Athenian forces sat with his
arms in his bosom, and suffered himself and 40000 men tamely to fall by the
insolent enemy, only because he was afraid of the laboring and eclipsed Moon.
When the Marble statues Rome did sweat (as naturally they did against all rainy
weather) the Augures gave an alarm to the City; but if lightning struck the
spire of the Capitol, they thought the sum of affairs, and the Commonwealth
it self was endangered. And this Heathen folly has stuck so close to the
Christian, that all the Sermons of the Church for 1600 years have not cured
them all: But the practices of weaker people and the artifice of ruling Priests
have superinduced many new ones. When Pope Eugenius sang Mass at Rhemes, and
some few drops from the Chalice were spilt upon the pavement, it was thought to
foretell mischief, wars, and blood, to all Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury sang the Mass of Requiem upon the day he was reconciled to his
Prince, it was thought to foretell his own death by that religious office: and
if men can listen to such whispers, and have not reason and observation enough
to confute such trifles, they shall still be afrighted with the noise of birds,
and every night-raven shall foretell evil as Micaiah to the King of Israel,
and every old woman shall be a Prophetess, and the events of humane affairs
which should be managed by the conduct of counsel, of reason,

To this may be reduced the observation of dreams, and fears commenced from the
fancies of the night. For the superstitious man does not rest, even when he
sleeps, neither is he safe because dreams usually are false, but he is
afflicted for fear they should tell true. Living and waking men have one world
in common, they use the same air and fire, and discourse by the same principles
of Logic and reason; but men that are asleep have every one a world Demon
good or bad: they are without rule and without reason, they are as contingent
as if a man should study to make a Prophecy, and by saying 10000 things may
hit upon one true, which was therefore not foreknown though it was Artemidorus)
and they that use to remember such fantastic idols are afraid to lose a
friend when they dream their teeth shake, when naturally it will rather
signify a scurvy; for a natural indisposition and an imperfect sense of the
beginning of a disease, may vex the fancy into a symbolicall representation;
for so the man that dreamt he swam against a stream of blood, had a Plurisie
beginning in his side: and he that dreamt he dipped his A thief is confident in
the twilight; Eurip.
if you suffer impressions to be made upon you by dreams, the Devil has the
reins in his own hands, and can tempt you by that which will abuse you when you
can make no resistance. Dominica the wife of Valens the Emperor dreamt that God
threatened Basil: the fear proceeding from this instance was safe and fortunate;
but if she had dreamt in the behalf of a Heretic, she might have been cousened
into a false proposition upon a ground weaker then the discourse of a waking
child. Let the grounds of our actions be noble, beginning upon reason,
proceeding with prudence, measured by the common lines of men, and confident
upon the expectation of an usual providence. Let us proceed from causes to
effects, from natural means to ordinary events, and believe felicity not to be
a chance but a choice, and evil to be the daughter of sin and the Divine
anger, not of fortune and fancy; let us fear God when we have made him angry;
and not be afraid of him when we heartily and laboriously do our duty; our
fears are to be measured by open revelation and certain experience, by the
threatenings of God and the sayings of wise men, and their limit is reverence,
and godliness is their end; and then fear shall be a duty, and a rare
instrument of many: in all other cases it is superstition or folly, it is sin
or punishment, a rejoicing evermore.

2. But besides this superstitious fear, there is another fear directly
criminal, and it is called, worldly fear, of which the Spirit of God has said,
But the fearful and incredulous shall have their part Revel. 21. 8.
in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death;
that is, such fears which make men to fall in the time of by all means. St.
Athanasius for 46 years did run and fight, he disputed with the Arrians and
fled from their Officers; and that flies, may be a man worth preserving, if he
bears his Perfect love casts out fear (faith the Apostle) that is, he that
loves God will not fear to dye for him, or for his sake to be poor. In this
sense no man can fear man and love God at the same time; and when St. Laurence
triumphed over Valerianus, St. Sebastian over Diocletian, St. Vincentius over
Dacianus, and the armies of Martyrs over the Proconsuls, accusers, and leading
captivity captive by the strength of their Captain, whose garments were red
from Bozrah.

3. But this fear is also tremulous and criminal, if it be a trouble from the
apprehension of the mountains and difficulties of duty, and is called
pusillanimity. For some see themselves encompassed with temptations, they
observe their frequent falls, their perpetual returns from good purposes to
weak performances, the daily mortifications that are necessary, the resisting
natural appetites, and the laying violent hands upon the desires of flesh and
blood, the uneasinesse Austin compares such men to children and fantastic
Terribiles visu formae, the sight seems full of horror, but touch them and they
are very nothing, the mere daughters of a sick brain, and a weak heart, an
infant experience and a trifling judgment: so are the illusions of a weak
piety, or an unskilful unconfident soul; they fancy to see mountains of
difficulty, but touch them and they seem like clouds riding upon the wings of
the wind, and put on shapes as we please to dream. He that denies to give
alms for fear of being poor, or to entertain a Disciple for fear of being
suspected of the party, or to own a duty for fear of being put to venture for a
crown,

Thus far I have discoursed concerning good fear and bad, that is, filial
and servile: they are both good, if by servile we intend initiall or the new
beginning fear of penitents; a fear to offend God upon less perfect
considerations: But servile fear is vicious when it still retains the affection
of slaves, and when its effects are hatred, weariness, displeasure, and want
of charity: and of the same cogrations are those fears which are superstitious,
and worldly.

Angelical, that is, such a fear as the blessed Angels have, who before God
hide their faces, and tremble at his presence, and fall down before his
footstool, and are ministers of his anger and messengers of his mercy, and
night and day worship him with the profoundest adoration. This is the same that
is spoken of in the Text: Let us serve God with reverence and godly fear; all
holy fear partakes of the nature of this which Divines call Angelical, and it
is expressed in acts of adoration, of vows, and holy prayers, in hymns, and
psalms, in the eucharist and reverentiall addresses; humane; but as it arises
to great degrees, and to perfection, it is Angelical and Divine; and then it
appertains to mystic Theology, and therefore is to be considered in another
place; but for the present, that which will regularly concern all our duty, is
this, that when the fear of God is the instrument of our duty, or Gods worship,
the greater it is, it is so much the better. It was an Romans, Religentem esse
oportet, religiosum, nefas; Every excess in the actions of religion is
criminal; they supposing that in the services of their gods, there might be
too much. True it is, there may be too much of their undecent expressions, and
in things indifferent, the very multitude is too much, and becomes an
undecency: and if it be in its own nature undecent or disproportionable to the
end, or the rules, or the analogy of the Religion, it will not stay for numbers
to make it intolerable; but in the direct actions of glorifying God, in doing
any thing of his Commandments, or any thing which he commands, do as much as
you can; take care that your expressions be prudent, and safe, consisting with
thy other duties; and for the passions or virtues themselves, let them pass
from beginning to great progresses, from man to Angel, from the imperfection of
man to the perfections of the sons of God; and when ever we go beyond the
bounds of Nature, and grow up with all the extention, and in the very
commensuration of a full grace, we shall never go beyond the excellencies of
God: For ornament may be too much, and turn to curiosity; cleanliness may be
changed into

Sermon, X. The Flesh and the Spirit: Part I.
The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak.
FRom the beginning of days Man has been so cross to the Divine
commandments, that in many cases there can be no reason given why a man should
choose some ways, or do some actions, but only because they are forbidden;
When God bade the Isaaelites rise and go up Canaanites, and possess the Land,
they would not stir; the men were Anakims, and the Cities were impregnable,
and there was a Lion in the way; but presently after, when God forbad them to
go, they would and did go, though they died for it. I shall not need to
instance in particulars, when the whole life of man is a perpetual
contradiction; and the state of Disobedience is called the contradiction of
Sinners; even the man in the Gospel that had two sons, they both crossed him,
even he that obeyed him, and he that obeyed him not: for the one said, he
would, and did not; the other said, he would not, and they would not, and at
last have better bethought themselves; And who can guess at any other reason
why men should refuse to be temperate? for he that refuses the commandment,
first does violence to the commandment, and puts on a praeternaturall
appetite, he spoils his health, and he spoils his understanding; he brings to
impossible commandments: for we complain already, even when God commands us to
drink so long as it is good for us; this is one of his impossible laws: it is
impossible for us to know when we are dry, or when we need drink; for if we do
know, I am sure it is possible enough, not to lift up the wine to our heads.
And when Paul in another case, upon our uncomely parts we bestow more abundant
comeliness. For whereas our body it self is a servant to our soul, we make it
the heir of all things, and treat it here already, as if it were in Majority;
and make that which at the best was but a weak friend, to become a strong
enemy; and hence proceed the vices of the worst, and the follies and
imperfections the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.

The spirit] that is, (...), the inward man, or the reasonable part of man,
especially as helped by the Spirit of Grace, that is willing: for it is the
principle of all good actions, the (...), the power of working is from the
spirit; but the flesh is but a dull instrument, and a broken arm, in which
there is a principle of life, but it moves uneasily; and the flesh is so weak,
that in Scripture to in the flesh signifies a state of weakness, and
infirmity; so the humiliation of Christ is expressed by being in the flesh,
(...), God manifested in the flesh; and what S. Peter calls [put to death in
the flesh] St. Paul calls [crucified through weakness;] and, ye know that
through the infirmity of the flesh I preached unto you, said S. Paul: but here,
flesh is not opposed to the spirit as a direct enemy, but as a weak servant:
for if the flesh be powerful and opposite, the spirit stays not there:

-- veniunt ad candida tecta columbae:
The old man and the new cannot dwell together; and therefore here, where the
spirit inclining to good, well disposed, and apt to holy counsels, does inhabit
in society with the flesh, it means only a weak and unapt nature, or a state
of infant-grace, for in both these, and in these only the text is verified.



1. Our nature is too weak in order to our duty and final interest, that at
first it cannot move one step toward God, unless God by his preventing grace
puts into it a new possibility.


(...).
There is nothing that creeps upon the earth, nothing that ever God made,
weaker then Man; for God fitted Horses and Mules with strength, Bees and
Pismires with sagacity, Hearts and Hares with swiftness, Birds with feathers
and a light a\l=e"\ry body; and they all know their times, and are fitted for
their work, and regularly acquire the proper end of their creation; but man
that was designed By nature we were the sons Ephesians. 2. 3.
of wrath, that is, we were born heirs of death, which death came upon us from
Gods anger for the sin of our first Parents; or by nature, that is, (...),
really, not by the help of fancy, and fiction of law, for so Oecumenius and
Theophylact expound it; but because it does not relate to the sin of Adam in
its first intention, but to the evil state of sin, in which the Ephesians
walked before their conversion; it signifies that our nature of it self is a
state of opposition to the spirit of grace; it is privatively opposed, that is,
that there is nothing in it that can bring us to felicity; nothing but an
obedientiall capacity; our flesh can become sanctified, as the stones can
become children unto Abraham, or as dead seed can become living corn; and so it
is with us, that it is necessary God should make us a new creation, if he means
to save us; he must take our hearts of stone away, and give us heart of flesh;
he must purge the old leaven, and make us a new conspersion; he must destroy
the flesh, and must breath into us Spiritum vita, the celestial breath of
life, without No man can come unto me (said Christ) unless my Father draw
him, (...). The Divine love must come upon us and snatch us from our
imperfection, enlighten our understanding, move and stir our affections, open
the gates of heaven, turn our nature into grace, entirely forgive our former
prevarications; take us by the hand, and lead us all along, and we only
contribute our assent unto it; just as a child when he is tempted to learn to
go, and called upon, and guided, and upheld, and constrained to put his

2. But that I may instance in particulars, our natural weakness appears best
in two things, even in the two great instances of temptation, pleasure and
pain; in both which the flesh is destroyed if it be not helped by a mighty
grace, as certainly as the Canes do bow their heads before the breath of a
mighty wind. 1. In pleasure we see it by the public miseries and follies of
the world. An old Greek said well, Poet that Horace tells of:


Securus, cadat, an recto stet fabula talo.
Let him but have money for rehearsing his Comedy, he cares not whether you
like it or no; and if a temptation of money comes strong and violent, you may
as well tie a wild dog to quietness with the guts of a tender Kid, as suppose
that most men can do virtuously when they may sin at a great price. Men avoid
poverty, not only because it has some inconveniences; for they are Riches is
attended by pride and lust, tyranny and oppression, and has in its hand all
that it has in its heart; and Sin waits upon Wealth ready dressed and fit for
action, therefore in some temptations they confess how little their souls are,
they cannot stand that assault; but because this passion is the daughter of
Voluptuousness, and very often is Lust and Drunkenness. Nemo enim se
adsuefacit ad vitandum and ex animo evellendum ea quae molesta ei non sunt. Men
are so in Plutar.
love with pleasure, that they cannot think of mortifying or crucifying their
lust; we do violence to what we hate, not to what we love. But the weakness
of the flesh, and the empire of lust is visible in nothing so much, as in the
captivity and folly of wise men. For you shall see some men fit to govern a
Province, sober in their counsels, wise in the conduct of their affairs, men
of discourse Solomon glorious in all things but when he bowed to Pharaoh's
daughter, and then to Devils? and is it not published by the sentence and
observation of all the world, that the bravest men have been softened into
effeminacy by the lisping charms, and childish noyses of Women and imperfect
persons? A fair slave bowed the neck of stout Polydamas, King of Nicomedia in
the midst of temptation by a witty beauty, tied upon a bed with silk and pretty
violences, courted with music and perfumes, with promises and easy postures,
invited by opportunity and importunity, by rewards and impunity, by privacy and
a guard; what would his nature do in this throng of evils and flesh do in such
a day of danger? Is it not necessary that we take in auxiliaries from Reason
and Religion, from heaven and earth, from observation and experience, from hope
and fear, and cease to be what we are, left we become what we ought not? It is
certain that in the cases of temptations to voluptuousness, a man is
naturally, as the Prophet said of Ephraim, like a Pigeon that has no heart, no
courage, no conduct, no resolution, no discourse, but falls as the water of
Nilus when it comes to its cataracts, it falls infinitely and without Nations
are marked for intemperance, and that it is less noted because it is so
popular, and universal, and that even in the midst of the glories of
Christianity there are so many persons drunk, or too full with meat, or greedy
of lust, even now that the Spirit of God is given to us to make us sober, and
temperate, and chaste, we may well imagine, since all men have flesh, and all
men have nor the

And it is no otherwise when we are tempted with pain. We are so impatient of
pain, that nothing can reconcile us to it; not the laws of God, not the
necessities of nature, not the society of all our kindred, and of all the
world, not the interest of virtue, not the hopes of heaven; we will submit to
pain upon no terms, but the basest and most dishonorable; for if sin bring us
to pain, or affront, or sickness, we choose that, so it be in the retinue of a
lust, and a base desire; but we accuse Nature, and blaspheme God, Cappadocia
set in a freezing lake, almost

-- Odi artus, fragilemque hunc corporis usum
Desertorem animi --
We carry about us the body of death, and we bring evils upon our selves by our
follies, and then know not how to bear them; Patience with its appendages is
the sum total of almost all our duty that is proper to the days of sorrow:
and we shall find it enough to entertain all our powers, and to employ all our
aids; the counsels of wise men, and the comforts of our friends, the advices of
Scripture, and the results of experience, the graces of God, and the strength
of our own resolutions are all then full of employments, and find it work
enough to secure that one grace. For then it is that a could is Monitor, yet it
is an ill stage to act some virtues in; and a good man cannot then do much,
and therefore he that is in the state of flesh and blood, can do nothing at
all.

4. But in these considerations we find our nature in disadvantages; and a
strong man may be overcome when a stronger comes to disarme him; and pleasure
and pain are the violences of choice and chance; but it is no better in any
thing else: for nature is weak in all its strengths, and in its fights, at
home, and abroad, Stoic when we see God dishonored; we passionately desire
our preservation, and yet we violently destroy our selves, and will not be
hindered; we cannot deny a friend

5. But to sum up all the evils that can be spoken of the liberty, and yet
suppose it determined to one object only; because that one object is the thing
we choose. For although God has set life and death before us, fire and water,
good and evil, and has primarily put man into the hands of his own counsel,
that he might have chosen good as well as evil, yet because he did not, but
fell into an evil condition and corrupted manners, and grew in love with it,
and infected all his children the thoughts of man's hearts are only evil, and
that continually, and there is not one that does good, no not one that sins
not: since (I say) all the world have sinned, we cannot suppose a liberty of
indifferency to good and bad; it is impossible in such a liberty that there
should be no variety, that all should choose the same thing; but a liberty of
complacency or delight we may suppose; that is so, that though naturally he
might choose good, yet morally he is so determined with his love to evil, that
good seldom comes into dispute; and a man grace of God eases the malignity
here, but it cannot be cured but by glory: know no good, but to please a wild,
indetermin'd, infinite appetite; so they will nothing else but what is good in
their limit and proportion; and it is with us as it was with the shee-goat that
suckled the wolves whelp; he grew up by his nurses milk, and at last having
forgot his foster mothers kindness, eat that udder which gave him drink and
nourishment; Improbit as nullo flectitur obsequio; for no kindness will cure
an ill nature and a base disposition: so are we in the first constitution of
our nature; so perfectly given to natural vices, that by degrees unnatural,
and no education or power of art can make us choose wisely or honestly: (...),
said Phalaris, There is no good nature but only virtue; till we are new
created, we are wolves and serpents, free and delighted in the choice of evil,
but stones and iron to all excellent things and purposes.

2. Next I am to consider the weakness of the flesh, even when the state is
changed, in the beginning of the state of grace: For many persons, as soon as
the grace of God rises in their hearts, are all on fire, and inflamed; it is
with them as Homer Syrian star,

(...),
(...).
It shines finely, and brings fevers; splendour and Zeal are the effects of the
first grace, and sometimes the first turns into pride, and the second unto
uncharitableness; and either by too dull and slow motions, or by too violent
and unequal, the flesh will make pretenses, and too often prevail upon the
spirit, even after the

1. In some dispositions that are forward and apt, busy and unquiet, when the
grace of God has taken possessions, and begins to give laws, it seems so
pleasant and gay to their undiscerning spirits, to be delivered from the
sottishness of lust, and the follies of drunkenness, that reflecting upon the
change, they begin to love themselves too well, and take delight in the wisdom
of the change, and the Aristophanes thus describes, (...); pale, and barefoot,
and proud; that is, persons singular in their habit, eminent in their
institution, proud and pleased in their persons, and despisers of them that are
less glorious in their virtue then themselves; and for this very thing our
blessed Savior remarks the Pharisees; they were severe and fantastical
advancers of themselves, and Judgers of their neighbors; and here, when they
have mortified

2. Sometimes the passions of the flesh spoil the changes of the Spirit, by
natural excesses, and disproportion of degrees; it mingles violence with
industry, and fury with zeal, and uncharitableness with reproof, and
censuring with discipline, and violence with desires, and immortifications in
all the appetites and holy, so they desire it in prayer; that if they reprove a
vicious person, they may say what they list, and be as angry as they please;
that when they demand but reason, they may enforce it by all means; that when
they exact duty of their children, they may be imperious and without limit;
that if they design a good end, they may prosecute it by all instruments; that
when they give God thanks for blessings, they may willing and holy, but the
flesh creeps too busily, and insinuates into the substance of good actions, and
spoils them by unhandsome circumstances; and then the prayer is spoiled for
want of prudence or conformity to Gods will, and discipline and government is
imbittered by an angry spirit; and the Fathers authority turns into an uneasy
load, by being thrust like an unequal burden to one side, without allowing
equal measures to the other: And if we consider it wisely, we shall find that
in many good actions the flesh is the bigger ingredient, Justice or Charity;
and many men pray in the flesh, when they pretend they pray by the spirit.

3. In the first changes and weak progresses of our spiritual life, we find a
long weakness upon us, because we are long before we

4. Some men are wise and know their weaknesses, and to prevent their startings
back, will make fierce and strong resolutions, and bind up their gaps with
thorns, and make a new hedge about their spirits; and what then? this shows
indeed that the spirit is willing; but the storm arises, and winds blow, and
rain descends, and presently the earth trembles, and the whole fabric falls
into ruin and disorder. A resolution (such as we usually make) is nothing but
a little trench which every child can step over; and willing sin, but he does
it against his resolution; and what Christian lives, that will not say, and
think, that he has repented in some degree; and yet still they commit sin,
that is, they break all their holy purposes as readily as they lose a dream;
and so great is our weakness, that to most men the strength of a resolution is
just such a restraint as he suffers who is imprisoned in a curtain, and secured
with doors and bars of the finest linen: for though the spirit be strong to
resolve, the flesh is weak to keep it.

5. But when they have felt their follies, and see the linen vail resolutions
with vows, and then the spirit is fortified, and the flesh may tempt and call,
but the soul cannot come forth, and therefore it triumphs and acts its interest
easily and certainly; and then the flesh is mortified; It may be so. But do
not many of us inquire after a vow? And we consider it may be it was rash, or
it was an impossible matter, or without just consideration, and weighing of

6. Beyond all this, some choose excellent guides, and stand within the
restraints of modesty, and a severe Monitor; and the Spirit of God has put a
veil upon our spirits, and by modesty in women and young persons, by
reputation in the more aged, and by honor in the more noble, and by conscience
in all, have fortified the spirit of Man, that men dare not prevaricate their
duty though they be tempted strongly, and invited perpetually; and this is a
partition wall that separates the spirit from the flesh, and keeps it in its
proper strengths and retirements. But here the spirit of reputation, and
sometimes supplies it with little arts of flattery, and self-love, and is
modest as long as it can be secret, and when it is discovered, it grows
impudent; and a man shelters himself in crowds and heaps of sinners, and
believes that it is no worse with him then with other mighty criminals, and
public persons, who bring sin into credit amongst fools and vicious persons;
or else men take false measures of fame or public honesty, and the world being
broken into so many parts of disunion, and agreeing in nothing but honor and
public fame, modesty, and shame, are now so slender guards to the spirit, that
the flesh breaks in and makes most men more bold against God then against men,
and against the laws of Religion, then of the Commonwealth.

7. When the spirit is made willing by the grace of God, the flesh interposes
in deceptions and false principles. If you tempt some man to a notorious sin,
as to rebellion, to deceive his trust, or to be drunk, he will answer, he had
rather die then do it: But put the Adams fig leaves, or the excuses of
children and truants, it shall be enough to make the flesh prevail, and the
spirit not to be troubled; for so great is our folly, that the flesh always
carries the cause, if the spirit can be cousen'd.

8. The flesh is so mingled with the spirit, that we are forced to make
distinctions in our appetite, to reconcile our affections to God and Religion,
lest it be impossible to do our duty; we weep for our sins, but we weep more
for the death of our dearest friends, or other temporal sadnesses; we say we
had rather die then lose our says, and yet we do not live according to it; we
lose our estates valuation of price, and a valuation of sense: or the spirit
has one rate of things, and the flesh has another; and what we believe the
greatest evil, does not always cause to us the greatest trouble; which shows
plainly, that we are imperfect carnal persons, and the flesh will in some
measure prevail over the spirit; because we will suffer it in too many
instances, and cannot help it in all.

sorrow breeds death, and therefore our repentances must be more gentle, and we
must support our selves in all our calamities: for we cannot bear our crosses
without a freer refreshment, and this freedom passes on to license, and many
melancholy persons drown their sorrows in sin and forgetfulness, as if sin
were more tolerable then sorrow, and Adam being too fond of his Eve, attends to
all its murmurs and temptations; and yet the flesh is able to bear far more
then is required of it in usual duties. Custom of suffering will make us
endure much, and fear will make us suffer more, and necessity makes us suffer
any thing; and lust desire makes us to endure more then God is willing we
should; and yet we are nice, and tender, and indulgent to our weaknesses, till
our weaknesses grow too strong for us. And what shall we do to secure our
duty, and to be delivered of our selves, that the body of death which we bear
about us may not destroy the life of the spirit?

I have all this while complained, and you see not without cause; I shall
afterward tell you the remedies for all this evil. In the mean time, let us
have but mean opinions of our selves; let us watch every thing of our selves as
of suspected persons, and magnify the grace of God, and be humbled for our
stock and spring of follies, and

(...),
(...).
And pray that God would give us what we ask, and what we ask not; for we want
more helps then we understand, and we are nearer to evil then we perceive, and
we bear sin and death about us, and are in love with it; and nothing comes from
us but false principles, grace is sufficient for us, and strong enough to
prevail over all our follies and infirmities.

SERMON, XI. Part II.


1. That since it is our flesh and blood that is the principle of mischief, we
must not think to have it cured by washings and light medicaments; the
Physician that went to cure the Hectic with quicksilver and fasting spittle,
did his Patient no good, but himself became a proverb; and he that by easy
prayers and a seldom fast, by the scattering of a little alms, and the issues
of some more natural Quanto satius est mentem potius eluere quae malis
cupiditatibus Lactantius.
sordidatur, and uno virtutis ac fidei lavacro universa vitia depellere? Better
it is by an entire body of virtue, by a living and active faith to cleanse the
mind from every vice, and to take off all superinduced habits of sin; Quod qui
fecerit, quamlibet inquinatum ac sordidum corpus gerat, satis purus est. If we
take this course, although our body is foul, and our affections unquiet, and
our rest discomposed, yet we shall be masters of our resolution, and clean
naturally evil, that is, by a superinduced nature; just as drunkards and
intemperate persons have made it necessary to drink extremely, and their nature
requires it, and it is health to them; they dye without it, because they have
made to themselves a new constitution, and another nature, but much worse then
that which God made; their sin made this new nature; and this new nature makes
sin necessary and unavoidable: so it is in all other instances; Our nature is
evil, because we have spoiled it; and therefore the removing the sin which


(...).
We must have a new nature put into us, which must be the principle of new
counsels, and better purposes, of holy actions and great devotion; and this
nature is derived from God, and is a grace and a favor of heaven. The same
Spirit that caused the holy Jesus to be born after a new and strange manner,
must also descend upon us and cause us to be born again, and to begin a new
life upon the Origin, From him it first began that a divine and humane nature
were weaved together, that the humane nature by communication with the
celestial may also become divine, (...), Not only in Jesus, but in all that
first believe in him, and then obey him, living such a life as Jesus taught:
and this is the sum total of the whole design; As we have lived to the
flesh, so we must hereafter live to the spirit: as our nature has been flesh,
not only in its original, but in habits and affection; so our nature must be
spirit in habit and choice, in design and effectual

-- (...)
(...),
Euripides.
(...).
It is a fine thing to see the light of this sun, and it is pleasant to see the
storm allayed and turned into a smooth sea and a fresh gale; our eyes are
pleased to see the earth begin to live, and to produce her little issues with
part colored coats:

-- (...)
(...)
(...).
Nothing is so beauteous as to see a new birth in a childlesse family; And it
is excellent to hear a man discourse the hidden things of Nature, and unriddle
the perplexities of humane notices and mistakes;

2. Our life, and all our discourses, and every observation, and a state of
reason, and a union of sober counsels, are too little to cure a peevish spirit,
and a weak reasoning, and silly principles, and accursed habits, and evil
examples, and perverse affections, and a whole body of sin and death. It was
well said in the Comedy.

Nunquam it a quisquam been subducta ratione ad vitam fuit,
Quin aetas, usus semper aliquid apportet novi,
Aliquid moneat; ut illa quae scire credas, nescias,

Men at first think themselves wise, and are always most confident when they
have the least reason; and to morrow they begin to perceive yesterdayes folly,
and yet they are not wise; But as the little Embryo in the natural sheet and
lap of its mother, first distinguishes into a little knot, and that in time
will be the heart, and then into a bigger bundle, which after some days abode
grows into two little spots, and they if cherished by nature will become eyes,
and each part by order commences into weak principles, and is preserved the
Spirit of grace: Nature and reason alone cannot do it, and therefore the proper
cure is to be wrought by those general means of inviting and cherishing, of
getting and entertaining Gods Spirit, which when we have observed, we may
account our selves sufficiently instructed toward the repair of our breaches,
and the reformation of our evil nature.

1. The first great instrument of changing our whole nature into the state of
grace, flesh into the spirit, is a firm belief, and a perfect assent to, and
hearty entertainment of the promises of the Gospel; It quenches the fiery
darts of the Devil, says St. Paul, it overcomes the world, Ephesians. 4. 16.
says St. John, it is the fruit of the Spirit, and the parent of love, it 1
Ioh. 5. 4.
is obedience, and it is humility, and it is a shield, and it is a brestplate,
and a work, and a mystery, it is a fight and it is a victory, it is a pleasing
God, and it is that whereby the just do live; by faith we are purified, and by
faith we are sanctified, and by faith we are justified, faith we are saved: by
this we have access to the throne of grace, and by it our prayers shall
prevail for the sick, by it we stand, and by it we walk, and by this Christ
dwells in our hearts, and by it all the miracles of the Church have been done;
it gives great patience to suffer, and great confidence to hope, and great
strength to do, and infallible certainty to enjoy the end of all our faith, and
satisfaction of all our hopes, and the reward of all our labors, even the most
mighty price of our high calling: and if faith be such a magazine of spiritual
excellencies, of such universal efficacy, nothing can be a greater antidote
against the venom of a corrupted resurrection of our bodies and souls to
eternal life, and glories infinite. Now is it possible that a man that
believes this, and that he may obtain it for himself, and that it was prepared
for him, and that God desires to give it him, that he can neglect and despise
it, and not work for it, and perform such easy conditions upon which it may be
obtained? Are not most men of the world made miserable at a less price then a
thousand pound a year? Do not all the usurers and merchants, all tradesmen and
laborers under the Sun toil and care, labor and contrive, venture and plot
for a little money, and no man gets, and scarce any man desires so much of it
as he can lay upon Fides est velut quoddam aeternitatis exemplar, praeterita
simul and praesentia and futura sinu quodans vastissimo comprehendit, ut nihil
ei praetereat, nil pereat, praeeat nihil; Now, Faith is a certain image of
eternity, all things are present to it, things past and things to come, are all
so before the eyes of faith, that he in whose eye that candle is enkindled,
beholds heaven as present, and sees how blessed thing it is to dye in Gods
Ethiopian; that faith that cures the sick, and strengthens the Paralytick, and
baptizes the Catechumens, and justifies the faithful, and repairs the
penitent, and confirms the just, and crowns the Martyrs; that faith if it be
true and proper, Christian and alive, active and effective in us, is sufficient
to appease the storm of our passions, and to instruct all our ignorances, and
to make us wise unto salvation; it will, if we let it do its first intention,
heaven to be the end of our desires, and God the object of our love and
worshippings, and the Scripture the rule of our actions, and Christ our Lord
and Master, and the holy Spirit our mighty assistance and our Counselor, all
the little uglinesses of the world, and the follies of the flesh will be
uneasy, and unsavory, unreasonable, and a load; and then that grace, the grace
of faith, that lays hold upon the holy Trinity, although it cannot understand
it, and beholds heaven before it can possess it, shall also correct our
weaknesses, and master all our aversations; and though we cannot in this world
be perfect masters, and triumphant persons, yet we be conquerors and more; that
is, conquerors of the direct hostility, and sure of a crown to be revealed in
its due time.

2. The second great remedy of our evil Nature and of the loads of the flesh,
is devotion, or a state of prayer, and intercourse with God. For the gift of
the Spirit of God, which is the great antidote of our evil natures, is
properly and expressly promised to prayer; If you who are evil give good things
to your children that ask you, how much Luke 11. 13. Mat. 7. 11.
more shall your Father from heaven give his holy Spirit to them that ask it?
That which in S. Luke is called (...), the holy Spirit, is called in St.
Matthew, (...), good things; that is, the holy Spirit is all that good that we
shall need toward our pardon, and our sanctification, and our glory, and this
is promised to Prayer; Prayer is but one part of devotion; and though of
admirable efficacy toward the obtaining this excellent promise, yet it is to
be assisted by the other parts of devotion, to make it a perfect remedy to our
great evil. He that would secure his evil Nature, must be a devout person,
and he that is devout, besides, that he prays frequently, he delights in it as
it is a conversation with God; he rejoices in God, and esteems him the light of
his eyes, and the support of his confidence, the object of his love, and the
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice; that Phil. 4. 4.
is, as the Levites were appointed to rejoice, because God was their portion in
tithes and offerings, so now that in the spiritual sense God is our portion,
we should rejoice in him, and make him our inheritance, and his service our
employment, and the peace of conscience to be our rest, and then it is
impossible we should be any longer slaves to sin, and afflicted by the baser
employments of the Juvenal observed well, Nullum malum gaudium est, No true joy
can be evil; and therefore it was improperly said of Virgil, Mala gaudia
mentis, calling lust and wild desires, the evil joys of the mind; Gaudium
enim nisi sapienti non contingere, said Seneca, none but a wise and a good man
can truly rejoice; The evil laugh loud, and sigh deeply, they drink drunk, and
forget their sorrows, and all the joys of an evil man is only arts of
forgetfulness, devices to cover their sorrow, and make them not see their
death, and its affrighting circumstances; but the heart never can rejoice, and
be secure, be pleased and be at rest, but when it dwells with holiness: the
joys that come from thence are safe and great, unchangeable and unabated,
healthful and holy; and this is true joy: and this is that which can cure all
the little images of pleasure, and temptation which debauch our nature, and
make it dwell with St. Gregory well observed the difference: saying, that
Corporal pleasures when we have them not, inkindle a flame and a burning
desire in the heart, and make a man very miserable, before he tastes them; the
appetite to them is like thirst and the desires of a fever, the pleasure of
drinking will not pay for the pain of the desire; and when they are enjoyed,
they instantly breed satiety and a loathing. But spiritual rejoycings, and
delights are loathed by them that have them not, and despised by them that
never felt them; but when they are once tasted they increase the appetite and
swell it to And therefore when this new and stranger appetite, and consequent
joy arises in the heart of man, it so fills all the faculties, that there is no
gust, no desire left for toads and vipers, for hemlock and the deadly
nightshade.

Sirenas, hilarem navigantium poenam,
Blandasque mortes, gaudiumque crudele,

Prudens Ulysses dicitur reliquisse.
Then a man can hear the music of songs and dances, and think them to be
heathenish noises; and if he be engaged in the society of a woman singer, he
can be as unconcerned as a marble statue; he can be at a feast and not be
defiled, he can pass through theaters as through a street; then he can look on
money as his servant, nec distant era lupinis, he can use it as the Greeks did
their sharp coins, to cast accounts withal, and not from thence take the
accounts pursuit of the affairs of his Kingdom, then you have the grace
devotion, and your evil nature shall be cured.

3. Because this great cure is to be wrought by the Spirit of God, which is a
new nature in us, we must endeavor to abstain from those things which by a
special malignity are directly opposite to the spirit of reason, and the
spirit of grace; and those are drunkenness and lust. He that is full of wine
cannot be full of the spirit of God; St. Paul notes the hostility. Be not
drunk with wine, Ephesians. 5. 18.
but be filled with the Spirit; a man that is a drunkard does perire cito, he
perishes quickly, his temptations that come to him make but short work with
him; a drunkard is (...): our English well a sottishness, and the man is
(...), an useless, senseless person, (...); of all the evils of the world
nothing is worse to a man's self, nothing is more harmfull then this; (...),
said Crobylus, it deprives a wise man of his counsel and his understanding:
now, because it is the greatest good that nature has, that which takes it away
must needs be our greatest enemy. Nature is weak enough of it self, but
drunkenness takes from it all the little strengths that are left to it, and
destroys the spirit; and the man can neither Spiritus sanctus amat sicca
corda, the Spirit of Godloves dry hearts, said the Christian Proverb; and
Josephus said of Samson, (...), it appears he was a Prophet, or a man full of
the Spirit, by the temperance of his diet; and now that all the people are holy
unto the Lord, they must (...), as Plutarch said of their consecrated persons;
they must have dry and sober purities: for by this means their reason is
useful, and their passions not violent, and their discourse united, and the
precious things of their memory Adams sin, and stop all the effect which is
upon him from all the evils of the world, if he delights in seas of drink, and
is pleased with the follies of distempered persons, and laughs loud at the
childish humors and weak discourses of the man that can do nothing but that
for which Dionysius slew Antiphon, and Timagenes did fall Caesar's friendship;
that is, play the fool and abuse his friend; He cannot give good counsel or
spend an hour in wise sayings; but half a day they can talk ut foret unde
corona cachinnum tollere possit, to make the crowd laugh and consider not.

And the same is the case of lust; because it is exactly contrary

4. Hither is to be reduced, that we avoid all flatterers and evil company;
for it was impossible that Alexander should be wise and cure his pride and his
drunkenness, so long as he entertained Agesius and Agnon, Bagoas and
Demetrius, and slew Parmenio and Philotas, and murdered wise Calisthenes for he
that loves to be flartered, loves not to change his pleasur^; but had rather to
hear himself called wise, then to be so. Flattery does bribe an evil nature,
and corrupt a good one; and make it love to give wrong judgment, and evil
sentences; he that loves to be flattered can never want some to abuse him, but
he shall always want one to counsel him, and then he can never be wise.

5. But I must put these advices into a heap; he therefore that will cure his
evil nature, must for himself against his chiefest lust, which when he has
overcome, the lesser enemies will come in of

8. It is necessary that in all actions of choice he deliberate and consider,
that he may never do that for which he must ask a pardon, and he must suffer
shame and smart: and therefore Cato did well reprove Aulus Albinus for writing
the Roman story in the Greek tongue, of which he had but imperfect knowledge;
and himself was put to make his Apology for so doing; Cato told him that he
was mightily in love with a fault, that he had rather beg a pardon compendium
not to enter in from whence we must uneasily retire.

9. In all the contingencies of chance and variety of action, remember that
thou art the maker of thy own fortune, and of thy own sin; charge not God with
it either before or after; Egyptian robber sleeping under a rotten wall was
awakened by Serapis, and sent away from the ruin; but being quit from the
danger, and seeing the wall to slide, thought that the Demon loved his crime,
because he had so strangely preserved him from a sudden and a violent death.
But Serapis told him, (...), I saved you from the wall to reserve you for the
wheel; from a short and a private death, to a painful and disgraceful; and so
it is very frequently in the event of humane affairs: men are saved from one
death, and reserved for another; or are preserved here to be destroyed
hereafter; and they that would judge of actions by events, must stay till all
events are passed; that is, till all their posterity be dead, and the sentence
is given at Doomsday; in the mean time, the evils of our nature are to be
looked upon without all accidental appendages; as they are in themselves, as
they have an irregularity and disorder, an unreasonablenesse and a sting; and
be sure to rely upon

9. Avoid all delay in the counsels of Religion. Because the aversation and
perverseness of a childs nature may be corrected easily;

10. Learn to despise the world; or, which is a better compendium in the duty,
learn but truly to understand it; for it is a cousenage all the way; the head
of it is a rainbow, and the face of it is flattery; its words are charms, and
all its stories are false; its body is a shadow, and its hands do knit spiders
webs; it is an image and a noise, with a Hyaena's lip and a Serpents tail; it
was given to serve the needs of our nature, and in stead of doing it, it
creates strange appetites, and nourishes thirsts and fevers; it brings care

is hindered, but not by God that requires them, and therefore by himself, or
his worst enemy. But the measures of this question are these.

1. If the flesh hinders us of our duty, it is our enemy; and then it is weak,
but not directly, nor always criminal. But to speak particularly.

If our flesh hinders us of any thing that is a direct duty, and prevails upon
the spirit to make it do an evil action, or contract an evil habit, the man
is in a state of bondage and sin: his flesh is the mother of corruption, and an
enemy to God. It is not enough to say, I desire to serve God, and cannot as I
would: I would fain love God above all the things in the world, but the flesh
has I pray to be forgiven as I forgive others; but flesh and blood cannot put
up such an injury: for know that no infirmity, no unavoidable accident, no
necessity, no poverty, no business can hinder us from the love of God, or
forgiving injuries, or being of a religious and a devout spirit; Poverty and
the intrigues of the world are things that can no more hinder the spirit in
these duties, then a strong enemy can hinder the sun to shine, or the clouds to
drop rain. These things which God requires of us, and exacts from us with
mighty penalties, these he has made us able to perform; for he knows that
because they will not quit the love of Gods enemies; and

2. If the spirit and the heart be willing, it will pass on to outward actions
in all things where it ought, or can. He that has a charitable soul will have
a charitable hand; and will give his money to the poor, as he has given his
heart to God: For these things which are in our hand are under the power of our
will, and therefore are to be commanded by it. He that says to the naked, be
warm and clothed, and gives him not the garment that lies by him, God, and the
poor, and himself. Nequam illud verbum est, been vult, nisi qui been facit,
said the Comedy; It Trinummus.
is an evil saying, he wishes well, unless he do well.

3. Those things which are not in our power, that is, such things in which the
flesh is inculpably weak, or naturally, or politically disabled, the will does
the work of the outward and of the inward man; we cannot cloth Christ's body,
he needs it not; and we cannot approach so sacred and separate a presence; but
if we desire to do it, it is accounted as if we had. The ignorant man cannot
discourse wisely and promote the interest of souls, but he can love

4. For that is the last caution, concerning this question. No man is to be
esteemed of a willing spirit, but he that endeavors to do the outward work, or
to make all the supplies that he can; not only Silver and gold have I none, and
therefore I can give you none: But I wish you well; How will that appear? why
thus, Such as I have I will give you: Rise up and walk. I cannot give you gold,
but I can give you counsel; I cannot relieve your need, but I can relieve your
sadness; I cannot cure you, but I can comfort you; I cannot take away your
poverty, but I can ease your spirit; and God accepts us (says the Apostle)
according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not. Only as
our desires are great, and our spirits are willing,

Et labor ingenium misero dedit, and sua quemque
Advigilare sibi jussit fortuna premendo.


(...).
The necessity of our fortune, and the willingness of our spirits will do all
this; all that it can, and something that it cannot; You have relieved the
Saints (says St. Paul) according to your power, yea and beyond your power;
Only let us be careful in all instances, that we

Sermon, XII. Of Lukewarmnesse, and Zeal: OR SPIRITVALL TERROVR. Part I.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully.
Christ's Kingdom being in order to the Kingdom of his Father, which shall be
manifest at the day of Judgment, must therefore be spiritual, because then it
is, that all things must become spiritual, not only by way of eminency, but by
entire constitution and perfect change of natures. the wine of elect souls; and
as to every natural appetite there is now proportioned an object, crasse,
material, unsatisfying, and allayed natural flesh, and heavenly spirit, that
is, the powers of darkness, and the regions of light, the miseries of man, and
the perfections of God; the imperfection of nature where we stand by our
creation, and supervening follies, and that state of felicities whither we are
designed by the mercies of God, there is a middle state; the Kingdom of grace
wrought for the man Christ Jesus, who came to perfect the virtue of Religion,
and the designs of God, and to reform our Nature, and to make it possible for
us to come to that spiritual state where all felicity does dwell. The Religion
that Christ taught is a spiritual Religion, it designs (so far as this state
can permit) to make us spiritual; that is; so as the spirit be the prevailing
ingredient. God must now be worshipped in spirit, and not only so, but with a
fervent spirit; and though God in all religions did seize upon the spirit, and
even under Moses Law did by the shadow of the ceremony, require the
substantial worship, while the spirit prevails, we do not to evil purposes of
abatement fervent, intense, active, wise, and busy, according to the nature of
things spiritual. Now because God always perfectly intended it, yet because
he less perfectly required it in the Law of Moses, I say they fell short in
both.

For, 1. They so rested in the outward action, that they thought themselves
chaste, if they were no adulterers, though their eyes were wanton as Kids, and
their thoughts polluted as the springs of the wilderness when a Panther and a
Lioness descend to drink and lust; and if they did not rob the Temple, they
accounted Josephus reproves Polybius for saying that Antiochus was punished for
having a design of sacrilege; and therefore Tertullian says of them, they
were nec plenae, nec adeo timendae disciplinae ad innocentiae veritatem; this
was their righteousness which Christ said unless we will exceed, we shall not
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, where all spiritual perfections are in
state and excellency.

2. The other part of a spiritual worship is a fervor and a holy Zeal of Gods
glory, greatness of desire, and quickness of action; the work of the Lord
deceitfully; they either gave him the action without the heart, or zeal without
charity, or religion without zeal, or ceremony without religion, or
indifferency without desires; and then God is served by the outward man his
work be done sincerely, and our duty with great affection; and by these two
provisions, both the intension and the extension are secured; our duty shall be
entire, and it shall be perfect, we shall be neither lame nor cold, without a
limb, nor without natural heat, and then the work of the Lord will prosper in
our hands: but if we the Lords work deceitfully, and then we are accursed. For
so says the Spirit of God; Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully.

1. Here then is the duty of us all: 1. God requires of us to serve him with an
integrall, entire, or a whole worship and religion. 2. God requires of us to
serve him with earnest and intense affections; The entire purpose of both
which, I shall represent in its several parts by so many propositions. 3. I
shall consider concerning the measures of zeal, and its inordinations.

1. He that serves God with the body without the soul, serves God deceitfully.
My son give me thy heart; and though I cannot think that Nature was so
sacramental, as to point out the holy and mysterious Trinity by the triangle
of the heart, yet it is certain that the heart of man is Gods special portion,
and every angle ought to point out toward him directly; that is, the soul of
man ought to be presented to God, and given to him as an oblation to the
interest of his service.

1. For, to worship God with our souls consesses one of his glorious
ateributes; it declares him to be the searcher of hearts, and that he reads the
secret purposes, and beholds the smallest arrests

2. It advances the powers and concernments of his providence, and confesses
all the affairs of men, all their cabinets and their nightly counsels, their
snares and two-edged mischiefs to be overruled by him; for what he sees he
judges, and what he judges he rules, and what he rules must turn to his glory;
and of this glory he reflects rays and influences upon his servants, and it
shall also turn to their good.

3. This service distinguishes our duty toward God from all our fiscus empty,
and that all the revenues of the Crown were in his counting house, cannot be
punished by the Laws, unless himself become his own traitor and accuser; and
therefore what man cannot discern, he must not judge, and must not require? but
God sees it and judges it, and requires it, and therefore reserves this as his
own portion and the chiefest

4. He that secures the heart, secures all the rest; because this is the
principle of all the moral actions of the whole man, and the hand obeys this,
and the feet walk by its prescriptions; we eat and drink by measures which the
soul desires and limits; and though the natural actions of man are not subject
to choice and rule, yet the animal actions are under discipline; and although
it cannot be helped but we shall desire,

5. That I may sum up many reasons in one; God by requiring the heart secures
the perpetuity and perseverance of our duty, and its sincerity, and its
integrity, and its perfection: for so also God takes account of little things;
it being all one in the heart of man, whether maliciously it omits a duty in a
small instance or in a great; for although the expression has variety and
degrees in it in relation to those purposes of usefulness and charity whither
God designs it, yet the obedience and disobedience is all one, and shall be
equally Tryphon disputed against Justin, that the precepts of the Gospel were
impossible to be kept, because it also requiring the heart of man did stop
every egression of disorders: for making the root holy and healthful, as the
Balsame of Judaea, or the drops of Manna in the evening of the sabbath; it also
causes that nothing spring thence but gummes sit for incense, and oblations for
the Altar of proposition, and a cloud of perfume fit to make atonement for our
sins, and being united to the great sacrifice of the world to reconcile God and
man together. Upon these reasons you see it is highly fit that God should
require sacrifice of our hearts; and not at all think that God is satisfied
with the work of the hands, when the affections of the heart are absent. He
that prays because he would be quiet, and would fain be quit of it, and
communicates for fear of the laws, and comes to Church to avoid shame, and
gives alms to be eased of an importunate beggar, or relieves his old parents
because they will not dye in their time, and provides for his children lest he
be compeld by Laws and shame, but yet complains of the charge of Gods
blessings, this man is a servant of the eyes of men, and offers parchment or a
white skin in sacrifice, but

2. He that serves God with the soul without the body, when both can be
conjoined, does the work of the Lord deceitfully. Paphnutius, whose knees were
cut for the testimony of Jesus, was not obliged to worship with the humble
flexures of the bending penitents: and blind Bartimeus could not read the holy
lines of the Law, and therefore that part of the work was not his duty; and God
shall not call Lazarus to account for not giving alms, nor St. Peter and St.
John for not giving silver and gold to the lame man, nor Epaphroditus for not
keeping his fasting days when he had his sickness. But when God has made the
body an apt minister to the soul, and has given money for alms, and power to
protect the oppressed, Rachel gave her maid to Jacob and she bore children to
her Lord upon her Mistress knees, and the children were reckoned to them both,
because the one had fruitful desires and the other a fruitful womb: so must
the body serve the needs of the spirit; that what the one desires the other may
effect, and the conceptions of the soul may be the productions of the body; and
the body must bow when the soul worships, and the hand must help when the soul
pities, and both together do the work of a holy Religion; the body alone can
never serve God a body and a spirit, a material and a spiritual part: and
when the action has the same constitution that a man has, without the act of
both it is as imperfect as a dead man; the soul cannot produce the body of some
actions any more then the body can put life into it; and therefore an
ineffective pity and a lazy counsel, an empty blessing, and gay words, are
but deceitful charity.


He that gave his friend counsel to study the Law, when he desired to borrow
20 l. was not so friendly in his counsel as he was useless in his charity;
spiritual acts can cure a spiritual malady, but if my body needs relief,
because you cannot feed me with Diagrams, or cloth me with Euclids elements,
you must minister a real supply by a corporal charity to my corporal
necessity. This proposition is not only useful in the doctrine of charity, and
the virtue of religion, but in the professions of faith, and requires that it
be public, open, and ingenuous. In matters of necessary duty it is not
sufficient to have it to our selves, but we must also have it to God, and all
the world; and as in the heart we believe, so by the mouth we confess unto
salvation: he is an ill man that is only a Christian in his heart, and is not
so in his professions and publications; and as your heart must not be wanting
in any good profession and pretenses, so neither must public profession be
wanting in every good and necessary persuasion. The faith and the cause of God
must be owned we do the Lords work deceitfully.

3. They are deceitful in the Lords work that reserve one faculty for sin, or
one sin for themselves, or one action to please their appetite, and many for
Religion. Rabbt Kimchi taught his Scholars, Cogitationem pravam Deus non habet
vice facti, nisi concepta fuerit in Dei sidem and Religionem; that God is never
angry with an evil thought, unless it be a thought of Apostasy from the
Jews religion; and therefore, provided that men be severe and close in anger
at one end, and lust at the other, so they did not flame out in egressions of
violence and injustice, in adulteries and fouler complications: nay they would
give leave to some degrees of evil actions; for R. Moses and Selomoh taught,
that if the most part of a man's actions were holy and just, though in one he
sinned often, yet the greater ingredient should prevail, and the number of good
works should outweigh the lesser account of evil things; and this Pharisaicall
righteousness is too frequent even amongst Christians. For who almost Austin
said, Audco dicere superbis continentibus expedit cadere, they that are chaste
and proud, it is sometimes a remedy for them to fall into sin, and by the shame
of lust to cure the devil of pride, and by the sin of the body to cure the
worser evils of the spirit; and therefore he adds, that he did believe, God in
a severe mercy did permit the barbarous nations, breaking in upon the Roman
Empire, to violate many virgins professed in Cloisters and religious Families
to be as a mortification of their pride, lest the accidental advantages of a
continent life should bring them into the certain Peter was safer by his fall
(as it fell out in the event of things) then by his former confidence. Man must
never cure a sin by a sin; but he that brings good out of our evil, he can
when he please. But I speak it, to represent how deceitfully many times we do
the work of the Lord. We reprove a sinning Brother, but do it with a pompous
spirit; we separate from scandal, and do it with glory, and a a savor of
death, though they were intended for the beginning and the promotion of an
eternal life; and those are faith and charity; some men think if they have
faith, it is enough to answer all the accusations of sin which our consciences
or the Devils make against faith, at last to quit my scores. For he that is
most careful is not innocent, but must be saved by faith, and he that is least
careful may have faith, and that will save him. But because these men mistake
concerning faith, and consider not that charity or a good life is a part of
that faith that saves us, they hope to be saved by the Word, they fill their
bellies with the story of Frimalcions banquet, and drink drunk with the news
of wine, they eat shadows, and when they are drowning, catch at the image of
the

But thus many men do with charity, [Give alms and all things shall be clean
unto you, said our Blessed Savior:] and therefore, many keep a sin alive, and
make account to pay for it, and God shall be put to relieve his own poor at the
price of the sin of another of his servants; charity shall take lust or
intemperance into protection, faith without charity, and these have charity
without hope; for every one that has this hope, that is, the hope of receiving
the glorious things of God purifies himself even as God is pure; faith and
charity too, must both suppose repentance; and repentance is the abolition of
the whole body of sin, the purification of the whole man. But the sum of the
Doctrine and case of conscience in this particular is this.

1. Charity is a certain cure of sins that are past, not that are present. He
that repents and leaves his sin, and then relieves the poor and pays for his
folly by a diminution of his own estate, and the supplies of the poor, and his
ministering to Christ's poor members, turns all his former crimes into holiness;
he purges Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar [Break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thine iniquities Den. 4. 27.
by showing mercy to the poor:] first be just, and then be charitable; for it
is pity alms, which is one of the noblest services of God, and the greatest
mercy to thy Brother, should be spent upon sin, and thrown away upon folly.

2. Faith is the remedy of all our evils, but then it is never of force, but
when we either have endeavored or undertaken to do all good; this in baptism,
that after: faith and repentance at first; faith and charity at last; and
because we fail often by infirmity, and sometimes by inadvertency, sometimes by
a surprise, and often by omission; and all this even in the midst of a sincere
endeavor to live justly, and perfectly; therefore the passion of our Lord pays
for this, and faith lays hold upon that. But without a hearty and sincere
intent, and vigorous prosecution of all the parts of our duty, faith is but a
word, not so much as a cover to a naked bosom, nor a pretense big enough to
deceive persons that are not willing to be cousened.

3. The bigger ingredient of virtue and evil actions will prevail, when virtue
is habitual, and sins are single, interrupted, casual and seldom, without
choice and without affection; that is, when our repentance is so timely that it
can work for God, more then we served under the tyranny of sin; so that if you
will account the whole life of man, the rule is good, and the greater
ingredient that must be pure and unmingled; if sin mingles in seldom and
unapproved instances, the drops of water are faith and charity.

4. There is one deceit more yet, in the matter of the extension of our duty,
destroying the integrity of its constitution: for they do the work of God
deceitfully, who think God sufficiently served with abstinence from evil, and
converse not in the acquisition and pursuit of holy charity and religion. This
Clemens Alexandrinus affirms of the Pharisees, they were (...), they hoped to
be justified by abstinence from things forbidden; but if we Flee from evil,
and do the thing that is good, and dwell for evermore, said the Spirit of God
in the Psalms: and St. Peter [Having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lust, give all diligence to add to your faith virtue, to virtue
patience, to patience godliness, and brotherly kindness and charity. Many
persons think themselves fairly assoiled, because they are no adulterers, no
rebels, no drunkards, not of scandalous lives; In the mean time like the
Laodiceans, they are naked and poor; they have no catalogue of good things
registered in heaven, no treasures in the repositories of the poor, neither have
the poor often prayed concerning them, Lord remember thy servants for this
thing at the day of Judgment. A negative Religion is in many the work of the
Lord, and their own too, very deceitfully, unless they account
correspondencies of piety to all their powers and possibilities: they are to
reckon and consider concerning what oppressions they have relieved, what causes
and what fatherless they have defended, how the work of God and of Religion,
of justice furca and the wheel, the torments of lustful persons, and the crown
of flames, that is reserved for the ambitious; or they shall not be gnawn with
the vipers of the envious, (poenam sensus, the Schools call it) yet the lazy
and the imperfect, the harmless sleeper and the idle worker shall have poenam
damni, the loss of all his hopes, and the dishonours of the loss; and in the
sum of affairs it will be no great difference whether we have loss or pain,
because there can pain imaginable then to lose the sight of God to eternal
ages.

5. Hither are to be reduced as deceitful workers, those that promise to God,
but mean not to pay what they once intended; * people that are confident in the
day of case, and fail in the danger; Michael and the Dragon; for they divide
the Spirit of God, and distinguish his commandments into parties and factions;
by seeking an excuse, sometimes they destroy the integrity and perfect
constitution of duty, or they do something whereby the effect and usefulness
of the duty is hindered: concerning

SERMON, XIII. Part II.
intention of our duty: and here it will not be amiss to change the word
fraudulenter, or dolose, into that which some of the Latin Copies do use,
Maledictus qui facit opus Dei [negligenter,] Cursed is he that does the work of
the Lord negligently, or remissely: and it implies, that as our duty must be
whole, so it must be fervent; for a languishing body may have all its parts,
and yet be useless to many purposes of nature: and you may reckon all the
joints of a dead man, but the heart is cold, and the joints are stiff and fit
for nothing but for the such are they whom S. Bernard describes, whose
spiritual joy is allayed with tediousness, whose compunction for sins is
short and seldom, whose thoughts are animal, and their designs secular,
whose Religion is lukewarm; their obedience is without devotion, their
discourse without profit, their prayer without intention of heart, their
reading without instruction, their meditation is without spiritual advantages,
and is not the commencement and strengthening of holy purposes; and they are
such whom modesty will not restrain, nor reason bridle, nor discipline correct,
capitulars and canons of Religion, to love God, and to love our neighbors;
besides, that the material part of the duty [love] is founded in the spirit,
as its natural seat, he also three words to involve the spirit in the action,
and but one for the body: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and lastly, with all thy
strength; this brings in the body too; because it has some strengths, and some
significations of its own; but heart and soul and mind mean all the same thing
in a stronger and more earnest expression; that is, that we do it hugely, as
much as we can, with a clear choice, with a resolute understanding, with strong
affections, with great diligence: Enerves animos odisse virtus solet, Virtue
hates weak and ineffective minds, and tame easy prosecutions; Loripedes,
people whose arm is all flesh, whose foot is all leather, and an unsupporting
skin; they creep like snakes, and pursue the noblest mysteries of Religion, as
Naaman did the mysteries of Rimmon, only in a complement, or for secular
regards; but without the mind, and therefore without Zeal; I would thou were
either hot or cold, said the Spirit of God to the Angel or Bishop of Laodicea.
In feasts or sacrifices the Ancients did use apponere frigidam or calidam;
sometimes they drank hot drink, sometimes they poured cold upon their graves,
or in their wines, but no services of Tables or Altars were ever with lukewarm.
God hates it worse accidentally it is much worse: and so it is, if we rightly
understand it; that is, if we consider it, not as a being in, or passing
through the middle way, but as a state and a period of Religion. If it be in
motion, a lukewarm Religion is pleasing to God; for God hates it not for its
imperfection, and its natural measures of proceeding; but if it stands still
and rests there, it is a state against the designs, and against the perfection
of God, and it has in it these evils.

1. It is a state of the greatest imprudence in the world; for it Gyarus, the
Island of his sorrow, and to dwell upon the Adriatic: So is he that begins a
state of Religion, and does not finish it; he abides in the highway, and
though he be nearer the place, yet is as far from the rest of his country as
ever; and therefore all that beginning of labor was in the prejudice of his
rest, but nothing to the advantages of his hopes. He that has never begun,
has lost no labor; Jactura praeteritorum, the loss of all that he has done,
is the first evil of the negligent and lukewarm Christian; according to the
saying of Solomon: He that is remiss or idle in his labor, is the brother of
him that scatters Prove. 18. 9.
his goods.

2. The second appendant evil is, that lukewarmnesse is the occasion of
greater evil; because the remiss easy Christian shuts the gate against the
heavenly breathings of Gods holy Spirit; he thinks every breath that is fan'd
by the wings of the holy Dove, is not intended to encourage his fires, which
burn, and smoke, and peep through the cloud already; it tempts him to security;
and if an evil life be a certain inlet to a second death, despair on one
side, and security on the other are the bars and locks to that door, he can
never pass forth again while that state remains; who ever vel pravae
institutionis deceptus exordio, aut per longam mentis incuriam, and virtute
animi decidente, as St. Austin observes; either upon the pursuit of his first
error, or by a careless spirit, or a decaying slackned resolution; all which
are the direct effects of lukewarmnesse. But so have I seen a fair structure
begun with art and care, and raised to half its stature, and then it stood
still by the misfortune or negligence of the owner, and the rain descended, and
dwelt in its joints, and supplanted the contexture of unthankfulness and
carelessness, a positive neglect, and a despite of holy things, a setting a low
price to the things of God, laziness and wretchlesnesse;

3. A state of lukewarmnesse is more incorrigible then a state of coldness;
while men flatter themselves that their state is good, that they are rich and
need nothing, that their lamps are dressed, and full of ornament. There are
many that think they are in their country as soon as ever they are weary, and
measure not the end of their hopes by the possession of them, but by their
precedent labor, which they overvalue, because they have easy and effeminate
Bernard complains of some that say, Sufficit nobis, nolumus esse meliores quam
Patres nostri: It is enough for us to be as our forefathers, who were honest
and useful in their generations, but be not over-righteous: These men are such
as think they have knowledge enough to need no teacher, devotion enough to need
no new fires, perfection enough to need no new progress, justice enough to
need no repentance; and then because the spirit of a man and all the things of
this world are in perpetual variety and change, these men decline when they
have gone their period; they stand still, and then revert; like a stone
returning from the bosom of a Cassian spoke a hard saying, Frequenter vidimus
de frigidis and carnalibus ad spiritualem venisse fervorem, de tepidis and
animalibus omnino non vidimus: Many persons from vic^^us, and dead, and cold,
have passed into life and an excellent grace, and a spiritual warmth, and holy
fires; but from lukewarm and indifferent never any body came to an excellent
condition, and rarissime S. Bernard says, very extremely seldom; and our
blessed Savior said something of this, The Publicans and the Harlots go
before you into the Kingdom of heaven; they are moved by shame, and punished
by disgrace, and remarked by punishments, and frighted by the circumstances and
notices of all the world, and separated from sober persons by laws and an
intolerable character; and the sense of honor, and the care of their not to
have comprehended, but still presses toward the mark of his calling, unless
(I say) he still increases in his appetites of Religion as he does in his
progression, he will think he needs no counselor, and the spirit of God
whispers to an ear that is already filled with noyses, and cannot attend to the
Qui non proficit vult deficere, said S. Bernard: He that goes not forward in
the love of God, and of Religion, does not stand still, but goes for all that,
but whither such a motion will lead him, himself without a timely care shall
feel by an intolerable experiment.

In this sense and for these reasons it is that although a lukewarm Christian
has gone forward some steps toward a state of holiness, absolutely and
naturally, is nearer the Kingdom of God then he, that is not yet set out; yet
accidentally, and by reason of these ill appendages, he is worse, in greater
danger, in a state equally unacceptable, and therefore must either go forward,
and still do the work of God carefully, and diligently, with a Fervent spirit,
and an Active hand, with a willing heart, and a cheerful eye, or it had been
better he had never begun.

2. It concerns us next to enquire concerning the duty in its proper faith, of
prayer, and of charity.

1. Our faith must be strong, vigorous, active, confident, and patient,
reasonable, and unalterable, without doubting, and fear, and partiality. For
the faith of very many men, seems a duty so weak and indifferent, is so often
untwisted by violence, or ravel'd and entangled in weak discourses, or so false
and fallacious by its mixture of interest, that though men usually put most
confidences in the pretenses of faith, yet no pretenses are more unreasonable.

1. Our faith and persuasions in Religion is most commonly imprinted in us by
our country, and we are Christians at the same rate as we are English or
Spaniards, or of such a family; our reason is first stained and spotted with
the dye of our kindred, and country, and our education puts it in grain, and
whatsoever is against this we are taught to call a faith, which is only the
air of the country, or an heireloome of the family, or the daughter of a
present interest. Whatever it was that brought us in, we are to take care that
when we are in, our faith be noble, and stand upon its most proper and most
reasonable foundation; it concerns us better to understand that Religion which
we call Faith, and that faith whereby we hope to be saved.

2. The faith and the whole Religion of many men is the production of fear. Men
are threatened into their persuasions, and the

Antisthenes was initiated into the mysteries of Orpheus, the Priest told him,
that all that were of that Religion, His qui sacris visis abeunt ad inferos
Homines beati sunt, solis quia vivere Contingit illic istis, turba caetera
Omnium malorum generi incidit.
immediately after death should be perfectly happy; the Philosopher asked him,
why he did not dye if he believed what he said? such a faith as that, was fine
to talk of at table, or eating the sacrifices of the Religion, when the mystic
man was (...) full of wine and flesh, of confidence and religion; but to dye,
is a more material Bias his case when he was poisoned by the Atheismes of
Theodorus, no man died more like a coward and a fool; as if the gods were to
come and go as Bias pleased to think and talk: so one said of his folly. If
pride or flatteries; and Atheisine is a proportion so unnatural and as faith
does, in health and sickness, in peace and war, in company and alone, at the
beginning and at the end of a design; but comes from weak principles, and
leaves shallow and superficial impressions; but when men endeavor to
strengthen and confirm it, they only strive to make themselves worse then
they can. Naturally a man cannot be an Atheist: for he that is so, must have
something within him that is worse either then man or devil.

4. Some measure their faith by shows and apparencies, by ceremonies and names,
by professions and little institutions. Diogenes Agesilaus, and Epaminondas,
two noble Greeks that had preserved their country, and lived virtuously. The
faith of a Christian has no signification at all but obedience and charity; if
men be just, and charitable, and good, and live according to their faith, then
only they are Christians; whatsoever else is pretended is but a shadow and the
image of a grace; for since in all the sects and institutions of the world, the
professors did in some reasonable sort conform to the rules of the profession
(as appears in all the Schools of Philosophers, and Religions Jews, and the
usages and the country customs of the Turks) it is a strange dishonor to
Christianity, that in it alone men should pretend to the faith of it, and do
nothing of what it persuades, and commands upon the account of those promises,
which it makes us to believe. * He that means to please God by his faith, must
have his faith begotten in him by the Spirit of God, and proper arguments of
Religion; he must profess it without fear, he must dare to die for it, and
resolve to live according to its institution; he must grow more confident, and
more holy, have fewer doubtings and more virtues, he contend earnestly for the
faith, by the most prevailing arguments, by the arguments of holy living, and
ready dying, by zeal and patience, by conformity and humility, by reducing
words to actions, fair discourses to perfect persuasions, by loving the
article, and increasing in the knowledge and love of God and his Son Jesus
Christ; and then his faith is not negligent, deceitful, artificial and
improper, but true, and holy, and reasonable, and useful, zealous and
sufficient, and therefore can never be reproved.

2. Our prayers and devotions must be fervent and zealous, not See Sermons of
the Return of Prayer, Part 2
cold, patient, easy, and soon rejected; but supported by a patient spirit,
set forwards by importunity, continued by perseverance, waited on by attention,
and a present mind, carried along with holy little drops will turn aside, and
fall from the full channel by the A wise man, and a full resolution, and an
earnest spirit can do any thing of duty; but every temptation prevails when
we are willing to die; and we usually lend nothing to the Lords work
deceitfully.

3. Our Charity also must be fervent: Malus est miles qui ducem suum gemens
sequitur, He that follows his General with a heavy march and a heavy heart is
but an ill soldier; but our duty to God should be hugely pleasing, and we
should rejoice in it: it must pass the labor and travail of love; A friend at
a sneese and an almes-basket full of prayers, a love that is lazy, and a
service that is useless, and a pity without support, are the images and
colors of that grace, whose very constitution and design is, beneficence and
well-doing. He that loves passionately will not only do all that his friend
needs, but all that himself can; for although the law of charity is fulfilled
by acts of profit, and bounty, and obedience, and labor; yet it has no other
measures but the proportions and abundance of a good mind; and according to
this God requires abounding, and that always, in the work of the Lord; if we
love passionately, we shall do all this, for love endures labor, and calls it
pleasure, it spends all and counts it a gain, it suffers inconveniences, and
is quickly reconciled to them; if dishonours and affronts be to be endured,
love smiles and calls them favors, and wears them willingly.

-- alii jacuere ligati
Turpiter, atque aliquis de Diis non tristibus optat
Sic fieri turpis, --
It is the Lord, said David, and I will be yet more vile, and it shall be
honor unto me; thus did the Disciples of our Lord go from tribunals rejoicing
that they were accounted worthy to suffer stripes for that beloved name; and we
are commanded to rejoice in persecutions, to resist unto blood, to strive to
enter in at the strait gate, not to be weary of well doing; do it hugely, and
do it always. Non enim votis neque suppliciis muliebribus auxilia Deorum
parantur; sed vigilando, agendo, been consulendo omnia prospere cedunt. No man
can obtain the favor of God by words and imperfect resolutions, by lazy
actions, and a remiss piety, but by severe counsels, and sober actions, by
watchfulness and prudence, by doing excellent things with holy intentions, and
vigorous prosecutions. Ubi socordiae and ignaviae te tradideris nequidquam Deos
implorabis: If your virtues be lazy, your vices will be bold and Democritus
said well, that the painful and the soft-handed people in Religion differ just
as good men and bad; nimirum spe bona, the laboring charity has a good hope,
but a cool Religion has none at all, and the distinction will have a sad
effect to eternal ages.

These are the great Scenes of duty in which we are to be fervent and zealous;
but because earnestness and zeal are circumstances of a great latitude; and
the zeal of the present age is stark cold, if compared to the fervors of the
Apostles, and other holy primitives; and in every age a good man's care may
turn duty dwells there, and whatsoever is above it is a degree of excellence;
but all that is less then it, is lukewarmnesse, and the state of an ungracious
and an unaccepted person.

1. No man is fervent and zealous as he ought, but he that absolutely, and in
particular instances, but always generally; and when it descends to
particulars, it must be in proportion to circumstances, and by their proper
measures: for,

1. In the whole course of life it is necessary that we prefer Religion before
any state that is either contrary to it, or a lessening of ats duties. He that
has a state of life in which he cannot at all in fair proportions tend to
Religion, must quit great proportions of that, this, this is that which our
blessed Savior calls pulling out the right eye if it offend thee.

2. In particular actions, when the necessity is equal, he that does not
prefer Religion is not at all Zealous; for although all natural necessities
are to be served before the circumstances and order of Religion, yet our belly
and our back, our liberty and our life, our health, and a friend are to be
neglected rather

3. Although the things of God are by a necessary Zeal to be preferred before
the things of the world; yet we must take heed that we do not reckon Religion,
and orders of worshipping, only to be the things of God, and all other duties
to be the things of the world; for it was a Pharisaicall device to cry Corban,
and to refuse to relieve their aged Parents; it is good to give to a Church,
but it is better to give to the Poor; and though they must be both provided
for, yet in cases of dispute Mercy carries Mary was commended for choosing the
better part, yet Mary had done worse if she had been at the foot of her Master
when she should have relieved a perishing brother. Martha was troubled with
much serving; that was more then need, and therefore she was to blame; and
sometimes hearing in some circumstances may be more then needs; and some women
are troubled with overmuch hearing, and then they had better have been serving
the necessities of their house.

4. This rule is not to be extended to the relatives of Religion; immediately,
or more effectively, cannot at all times be known; the partaking the Spirit is
a nearer relation to him, then doing his ministeries, and serving his ends upon
others; * and if relations to God and Gods Spirit could bring an obligation of
giving proportionable civil honor, every holy man might put in some pretense
for dignities above some Kings and some Bishops. * But as the things of the
Spirit are in order to the affairs of another world, so they naturally can
infer only such a relative dignity, as can be expressed in spiritual
manners. But because such relations are subjected in men of civil excellencies
are the proper ground of receiving and exacting civil honors, and spiritual
excellencies do only claim them accidentally, civil praeeminence is the
appendix of the greatest civil power and employment, and is to descend in
proper measures; and for a spiritual relation to challenge a temporal
dignity, is as if the best Music should challenge the best clothes, or a
Lutestring should contend with a Rose for the honor of the greatest
sweetness. * Add to this, that although temporal things are in order to
spiritual, and therefore are less perfect, yet this is not so naturally; for
temporal things are properly in order to the felicity of man in his proper and
present constitution; and it is things, and persons, and callings have properly
the chiefest temporal regard; and Christ took nothing of this away from them,
but put them higher, by sanctifying and ennobling them. * But then the higher
calling can no more suppose the higher man, then the richest trade can suppose
the richest man. From callings to men, the argument is fallacious; and a Smith
is a more useful man then he that teaches Logic; but not always to be more
esteemed, and called to stand at the chairs of Princes and Nobles.

sold to redeem Captives when there is a great calamity imminent,

But in the whole, the duty of zeal requires that we neglect an ordinary visit
rather then an ordinary prayer, and a great profit rather then omit a required
duty. No excuse can legitimate a sin; and he that goes about to distinguish
between his duty and his profit, and if he cannot reconcile them, will yet tie
them together like a Hyaena and a Dog, this man pretends to Religion, but
secures the world, and is indifferent and lukewarm toward that, so he may be
warm and safe in the possession of this.

2. To that fervor and zeal that is necessary and a duty, it is required that
we be constant and persevering. Esto fidelis ad mortem, said the Spirit of God
to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Be faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a crown of life: For he that is warm to day, and cold to morrow, zealous
in his resolution and weary in his practices, fierce in the beginning, and
slack and easy in his progress, has not yet well chosen what side he will be
of; he sees not reason enough for Religion, and he has not confidence enough
for its contrary; and therefore he is duplicis animi, as St. James calls him,
of a doubtful mind. For Religion is

3. No man is zealous as he ought, but he that delights in the service of God:
without this no man can persevere, but must faint under the continual pressure
of an uneasy load. If a man goes personam sustinere, he acts a part which he
cannot long personate, but will find so many excuses and silly devices to omit
his duty, such tricks to run ansa or handle left whereby we can easily be
drawn from duty, when all parties are pleased with the employment. Jonathan
when he had newly tasted honey, and the light came into his eyes, and he was
refreshed and pleasant. This happens sometimes when God please to entice, or
reward a man's spirit, with little Antepasts of heaven; but such a delight only
is necessary, and a duty, that we always choose our duty regularly, and
undervalue the pleasures of temptation, and proceed in the work of grace with a
firm choice and unabated election; our joy must rejoicing in hope, so the
Apostle calls it; that is, a going forward upon such a persuasion as sees the
joys of God laid up for the Children of men: and so the sun may shine under a
cloud; and a man may rejoice in persecution, and delight in losses; that is,
though his outward man groans, and faints, and dies, yet his spirit, (...),
the inner man is confident and industrious, and has a hope by which it lives
and works unto the end: It was the case of our blessed Savior in his agony;
his soul was exceeding sorrowful unto death, and the load of his Fathers
anger crushed his shoulder, and bowed his knees to the ground; and yet he chose
it, and still went forward, and resolved to die, and did so; and what we
choose we delight in; and we think it to be eligible, and therefore amiable,
and fit by its proper excellencies and appendages to be delighted in; it is not
pleasant to the flesh at all times, for its dignity is spiritual and heavenly;
but therefore

These are the necessary parts of zeal; of which if any man fails, he is in a
state of lukewarmnesse, and that is a spiritual death. As a banished man or a
condemned person is dead civilly; he is diminutus capite, he is not reckoned in
the census, nor partakes of the privileges, nor goes for a person, but is
reckoned among things in the possession of others: so is a lukewarm person; he
is cord diminutus, he is spiritually dead, his heart is estranged

SERMON, XIV. Part III.
frequency in prayer, and alms above our estate. Concerning which two
instances I have these two cautions to insert. 1. Concerning frequency in
prayer, it a religious person. For in Scripture there is no other rule for the
frequency of prayer given us, but by such words which signify we should do it
always, Pray continually: and, Men ought always to pray and not to faint. And
then, men have so many necessities, that if we should esteem our needs to be
the circumstances and positive determination of our times of prayer, we should
be very far from admitting limitation they cannot be restrained with fear: the
hand they cannot be restrained with disability to sin; they are flattered by
all mean, and base, and indiligent persons, which are the greatest part of
mankind; but few men dare reprove a potent sinner; he shall every day be
flattered and seldom counseled: and his great reflections and opinions of his
condition makes him impatient of reproof, and so he cannot be restrained with
modesty: and therefore pray often, that they pray without ceasing; For there is
great reason they should do so, and great security and advantage, if they do;
he that prays well and prays often, must needs be a good and a blessed man;
and truly he that does not, deserves no pity for his misery. For when all the
troubles and dangers of his condition may turn into his good, if he will but
desire they should; when upon such easy terms he may be happy, for there is no
more trouble in it then this, Ask and ye shall receive; that is all that is
required; no more turnings and variety in their road; when (I say) at so cheap
a rate, a poor man may be provided for, and a rich man may escape damnation,
they that refuse to apply themselves to this remedy, quickly, earnestly,
zealously, and constantly, deserves the smart if he be poor, and if he be rich
it is fit he should (because he desires it) dye by the evils of his proper
danger. * It was observed by Cassian; orationibus maxim infidiantur Daemones,
the Devil is more busy to disturb our prayers, then to hinder any thing else.
For else it cannot be imagined why we should be brought to pray so seldom, and
to be so listlesse to them, and so trifling to them. No, The Devil knows upon
what hard terms he stands with the praying man; he also knows that it is a
mighty cmanation of Gods infinite goodness and a strange desire of saving
mankind, that he has to so easy a duty to pray coldly, or to pray seldom,
he secures his interest, and destroys the man's; and it is infinitely strange,
that he can and does prevail so much in this so unreasonable temptation.
Opposuisti nubem ne transirot oration, the mourning Prophet complained there
Lam. 3. 44.
was a cloud passed between heaven and the prayer of Judah; a little thing God
knows; it was a wall which might have been blown down with a few hearty sighs,
and a few penitential tears; or if the prayers had ascended in a full and
numerous body, themselves would have broken through that little partition; but
so the Devil opponit nubem: he claps a cloud between; some little objection; a
stranger is come; or my head aches; or the Church is too cold; or I have letters
to write; or I am not disposed; or it is not yet time, or the time is past:
these, and such as these are the clouds, the Devil claps between heaven and
us; but these are such impotent objections, that they were as soon confuted as
pretended, by all men that are not fools, or professed enemies of Religion, but
that they are clouds: which sometimes look like Lions and Bears, Castles, and
walls of fire, armies and horses; and indeed are any thing that a man will
fancy; and the smallest article of objection Aristo. (...).
as the Sophister said in the Greek Comedy, Clouds become any thing as they are
represented; Wolves to Simon, Hearts to Cleonymus; For the Devil fits us with
clouds according as we can be abused; and if we love affairs of the world, he
can contrive its circumstances so, that they shall cross our prayers; and so
it is in every instance: and the best way to cure this evil is prayer; pray
often, and pray zealously, and habits are the daughters of action, but then
they nurse their mother, and produce daughters after her image, but far more
beautiful and prosperous. For in frequent prayer there is so much rest and
pleasure, that as soon as ever it is perceived, the contrary temptation appears
unreasonable; none are so unwilling to pray as they that pray seldom; for they
that do pray often, and with zeal, and passion and desire, feel taste how good
and gracious the Lord is to the praying man, so long you cannot see the evil
of your coldness and lukewarm state; but if you would but try, though it be
but for curiosity sake, and inform your selves in the vanity of things, and
the truth of pretenses, and the certainty of Theological propositions, you
should find your selves taken in a golden snare, which will tie you to nothing
but felicity, safety, and holiness, and pleasures. But then the caution which
I intended to insert is this; that frequency in prayers, and that part of zeal
which relates to it, is to be upon no account but of an holy spirit, a wise
heart, and reasonable persuasion; for if it begins upon passion or fear, in
imitation of others, or desires of reputation, honor or fantastic
principles, it will be unblessed and weary, unprosperous and without return or
satisfaction: therefore if it

2. When you are entered into a state of zealous prayer, and a regular devotion,
what ever interruption you can meet with, observe their causes and be sure to
make them irregular, seldom, and contingent, that your omissions may be
seldom and casual, as a bare accident; for which no provisions can be made;
for if ever it come, that you take any thing habitually and constantly from
your very frequently, it cannot be but you will become troublesome to your
self; your prayers will be uneasy, they will seem hindrances to your more
necessary affairs of passion and interest, and the things of the world: and it
will not stand still, till it comes to Apostasy, and a direct despite and
contempt of holy things. For it was an old rule, and of a sad experience,
Tepiditas si callum obduxerit fiet apostasia, if your lukewarmnesse be
habitual and a state of life, if it once be hardened by the usages of many
days, it changes the whole state of the man, it makes him an apostate to
devotion. Therefore be infinitely Chrysostom, Docendi, praedicandi officia and
alia cessant suo tempore, precandi autem nunquam; there are seasons for
teaching, and preaching, and other outward offices; but prayer is the duty of
all times, and of all persons, and in all contingences: From other things in
many cases we can be excused, but from prayer never. In this therefore (...),
it is good to be zealous.

2. Concerning the second instance I named, viz. To give alms above our
estate, it is an excellent act of zeal, and needs no other caution to make it
secure from illusion and danger, but that our egressions of charity do not
prejudice justice. See that your alms do not other men wrong, and let them do
what they can to thy self, they will never prejudice thee by their abundance;
but then be also careful that the pretenses of justice do not cosen thy self
of thy charity, and the poor of thine alms, and thy soul of the reward. He
that is in debt is not excused from giving alms till his debts are paid; but
only from giving away such portions which should and would pay them, and such
which he intended should do it: There are lacernae divitiarum, and crumbs from
the table, and the gleanings of the harvest, and the scatterings of the
vintage, which Mat. 5. 16.


3. Hither is to be reduced *the accepting and choosing the counsels
Evangelicall: *the virgin or widow estate in order to Religion: selves Eunuchs
for the Kingdom of Heaven: *offering our selves to death voluntary, in
exchange or redemption of the life of a most useful person, as Aquila and
Priscilla, who ventured their lives for St. Paul: *the zeal of souls: *St.
Paul's preaching to the Corinthian Church without wages: remitting of rights
and forgiving of debts, when the obliged person could pay, but not without much
trouble: *protection of calamitous persons with hazard of our own interest and
a certain trouble; concerning which and all other acts of zeal, we are to
observe the following measures, by which

1. The first measure, by which our zeal may comply with our 3.
duty, and its actions become laudable, is charity to our neighbor. For since
God receives all that glorification of himself whereby we can serve and
minister to his glory, reflected upon the foundation of his own goodness, and
bounty, and mercy, and all the Allellujahs that are or ever shall be sung in
heaven are praises and thank givings, and that God himself does not receive
glory from the acts of his in via misericordiae, in the way of mercy, and
bounty, charity, and forgiveness, love, and fair compliances; There is no
greater charity in the world then to save a soul, nothing that pleases God
better, nothing that can be in our hands greater or more noble, nothing that
can be a more lasting and delightful honor, then that a perishing soul,
snatched from the flames of an intolerable Hell, and born to Heaven upon the
wings of piety and mercy, by the Ministry of Angels, Him, for the Author and
finisher of salvation, and thee for the Minister and charitable instrument;
that bright star must needs look pleasantly upon thy face for ever, which was
by thy hand placed there, and had it not been by thy Ministry might have been
a ^ooty coal, in the regions of sorrow, Now in order to this, God has given us
all some powers, and ministeries, by which we may by our charity promote this
Religion, and the great interest of souls: Counsels, and prayers, preaching,
and writing, passionate desires, and fair examples, going before others, in by
the way we should do well to consider what we have done toward it. For as it
will be a strange arrest at the day of Judgment to Dives, that he fed high
Lazarus to starve, and every garment that lies by thee and perishes while thy
naked brother does so too for want of it, shall be a bill of Indictment against
thy unmercifull soul; so it will be in every instance: in what thou could
profit thy brother and did not, thou art accountable; and then tell over the
times, in which thou have prayed for the conversion of thy sinning brother; and
compare the times together, and observe whether thou have not tempted him or
betrayed him to a sin, or encouraged him in it, or did not hinder him when
thou might, more frequently then thou have humbly, and passionately, and
charitably, and zealously cruelty or importune justice. He that strikes the
Prince for justice, as Solomon's expression is, is a companion of murderers; and
he that out of zeal of Religion shall go to convert Nations to his opinion by
destroying Christians whose faith is entire summed up by the Apostles; this man
breaks the ground, with a sword, and sowes tares, and waters the ground with
blood, and ministers to envy and cruelty, to errors and mistake, and there
comes up nothing but poppies to please the eye and fancy, disputes and
hypocrisy, new summaries of Religion estimated by measures of anger, and
accursed principles; and so much of the religion as is necessary to salvation
is laid aside, and that brought forth that serves an interest, not holiness;
that fills the Schools of a proud man, but not that which will fill Heaven. Any
zeal is proper for Religion, but the zeal of the sword, and the zeal of anger;
the bitterness of zeal; and it is a certain temptation Iam. 3. 14.
to every man against his duty; for if the sword turns preacher and dictates
propositions by empire in stead of arguments, and ingraves them in men's hearts
with a poniard, that it shall be death to believe what I innocently and
ignorantly am persuaded of, it must needs be unsafe to try the spirits, to try
all things, to make inquiry; and yet without this liberty, no man can justify
himself before God or man, nor confidently say, that his Religion is best;
since he cannot without a final danger make himself able to give a right
sentence, and to follow that which he finds inordination of zeal; for Christ
by reproving St. Peter drawing his sword, even in the cause of Christ, for his
sacred and yet injured person, (...), (says Theophylact) teaches us not to use
the sword though in the Moses passion, it throws the tables of the Law out of
our hands, and breaks them in pieces out of indignation to see them broken.
This is the zeal that is now in fashion, and has almost spoiled Religion; men
like the Zelots of the Jews cry up their Sect and in it their interest, (...);
they affect Disciples and fight against the opponents; and we shall find in
Scripture, that when the Apostles began to preach the meekness of the
Christian institution, salvations, and promises, they stirred up the City, they
made tumults, they persecuted this way unto the death, they got letters from
the high Priest, they kept Damascus with a Garrison, they sent parties of
soldiers to silence and to imprison the Preachers, and thought they did God
service, when they put the Apostles to death, and they swore neither to eat nor
to drink till they had killed Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti,
Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos.
They would not show the way to a Samaritan, nor give a cup of cold water but
to a circumcised brother. That was their Zeal; But the zeal of the Apostles was
this; they preached publicly and privately, they prayed for all men, they wept
to God for the hardness of men's hearts, they became all things to all men that
they might gain some, they traveled through deeps and deserts, they endured the
heat of the Syrian Star, and the violence of Euroclydon, winds and tempests,
seas and prisons, mockings and scourgings, fastings and poverty, labor and
watching, they endured every man and wronged no man, they would do any good
thing and suffer any evil if they had but hopes to prevail upon a soul; they
persuaded men meekly, they entreated them humbly, they convinced them
powerfully, the watched for their good but meddled not with their interest, and
this is the Christian Zeal, the Zeal of the Zeal of charity, the Zeal of
patience, (...), in these it is good to be zealous, for you can never go far
enough.

2. The next measure of zeal is prudence. For, as charity is the matter of
Zeal, so is discretion the manner. It must always be for good to our
neighbor, and there needs no rules for the conducting a Zeal also of Religion
or worshipping, and this has more need of measures and proper cautions. For
Religion can turn into a snare, it may be abused into superstition, it may
become weariness in the spirit, and tempt to tediousness, to hatred, and
despair: and many persons through their indiscreet conduct and furious marches,
and great loads taken upon tender shoulders and unexperienced, have come to be
perfect haters of their joy, and despisers of all their hopes, being like dark
Lanthorns, in which a candle burns bright, but

1. Therefore our Zeal must never carry us beyond that which is profitable.
There are many institutions, customs, and usages introduced into Religion upon
very fair motives, and apted to great necessities; but to imitate those things
when they are disrobed of more non saculari, after the manner of men divorced
from the usual entercourses of the world, be used alone. He therefore that
thinks he is a more holy person for being a virgin or a widower, or that he is
bound to be so because they were so, or that he cannot be a religious person
because he is not so, has zeal indeed, but not according to knowledge. But now
if the single state can be taken out and put to new appendages, and fitted to
the end of another nothing else; fast when they have no need, when there is
need they superiors should not think the Law obeyed, unless the end of the
first institution be observed; a fasting day is a day of humiliation, and
prayer; and fasting being nothing it self, but wholly the handmaid of a further
grace, ought not to be divested of its holiness and sanctification, and left
like the

2. Our Zeal must never carry us beyond that which is safe. Some there are who
in their first attempts and entries upon Religion while the passion that
brought them in remains, undertake things as great as their highest thoughts;
no repentance is sharp enough, no charities expensive enough, no fastings
afflictive enough, then totis Quinquatribus orant; and finding some
deliciousness at the first contest, and in that activity of their passion,
they make vows to from something to something, at last it will come to just
nothing, and the proper effect of this is, indignation and hatred of holy
things, an impudent spirit, carelessenesse or despair. Zeal sometimes carries a
man into temptation: and he that never thinks he loves God dutifully or
acceptably, because he is not imprisoned for him, or undone, or designed to
Martyrdom, may desire a trial that will undo him. It is like fighting of a
Duel to show our valor. Stay till the King commands you to fight and die, and
then let zeal do its noblest offices. This irregularity and mistake was too
frequent in the primitive Church, when men and women would strive for death,
and

3. Let Zeal never transport us to attempt anything but what is possible. M.
Teresa made a vow that she would do always that which was absolutely the best.
But neither could her understanding always tell her which was so, nor her will
always have the same fervours: and it must often breed scruples, and sometimes
tediousness, and wishes that the vow were unmade. He that vows never to have
an ill thought, never to commit an error, has taken a course

4. Zeal is not safe unless it be in re probabili too, it must be in a likely
matter. For we that find so many excuses to untie all our scruple and snares,
shameful retreats and new fantastic principles; In all our undertakings we
must consider what is our state of life, what our natural inclinations, what
is our society, and what are our dependencies; by what necessities we are born
down, by what hopes we are biassed; and by these let us measure our heats and
their proper business. A zealous man runs up a sandy hill; the violence of it
sometimes spoils the action, and always endangers it. But I must smoke and
lurking fires do corrode and secretly consume: therefore this discourse is
less necessary. A Physician would have but small employment near the Riph^an
Mountains, if he could cure nothing but Calentures; Catarrhes, and dead
palsies, Colds and Consumptions are their evils, and so is lukewarmnesse and
deadness of spirit, the proper maladies of our age: for Nondum vidisti requiem
quam speramus, nec tormenta quae timemus; young man, thou have not seen the
glories which are laid up for the zealous and devout, nor yet beheld the flames
which are prepared for the lukewarm, and the haters of strict devotion. Adam
having seen the beauties, and tasted the delicacies of Paradise, repented and
mourned upon the Indian Mountains for three hundred years together: and we who
have a great share in the cause of his sorrows, can by nothing be invited to a
persevering, a great, a passionate religion, more then by remembering what he
lost, and what is laid up for them whose hearts are burning lamps, and are all
on fire with Divine love, whose flames are fanned with the wings of the holy
Dove, and whose spirits shine and burn with that fire which the holy Jesus came
to enkindle upon the earth.

Sermon, XV. The House of Feasting: OR THE EPICVRES MEASVRES. Part I.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye.
THis is the Epicures Proverb, begun upon a weak mistake; started by chance,
from the discourses of drink, and thought witty by the undiscerning company,
and prevailed infinitely, because it struck their fancy luckily, and maintained
Seneca describes the spare diet of Epicurus and Metrodorus, he uses this
expression; Liberaliora sunt alimenta carceris: sepositos ad capitale
supplicium, non tam anguste, qui occisurus est, pascit. The prison keeps a
better table, and he that is to kill the criminal to morrow morning, gives him
a better supper over night. By this he intended die to morrow, and by the
sentence and unalterable decree of God, they Philenium's name, no fat Mullets,
no Oysters of Luerinus, no Lesbian or Chian Wines, (...), Therefore now enjoy
the delicacies of Nature, and feel the descending wines distilled larynx, and
suck the delicious juice of fishes, the marrow of the laborious Ox, and the
tender lard of Apulian Swine, and the condited bellies of the scarus; but lose
no time; for the Sun drives hard, and the shadow is long, and the days of
mourning are at hand, but the number of the days of darkness and the grave
cannot be told.

Thus they thought they discoursed wisely, and their wisdom was turned into
folly; for all their arts of providence, and witty securities of pleasure were
nothing but unmanly prologues to death, fear and folly, sensuality and beastly
pleasures. But they are to be excused rather then we. They placed themselves in
the order of beasts and birds, and esteemed their bodies nothing but
receptacles of flesh and wine, larders and pantries; and their soul the fine
instrument of pleasure and brisk perception, of relishes and gusts, reflections
and duplications of delight; and therefore they trea ed themselves accordingly.
But then why we should do the same things, who are led by other principles, and
a more severe institution, and better notices of immortality, who understand
what shall happen to a soul hereafter, and know that this time is but a passage
eternity, this body but a servant to the soul, this soul a minister to the
Spirit, and the whole man in order to God and to felicity; this I say is more
unreasonable, then to eat aconite to preserve our health, and to enter into the
flood that we may die a dry death; this is a perfect contradiction to the state
of good things, whither we are designed, and to all the principles of a wise
Philophy, whereby we are instructed that we may become wise unto salvation.
That I may therefore do some assistances toward the curing the miseries of
mankind, and reprove the follies and improper motions toward felicity, I
shall endeavor to represent to

1. That plenty and the pleasures of the world are no proper instruments of
felicity.

2. That intemperance is a certain enemy to it; making life unpleasant, and
death troublesome and intolerable.



1. Plenty and the pleasures of the world are no proper instrument of felicity.
It is necessary that a man have some violence done to himself before he can
receive them: for natures bounds are, non esurire, non sitire, non algere, to
be quit from hunger, and thirst, and cold, that is, to have nothing upon us
that puts us to pain; against which she has made provisions by the fleece of
the sheep, and the skins of beasts, by the waters of the fountain, and fungus,
to cats and owls, to moles and bats, making her storehouses always to stand
open to them, and that for the Lord of all these, even to the noblest of her
productions she should have made no provisions, and only produced in us
appetites sharp as the stomach of Wolves, troublesome as the Tigres hunger, and
then run art and chance, violence and study, to feed us and to cloth us. This
is so far from truth, that we are certainly more provided for by nature then
all the world besides; for every thing can minister to us; and we can pass
into none of Natures cabinets, but we can find our table spread: so that what
David said to God, Whither shall I go from thy presence? If I go to heaven,
thou art there, if I descend to the deep, thou art there also; if I take the
wings of the morning and fly into the uttermost parts of the wilderness, even
there thou will find me out, and thy right band shall uphold me: we may say it
concerning our table, and our wardrobe; are ministered singly; by that labor
that can procure what we need, Susa, or garments stained with the blood of the
Tyrian fish, that if we desire to feed like Philoxenus, or to have tables
laden like the boards of Vitellius, that we shall never want. It is not Nature
that desires these things, but lust and violence; and by a disease we entered
into the passion and the necessity, and in that state of trouble it is likely
we may dwell for ever, unless we reduce our appetites to natures measure.

Si ventri been, si lateri est, pedibu^sque tuis, nil Horace.

Divitiae poterunt Regales addere majus.
And therefore it is that plenty and pleasures are not the proper instruments
of felicity. Because felicity is not a jewel that can be

He that cannot be satisfied with common provisions, has a bigger need then he
that can; it is harder, and more contingent, and more difficult, and more
troublesome, for him to be satisfied; Epicurus, I feed sweetly upon bread and
water, those sweet and easy provisions of the body, and I defy the pleasures
of costly provisions; And the man was so confident that he had the advantage
over wealthy tables, that he thought himself happy as the immortal Gods,
(...): For these provisions are easy, they are to be gotten without amazing
cares; no man needs to flatter, if he can live as Nature did intend: Magna pars
libertatis est been moratus venture: Sense.
he need not swell his accounts, and intricate his spirit with arts of subtlety
and contrivance, he can be free from fears; and the Anachoreticall and
Philosophical persons, who lived meanly as a sheep, and without variety as the
Baptist, but in the same proportion it is also true in every man that can be
contented with that which is honestly sufficient. Maximus Tyrius considers
Diogenes, a poor Synopean, having not so much nobility as to be born in the
better parts of Greece; but he saw that he was compelled by no Tyrant to speak
or do ignobly; he had no fields to till, and therefore took no care to buy
cattle, and to hire servants; he was not distracted when a rent-day came, and
feared not when the wise Greeks played the fool and fought who should be Lord
of that field that lay between Thebes and Athens; he laughed to see men
scramble for dirty silver, and spend 10000. Attick talents for the getting the
revenues of 200 Philippios; he went with his staff and bag into the camp of
Phoconses, and the soldiers reverene'd his person and despised his poverty,
and it was truce with him whosoever had wars; and the Diadem of Kings, and the
Purple of the Emperors, the Mitre of high Priests, and the divining staff of
Soothsayers were things of envy and ambition, the purchase of danger, and the
rewards of a mighty passion: and men entered into them by trouble and extreme
difficulty, and dwelt under them as a man under a falling roof, or as Damocles
under the Tyrants sword,

Nunc lateri incumbens -- mox deinde supinus,

Sleeping like a condemned man; and let there be what pleasure men can dream of
in such broken slumbers, yet the fear of waking from this illusion and parting
from this fantastic pleasure, is a pain and torment which the imaginary
felicity cannot pay for. Cui cum paupertate been convenit, di^es est; non qui
parum habet, sed qui plus cupit, pauper est. All our trouble is from within us;
and if a dish of lettice and a clear fountain can cool all my heats, so that I
shall have neither thirst nor pride, lust nor revenge, envy nor ambition, I am
lodged in the bosom of felicity; and indeed no men sleep so soundly, as they
that lay their head upon Natures lap. For a single dish and clean chalice
lifted from the springs, can cure my hunger and thirst: but the meat of
Ahasuerus feast cannot satisfy my ambition and my pride. Nulla re egere, Dei
proprium; quam paucissimis autem, Deo proximum, said Socrates. He therefore
that has the fewest desires and the most quiet passions, whose wants are soon
provided for, and whose possessions cannot be disturbed with violent fears, he
that dwells next door to satisfaction, and can carry his needs and lay them down
where he Dives jam factus desiit gaudere lent, Carius edit and bibit, and
laetatur dives, quam pauper, qui in quolibet, in parato, in inempto gaudet, and
facile epulari potest, dives nunquam. For as it is in plants which nature
thrusts forth from her navell, she makes regular provisions, and dresses them
with strength and ornament, with easiness and a full stature, but Scythian
clown; she feeds them and makes them easy without cares and costly passion;
but if you thrust and appetite into her which she intended not, she gives Ad
supervacua sudatur. A man must labor infinitely to get more then he needs; but
to drive away thirst and hunger, a man needs not sit in the fields of the
oppressed poor, nor lead armies, nor break his sleep, and contumeliosam
humanitatem pati, and to suffer shame and danger,

-- Quis non Epicurum
Suspicit, exigui laetum plantaribus horti?
If men did but know what felicity dwells in the cottage of a virtuous poor man,
how sound his sleeps, how quiet his breast, how composed his mind, how free
from care, how easy his provision, how healthful his morning, how sober his
night, how moist his mouth, how joyful his heart, they would never admire the
noises

Nam neque divitibus contingunt gaudia solis.
These which you call pleasures are but the imagery and fantastic
appearances, and such appearances even poor men may have. It is like felicity
that the King of Persia should come to Babylon in the winter, and to Susa in
the summer; and be attended with all the servants Asia. It is like this, that
Diogenes went to Corinth in the time of vintage, and to Athens when winter
came, and in stead of Courts visited the Temples and the Schools, and was
pleased in the society of Scholars and learned men, and conversed with the
Students of all Asia and Europe. If a man loves privacy, the poor fortune can
have that when Princes cannot; if he loves noises, he can go to Markets and to
Courts, and may glut himself with strange faces, and strange voices, and
stranger manners, and the wild designs of all the world: and when that day
comes in which we shall dye, nothing of the eating and drinking remains,
nothing of the pomp and luxury, but the sorrow to part with it, and shame to
have dwelt there where wisdom and virtue seldom comes, unless it be to call
men to sober counsels, to a plain and a severe and more natural way of living;
and when Lucian derides the Philip of Macedon, (...), mending of shoes in a
little stall; he intended to represent, that in the shades below and in the
state of the grave, the Princes and voluptuous have a being different from
their present plenty, but that their condition is made contemptible and
miserable by its disproportion to their lost and perishing voluptuousness. The
result is this, that Tiresias told the Ghost of Menippus enquiring what state
of life was nearest to felicity, (...), The

Intemperance in eating and drinking is the most contrary course to the
Epicures design in the world; and the voluptuous man has the least of
pleasure; and upon this proposition, the consideration is more material and
more immediately reducible to practice, because in eating and drinking men
please themselves so much, and have the necessities of Nature to usher in the
inordination of gluttony and drunkenness, and our need leads in vice by the
hand, that we know not how to distinguish our friend from our enemy; and St.
Austin is sad upon this point; Thou O Lord have taught me that I should take my
meat as I take my Physic, but while I pass from the trouble of hunger to the
quietness of satisfaction, in the very passage I am ensnared by the cords of
my own concupiscence; Necessity bids me pass, but I have no way to pass from
hunger to fullness, but over the bridge of pleasure; and although health and
life be the cause of eating and drinking, yet pleasure, a dangerous pleasure
thrusts her self into attendance, and sometimes endeavors to be the
principal, and I do that for pleasures sake which I would only do for health;
and yet they have distinct measures whereby they can be separated, and that
which is enough for health is too little for delight, and that which is for my
delight destroys my health, and still it is uncertain for what end I do
indeed desire; and the worst of the evil is this, that the soul is glad
because it is uncertain, and that an excuse is ready, that under the pretense
of health, Obumbret negotium voluptatis, the design of pleasure may be advanced
and protected. How far the ends of natural pleasure may lawfully be enjoyed,
I shall afterward consider; In the mean time, if we remember that the Epicures
design is pleasure principally, we may

1. It is an enemy to health, without which it is impossible to feel anything
of corporal pleasure. 2. A constant full table has in it less pleasure then
the temperate provisions of the Hermit, or the Labourer, or the Philosophical
table of Scholars, and the just pleasures of the virtuous. 3. Intemperance is
an impure fountain of vice, and a direct nurse of uncleanness. 4. It is a
destruction of wisdom. 5. It is a dishonor and disreputation to the person
and

It is an enemy to health: which is as one calls it, ansa voluptatum 1.
and condimentum vitae; it is that handle by which we can apprehend, and
perceive pleasures, and that sauce that only makes life delicate; for what
content can a full table administer to a man in a fever? and he that has a
sickly stomach admires at his happiness that can feast with cheese and
garlic, unctious breuuages and the low tasted spinach: Health is the
opportunity of wisdom, the fairest scene of Religion, the advantages of the
glorifications of God, the charitable ministeries to men; it is a state of joy
and thanksgiving, and Paul affirms to be (...), manifest, leading before unto
judgment. It bears part of its punishment in this life, and has this
appendage like the sin against the holy Ghost, that it is not remitted in this
world, nor in the world to come; that is, if it be not repented of, it is
punished here and

But in this the sinner gives sentence with his mouth and brings it to
execution with his own hands;

Paena tamen praesens, cum tu deponis amictum
Turgidus, et crudum pavonem in balneaportas.
The old gluttons among the Romans, Heliogabalus, Tigellius, Crispus, Montanus,
notaeque per oppida buccae, famous Epicures, mingled Vitellius, and entered
into their baths to digest their Phesants, that they might speedily return to
the Mullet and the Eeles of Syene, and then they went home and drew their
breath short till the morning, and it may be not at all before night,

Hinc subitae mortes, atque intestata senectus. Their age is surprised at a
feast, and gives them not time to make their will, but either they are choked
with a large morsel, and there is no room for the breath of the lungs, and the
motions of

Plurimus hinc aeger moritur vigilando: sed illum
Languorem peperit cibus imperfectus, and haerens

So that the Epicures geniall proverb may be a little altered, and say, Let us
eat and drink, for by this means to morrow we shall die; but that is not all,
for these men live a healthlesse life, that is, are long, are every day dying,
and at last dye with torment. Menander was too soft in his expression, (...);
that it is indeed a death, but gluttony is a pleasant death,

(...)

(...).
For this is the gluttons pleasure, to breath short and difficultly, scarce to
be able to speak, and when he does, he cries out, I dye and not with pleasure.
But the folly is as much to be derided as the men to be pityed, that we daily
see men afraid of death with a most intolerable apprehension, and yet increase
the evil of it, the pain, and

Rem struere exoptant caeso bove, Mercuriumqque
Arcessunt fibra --
They pray for herds of cattle, and spend the breeders upon feasts and
sacrifices. For why do men go to Temples and Churches, and make vows to God
and daily prayers, that God would give them a healthful body, and take away
their gout and their palfies, their

Poscis opem'nervis, corpusqque fidele senectae.
Esto age, sed grandes patinae tucetaqque crassa Ver. sat. 2.

Annuere his superos vetuere, Jov emqque morantur.
But it is enough that the rich glutton shall have his dead body condited and
embalmed; he may be allowed to stink and suffer living sinners and walking
rottenness, and hereafter will be dying penitents and perfumed carcasses, and
their whole felicity is lost in the confusions of their unnatural disorder.
When Cyrus had espied Astyages and his fellows coming drunk from a banquet
laden with variety of follies and filthiness, their legs failing them, their
eyes red and staring, cousened, with a moist cloud, and abused by a doubled
object, their tongues full as spunges, and their heads no wiser, he thought
they were poisoned, and he had reason; for what malignant quality can be more
venomous and hurtful to a man then the effect

But therefore me thinks the temptations which men meet withal from without,
are in themselves most unreasonable and soonest confuted by us. He that tempts
me to drink beyond my measure, civilly invites me to a fever; and to lay aside
my reason, as the Persian women did their garments and their modesty at the end
of feasts: and all the question then will be, which is the worse evil, to
resuse your uncivil kindness, or to suffer a English Surfeit. Creon in the
Tragedy said well,

(...),
(...),
grieve thee O stranger, or to he affronted by thee, then to be tormented by
thy kindness the next day and the morrow after; and the freed man of Domitius
the Father of Nero suffered himself to be killed by his Lord; and the son of
Praxaspes by Cambyses, rather then they would exceed their own measures up to a
full intemperance, and a certain sickness, and dishonor. For, (as Plutarch
said well) to avoid the opinion of an uncivil man, or being clownish, to run
into a pain of thy sides or belly, into madness or a headache, is the part of
a fool and a coward, and of one that knows not how to converse with men citra
pocula and nidorem, in any thing but in the famelick smells of meat and
vertiginous drinkings:

Ebrius and petulans, qui nullum forte cecidit,
Dat poenas, noctem patitur lugentis amicum
Pelidae --
A drunkard and a glutton feels the torments of a restless night, although he
has not killed a man; that is, just like murderers and persons of an
afrighting conscience; so wake the glutton, so furorem illum conviviorum and
foedissimum patrimoniorum exitium culinam, of the madness of delicious feasts,
and that his kitchen has destroyed his Patrimony; let him tell that he takes
in every day,

-- Quantum Lauseia bibebat,


Ut quod multi Damalis meri
Bassum Threicia vicit amystide,
That he has knocked down Damalis with the 25th. bottle, and has outfeasted
Anthony or Cleopatra's luxury; it is a goodly pleasure and himself shall bear
the honor.


Gutturis exemplum, conducendusqque magister.
But for the honor of his banquet he has some ministers attending that he did
not dream of, and in the midst of his loud laughter, the gripes of the belly
and the fevers of the brain, Pallor and genae pendulae, oculorum ulcera,
tremulae manus, furiales somm, inquies nocturna, as Pliny reckons them,
palenesse and hanging cheeks, ulcers of the eyes and trembling hands, dead or
distracted sleeps, these speak aloud, that to day you eat and drink, that to
morrow you may dye, and dye for ever.

It is reported concerning Socrates, that when Athens was destroyed by the
plague, he in the midst of all the danger escaped untouched by sickness,
because by a spare and severe diet, he had within him no tumult of disorderly
humors, no factions in his blood, no loads of moisture prepared for charnell
houses, or the sickly hospitals; but a vigorous heat, and a well proportioned
health and study, Philosophy and Religion, for the temples and the Academy, but
no superfluities to be spent in groans and sickly nights: And all the world of
gluttons is hugely convinced of the excellency of temperance in order to our
temporal felicity and health, because when themselves have left virtue, and
sober diet, and counsels, and first lost their temperance, and then lost their
health, they were forced to run to temperance and abstinence for their cure,
Vilis enim tenuisque mensa (ut loquuntur pueri) sanitatis S. Chrysostom.
matter est, Then, a thin diet and a humbled body, fasting and emptiness, and
arts of scattering their sin and sickness, is in season; Vitellius vomiting,
that they might eat again; but so they may entail a fit of sickness upon every
full moon, till both their virtue and themselves decrease into the corruptions
and rottenness of the grave. But if they delight in sharp fevers and horrid
potions, in sour palats and heaps of that which must be carried forth, they
may reckon their wealthy pleasures to be very great and many, if they will but
tell them one by one with their sicknesses and These men (as St. Paul's
expression is) heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of
the day of Gods most righteous judgments. Strange therefore it is that for the
stomach which is scarce a span long, there should be provided so many furnaces
and ovens, huge fires and an army of cooks, cellars swimming with wine, and
granaries sweating with corn; and that into one belly should enter the vintage
of many Nations, the spoils of distant Provinces, and the shell-fishes of
several seas. When the Heathens feasted their Gods, they gave Liguria,
Sicilian beeves, and wheat from Egypt, wild boars from Illyrium, and Grecian
sheep, variety, and load, Cynic; It is to be wondered at, that men eat so much
for pleasures sake; and yet for the same pleasure should not give over eating,
and betake themselves to the delights of temperance, since to be healthful and
holy is so great a pleasure. However, certain health, and their virtue, and
their God is departed from them.

SERMON, XVI. Part II.
Constant full Table is less pleasant then the temperate provisions of the
virtuous, or the natural banquets of the poor. (...), said Epicurus, Thanks
be to the God of Nature, that he has made that which is necessary to be ready
at hand, and easy to be had, and that which cannot easily be obtained, is not
necessary it should be at all; which in effect is to say, it cannot be
constantly pleasant; for necessity and want makes the appetite, and the
appetite makes the pleasure; and men are infinitely mistaken excise of
pleasure, and that he can suffer his days labor, and recompense it with
unsavory herbs, and potent garleek, with watercresses, and bread colored like
the ashes that gave it hardness; he has a hunger that gives it
deliciousness; and we may as well wonder that a Lion eats raw flesh, or that a
Wolf feeds upon the turfe, they have an appetite proportionable to this meat,
and their necessity, and their hunger, and their use, and their nature are the
Cooks* that dress their provisions, and make them delicate: And yet if water
and pulse, Non est voluptas aqua and polenta, (said a Philosopher) sed summa
voluptas est ^posse ex his capere voluptatem, It is an excellent pleasure to be
able to take pleasure in worts and water, in bread and onions; for then a man
can never want pleasure when it is so Fortune and Art gives delicacies; Nature
gives meat and drink; and what nature gives, fortune cannot take away, but
every change can take away what only is given by the bounty of a full fortune;
and if in satisfaction and freedom from care, and security state of feastings
which a War can lessen, and a Tyrant can take away, or the Pirates may
intercept, or a Blast may spoil, and is always contingent, and is so far from
satisfying, that either it destroys the appetite, and capacity of pleasure, or
increases it beyond all the measures of good things.

He that feasts every day, feasts no day, (...) and however you treat your
selves, sometimes you will need to be

Plerumque gratae principibus vices,
Mundaeque parvo sub lare pauperum
Coenae sine aulaeis, and ostro,
Sollicitam explicuere frontem.
of all the things in the world a man may best and most easily want pleasure,
which if you have enjoyed, it passes away at the present, and leaves nothing at
all behind it, but sorrow and sour remembrances. No man felt a greater
pleasure in a goblet of wine, then Lysimachus when he fought against the Getae;
and himself and his whole Army were compelled by thirst to yield themselves to
bondage; but when the wine was sunk as far as his navel, the pleasure was
gone, and so was his Kingdom and his liberty; for though the sorrow dwells
with a man pertinaciously, yet the pleasure is swift as lightning, and more
pernicious; but Timotheus said of Plato's Scholars, they converse sweetly, and
are of perfect temper and delicacy of spirit even the next morning; whereas the
intemperate man is forced to lie long in bed, and forget that there is a Sun in
the sky; he must not be called till he has concocted, and slept his surfeit
into a trace and a quiet respite; but whatsoever this man has suffered,
certain it is that the poor man's head did not ache, neither did he need the
juice of poppies, or costly cordials, Physicians or Nurses, to bring him to his
right shape again; like Apuleius's his head aches longer then his throat was
pleased; and which is worst, his glass runs out with joggings and violence,
and every such concussion with a surfeit makes his life look nearer its end,
and ten to one but it will before its natural period be broken in pieces. If
these be the pleasures of an Epicures Table, I shall pray that my friends may
never feel them; but he that sins against his Maker shall fall into the
calamities of intemperance.

3. Intemperance is the Nurse of vice; (...), Venus milk so Aristophanes calls
wine, (...), the Mother of all grievous things: so Pontianus. For by the
experience of all the world, it is the baud to lust: and no man must ever dare
to pray to God for a pure soul in a chaste body, if himself does not live
temperately, if himself make provisions for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of
it; for in this case he shall find that which enters into him shall defile him
more then he can be cleansed by those vain Diogenes, Tyrants never come from
the cottages of them that eat pulse and course fare, but from the delicious
beds and banquets James, Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you Iam. 2. 6.
before the Judgment seat? For all men are passionate to live according to that
state in which they were born, or to which they are devolved, or which they
have framed to themselves; Those therefore that love to live high and
deliciously,

Et quibus in solo vivendi causa palato,
who live not to God, but to their belly, not to sober counsels, but to an
intemperate table, have framed to themselves a manner of living which
oftentimes cannot be maintained, but by injustice and violence, which coming
from a man whose passions are made big with sensuality and an habitual folly,
by pride and forgetfulness of the condition and miseries of mankind, are
always unreasonable, and sometimes intolerable.

-- regustatum digito terebrare salinum
Contentus perages, si vivere cum Jove tendis.
Formidable is the state of an intemperate man, whose sin begins with
sensuality, and grows up in folly and weak discourses, and is fed by violence
and applauded by fools and parasites, full bellies, and empty heads, servants
and flatterers, whose hands are full of flesh and blood, and their hearts empty
of pity and natural compassion; where religion cannot inhabit, and the love of
God must needs be a stranger; whose talk is loud, and trifling, injurious and
impertinent; and whose employment is the same with the work of the sheep or the
calfe, always to eat; their loves are the lusts of the lower belly, and their
portion is in the lower regions to eternal ages, where their thirst, and their
hunger, and their torment shall be infinite.

slow bellies, so S. Paul concerning the intemperate Cretans out of their own
Poet: they are like the Tigres of Brasil, which when they are empty are bold,
and swift, and full of sagacity, but being full, sneak away from the barking of
a village dog. So are these men, wise in the morning, quick and fit for
business; but when the sun gives the sign to spread the tables, and
intemperance brings in the messes, and drunkenness fills the bouls, then the
man falls away, and leaves Aristophanes has fitted them with a character,
carcasses above half way; Plotinus descends one step lower yet; affirming such
persons, (...), they are made trees, whose whole employment and life is nothing
but to feed and suck juices from the bowels of their Nurse and Mother; and
indeed commonly they talk as trees in a wind and tempest, the noise is great
and querulous, but it signifies nothing but trouble and disturbance. A full
meal is like Sisera's banquet; at the end of which there is a nail struck into
a man's head: Porphyrie; it knocks a man down, and nayls his soul to the
sensual mixtures of the body. For what wisdom can be expected from them,
whose soul dwells in clouds of meat, and floats up and down in wine, like the
spilled cups which fell from their hands, when they could lift them to their
heads no longer? (...): It is a perfect shipwreck of a Man, the Pilot is drunk
and the helm dashed in pieces, and the ship first reels, and by swallowing too
much is it self swallowed up at last. And therefore the Navis Agrigentina, the
madness of the young fellows of Agrigentum, who being drunk, fancyed
themselves they were all cast away, they were broken in pieces by the foul
disorder of the storm.

Hinc vini atque somni degener discordia,
Prudent. him. de jejun.
Libido sordens, inverecundus lepos,
Variaeque pestes languidorum sensuum.
Hinc frequenti marcida oblectamine
Scintilla mentis intorpescit nobilis,
Animusque pigris stertit in praecordiis.
The senses languish, the spark of Divinity that dwells within is quenched, and
the mind snorts, dead with sleep and fullness in the fouler regions of the
belly.

So have I seen the eye of the world looking upon a fenny bottom, and drinking
up too free draughts of moisture gathered them into a cloud, and that cloud
crept about his face, and made him first look

Putrem resudans crapulam
Obstrangulatae mentis ingenium premit.
The clouds gather about the head, and according to the method and period of
the children, and productions of darkness, it first grows red, and that
redness turns into an obscurity, and a thick mist, and reason is lost to all
use and profitablenesse of wise and sober discourses; Clem. Alexandr.
darkens the soul, and makes it crasse and material, polluted and heavy,
clogged and laden like the body: (...), And there cannot be any thing said
worse, reason turns into folly, wine and flesh into a knot of clouds, the soul
it self into a body, and the spirit into corrupted meat; there is nothing left
but the rewards and portions of a fool to be reaped and enjoyed there, where
flesh and corruption shall dwell to eternal ages; and therefore in Scripture
such men are called (...). Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravant:

But temperance is reasons girdle, and passions bridle, (...), so Homer in
Stobaeus, that is (...), prudence is safe, while the man is temperate, and
therefore (...) is opposed (...), a temperate man is no fool, for temperance is
the (...), such as Plato appointed to night-walkers, a prison to restrain
their inordinations; Pythagoras calls it; (...), so Socrates; (...), so Plato;
(...), so Iamblicus, It is the strength of the soul, the foundation of virtue,
the ornament of all good things, and the corroborative of all excellent habits.

Alcaeus.
rightly renders, They that are drunk are drunk in the night; but the Priests
of Heliopolis never did sacrifice to the Sun with wine; meaning, that this is
so great a dishonor, that the Sun ought not to see it; and they that think
there is no other eye but the Sun that sees them, may cover their shame by
choosing their time; just as Theophrastus makes them characters of a Clown.

And now that I have told you the foulness of the Epicures feasts 3.
and principles, it will be fit that I describe the measures of our eating and
drinking, that the needs of nature may neither become the cover to an
intemperate dish, nor the freer refreshment of our persons be changed into
scruples, that neither our virtue nor our conscience fall into an evil snare.

natural needs, (...); these are the measures of nature, that the body be free
from pain, and the soul from violence. Hunger, and thirst, and cold are the
natural diseases of the body; and food, and raiment, are their remedies, and
therefore are the measures.

In quantum sitis atque fames, and frigora poscunt,
Quantum Epicure tibi parvis suffecit in hortis.
nature, and nothing at all to grace; For God has given a latitude in desires
and degrees of appetite; and when he has done, he laid restraint upon it in
some whole instances, and of some parts in every instance; that man might have
something to serve God of his own, and something to Ructation, uneasy loads,
singing, looser pratings, importune drowsinesse, provocation of others to
equal and full chalices; and though

2. This hunger must be natural, not artificial and provoked: For many men
make necessities to themselves, and then think they are bound to provide for
them. It is necessary to some men to have garments made of the Calabrian fleece
stained with the blood of the murex, and to get money to buy pearls round and
orient; scelerata hoc fecit pulpa; but it is the man's luxury that made it so;
and by the same principle it is, that in-meats, what is abundant to nature is
Chrysostom.
wonder that men should be so much in love with earth and corruption, the
parent of rottenness, and a disease, that even then when by all laws witches
and inchanters, murderers and manstealers are chastised and restrained with the
iron hands of death, yet that men should at great charges give pensions to an
order of men, whose trade it is to rob them of their temperance, and wittily to
destroy their health; Greek Fathers call such persons;

-- curvae in terris animae and coelestium inanes,
people bowed down to the earth; lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God:
Viz. ab Areto, unde sicut ex ali^ Etruriae figulinis testacea vasa Romam
des^rebant.
Aretinas mentes, so Antidamus calls them, men framed in the furnaces of
Etruria, Aretine spirits, beginning and ending in flesh and filthynesse; dirt
and clay all over. But go to the Crib thou glutton, and there it will be found
that when the charger wantonness and folly wait at the table, and sickness and
death take away.

2. Reason is the second measure; or rather the rule whereby we judge of
intemperance; For whatsoever loads of meat or drink make Quae cum amatore suo
cum coenant liguriunt: These persons are to take their accounts from the
measures of Religion, and the Spirit; though they can talk still or transact
the affairs of the world, yet if they be not fitted for the things of the
Spirit, they are too full of flesh or wine, and cannot or care not to Dum sumus
in quadam delinquendi libidine, nebulis quibusdam insipientiae men's obducitur,
says St. Ambrose, when the fleshpots reek, and the uncovered dishes send
forth a nidor and hungry smells, that cloud hides the face, and puts out the eye
of reason, and then tell them mors in olla, that death is in the pot, and folly
in the chalice, that those smells are fumes of brimstone, and vapors of Egypt;
that they will make their heart easy, and their head

(Mullorum leporumque and suminis exitus hic est,
Sulphureusque color carnificesque pedes.
For that is the end of delicacies, (...), as Dio Chrysostom. palenesse and
effeminacy, and laziness, and folly:) yet under the dominion of the pleasures
of sensuality, men are so stripped of the use of reason, that they are not only

3. Though reason be so strictly to be preserved at our tables as well as at
our prayers, and we can never have leave to do any violence to it; yet the
measures of Nature may be enlarged beyond the bounds of prime and common
necessity. For besides hunger and thirst, there are some labors of the body,
and others of the mind, and there are sorrows and loads upon the spirit by its
communications student and contemplative man with more delicious and spritefull
nutriment: for as the tender and more delicate easily-digested meats will not
help to carry burthers upon the neck, and hold the plough in society and yokes
of the laborious oxen; so neither will the pulse and the leeks, Lavinian
sausages, and the Cisalpine tucets or gobbets of condited bulls ^esh thinking
man; but his notion will be flat as the noise of the Arcadian porter, and thick
as the first juice of his country lard, unless he makes his body a fit
servant to the soul, and both fitted for the employment.

But in these cases necessity, and prndence, and experience are to make the
measures and the rule; and so long as the just end is fairly designed, and
aptly ministered to, there ought to be no scruple concerning the quantity or
quality of the provision: and he that would stint a Swain by the commons of a
Student, and give Philot as the Candian, the leavings of Pluto, does but ill
serve the ends of temperance,

4. Sorrow and a wounded spirit may as well be provided for in the quantity and
quality of meat and drink, as any other disease; and this disease by this
remedy as well as by any other. For great sorrow and importune melancholy may
be as great a sin as a great anger; and if it be a sin in its nature, it is
more malignant and dangerous in its quality; as naturally tending to murmur and
despair, wear inesse of Religion, and hatred of God, timorousness and
jealousies, fantastic images of things and superstition; and therefore as it
is necessary to restrain the fevers of anger, so also to warm the freezings
Give Prove. 31. 6.
strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of
heavy hearts, let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more, said King Lemuel's Mother. But this is not intended to be an habitual
cure, but single and occasional; for he that has a pertinacious sorrow is
beyond the cure of meat Germans use to mingle music with their bowls, and
drink by the measures of the six Notes of Music: Ut relevet miserum fatum,
solitosque labores:
but they sing so long that they forget not their sorrow only, but their
virtue also, and their Religion; and there are some men that fall

natural and necessary, is therefore not criminal, because it is of Gods
procuring; and since we eat for need, and the satisfaction of our need is a
removing of a pain, and that in nature is the greatest pleasure, it is
impossible that in its own nature it should be a sin. But in this case of
Conscience, these cautions are to be observed: 1. So long as nature ministers
the pleasure and not art, it is materially innocent. Si tuo veniat jure,
luxuria est: But it is safe while Seneca.
Malum panem expecta, bonus siet; etiam illum tenerum tibi and siligineum fames
reddet: If you abstain and be hungry, you shall turn the meanest provision
into delicate, and desirable.

2. Let all the pleasure of meat and drink be such as can minister to health,
and be within the former bounds. For since pleasure in eating and drinking is
its natural appendage, and like a shadow

3. It is lawful when a man needs meat to choose the pleasanter, even merely
for their pleasures; that is, because they are pleasant, besides that they are
useful; this is as lawful as to better serve for health, and directly to
refreshment, so collaterally to Religion: Always provided, that it be in its
degree moderate, and we temperate in our desires, without transportation and
violence, without unhandsome usages of our selves, or taking from God and from
Religion any minutes and portions of our affections. Eicadastes the Epicure saw
a goodly dish of hot meat served up, he sung the verse of Homer, (...),
and swallowed some of it greedily, till by its hands of fire it curled his
stomach, like parchment in the flame, and he was carried from

Non poterat letho nobiliore mori:
It was fit he should dye such a death; but that death bids us beware of that
folly.

4. Let the pleasure as it came with the meat, so also pass away with it.
Philoxenus was a beast, (...), he wished his throat as long as a Cranes, that he
might be long in swallowing his pleasant morsels: Moeret quod magna pars
felicitat is exclusa esset corporis angustiis; he mourned because the pleasure
of eating was not spread over all his body, that he might have been an Epicure
in his hands: and indeed, if we consider it rightly, great eating and drinking
is not the greatest pleasure of the taste, but of the touch; and Philoxenus
might feel the unctious juice slide softly down his throat, but he could not
taste it in the middle of the long neck; and we see that they who mean to feast
exactly, or delight the palate, do libare or pitissare, take up little
proportions and spread them upon the tongue or palate; but full morsells and
great draughts are easy and soft to the touch; but so is the feeling of silk,
or in latrinam, together with the meals whose attendant pleasure is.

5. Let pleasure be the less principal, and used as a servant; it may be
modest and prudent to strew the dish with Sugar, or to dip thy bread in
vinegar, but to make thy meal of sauces, and to make the accessory become the
principal, and pleasure to rule the table, and all the regions of thy soul,
is to make a man less and lower then an Oglio, of a cheaper value then a
Turbat; a servant and a worshipper of sauces, and cooks, and pleasure, and
folly.

6. Let pleasure as it is used in the regions and limits of nature and
prudence, so also be changed into religion and thankfulness. Turtures cum
bibunt non resupinant colla, say Naturalists, Turtles when they drink lift not
up their bills; and if we swallow our pleasures without returning the honor
and the acknowledegment to God that gave them, we may large bibere jumentorum
modo, drink draughts as large as an Ox, but we shall die like an Ox,

Qui Veientarum festis potare diebus,
Campana solitus trulla, vappamque profestis.
For then the body may rejoice in fellowship with the soul, and then a
pleasant meal is religious, if it be not inordinate. But if our festival days
like the Gentile sacrifices end in drunkenness

To sum up this particular, there are, as you perceive, many cautions to make
our pleasure safe, but any thing can make it inordinate, and then scarce any
thing can keep it from becoming dangerous.

Habet omnis hoc voluptas, Boethius l. 3. Metr. 7.


Apiumque par volantum,
Ubi grata mella fudit,
Fugit and nimis tenaci
Ferit icta corda mersu.
And the pleasure of the honey will not pay for the smart of the sting. Amores
enim and delicia' mature and celeriter destorescunt, and in omnibus rebus
voluptatibus maximis fastidium finitimum est. Nothing is so soon ripe and
rotten as pleasure, and upon all possessions For this is the law of our nature
and fatal necessity; life is always poured forth from two goblets.

And now after all this, I pray consider, what a strange madness and prodigious
folly possesses many men, that they love to swallow at least to be accounted
wise; and would infinitely scorn to be folly and madness, and healthlesnesse
and dishonor. We do to God what we severely punish in our servants; we
correct our children for their meddling with dangers, which themselves prefer
before immortality; and though no Grecian Orator in the midst of his popular
noyses, at the same time he shall talk such dirty language, such mean low
things, as may well become a changeling and a fool, for whom the stocks are
prepared by the laws, and the just scorn of men. Every drunkard clothes his
head with a mighty scorn, and makes himself lower at that time then the
meanest of his servants; the boys can laugh at him when he is led like a
cripple, directed honor, and the most jealous of loosing the shadow, and the
most careless of the thing? Is it not a horrid thing, that a wise, or a
crafty, a learned, or a noble person should dishonor himself as a fool,
destroy his body as a murderer, lessen his estate as a prodigal, disgrace
every good cause that he can pretend to by his relation, and become an
appellative of scorn, a scene of laughter or derision, and all, for the reward
of forgetfulness and madness?

Why do valiant men and brave personages fight and die rather then break the
laws of men, or start from their duty to their Prince, and will suffer
themselves to be cut in pieces rather Glutton or Drunkard, and to preserve
their Temperance, shall not deny themselves one luscious morsel, or pour a
cup of wine on the ground, when they are invited to drink by the laws of the
circle or wilder company.

Me thinks it were but reason, that if to give life to uphold a cause be not
too much, they should not think too much to be hungry and suffer thirst for the
reputation of that cause; and therefore much rather that they would think it
but duty to be

There are in the world a generation of men that are engaged in a cause, which
they glory in, and pride themselves in its relation and appellative: but yet
for that cause they will do nothing but talk and drink; they are valiant in
wine, and witty in healths, and full of stratagem to promote debauchery; but
such persons are not considerable in wise accounts; that which

Arcanum neque tu scrutaber is ullius unquam,
Commissumque teges, and vino tortus and ira.
Wine discovers more then the rack, and he that will be drunk is not a person
fit to be trusted: and though it cannot be expected men should be kinder to
their friend, or their Prince, or their honor, then to God, and to their own
souls, and to their own lie in hell like sheep, death gnawing upon them, and
the righteous shall have domination over them in the morning of the
resurrection.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora non est tua, came furit Lyaeus
Cum regnant rosae, cum madent capilli.
Much safer it is to go to the severities of a watchful and a sober life; for
all that time of life is lost, when wine, and rage, and pleasure, and folly
steal away the heart of a man, and make him go singing to his grave.

I end with the saying of a wise man; He is fit to sit at the table of the
Lord, and to feast with Saints, who moderately uses

Sermon, XVII. THE MARRIAGE RING: OR THE Mysteriousnesse and Duties of
Marriage. Part I.
Ephesians. 5. 32, 33. This is a great mystery, But I speak concerning Christ and
the Church. Nevertheless let every one of you in particular so love his Wife
even as himself, and the Wife see that she reverence her Husband.
Quemlibet hominem cui non est uxor, minime esse hominem, cum etiam in
Scriptura dicatur, Masculum and foeminam creavit eos and vocavit no men little
Adam seu hominem. R. Eliezer dixit in Gem. Bab. Quicunque ncgligit praeceptum
de multiplicatione humani generis habendum esse veluti homicidam.
the world was most desirous of children, impatient of barrenness, accounting
single life a curse, and a childlesse person hated by God. The world was rich
and empty, and

(...)
(...).
You that are rich Numenius, you may multiply your family, poor men are not so
fond of children; but when a family could drive Increase and multiply. The next
blessing was the promise of the Messiah, and that also increased in men and
women a wonderful Abraham to be the blessed line, from whence the worlds
Redeemer should descend according to the flesh, every of his daughters hoped to
have the honor to be his Mother, or his Grandmother or something of his
kindred: and to be childelesse Christiani and apud Athenas, (...) refert Julius
Pollux l. 3. (...). Idem etiam Laccdaemone and Romae. vide Festum verb.
uxorium, atque ibi Joseph. Scal.
in Israel was a sorrow to the Hebrew women great as the slavery of Egypt, or
their dishonours in the land of their captivity.

But when the Messiah was come, and his doctrine was published, and his
Ministers but few, and the Disciples were to suffer Etiam Judaei qui praeceptum
esse viris (...) aiunt uno ore conc^dunt tamen dispensatum esse cum iis qui
assiduo legis studio vacare volunt, alias etiam immunibus ab acriori carnis
stimulo. Maimon. cap. 15. Halach. Ishoth.
ministeries and private piety. There are some (said our blessed Lord) who make
themselves Eunuchs non ad vitae bonae meritum (as St. Austin in the like case)
not that it is a better service of God in it self, but that it is useful to
the first circumstances of the Gospel (...), etc. Epist. ad Philadelph.
apt to spiritual and Ecclesiastical employments: first (...) and then (...),
holy in his own person, and then sanctified to public ministeries; and it was
also of ease to the Christians themselves, because as then it was, when they
were to fly, and to fly for ought they knew, in winter, and they were
persecuted to the four winds of heaven; and the nurses and the women with
child were to suffer a heavier load of Paul (...), Such shall have trouble in
the flesh, that is, they that are married shall, and so at that time they had:
and therefore it was an act of charity to the Christians to give that counsel,
(...) I do this to spare you, and (...): for when the case was altered and that
storm was over, and the first necessities of the Gospel served, and the sound
was gone out into all nations; in very many persons it was wholly changed, and
not the married but the unmarryed had and non non erat bonum homini esse
solitarium, and it was not good for man to be alone.

But in this first intervall, the public necessity and the private zeal
mingling together did sometimes over-act their love of single life, even to the
disparagement of marriage, and to the scandal of Religion; which was increased
by the occasion of some pious persons renouncing their contract of marriage,
not consummate, with unbeleevers. For when Flavia Domitilla being converted by
Nereus and Achilleus the Eunuchs, refused to marry Aurelianus Aurelianus
thought himself an injured person, and caused St. Clemens who veiled her, and
his spouse both, to dye in the quarrel. St. Thecla being converted by St. Paul
grew so in love with virginity, that she leaped back from the marriage of
Tamyris where she was lately engaged. St. Iphigenia denied to marry King
Hirtacus, and it is said to be done by the advice of St. Matthew. And Susanna
the Niece of Diocletian refused the love of Maximianus the Emperor; and these
all had been betrothed; and so did St. Agnes and Felicula, and diverse others
then and afterward; insomuch, that it was reported among the Gentiles, that
the Christians did not only hate all that were not of their persuasion, but
were enemies of the chaste laws of marriage; And indeed some that were called
Christians were so; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.
Upon this occasion it grew necessary for the Apostle to state the question
right, and to do honor to the holy rite (...). Ignatius epistel. ad
Philadelph. Et Clomens idem ait apud Eusebium hist. Eccles. lib. 3. sed tamen
eam non circumduxit sicut Petrus: probat autem ex Philip. 4.
had been a married man, but was now a widower, does explicate the
mysteriousnesse of it, and describes it is honors, and adornes it with rules
and provisions of Religion, that as it begins with honor, so it may proceed
with piety, and end with glory.

For although single life has in it privacy and simplicity of affairs,
Marriage is honorable in all men, so is not single life; for in some it is a
snare and a (...), a trouble in the flesh, a prison of unruly desires which is
attempted daily to be broken. Celibate or single life is Raphael waited upon a
young man that he might have a blessed marriage, and that that marriage might
repair two fad families, and bless all their relatives. Our blessed Lord,
though he was born of a maiden, yet she was veiled under the cover of marriage,
and she was married to a widower; for Joseph the supposed Father of our Lord
had children by a former wife. The first Miracle that ever Jesus did, was to
do honor to a wedding; marriage was in the world before sin, and is in all
ages of the world the greatest and most effective antidote against sin, in
which all the world she shall be saved in childbearing, if she be found in
faith and righteousness. Marriage is a Marriage has cares, yet the single
life has desires which are more troublesome and more dangerous, and often end
in sin, while the cares are but instances of duty and exercises of piety; and
therefore if single life has more privacy of devotion, yet marriage has more
necessities and more variety of it, and is an exercise of more graces. In two
virtues celibate or single life may have the advantage of degrees ordinarily
and commonly, that is, in chastity and devotion: but as in some persons this
may fail, and it does in very many, and a married man may spend as much time in
devotion as any virgins or widows do, yet (...). Plato.
exercises and trials for those graces, for which single life can never be
crowned; Here is the proper scene of piety and patience, of the duty of Parents
and the charity of relatives; here kindness is Add quod Eunuchus nulla
pietate movetur,

Nec generi natis^e cavet: clementia cunctis

In similes, animosque ligant consortia damni. Claudian.


spread abroad, and love is united and made firm as a center. Marriage is the
nursery of heaven; the virgin sends prayers to God, but she carries but one
soul to him; but the state of marriage fills up the (...).
more sad; is fuller of sorrows, and fuller of joys; it lies under more
burdens, but it is supported by all the strengths of love and charity, and
those burdens are delightful. Marriage is the mother of the world, and
preserves Kingdoms, and fills Cities, and Churches, and Heaven it self:
Celibate, like the fly in the heart of an apple, dwells in a perpetual
sweetness, but sits alone, and is confined and dies in singularity; Siquis
patriam majorem parentem extinguit, in eo culpa est, quod facit pro sua part
qui se exnuchat aut aliqua liberos producit, i. e. differt eorum procreationem.
Varro in lege Maenia.
virtues, and promotes the interest of mankind, and is that state of good
things to which God has designed the present constitution of the world.

(...)
(...).
This is a great mystery, but it is the symbolicall and sacramental
representment of the greatest mysteries of our Religion. Christ descended from
his Fathers bosom, and contracted his divinity with flesh and blood, and
married our Nature, and we became a Church, atque una domus est omnium filiorum
ejus, all the children dwell in the same house, and are heirs of the same
promises, entitled to the same inheritance. Here is the eternal conjunction,
the indissoluble knot, the exceeding love of Christ, the obedience of the
Spouse, the communicating of goods, the uniting of interests, the fruit of
marriage, a celestial generation, a new creature; Sacramentum hoc magnum est;
this is the sacramental mystery represented by the holy rite of marriage; so
that marriage is divine in its institution, sacred in its union, holy in the
mystery, sacramental in its signification, honorable in its appellative,
religious holiness to the Lord. Di^o autem in Christo and Ecclesia,] It must
be in Christ and the Church.

If this be not observed, marriage loses its mysteriousnesse: but because it is
to effect much of that which it signifies, it concerns all that enter into
those golden fetters to see that Christ and his Church be in at every of its
periods, and that it be entirely conducted and overruled by Religion; for so
the Apostle passes from the sacramental rite to the real duty; Nevertheless,
that is, although the former discourse were wholly to explicate the conjunction
of Christ that the man love his wife, and the wife reverence her husband; and
this is the use we shall now make of it, the particulars of which precept I
shall thus dispose.

1. I shall propound the duty as it generally relates to Man and Wife in
conjunction. 2. The duty and power of the Man. 3. The rights and privileges
and the duty of the Wife.

1. In Christo and Ecclesia] that begins all, and there is great need it should
be so, for they that enter into the state of marriage cast a dye of the
greatest contingency, and yet of the greatest

(...),
(...).


Ah tum te miserum, malique fati
Quem attract is pedibus patente porta
Percurrent mugilesque raphanique
The boys, and the pedlers, and the fruiterers shall tell of this man, when he
is carried to his grave, that he lived and dyed a poor wretched person. The
Stags in the Greek Epigram, whose knees were clogged with frozen snow upon the
mountains, came down (...), etc.
marriage to refresh their troubles, and there they enter into fetters, and are
bound to sorrow by the cords of a man's or woman's peevishness: and the worst of
the evil is, they are to thank their own follies; for they fell into the snare
by entering an improper way: Christ and the Church were Indian women, enter into
folly for the price of an Elephant, and think their crime warrantable; so do
men and women change their liberty for a rich fortune (like Eriphyle the
Argive, (...), she preferred gold before a good man) and show themselves to be
less then money by overvaluing that to all the content and wise felicity of
their lives: and when they have counted the money and their sorrows together,
how willingly would they Non ego illam mihi dotem duco esse quae dos dicitur,
Sed pudicitiam and pudorem, and sedatum cupidinem, Deum metum, parentum amorem,
and cognatum concordiam. Plaut. in Amphit.
buy with the loss of all that money, modesty, or sweet nature to their
relative! the odd thousand pound would gladly be allowed in good nature and
fair Facies, non uxor amatur.
beauty principally; cui sum eruditi oculi and stulta men's (as one said) whose
eyes are witty, and their soul sensual; It is an ill band of affections to tie
two hearts together by a little thread of red and white.


(...).
And they can love no longer but until the next ague comes, and Tres rugae
subeant, and se cutis arida laxet, Fiant obscuri dentes, oculique minores,
Collige sarcinutas dicet libertus, and exi. Juven. Sat. 6.
they are fond of each other but at the chance of fancy, or the small pox, or
childebearing, or care, or time, or any thing that can destroy a pretty flower.
But it is the basest of all when lust is the Paranymph and solicits the suit,
and makes the contract, and joined the hands; for this is commonly the effect
of the former, according to the Greek proverb,

(...),
(...).
At first for his fair cheeks and comely beard, the beast is taken for a Lion,
but at last he is turned to a Dragon or a Leopard, or a Swine. That which is at
first beauty on the face may prove lust in the manners.

(...)
(...),
So Eubulus wittily reprehended such impure contracts; they offer in their
maritall sacrifices nothing but the thigh and that which the Priests cut from
the goats when they were laid to bleed upon the Altars. (...), said St.
Clement. He or she that looks too curiously upon the beauty of the body, looks
too low, and has flesh and corruption in his heart, and is judged sensual and
earthly in his affections Begin therefore with God, Christ is the president of
marriage and the holy Ghost is the fountain of purities and chaste loves, and he
joins the hearts; and therefore let our first suit be in the court of heaven,
and with designs of piety, or safety, or charity; let no impure spirit defile
the virgin purities and castifications of the soul, (as St. Peter's phrase is)
let all such contracts begin with religious affections.

Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris, at illi
Notum qui pueri, qualisve futura sit uxor.
We sometimes beg of God for a wife or a child, and he alone knows what the
wife shall prove, and by what dispositions and manners and into what fortune
that child shall enter: but we shall not need to fear concerning the event of
it, if religion, and fair intentions, and It is not good for man to be alone;
Children was the next, Increase and multiply; but the avoiding fornication came
in by the superfetation of the evil accidents of the world. The first makes
marriage delectable, the second necessary to the public, the third necessary
to the particular; This is for safety, for life and

Nam simulac venas inflavit dira cupido,
Huc juvenes aequum est descendere; --
The other have in them joy and a portion of immortality: the first makes the
man's heart glad, the second is the friend of Kingdoms, and cities, and
families, and the third is the enemy to hell, and an antidote of the chiefest
inlet to damnation: but of all these the noblest end is the multiplying
children, Mundus cum patet, Deorum tristium atque inferum quasi patet janua;
propterea uxorem liberorum quaerendorum causa ducere religiosum est, said
Varro, It is religion Macrobius ex Varrone.
to marry for children; and Quintilian puts it into the definition of a wife,
est enim uxor quam jungit, quam diducit utilitas; cujus haec reverentia est,
quod videtur inventa in causa liberorum, and therefore St. Ignatius when he had
spoken of Elias, and Titus, and Clement, Epist. ad Philadelph.
with an honorable mention of their virgin state, lest he might seem to have
lessened the married Apostles, at whose feet in Christ's Kingdom he thought
himself unworthy to sit, he gives this testimony, Amabit sapiens, cupient
caeteri, said Afranius, love is a fair inducement, but desire and appetite are
rude, and the characterismes of a sensual person: Amare justi and boni est,
cupere impotemis; to love, belongs to a just and a good man; but to lust,

2. Man and wife are equally concerned to avoid all offenses of each other in
the beginning of their conversation: every little thing can blast an infant
blossom; and the breath of the south can shake the little rings of the Vine,
when first they begin to curle like the locks of a new weaned boy; but when by
age and consolidation Plutarch compares a new marriage to a vessel before the
hoops are on, (...), every thing dissolves their tender compaginations, but
(...), when the joints are stiffned and are tied by a firm compliance and
proportioned (...).
nothing else could entice him to return: and the band of common children, and
the sight of her that nurses what is most dear to him, and the endearments of
each other in the course of a long society,

-- Tormentum ingens nubentibus haeret
Quae nequeunt parere, and partu retinere maritos.
When it is come thus far, it is hard untwisting the knot; but be careful in
its first coalition, that there be no rudeness done; for if there be, it will
for ever after be apt to start and to be diseased.

3. Let man and wife be careful to stifle little Quaedam parva quidem, s^d non
toleranda maritis.
things, that as fast as they spring, they be cut down and trod upon; for if
they be suffered to grow by numbers, they make the spirit peevish, and the
society troublesome, and the affections loose and easy by an habitual
aversation. Some men are more vexed with a fly then with a wound;

4. Let them be sure to abstain from all those things which by Mercury str^ding
by Venus, to signify, that by fair language and sweet entreaties, the minds
of each other should be united; and hard by them Suadam and Gratias
descripserunt, they would have all deliciousness -- Hujus n^rari summique
voluptas Nulla boni, quoties animocorrupta superbo Plus aloes quam mellis habet
-- Juven. Sat. 6.
of manners, compliance and mutual observance to

5. Let the husband and wife infinitely avoid a curious distinction of mine and
thine; for this has caused all the laws, and all the suits, and all the wars
in the world; let them who have but one person, have also but one interest. The
husband and wife are heirs to each other (as Dionysius Halicarnasseus relates
from Romulus) if they dye without children, but if there be children, the wife
is (...), a partner in the inheritance; But during their life the use and
employment is common to both their necessities, and in this there is no other
difference of right, but that the man has the dispensation power, but no right
to do so. And when either of them begins to impropriate, it is like a tumor in
the flesh, it draws more then its share, but what it feeds on turns to a bile:
and therefore the Romans forbad any donations to be made between man and wife,
because neither of them could transfer a new right of those things which
already they Corvinus dwells in a farm and receives all its profits, and reaps
and sowes as he please, and eats of the corn and drinks of the wine, it is his
own: but all that also is his Lords, and for it, Corvinus pays
acknowledgement; and his patron has such powers and uses of it as are proper
to the Lords; and yet for all this, it may be the Kings too, to all the
purposes that he can need, and is all to be accounted in the census and for
certain services, and times of danger: So are che riches of a family, Macarius
in is 32 Homily speaks fully in this particular, a woman betrothed to a man
bears all her portion, and with a mighty love pours it into the hands of her
husband, and says, (...), I have nothing of my own, my goods, my portion, my
body and my mind is yours. (...), (...).
all that a woman has is reckoned to the right of her husband; not her wealth
and her person only, but her reputation and her praise; So Lucian. But as the
earth, the mother of all creatures here below, sends up all its vapors and
proper emissions

These are the duties of them both, which have common regards and equal
necessities, and obligations; and indeed there is love, in the other is called
reverence; and what in the wife is obedience, the same in the man is duty. He
provides, and she dispenses; he gives Periander did his dead Melissa, by an
unnatural

SERMON, XVIII. Part II.
Let every one of you so love his wife even as himself; she is as himself, the
man has power over her as over himself, and must love her equally. A husbands
power over his wife is paternall and friendly, not magisteriall and despotick.
The wife is in perpetua tutela, under conduct and counsel; for the power a man
has is founded in the understanding, not in the will or force; it is not a
power of coercion, but a power of advice, and that government that wise men
have over those who Et vos in manu and in tutela non in servitio debetis habere
eas, and malle patres vos, and viros, quam dominos dici, said Valerius in
Livie; Husbands should rather be Fathers then Lords. Homer adds more soft
appellatives to the character of a husbands duty, (...), Thou art to be a
father and a mother to her, and a brother: and great reason, unless the state
of marriage should be no better then the condition of an Orphan. For she that
is bound to leave father and mother, and brother for thee, either is miserable
like a poor fatherless child, or else ought to find all these and more in
Medea in Euripides had cause to complain when she found it otherwise.

(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Which St. Ambrose well translates: It is sad] when virgins are with their own
money sold to slavery; and that services are in better Exhort. ad virg.
state then marriages; for they receive wages, but these buy their setters and
pay dear for their loss of liberty: and therefore the Romans expressed the
man's power over his wife but by a gentle word, Nec vero mulieribus praefectus
reponatur, qui apud Graecos creari solet, sed sit censor qui viros doceat
moderari uxoribus; said Cicero, let there be no governor of the women
appointed but a censor of manners, one to teach the men to moderate their
wives, that is, fairly to induce them to the measures of their own proportions.
It was rarely observed of Philo, (...) when Adam made that fond excuse for his
folly in eating the forbidden fruit, he said [The woman thou gave to be with
me she gave me] He says not [the woman which thou gave to me] no such thing;
she is none of his goods, none of his possessions, not to be reckoned among his
servants; God did not give her to him so; but to be with me] that is, to be my
partner, the companion of my joys and sorrows, thou gave her for use, not
for dominion. The dominion of a man over his wife is no other then as the soul
rules the body; for which it takes a mighty care, and uses it with a delicate
tenderness, and cares for it in all contingencies, and watches to keep it from
all evils, and studies to make for it fair provisions, and very often is led by
its inclinations and desires, and does never contradict its appetites, but when
they are evil, and then also not without some trouble and sorrow; and its
government comes only to this, it furnishes the body with government is no
other then provision; as a nurse governs a child when she causes him to eat
and to be warm, and dry and quiet; and yet even the very government it self is
divided; for man and wife in the family are as the Sun and Moon in the
sirmament of heaven; He rules by day, and she by night, that is, in the lesser
and more proper circles of her affairs; in the conduct of domestic provisions
and necessary offices, and shines only by his light and rules by his authority:
and as the Moon in Gynaeceo in the nursery and offices of domestic employment;
but when she is in conjunction with the Sun her Brother, that is, in that place
and employment in which his care and proper offices are employed, her light is
not seen, her authority has no proper business; but else there is no
difference: for they were barbarous people, among whom wives were in stead of
servants, said Spartianus in Caracalla; and it is a sign of impotency and
weakness to force Dominus and Domina, Governor and Governesse, Lord and Lady,
Master and Mistress, the same difference there is in the authority of man and
woman, and Si tu Caius ego Caia, was publicly proclaimed upon the threshold of
the young man's house, when the bride entered into his hands and power; and the
title of Domina in the sense of the civil Law was among the Romans given to
wives.

Hi Dominam Ditis thalamo diducere adorti, Aeneid. 6.

said Virgil: where though Servius says it was spoken after the manner of the
Greeks who called the wife (...) Lady or Mistress, yet it was so amongst both
the Nations, Ac domus Dominam voca, Catullus; Haerebit Dominae vir comes ipse
suae, so Martial; and Epithal. Juliae.
therefore although there is a just measure of subjection and obedience due
from the wise to the husband (as I shall after explain) yet nothing of this is
expressed in the man's character, or in his duty; he is not commanded to rule,
nor instructed how, nor bidden to exact obedience, or to defend his privilege;
all his duty is signified by love, by nourishing and cherishing, by being
joined to her Ephesians. 5. 25.
in all the unions of charity, by not being bitter to her, by dwelling Col. 3.
19.
with her according to knowledge, giving honor to her: so that it seems 1 Pet.
3. 7.
to be with husbands, as it is with Bishops and Priests, to whom much

Let him love his wife even as himself:] that is his duty, and the measure of it
too; which is so plain, that if he understands how he treats himself, there
needs nothing be added concerning his demeanor

(...). That Is the first. Be not bitter against her; and this is the least
Index and signification of love; a civil man is never bitter against a friend
or a stranger, much less to him that enters under his roof, and is secured by
the laws of hospitality. But a wife does all that, and more; she quits all her
interest for his love, she gives him all that she can give, she is as much the
same person as another can be the same, who is conjoined by love, and mystery,
and religion, and all that is sacred and profane.

Non equidem hoc dubites amborum foedere certo
Consentire dies, and ab uno sidere duci;
They have the same fortune, the same family, the same children, the [erunt duo
in carnem unam] and therefore this the Apostle urges for his (...), no man
hates his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it; and he certainly is
strangely sacrilegious and a violator of the rights of hospitality and
sanctuary, who uses her rudely, who is fled for protection, not only to his
house, but also to his heart, and bosom. A wise man will not wrangle with any
one, much less with his dearest relative; and if it be accounted undecent to
embrace in public, it is extremely shameful to brawle in public, for the
other is in it self lawful, but this never, though it were assisted with the
best circumstances Marcus Aurelius said, that a wise man ought often to
admonish his wife, to reprove her seldom, but never to lay his hands Ah lapis
est, ferrumque, suam quicunque puellam Verberat, e coelo diripit ille Deos. Sit
satis e membris tenuem praescindere vestem, Sit satis ornatas dissoluisse
comas, Sit lachrymas movisse satis quater ille beatus, Quo tenerairato flere
puella potest. Sed manibus qui saevus erit, scutumque sudemque Is gerat, and
miti sit procul a Venere. Tibull.
upon her: neque verberibus neque maledictis exasperandam uxorem, said the
Doctors of the Jews; and Homer brings in Jupiter sometimes speaking sharply to
Juno (according to the Greek liberty and Empire) but made a pause at striking
her,


Iliad. O.
(...).
And the Ancients use to sacrifice to Juno (...) or the president of Marriage
without gall, and St. Basil observes and urges it, by way of upbraiding
quarrelling husbands; etiam vipera virus ob nuptiarum venerationem evomit, the
Viper casts all his poison when he marries his female, Tu duritiam animi, tu
feritatem, tu crudelitatem Homil. 7. Hexaem.
ob unionis reverentiam non deponis? He is worse then a viper who for the
reverence of this sacred union will not abstain from Chrysostom preaching
earnestly against this barbarous inhumanity of striking the wife, or reviling
her with evil language, says it is as if a King should beat his Viceroy and
use him like a dog; from whom most of that reverence and majesty must needs
depart which he first put upon him, and the subjects shall pay him less duty,
by how much his Prince has treated him with less civility; but the loss
redounds to himself; and the government of the whole family Quod si
verberaveris exasperabis morbum, (says St. Chrysostom) asperitas enim
mansuetudine non alia asperitate dissolvitur; if you strike you exasperate the
wound, and (like Cato at Utica in his despair) tear the wounds in pieces; and
yet he that did so ill to himself whom he loved well, he loved not women
tenderly, and yet would never strike; And if the man cannot endure her talking,
how can she endure his striking? But this caution contains a duty in it which
none prevaricates but the meanest of the people, fools and bedlams, whose
kindness is a curse, whose government is by chance and violence, and their
families are herds of talking cattle.

Sic alternos reficit cursus
Alternus amor, sic astrigeris
Bellum discors exulat or is.
Haec concordia temperat aquis
Elementa modis, ut pugnantia
Vicibus cedant humida siccis,
Jungantque fidem frigora flammis.
The maritall love is infinitely removed from all possibility of such
rudenesses: it is a thing pure as light, sacred as a Temple, lasting Aamicitia
quae desinere potuit nunquam vera fuit, said one; that love that can cease was
never true: it is (...), so Moses called it; it is (...), so St. Paul; it is
(...), so Homer; it is (...), so Plutarch; that is, it contains in it all
sweetness, and all society, and all felicity, and all prudence, and all
wisdom. For there is nothing can please a man without love, and if a man be
weary of the wise discourses of the Apostles, and of the innocence of an even
and a private fortune, or hates peace or a fruitful year, he has reaped
thorns and thistles from the choicest flowers of Paradise; For nothing can
sweeten felicity it self, but love; but when a man Felicet ter and amplius Quos
irrupta tenet copula, nec malis Divulsus querimonus Suprema citius solvet amor
die. Horat.
No man can tell but he that loves his children, how many delicious accents
make a man's heart dance in the pretty conversation of those dear pledges; their
childishness, their stammering, their little angers, their innocence, their
imperfections, their necessities are so many little emanations of joy love his
wife, are nothing but so many necessities and capacities She that is loved is
safe, and he that loves is joyful. Love is a union of all things excellent; it
contains in it proportion and satisfaction, and rest, and confidence; and I
wish that this were so much proceeded in, that the Heathens themselves could
not go beyond us in this virtue, and its proper, and its appendant happiness.
Tiberius Gracchus chose to die for the safety of his wife; and yet me thinks to
a Christian to do so, should be no hard thing; for many servants will dye for
their masters, and many Gentlemen will die for their friend; but the examples
are not so many of those that are ready to do it for their dearest relatives,
and yet some Baptista Fregosa tells of Neapolitan that gave himself a slave to
the Moors, that he might follow his wife; and Dominicus Catalusius the Prince
of Lesbos kept company with his Lady when she was a Leper; and these are
greater things then to die.

But the cases in which this can be required are so rare and contingent, that
holy Scripture instances not the duty in this particular; but it contains in it
that the husband should nourish and cherish her, that he should refresh her
sorrows and entice her fears into confidence and pretty arts of rest; for even
the fig trees that grew Uxoris vitium tollas opus est, aut feras: Qui tollit
vitium, uxorem commodiusculam Sibi praestat; qui fert, sese meliorem facit.
Varro.
Eurip.
by fairly expounding all the little traverses of society and communication, by
taking every thing by the right handle, (as Plutarchs expression is) for there
is nothing but may be misinterpreted, and yet if it be capable of a fair
construction, it is the office of

(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Love will account that to be well said, which it may be was not so intended;
and then it may cause it to be so another time.

3. Hither also is to be referred that he secure the interest of her complain
not that she is infected that lies in the bosom; the interest of whose love
ties her to transcribe thy copy and write after the characters of thy manners.
Paris was a Helena was an adulteress, and she added covetousness upon her own
account. But Ulysses was a prudent man, and a wary counselor, sober and
severe, and he efformed his wife into such imagery as he desired, and she was
chaste as the snows upon the mountains, diligent as the fatal sisters, always
busy, and always faithful: (...), she had a lazy tongue and a busy hand.

4. Above all the instances of love, let him preserve toward (...).
her an inviolable faith, and an unspotted chastity, for this is the marriage
Ring, it ties two hearts by an eternal band; it is like

(...)
(...).
This is a grace that is shut up and secured by all arts of heaven, and the
defense of laws, the locks and bars of modesty, by honor and reputation, by
fear and shame, by interest and high regards; and that contract that is
intended to be for ever, is yet dissolved and broken by the violation of this;
nothing but death can do so much evil to the holy ties of marriage, as
unchastity and breach of faith can. The shepherd Cratis falling in love with a
she goat, had his brains beaten out with a buck as he lay asleep; Romans, a man
might kill his daughter or his wife if he surprised her in the breach of her
holy vows, which are as sacred as the threads of life, secret as the privacies
of the sanctuary, and holy as the society of Angels. Nullae sunt inimicitiae
nisi amoris acerbae, and God that commanded us to forgive our enemies left it
in our choice, and has not commanded us to forgive an adulterous husband or a
wife; but the offended parties displeasure may pass into an eternal
separation of society and friendship. Now in this grace it is fit that the
wisdom and severity of the man should hold forth a pure taper, that his wife
who can more easily be tempted by another, and less by her self.

These are the little lines of a man's duty, which like threads of light from the
body of the Sun do clearly describe all the regions of his proper obligations.
Now concerning the woman's duty, although it consists in doing whatsoever her
husband commands, and so receives measures from the rules of his government,
yet there are

1. The first is obedience; which because it is no where enjoined that the man
should exact of her, but often commanded to her to pay, gives demonstration
that it is a voluntary cession that is required, such a cession as must be
without coercion and violence on his part, but upon fair inducements, and
reasonableness in the thing, and out of love, and honor on her part. When God
commands us to love him, he means we should obey him; This is love that ye keep
my Commandments, and, if ye love me (said our Lord) keep my Commandments: Now
as Christ is to the Church, so is man to the wife: and therefore obedience is
the best instance of her love; for it proclaims her submission, her humility,
her opinion of his wisdom, his preeminence in the family, the right of his
privilege, and the injunction imposed by God upon her sex, that although in
sorrow she brings forth children, yet with love and choice she should obey. The
man's authority is love, and the woman's love is obedience; and it was not
rightly observed of him that said, when woman fell God made her timorous that
she might be ruled, Receptae reverentiae est si mulier viro C. alia D. solut.
Matrim.
subsit, said the Law; unless also that we will add, that it is an effect of
that modesty which like rubies adorn the necks and cheeks of women. Pudicitia
est, pater, eos magnificare qui nos socias sumpserunt Pluatus in Sticho.
sibi; said the maiden in the comedy: It is modesty to advance and highly to
honor them who have honored us by making us to be the companions of their
dearest excellencies; for the woman that went before the man in the way of
death, is commanded to follow him in the way of love: and that makes the
society

Inferior Matrona suo sit, Sexte, marito;
Non aliter fiunt foemina virque pares.
For then the soul and body make a perfect man when the soul Male and Female
created he them, and called their Genesis 5. 2.
name Adam, says the holy Scripture; they are but one: and therefore the
several parts of this one man must stand in the place where God appointed,
that the lower parts may do their offices in their own station, and promote the
common interest of the

-- Faciunt graviora coacta
Imperio sexus -- Juvenal.

But that is not all; for she is miserable too: for,

(...)
(...).
It is a sad calamity for a woman to be joined to a fool or a weak person; it
is like a guard of geese to keep the Capitol, or as if a flock of sheep should
read grave lectures to their shepherd, and give him orders where he shall
conduct them to pasture. O vere Phyrgiae, neque enim Phryges, It is a curse
that God threatened sinning persons, Devoratum est robur eorum, facti sunt quasi
mulieres. Esai. 3. 4.
Effeminati dominabuntur eis. To be ruled by weaker people, (...). to have a
fool to ones master is the fate of miserable and unblessed people: and the wife
can be no ways happy, unless she be governed by a prudent Lord, whose

But now concerning the measures and limits of this obedience, we can best take
accounts from Scripture: (...), says the Apostle, in all things; ut Domino, as
unto the Lord; and that is large enough; Ephesians. 5. 24.
ut Ancilla Domino, so St. Hierom understand it, who neither was a friend to
the sex nor to marriage; But his mistake is soon confuted by the text; It is
not ut Dominis, be subject to your husbands as unto Lords, but (...), that is,
in all religion, in reverence and in love, in duty and zeal, in faith and
knowledge; or else (...) may signify, wives be so subject to your husbands,
but yet so, that at the same time ye be subject to the Lord. For that is the
measure of (...) in all things; and it is more plain in the parallel place,
(...) as it is fit in the Lord: Religion Col. 3. 18.
must be the measure of your obedience and subjection: intra limits
disciplinae, so Tertullian expresses it. (...), Stromat. 7.
so Clemens Alex. In all things let the wise be subject to the husband, so as
to do nothing against his will, those only things excepted in which he is
impious or refractary in things pertaining to wisdom and piety.

But in this also there is some peculiar caution. For although in those things
which are of the necessary parts of faith and holy life, the woman is only
subject to Christ, who only is and can be Lord of consciences, and commands
alone where the conscience is instructed Plutarch) that the wife should
acknowledge her husband for her teacher and her guide; for then when she is
what he please to efform her, he has no cause to complain if she be no better:
Eosdem quos maritus nosse Deos and colere solos uxor debet (said Plutarch.) And
the rites which a woman performs severally from her husband are not pleasing
to God; and therefore Pomponia Graecina because she entertained a stranger
religion was permitted to the judgment of her husband Plantius. And this whole
affair is no stranger to Christianity. For the Christian Romulus. A woman by
the holy Laws has right to partake of her husbands goods, and her husbands
sacrifices, and holy things. Where there is a schism in one bed, there is a
nursery of temptations, and -- Quis deditus autem Usque adeo est, ut non illam
quam laudibus effert, Horreat, inque diem septenis oderit hor^^? Juven. Sat. 6.
love is persecuted and in perpetual danger

2. The next line of the woman's duty is compliance, which S. Peter calls, the
hidden man of the heart, the ornament of a meek and 1 Pot. 3. 4.
a quiet spirit, and to it he opposes the outward and pompous ornament of the
body; concerning which as there can be no particular Menander in the Comedy
brings in a man turning his wife from his house because she stained her hair
yellow, which was then the beauty,

(...)
(...).
A wise woman should not paint. A studious gallantry in clothes cannot make a
wise man love his wife the better. (...), said the Comedy, such gayeties are
fit for tragedies, but not for the uses of life: decor occultus, and recta
venustas, the hidden man of the heart, sweetness of manners, humble
comportment, fair interpretation of all addresses, ready Malo Venusinam quam te
Cornelia matter Gracchorum, si cum magnis virtutibus offers Grande supercilium,
and numer as in dote triumphos. Juven Sat. 6.
compliances, high opinion of him, and mean of her self.

(...), To partake Quid juvat ornato procedere vitta capillo, Teque peregrmis
vendere muneribus, Naturaeque decus mercato perdere cultu, Nec sinere in
propriis membra nitere bonis? Propert. l. 1. el. x.
secretly, and in her heart of all his joys and sorrows, to believe him comely
and fair, though the Sun has drawn a cypress over him, (for as marriages are
not (...).
with reason and the hearts: so are these judgments to be made by the mind,
not by the sight:) and Diamonds cannot make the woman virtuous, nor him to
value her who sees her put them off then, when charity and modesty are her
brghtest ornaments.

(...)
(...), etc.
Circe had turned Ulysses companions into hogs and monkies, by pleasures and
the enchantments of her bravery and luxury, they were no longer useful to her,
she knew not what to do with them; but on wise Ulysses she was continually
enamored. Indeed the outward ornament is fit to take fools, but they are not
worth the taking; But she that has a wise husband, must entice him to an
eternal dearnesse by the vail of modesty, and the grave robes of chastity,
fucus but blushings, her brightness must be purity, and she must shine round
about with sweetnesses and friendship, and she shall be pleasant while she
lives, and desired when she dies. If not,

-- (...),
(...),
(...).
after she is dead: For that will be the end of all merry meetings; and I
choose this to be the last advice to both.

3. Remember the days of darkness, for they are many; The joys of the bridal
chambers are quickly past, and the remaining portion of the state is a dull
progress without variety of joys, but not Abraham and Joseph, S Peter and St.
Paul,

(...)
(...).
All those things that now please us shall pass from us, or we from them, but
those things that concern the other life are permanent as the numbers of
eternity: and although at the resurrection there shall be no relation of
husband and wife, and no marriage shall be celebrated, but the marriage of the
Lamb, yet then shall be remembered

Amen.
Sermon, XIX. APPLES of SODOM: OR The Fruits of Sin. Part. I.
Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
THe son of Sirach did prudently advise concerning making judgments of the
felicity or infelicity Eccles. 11. 28.
of men: Judge none blessed before his death, for a man shall be known in his
children. Some men raise their fortunes from a cottage to the chaires of
Princes, from a sheep-coat to a throne, and dwell in the circles of the Sun,
and in the lap of prosperity; their wishes and success dwell under the same
roof, and providence brings all events into their design, and ties both ends
together with prosperous successes; and even the little conspersions and
intertextures of evil accidents in their lives are but like a faing'd note in
music, by an artificial discord making the ear covetous, and then pleased
with the harmony

Eripitur persona, manet res.
Indeed they cannot longer dwell upon the estate, but that remains Chabrias
grew miserable by the folly of his son Ctesippus; and the reputation of brave
Germanicus began to be ashamed, when the base Caligula entered upon his scene of
dishonorable crimes. Commodus the wanton and feminine son of wise Antoninus
Hortensius Corbius was prostitute, and the heir of Q. Fabius Maximus was
disinherited by the sentence of the city Praetor, as being unworthy to enter
into the fields of his glorious Father, and young Scipio the son of Africanus
was a fool and a prodigal; posterity did weep afresh over the monuments of
their brave progenitors, and found that infelicity can pursue a man, and
overtake him in his grave.

This is a great calamity when it falls upon innocent persons: and that Moses
died upon Mount Nebo in the sight of Canaan, was not so Eliezer and Gersom were
unworthy to succeed him; but that Priesthood was devolved to his Brother, and
the Principality to his servant: And to Samuel, that his sons proved corrupt,
and were exauthorated for their unworthiness, was an allay to his honor and
his joys, and such as proclaims to all the world, that the measures of our
felicity are not to be taken by the lines of our own person, but of our
relations too; and he that is cursed in his children, cannot be reckoned among
the fortunate.

This which I have discoursed concerning families in general, is outward
senses are its handmaids, and the inward senses are of its privy chamber; the
understanding is its counselor, the will its friend, riches are its
ministers, nature holds up its train, and art is its emissary to promote its
interest and ugly and deformed, foolish and ill natured; and the Apostles calls
them by their names, shame and death. These are the fruits of Sin, the apples
of Sodom, fair outsides, but if you touch them, they turn to ashes and a stink;
and if you will nurse these children, and give them whatsoever is dear to you,
then you may be admitted into the house of feasting, and chambers of riot where
sin dwells; but if

In answer to which question we are to consider, 1. What is the sum total of
the pleasure of sin? 2. What fruits and relishes it leaves behind by its
natural efficiency? 3. What are its consequents by its demerit, and the
infliction of the superadded wrath of God, which it has deserved? Of the first
St. Paul gives no account, nothing that they dare own, nothing that remains:
and where is it? show it; what is become of it? Of the second he gives the sum
total; all its natural effects are shame and its appendages. The third, or
the superinduced evils by the just wrath of God, he calls death, the worst name
in it self, and the greatest of evils that can happen.

1. Let us consider what pleasures there are in sin; most of them are very
punishments. I will not reckon nor consider concerning envy, which one in
Stobaeus calls (...), the basest spirit and yet very just, because it punishes
the delinquent in the very act of sin, doing as Aelian says of the Polypus,
(...), when he wants his prey, he devours his own arms; and the leanness, and
the secret pangs, and the perpetual restlesnesse of an envious man feed upon
his own heart, and drink down his spirits, unless he can ruin or observe the
fall of the fairest fortunes of his neighbor. The fruit of this tree are
mingled and sour, and not to be endured in the very eating. Neither will I
reck on the horrid afrightments and amazements of murder, nor the uneasinesse
of impatience, which doubles every evil that it feels,

It were easy to make a catalogue of sins, every one of which is a disease, a
trouble in it is very constitution and its nature: such are loathing of
spiritual things, bitterness of spirit, rage, greediness, confusion of
mind, and irresolution, cruelty and despite, slothfulness and distrust,
unquietness and anger, effeminacy and niceness, prating and sloth, ignorance
and inconstancy, incogitancy and cursing, malignity and fear, forgetfulness
and rashness, pusillanimity and despair, rancour and superstition: if a man
were to curse his enemy, he could not wish him a greater evil then these; and
yet these are several kinds of sin which men choose, and give all their hopes
of heaven in exchange for one of these diseases. Is it not a fearful
consideration that a man should rather choose eternally to perish, then to say
his prayers heartily, and affectionately? But so incogitancy, and hates the
employment, and suffers the torments of prayers which he loves not; and all
this, although for so doing it is certain he may perish: what fruit, what
deliciousness can he fancy in being weary of his prayers? There is no pretense
or color for these things. Can any man imagine a greater evil to the body and
soul of a man, then there are but very few sins that pretend to pleasure:
although a man be weak and soon deceived, and the Devil is crafty, and sin is
false and impudent, and pretenses are too many, yet most kinds of sins are
real and prime troubles to the very body, without all manner of
deliciousness, even to the sensual, natural, and carnal part; and a man
must put on something of a Devil before he can choose the lusts of the lower
belly, ambition, and revenge; and although the catalogue of sins is numerous as
the production of fishes, yet these three only can be apt to cosen us with a
fair outside; and yet upon the survey of what fruits they bring, and what taste
they have, in the manducation, besides the filthy relish they leave behind, we
shall see how miserably they are abused and fooled, that expend any thing upon
such purchases.

2. For a man cannot take pleasure in lusts of the flesh, in gluttony,
drunkenness, unless he be helped forward with inconsideration and folly. For
we see it evidently that grave and wise persons, men of experience and
consideration are extremely less affected with lust and loves; the
hare-brain'd boy, the young gentleman that thinks nothing in the world greater
then to be free from affricare cutem, it went but to the skin; but the allay
went further; it kept a guard within, and suffered the pleasure to pass no
further. A man must resolve to be a fool, a rash, inconsiderate person, or he
will feel but little satisfaction in the enjoyment of his sin: indeed he that
stops his nose, may drink down such corrupted waters, and he understood it well
who chose rather to be a fool,

Dum mala delectent mea me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere and ringi --


3. For the pleasures of intemperance, they are nothing but the relics and
images of pleasure, after that nature has been feasted; For so long as she
needs, that is, so long as temperance waits, so long pleasure also stands
there. But as temperance begins to go away, having done the ministeries of
Nature, every morsel, and every new goblet is still less delicious, and
cannot be endured but as men force nature by violence to stay longer then she
would: How have some men rejoiced when they have escaped a cup! and when they
cannot escape, they pour it in, and receive it with as much pleasure Devil in
the company, and such as is his pleasure, such is theirs: he rejoices in he
thriving sin, and the swelling fortune of his darling drunkenness, but his
joys are the joys of him that knows and always remembers that he shall
infallibly have the biggest damnation;

Non been mendaci risus componitur ore,
Nec been sollicitis ebria verba sonant.
Certain it is, intemperance takes but natures leavings; when the belly is full
and nature calls to take away, the pleasure that comes in afterward is next to
loathing: it is like the relish and taste of meats at the end of the third
course, or the sweetness of honey to Phalangia of old, (...), some of these
serpents make men die laughing, and some to die weeping: so does the
intemperate, and so does his brother that languishes of a consumption; this man
dies weeping, and the other dies laughing: but they both die infallibly, and
all his pleasure is nothing but the sting of a serpent, immixte liventia mella
veneno, it wounds the heart, and he dies with a Tarantula dancing and singing
till he bows his neck,

4. In these pretenders to pleasure which you see are but few, and they not
very prosperous in their pretenses, there is mingled so much trouble to bring
them to act and enjoyment, that the appetite is above half tired before it
comes; It is necessary a man should be hugely patient that is ambitious,
Ambulare per Britannos, Scythicas pati pruinas: no man buy's death and
damnation at so dear a rate, as he that fights for it, and endures cold and
hunger,

-- Patiens liminis atque solis,
The heat of the sun, and the cold of the threshold; the dangers of war, and
the snares of a crafty enemy; he lies upon the ground with a severity greater
then the penances of a Hermit, and fasts beyond the austerity of a rare
penitent; with this only difference, that the one does it for heaven, the other
for an uncertain honor, and an eternity of flames. But however, by this time
that he has won something, he has spent some years, and he has not much time
left him to rest in his new purchase, and he has worn revenge, which is
pleasant only to a devil, or a man of the same cursed temper. He does a thing
which ought to trouble him, and will move him to pity what his own vile hands
have acted; but if he does not pity, that is, be troubled with himself and wish
the things undone, he has those affections by which the Devil does rejoice in
destroying souls; which affections a man cannot have, unless he be perfectly
miserable, by being contrary to God, to mercy, and to felicity; and after all,
the pleasure is false, fantastic, and violent; it can do him no good, it can
do him hurt: it is ods airy and fantastical; It is like a rolling stone, which
when a man has forced up a hill, will return upon him with a greater violence,
and break those bones whose sinews gave it motion. The pleasure of revenge is
like the pleasure of eating chalk and coals; a foolish disease made the
appetite, and it is entertained with an evil reward; it is like the feeding of
a Cancer or a Wolf, the man is restless till it be done, and when it is,
every man sees how infinitely he is removed from satisfaction or felicity.

Persian King gave Themistocles a goodly pension, assigning Magnesia with the
revenue of 50 talents for his bread, Lampsacum for his wine, and Myos for his
meat; but all the while he sed high and drunk deep, he was infinitely afflicted
that every thing went cross to his undertaking, and he could not bring his
plenteous and criminal; but its employment is base, and it is so against a
man's interest, and against what is and ought to be dearest to him, that he
cannot persuade his better parts to consent, but must fight against them and
all their arguments. These things are against a man's conscience, that is,
against his reason and his rest; and something within makes it pleases the
senses, but diseases the spirit, and wounds that: and

-- Difficile est imitari gaudia falsa,
Difficile est tristi fingere mente jocum.
It will be very hard to delight freely in that which so vexes the more tender
and most sensible part; so that, what Pliny said of Caicus, (...), it brings a
stone in stead of a flower of fruit; so are the pleasures of these pretending
sins; the flower at the best is stinking but there is a stone in the bottom,
it is gravel in the teeth, and a man must drink the blood of his own gums when
he manducates such unwholesome, such unpleasant fruit.

-- Vitiorum gaudia vulnus habent.
They make a wound, and therefore are not very pleasant.

6. The pleasure in the acts of these few sins that do pretend to it, is a
little limited nothing, confined to a single faculty, to one sense, having
nothing but the skin for its organ, or instrument, an artery, or something not
more considerable then a Lute-string; and at the best it is but the
satisfaction of an apperite which reason can cure, which time can appease,
which every diversion can take off; such as is not perfective of his nature,
nor of advantage to his person; it is a desire to no purpose, and as it comes
with no just cause, so sensual desires are nothing but an impatience of being
well and wise, of being in health, and being in our wits; which two things if a
man could endure (and it is but reasonable, a man would think, that we should)
he would never lust to drown his heart in seas of wine, or oppress his belly
with loads of undigested meat, or make himself base as the mixtures of a
harlot, by breaking the sweetest limits, and holy festivities of marriage.
Malum impatientia est boni, said Tertullian, it is nothing else; to please the
sense, is but to do a man's self mischief; and all those lusts tend to some
direct dissolution of a man's health, or his felicity, his reason, or his
religion; it is an enemy that a man carries about him, and as the spirit of God
said concerning Babylon, Quantum in deliciis fuit, tantum dat illi tormentum
and luctum, Let her have torment and sorrow according to the measure of her
delights; is most eminently true in the pleasing of our senses; the lust and
desire is a torment; the remembrance and the obsence is a torment, and the
enjoyment does not satisfy, but disables the instrument, and tires the
faculty; and when a man has but a little of what his sense covets, he is not
contented, but impatient for more; and when he has loads of it, he does not
feel it; for he that swallows a full goblet does not taste his wine: and this
is the pleasure of the sense; nothing contents it but that which he cannot
perceive: and it is

7. Sin has little or no pleasure in its very enjoyment; because its very
manner of entry and production is by a curse and a contradiction; it comes into
the world like a viper through the sides of its mother by means unnatural,
violent, and monstrous. Men love sin only because it is forbidden; Sin took
occasion by the Law, says St. Paul, it could not come in upon its own
pretenses, but men rather suspect a secret pleasure in it because there are
guards kept upon it;

Sed quia caecus inest vitiis amor, omne futurum
Despicitur, suadentque brevem praesentia fructum,
Et ruit in vetitum damni secura libido.
Men run into sin with blind affections, and against all reason despise

-- Frontemque a crimine sumunt,
Some because they are reproved, many by custom, others by importunity:


It grows upon crab-stocks, and the lust it self is sour and unwholesome; and
since it is evident, that very many sins come in wholly upon these accounts,
such persons and such sins cannot pretend pleasure; but as Naturalists say of
pulse, cum maledictis and probris serendum praecipiunt, ut laetius porvemat;
the country people were used to curse it and rail upon it all the while that
it was sowing that it might thrive the better; it is true with sins, they grow up
with curses, with spite and contradiction, peevishness and indignation, pride
and cursed principles; and therefore pleasure ought not to be the inscription
of the box; for that is the least part of its ingredient and constitution.

8. The pleasures in the very enjoying of sin are infinitely trifling and
inconsiderable, because they pass away so quickly; if they be in themselves
little, they are made less by their volatile and fugitive knit and solid only
by contingency, and are very often born away with the impetuous torrent of an
inevitable accident, like Xerxes bridge over the Hellespont, and then he is to
begin again, and sets new wheels a going; and by the arts, and the labor, and
the watchings, and he enters upon possession, and finds them not of so long
abode as one of his cares, which in so vast numbers made so great a portion of
his life afflicted? (...), The enjoying of sin for a season, St. Paul Heb. 11.
25.
calls it; he names no pleasures; our English translation uses the word of
enjoying pleasures; but if there were any, they were but for that season, that
instant, that very transition of the act, which dies in its very birth, and of
which we can only say as the minstrell sung of Pacuvius when he was carried
dead from his supper to his bed, it is alive, but that it was: nullo non se die
extulit, it died every day, it lived never unto life, but lived and dyed unto
death, being its mother, and its daughter: The man dyed before the sin did
live, and when it had lived, it consigned him to dye eternally.

Add to this, that it so passes away, that nothing at all remains behind it,
that is pleasant: it is like the path of an arrow in the air; the next morning
no man can tell what is become of the pleasures of the last nights sin: they
are no where but in Gods books, deposited in the conscience, and sealed up
against the day of dreadful He that dies, dies for that which is not; and in
the very little Haec mala mentis gaudia. It abides too little a while to be
felt, or called pleasure; and ifit should abide longer, it would be troublesome
as pain, and loathed like the tedious speech of an Orator pleading against the
life of the innocent.

9. Sin has in its best advantages but a trifling inconsiderable pleasure:
because not only God and reason, conscience and honor, interest and laws, do
sour it in the sense and gust of pleasure, but even the devil himself either
being overruled by God, or by a strange unsignificant malice makes it
troublesome and intricate, entangled and involved; and one sin contradicts
another, and vexes the man with so great variety of evils, that if in the
course of Gods service he should meet with half the difficulty, he would
certainly give over the whole employment. Those that St. James speaks of who
prayed that they might spend it upon their lusts, were covetous and prodigal,
and therefore must endure the torments of one to have the the pleasure of
spending, or the displeasure that it is spent, and does not still remain after
its consumption, is easy to tell: certain it is, that this lasts much longer.
Does not the Devil often tempt men to despair, and by that torment put bars
and locks upon them, that they may never return to God? Which what else is it
but a plain indication that it is intended, the man should feel the images and
dreams of pleasure, no longer but till he be without remedy? Pleasure is but
like centries or wooden frames, set under arches, till they be strong by their
own weight and consolidation to an early hell, and be tormented before the
time. Does not envy punish or destroy flattery; and self-love sometimes
torment the drunkard; and intemperance abate the powers of lust, and make the
man impotent; and laziness become a hinderance to ambition; and the desires of
man wax impatient upon contradicting interests, and by crossing each others
design on all hands lessen the pleasure, and leave the man tormented?

can give; Men could not otherwise be cousened. And if it be without and
against its interest; but either they still proceed, hoping to supply by
numbers what they find not in proper measures; or God permits Lucius, (...),
and seeing waters pure as the tears of the spring, or the pearls of the
morning, expects that in such a fair promising bosom, the inmates should be
fair and pleasant, (...), but finds the fishes black, filthy, and unwholesome;
so it is in sin, its face is fair and beauteous,

(...),
(...).
Softer then sleep, or the dreams of wine, tenderer then the curds of milk, and
Euganea quantumvis mollior agna; but when you come to handle it, it is filthy,
rough as the Porcupine, black as the shadows of the night, and having promised
a fish it gives a scorpion, and a stone in stead of bread.

11. The fruits of its present possession, the pleasures of its taste are less
pleasant, because no sober person, no man that can discourse does like it long,

-- Breve sit quod turpiter audes.
Juven.
But he approves it in the height of passion, and in the disguises of a
temptation; but at all other times he finds it ugly and unreasonable; Dion
Prusaeus reports that when the Persians had got the victory, they would pick
out the noblest slave, (...). They make him a King for three days, and cloth
him with royal robes, and minister to him all the pleasures he can choose, and
all the while he knows he is to dye a sacrifice to mirth and folly. But then
let it be remembered what checks and allayes of mirth the poor man starts at,
when he remembers Qui sacrificant bominem osculabuntur Vitulum, He that Hos.
13. 2,
gives a man in sacrifice shall kiss the calf, that is, shall be admitted to
the seventh chapel of Moloch to kiss the Idol: a goodly reward for so great
a price, for so great an iniquity.

protestatio contra factum, and fine pretenses against all experience; and that
for all these severe sayings, sin is still so pleasant as to tempt the wisest
resolution. Such men are in a very evil condition: and in their case only I
come to understand the meaning of those words of Seneca; Malorum ultimum est
mala sua amare, ubi turpia non solum delectant, sed etiam placent. It is the
worst of evils when men are so in love with sin that they are not only
delighted with them but pleased also; not only feel the relish with too quick a
sense, but also feel none of the objections, nothing of the pungency, the
sting, or the lessening circumstances. However, to these men I say this only,
that if by experience they feel sin pleasant, it is as certain also by
experience, that most sins are in their own nature sharpnesses and diseases;
*and that very few do pretend to pleasure: *That a man cannot feel any
deliciousness in them, but when he is helped by folly and inconsideration;
Phryne desired to be writ on the gates of Thebes, (...), Phryne the harlot
built it up, but Alexander dug it down; the pleasure the harlots hands that
build the fairy eastle, but the hands of reason and religion, sober counsels
and the voice of God, experience of wise men, and the sighings and intolerable
accents of perishing or returning sinners dig it down, and sow salt in the
foundations, that they may never spring up in the accounts of men that delight
not in the portion of fools and forgetfulness. Neque enim Deus ita viventibus
quicquam promisit boni, neque ipsa per se men's humana talium sibi conscia Plat.
de Rep.
quicquam boni sperare audet. To men that live in sin God has promised no
good, and the conscience it self dares not expect it.

SERMON, XX. Part II.
dunghill covered with snow, which was indeed on the outside white as the spots
of leprosy, but it was no better; and if the very colors and instruments of
deception, if the fucus and ceruse be so spotted and sullyed, what can we
suppose to be under the wrinkled skin, what in the corrupted liver, and in the
sinks of the body of sin? That we are next to consider: But if we open the
body, and see what a confusion of all its parts, what a rebellion and tumult of
the humors, what a disorder of the members, what a monstrosity or deformity is
fever, or long for madness or the gout. Sin in its natural efficiency has
in it so many evils, as must needs afright a man, and scare the confidence of
every one that can consider.

* When our blessed Savior shall conduct his Church to the mountains of glory,
he shall present it to God without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.
that is, pure and vigorous, entirely freed from the power, and the infection
of sin. Upon occasion of which expression it has been spoken, that sin leaves
in the soul a stain or spot, permanent upon the spirit, in sordibus in such
filthiness, that he who is of pure eyes cannot behold. But roncerning the
nature or proper effects of this spot or stain, they have not been agreed. Some
call it an obligation or a guilt of punishment; so Scotus. Some fancy it to be
an elongation from God, by a dissimilitude of conditions; so Peter Lombard.
Alexander of Ales says it is a privation of the proper beauty and splendour of
the soul, with which God adorned it in the creation and superaddition of grace;
and upon this expression they most agree, but seem not to understand what they
mean by it; and it signifies no more, but as you describing sickness, call it
a want of health, and folly a want of wisdom; which is indeed to say what a
thing is not, but not to tell what it is: But that I may not be hindered by this
consideration, we may observe that the spots and stains of sin are
metaphorical significations of the disorder and evil consequents of sin;
which it leaves partly upon the meekness is called an ornament, and faith a
shield, and salvation a helmet, and sin it self a wrinkle, corruption,
rottenness, a burden, a wound, death, filthiness Psa. 38. 4. and 65. 2 Timothy
3. 6.
: so it is a^ defiling of a man, that is, as the body contracts nastinesse and
dishonor by impure contacts, and adherencies, so does the soul receive such a
change as must be taken away before it can enter in to the eternal regions,
and house of purity. But it is not a distinct (...), etc.
thing, not an inherent quality, which can be separated from other evil
effects of sin, which I shall now reckon by their more proper names; and St.
Paul comprises under the scornful appellative of shame.

1. The first natural fruit of sin is ignorance. Man was first tempted by the
promise of knowledge; he fell into darkness by believing the Devil holding
forth to him a new light. It was not likely good should come of so foul a
beginning; that the woman should believe the Devil putting on no brighter
shape then a snakes skin, she neither being afraid of sin nor afrighted to hear
a beast speak, and he pretending so weakly in the temptation, that he promised
only that they should know evil; for they knew good before; and all that was
offered to them was the experience of evil: and it was no wonder an experience
of evil, no other knowledge can come upon that account; but the wonder was,
why the woman should sin for no other reward, but for that which she ought to
have feared infinitely; for nothing could have continued her happiness, but
not to have known evil. Now this knowledge was the introduction of ignorance.
For when the understanding suffered it self to be so baffled as to study evil,
the will was as foolish to fall in love with it, and they conspired to undo
each other. For when the will began to love it, then the understanding was set
on work to commend, to advance, to know evil, just as a man is said to taste
of death: for in proper speaking, as death is not to be felt, because it takes
away all sense; so nether can evil be known, because whatsoever is truly
cognoscible, is good and true; and therefore all the knowledge a man gets by
sin is to feel evil: he knows it not by discourse, but by sense; not by
proposition, but by smart; The Devil doing to man as Esculapius Neoclides,
(...), he gave him a formidable collyrium to torment him more: the effect of
which was, (...): the Devil himself grew more quicksighted to abuse us, but we
became more blind by that opening of our eyes. I shall not need to discourse
of the Philosophy of this mischief, and by the connection of what causes
ignorance does follow sin: but it is certain, whether a man would fam be
pleased with sin, or be quiet, or fearlesse when he has sinned, or continue in
it, or persuade others to it, he must do it by false propositions, by lyings
the fool has said in his heart, there is no God. That Is his character: the
thing framed says that nothing framed it; the tongue never made it self to
speak, and yet talks against him that did; saying, that which is made, is, and
that which made it, is not. But this folly is as infinite as hell, as much
without light or bound, as the Chaos or the primitive nothing. But in this, the
Devil never prevailed very far; his Schools were always thin at these
Lectures: some few people have been witty against God, that taught them to
speak before they knew to spell a syllable; but either they are monsters in
their manners, or mad in their understandings, or ever find themselves
confuted by a thunder or a

But the Devil has infinitely prevailed in a thing that is almost as
senseless and ignorant as Atheism, and that is idolatry; not only making God
after man's image, but in the likeness of a calf, of a cat, of a serpent;
making men such fools as to worship a quartan ague, fire is cold, and the Sun
black, that fornication can make a man happy, or drunkenness can make him
wise? And this is the state of a sinner, of every one that delights in
iniquity; he cannot be pleased with it if he thinks it evil; he cannot endure
it, without believing this proposition, that there is in drunkenness, or lust,
pleasure enough, good enough to make him amends for the intolerable pains of
damnation. But then if we consider upon what nonsense principles the state of
an evil life relies, we must in reason be in patient, and with scorn and
indignation drive away the fool; such as are: sense is to be preferred before
reason, interest before religion, a lust before heaven, moments before
eternity, money above God himself; that, a man's felicity consists in that which
a beast enjoyes; that, a little in present uncertain, fallible possession, is
better then the certain state of infinite glories hereafter; what child, what
fool can think things more weak, and more unreasonable? And yet if men do not
go upon these grounds, upon what account do they sin? sin has no wiser reasons
for it self then these: (...), no wiser are his hopes; all his hopes that he
has is, that he shall have time to repent of that which he chooses greedily;
that he whom he every day provokes will save him, whether he will or no; that
he can in an instant, or in a day make amends for all the evils of 40 years; or
else that he shall be saved whether he does or no; that heaven is to be had for
a sigh, or a short prayer, and yet

But then consider, that there are some sins whose very formality is a lie.
Superstition could not be in the world, if men did believe God to be good and
wise, free and merciful, not a tyrant, not an unreasonable exactor: no man
would dare do in private, what he by God; or that the shame of a few men's talk
is more intolerable opinion is better then reality, and that there is in virtue
nothing good, but the fame of it. * And the man that takes revenge, relies upon
this foolish proposition; that his evil that he has already suffered grows
less if another suffers the like; that his wound cannot smart, if by my hand
he dies that gave it. (...), the sad

I shall not need to thrust into this account the other evils of mankind that
are the events of ignorance, but introduced by sin; such as are our being moved
by what we see strongly, and weakly by what we understand; that men are moved
rather by a fable then by a syllogism, by parables then by demonstrations, by
examples then by precepts, by seeming things then by real, by shadows then by
substances; that men judge of things by their first events, and measure the
events by their own short lives, or shorter observations; So foolish and
ignorant was I (said David) and as it were a beast before thee. Ambition is
folly, and temerity is ignorance, and confidence never goes without it, and
impudence is worse, and zeal or contention is madness, and prating is want of
wisdom, and lust destroys it, and makes a man of a weak spirit, and a cheap
reasoning; and there are in the Catalogue of of sins very many, which are
directly, kinds and parts, and appendages of ignorance; such as are blindness
of mind, affected ignorance, and wilful; neglect of hearing the word of God,
resolved incredulity, forgetfulness of holy things, lying and believing a lie;
this is the fruit of sin, this is the knowledge that the Devil promised to our
first parents as the rewards of disobedience; and although they sinned as
weakly and fondly, (...), upon as slight grounds Chaldees and the wiser
Hebrews which worship God chastely and purely, they only have a right to be
called wise; all that do not so are fools and ignorants, neither knowing what
it is to be happy, nor how to purchase it; ignorant of the noblest end, and of
the competent means toward Harpaste think that the house is dark, but not
themselves. Virtue makes our desires temperate and regular, it observes our
actions, condemns our faults, mortifies our lusts, watches all our dangers and
temptations: but sin makes our desires infinite, and we would have we cannot
tell what; we strive that we may forget our faults; we labor that we may
neither remember nor consider; we justify our errors, and call them innocent,
and that which is our shame insensati, madness and folly possesses the greater
part of mankind. What greater madness is there then to spend the price of a
whole farm in contention for three sheaves of corn? and yet tantum pectora
caecae noctis habent, this is the wisdom of such as are contentious, and love
their own will more then their happiness, their humor more then their peace.


Men lose their reason, and their religion, and themselves at last for want of
understanding; and all the wit and discourses by which sin creeps in, are but
(...), frauds of the tongue, and consultations of care: but in the whole circle
of sins there is not one wise proposition, by which a man may conduct his
affairs, or himself become instructed to felicity. This is the first natural
fruit of sin: It makes a man a fool, and this hurt sin does to the
understanding, and this is shame enough to that in which men are most apt to
glory.

natural disability: for it is equally ready for a man to will good as evil,
and as much in the power of his hands to be lifted up in prayer to God as
against his Brother in a quarrel; and between a virtuous object and his
faculties there is a more apt proportion, then between his spirit and a vice;
and every act of grace does more please the mind, then an act of sin not to be
drunk, not to swear, and it is not to be understood that a man has naturally
no power not to do; if there be a natural disability, it is to action, not to
rest or ceasing; and therefore in this case, we cannot reasonably nor justly
accuse our Nature, but we have reason to blame our manners which have
introduced upon us a moral disability; that is, not that the faculty is
impotent and disabled, but that the whole man is; for the will in many cases
desires to do good, and the understanding is the hand can obey, and the
passions can be directed, and be isntrumental to Gods service: but because
they are not used to it, the will finds a difficulty to do them so much
violence, and the understanding consents to their lower reasonings, and the
desires of the lower man do will stronger; and then the whole man cannot do the
duty that is expected. There is a law in the members, and he that gave that law
is a tyrant, and the subjects of that law are slaves, and oftentimes their ear
is bored, and they love their fetters and desire to continue that bondage for
ever; The law is the law of sin, the Devil is the tyrant, custom sanction or
the firmament of the law; and every vicious man is a slave, and chooses the
vilest master, and the basest of services, and the most contemptible rewards.
Lex enim peccati est violentia consuetudinis, qua trahitur and tenetur animus
etiam invitus, eo merito quo in eam volens illabitur, said St. Austin; The law
of sin is the violence of custom, which keep a man's mind against his mind,
because he entered willingly, and gave up his own interest, which he ought to
have secured for his own felicity, and for his service who gave for it an
invaluable price: And indeed in questions of virtue and vice there is no such
thing as Nature; or it is so inconsiderable, a perfect indifferency, we may if
we will, or we may choose; but custom brings in a new nature, and makes a
Biass in every faculty. To a vicious man some sins become necessary; Temperance
makes him sick; severity is death to him; it destroys his cheerfulness and
activity; it is as his nature, and the desire dwells for ever with him, and his
reasonings are framed for it and his fancy, and in all he is helped by example,
by company, by folly, and inconsideration; and all these are a faction and a
confederacy against the honor and Philosophy is at a stand, nothing can give
an account of it but experience, and sorrowful instances; for it is infinitely
unreasonable, that when you have discoursed wisely against unchastity, and
told, that we are separated from it by a circumvallation of Laws of God and
man, that it dishonours the Plutarch.
Custom does as much as Nature can Eudemus had so used his stomach to so
unnatural drinks, that, as himself tells the story, he took in one day two and
twenty potions in which Hellebore was infused, and rose at noon, and supped at
night, and felt no change. So are those that are corrupted with evil customs,
nothing will purge them; if you discourse wittily, they hear you not; or if
they do, they have twenty ways to answer, and twice twenty to neglect it: if
you persuade them to promise to leave their sin, they do but show their folly
at the next temptation, and tell that they did bars and locks of vows upon
them, it is all one; one vow shall hinder but one action, and the appetite
shall be doubled by the restraint, and the next opportunity shall make an
amends for the first omission: or else the sin shall enter by parts; the vow
shall only put the understanding to make a distinction, or to change the
circumstance, and under that color the crime shall be admitted, because the
man is resolved to suppose the matter so dressed was not vowed against. But
then when that

Nam si discedas, laqueo tenet ambitiost
Consuetudo mali: -- and in agro cord senescit.
Custom has waxen old in his deceived heart, and made snares for him that he
cannot disintangle himself; so true is that saying Can an Aethiop change his
skin? then may ye learn to do well when ye are accustomed to do evil. But I
instance in two things which to my sense seem great aggravations of the slavery
and weakness of a customary sinner.

The first is, that men sin against their interest. They know they shall be
ruined by it; it will undo their estates, lose their friends, ruin their
fortunes, destroy their body, impoverish the spirit, load the conscience,
discompose his rest, confound his reason, amaze him in all his faculties,
destroy his hopes, and mischief enough besides; and when he considers this, he
declares against it; but, Cum bona verba erumpant, affectus tamen ad
consuetudinem relabuntur, the man gives good words, but the evil custom
prevails; and it happens as in the case of the Tyrinthians, who to free their
nation from a great plague, were bidden only to abstain from laughter, while
they offered their sacrifice: but they had been so used to a ridiculous
effeminacy, and vain course of conversation, that they could not, though the
honor and splendour of the Nation did depend upon it. God of his mercy keep all
Christian people from a custom in sinning; for if they be once fallen thither,
nothing can recover them but a miraculous grace.

2. The second aggravation of it is, that custom prevails against experience.
Though the man has already smarted, though he has been disgraced, and undone,
though he lost his relation and his friends, he is turned out of service, and
disimployed, he begs with a load of his old sins upon his shoulders, yet this
will not cure an evil custom: Do not we daily see how miserable some men make
themselves with drunkenness, and folly? Have not we seen them that have been
sick with intemperance, deadly sick, enduring for one drunken meeting, more
pain then are in all the fasting days of the whole year? and yet do they not
the very next day go to

Nec tu cum obstiteris semel, instantique negaris
Parere imperio, Rupi jam vincula, dicas.
Think not the chain is off when thou have once or twice resisted; or if the
chain be broke, part remains on thee, like a cord upon a dogs neck,

Nam and luctata canis nodum arripit; attamen illi
Cum fugit, a collo trahitur pars magna catenae.
He is not free that draws his chain after him; and he that breaks Opus est
aliqua fortunae indulgentia adhuc inter humana luctanti, dum nodum illum
exolvit and omne vinculum mortale, Seneca de vita beata.
for the knot can hardly be untied which a course of evil manners has bound
upon the soul; and every contingency in the world can entangle him that wears
upon his neck the links of a broken chain. Nam qui ab eo quod amat, Quam
extemplo suaviis sagittatis percussus est, illico res for as labitur, liquitur;
if he sees his Philomusus was a wild young fellow in Domitian's time, and he
was hard put to it to make a large pension to maintain his lust and luxury, and
he was every month put to beggarly arts to feed his crime. But when his father
died and left him all, he disinherited himself; he spent it all though he knew
he

Now this is such a state of slavery, that persons that are sensible ought to
complain, (...), that they serve worse lords then Egyptian taskmasters, there
is a lord within that rules and rages, Intus and in jecore aegro pascuntur
domini; sin dwells there, and makes a man a miserable servant: and this is not
only a Metaphorical expression, under which some spiritual and metaphysicall
truth is represented, but it is a physical, material truth, and a man endures
hardship, he cannot move but at this Marcus Antoninus; The two parts of a man
are rent in sunder, and that that prevails is the life, it is the man, it is
the eloquence persuading every thing to its own interest. * And now consider
what is the effect of this evil. A man by sin is made a slave, he loses that
liberty that is dearer to him then life it self; and like the dog in the fable,
we suffer chains and ropes only for a piece of bread; when the Lion thought
liberty a sufficient reward and price

(...),
(...),
(...)
(...). Euripid.

Either men are slaves to fortune, or to lust; to covetousness, or tyranny;
something or other compels him to usages against his will and reason; and when
the laws cannot rule him, money can; divitia enim apud sapientem virum in
servitute sunt, apud stultum in imperio; for money is the wise man's servant,
and the fools Master: Peter's Angel call us and b^at us upon the sides, and
offer to go before us, yet we cannot come forth from prison; for we have by our
evil customs given hostages to the Devil, never to stir from the enemies
quarter; and this is the greatest bondage that is imaginable, the bondage of
conquered, wounded, unresisting people: (...), Virtue only is the And if the
Son of God make us free, then are we free indeed.

3. Sin does naturally introduce a great baseness upon the spirit, expressed
in Scripture in some cases by the Devils entering into a man, as it was in the
case of Judas, after he had taken the sop, Ioh. 13. 27.
Satan entered into him; and St. Cyprian speaking of them that after Baptism
lapsed into foul crimes, he affirms that spiritu immundo Cypr. Ep. 76.
quasi redeunte quatiuntur, ut manifestum sit Diabolum in baptismo fide
credentis excludi, si fides postmodum defecerit regredi; Faith, and the grace
of Baptism turns the Devil out of possession: states of evil rather then
evil actions, principles of mischief rather then direct emanations; such as
are, unthankfulness, impiety, giving a secret blow, fawning hypocrisy,
detraction, impudence, forgetfulness of the dead, and forgetting to do that in
their absence which we promised to them in presence, (...); Concerning which
sorts of unworthiness Eurip.
it is certain they argue a most degenerous spirit, and they are the effect,
the natural effect of malice and despair, an unwholesome Phaedrus, it is told
concerning an ill natured fellow, that he refused to pay his Symbol, which
himself and all the company had agreed should be given for every disease, that
each man had; he denying his itch to be a disease; but the company taking off
the refusers hat for a pledge, found that he had a scaled head, and so demanded
the money double; which he pertinaciously resisting, they threw him down, and
then discovered he was broken bellied, and justly condemned him to pay three
Philippicles:

One disease discovers it self by the hiding of another, and that being opened
discovers a third; He that is almost taken in a fault, tells a lie to escape;
and to protect that lie, he forswears himself; and that he may not be suspected
of perjury, he grows impudent; and that sin may not shame him, he will glory
in it, like the slave in the Comedy, who being torn with whips, grinn'd, and
forced an ugly smile that it might not seem to smart. * There are some there is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked] therefore they must make a fantastic
peace by a studied cousening of themselves, by false propositions, by
carelessness, by stupidity, by impudence, by sufferance, and habit; by
conversation, and daily acquaintances; by doing some things as Absalom did when
he lay with his fathers concubines, to make it impossible for him to repent, or
to be forgiven, something to secure him in the possession of hell; Tute hoc
intristi quod tibi exedendum est, the man must thorough it now; and this is it
that makes men fall into all baseness of spiritual sins, [(...), malice and
despite, rancor and impudence, malicious studied ignorance, voluntary contempt
of all Religion, hating of good men and good counsels, and taking every wise
man and wise action to be his enemy; (...). And this is that baseness of sin
which Plato so much detested, that he said he should blush to be guilty of,
though he knew God would propter solam peccati turpitudinem, for the very
baseness that is in it. A man that is false to God, will also, if an evil
temptation overtakes him, betray his friend; and it is notorious in the
covetous and ambitious,

(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
They are an unthankful generation, and to please the people, or to serve
their interest will hurt their friends. That man has so lost himself to all
sweetness and excellency of spirit, that is gone thus far in sin, that he
looks like a condemned man, or is like the accursed spirits preserved in chains
of darkness and impieties unto the Judgment of the great Day, (...), this man
can be nothing but evil; for these inclinations and evil forwardnesses, this
dyscrasie and gangrened disposition does always suppose a long or a base sin
for their parent; and the product of Devil shall enter into them as he entered
into Judas, and fill them full of iniquity.

Part III.
Devils sin was the worst, Adams was the worst, because it was of most
universal efficacy and dissemination: Judas sin the worst of men, because
against the most excellent person; and the relapses of the godly are the worst,
by reason they were the most obliged persons. But the ignorance of the Law is
the greatest of evils, if we consider its danger, but covetousness is worse
then it, if we regard its incurable and growing nature: luxury is most alien
from spiritual things, and is the worst of all in its temptation and our
pronenesse; but pride grows most venomous by its unreasonablenesse and
importunity, arising even from the good Sins of malice and against the Holy
Ghost oppu^n the greatest grace with the greatest spite; but Idolatry is
perfectly hated by God by a direct enmity. Some sins are therefore most
heinous, because to resist them is most easy, and to act them there is the
least temptation: such as are severally, lying, and swearing. There is a
strange poison in the nature of sins, that of so many sorts, every one of them
should be the worst. Every sin has an evil spirit, a Devil of its own to
manage, to conduct, and to imbitter it: and although all these are Gods
enemies, shame in their retinue, yet to some sins shame is more appropriate,
and a proper ingredient in their constitutions: such as are lying, and lust,
and vow-breach, and inconstancy. God sometimes cures the pride of a man's spirit
by suffering his evil manners, and filthy inclination to be determined upon
lust; lust makes a man afraid of public eyes, and common voices; it is (as all
sins else are, but this especially) a work of darkness, smart so much as
shame: Lustful souls are cheap and easy, trifling and despised in all wise
accounts; they are so far from being fit to sit with Princes, that they dare
not chastise a sinning servant that is private to their secret follies; It is
strange to consider what laborious arts of concealment, what excuses and
lessenings, what pretenses and fig leaves men will put before their nakedness
and Adam, and when the second world began, there was a strange scene of shame
acted by Noah and his sons, and it ended in slavery and baseness to all
descending generations.

We see the event of this by too sad an experience. What arguments, what
hardness, what preaching, what necessity can persuade men to confess their
sins? they are so ashamed of them, that to be concealed they prefer before
their remedy; and yet in penitential confession the shame is going off, it is
like Cato's coming out of the Theater, or the Philosopher from the Tavern;
dressed of so shameful a disease. And there are but few men that will endure
it, but rather choose to involve it in excuses and denial, in the clouds of
lying, and the white linen of hypocrisy: and yet when they make a vail for
their shame, such is the fate of sin, the shame grows the bigger and the
thicker; we lie to men, and we excuse it to God; either some parts of lying, or
many parts of impudence, darkness, or forgetfulness, running fucus, and the
chinks filled with ceruse; besides that it makes no real beauty, it spoils the
face, and betrays evil manners; it does not hide old age, or the change of
years, but it discovers pride or lust; it was not shame to be old, or wearied
and worn out with age, but it is a shame to dissemble nature by a wanton vizor.
So sin retires from blushing into shame; if it be discovered, it is not to be
endured, and if we go to hide it, we make it worse. But then if we remember
fame and reputation, for honor and a fair opinion, for a good name all our
days, and when our days are done, and that no ingenuous man can enjoy any
thing he has, if he lives in disgrace, and that nothing so breaks a man's
spirit as dishonor, and the meanest person alive does not think himself fit
everybody can chide us, and we dye unpitied, and lie in our graves eaten up by
worms, and a foul dishonor; but after all this, at the day of Judgment we
shall be called from our charnell houses, where our disgrace could not sleep,
and shall in the face of God, in the presence of Angels and Devils, before
shame; there is light enough for that, but darkness for all things else: and
then he shall reap the full harvest of his shame; all that for which wise men
scorned him, and all that for which God hated him; all that in which he was a
fool, and all that in which he was malicious; that which was public, and that
which was private; that which fools applauded, and that which himself

There is one great circumstance more of the shame of sin, which

3. When the Boeotians asked the Oracle, by what they should become happy? the
answer was made, (...), wicked and irreligious persons are prosperous: and they
taking the Devil at his word, threw the inspired Pythian, the ministering
witch, into the sea, hoping so to become mighty in peace and war. The effect
of which was this, The Devil was found a liar, and they Sympathies
Antipathies, effects which we feel by experience, and are forewarned of by
revelation, which no natural reason can judge, nor any providence can prevent
but by living innocently, and complying with the Commandments of God. The rod
of God, which comes not into the lot of the righteous, strikes the sinning man
with sore strokes of veng eance.

1. The first that I shall note is that which I called the aggravation of the
shame of sin; and that is, an impossibility of being concealed in most cases of
heinous crimes; (...), let no man suppose that he shall for ever hide his sin:
Ulysses did the search of Polyphemus, and it shall in time be known that it did
escape, and shall be discovered that it was private; that is, that it is so no
longer. But no wicked man that dwelt and delighted in sin, did ever go off from
his scene of unworthiness without a filthy character; The black veil is
thrown over him before his death, and by some contingency or other he enters
into his cloud, because few sins determine finally in the thoughts; but if they
dwell there, they will also enter into action, and then the thing discovers it
self; or else the Epicurus, believed that no man could Scelus aliqua tutum,
nulla securum tulit; They are not secure even when they are safe; but are
afflicted with perpetual jealousies; and every whisper is concerning them, and
all new noises, are arrests to their spirits; and the day is too light, and the
night is too horrid, and both are the most opportune for their discovery; and
besides the undiscernible connection of the contingencies of providence, many
secret crimes have been published by dreams, and talkings in their sleep. It is
the observation of Lucretius,


Indicioque sui facti persape fuere.
And what their understanding kept a guard upon, their fancy let loose; fear
was the bars and locks, but sleep became the key to open, even then when all
the senses were shut, and God ruled alone without the choice and discourse of
man. And though no man regards the wilder talkings of a distracted man, yet it
has sometimes happened that a delirium and a fever, fear of death, and the
intolerable apprehensions of damnation have opened the cabinet

Quippe ubi se multis per somnia saepe loquentes,
Aut morbo delirantes protraxe feruntur,
Et celata diu in medium peccata dedisse.
But there are so many ways of discovery, and amongst so many, some one does
so certainly happen that they are well summed up by Sophocles, by saying, that
time hears all and tells all,


(...).
A cloud may be its roof and cover till it passes over, but when it is driven
by a fierce wind, or runs fondly after the Sun, it lays open a deformity,
which like an ulcer had a skin over it, and a pain within, and drew to it a
heap of sorrows big enough to run over all its enclosures. Many persons have
betrayed themselves by their own fears, and knowing themselves never to be a
word in a fools heart, was uneasy till it came out; Non amo se nimium
purgitantes, when men are over-busie in justifying themselves, it is a sign
themselves think they need it. Plutarch tells of a young gentleman that
destroyed a swallow's nest, pretending to them that repreved superstition the
Creeks esteemed so ominous, that the little bird accused him for killing his
Father. And to this purpose it was that Solomon gave counsel: Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, nor the rich in thy bedchamber, for
a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that that has wings shall tell
the matter; Murder and treason have by such strange ways been revealed, as if
God had appointed an Angel president of the revelation, and had kept this in
secret and sure ministry to be as an argument to destroy Atheism from the face
of the earth, by opening the secrets of men with this key Intercepting of
letters, mistaking names, false inscriptions, errors of messengers, faction of
the parties, fear in the actors, horror in the action, the majesly of the
person, the restlesnesse of the mind, distracted looks, weariness of the
spirit, and all under the conduct of the Divine wisdom, and the Divine
vengeance, make the covers of the most secret sin transparent as a net, and
visible as the Chian wines in the purest Crystal.

For besides that God takes care of Kings and of the lives of men,

(...)
Homer.
(...),
driving away evil from their persons, and watching as a Mother to keep gnats
and flies from her dear boy sleeping in the cradle, there are in the
machinations of a mighty mischief, so many motions to be concentred, so many
wheels to move regularly, and the hand that turns them does so tremble, and
there is so universal a confusion in the conduct, that unless it passes
suddenly into act, it will be prevented by discovery, and if it be acted it

2. A second superinduced consequent of sin brought upon it sin; when God
punishes sin with sin he is extremely angry; for then the punishment is not
medicinal, but final and exterminating; God in that case takes no care
concerning him, though he dies and dies eternally. I do not here speak of those
sins which are naturally consequent to each other, David's adultery by
permitting him to fall to murder, and Solomon's wanton and inordinate love, with
the crime of idolatry, and Ananias his sacrilege with lying against the holy
Ghost, and Judas his covetousness with betraying his Lord, and that betraying
with despair, and that despair with self-murder.


(...),
One evil invites another, and when God is angry and withdrawes his grace, and
the holy Spirit is grieved and departs from his dwelling, the man is left at
the mercy of the merciless enemy, and he shall receive him only with variety
of mischiefs; like Hercules when he had broken the horn of Achelous, he was
almost drowned with the flood that sprung from it; and the evil Habenti
dabitur, said our blessed Lord, to him that has shall be given, and he shall
have more abundantly; from him that has not shall be taken, even that which he
has. It is a remarkable saying of David; I have thought upon thy name O Lord
Ps. 119. 55, 56.
in the night season, and have kept thy Law; this I had because I kept thy
Commandments: keeping Gods Commandments, was rewarded with keeping Gods
Commandments; And in this world God has not a greater reward to give; for so
the soul is nourished unto life, so it grows up with the increase of God, so
it passes onto a perfect man in Christ, so it is consigned for heaven, and so
it enters into glory; for glory is the perfection of grace, and when our love
to God is come to its state and perfection, then we are within the circles of a
Diadem, and then we are within the regions of felicity. And there is the same
reason in the contrary

The wicked person falls into sin, and this he had because he sinned against his
maker. Tradidit Deus eos in desideria cordis eorum: and it concerns all to
observe it; and if ever we find that a sin succeeds a sin in the same
instance, it is because we refuse to repent; but if a sin succeeds a sin in
another instance, as if lust follows pride, or murder drunkenness; it is a
sign that God will not give us the grace of repentance: he is angry at us with
a destructive fury, he has dipped his arrows in the venom of the serpent, and
whets his-sword in the forges of hell; then it is time that a man withdraw his
foot, and that he start back from the preparations of an intolerable ruin: For
though men in this case grow insensible, and that is part of the disease, (...),
says Chrysostom, it is the biggest part of the evil that the man feels it
not, yet the very antiperistasis or the contrariety, the very horror and
bigness of the danger may possibly make a man to contend to leap out of the
fire; and sometimes God works a miracle,

3. Sin brings in its retinue, fearful plagues and evil angels, messengers
of the displeasure of God, concerning which, (...), there are enough of dead; I
mean the experience is so great, and the notion so common, and the examples so
frequent, and the instances so sad, that there is scarce any thing new in David
did? we have reason to tremble when we remember what he suffered, even when God
had sealed his pardon. Did not God punish Zedekiah with suffering his eyes to
be put out in the house of bondage? was not God so angry with Valentinian,
rebellion was punished in Corah and his company, by the gaping of the earth,
and the men were buried alive; and Dathan and Abiram were consumed with fire
for usurping the Priests office: But God has struck severely since that time;
and for the prostitution of a Lady by the Spanish King, the Moors were brought
in upon his Kingdom, and ruled there for 700. years. And have none of us known
impartial, and we have no privilege, no promise of exemption, no reason to
hope it; what then do we think shall become of this affair? where must we
suffer this vengeance? For that it is flaying alive not to be too big a
punishment: that for which God has smitten Kings with formidable plagues; that
for which governments have been changed, and nations enslaved, and Churches
destroyed, and the Candlestick removed, and famines and pestilences have been
sent upon a whole Kingdom; and what shall become of us? why do we vainly hope
it shall not be so with us? If it was just for these men to suffer what they
did, then we are at least to expect so much; and then let us consider into what
Zedekiah, or Corah, or Dathan, or the King of Spain, or any other King who,
were, for ought we know, infinitely more innocent and more excellent persons
then any of us. What will become of us? For God is as just to us as to them:
and Christ dyed for them as well as for us; and they have repented more then we
have done; and what mercy can we expect that they might not hope for, upon at
least as good ground as we? Gods ways are secret, and his mercies and justice
dwell in a great abyss; but we are to measure our expectations Zedekiahs, or
King David's? where have we in our body room enough for so many stripes, as our
sin ought justly to be punished withal? or what security or probability have
we that he will not so punish us?

For I did not represent this sad story, as a matter of possibility only, that
we may fear such fearful strokes as we see God lay upon sinners; but we ought
to look upon it as a thing that will come some way or other, and for ought we
know we cannot Me e Coelo ad Barathrum demisit peccatum, and vos ullum in terra
locum tutum existimabitis? Sin thrust me from heaven to hell, and do you think
on earth to have

Tuum libenter prorsus appeterem cibum, Phaedrus.

Nisi qui nutritus illo est, jugulatus foret;
we may learn to avoid these vain pleasures which cut the throat after they are
swallowed, and leave us in that condition that we may every day fear, lest that
evil happen unto us, which we see fall upon the great examples of Gods anger;
and our fears cannot, ought not at all to be taken off, but by an effective,
busy, pungent, hasty, and a permanent repentance; and then also but in some
proportions, for we cannot be secured from temporal

1. But this has two appendages which are very considerable; and the first is,
that there are some mischiefs which are the proper and appointed scourges of
certain sins, and a man need not ask; Cujus vulturis hoc erit cadaver? what
vultur, what death, what affliction shall destroy this sinner? The sin has a
punishment Make them, O my God, like unto Psalm. 83.
a wheel, of an unconstant state: and we and our fathers have seen it, in the
change of so many families, which have been undone by being made rich: they
took the lands from the Church, and the curse went along with it, and the
misery and the affliction lasted longer then the sin. Telling lies frequently
has for its punishment to be given over to believe a lie, and at last, that no
body shall believe it but himself; and then the mischief is full, he lust is
properly shame; and witchcraft is still punished with baseness, and beggary;
and oppression of widows has a sting, for the tears of the oppressed are to
the oppressor, like the waters of jealousy, making the belly to swell, and
the thigh to rot; the oppressor seldom In quo quis peccat, in eo punitur. The
Divine Judgment did point at the sin, lest that be concealed by excuses, and
protected by affection, and increased by passion, and destroy the man by its
abode. For some sins are so agreeable to the spirit of a fool and an abused
person, because he has framed his affections to them, and they comply with his
unworthy interest, that when God out of an angry kindness, smites the man, and
punishes

2. The second appendage to this consideration is this, that there are some
states of sin which expose a man to all mischief, as it can happen by taking
off from him all his guards, and defenses; by a grieving the good Spirit of
God. But the guard of Angels is in Scripture only promised to them that live
godly; The Angels of the Lord pitch their Psalm. 33.
tents round about them that fear him, and delivers them, said David.

(...)
(...).
Hellenists use to call the Angels (...) watchmen; which custody is at first
designed and appointed for all, when by baptism they give up their names to
Christ, and enter into the covenant of Religion. And of this the Heathen have
been taught something by conversation with the Hebrews and Christians;
unicuique nostrum dare paedagogum Deum, said Seneca to Lucilius, non primarium,
sed ex eorum numero, quos Ovidius vocat ex plebe deos. There is a guardian God
assigned to every one of us, of the number of those which are of the second
order; such are those of whom David speaks, before the Gods will I sing praise
unto thee; and it was the doctrine of the Stoics, that to every one there was
assigned a Genius and a Juno: Quamobrem major coelitum populus etiam quam
hominum intelligi potest, quum singuli ex semetipsis totidem Deos faciant,
Junones geniosque adoptando sibi, said Pliny. Every one does adopt Gods into
his family and get a Gunius and a Juno of their own, Junonem meam iratam
habeam; it was the oath of Quartilla Petronius; and Socrates in Plato is said
to swear by his Juno; though afterward among the Romans it became the woman's
oath, and a note of effeminacy; But the thing they aimed at was this, that God
took a care of us below, and sent a ministering spirit for our defense; but that
this is only upon the accounts of piety, they know not. But we are taught it by
the Spirit of God in Scripture. For, the Angels are ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister to the good of them who shall be heirs of salvation; and
concerning St. Peter, the faithful had an opinion, that it might be his
Angel; agreeing to the Doctrine of our blessed Lord, who spoke of Angels
appropriate Behold I send an Angel before thee, beware of him and obey his
Exodus 23. 20.
voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your trangressions. So that if
we provoke the Spirit of the Lord to anger by a course of evil living, either
the Angel will depart from us, or if he stays, he will strike us. The best of
these is bad enough, and he is highly miserable,

-- Qui non sit tanto hoc custode securus,
Erythrean Sibyl gave of God,

(...),
(...),
(...).
It is Gods appellative to be a giver of excellent rewards to just and innocent
persons: but to assign to evil men fury, wrath, and ponam Babylonem in
possessionem Erinacei, Babylon shall be the possession of an Hedgehog: that is a
sinners dwelling; encompassed round with thorns and sharp prickles,
afflictions and uneasinesse all over. So that he that wishes his sin big and
prosperous, wishes his Be as big as a Bull, and his Hedgehog like an Elephant;
the pleasure Publius Mimus, Tolerabilior est qui mori jubet quam qui male
vivere, He is more to be endured that puts a man to death, then he that
betrays him into sin. For the end of this is death eternal.

Sermon, XXII. THE GOOD and EVIL TONGUE.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.
HE that had an ill memory did wisely comfort himself by reckoning the
advantages he had by his forgetfulness. For by this means he was hugely
secured against malice, and ambition; for Egyptians sacrificed to Harpocrates
their god of Silence, in the midst of their rites they cried out (...), The
Tongue is an Angel, good or bad, that is as it happens; Silence was to them a
god, but the Tongue is greater; it is the band of humane intercourse, and makes
men apt to unite in Societies and Republics; and I remember what one of the
Ancients said, that we are better in the company of a known dog, then of a man
whose speech is not known, ut externus alieno non sit hominis vice; a stranger
to a stranger in his language, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of God, spoken by the tongues of men and Angels; and the blessed Spirits in
heaven cease not from saying night and day their (...), their song of glory to
him that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever; and then
Allelujahs to their Maker and Redeemer; and therefore since Nature has taught
us to speak, and God requires it, and our thankfulness obliges us, and our
necessities engage us, and charity sometimes calls for it, and innocence is to
be defended, and we are to speak in the cause of the oppressed, and open our
mouths in the cause of God: and it is always a seasonable prayer, that God
open our lips, that our mouth may do the work of heaven, and declare his
praises, and show forth his glory; it concerns us to take care that nature be
changed into grace, necessity into choice, that while we speak the greatness
of God, and minister to the needs of our neighbor, and do the works of life
and religion, of society and prudence, we may be fitted to bear a part in the
songs of Angels, when they shall rejoice at the feast of the marriage supper of
the Lamb. But the tongue is a fountain both of bitter waters and of pleasant;
it sends forth blessing, and cursing; it praises God, and railes at men; it is
sometimes set on fire, and then it puts whole Cities grace to the hearers, and
then it is as God would have it; and this is the precept of the text, first
telling us what we should avoid, and then telling us what we should pursue;
what our discourse ought not to be, and 2ly. what it ought to be; there being
no more variety in the structure of the words, I shall 1. discourse of the
vices of the tongue; 2. of its duty and proper employment.

1. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth; (...), corrupt or
filthy communication; so we read it; and it seems properly to note such
communication as ministers to Fescennines of Ausonius, the excrement and spume
of Martial's verse, and the Ephesiaca of Xenophon; indeed this is such a
rudeness as is not to be admitted into civil conversation; and is wittily
noted by the Apostle, charging that fornication should not be once named among
them as becomes Saints; not meaning that the vice should not have its name and
filthy character, but that nothing of it be named, in which it can be tempting
or offensive; nothing tending to it, or teaching of it, should be named: we
must not have (...), fornication in our talk; that is such a baseness, that it
not only grieves the Divine Spirit, but auriculas non calentes, sober and
chaste ears. For who can without blushing read Seneca describing the Looking
glass of Hostius, or the severe but looser words of Persius, or the reproves
of St. Hierom himself, that great Patron of virginity, and exacter of
chastity? yet more then once he reproves filthy things with unhandsome
language: St. Chrysostom makes an Apology for them that do so; (...), Homil.
4. in ep. Romans
you cannot profit the hearers unless you discover the filthiness, for the
withdrawing

Irritamentum Veneris languentis and acris

and not wholly to be excused by the fair meaning, will soon be granted by all
who know what danger and infection it leaves upon the fancy, even by those
words by which the spirit is instructed. Ab hac scabie tenemus ungues, it is
not good to come near the leprosy, though to cleanse the Lepers skin.

But the word which the Apostle uses [(...)] means more then this. (...), said
Eupolis, and so it signifies musty, rotten, and outworn with age; (...),
Aristephanes: and according to this acception of the word, we are forbidden to
use all language that is in any sense corrupted, unreasonable, or useless;
language proceeding from our old iniquity, evil habits, or unworthy customs,
called in the style of Scripture the remains of the old man, and by the Grecks,
doting or talking fondly; (...); the boy talks like an old dotard. 2. (...)
signifies wicked, filthy, or reproachful, (...), any thing that is in its own
nature criminal and disgraceful, any language that ministers to mischief. But
it is worse then all this: (...), it is a deletery, an extinction Menander
quoted by St. Paul, (...), Evil words corrupt good manners. And therefore
under this word is comprised all the evil of the tongue, that wicked
instrument of the unclean Spirit, in the capacity of all the appellatives. 1.
Here is forbidden the useless, vain, and trifling conversation, the (...),
Hesychius; it is slander, hatred, and calumny. 3. But the third is (...), the
Devils worst appellative, the Destroyer, the dissolute, wanton, tempting,
destroying conversation; and its worst instance of all is flattery, that
malicious cousening devil, that strengthens our friend in sin, and ruins him
from whom let no vain communication proceed out of your mouth.

1. The first part of this inordination is multiloquium, talking too much:
concerning which, because there is no rule or just measure for the quantity,
and it is as lawful, and sometimes as prudent to tell a long story as a short,
and two as well as one, and sometimes ten as well as two; all such discourses
are to take their estimate by the matter, and the end, and can only be altered
by their circumstances Martial speaks of, he was a good man, and full of
sweetness and justice and nobleness, but he would read his nonsense verses to
all companies at the public games and in private feasts, in the baths, and on
the beds, in public and in private, to sleeping and waking people.

Vis quantum mali facias videre?
Lib. 3. ep. 44
Vir justus, probus, innocens timeris.
Every one was afraid of him, and though he was good, yet he was not to be
endured: The evil of this is very considerable in the accounts of prudence,
and the effects and plaisance of conversation: and the Ancients described its
evil well by a proverbiall expression; for when a sudden silence arose, they
said that Mercury was entered, meaning, that he being their loquax numen, their
prating god, yet that quitted him not, but all men stood upon their guard, and
called for aid and rescue, when they were seized upon so tedious an
impertinence. Pontus they perpetually empty themselves by their mouth, making
every company or single person they fasten on, to be their Propontis; such a
one as was Anaximenes, (...), He was an Ocean of words, but a drop of
understanding. old men, and young men and women to separate from their persons
the reproach of their sex and age, that modesty of speech be the Supellex ejus
(...). Comoed. Mul^^bre ingen^um p^cluvium. Acci^s in Androme. a. Sola
laboranti potuit (...) Lunae.
ornament of the youthful, and a reserved discourse be the testimony of the
old man's prudence. Adolescens from (...), said one: a young man is a talker for
want of wit, and an old man for want of memory; for while he remembers the
things of his youth, and not how often he has told them in his old age, he
grows in love with the trifles of his youthful days, and thinks the company
must do so too; In multiloquio peccatum non deerit, Sin goes along with it,
and is an ingredient in the whole composition. For it is impossible but a long
and frequent discourse must be served with many passions, and they are not
always innocent; for he that loves to talk much, must rem corradere, scrape
materials together to furnish out the scenes and long orations; and some talk
themselves into anger, and some furnish out their that, truth or honest
plainness seldom does) or there is a byasse in it, which the more of weight
and transportation it has, the less it has of ingenuity. Non credo Auguribus
qui aureis rebus divinant, like Soothsayers, men speak Pride and flattery,
malice and spite, self-love and vanity, these usually wait upon much speaking;
and the reward of it is, that the persons grow contemptible and troublesome,
they engage in quarrels, and are troubled to answer exceptions, some will
mistake them, and some will not believe them, and it will be impossible that
the mind should be perpetually present to a perpetual talker, but they will
forget truth and themselves, and their own relations. And upon this account it
is, that the Doctors of Verily I say unto you, of every idle word that Matt.
12. 36.
men shall speak, they shall give account at the day of Judgment. And by idle
words, they understand, such as are not useful to edification and instruction.
So St. Basil, So great is the danger of an idle In Reg. brevior.
word, that though a word be in its own kind good, yet unless it be directed
to the edification of faith, he is not free from danger that speaks it: To this
purpose are the words of St. Gregory; while Lib. 7. Moral.
the tongue is not restrained from idle words, ad temeritatem stultae
increpationis efferatur, it is made wild, or may be brought forth to rashness
and folly: And therein lies the secret of the reproof: A periculo liber non
est, and ad temeritatem efferatur, the man is not free from danger, and he may
grow rash, and foolish, and run into crimes, whilst he gives his Tongue the
reins, and lets it wander, and so it may be fit to be reproved, though in its
nature it were innocent. I deny not but sometimes they are more severe. St.
Gregory calls every c. 17. ubi sup.
word vain or idle, quod aut ratione justae necessitatis, aut intention piae
utilitatis caret: and St. Hierom calls it vain, quod sine utilitatis in cap. 12
Matt.
and loquentis dicitur and audientis, which profits neither the speaker nor the
hearer. The same is affirmed by St. Chrysostom in Ps. 118.
, and Gregory Nyssen cap. 1.
upon Ecclesiastes, and the same seems intimated in the word (...) or (...), as
it is in some copies, every word that is idle or empty of business. But for
the stating the case of Conscience, I have these things to say.

1. That the words of our blessed Savior being spoken to the Jews, were so
certainly intended as they best and most commonly understood, and by [vain]
they understood false or lying, not useless imprudent; and yet so though our
blessed Savior has not so severely forbidden every empty, unsignificant
discourse, yet he has forbidden every lie, though it be in genere bonorum, as
St. Basil's expression is; that is, though it be in the intention charitable,
or in the matter innocent.

2. Of every idle word we shall give account, but yet so, that sometimes the
(...), the judgment shall fall upon the words, not upon the persons; they be
hay and stubble, useless and impertinent, light and easy, the fire shall
consume them, and himself shall escape with that loss; he shall then have no
honor, no fair return for such discourses,

3. If all unprofitable discourses be reckoned for idle words and put upon the
account, yet even the capacities of profit are so large and numerous, that no
man has cause to complain that his tongue is too much restrained by this
severity. For in all the ways in which he can do himself good, or his
neighbor, he has his liberty; he is only to secure the words from being
directly criminal, and himself from being arrested with a passion, and then he
may reckon it lawful even upon the severest account to discourse freely, while
he can instruct, or while he can please his neighbor;

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare --
while himself gets a fair opinion and a good name, apt to serve honest and
fair purposes; he may discourse himself into a friendship, Idea or witty
representment; and he that can find talk beyond all this, discourse that
cannot become useful in any one of these purposes, may well be called a
prating man, and expect to give account of his folly in the days of recompense.

4. Although in this latitude a man's discourses may be free and safe from
judgment, yet the man is not, unless himself design it to good and wise
purposes, not always actually, but by an habitual general purpose.
Concerning which he may by these measures best take his accounts.

1. That he be sure to speak nothing that may minister to a vice, willingly and
by observation.

2. If any thing be of a suspicious and dubious nature, that he decline to
publish it.

3. That by a prudent moral care he watch over his words, that he do none of
this injury and unworthiness.

4. That he offer up to God in his prayers all his words, and then look to it,
that he speak nothing unworthy to be offered.

Zeno calls (...), to dip our tongues in understanding. In all other cases the
rule is good, (...), either keep silence, or speak Eurip.
something that is better then it; (...), so Isocrates constantly enough to
this Evangelicall precept; a seasonable

5. This account is not to be taken by little traverses and intercourses of
speech, but by greater measures, and more discernible portions, such as are
commensurate to valuable portions of time; for however we are pleased to throw
away our time, and Bernard gave caution, Nemo parvi aestimet tempus quod in
verbis consumitur otiosis, Let no man think Sermon. de triplici custodia.
it a light matter that he spend his precious time in idle words; let no man be
so weary of what flies away too fast, and cannot be recalled, as to use arts
and devices to pass the time away in vanity, which might be rarely spent in
the interests of eternity. Time is given us to repent in, to appease the divine
anger, to prepare

(...)
(...).
Eurip.
Good counsel is lost upon him, and he has served all his ends when he pours
out whatsoever he took in; for he therefore loaded his vessel that he might
pour it forth into the sea.

These and many more evils, and the perpetual unavoydable necessity of sinning
by much talking, has given great advantages to silence, and made it to be
esteemed an act of Discipline and great Religion. St. Romualdus upon the Syrian
mountain severely kept a seven years silence: and Thomas Cantipratensis tells
of a religious person in a Monastery in Brabant, that spoke Palladius tells of,
Ammona who lived with 3000 Brethren in so great silence, as if he were an
Anachoret; but Theona was silent for 30 years together, and Johannes surnamed
Silentiarius was silent for 47 years. But this morosity and sullenness is so
far Gregory Nazianzen, who made Silence an act of Discipline, and kept it a
whole Lent in his religious retirements, cujus facti mei si causam quaeris
(said he in his account he gives of it) idcirco a sermon prorsus abstinui, ut
sermonibus meis moderari discam; I then abstained wholly, that all the year
after I might be more temperate in my talk. This was in him an act of caution,
but how apt it was to minister to his purpose of a moderated speech for the
future, is not certain; nor the philosophy of it, and natural efficacy easy
to be apprehended. It was also practiced by Paul the Hermit, Scholar of St.
Anthony, that having once asked whether Christ or the old Prophets were first,
he grew so ashamed of his foolish Question, that he spoke not a word for 3
years following: And Sulpitius, as St. Hierom reports of him, being deceived by
the Pelagians, spoke some fond things, and repenting of it, held his tongue
till his dying ut peccatum quod loquendo contraxerat tacendo penitus emendaret.
Though the pious mind is in such actions highly to be regarded, yet I am no
way persuaded of the prudence of such a deadness and Libitinarian Religion;

Murmuracum secum and rabiosa silentia rodunt,
so such importune silence was called, and understood to be a degree of
stupidity and madness; for so Physicians among the signs of that disease in
dogs, place their not barking; and yet, although there is wisdom, and there
may be deep religion. So Aretaeus describing the life of a studious man, among
others, he inserts this, they are (...), without color, pale and wise, when
they are young, and by reason of their knowledge, silent as Mutes, and dumb as
the Seriphian frogs. ut quisque contemptissimus and maxim ludibrio est, it a
solutissimae linguae est, said Seneca, Every man as he is a fool and
contemptible, so his tongue is hanged loose, being like a bell, in which there
is nothing but tongue and noise.

Silence therefore is the cover of folly, or the effect of wisdom; but it is
also religious, and the greatest mystic rites of any institution are ever the
most solemn and the most silent; the words in use are almost made Synonymous;
There was silence made in heaven for a while, said St. John, who noted it upon
occasion of a great solemnity, and mysterious worshippings or revelations to be
made there. (...), one of the gods is within, said Telemachus, upon occasion of
which his Father reproved his talking.

(...)
(...).
Be thou also silent and say little, let thy soul be in thy hand, and under
command, for this is the rite of the gods above. And I remember that when
Aristophanes describes the Religion in the Temple of Esculapius, (...), The
Plu^us.
Priest commanded great silence when the mysteriousnesse was nigh; and so among
the Romans,

Ite igitur pueri, linguis animisque faventes,
Sertaque delubris and farra imponite cultris.
But now although silence is become religious, and is wise and reverend, and
severe, and safe, and quiet, (...), as Hippocrates affirms of it, without
thirst, and trouble, and anguish; yet it must be (...), it must be seasonable,
and just, not commenced upon chance or humor, not sullen and ill-natured, not
proud and full of fancy, not pertinacious and dead, not mad and uncharitable,
nam sic etiam tacuisse nocet. He that is silent in a public joy has no
portion in the festivity, or no thankfulness pain and grief to David to be
silent; But yet, although tedious and dead silence has not a just measure of
praise and wisdom; yet the worst silence of a religious person is more
tolerable and innocent, then the usual pratings of the looser and foolish men.
Pone Domine custodiam ori meo and ostium circumstantiae lab^is meis, said
David, Put a guard O Lord unto my mouth, and a door unto my lips; upon which
St. Gregory said well, Non parietem, sed ostium petit, quod viz. aperitur and
clauditur; he did not ask for a wall, but for a door; a door that might open
and shut: and it were well it were so indeed. Labia tua sicut vitta coccinea,
so Christ commends his Spouse in the Canticles; Thy lips are like a scarlet
hair-lace, that is tied up with modesty from folly and dissolution. For however
that few people offend in silence and keeping the door shut too much, yet in
opening it too hastily, and speaking too much and too foolishly, no man is
without a load of guiltynesse, and some mouths like the gates of death

Noctes atque dies patent --
Cicero, he never spoke a word which himself would fain have recalled, he spoke
nothing that repented him. St. Austin in his 7. Ep. to Marcellinus says, it
was the saying of a fool and a sot, not of a wise man, and yet I have read the
same thing to have been spoken by the famous Abbat Pambo in the Primitive
Church; and if it could be well said of this man who was sparing and severe in
talk, it is certain it could not be said of the other, who

Part II.


1. Plutarch advises that such men should give themselves to writing, that
making an issue in the arm, it should drain the floods Ligurinus had writ a
Poem, he talked of it to all companies he came in; But however, it can be no
hurt to try, for some have been cured of bleeding at the nose, by opening a
vein in the arm.

2. Some advise, that such persons should keep company with their betters, with
grave, and wise, and great persons, before whom men do not usually bring forth
all, but the better parts of their discourse, and this is apt to give
assistance by the help of modesty; and might do well if men were not apt to
learn to talk more in the society of the aged, and out of a desire to seem wise
and knowing, be apt to speak before their opportunity.

3. Consideration of the dangers and consequent evils has some efficacy in
nature to restrain our looser talkings, by the help of fear and prudent
apprehensions. Aelian tells of the geese flying over the mountain Taurus, (...),
that for fear of Eagles nature has taught them to carry stones in their
mouths, till they be past their danger; care of our selves, desire of
reputation, appetites of being believed, love of societies

4. Some advise that such persons should change their speech action and
business is not the cure alone, unless we add solitariness; for the
experience of this last age has made us to feel, that companies of working
people have nursed up a strange Religion; the first, second, and third part of
which is talking and folly, save only that mischief, and pride, and fighting
came in the retinue. But he that works and works alone, he has employment, and
no opportunity. But this is but a cure of the symptom and temporary effect;
but the disease may remain yet. Therefore,

pruritus or itch of talking, let it be in matters of Religion, in prayers and
pious discourses, in glorifications of God, and the wise sayings of Scripture
and Holy men; this indeed will secure the material part, and make that the
discourses in their nature shall be innocent. But I fear this cure will either
be improper, or unsufficient. For in prayers, multitude of words is sometime
foolish, very often dangerous, and of all things in the world we must be
careful we bring not to God the sacrifice of fools; and the talking

6. But some men will never be cured without a Canker or a Squinsie; and such
persons are taught by all men what to do, for if they would avoid all company,
as willingly as company Spartan brevity. But Gods grace is sufficient to all
that will make use of it; and there is no way for the cure of this evil, but
the direct obeying of a counsel, and submitting to the precept, and fearing the
divine threatening; always remembering, that of every word a man speaks, he
shall give account at the day of Judgment: I pray God show us all a mercy in
that day, and forgive us the sins of the Tongue. Amen.

Cito lutum colligit amnis exundans, said St. Ambrose, Let your language be
restrained within its proper channels and measures, Stultiloquium, or speaking
like a fool: 2. Scurrilitas, or immoderate and absurd jesting: 3. And revealing
secrets.

1. Concerning Stultiloquy, it is to be observed that the Masters talk and
useless babble of weak and ignorant persons; because in their proportion they
may serve their little mistaken ends of civility and humanity, as seemingly to
them, as the strictest and most observed words of the wiser; if it be their
best, their folly may be pityed, but not reproved, and to them there is no
caution to be added, but that it were well if they would put the bridle into
the hands of another, who may give them check when themselves cannot; and no
wisdom can be required or useful to them, but to suspect themselves and
choose to be conducted by another. For so the little birds and supreme power,
their Lord, and ours, do things with greater niceness and exactness of art,
and regularity of time, and certainty of effect, then the wise Counselor, who
standing at the back of the Princes chair, guesses imperfectly, and counsels
timorously, and thinks by interest, and determines extrinsecall events by
inward and unconcerning principles; because these have understanding, but it is
less then the infinity of accidents and contingences

But that which is here meant by Stultiloquy, or foolish speaking, is the
Lubricum verbi, as St. Ambrose calls it, the slipping with the tongue, which
prating people often suffer, whose discourses betray the vanity of their
spirit, and discover the hidden man of the heart. For no prudence is a
sufficient guard, or can always stand in excubiis still watching, when a man
is in perpetual floods of talk; for prudence attends after the manner of an
Angels ministry; it is dispatched on messages from God, and drives away
enemies, and places guards, and calls upon the man to awake, and bids him send
out spies and observers, and

2. The second is Scurrility, or foolish jesting. This the Apostle [foolish
speaking and jestings Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
which are not convenient] that some think this to be explicative of the other,
and that St. Paul using the word (...) (which all men before his time used in a
good sense) means not that which indeed is witty and innocent, pleasant and
apt for institution, but that which fools and Parasites call (...), but indeed
is (...), what they called facetiousnesse and pleasant wit, is indeed to all
wise persons a mere Stultiloquy, or talking like a fool; and that kind of
jesting is forbidden. And indeed I am induced fully to this understanding of
St. Paul's words by the conjunctive and filthiness, and [foolish talking, or
jesting] just as in the succeeding verse he joins (...), uncleanness (so we
read it) or covetousness; one explicates the other, for by covetousness is
meant any defraudation; (...), fraudator, so St. Cyprian renders it: and (...)
St. Hierom derives from (...), to take more then a man should; and therefore
when St. Paul Let no man circumvent his brother in any matter, he expounds it
of adultery; and in this very place he renders (...), stuprum, lust; and indeed
it is usual in Scripture, that Covetousness being so universal, so original
a crime, such a prolisick sin, be called by all the names of those sins by
which it is either punished, or to which it tempts, or whereby it is nourished;
and as here it is called uncleanness or corruption; so in another place it is
called idolatry. But to return; This jesting which St. Paul reproves, is a
direct (...), or the jesting of Mimics and Players, that of the fool in the
play, which in those times, and long Socrates or Aristides: and because the
rabble were the laughers, they knew how to make them roar aloud with a
slovenly and wanton word, when they understood not the salt and ingenuity of a
witty and useful answer, or reply; as is to be seen in the intertextures of
Aristophanes Comedies. But in pursuance of this of St. Paul, the Fathers of the
Church have been very severe in their censures of this liberty. St. Ambrose
forbids all. Non solum Lil. de Offic.
profusos, sed etiam omnes jocos declinandos arbitror; Not only the looser
jestings, but even all are to be avoided: Nay, licet interdum joca honesta and
suavia sint, tamen ab Ecclesia horrent regula, the Church allows them not,
though they be otherwise honest and pleasant; for how can we use those things
we find not in holy Scriptures? St. Basil gives reason for this severity;
jocus facit animam remissam and erga pracepta Dei negligentem; and indeed that
cannot be denied; those persons whose souls are dispersed and ungathered by
reason of a wanton humor of intemperate jesting, are apt to be trifling in
their Religion. St. Hierom is of the same opinion, and adds a commandment of a
full In ep. ad Ephesians.
authority, if at least the record was right; for he quotes a saying blessed
Savior out of the Gospel of the Nazarens, Nunquam laett sitis nisi cum fratrem
vestrum in charitate videritis, Never be merry but when you see your brother in
charity: and when you are merry, St. James has appointed a proper expression
of it; and a fair entertainment to the passion; If any man be merry, let him
sing Psalms. But St. Bernard who is also strict in this particular, yet he
adds the temper. Though jesting be not fit for a Christian, interdum tamen si
incidant, ferendae fortassis, referendae nunquam: magis interveniendum caute
and prudenter nugacitati: If they seldom happen, they are to be borne, but
never to be returned and made a business of; but we must rather interpose
warily and prudently to hinder the growth and progress of the trifle. But
concerning this case of conscience, we are to remember, these holy persons
found jesting to be a trade; such were the Vide St. Chrysostom. homil. 6. in
Matthew.
ridicularii among the Romans, and the (...) among the Greeks; Paul upon the
same account. And in the same state of reproof to this day, are all that do
as they did: such professed jesters, people that play the fool for money,
whose employment and study is to unclothe themselves of the covers of reason,
or modesty, that they may be laughed at. And let it be considered, how
miserable every sinner is, if he does not deeply and truly repent; and when
the man is wet with tears and covered with sorrow, crying out mightily against
his sins, how ugly will it look when this is remembered the next day that he
plays the fool, and raises his laughter louder then his prayers and
yesterdayes groans, for no interest but that he may eat? A Penitent and a
Jester is like a Grecian piece of money, on Helena on one side and a Hecuba on
the other, a Rose and a deadly Aconite, a Paris and an Aesop, nothing was more
contrary; and upon this account this folly was reproved by St. Hierom, Verum
and haec a sanctis viris penitus vbi supra.
propellenda, quibus magis convenit flere atque lugere; Weeping and
penitential sorrow, and the sweet troubles of pity and compassion become a
holy person, much better then a scurrilous tongue. But the whole state of this
Question is briefly this.

1. If j^sting be unseasonable, it is also intolerable; (...).



3. If it be in an ordinary person, it is dangerous; but if in an eminent, a
consecrated, a wise, and extraordinary person, it is scandalous. Inter
saeculares nugae sunt, in ore Sacerdotis blasphemiae; so St. Bernard.

4. If the matter be not of an indifferent nature, it becomes sinful by giving
countenance to a vice, or making virtue to become ridiculous.



6. If it be not intended to fair and lawful purposes, it is sour in the
using.

7. If it be frequent, it combines and clusters into a formal sin.

8. If it mingles with any sin, it puts on the nature of that

The Ecclesiastical History reports that many jests passed between St. Anthony
the Father of the Hermits, and his Scholar St. Paul; and St. Hilarion is
reported to have been very pleasant, and of a facete, sweet, and more lively
conversation; and indeed plaisance, and joy, and a lively spirit, and a
pleasant conversation, and the innocent caresses of a charitable humanity, is
not forbidden; plenum tamen suavitatis and gratiae sermonem non esse indecorum,
St. Ambrose affirmed; and here in my text our conversation is commanded to be
such, (...), that it may minister grace, that is, favor, complacence,
cheerfulness; and be acceptable and pleasant to the hearer: and so must be our
conversation; it must be as far from sullenness, as it ought to be from
lightness; and a cheerful spirit is the best convoy for Religion; and though
sadness does in some cases become a Christian, as being an Index of a pious
mind, of compassion, and a wise proper resentment of things, yet it serves but
one end, being useful in the only instance of repentance; and has done its
greatest cheerfulness and a festival spirit fills the soul full of harmony,
it composes music for Churches and hearts, it makes and publishes
glorifications of God, it produces thankfulness and serves the ends of
charity, and when the oil of gladness runs over, it makes bright and tall
emissions of light and holy fires, reaching up to a cloud, and making joy round
about: And therefore since it is so innocent, and may be so pious and full of
holy advantage, whatsoever can innocently minister to this holy joy does set
forward the work of Religion and Charity. charity it self, which is the
vertical top of all Religion, is nothing else but an union of joys,
concentred in the heart, and reflected from all the angles of our life and
intercourse. It is a rejoicing in God, a gladness in our neighbors good, a
pleasure in doing good, a rejoicing with him; and without love we cannot have
any joy at all. It is this that makes children to be a pleasure, and friendship
to be so noble and divine a thing; and upon this account it is certain that
all that which can innocently make a man cheerful, does also make him
charitable; for grief, and age, and sickness, and weariness, these are
peevish and mirth and cheerfulness is content, and civil, and compliant, and
communicative, and loves to do good, and swells up to felicity only upon the
wings of charity. In this account here is pleasure enough for a Christian in
present, and if a facete discourse and an amicable friendly mirth can refresh
the spirit, and Campanian wines; and our faces and our heads may as well be
anointed and look pleasant with wit and friendy intercourse, as with the fat of
the Balsam tree; and such a conversation no wise man ever did, or ought to
reprove. But when the jest has teeth and nails, biting or scratching our
Brother*, when it is loose and wanton*, when it is unseasonable*, and much, or
many*, when it serves ill purposes*, or the drunkenness of the soul, and makes
the spirit fly away, seeking for a Temple where the mirth and the music is
solemn and religious.

But above all the abuses which ever dishonored the tongues of men, nothing
more deserves the whip of an exterminating Angel, or the stings of scorpions,
then profane jesting: which is a bringing of the Spirit of God to partake of
the follies of a man; as if it were not enough for a man to be a fool, but the
wisdom of God must be brought into those horrible scenes: He that makes a jest
of the words of Scripture, or of holy things, Search the Scriptures, for
therein you hope to have life eternal; and, All Scripture is written by
inspiration of God, and is fit for instruction, for reproof, for exhortation,
for doctrine, not for jesting; but he that makes that use of it, had better
part with his eyes in jest, and give his heart to make a tennisball; and that I
may speak the worst thing in the world of it, it is as like the material part
of the sin against the holy Ghost, as jeering of a man is to abusing him; and
no man can use it but he that wants wit and manners as well as he wants
Religion.

3. The third instance of the vain trifling conversation, and immoderate
talking is, revealing secrets; which is a dismantling and goes thither as to
sanctuary, and to violate the rites of that is sacrilege, profanation of
friendship, which is the sister of Religion, and the mother of secular
blessing; a thing so sacred, that it changes a Kingdom into a Church, and
makes Interest to be Piety, and Justice to become Religion. But this mischief
grows according to the subject matter and its effect; and the tongue of a
babbler may crush a man's bones, or break his fortune upon her own wheel; and
whatever the effect be, yet of it self it is the betraying of a trust, and by
reproach, oftentimes passes on to intolerable calamities, like a criminal to
his scaffold through the execrable gates of Cities; And though it is infinitely
worse when the secret is laid open out of spite or treachery, yet it is more
foolish when it is discovered for no other end but to serve the itch of
talking, or to seem to know, or to be accounted worthy of a trust; for so some
men open their cabinets to show only that a treasure is laid up, and that
themselves were valued by their friend, when they were thought capable of a
secret; but they shall be so no more; for he that by that means goes in pursuit
of reputation, loses the substance by snatching at the shadow, and by desiring
to be thought worthy of a secret, proves himself unworthy of friendship or
society. D' Avila tells of a French Marquess, young and fond, to whom Guise had
conveyed notice of the intended massacre, which when he had whispered into the
Kings ear, where there was no danger of publication, but only would seem a
person worthy of such a trust, he was instantly murdered, lest a vanity like
that might unlock so horrid a mystery.

I have nothing more to add concerning this, but that if this vanity happens
in the matters of Religion, it puts on some new circumstances of deformity: And
if he that ministers to the souls of men, and is appointed to restore him that
is overtaken in a fault, shall publish the secrets of a conscience, he
prevaricates the bands of Nature Valerius Soranus was put to death by the old
and braver Romans, ob meritum profanae vocis, quod contra interdictum Romae
nomen eloqui fuit ausus; because by prating he profaned the secret of their
Religion, and told abroad that name of the City which the Tusean rites had
commanded to be concealed, lest the enemies of the people should call from them
their tutelar gods, which they could not do but by telling the proper
relation. And in Christianity all Nations

These I reckon as the proper evils of the vain and trifling tongue; for though
the effect passes into further mischief, yet the original is weakness and
folly, and all that unworthiness which is not yet arrived at malice. But
hither also upon the same account some other irregularities of speech are
reducible, which although they are of a

1. The first is common Swearing, against which St. Chrysostom spends twenty
homilies: and by the number and weight of arguments has left this testimony,
that it is a foolish vice, but hard to be cured; infinitely unreasonable, but
strangely prevailing; almost as much without remedy as it is without pleasure;
for it enters first by folly, and grows by custom, and dwells with
carelessness, and is nursed by irreligion, and want of the fear of God; it
profanes the most holy things, and mingles dirt with the beams of the Sun, God
is so sacred, so mighty, that it rends mountains, it opens the bowels of the
deepest rocks, it casts out Devils and makes Hell to tremble, and fills all the
regions of Heaven with joy; the name of God is our Eden with the swords of
Cherubims, and none durst speak it but he whose lips were hallowed, and that at
holy and solemn times, in a most holy and solemn place; I mean the High Priest
of the Jews at the solemnities when he entered into the sanctuary, then he
taught all the world the majesty and veneration of his Name; and therefore it
was, that God made restraints upon our conceptions and expressions of him: and
as he was infinitely curious, putting his name amongst them, and representing
no shape; so even when he had put his name amongst them, he took it off from
the tongue and placed it before the Jehovah was so written on the Priests
Mitre, that all might see and read, but none speak it but the Priest. But
besides all this, there is one great thing concerning the Name of God, beyond
all that can be spoken or imagined else; and that is, that when God the Father
was pleased to pour forth all his glories, and imprint them upon his holy Son
in his exaltation, it was by giving him his holy Name, the Tetragrammaton or
Jehovah made articulate; to signify God manifested in the flesh; and so he
wore the character of God, and became the bright image of his person.

Now all these great things concerning the Name of God are infinite reproves
of common and vain swearing by it, Gods name is left us here to pray by, to
hope in, to be the instrument and conveyance of our worshippings, to be the
witness of truth and the Judge of secrets, the end of strife and the avenger
of perjury, the discerner of right and the severe exacter of all wrongs; and
shall all this be unhallowed by impudent talking of God without sense, or
fear, or notices, or reverence, or observation?

One thing more I have to add against this vice of a foolish James, But above
all things swear not at all, (...), that ye may not fall Chap. 5. v. 12.
into condemnation; so we read it, following the Arabian, Syrian, and Latin
books, and some Greek Copies; and it signifies, that all such swearing and
putting fierce appendages to every word, like great iron bars to a straw
basket, or the curtains of a tent, is a direct condemnation of our selves: For
while we by much talking regard truth too little, and yet bind up our trifles
with Of every idle word Matthew. 12.
you shall give account; for by thy words thou shall be condemned, and by thy
words thou shall be justified. But there is another reading of these words,
which has great emphasis and power, in this article, Swear not at all, (...),
that you may not fall into hypocrisy, that is, into the disreputation of a
lying, deceiving,

James expression, of (...), above all things swear not,] it is a thing so
highly to be regarded, and yet is so little considered, that it is hard to say,
whether there be in the world any instance in which men are so careless of
their danger and damnation, as in this.

The next appendage of vain and trifling speech is contention, wrangling and
perpetual talk proceeding from the spirit of contradiction: Profert enim
mores plerumque oration, and animi secreta detegit: Nec sine causa Graeci
prodiderunt, ut vivat quemque etiam dicere, said Quintilian: For the most part,
a man's words betray his manners, and unlocks the secrets of the mind: And it
was not without cause that the Greeks said, As a man lives so he speaks; for so
indeed Menander, (...), and Aristides, (...): So that it is a sign of a
peevish, an angry and quarrelling disposition, to be disputative and busic in
Questions, and impertinent oppositions.

You shall meet with some men (such were the Skeptics, and such were the
Academics of old) who will not endure any man shall be of their opinion, and
will not suffer men to speak truth, clamosum altercatorem, Quintilian calls
such a one. This is (...), an overflowing of the heart and of the gall; and it
makes men troublesome, and intricates all wise discourses, and throws a cloud
upon the face of truth, and while men contend for truth, error dressed in the
same habit slips into her chair, and all the litigants court her for the
divine sister of wisdom. Nimirum altercando veritas amittitur: There is noise
but no harmony, fighting but no victory, talking but no learning, teachers and
all are wilful, every man is angry, and without reason and without charity.

(...),
Their mouth is a spear, their language is a two-edged sword, their throat is a
shield, (as Nonnus his expression is) and the clamors and noyses of this folly
is that which St. Paul reproves in this chapt. Let all bitterness and clamor
be put away. People that contend earnestly, talk loud; Clamor equus est irae,
cum prostraveris equitem dejeceris, says St. Chrysostom, Anger rides upon
noise as upon a fine strength, and the cleanest spiritual force that can be
exercised in this instance; and though it be hard in the midst of a violent
motion instantly to stop, yet by strength and good conduct it may be done. But
he whose tongue rides upon passion, and is spurred by violence and contention,
is like a horse or mule without a bridle, and without understanding, (...), No
person that is clamorous can be wise.

These are the vanities and evil fruits of the easy talker; the instances of
a trifling impertinent conversation; and yet it is observable, that although
the instances in the beginning be only vain, yet in the issue and effects they
are troublesome and full of mischief: and that we may perceive, that even all
effusion and multitude of language and vainer talk cannot be innocent, we may
observe that there are many good things which are wholly spoiled if they do
but touch the tongue; they are spoiled with speaking: such as is the sweetest
of all Christian graces, humility, and the noblest actions humanity, the doing
favors and acts of kindness. If you speak of them, you pay your self, and
lose your kindness; humility is by talking changed into pride and hypocrisy,
and patience passes into peevishness, and secret trust into perfidiousnesse,
and modesty into dissolution, and judgment into censure; but by silence and a
restrained tongue all the first mischiefs are avoided, and all these graces
preserved.

SERMON, XXIV. Part III. Of Slander and Flattery.
The spirit of detraction; and 2. The spirit of flattery. The first is (...),
from whence the Devil has his name, He is an Accuser of the brethren. But the
second is worse; it is (...) or (...), damnable and deadly; it is the nurse of
vice, and the poison of the soul. These are (...), sour and filthy
communication; the first is rude, but the latter is most mischievous, and both
of them to be avoided like death, or the

1. Let no calumny, no slandering, detracting communication proceed out of your
mouth; the first sort of this is that which the Apostle calls whispering, which
signifies to abuse our neighbor secretly, by telling a private story of him.

linguaque refert audita susurro,
for here the man plays a sure game as he supposes, a mischief without a
witness,

(...),
as Anacreon calls them; the light, swift arrows of a calumniating tongue; they
pierce into the heart and bowels of the man speedily. These are those which the
holy Scripture notes by the disgraceful Talebearers: Thou shall not go up and
down as Levit. 19. 6.
a Talebearer among the people; for there are six things which God hates,
(says Solomon) yea the seventh is an abomination unto him, it is (...), as bad
and as much hated by God as an idol, and that is, a whisperer or talebearer
that sows contention amongst brethren. Prove. 6. 17. and 26. 20.
This kind of communication was called (...) among the Greeks, and was as much
hated as the Publicans among the Jews, (...), It is a vile thing, O ye
Athenians, it is a vile thing for a man to be a Sycophant, or a Talebearer,
and the dearest friendships in the world cannot

Te fingente nefas Pyladen odisset Orestes,
Thesea Pirithoi destituisset amor:
Tu Siculos fratres, and majus nomen Atridas,
Et Ledae poteras dissociare genus.
But this crime is a conjugation of evils, and is productive of infinite
mischiefs; it undermines peace, and saps the foundation of friendship; it
destroys families, and rends in pieces the very heart

Et si non aliqua nocuisses, mortuus esses,
and no man's interest nor reputation, no man's peace or safety can abide, where
this nurse of jealousy, and parent of contention like the earwig creeps in at
the car, and makes a diseased noise, and scandalous murmur.

2. But such tongues as these, where they dare, and where they can safely, love
to speak louder, and then it is detraction; when men under the color of
friendship will certainly wound the reputation of a man, while by speaking some
things of him fairly, he shall without suspicion be believed when he speaks
evil of him; Horace speaks of, Me Capitolinus convictore usus amicoque etc.
Capitolinus is my friend, and we have long lived together, and obliged each
other by mutual endearments, and I am glad he is acquitted by the criminal
Judges,

Sed tamen admiror, quo pacto judicium illud
Fugerit --
yet I confess I wonder how he should escape; but I Will say no more, because he
is my friend. Polybius; This is a new way of accusation to destroy a man by
praises. These men strike obliquely like a wild swine, or the (...), or like
bulls in a yoke, they have horns upon their necks, and do you a mischief when
they plough your ground; and as Joab slew Abner, he took him by the beard and
kissed him, and smote him under the fifth rib that he died; so does the
detracting tongue, like the smooth tongued lightning, it will break your bones
when it kisses the flesh; so Syphax did secretly wound Massinissa, and made
Scipio watchful and implacable against Sophonisba,

3. But the next is more violent, and that is railing or reviling, which
Aristotle in his Rhetoricks says is very often the vice of boys and of rich
men, who out of folly or pride, want of manners, Tacitus noted it of the
Claudian family in Rome, an old and inbied pride and scornfulnesse made them
apt to abuse all that fell under their power and displeasure; quorum superbiam
frustra per obsequium and modestiam effugeres; No observance, no prudence, no
modesty can escape the reproaches of such insolent and high talkers. A. Gellius
tells of a boy that would give every one that he met a box on the ear; and some
men will give foul words, having a tongue rough as Nero did so to Thraseas, and
the old Heathens to the primitive Martyrs, pereuntibus addita ludibria, said
Tacitus of them, they crucified them again by putting Psalmist speaks. Our
tongues are our own, we are they that ought to speak, who is Lord over us?
that is, our tongues cannot be restrained; and St. James said James 3.
something of this, The tongue is an unruly member which no man can tame; that
is, no private person, but a public may; for he that can rule the tongue, is
fit also to govern the whole body, that is, the Church or Congregation;
Magistrates and the Governors

(...)
(...),
no evil is worse or of more open violence to the rest and reputation of men,
then a reproachful tongue. And it were well if we considered this evil, to
avoid it in those instances, by which our conversation is daily stained. Are we
not often too imperious against our blessed Savior restraining the hostility
and murder of the tongue, threatens hell fire to them that call their brother
fool; meaning, that all language which does really and by intention disgrace
him in the greater instances, is as directly against the charity of the Gospel,
as killing a man was against the severity and justice of the law. And although
the word it self may be used to reprove the indiscretions, and careless
foolish; and S. James used (...), Matt. 23. 17, 19. Luke 24. 25.
vain man, signifying the same with the forbidden raca, (...), vain, useless,
or empty; and St. Paul calls the Galatians, mad, and foolish, and bewitched;
and Christ called Herod, Fox; and St. John called the Pharisees, the generation
of vipers; and all this matter is wholly determined by the manner, and with
what mind it is done: If it be contumely; But when men upon all occasions
revile an offending person, lessening his value, sowring his spirit, and his
life, despising his infirmities, Apollonius the Philosopher said, will not
suffer the offending person to know when his fault is great, and when it is
little. For they who always put on a supreme anger, or express the less
anger with the highest reproaches, can do no more to him that steals, then to
him that breaks a Crystal: Non plus aequo, non diutius aequo, was a good rule
for reprehension of offending servants; But no more anger, no more severe
language then the thing deserves; if you too long, your reproof is changed
into reproach; if too bitterly, it becomes railing; if too loud, it is
immodest; if too public, it is like a dog.

(...)
(...),
so the man told his wife in the Greek Comedy; to follow me in the streets with
thy clamorous tongue is to do as dogs do, not as persons civil or religious.

slander, or the inventing evil things, falsely imputing crimes to our
neighbor: Falsum crimen quasi venenatum telum, (said Cicero) A false tongue or
a foul lie against a man's reputation, is like a poisoned arrow, it makes the
wound deadly, and every scratch to be incurable. Promptissima vindicta
contumelia, said one, To reproach and rail is a revenge that every girl can
take. But falsely to accuse is spiteful as Hell, and deadly as the blood of
Dragons.

This is the direct murder of the Tongue, for life and death are in the hand
of the tongue, said the Hebrew proverb, and it was esteemed so vile a thing,
that when Jesabel commanded the Elders of Israel to suborn false witnesses
against Naboth, she gave them instructions to take two men, the sons of Belial;
none else were fit for the employment.

Quid non audebis perfida lingua loqui? Ephraim in judgment, and executed the
fierce anger of the Lord upon him; God gave him over to be oppressed by a false
witness, quoniam coepit abire post sordes, therefore he suffered calumny, and
was overthrown in judgment. This was it that humbled Joseph in fetters, and
the iron entered into his soul, but it crushed him not so much as the false
tongue of his revengefull until his cause was known, and the Word of the Lord
tried him. This was it that flew Abimelech, and endangered David; it was a
sword in manu linguae Doeg, in the hand of Doegs tongue. By this Siba cut off
the legs of Mephibosheth, and made his reputation lame forever; it thrust
Jeremy into the dungeon, and carried Susanna to her stake, and our Lord to his
Cross; and therefore against the dangers of a slandering tongue, all laws have
so cautelously armed themselves, that besides the severest prohibitions of God
often Levit. 6.
recorded in both Testaments, God has chosen it to be one of his appellatives
Zech. 7.
to be the Defender of them, a party for those, whose innocence Luke 3.
and defencelesse state makes them most apt to be undone by this evil spirit;
I mean pupils, and widows, the poor, and the oppressed. And in pursuance of
this charity the Imperial laws have invented a juramentum de calumnia on oath
to be exhibited to the Actor or Plaintiff, that he believes himself to have a
just cause, and that he does not implead his adversary calumniandi animo, with
false instances, and indefencible allegations; and the Defendant is to swear
that he thinks himself to use only just defenses, and perfect instances of
resisting; and both of them obliged themselves, that they would exact no proof
but what was necessary to the truth of a spear, and a sword, and an arrow is a
man that speaks false witness against his neighbor. And therefore the laws
of God added yet another bar against this evil, and the false Accuser was to
suffer the punishment of the objected crime: and as if this were not
sufficient, God has in several ages wrought miracles, and raised the dead to
life, that by such strange appearances they might relieve the oppressed
Innocent, and load the false accusing Tongue with shame and horrible confusion.
So it happened in the case of Susanna, the spirit of a man was put into the
heart of a child to acquit the virtuous Gregory Bishop of Agrigentum, falsely
accused by Sabinus and Crescentius; Gods power cast the Devil out of Eudocia,
the Devil or spirit of Slander, and compelled her to speak the truth. St.
Austin in his book De cura promortuis, c. 11.
tells of a dead Father that appeared to his oppressed Son, and in a great
matter of Law delivered him from the teeth of false accusation. So was the
Church of Monts rescued by the appearance of Aia the deceased wife of Hidulphus
their Earl, as appears in the Hanovian story; and the Polonian Chronicles tell
the like of Stanislaus Bishop of Cracovia, almost oppressed by the anger and
calumny of Boleslaus their King; God relieved him by the testimony of St. Peter
their Bishop, or a Phantasme like him. But whether these records may be
credited or no, I contend not; yet it is very material which Eusebius relates
of the three false witnesses accusing Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, of an
infamous crime, which they did, affirming it l. 6. c. 7.
first wishing that if he said false, God would destroy him with fire; the
second, that he might die of the Kings evil; the third, that he might be blind:
and so it came to pass; the first being surprised with fire in his own roof,
amazed and intricated, confounded and despairing, paid the price of his slander
with the pains of most fearful flames: and the second perished by pieces, and
Surgeons, and torment: which when the third saw, he repented of his fault,
cried mightily for pardon, but wept so bitterly, and found at the same time the
reward of his calumny, and the acceptance of his repentance: (...), said
Cleanthes, nothing is more operative of spiteful and malicious purposes, then
the calumniating Tongue. In the Temple at Smyrna there were Looking-glasses
which represented the best face as crooked, ugly, and deformed; the Greeks call
these (...): and so is every false tongue; it lies in the face of heaven, and
abuses the ears of justice, it oppresses the Innocent, and is secretly revenged
of virtue, it defeats all the charity of laws, and arms the supreme power, and
makes it strike the Innocent; it makes frequent appeals to be made to heaven,
and causes an oath, in stead of being the end of strife, to be the beginning of
mischief; it calls

5. The last instance of this evil I shall now represent is Cursing;
concerning which I have this only to say; that although the causeless curse
shall return upon the tongue that spoke it, yet because very often there is a
fault on both sides, when there is reviling or cursing on either, the danger of
a cursing tongue is highly to be declined, as the biting of a mad dog, or the
tongue of a smitten serpent. For as envy is in the evil eye, so is cursing in
the reproachful tongue; it is a kind of venom and witchcraft, an instrument
by which God oftentimes punishes anger and uncharitableness; and by which the
Devil gets power over the bodies and interests of men: For he that works by
Thessalie ceremonies, by charms, and non sense words, by figures and
insignificant characterismes, by images and by rags, by circles and imperfect
noyses, has more advantage and real title to the opportunities of mischief,
by the cursing tongue; and though God is infinitely more ready to do acts of
kindness then of punishment, yet God is not so careless a regarder of the By
the tongue we bless God and curse men (says St. James) (...), reproaching is
cursing; and both of them opposed to (...), to blessing; and there are many
times and seasons in which both of

3. I am now to instance in the third sort of silthy communication, that in
which the Devil does the most mischief, by which he undoes souls; by which he
is worse then (...), an Accuser: For though he accuses maliciously, and
instances spitefully, and heaps objections diligently, and aggravates bitterly,
and with all his powers endeavors to represent the separate souls to God as
polluted and unfit to come into his presence, yet this malice is ineffective,
because the scenes are acted before the wise Judge of Men and Angels, our
Father and our Lord, who knows whereof we be made, and remembers that we are
but dust; before our Savior and our elder Brother, who has felt our
infirmities, and knows kow to pity, to excuse, and to answer for us: But though
this accusation of us cannot hurt them who will not hurt themselves, yet this
malice is prevailing when the spirit of flattery is let forth upon us. This is
the (...), the Destroyer, and is the most contrary thing to charity in the
whole world: and St. Paul noted it in his character of Charity, (...), Charity
vaunteth not 1 Cor. 13. 5.
it self, so we translate it, but certainly not exactly, for it signifies
easiness, complying foolishly, and flattering, Charity flattereth not, (...),
says Suidas out of St. Basil, it signifies any thing that serves rather for
ornament then for use, for pleasure then for profit.

Et eo plectuntur poetae quam suo vitio saepius,
Ductabilitate nimia vestra aut perperitudine,
says the Comedy; the Poets suffer more by your easiness and flattery, then
by their own fault. And this is it which St. Paul says is charity. For if to
call a man fool and vicious, be so high an injury, we may thence esteem what a
great calamity it is to be so; and therefore he that makes him so, or takes a
course he shall not become other, is the vilest enemy to his person, and his
felicity; and this is the mischief that is done by flattery; it is a design
against the wisdom, against the repentance, against the growth and promotion
of a man's soul. He that persuades an ugly, deformed man, that he is handsome, a
short man that he is tall, a bald man that he has a good head of hair, makes
him to become ridiculous and a fool, but does no other mischief. But he that
persuades his l. and rather then lose this contemptible sum of money, I will
throw him that shall give it me (as far as I can) into hell, there to roar
beyond all the measures of time or patience. Can any hatred be more, or love be
less, can any expression of spite be greater, then that it be said, you will
not part with 20 l. to save your Friends, or your Patrons, or Courtiers of
Alexander counterfeited his wry neck, and the Servants of the Sicilian Tyrant
pretended themselves dim sighted, and on purpose rushed one against another,
and overthrew the meat as it was served to his table, only because the Prince
was shortsighted, they gave them sufficient instances in what state of affairs
they stood with them that waited; it was certain they would commend every
foolish answer, and pretend subtilty in every absurd question, and make a
petition that their base actions might pass into a law, and be made to be the
honor and sanctity of all the people: and what proportions or ways can such
great personages have toward Carneades said bitterly, but it had in it too
many degrees of truth; that Princes and great personages never learn to do any
thing perfectly well, but to ride the great horse, quia scil. ferociens bestia
adulari non didicit, because the proud beast knows not how to flatter, but will
as soon throw him off from his back as he will shake off the son of a Potter.
But a Flatterer is like a neighing Horse, that neigheth under every rider, and
is pleased with every thing, and commends perish pleasantly. And indeed that is
a calamity that undoes many a soul; we so love our peace, and sit so easily
upon our own good opinions, and are so apt to flatter our selves, and lean
upon our own false supports, that we cannot endure to be disturbed or awakened
from our pleasing lethargy. For we care not to be safe, but to be secure, not
to escape hell, but to live pleasantly; we perit procari, si latet, said
Plancus, If you be not

1. Some flatter by giving great names, and propounding great examples; and
thus the Egyptian villains hung a Tumblers rope upon their Prince, and a
Pipers whistle; because they called their Ptolemy by the name of Apollo their
God of Music. This put buskins upon Nero, and made him fidle in all the great
Towns of Greece. When their Lords were Drunkards, they called them Bacchus;
when they were Wrestlers, they saluted them by the name of Hercules; and some
were so vain as to think themselves commended, they had drunk more then
Alexander the Conqueror. And indeed nothing more abuses easy fools that
only seek for an excuse for their wickedness, a Patron for their vice, a
warrant for their sleepy peace, then to tell stories of great examples remarked
for the instances of their temptation. When old Cato commended meretricious
mixtures, and to prevent adulteries permitted fornication, the youth of the
succeeding ages had warrant enough to go ad olentes fornices, into their
chambers of filthy pleasure;

Quidam notus homo cum exiret fornice; macte
Virtute esto (inquit) sententia dia Catonis:
And it would pass the goblets in a freer circle, if a flattering man shall
but say, Narratur and prisci Catonis saepe mero caluisse virtus, that old Cato
would drink hard at sunset. When Varro had noted, that wise and severe Salust,
who by excellent sententious words had reproved the follies of lust, was
himself taken in adultery, The Roman youth did hug their vice, and thought it
grew upon their nature like a man's beard, and that the wisest men would lay
their Seneca tells that the women of that age despised the adultery of one man
only; and hated it like marriage, and despised that as want of breeding, and
grandeur of spirit, because the braver Spartans did use to breed their children
promiscuously, as the Heards-men do cattle from the fairest Bulls. And Arrianus
tells that the women would defend their baseness by the doctrine of Plato, who
maintained the community of women. This sort of flattery is therefore more
dangerous, because it makes the temptation ready for mischief, apted and
dressed with proper, material, and imitable circumstances. The way of
discourse is far about, but evil examples kill quickly.

2. Others flatter by imitation: for when a crime is rare and insolent,
singular and out of fashion, it must be a great strength of malice and
impudence that must entertain it; but the flattering man doing the vice of his
Lord takes off the wonder, and the fear of being popular and common. Plutarch
tells of one that divorced himself from his wife because his friend did so; that
the other might be hardened in the mischief; and when Plato saw his scholars
stoop in the shoulders, and Aristotle observed his to stammer, they began to be
less troubled with those imperfections which they thought common to themselves
and others.

3. Some pretend a rusticity and downright plainness, and upon the confidence
of that humor their friends vice, and flatter his ruin. Seneca observed it of
some of his time; alius quidam adulatione clam utebatur parce, alius ex aperto
palm, rusticitate simulata, quasi simplicitas illa ars non sit. They pretend
they love not to dissemble, and therefore they cannot hide their thoughts; let
their friend take it how he will, they must commend that which is commendable;
and so man that is willing to dye quietly, is content with the honest
heartynesse and downright simplicity of him that with an artificial rudeness
dressed the flattery.

4. Some will dispraise themselves that their friend may think better of
himself, or less severely of his fault.

5. Others will reprove their friend for a trifle, but with a purpose to let
him understand, that this is all; for the honest man would

6. Some will laugh and make a sport of a vice, and can hear their friend tell
the cursed narrative of his adultery, of his drunkenness, of his craft and
unjust purchases; and all this shall prove but a merry scene; as if damnation
were a thing to be laughed at, and the everlasting ruin of his friend were a
very good jest. But thus the poor sinner shall not be affrighted from his
danger, nor chastised by severe language, but the villain that eats his meat
shall take him by the hand, and dance about the pit till he falls in, and dies
with shame and folly. Thus the evil Spirit puts on shapes enough; none to
affright the

(...)
(...).
The Parasite or Flatterer is a beast that is all belly, looking round teeth;
they feed him, and kill them that reach him bread: for that is the nature of all
vipers.

I have this one thing only to insert, and then the caution will be
sufficient, viz. that we do not think all praise given to our friend to be
flattery, though it be in his presence. For sometimes praise is the best
conveyance for a precept, and it may nourish up an infant virtue, and make it
grow up toward perfection, and its proper measures and rewards. Friendship
does better please our friend then flattery, and though it was made also for
virtue, yet it mingles pleasures it is delicious to behold the face of a
friendly and a sweet person; and it is not the office of a friend always to be
sour, or at any time morose; but free, open, and ingenuous, candid and humane,
not denying to please, but ever refusing to abuse or corrupt. For as adulterine
metals retain the luster and color of gold, but not the value; so flattery in
imitation of friendship takes the face and outside of it, the delicious part;
but the flatterer uses it to the interests of vice, and a friend by it serves
virtue; and therefore Plutarch well compared friendship to medicinal
ointments, which however delicious they be, yet they are also pleasant to be
good; and he that does so, shall also better be suffered when he reproves,
because the needing person shall find that then is the opportunity and season
of it, since he denied not to please so long as he could also profit. I only
add this advice, that since self-love is the serpents milk that feeds this
viper flattery, we should do well to choke it with its mothers milk; I mean,
learn to love our selves more, for then we should of all sauces (said Euenus)
sharpness, severity, and fire is the best.

SERMON, XXV. Part IV. The Duties of the Tongue.
Ephesians. 4. latter part of the 29 verse. -- But that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.
LOquendi ministros habemus homines, tacendi Deos, said one; Men teach us to
speak, and God teaches us to hold our tongue. The first we are taught by the
lectures of our Schools; the garrulity and foolish inordinate talking is a
conjunction of folly and sin, and the prating man while he desires to get the
love of them he converses with, incurres their hatred; while he would be
admired, is and Religion; yet it is with holy speaking and innocent silence as
Hermit and a Bishop; the first goes to a good school, but the second is
proceeded toward greater perfection; and therefore the practical life of
Ecclesiastical Governors being found in the way of holiness and zeal, is
called status perfectionis, a more excellent and perfect condition of life, and
far beyond the retirements and inoffensive life of those innocent persons
which do so much less of profit, by how much charity is better then
meditation, and going to heaven by religion and charity, by serving God and
converting souls, is better then going to heaven by prayers and secret
thoughts: So it is with silence, and religious communication. That does not
offend God; this glorifies him: That prevents Sin; this sets forward the
interests of Religion. And therefore Plutarch said well, Qui generose and regio
more instituuntur, primum tacere, deinde loqui discunt. To be taught first to
be silent, then to speak well and handsomely, is education fit for a Prince;
and that is St. Paul's method here: first we were taught how to restrain our
tongues in the foregoing instances, and now we are called to employ them in
Religion.

1. We must speak that which is good] (...), any thing that may serve the ends
of our God and of our Neighbor, love God, by this love Christ understands
obedience; when we are commanded to honor God, it is by singing and reciting
his praises, and doing things which cause reputation and honor: and even here
when we are commanded to speak that which the edification of necessity: the
phrase is an Hebraisme, where the genitive case of a substantive is put for the
adjective; and means, that our speech be apted to necessary edification, or
such edification that it may minister grace,

1. To Instruct. 2. To Comfort. 3. To Reprove.

1. Our conversation must be (...), apt to teach. For since all our hopes on
our part depend upon our obedience to God, and conformity to our Lord Jesus, by
whom our endeavors are sanctified and accepted, and our weaknesses are
pardoned, and all our obedience relies upon, and is encouraged and grounded in
faith, and faith is founded naturally and primarily in the understanding, we
may observe that it is not only reasonably to be sufficient to the thing, is
not sufficient for the person; and therefore that God does usually give us
more, and we need more yet; works in us to will and to do, we shall neither
will nor do; though to will be in the power of our hand, yet we will not will;
it follows from hence that all they who will comply with Gods method of
graciousnesse, and the necessities of their Brethren, must endeavor by all
means, and in all their own measures, and capacities to lay up treasures of
notices and instructions in their brothers soul, that by some argument or other
predestination, a favor of which he has no promise, no security, no
revelation; and although to do this God, has appointed a special Order of
men, the whole Ecclesiastical Order, whom he feeds they who are set over them
shall also die for want of charity. Here therefore we must remember, that it is
the duty of us all, in our several measures and proportions, to instruct those
that need it, and whose necessity is made ready for our ministration; and let

2. Our Conversation must be (...), apt to comfort the disconsolate; and then
this, men in present can feel no greater charity. For since half the duty of a
Christian in this life consists in the exercise of passive graces, and the
infinite variety of providence, and the perpetual adversity of chances, and
the dissatisfaction and emptynesse that is in things themselves, and the
weariness and anguish of our spirit does call us to the trial and exercise of
patience even in the days of sunshine, and much wine, and oil, and society,
cordials and variety; and time it self is checkered with black and white; stay
but till to morrow, and your present sorrow will be weary, and will lie down
to rest. But this is not all. The third person of the holy Trinity is known to
us by the name and dignity of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, and therefore to minister in the office is
to become like God, and to imitate the charities of heaven; and God has fitted
mankind for it; he most needs it, and he feels his brothers wants by his own
experience, and God has given us speech, and the endearments of society, and
pleasantness of conversation, and powers of seasonable discourse, arguments to
allay the sorrow, by abating our apprehensions and taking out the sting, or
telling the periods of comfort, or exciting hope, or urging a precept, and
reconciling our affections, and reciting to listen for light and ease, and when
he perceives that there is such a thing in the world, and in the order of
things, as comfort and joy, to begin to break out from the prison of his
sorrows at the door of sighs and tears, and by little and little melt into
showers and refreshment? This is glory to thy voice, and employment fit for the
brightest Angel. But so ut sit homo homini Deus, that every good man in his
season may be to his brother in the place of God, to comfort and restore him;
and that it may appear how much it is the duty of us all to minister comfort to
our brother, we may remember that the same words and the same arguments do
oftentimes more prevail upon our spirits when they are applied by the hand of
another, then when they dwell in us, and come from our own discoursings. This
is indeed (...), it is (...), to the edification

3. Our communication must in its just season be (...), we must reprove our
sinning brother; for the wounds of a friend are better then the kisses of an
enemy (says Solomon:) we imitate the office of the great Shepherd and Bishop
of souls, if we go to Prove. 27. 6.
seek and save that which was lost; and it is a fearful thing to see a friend
go to hell undisturbed, when the arresting him in his horrid progress may
possibly make him to return; this is a course that will change our vile itch of
judging and censuring others into an act of charity; it will alter slander into
piety, detraction into counsel, revenge into friendly and most useful
offices, that the Vipers flesh may become Mithridate, and the Devil be
defeated in his malicious employment of our language. He is a miserable man
whom none dares tell of his faults so plainly, that he may understand his
danger; and he that is incapable and proud, and Scorner is his name; he thinks
himself exempt from the condition and failings of men, or if he does not, he
had rather go to hell then be called to his way by an angry Sermon, or driven
back by the sword of an Angel, or endure one blushing, for all his hopes and
interests of heaven. It is no shame to be reproved, but to deserve it; but he
that deserves it, and will do so still, shall increase his warrant shall be
liberty, whose thanks shall be amendment, whose entertainment shall be
obedience; for a flattering word is like a bright sunshine to a sore Eye, it
increases the trouble, and lessens the sight;


The severe word of the reproving man is wise and healthful: But because all
times and all circumstances, and all persons are not fit for this employment:

-- et plurima sunt quae
Non audent homines pertusa dicere laena;
Some will not endure that a poor man, or an obliged person should

1. Let not your reproof be public and personal: if it be public, general;
if it be personal, it must be in private; and this is expressly commanded by
our blessed Savior: If thy Brother offends, tell it him between him and thee;
for when it comes afterward in case of contumacy to be declared in public, it
passes from fraternall correption to Ecclesiastical discipline. When Socrates
reproved Plato at a feast, Plato told him, it had been better he had told him
his fault in private; for to speak it publicly is indecency: Socrates replied;
and so it is for you publicly to condemn that indecency. For it is the nature
of man to be spiteful when he is shamed, and to esteem that the worst of
impudence and perseverance for its cover, when his shame is naked: And for this
indiscretion Aristomenes the Tutor of Ptolemy, who before the Corinthian
Ambassadors reproved the King for sleeping at the solemn audience, profited
nothing, but enraged the Prince, and was himself forced to drink poison. But
this wariness is not always necessary. For 1. a public and an authorized
person, may do it publicly, and may name the person as himself shall judge
expedient.

-- secuit Lucilius urbem:
Te Lupe, te Muti; and genuinum fregit in illis:
Omne vafer vitium --
Lucilius was a censor of manners, and by his office he had warrant and
authority. 2. There are also some cases in which a public reproof is prudent,
and that is when the crime is great, but not understood to be any at all; for
then it is Instruction and Catechism, and lays aside the affront and trouble
of reproof. Thus Ignatius the Martyr did reprove Trajan sacrificing at the
Altar in the sight of all the Officers of the Army; and the Jews were commanded
Jer. 10. 11.
to reprove the Babylonians for Idolatry in the land of their Captivity: and if
we see a Prince in the confidence of his pride, and carelessness of spirit, and
heat of war spoil a Church or rob God, it is then fit to tell him the danger
of Sacrilege, if otherwise he cannot well be taught his danger, and his duty.
3. There are some circumstances of person in which by interpretation, duty or
custom a leave is indulged or presumed, that liberty may be prudently used,
publicly to reprove the public vices: so it was in the old days of the
Romans; vice had then so little footing and authority, so few friends and
advocates, that the Prophets and Poets used a bolder liberty to disgrace

-- unde illa priorum
Scribendi quodcunque animo flagrante liberet
Simplicitas --


2. Use not to reprove thy brother for every thing, but for great things only:
for this is the office of a Tutor, not of a Friend; and few men will suffer
themselves to abide always under Pupillage. When the friend of Philotimus the
Physician came to him to be cured of a sore finger, he told him, Heus tu, non
tibi cum reduvia est nego^ium, he let his finger alone, and told him that his
liver was impostumate: and he that tells his friend that his countenance Solon
reproved Croesus, and Socrates Alcibiades, and Cyrus chid Cyaxares, and Plato
told Dion that of all things in the world he should beware of that folly, by
which men please themselves, and despise a better judgment: quia ei vitio
adsidet solitudo, Because that folly has in it singularity, and is directly
contrary to all capacities of a friendship, or the entertainments of necessary
reproof.

3. Use not liberty of reproof in the days of sorrow and affliction; for the
calamity it self is enough to chastise the gayeties of sinning persons, and to
bring him to repentance; it may be sometimes fit to insinuate the mention of
the cause of that sorrow, in order to repentance, and a cure: But severe and
biting Crater the Cynic met Demetrius Phalereus in his banishment and trouble,
he went to him and spoke to him friendly, and used his Philosophy in the
ministeries of comfort, and taught him to bear his trouble nobly, and so
wrought upon the criminal, and wild Demetrius; and he moved him to repentance,
who if he had been chidden (as he expected) would have scorned the manners of
the Cynic, and hated his presence and institution; and Perseus killed Euchus and
Eulaeus, for reproving his rashness, when he was newly defeated by the Romans.

4. Avoid all the evil appendages of this liberty: for since to Hieron invited
Epicharmus to supper, and he knowing that Hieron had unfortunately killed his
friend, replied to his invitation, Atque nuper cum amicos immolares non
vorasti, I think I may come, for when thou did sacrifice thy friends thou
did not devour them. This was a bitter sarcasme, and might with more prudence
and charity have been avoided. They Ammonius observing that his Scholars were
nice and curious in their diet, and too effeminate for a Philosophical life,
caused his freed man to chastise his boy for not dining without vinegar, and
all the while looked upon the young Gentlemen, and read to them a lecture of
Severity. Thus our dearest Lord reproved St. Peter, he looked Alcibiades was
supposed to do) for it is best to keep the severity of our own principles,
and the manner of our own living: for so Plato lived at Syracuse, just as he
lived in the Academy; he was the same to Dionysius that he was to Dion: But
this I mean, that he who means to win souls, and prevail to his brothers
institution, must as St. Paul did, effigiate and conform himself to those
circumstances of living, and discourse, by which he may prevail upon the
persuasions, by complying with the affections and usages of men.

These are the measures by which we are to communicate our counsels and advices
to our erring Brethren: to which I add this last advice, That no man should at
that time in which he is reproved give counsel and reproof to his Reprover,
for that betrays an angry spirit, and makes discord out of piety, and changes
charity into

That which remains now is, that I persuade men to do it, and that I persuade
men to suffer it; it is sometimes hard to do it, but the cause is only,
because it is hard to bear it; for if men were but apprehensive of their
danger, and were not desirous to die, there were no more to be said in this
affair; they would be as glad to entertain a severe Reprover as a careful
Physician; of whom because most men are so willing to make use, so thankful Et
per bujusmodi offensas emetiendum est confragosum hoc iter: it

-- dura fatemur
Esse, sed ut valeas multa dolenda feras.
Valentinian should in the midst of so many Christian Prelates make a law to
establish Polygamy, and that no Bishop should dare to reprehend

If now at last it be inquired whether every man is bound to reprove every man,
if he sins, and if he converse with him? I answer, that if it should be so, it
were to no purpose, and therefore for it there is no commandment; every man
that can may instruct him that wants it; but every man may not reprove him that
is already instructed; that is an act of charity, for which aut lucrentur vitam
loquendo, aut tacendo abscondant scientiam; if they speak, let them minister to
the good of souls; if they speak not, let them minister to sobriety; in the
first they serve the end of charity, in the other of humility.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 10. l. 35. r. entertained that at. p. 6. l. 30. scen r. scene. 29. 21.
dear r. clear. 152. 4. terror r. fervor. 71. 40. the bowed r. they bowed. 87.
41. reverend r reverene'd. 112. 27. r. illius pejo a prioribus. 100. 1. one r.
once. 102. 21. that flies r. he that flies. 142. 16. r. true or false. 98. 45.
if it be turned r. if it be not turned. 283. ult. r. get a Genius. 309. 40.
still r. till. 334. 5. r. his soul.

33. 8. (...) lege (forsan) (...). 52. 29. lege (...). 140. 9. lege (...). 200.
ult. lege (...). In margin. p. 225. 5. lege (...).

XXVIII SERMONS PREACHED AT GOLDEN GROVE; Being for the Summer half-year,
BEGINNING ON WHIT-SUNDAY, And ending on the xxv. Sunday after TRINITY.

TOGETHER WITH A Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness,
and Separation of the Office Ministerial.

BY JER. TAILOR, D. D.

QVI SEQVITUR ME NON AMBULAT IN TENEBRIS.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. 1651.

To the right Honorable and truly Noble, RICHARD Lord VAVGHAN, Earl of
Carbery, Baron of Emlin, and Molingar Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Bath.
My Lord,
I Now present to your Lordship a Copy of those Sermons the publication of
which was first designed by the appetites of that hunger and thirst of
righteousness, which made your Dear Lady (that rare soul) so dear to God, that
he was pleased speedily to satisfy her, by carrying her from our shallow and
impure cisterns to drink out of the fountains of our Savior. My Lord, I shall
but prick your tender eye, if I shall remind your Lordship, how diligent a
hearer, how careful a recorder, how prudent an observer, how sedulous a
practiser of holy discourses she was, and that therefore it was, that what did
slide through her ear, she was desirous to place before her eye, that by those
windows they might enter in and dwell in her heart: But because by this truth I
shall do advantage to the following discourses, give me leave (my Lord) to
fancy, that this Book is derived upon your Lordship almost in the nature of a
legacy from her, whose every thing was dearer to your Lordship, then your own
eyes, and that what she was pleased to believe apt to minister to her
devotions, and the religions of her pious and discerning soul, may also be
allowed a place in your closet, and a portion of your retirement, and a lodging
in your thoughts, that they may encourage and instruct your practice and
promote that interest, which is and ought to be dearer to you then all those
blessings and separations with which God has remarked your family and person.

My Lord, I confess the publication of these Sermons can so little serve the
ends of my reputation, that I am therefore pleased the rather to do it, because
I cannot at all be tempted, in so doing, to minister to any thing of vanity.
Sermons may please when they first strike the ear, and yet appear flat and
ignorant when they are offered to the eye, and to an understanding that can
consider at leisure. I remember that a young Gentleman of Athens being to
answer for his life, hired an Orator to make his defense, and it pleased him
well, at his first reading; but when the young man by often reading it that he
might recite it publicly by heart, began to grow weary and dspleased with it,
the Orator bade him consider that the Judges and the people were to hear it but
once, and then it was likely, they at that first instant might be as well
pleased as he. This has often represented to my mind the condition and fortune
of Sermons, and that I now part with the advantage they bad in their delivery,
but I have sufficiently answered my self in that, and am at rest perfectly in
my thoughts as to that particular, if I can in any degree serve the interest of
souls, and (which is next to that) obey the piety, and record the memory of
that dear Saint, whose name and whose soul is blessed: for in both these
ministeries, I doubt not but your Lordship will be pleased, and account as if I
had done also some service to your self: your religion makes me sure of the
first, and your piety puts the latter past my fears. However, I suppose in the
whole account of this affair, this publication may be esteemed but like
preaching to a numerous Auditory, which if I had done, it would have been
called either duty, or charity, and therefore will not now so readily be
censured for vanity, if I make use of all the ways I can to minister to the
good of souls: But because my intentions are fair in themselves, and I hope are
acceptable to God, and will be fairly expounded by your Lordship, (whom for so
great reason I so much value) I shall not trouble you or the world with an
Apology for this so free publishing my weaknesses; I can better secure my
reputation by telling men how they ought to entertain Sermons, for if they that
read or hear, do their duty aright, the Preacher shall soon be secured of his
fame, and untouched by censure.

1. For it were well, if men would not inquire after the learning of the
sermon, or its deliciousness to the ear or fancy, but observe its usefulness,
not what concerns the preacher, but what concerns themselves, not what may make
a vain reflection upon him, but what may substantially serve their own needs,
that the attending to his discourses may not be spent in vain talk concerning
him, or his disparagements but may be used as a duty and a part of religion, to
minister to edification and instruction. When S. John reckoned the principles
of evil actions, he told but of three, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life. But there was then also in the world (and now it
is grown into age, and strength, and faction) another lust, the lust of the
ear, and a fifth also, the lust of the tongue. Some people have an insatiable
appetite in hearing, and hear only that they may hear, and talk and make a
party: They enter into their neighbors house to kindle their candle, and
espying there, a glaring fire, sit down upon the hearth and warm themselves all
day, and forget their errand, and in the mean time, their own fires are not
lighted, nor their families instructed, or provided for, nor any need served,
but a lazy pleasure, which is useless and imprudent. Hearing or reading
sermons is, or ought to be in order to practice, for so God intended it, that
faith should come by hearing, and that charity should come by faith, and by
both together we may be saved. For a man's ears (as Plutarch calls them) are
virtutum ansae, by them we are to hold and apprehend virtue, and unless we use
them as men do vessels of dishonor, filling them with things fit to be thrown
away, with any thing that is not necessary, we are by them more nearly brought
to God, then by all the senses beside. For although things placed before the
eye affect the mind more readily then the things we usually hear, yet the
reason of that is, because we hear carelessly, and we hear variety; the same
species dwells upon the eye, and represents the same object in union and single
representment, but the objects of the ear are broken into fragments of periods,
and words, and syllables, and must be attended with a careful understanding;
and because every thing diverts the sound, and every thing calls off the
understanding, and the spirit of a man is truantly, and trifling; therefore it
is that what men hear, does so little affect them, and so weakly work toward
the purposes of virtue, and yet nothing does so affect the mind of man as
those voices to which we cannot choose but attend, and thunder and all loud
voices from Heaven rend the most ston^ heart, and makes the most obstinate pay
to God the homage of trembling, and fear, and the still voice of God usually
takes the tribute of love, and choice, and obedience. Now since hearing is so
effective an instrument of conveying impresses and images of things, and
exciting purposes, and fixing resolutions, (unless we hear weakly and
imperfectly) it will be of the greater concernment that we be curious to hear
in order to such purposes, which are perfective of the soul, and of the spirit,
and not to dwell in fancy and speculation, in pleasures and trifling arrests,
which continue the soul in its infancy and childhood, never letting it go forth
into the wisdom and virtues of a man. I have read concerning Dionysius of
Sicily, that being delighted extremely with a Minstrel that sung well, and
struck his Harp dexterously, he promised to give him a great reward, and that
raised the fancy of the Man, and made him play better. But when the music was
done and the man waited for his great hope, the King dismissed him empty,
telling him, that he should carry away as much of the promised reward, as
himself did of the Music, and that he had paid him sufficiently with the
pleasure of the promise for the pleasure of his song: both their ears had been
equally delighted and the profit just none at all: So it is in many men's
hearing Sermons, they admire the Preacher, and he pleases their ears, and
neither of them both bear along with them any good, and the hearer has as
little good by the sermon, as the Preacher by the air of the peoples breath,
when they make a noise, and admire, and understand not. And that also is a
second caution I desire all men would take.

2. That they may never trouble the affairs of preaching and hearing
respectively, with admiring the person of any man. To admire a preacher is such
a reward of his pains or worth, as if you should crown a Conqueror with a
garland of roses, or a Bride with Laurel; it is an undecency, it is no part of
the reward which could be intended for him. For though it be a good natured
solly, yet it has in it much danger, for by that means, the Preacher may lead
his hearers captive, and make them servants of a faction, or of a lust; it
makes them so much the less to be servants of Christ, by how much they call
any man Master upon earth; it weakens the heart and hands of others, it places
themselves in a rank much below their proper station, changing from hearing the
word of God, to admiration of the person and faces of men, and it being a fault
that falls upon the more easy natures and softer understandings, does more
easily abuse a man; and though such a person may have the good fortune to
admire a good man and a wise, yet it is an ill disposition, and makes him
liable to every man's abuse: Stupidum hominem quavis oratione percelli, said
Heraclitus. An undiscerning person is apt to be cozened by every oration: And
besides this, That Preacher whom some do admire, others will most certainly
envy, and that also is to be provided against with diligence, and you must not
admire too forwardly, for your own sake, lest you fall into the hands of a
worse preacher, and for his sake, whom when you admire you also love, for
others will be apt to envy him.

3. But that must by all men be avoided; for envy is the worst counselor in
the world, and the worst hearer of a wise discourse. I pity those men who live
upon flattery and wonder, and while they sit at the foot of the Doctors chair,
stare in his face, and cry (...), rarely spoken, admirably done, they are like
callow and unfeathered birds, gaping perpetually to be fed from another mouth,
and they never come to the knowledge of the truth, such a knowledge as is
effective, and expressed in a prudent and holy life. But those men that envy
the preacher; besides that they are great enemies of the Holy Ghost, and are
spitefully evil because God is good to him, they are also enemies to
themselves. He that envies the honors, or the riches of another, envies for
his own sake, and he would fain be rich with that wealth which sweats in his
neighbors coffers, but he that envies him that makes good sermons, envies
himself, and is angry because himself may receive the benefit, and be improved,
or delighted or instructed by another. He that is apt fondly to admire any man's
person must cure himself by considering, that the Preacher is Gods minister and
servant, that he speaks Gods word and does it by the Divine assistance, that he
has nothing of his own but sin and imperfection, that he does but his duty and
that also hardly enough, that he is highly answerable for his talent, and
stands deeply charged with the cure of souls, and therefore that he is to be
highly esteemed for the work sake, not for the person; his industry and his
charity is to be beloved, his ability is to be accounted upon another stock,
and for it, the preacher and the hearer are both to give God thanks, but
nothing is due to the man for that, save only, that it is the rather to be
employed, because by it we may better be instructed, but if any other reflection
be made upon his person, it is next to the sin and danger of Herod and the
people, when the fine Oration was made (...), with huge fancy the people were
pleased, and Herod was admired, and God was angry, and an Angel was sent to
strike him with death and with dishonor. But the envy against a preacher is to
be cured by a contrary discourse, and we must remember that he is in the place
of God, and has received the gift of God, and the aids of the holy Ghost, that
by his abilities God is glorified, and we are instructed, and the interests of
virtue, and holy religion are promoted, that by this means God who deserves
that all souls should serve him for ever, is likely to have a fairer harvest of
glory and service, and therefore that envy is against him: that if we envy
because we are not the instrument of this good to others, we must consider that
we desire the praise to our selves not to God. Admiration of a man supposes him
to be inferior to the person so admired, but then he is pleased so to be, but
envy supposes him as low, and he is displeased at it, and the envious man is
not only less then the other man's virtue, but also contrary: the former is a
vanity, but this is a vice, that wants wisdom, but this wants wisdom and
charity too, that supposes an absence of some good, but this is a direct
affliction and calamity.

4. And after all this, if the preacher be not despised, he may proceed
cheerfully in doing his duty, and the hearer may have some advantages by every
Sermon. I remember that Homer says the woers of Penelope laughed at Ulisses,
because at his return be called for a loaf, and did not, to show his gallantry,
call for swords and spears; Ulysses was so wise as to call for that he needed,
and had it, and it did him more good then a whole armory would in his case: so
is the plainest part of an easy, and honest sermon, it is the sincere milk of
the word, and nourishes a man's soul, though represented in its own natural
simplicity, and there is hardly any Orator, but you may find occasion to
praise something of him. When Plato misliked the order and disposition of the
Oration of Lysias, yet he praised the good words, and the elocution of the man.
Euripides was commended for his fullness, Parmenides for his composition.
Phocilides for his easiness, Archilochus for his argument, Sophocles for the
unequalnesse of his style: So may men praise their Preacher, he speaks
pertinently, or he contrives wittily, or he speaks comely, or the man is pious,
or charitable, or he has a good text, or he speaks plainly, or he is not
tedious or if he be he is at least industrious, or he is the messenger of God
and that will not fail us, and let us love him for that; and we know those that
love can easily commend any thing, because they like every thing: and they say,
fair men are like angels, and the black are manly, and the pale look like honey
and the stars, and the crook-nosed are like the sons of Kings, and if they be
flat they are gentle and easy, and if they be deformed they are humble, and
not to be despised because they have upon them the impresses of divinity, and
they are the sons of God. He that despises his Preacher, is a hearer of arts
and learning, not of the word of God, and though when the word of God is set
off with advantages and entertainments of the better faculties of our humanity,
it is more useful and of more effect, yet when the word of God is spoken
truly, though but read in plain language, it will become the disciple of Jesus
to love that man whom God sends, and the publik order, and the laws have
employed, rather then to despise the weakness of him who delivers a mighty
word.

Thus it is fit that men should be affected and employed when they hear and
read sermons, coming hither not as into a theater, where men observe the
gestures and noises of the people, the brow and eyes of the most busy
censurers, and make parties, and go aside with them that dislike every thing,
or else admire not the things, but the persons: But as to a sacrifice, and as
unto a school, where virtue is taught and exercised, and none come but such as
put themselves under discipline, and intend to grow wiser, and more virtuous,
to appease their passion, from violent to become smooth and even, to have their
faith established, and their hope confirmed, and their charity enlarged. They
that are otherwise affected do not do their duty, but if they be so minded as
they ought, I and all men of my employment shall be secured against the tongues
and faces of men who are ingeniosi in alieno libro, witty to abuse and
undervalue another man's book: And yet besides these spiritual arts already
reckoned, I have one security more, for (unless I deceive my self) I intend
the glory of God sincerely, and the service of Jesus in this publication, and
therefore being I do not seek my self, or my own reputation, I shall not be
troubled if they be lost in the voices of busy people, so that I be accepted
of God, and found of him in the day of the Lords visitation.

My Lord, It was your charity and nobleness that gave me opportunity to do
this service (little or great) unto religion, and whoever shall find any
advantage to their soul, by reading the following discourse, if they know how
to bless God, and to bless all them that are Gods instruments in doing them
benefit, will (I hope) help to procure blessings to your Person and Family, and
say a holy prayer, and name your Lordship in their Letanies, and remember, that
at your own charges you have dug a well, and placed cisterns in the high
ways, that they may drink and be refreshed, and their souls may bless you. My
Lord, I hope this, even because I very much desire it, and because you
exceedingly deserve it, and above all, because God is good and gracious, and
loves to reward such a charity, and such a religion as is yours, by which you
have employed me in the service of God, and in ministeries to your Family. My
Lord, I am most heartily, and for very many Dear obligations

Your Lordships most obliged, most humble, and most affectionate servant TAILOR.

Titles of the Sermons, their Order, Number, and Texts.
SErmon 1. 2. Of the Spirit of Grace. Folio 1. 12. Romans 8. ver. 9, 10. But ye
are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell
in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. *And
if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life,
because of righteousness.

Sermon 3. 4. The descending and entailed curse cut off. fol. 27. 40. Exodus
20. part of the 5. verse. I the Lord tby God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me:

6. And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

Sermon 5. 6. The invalidity of a late, or deathbed repentance. fol 52, 66.
Jerem. 13. 16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains: and while ye look for light,
or, (lest while ye look for light) he shall turn it into the shadow of death,
and make it gross darkness.

Sermon 7. 8. The deceitfulness of the heart. fol. 80. 92. Jerem. 17. 9. The
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?

Sermon 9. 10. 11. The faith and patience of the Saints: Or the righteous cause
oppressed. fol. 104. 119. 133. 1 Pet. 4. 17. For the time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what
shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear?

Sermon 12. 13. The mercy of the Divine judgments; or Gods method in curing
sinners. fol. 146. 159. Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness
of God leads thee to repentance?

Sermon 14. 15. Of grows in grace, with its proper instruments and signs.
fol. 172. 183. 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.

Sermon 16. 17. Of grows in sin, or the several states and degrees of
sinners, with the manner how they are to be treated. fol. 197. 210. Jude Epist
ver. 22, 23. And of some have compassion, making a difference: * And others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.

Sermon 18. 19. The foolish exchange. sol. 224. 237. Matthew. 16. ver. 26. For
what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Sermon 20 21. 22. The Serpent and the Dove, or a discourse of Christian
Prudence. fol. 251. 263. 274. Matthew. 10. latter part of ver. 16. Be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

Sermon 23. 24. Of Christian simplicity. 289. 301. Matthew. 10. latter part of
ver. 16. And harmless as doves.

Sermon 25. 26. 27. The miracles of the Divine Mercy. fol. 313. 327. 340. Psalm.
86. 5. For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy to
all them that call upon thee.

A Funeral Sermon, preached at the Obsequies of the Right Honorable the
Countess of Carbery. fol. 357. 2 Samuel 14. 14. For we must needs die, and are
as water spilt on the ground which cannot be gathered up again: neither does
God respect any person: yet does he devise means that his banished be not
expelled from him.

A Discourse of the Divine Institution, necessity, sacredness, and separation
of the Office Ministerial.

But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God, dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. Romans 8. 2.
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is
life, because of righteousness.


[The Lord gave his Spirit] or [the Lord gave his word] and great was the
company of the Preachers. For so I make bold to render that prophecy of David.
Christ was the word of God, verbum aeternum but the Spirit was the word of God,
verbum Patefactum: Christ was the word manifested in the flesh; the Spirit was
the word manifested to flesh, and set in dominion over, and in hostility
against the flesh. The Gospel and the Spirit are the same thing; not in
substance; but the manifestation of the Spirit is the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
and because he was this day manifested, the Gospel was this day first preached,
and it became a law to us, called Romans 8. 2.
the law of the Spirit of life, that is, a law taught us by the Spirit, leading
souls into minds, our minds into Spirit, our Spirit into glory: that he who
can give us all things, who is Lord of Men and Angels, and King of all the
Creatures should pray to God for us without intermission: that he who reigns
over all the world, should at the day of judgment give up the Kingdom to God
the Father, partakers of the Divine nature; of the Nature, the infinite nature
of God, and, must dwell in Christ, and Christ must dwell in them, and they must
be in the Spirit, and the Spirit must be for ever in them; these are articles
of so mysterious a Philosophy, that we could have inferred them from no
premises, discoursed them upon the stock of no natural, or scientificall
principles; nothing but God, and Gods spirit could have taught them to us: and
therefore the Gospel is Spiritus patefactus, the manifestation of the Spirit ad
aedificationem (as the Apostle calls it) for edification and building us up to
be 1 Cor. 12. 7.
a Holy Temple to the Lord.

2. But when we had been taught all these mysterious articles, we could not by
any humane power have understood them, Animalis homo, (...), that is, as S.
Jude expounds the word (...), the animal, or the natural man, the man that
has not the Spirit cannot discern the things of God, for they 1 Cor. 2. 14.
are spiritually discerned, that is, not to be understood but by the light
proceeding from the Sun of righteousness, and by that eye whose bird is the
Holy Dove, whose Candle is the Gospel;

Scio incapacem te sacramenti, Impie
Prudent.

Haurire nostrum: nil diurnum nox capit.
He that shall discourse Euclids elements to a swine, or preach (as Venerable
Bede's story reports of him) to a rock, or talk Metaphysics to a Bore, will as
much prevail upon his assembly as S. Peter, and S. Paul could do upon
uncircumcised hearts and ears, upon the indisposed Greeks, and prejudicate
Jews. An Ox will relish the tender flesh of Kids with as much gust and
righteousness, and judgment to come, then we put it off to another time, or
we forget it, and think we had nothing to do but to give the good man a
hearing, and (as Anacharsis said of the Greeks, they used money for nothing but
to cast account withal; so) our hearers make use of sermons and discourses
Evangelical, but to fill up void spaces of our time; to help to tell an hour
with, or without tediousness: The reason of this is a sad condemnation to such
persons; they have not yet entertained the Spirit of God, they are in
darkness: they were washed in water, but never baptized with the Spirit; for
these things are spiritually discerned. the spirit of Manifestation is not yet
upon them; and that is the first effect of the Spirit, whereby we can be called
sons of God, or relatives of Christ. If we do not apprehend, and greedily suck
in the precepts of this holy Discipline as aptly as Merchants do discourse of
gain, or Farmers of fair harvests,

3. The Gospel is called Spirit, because it consists of Spiritual Promises, and
Spiritual precepts, and makes all men that embrace it, truly to be Spiritual
men: and therefore S. Paul adds an Epithete beyond this, calling it a
quiohening Spirit that is, it puts 2 Cor. 3. 6.
life into our Spirits, which the law could not. The law bound us to
punishment, but did not help us to obedience, because it gave not the promise
of Eternal life to its Disciples. The Spirit, that is, the Gospel only does
this: and this alone is it which comforts afflicted minds, which puts
activenesse into wearyed Spirits, which inflames our cold desires, and does
(...) blows up sparks into live coals, and coals up to flames, and flames to
perpetual burnings: and it is impossible that any man who believes, and
considers the great, the infinite, the unspeakable, the unimaginable, the never
ceasing joys, that are prepared for all the sons and daughters of the Gospel
should not desire them; and unless he be a fool, he cannot but use means to
obtain them, effective, hearty pursuances. For it is not directly in the nature

4. But beyond this, is the reason which is the consummation of all the
faithful. The Gospel is called the Spirit, because by, the Spirit of
manifestation, that is, of instruction and of Catechism, of faith and
confident assent; but the Spirit of Confirmation or obsignation to all them
that believe and obey the Gospel of Christ; that is, the power of God is come
upon our hearts, by which in an admirable manner we are made sure of a glorious
inheritance; made sure (I say) in the nature of the thing; and our own
persuasions also are confirmed with an excellent, a comfortable, a discerning
and a reasonable hope: in the strength of which, and by whose aid, as we do
not doubt of the performance of the promise: so we vigorously pursue the spirit
of obsignation, or the confirming spirit, because it confirms our hope, and
assures our title to life eternal; and by means of it, and other it is
collateral assistances, it also confirms us in our duty, that we may not only
profess in word, but live lives according to the Gospel. And this is the sense
of [the Spirit] mentiond in the Text: ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you: That is, if ye be made
partakers of the Gospel, or of the spirit of manifestation, if ye be truly
entitled to God, and have received the promise of the Father, then are ye not
carnal men; ye are spiritual, ye are in the Spirit: if ye have the Spirit of
manifestation will but upbraid you in the shame and horrors of a sad eternity,
if you have not the Spirit of obsignation: if the Holy Ghost be not come upon
you to great purposes of holiness, all other pretenses are vain, ye are still
in the flesh, which shall never inherit the kingdom of God.

In the Spirit] that is, in the power of the spirit; so the Greeks in God, when
God is in him: and it is a similitude taken from persons encompassed with
guards; they are in custodia, that is, in their power, under their command,
moved at their dispose, they rest in their time, and receive laws from their
authority, and admit visiters whom they appoint, and mus^ be employed as they
shall suffer; so are men who are in the Spirit, that is, they believe as he
teaches, they work as he inables, they choose what he calls good, they are
friends of his friends, and they hate with his hatred; with this only
difference, in liber a custodia, the will is where it ought to be, and where it
desires to be, and it cannot easily choose any thing else, because it is
extremely in love with this: as the Saints and Angels in their state of
Beatific vision, cannot choose but love God; and yet the liberty of their
choice is not lessened, because the object fills all the capacities of the will,
and the understanding. Indifferency to an object is which draws to God, and
loves the fetters that confine us to the his service is perfect freedom; and
the more we are subjects, the more we shall reign as Kings; and the faster we
run, the easier is our burden, and Christ's yoke is like feathers to a bird, not
loads, but helps to motion, without them the body falls: and we do not pity is
in the Spirit is under Tutours and Governors. until the time appointed of the
Father, just as all great Heirs are; only, the first seizure the Spirit makes,
is upon the will. He that loves the yoke of Christ, and the discipline of the
Gospel, he is in the Spirit, that is, in the spirits power.

Upon this foundation, the Apostle has built these two propositions. 1.
Whosoever has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, he does not belong
to Christ at all: he is not partaker of his

2. Whosoever is in Christ, is dead to sin, and lives to the Spirit of Christ,
that is, lives a Spiritual, a holy and a sanctified life. These are to be
considered distinctly.

1. All that belong to Christ have the Spirit of Christ. Immediately before the
ascension, our blessed Savior bid his Disciples tarry in Jerusalem till they
should receive the promise of the Father. Whosoever stay at Jerusalem, and are
in the actual Communion of the Church of God shall certainly receive this
promise. For it is made to you and to your children (says S. Peter) and to as
many as the Lord our God shall call. All shall receive the Spirit of Christ,
the promise of the Father, because this was the great instrument of distinction
between the Law and the Gospel. In the Law God gave his Spirit, 1. to some; to
them 2. extraregularly, 3. without solennity, 4. in small proportions, like the
dew upon Gideons filiam vocis, the daughter of a voice, still, and small, and
seldom, and that by secret whispers, and sometimes inarticulate by way of
enthusiasme, rather then of instruction, and God spoke by the Prophets
transmitting the sound, as thorough an Organ pipe, things which themselves
oftentimes understood not. But in the Gospel, the spirit is given without
measure; first powered forth upon our head Christ Jesus; then descending upon
the beard of Aaron, the Fathers of the Church, and thence falling like the
tears of the

In the wisdom of the Ancient it was observed, that there are four great cords
which tie the heart of Man to inconvenience and a prison making it a servant of
vanity, and an heir of corruption 1. Pleasure and 2. Pain. 3. Fear, and 4.
Desire.

(...)

(...).
These are they that exercise all the wisdom and resolutions of man, and all
the powers that God has given him.

(...)
(...).
said Agathon.

These are those evil Spirits that possess the heart of man and mingle lust by
pleasure, or 2. to baser arts by covetousness, or 3. to impatience by sorrow,
or 4. to dishonorable actions by fear: and this is the state of man by nature;
and under the law; and for ever till the Spirit of God came, and by four
special operations cured these four inconveniences and restrained, or sweetened
these unwholesome waters.

1. God gave us his Spirit that we might be insensible of worldly

A man that has tasted of Gods Spirit can instantly discern the madness that
is in rage, the folly and the disease that is in envy, the anguish and
tediousness that is in lust, the dishonor that is in breaking our faith, and
telling a lie; and understands things truly as they are; that is, that charity
is the greatest nobleness in the world; crown of righteousness; and the
patient persons shall be rewarded with Job, and the meek persons with Christ
and Moses, and all with God; the very expectation the spirit of manifestation,
and bred up and strengthened by the spirit of obsignation is so delicious an
entertainment of all our reasonable appetites, that a spiritual man can no
more be removed, or intic d from the love of God, and of religion, then the
Moon from her Orb, or a Mother from loving the son of her joys, and of her
sorrows.

This was observed by S. Peter, [As new born babes desire the sincere 1 Ep. 2.
chap. ver. 5.
milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby; if so be that ye have tasted that
the Lord is gracious] When once we have tasted the grace of God, the
sweetnesses of his Spirit; then, no food but the food Divining cup, in which we
drink Salvation to our God, and call upon the Name of the Lord with ravishment
and thanksgiving; and there is no greater external testimony that we are in
the spirit, and that the spirit dwells in us, then if we find joy and delight,
and spiritual pleasures in the greatest food of Angels, the wine of elect
souls, is fit to succeed the Prodigal at his banquet of sin and husks, and to
be partaker of the table of Devils; but all they who have Gods Spirit, love to
feast at the supper of the Lamb, and have no appetites but what are of the
spirit, or servants to the spirit. I have read of a spiritual person who saw
heaven but in a dream, Read mihi campos meos floridos, columnam auream,
comitem Hieronymum, assistentes Angelos; Give me my fields again, my most
delicious fields, my pillar of a glorious light, my companion S. Jereme, my
assistant Angels; and this lasted till he was told of his duty, and matter of
obedience, and the fear of a sin had disincharmed

And if it were given to any of us to see Paradise, or the third heaven (as it
was to S. Paul) could it be that ever we should love any thing but Christ, or
follow any Guide but the Spirit, or desire any thing but Heaven, or understand
any thing to be pleasant but what shall lead thither? Now what a vision can do,
that the Spirit does certainly to them that entertain him. They that have him
really and not in pretense only, are certainly great despisers of the things
of the world. The Spirit does not create, or enlarge our appetites esteem all
things as less, and as dung so that we may gain Christ; No gain then is
pleasant but godliness, no ambition but longings after heaven, no revenge but
against our selves for sinning; nothing but God and Christ; Deus meus and
omnia; and date nobis animas, catera vobis tollite (as the king of Sodom said
to Abraham) Secure but the souls to us, and take our goods. Indeed this is a

S. John spoke a hard saying, but by the spirit of manifestation we are also
taught to understand it. Whosoever is born of God does not 1 Ep. 3. 9.
commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is
born of God. The seed of God] is the spirit which has a plastic power to
efform us in similitudinem filiorum Dei, into the image of the sons of God; and
as long as this remains in us, while the Spirit dwells in us We cannot sin; that
is, it is against our natures, our reformed they cannot sin; cannot without
trouble, and doing against our natures, and their most passionate inclinations.
A man, if you speak naturally, can masticate gums, and he can break his own
legs, and he can sip up by little draughts, mixtures of Aloes and Rhubarb, of
Henbane, or the deadly Nightshade; but he cannot do this naturally, or
willingly, cheerfully or with delight. Every sin is against a [For it Hebr. 6.
4.
is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, etc.] First we are
enlightened in Baptism, and by the Spirit of manifestation, the revelations of
the Gospel: then we relish and taste interior excellencies, and we receive the
Holy Ghost, the Spirit of confirmation, and he gives us a taste of the powers
of the world to come; that is, of the great efficacy that is in the Article of
eternal life to persuade us to religion and holy living: then we feel that as
the belief of that Article dwells upon our understanding, and is incorporated
into our wills and choice, so we grow powerful to resist sin by

2. The Spirit of God is given to all who truly belong to Christ as an anidote
against sorrows, against impatience, against the evil accidents of the world,
and against the oppression and sinking of our spirits under the cross. There
are in Scripture noted two births besides the natural; to which also by
analogy we may add a third. The first is to be born of water and the Spirit.
It is (...) one thing signified by a divided appellative, by two substantives,
Spiritus aqueus, the Spirit moving upon the waters of Baptism. The second is
to be born of Spirit and fire, for so Christ was promised to baptize us with
the Holy Ghost and with fire; that is, cum spiritu igneo, with a fiery spirit,
the Spirit as it descended in Pentecost in the shape of fiery tongues. And as 3.
there is another operation of the new birth, but the same Spirit, the spirit
of rejoicing, or spiritus exultans, spiritus laetitiae. Now Romans 15. 13.
the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may
abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. There is a certain joy and
spiritual rejoicing, that accompanies them in whom the Holy Ghost does dwell;
a joy in the midst of sorrow; a joy [And ye 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
became followers of us and of the Lord, having received the word in much
affliction with joy of the Holy Ghost.] Worldly afflictions and spiritual
joys, may very well dwell together; and if God did not supply us out of his
storehouses, the sorrows of this world would be mere and unmixt, and the
troubles of persecution would be too great for natural confidences. For who
shall make him recompense that lost his life in a Duel, fought about a draught
of wine, or a cheaper woman? What arguments shall invite a man the Spirit of
comfort. Now this Spirit of comfort is the hope and confidence, the certain
expectation of partaking in the inheritance of Jesus. This is the faith and
patience of the Saints, this is the refreshment of all wearied travelers, the
cordial of all languishing sinners, the support of the scrupulous, the guide
of the doubtful, the anchor of timorous inopis nos, atque pusilli finxerunt
animi; we have little souls, little faith, and as little fills us with joy in
believing: and a man that is in a great joy cares not for any trouble that is
less then his joy; and God has taken so great care to secure this to us, that
he has turned it into a precept. Rejoice evermore; and Rejoice in the Lord
always, and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
again, I say rejoice. But this rejoicing must be only in the hope Rejoicing
in Romans 12. 12.
hope. For although God sometimes maks a cup of sensible comfort to overflow
the spirit of a man, and thereby loves to refresh his sorrows; yet that is from
a secret principle, not regularly given not to be waitd for, not to be prayed
for, and it may fail us if we think upon it: but the hope of life eternal can
never fail us, and the joy of that is great enough to make us suffer any thing,
or to do any thing

-- ibimus, ibimus
utcunque praecedes, supremum
Carpere iter comites parati
To death, to bands, to poverty, to banishment, to tribunals, any whither in
hope of life eternal: as long as this anchor holds, we may suffer a storm, but
cannot suffer shipwreck: And I desire you by the way to observe, how good a God
we serve, and how excellent a Religion Christ taught, when one of his great
precepts is, that we should rejoice and be exceeding glad? and God has given
us the spirit of rejoicing, not a sullen, melancholy spirit, not the spirit of
bondage or of a slave, but the Spirit of his Son, consigning us by a holy
conscience to joys unspeakable and full of glory: And from hence you may also
infer, that those who sink under a persecution, or are impatient in a sad
accident they put out their own fires, which the Spirit of the Lord has
kindled, and lose those glories which stand behind the cloud.

Part II.
3. THe Spirit of God is given us, as an antidote against evil

The Jews were better taught for God was their teacher, and he gave the spirit
to them in single rays. But as the spirit of obsignation seal, and within a
veil; so the spirit of Manifestation or patefaction was like the gem of a
vine, or the bud of a rose, plain indices and significations of life, and
principles of juice and sweetness: but yet scarce out of the doors of their
causes; they had the infancy of knowledge; and revelations to them were given
as Catechism is taught to our children; which they read with the eye of a
bird, and speak with the tongue of a be, and understand with the heart of a
child, that is, weakly and imperfectly: and they understood so little; that 1.
They David was their Creat office, and the Avenger, on GOD the Lord of Hosts,
on God the Enemy of their Enemies; and they desired their Nation to be
prospered, and themselves blessed, and distinguished from all the world, by the
effects of such desires. This was the state of prayer in their Synagogue; save
only that it had also this allay. 4. That their addresses to GOD were crasse,
material, typical and full of shadows, and imagery, paterns of things to come,
and so in great things the Lord has done for us, God has powered his spirit
into our hearts, the spirit of prayer and supplication, and now. 1. Christians
pray in their spirit, with sighs and groans, and know that GOD who dwells
within them, can as clearly distinguish those secret accents, and read their
meaning in the Spirit as plainly as he knows the voice of his own thunder, or
could discern the letter of the law written in the tables of stone by the
finger of God. 2. likewise the spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought. That is, when God sends an affliction or
persecution upon us, we are indeed extreme apt to lay our hand upon the wound
and never take it off but when we lift it up in prayer to be delivered from
that sadness; and then we pray fervently to be cured of a sickness, to be
delivered from a Tyrant, to be snatched from the grave, not to perish in the
danger. But the spirit of God has from all sad accidents drawn the veil of
error the spirit having helped our infirmities, that is, comforted our
weaknesses and afflictions, our sorrows and impatience by this proposition,
that [All things work together for the good of them that fear God] he has
taught us to pray for grace, for patience under

3. Whereas only a Moses, or a Samuel, a David, or a Daniel, a John the
Baptist, or the Messiah himself could describe and indite forms of prayer and
thanksgiving to the time and accent of Heaven, now every wise and good Man is
instructed perfectly in the Scriptures (which are the writings of the spirit)
what things he

4. The Spirit of God has made our services to be spiritual, intellectual,
holy, and effects of choice and religion, the consequents of a spiritual
sacrifice, and of a holy union with God: The prayer of a Christian is with the
effects of the spirit of Sanctification; and then we pray with the Spirit when
we pray with Holiness, which is the great fruit, the principal gift of the
spirit, And this is by Saint James called [the prayer of faith] and is said to
be certain that it shall prevail. Such a praying with the spirit, when our
prayers are the spirit himself makes intercession for us: that is, has
enabled us to do it upon his strengths, we speak his sense, we live his life,
we breath his accents, we desire in order to his purposes, and our persons are
Gracious by his Holiness, and are accepted by his interpellation and
intercession in the act and offices of Christ. This is praying with the spirit.
To which by way of explication I add these two annexes of holy prayer, in
respect of which also, every good man prays with

5. The spirit gives us great relish and appetite to our prayers, and this
Saint Paul calls [serving of God in his spirit (...) that is, with a willing
mind; not as Jonas did Romans 1. 9.
his errand, but as Christ did die for us, he was straimed till spirit which
makes intercession for the Saints: but he that delights in his prayers, not
by a sensible or phantastic pleasure, but whose choice dwells in his prayers,
and whose conversation is with God in holy living, and praying accordingly,
that man has the spirit of Christ, and therefore belongs to Christ; for by this
spirit it is that Christ prays in Heaven assa faetida, or the raw flesh of a
murdered man upon the altar of incense.

6. The spirit of Christ and of prayer helps our infirmities, by giving us
confidence and importunity. I put them together. For as our faith is, and our
trust in God, so is our hope, and so is our prayer, weary or lasting, long or
short, not in [in all the world the true worshippers should worship in spirit
and in truth] that is, with a pure mind, with holy desires, for spiritual
things, according to the mind of the spirit in imitation of Christ's
intercession, with perseverance, with charity, or love. That is the spirit of
God, and these are the spiritualities of the Gospel, and the formalities of
prayer as they are Christian and Evangelicall.

7. Some men have thought of a seventh way, and explicate our praying in the
spirit, by a mere volubilty of language: which indeed is a direct undervaluing
the spirit of God and the spirit of manifestation and intercession; it is to
return to the materiality and imperfection of the law, it is to worship God in
outward forms, and to think that Gods service consists in shells and rinds, in
lips and voices, in shadows and images of things: it is to retire from Christ
to Moses, and at the best, it is a going from real graces to imaginary gifts:
and when praying with the spirit has in it so many excellencies, and gift of
speaking to which the nature of many men, and the art of all learned men, and
the very use and confidence of ignorant men is too abundantly sufficient. Let
us not so despise the spirit of Christ as to make it no other then the breath
of our lungs. * For though it might be possible that at the first, and when
forms of prayer were few and seldom, the spirit of God Besaleel and Aholiab:)
But then every weaver or worker in brass may by the same reason pretend that
he works by the spirit, as that he prays by the spirit, if by prayer he means
forming the words. For although in the case of working it was certain that the
spirit did teach: in the case of inditing or forming the words it is not
certain whether he did or no; yet because in both it was extraordinary (if it
was at all) and ever since, in both it is infinitely needless; to pretend the
Spirit in forms of every man's making (even though they be of

The Jews in their declensions to folly and idolatry did worship the stone of
imagination, that is, certain smooth images in which by art magic pictures and
little faces were represented, declaring hidden things and stolen goods; and God
Levit. 26. 1.
severely forbad this baseness: but we also have taken up this folly, and
worship the stone of imagination: we beget imperfect that he that glories, may
glory in the Lord.

Thus I have (as I could) described the effluxes of the Holy Spirit upon us in
his great channels. But the great effect of them is animalis homo is the same
with carnalis, that is, his soul is a servant of the passions and desires of
the flesh, and is flesh in it s operations and ends, in it s principles and
actions: So on the other side, by the Grace of God, and the promise of the
Father, and the influences of the Holy Ghost, our souls are not only recovered
from the state of flesh, and reduced back to the entireness of animal
operations, but they are heightened into spirit, and transform d into a new
nature: And

S. Hierom tells of the Custom of the Empire; When a Tyrant was overcome, they
us d to break the head of his Statues, and upon the same Trunk, to set the head
of the Conqueror, and so it passed wholly for the new Prince: So it is in the
kingdom of Grace: As soon as the Tyrant sin is overcome, and a new heart is put
into us, or that we serve under a new head, instantly we have a new Name given
us, and we are esteemed a new Creation; and not only changed in manners, but
we have a new nature within body, and soul, and spirit. My Text is plain for
it. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: and by
[Spirit] is not meant only the graces of God, and his gifts enabling us to do
holy things: there is more belongs to a good man the spirit of life, and he was
made in animam viventem, into a living soul; then he was made a man: So in the
new creation, Christ by whom God made both the worlds, intends to conform us to
his image, and he has given us the spirit of adoption, by which we are made
sons of God; and by the spirit of a new life we are made new creatures, capable
of a new state, entitled to another manner of duration, enabled to do new and
greater actions in order to higher ends; we have new affections, new
understandings, new wills: Veter a transierunt, and ecce omnia nova facta sunt;
All things are become new: And this is called the seed of God when it relates
to the principle and cause of this production: but the thing that is produced
is a spirit, and that is as much in nature beyond a soul, as a soul is beyond a
body. This great Mystery I should not utter but upon the greatest authority in
the world, and from an infallible Doctor, I mean S. Paul, who from Christ
taught the Church more secrets, then all the whole College besides: [And the
very God of peace sanctify you wholly, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
and I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.] We are spirit also be
kept blameless. This distinction is nice, and infinitely above humane reason:
but the word of Hebr. 4. 12.
God (says the same Apostle) is sharper then a two-edged sword, piercing even
to the dividing asunder the soul and the spirit: and that has taught us to
distinguish the principle of a new life, from the principle of the old, the
celestial from the natural; and thus it is.

The spirit (as I now discourse of it) is a principle infused into us by God,
when we become his children, whereby we live the Be ye holy as I am; be pure,
be perfect, as your heavenly Father is pure, as he is perfect: which because it
cannot be a perfection of degrees, it must be in similitudine naturae, in the
likeness of that nature which God has given us in the new birth, that by it,
we might resemble his excellency, and [According as his divine power has given
unto us all things that pertain 2 Epist. 1. 4.
to life and godliness, (that is, to this new life of godliness) through the
knowledge of him that has called us to glory and virtue, whereby are given
unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be
partakers of the Divine nature (so we read it) But it is something mistaken; it
is not (...), [The Divine nature] for Gods nature is indivisible, and
incommunicable; but it is spoken participative, or per analogiam, [partakers of
a Divine nature] that is, of this new and God-like nature, given to every
person that serves God, whereby he is sanctified and made the child of God,
and framed into the likeness of Christ. The Greeks generally call this (...),
a gracious gift, an extraordinary super addition to nature, not a single gift
in order to single purposes; but an universal principle, and it remains upon
all good white stone spoken of in the Revelation; and in it a new name written,
Apoc. 2. 17.
which no man knows but he that has it: And by this, Godssheep at the day of
judgment shall be discerned from goats: If their spirits be presented to God
pure and unblameable, this great (...), this talent which God has given to,
all Christians to improve, in the banks of grace and of Religion, if they bring
this to God increased and grown up to the fullness of the measure of Christ
(for it is Christ's Spirit, and as it is in us, it is called, the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ) then we shall be acknowledged for sons, Philip. 1. 19.


I need not to apply this Discourse: The very mystery it self is in the whole
world the greatest engagement of our duty that is imaginable, by the way of
instrument, and by the way of thankfulness.

Quisquis magna dedit voluit sibi magna rependi; He that gives great things to
us, ought to have great acknowledgements; and Seneca said concerning wise men;
That he that does benefit to others, hides those benefits as a man lays up
great treasures Irenaeus had a proverbiall saying, Perfecti sunt qui tria sine
querela Deo exhibent; They that present three things right to God, they are
perfect; that is, a chaste body, a righteous soul, and a holy spirit; and the
event shall be this, which Maimonides expressed not amiss, (though he did not
at all understand the secret of this mystery:) The soul of a man in this life,
is in potentia ad esse spiritum, it is designed to be a spirit, but in the
world to come, it shall be actually as very a spirit as an Angel is: and this
state is expressed by the Apostle, calling it, [the earnest of the spirit] that
is, here it is begun, and given us as an antepast of glory, and a principle of
Grace; but then we shall have it in plenitudine

-- regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio --
Here, and there, it is the same; but here we have the earnest, there the
riches and the inheritance.

But then, if this be a new principle, and be given us in order to the actions
of a holy life, we must take care that we receive not the Spirit of God in
vain, but remember it is a new life; and as no man can pretend, that a person
is alive that does not always do the works of life; so it is certain, no man
has the Spirit of God, but he that lives the life of grace, and does the works
of the Spirit, that is, in all holiness, and justice, and sobriety.

Spiritus qui accedit animo, vel Dei est, vel Daemonis (said Tertullian.)
[Christian. It is generally supposed, that unclean spirits walk in the night;
and so it used to be; for they that are drunk, are drunk in the night, said the
Apostle: but Suidas tells of certain Empusae, that used to appear at Noon, at
such time as the Greeks did celebrate the Funerals of the Dead; and at this day
some of the Russians fear the Noonday Devil, which appears like a mourning
widow to reapers of hay and corn, and uses to break their arms and legs,
unless they worship her. The Prophet David speaks of both kinds. Thou shall
not be afraid for Psalm. 91.
the terror by night, and a ruina and daemonio meridiano, from the Devil at
noon thou shall be free. It were happy if we were so; but besides the solemn
followers of the works of darkness, in the times and proper seasons of
darkness, there are very many who act their Scenes of darkness in the face of
the Sun, in open defiance

Here therefore I have a greater Argument to persuade you to holy living, then
Moses had to the sons of Israel. Behold, I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing: so said Moses; but I add, that I have upon the stock of
this Scripture, set before godliness is his gain, and this man understands the
things of God, and is ready to die for Christ, and fears nothing but to sin
against God, and his will is filled with love, and it springs out in obedience
to God, and in charity to his brother: and of such a man we cannot make
judgment by his fortune, or by his acquaintance, by his circumstances, or by
his adherencies, for they are the appendages the spiritual is judged of no
man: that is, the rare excellencies that make him happy, do not yet make him
illustrious, unless we will reckon Virtue to be a great fortune, and holiness
to be great Wisdom, and God to be the best Friend, and Christ the best
Relative, and the Spirit the hugest advantage, and Heaven the greatest Reward.
He that knows how to value these things, may sit down and reckon the felicities
of him that has the Spirit of God.

The purpose of this Discourse is this; That since the Spirit of God is a new
nature, and a new life put into us, we are thereby sins of infirmity. Whosoever
has the Spirit of God, lives the life of grace; The Spirit of God rules in
him, and is strong according to its age and abode, and allows not of those
often sins which we think unavoidable, because we call them, natural
infirmities.

[But if Christ he in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is
life because of righteousness.] The state of sin is a state of death; the
state of a man under the law, was a state of bondage, and infirmity, (as S.
Paul largely describes him in the seventh Chapter to the Romans) but he that
has the Spirit is made alive, and free, and strong, and a conqueror over all
the powers, and violencies of sin; such a man resists temptations, falls not
under the assault of sin, returns not to the sin which he last repented of,
acts no more that error which brought him to shame and sorrow: but he that
falls under a crime, to which he still has a strong, and vigorous inclination,
he that acts his sin, and then curses it, and then for where the Spirit of God
is, there is liberty, there is no such bondage and a returning folly to the
commands of sin. But because men deceive themselves with calling this bondage,
a pitiable and excusable infirmity, it will not be useless to consider the
state of this question more particularly, lest men from the state of a
pretended infirmity, fall into a real death.

1. No great sin is a sin of infirmity, or excusable upon that a sin of
infirmity. When a man is in the state of spiritual sickness or death, he is
in a state of infirmity, for he is a wounded man, a prisoner, a slave, a sick
man, weak in his judgment, and weak in his reasoning, impotent in his
passions, of childish resolutions, great inconstancy, and his purposes untwist,
as easily as the rude conjuncture of uncombining cables, in the violence of a
Northern tempest: and he that is thus in infirmity, cannot be excused; for it
is the aggravation of the state of his sin; he is so infirm that he is in a
state unable to do a servant of sin, a slave of the Devil, an heir of
corruption, absolutely under command; and every man is so, who resolves for
ever to avoid such a sin, and yet for ever falls under it: for what can he be
but a servant of sin, who fain would avoid it but cannot; that is, he has not
the Spirit of God within him; Christ dwells not in his soul, for where the Son
is, there is liberty: and all that are in the Spirit are sons of God, and
servants of righteousness, and therefore freed from sin. But then there are
also sins of infirmity, which are single actions, intervening seldom, in little
instances, unavoidable, or through a faultlesse ignorance. 1.
the sin is as full of excuse, as the ignorance was innocent. But no Christian
can pretend this to drunkenness, to murder, to rebellion, to uncleanness. For
what Christian is so uninstructed but that he knows Adultery is a sin? 2. Want
of observation, is the 2.
3.
it follows that they must come in at the door of malice, that is, of want of
Grace, in the absence of the Spirit; they destroy where ever they come, and the
man dies if they pass upon him.

It is true, there is flesh and blood in every regenerate man, but they do not
both rule: the flesh is left to tempt, but not to prevail. And it were a
strange condition, if both the godly and the ungodly were captives to sin, and
infallibly should fall into temptation, and death, without all difference, save
only; that the unwillingly, and the ungodly sins willingly. But if the same
things be done by both, and God in both be dishonored, and their duty
prevaricated, the pretended unwillingnesse is the sign of a greater, and a
baser slavery, and of a condition less to be endured. For the servitude which
is against me is intolerable, but if I choose the state of a servant, I am
free in my mind,

-- Libertatis servaveris umbrant
Si quicquid jubeare velis --
-- Tot rebus iniquis Paruimus victi: veniaest haec sola pudoris, Degenerisque
metus, nil jam potuisse negari. Lucan.
and there is no other difference, but that the mistaken good man feels his
slavery, and sees his chains, and his fetters; but therefore it is certain that
he is, because he sees himself to be a slave. No man can be a servant of sin,
and a servant of righteousness at the same time, but every

2. Sins of infirmity as they are small in their instance, so 2.
they put on their degree of excusablenesse, only according to the weakness,
or infirmity of a man's understanding: So far as men (without their own fault)
understand not their duty, or are possessed with weakness of principles, or
are destitute and void of

3. The violence or strength of a temptation is not sufficient to 3.
excuse an action, or to make it accountable upon the stock of a pitiable and
innocent infirmity; if it leaves the understanding still a sin of infirmity,
since they have been taught so to abuse themselves, by sowing fig leaves before
their nakedness: but because Joseph had a strength of God within him, the
strength of chastity, therefore it

4. No habitual sin, (that is) no sin that returns constantly, 4.
or frequently, that is repented of, and committed again, and still repented
of, and then again committed, no such sin is excusable with a pretense of
infirmity: Because that sin is certainly noted,

The sum is this. An animal man, a man under the law, a carnal man (for as to
this, they are all one) is sold under sin, he is a servant of corruption, he
falls frequently into the same sin to which he is tempted, he commends the Law,
he consents to it that it is good, he does not commend sin, he does some little
things against it, but they are weak and imperfect, his lust is he is led by
the Spirit, he lives in the Spirit, he does the works of God cheerfully,
habitually, vigorously: and although he sometimes slips, yet it is but seldom,
it is in small instances: his life is such as he cannot pretend to be justified
by works, and merit, but by mercy, and the faith of Jesus Christ; yet he never
sins great sins: If he does, he is for that present fallen from Gods favor; and
though possibly he may recover, (and the smaller, or seldomer the sin is, the
sooner may be his restitution) yet for the present (I say) he is out of Gods
favor. But he that remains in the grace of God, sins not by any deliberate,
consultive, knowing act; he is incident to such a surprise as may consist with
the weakness, and judgment of a good man: but whatsoever is, or must be
considered, if it cannot pass without consideration, it cannot pass without
sin; and therefore cannot enter upon him, while he remains in that state. For
he that is in Christ, in him the body is dead by reason of sin; and the the
promise of eternal life is such an argument to them that consider it, that it
must needs be of force sufficient, to persuade a man to use all his faculties,
and all his strength, that he may obtain it: God exacted all upon this stock;
God knew this could do every thing: Nihil non in hoc praesumpsit Deus (said
one.) This will make a satyr chaste, and the fruits of the Spirit, then we are
in Christ, and Christ in us, then we walk in the spirit, and the Spirit dwells
in us, and our portion shall be there, where Christ by the Spirit makes
intercession for us, that is, at the right hand of his Father for ever, and
ever.

Amen.
Cut off.
Exodus 20. part of the 5. verse. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me:

And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments.


IT is not necessary that a Commonwealth should give pensions to Orators, to
dissuade men from running into houses infected with the plague, or to entreat
them to be out of love with violent torments, or to create in men evil opinions
concerning famine, or painful deaths: Every man evils, that which turns good
into evil, and every natural evil into Ad natos natorum, and qui nascentur ab
illis, to the third and fourth generation: and therefore if a man should
despise the eye, or sword of man, if he sins he is to contest with the
jealousy of a provoked God: If he does not regard himself, let him pity his
pretty children: If he

God is a jealous God] that is the first great stroke, he strikes against sin,
he speaks after the manner of men, and in so speaking we know, he that is
jealous is suspicious, he is inquisitive, he is implacable. 1. God is pleased
to represent himself a person very suspioious, both in respect of persons and
things. For our persons we give him cause enough: for we are sinners from our
Mothers wo^^b; we make solemn vows and break them instantly; we cry for pardon
and still renew the sin; we desire God to try us once more, and we provoke him
ten times further: we use the means of grace to cure us, and we turn them into
vices and opportunites suspected persons. 2. And therefore God is inquisitive;
he looks for that which he fain would never find; we are not thereby
justified: For, as Moses accused the Jews; so do Christ and his Apostles accuse
us, not in their personss, but by their works, and by their words, by the thing
it self, by confronting the laws of Christ, and our practices. Sometimes the
Angels who are the observers of all our works carry up sad tidings to the Court
of Heaven against us. Thus, two Angels were the informers against Sodom; but
yet these were the last; for before that time the cry of their iniquity had
sounded loud and sadly in Heaven; and all this is the direct and proper effect
of his jealousy; we are made aspectacle to God, to Angels, and to Men: God
has set so many spies upon us, the blessed Angels and the accursed Devils,
good men and bad men, the eye of Heaven, and eye of that eye, God himself, all
watching lest we rob God of his Honor, and our selves of our hopes; For by his
prime intention he has chosen so to get his own glory, as may best consist
with our felicity: His great design is to be glorified in our being saved. 3.
Gods jealousy has a sadder effect then all this. implacable, that is, he is
angry with us to eternity unless we return in time: and if we do it may be he
will not be appeased in all instances: and when he forgives us he will make
some reserves of his wrath; he will punish our persons, or our estate; he will
chastise us at home, or abroad in our bodies, or in our children; for he will
visit our sins upon our children from generation to generation: and if they be
made miserable for our sins, they are unhappy in such parents; but we bear the
curse and the anger of God, even while they bear his rod: God visits the sins
of the Fathers upon the children] That Is the second Great stroke he strikes
against sin, and is now to be considered.

That God does so is certain; because he says he does; and that this is just
in him so to do, is also as certain therefore because 2.
he does it. For as his laws are our measures, so his actions, and his own
will are his own measures. He that has right over all things, and all persons,
cannot do wrong to any thing. He that is essentially just, (and there could be
no such thing as justice, or justice it self could not be good, if it did not
derive from him) it is impossible for him to be unjust. But since God is
pleased to

1. No man is made a sinner by the fault of another man without his own
consent. For to every one God gives his choice, and sets life and death before
every of the sons of Adam: and therefore this death is not a consequent to any
sin, but our own. In this sense it is true, that if the fathers eat sour
grapes, the childrens teeth shall not be set on edge: and therefore the sin of
Adam which was derived to all the world; did not bring the world to any other
death but temporal, by the intermediall stages of sickness, and temporal
infelicities: And it is not said that sin passed upon all men, but death, and
that also no otherwise but (...), in as much as al men have sinned; as they
have followed the steps of their father, so they are partakers of this death.
And therefore it is very remarkable; that death brought in by sin, was nothing
superinduced reduced to his own natural condition, from which before Adams
fall he stood exempted by supernatural favor; and therefore although the
taking away that extraordinary grace, or privilege was a punishment; yet the
suffering the natural death, was directly none; but a condition of his
creation, natural, and therefore not primarily evil; but if not good, yet at
least indifferent. And the truth and purpose of this observation will extend it
self, if we observe that before any man died, Christ was promised, by whom
death was to lose its sting, by whom death did cease to be an evil, and was, or
might our own sin; not of Adams: for although his sin brought death in, yet it
is only our sin that makes death to be evil: And I desire this to be observed,
because it is of great use in vindicating the Divine justice in the matter of
this question. The material part

2. For the fault of others many may become miserable, even all or any of
those, whose relation is such to the sinner, that he in any sense may by such
inflictions be punished, execrable, or oppressed. Indeed it were strange, if
when a plague were in Ethiopia, the Athenians should be infected: or if the
house of Pericles were visited, and Thucydides should die for it. For although
there are some evils which (as Plutarch says) are ansis and propagationibus
praedita incredibili celeritate in longinquum penetrantia,



1. It is so in kingdoms, in Churches, in families, in political, artificial,
and even in accidental societies.

When David numbered the people, God was angry with him; but he punished the
people for the crime; seventy thousand men died of the plague: and when God
gave to David the choice of three plagues, he chose that of the pestilence, in
which the meanest 2 Samuel 21. 14.
Saul his killing the Gibeonites. What had the people to do with their Kings
fault? or at least, the people of David with the fault of Saul? That we shall
see anon: But see the way that was appointed to expiate the crime, and the
calamity. David took seven of Saul's sons and hanged them up against the Sun,
and after that God was entreated for the land. The story observes one
circumstance more: that for the kindness of Jonathan, David spared
Mephibosheth. I will not bring the evil in his days, but in his sons days
will I bring the evil upon his house. Thus did God slay the child 1 King. 21.
29.
of Bathsheba for the sin of his father David: and the whole family of E^i* all
his kindred of the nearer lines were thrust from the priesthood, and a curse
made to descend upon his children that all the males should die young, and in
the flower of their youth. The boldness and impiety of Cham made his posterity
to be accursed, and brought slavery into the world. Because Ataalek fought with
the sons of Israel at Rephidim God took up a quarrel against the nation for
ever. And above all examples is that of the Jews, who put to death the Lord of
life, and made their nation to be an anathema for ever, until the day of
restitution. His blood be upon us, and upon our children. If we shed If we
crucify the Lord of life again and put him to an open shame, the wrath of God
will be upon us and upon our children, to make us a cursed family, and who are
the sinners, to be the stock and original of the curse; the pedigree of the
misery shall derive from us.

This last instance went further then the other of families and kingdoms. For
not only the single families of the Jews were made miserable for their Fathers
murdering the Lord of life, nor also was the Nation extinguished alone for the
sins of their Rulers, but John) and almost all the Churches of Africa, where
Christ was worshipped, and now Mahomet is thrust in substitution, and the
people are servants, and the religion is extinguished, or where it remains, it
shines like the Moon

-- Vetabo qui Cereris sacrum
vnlgarit arcanae, sub ijsdem
sit trabibus, fragilemque mecum
solvat phaselum, saepe Diespiter Hor. l. 3. od. 2.

Neglectus, in cesto addidit in tegrum
And it happened to the Mariners who carried Jonah, to be in danger with a horrid
storm, because Jonah was there who had sinned against the Lord. Many times the
sin of one man is punished by the falling of a house or a wall upon him, and
then all the family are like to be crushed with the same ruin; so dangerous, so
pestilential, so infectious a thing is sin, that it scatters the poison of its
breath to all the neighborhood, and makes that the man ought to be avoided

Next I am to consider why this is so, and why it is justly so? To this I
answer. 1. Between Kings and their people, Parents and their 2.
children there is so great a necessitude, propriety and intercourse of nature,
dominion, right and possession, that they are by God The honor of a King is in
the multitude of his people; and children are a gift that comes of the Lord;
and happy is that man that has his quiver full of them: and Lo thus shall the
man be blessed that fears the Lord; his wife shall be like the fruitful vine
by the walls of his house, his children like olive branches round about his
Table. Now if children be a blessing, then to take them away in anger is a
curse: and if the loss of flocks and herds, the burning of houses, the
blasting of fields be a curse; how much greater is it to lose our children, and
to see God slay them before our eyes, in hatred to our persons, and Jobs
Messengers told him the sad stories of fire from Heaven, the burning his sheep,
and that the Sabeans had driven his Oxen away, and the Chaldeans had stolen his
Camels; these were sad arrests to his troubled spirit: but it was reserved as
the last blow of that sad execution that the ruins of a house had crushed his
Sons and Daughters to their graves. Sons and daughters are greater blessings
then sheep and Oxen: they are not servants of profit as sheep are, but they
secure greater ends of blesssing; they preserve your Names; they are so many
titles of provision and providence; every new child is a new title to Gods
care of that Does (...) take care for Oxen? (said our blessed Savior) much
more for you: yea all and every one of your children are of more value then
many Oxen: when therefore God for your sin strikes them with crookedness, with
deformity, with foolishness, with impertinent and caytive spirits, with hasty
or sudden

2. But as this is a punishment to us, so it is not unjust as to them, though
they be innocent. For all the calamities of this life are incident to the most
Godly persons of the world; and since the King of Adams sin: but it is no evil
to those single persons that die in the Lord; for they are blessed in their
death. Jonathan was killed the same day with his Father the King; and this was
a punishment to Saul indeed; but to Jonathan it was a blessing: for since

3. God has many ends of providence to serve in this dispensation of his
judgments. *1. He expresses the highest indignation against sin; and makes his
examples lasting, communicative, and of great effect; it is a little image of
hell and we shall the less wonder that God with the pains of eternity punishes
the sins of time, when with our eyes we see him punish a transient action with
a lasting judgment. *2. It arrests the spirits of men, and surprises their
loosenesses, and restrains their gaiety, when we observe that the judgments of
God find us out in all relations, and turns our comforts into sadness, and
makes our families the scene of sorrows,

call the proud happy. No man can be called happy till he be dead; nor then
neither, if he lived vitiously: Look how God handles him in his children, in
his family, in his grandchildren; and as it tells that generation which sees
the judgment, that God was all the while angry with him; so it supports the
spirits of men in the intervall, and entertains them with the expectation of a
certain hope; for if I do not live to see his sin punished, yet his posterity
may find themselves accursed, and feel their fathers sins in their own
calamity; and the expectation,

neither he nor his parents have sinned; much more may it do so, when his
parents have, though he have not. For

3. I am now to consider in what degree, and in what cases, this is usual, or
to be expected. It is in the Text instanced in the matter of worshipping
images. God is so jealous of his honor, that he will not suffer an image of
himself to be made, lest the image dishonor the substance; nor any image of a
creature to be worshipped, though with a less honor, lest that less swell up
into

This one thing I desire to be strictly observed: That it is with much error,
and great indiligence usually taught in this question, in tertiam and quartam
generationem eorum qui oderunt me; to the third generation of them, of those
fathers that hate me: that is, upon the great-grand-children of such parents.
So that if the great-grandfathers be haters of God, and Antigonus was punished
for the tyranny of his father Demetrius; Phyleus for his father Auge^^; pious
and wise Nestor for his father Neleus: And it was so in the case of Jonathan,
who lost the Kingdom and his life upon the stock of his fathers sins; and the
innocent child of David was slain by the anger of God, not against the child,
who never had deserved it, but the fathers adultery. I need not here repeat
what Tiresias was esteemed unfortunate because he could not see his friends and
children: the poor man was blind with age: But Athamas and Agave were more
miserable, who did see their children, but took them for Lions, and Stags; The
parents were miserably frantic; But of all, they deplored the misery of
Hercules; who when he saw his children, took them for a man's enemies were they
of his own house, was accounted a great calamity: but it is worse, when we love
them tenderly, and fondly, and yet do them all the despite we wish to enemies;
But so it is, that in many cases we do more mischief Media did her brother
Absyrtus; For to leave them to inherit a curse, to leave them an intaild
calamity, a misery, a disease, the wrath of God for an inheritance, that it may
descend upon them, and remark the family like their coat of arms, is to be the
parent of evil; the ruin of our family, the causes of mischief to them, who
ought to be dearer to us then our own eyes. And let us remember this, when we
are tempted to provoke the jealous God: let us consider that his anger has a
progeny, and a descending

The Intail of Curses cut off. Part II.
4. IAm to consider what remedies there are for sons to cut off this intall of
curses; and whether, and by what means it is possible for sons to prevent the
being punished for their fathers sins? And since this thing is so perplexed and
intricate, has so easy an objection, and so hard an answer, looks so like a
cruelty, and so unlike a justice, (though it be infinitely just, and very
severe, and a huge enemy to sin) it cannot be thought but that there are not
only ways left to reconcile Gods proceeding to the strict rules of justice,
but also the condition of man to Ex tarditate si Dij soutes praetereant, and
insontes plectant, justitiam suam non sic recte resarciunt. If God be so slow
to punish the guilty, that the punishment be deferred till the death of the
guilty person; and that God shall be forced to punish the innocent, or to let
the sin quite escape unpunished, it will be something hard to join that justice
with mercy, or to join that action with justice. Indeed it will seem strange,
but the reason of its justice, I have already discoursed: If now we can find
how to reconcile this to Gods mercy too, or can learn how it may be turned into
a mercy,

1. The first means to cut off the intail of wrath and cursings from a family,
is for the sons to disavow those signal actions of Si quis paterni vitij
nascitur haeres, nascitur and poenae? The heir of his fathers wickedness, is
the heir of his fathers curse; and a son comes to inherit a animum leprosum in
cute munda, a leprous and a polluted mind even for nothing, even for an empty
and ineffective lust. An evil mind may contract the curse of an evil action;

2. The son may inherit his fathers wickedness by imitation and direct
practice, and then the curse is like to come to purpose; a curse by
accumulation, a treasure of wrath: and then the children as they arrive to the
height of wickedness by a speedy passage, as being thrust forward by an active
example, by countenance,

3. Sons inherit their fathers crimes, by receiving, and enjoying the purchases
of their rapine, injustice, and oppression, by rising upon the ruin of their
fathers souls, by sitting warm in the furs which their father stole, and
walking in the grounds which are watered with the tears of oppressed orphans,
and widows. Now in all these cases the rule holds. If the son inherits the sin,
he cannot call it unjust, if he inherits also his fathers punishment But to
rescind the fatal chain and break in sunder the line of Gods anger, a son is
tied in all these cases to disavow his fathers crime But because the cases are
several, he must also in several manners do it.

1. Every man is bound not to glory in, or speak honor of the powerful and
unjust actions of his Ancestors: But as all the sons of Adam are bound to be
ashamed of that original stain which they derive from the loins of their
abused Father, they must be humbled in it, they must deplore it as an evil
Mother, say to corruption, thou art my father, and to rottenness, thou art my
mother. I do not say that sons are bound to publish, or declaim against their
father crimes, and to speak of their shame in Piazza's and before Tribunals;
that indeed

Children are bound to pray to God, to sanctify, to cure, to forgive their
parents: and even concerning the sins of our forefathers, the Church has
taught us in her Letanies, to pray that God would be pleased to forgive them,
so that neither we, nor they may sink under the wrath of God for them.
[Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: Ours] in common and conjunction: And David
confessed to God, and humbled himself for the sins of his Ancestors Our fathers
have done amiss, and dealt wickedly, neither kept they thy great goodness in
remembrance, but were disobedient at the sea, even at the red sea. So did good
King Josiah, Great is the wrath of the Lord which is kindled against us, 2 King
32. 13.
because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book. But this is
to be done between God and our selves: or if in public, then to be done by
general accusation; that God only may read our particular sorrows in the
single shame of our families registered in our hearts, and represented to him
with humiliation, shame, and a hearty prayer.

2. Those curses which descend from the Fathers to the children Woe unto you for
ye build the sepulcher of the Prophets and your Fathers killed them: truly ye
bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers: for they killed Luke.
11. 47.
them and ye build their sepulchers: that is, the Pharisees were colebant
mortuos quos nollent Superstites: In charity to themselves some men wish their
enemies in Heaven, and would be at charges for a monument for them, that their
malice and their power and their bones might rest in the same grave: and yet
that wish, and that expense is no testimony of their Charity but of their
anger. 2. These men were willing that the monuments of those Piophets should
remain and be a visible affrightment to all such bold Chrysostom gave of the
place. 3. To which also the circumstances of the place concur. For they only
said, if they had lived in their Fathers days they would not have done as they
did; but it is certain they approved it, because they pursued the same courses:
and therefore our blessed Savior calls them (...), Not only the children of
them that did kill the Prophets, but a Killing generation; Mat. 23. 31.
the sin also descends upon you, for ye have the same killing mind, Dion said
of Caracalla (...) The man was troublesome to all good men when they were
alive, but did them honor when they were dead: And when Herod had killed
Aristobulus, yet he made him a most magnificent funeral; and because the
Pharisees were of the same humor, therefore our blessed Savior bids them to
filup the measure of their Fathers iniquity; for they still continued the
malice, only adorning of the Prophets sepulchers have been just cause of a woe
from christ; this being an act of piety, and the other of nature, inevitable,
and not chosen by them; and therefore not chargable upon them. He therefore
that will to real purposes disavow his Fathers crimes; must do it heartily
Isaiah, or Jeremy, and himself shall kill Aristohulus and John the Baptist; he
that is angry because the old Prophets were murdered, and shall imprison, and
beggar and destroy the new ones; He that disavows the persecution in the
primitive times, and honors the memory of the dead Martyrs, and yet every day
makes new ones; He that blames the oppression of the Country by any of his
predecessors, and yet shall continue to oppress his Tenants, and all that are
within his gripe, that man cannot hope to be eased from the curse

3. But concerning the third; there is yet more difficulty. Those sons that
inherit their Fathers sins by possessing the price of their Fathers souls, that
is, by enjoying the goods gotten by their Fathers rapine, may certainly quit
the inheritance of the curse, if they quit the purchase of the sin, that is, if
they pay their Fathers debts; his debts of contract, and his debts of justice;
his debts of intercourse, and his debts of oppression. I do not say that every
man is bound to restore all the land which his Ancestors have unjustly
snatched: bonae fidei possessor, and may enjoy it justly: and the reasons of
this are great, and necessary; for the avoiding eternal suites, and perpetual
diseases of rest and conscience: because there is no estate in the world that
could be enjoyed by any man honestly, if posterity were bound to make
restitution of all the wrongs done by their progenitors. But although the
children of the far removed lines, are not obliged to restitution, yet others
are; and some for the same, some for other reasons.

1. Sons are tied to restore what their Fathers did usurp, or to make
agreement, and an acceptable recompense for it, if the case be visible, evident
and notorious, and the oppressed party demands it; because in this case the law
has not settled the possession in the new tenant: or if a judge has, it is by
injury; and there is yet no collateral accidental title transferred by long
possession, as it is in other cases: and therefore if the son continues to
oppress the same person, whom his Father first injured, he may well expect to
be the heir of his Fathers curse, as well as of his cursed purchase.

2. Whether by law and justice, or not, the person be obliged, nay although by
all the solemnities of law the unjust purchase be established, and that in
conscience the Grandchildren be not obliged to restitution in their own
particulars, but may continue to enjoy it without a new sin; yet if we see a
curse descending upon the family res transit cum suo onere. All lands and
possessions pass with their proper burdens. And if any of my Ancestors was a
Tenant, and a servant, and held his lands as a Villane to his Lord, his
posterity also must do so, though accidentally they become noble. The case is
the same If my Ancestors entered unjustly, there is a curse and a plague that is
due to that oppression and injustice; and that is the burden of the land, and
it descends all along with it: And although I by the consent of laws am a just
possessor, yet I am obliged

The sum is this. As Kingdoms use to expiate the faults of others by acts of
justice: and as Churches use to remove the accursed thing from sticking to the
communities of the faithful, and the sins of Christians from being required of
the whole Congregation,

Secondly, But after all this, many cases do occur, in which we

1. The pious children of evil Parents are to stand firm upon the confidence
of the Divine grace and mercy; and upon that persuasion sin does abound, and
evils by sin are derived from his Parents, much more shall grace super abound,
and mercy by grace. If he was in danger from the crimes of others, much rather
shall he be secured by his own piety. For if God punishes the sins of the
fathers to four Abraham were persons not noted for religion; but suffered in
the public impiety, and almost universal idolatry of their ages; and yet all
the evils that could thence descend upon the family, were wiped off; and God
began to reckon with Abraham upon a new stock of blessings and piety; and he
was under God, the Original of so great a blessing, that his family for 1500.
years together had from him a title to many favors; and what ever evils did
chance to them in the descending ages, were but single evils, in respect of
that treasure of Esau proved a naughty man, and he lost the great blessing
which was in tailed upon the family; but he got, not a curse, but a less
blessing: and yet because he lost the greater blessing, God excluded him from
being reckoned in the elder time; Esau into a great Nation, and made him the
Father of many Princes. Now the line of blessing being reckoned in Jacob, God
blessed his family strangely, and by miracle, for almost five generations; he
brought them from Egypt by mighty signs and wonders; and when for sin they all
died in their way to Canaan, two only excepted, God so ordered it, that they
were all reckoned as single deaths, the Nation still descending still God
remembered his promise which he made with their forefathers, and that breach was
made up. After still God remembered his covenant with Abraham, and left two
Tribes; but they were restless in their provocation of the God of Abraham; and
they also were carried captive: But still God was the God of their fathers and
brought them back, and placed them safe, and they grew again into a Kingdom and
should have remained for ever but that they killed one that was greater then
Abraham, even the Messiah; and then they were rooted out, and the old covenant
cast off, and God delighted no more to the God of Abraham; but the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. As long as God kept that relation, so long for the
fathers sakes they had a title and an inheritance to a blessing: for so says
Saint Paul. [As touching the election they are beloved for the Fathers Romans 11.
28.
sakes.]

I did insist the longer upon this instance that I might remonstrate how great
and how sure, and how persevering mercies, a pious Father of a family may
derive upon his succeeding generations: And if we do but tread in the footsteps
of our Father Abraham, we

1. If a great impiety, and a clamorous wickedness has stained the honor of
a family, and discomposed its title to the Divine mercies and protection, it is
not an ordinary piety that can restore this family. An ordinary, even course of
life, full of sweetness, and innocence will secure every single person in his
own eternal interest: but that piety which must be a spring of blessings, and
Eli, upon whom a sad curse was intailed that there should not be an old man of
the family for ever, and that they should be beggars, and lose the office of
Priesthood: by the counsel of R. Johanan the son Zacheus all the family betook
themselves to a great, a strict and a severe religion; and God was entreated to
revoke his decree, to be reconciled to the family, to restore them to the
common condition of men, from whence they stood separate by the displeasure of
God against the crime of Eli, and his Sons Hophni and Phinehas. This course is
sure either to take off the judgment, or to change it into a blessing; to take
a way the rod, or the smart and evil of it; to convert the punishment into a
mere natural, or humane chance, and that chance to the opportunity of a
virtue, and that virtue to the occasion of a crown.

2. It is of great use for the securing of families, that every Master of a
family order his life so that his piety and virtue be as communicative as is
posible; that is, that he secure the religion of his whole family, by a severe
supravision and animadversion, and by cutting off all those unprofitable and
hurtful branches I know that Abraham will teach his sons to fear me. When a man
teaches his family to know and fear God, then he scatters a blessing round
about his habitation. And this helps to illustrate the reason of the thing as
well as to prove a believing wife, an unbeleeving husband; and either of them
makes the children to be sanctified, else they were unclean, and unholy; that
is, the very designing children to the service of God is a sanctification of
them; and therefore S. Hierom calls Christian children Candidatos fidei
Christianae: and if this very designation of them makes them holy; that is,
acceptable to God, entitled to the promises, partakers of the Covenant, within
the condition of sons; much more shall it be effectual to greater blessings a
chosen generation, an elect family; and then there can no evil happen to them,
but such which will bring them nearer to God; that is, no cross, but the
cross of Christ; no misfortune, but that which shall lead them to felicity:
and if any semblance of a curse happens in the generations, it is but like the
anathema of a sacrifice; not an accursed, but a devoted thing: for so the
sacrifice upon whose neck the Priests knife does fall, is so far from being
accursed, that it helps to get a blessing to all that join in the oblation: so
every misfortune that shall whose branches are Holiness unto the Lord. If any
leaf, or any boughs shall fall untimely, God shall gather it up, and place it
in his Temple, or at the foot of his throne; and that family

3. If a curse be feared to descend upon a family for the fault of their
Ancestors; pious sons have yet another way to fecure themselves, and to
withdraw the curse from the family, or themselves from the curse; and that is,
by doing some very great and illustrious act of piety, an action in gradu
heroico (as Aristotle calls it) an heroical action. If there should happen to
be one Martyr in a family, it would reconcile the whole kindred to God, and make
him who is more inclined to mercy then to severity, rather to be pleased with
the Relatives of the Martyr, then continue to be angry with the Nephews of a
deceased Behold I give unto him my covenant of peace, Numb. 25. 12.
and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of an
everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for the children of Israel. Thus the sons of Rechab obtain d the
blessing of an enduring and blessed family, because they were most strict and
religious observers of their fathers precept, and kept it after

One thing more I have to add by way of advice; and that is, that all parents
and fathers of families, from whose loins a blessing or a curse usually does
descend, be very careful, not only generally in all the actions of their
lives (for that I have already pressed) but, particularly in the matter of
repentance; that they be curious that they finish it, and do it thoroughly: for
there are certain (...), leavings of repentance, which makes that Gods anger is
taken from us so imperfectly: and although God for his sake who died for us,
will pardon a returning sinner, and bring him to heaven through tribulation
Ahab; he humbled himself and went softly, and lay in sackcloth, and called for
pardon and God took from him a judgment which was falling heavily upon him:
but we all know his repentance was imperfect and lame: The same evil fell upon
his sons; for so said God; I will bring the evil upon his house in his sons
days. Leave no arreares for thy posterity to pay; but repent with an integral,
a holy and excellent repentance, that God being reconciled to thee thoroughly,
for thy sake also he may bless thy seed after thee.

[God bless thee] will not outweigh the load of a great vice; and the curse
that scatters from thee by virtual contact, and by the channels of relation, if
thou be a vicious person: Nothing can issue from thy fountain but bitter
waters, And as it were a great impudence for a condemned Traitor to beg of his
injured Prince a province for his son, for his sake: so it is an ineffective
blessing for them, what we have no title to for our selves, Nay, when we can
convey to them nothing but a curse. The prayer of a sinner, the unhallowed wish
of a vicious Parent is but a poor donative to give to a child who sucked
poison from his nurse, and derives cursing from his Parents. They are punished
with a double torture in the shame and pains of the damned, who dying Enemies
to God have left an inventary of sins and wrath to be divided amongst their
children. But they that can truly give a blessing to their children, are such
as live a blessed life, and pray holy prayers, and perform an integral
repentance, and do separate from an evileye, and are infectious; some look
healthfully as a friendly planet, and innocent as flowers: and as some fancies
convey private effects to confederate and allayed bodies; and between the very
vital spirits of friends and Relatives there is a cognation, and they refresh
each other like social plants, and a good man is a *friend to every Good man;
and (they say) that an usurer knows an usurer and one rich man another, there
being by the very manners (...). Aristot.
of men contracted a similitude of nature, and a communication of effects: so
in parents and their children there is so great a society of nature and of
manners, of blessing and of cursing, that an evil parent cannot perish in a
single death and holy parents never eat their meal of blessing alone; but they
make the room shine like the fire of a holy sacrifice: and a Fathers or a
Mothers piety makes all the house festival, and full of joy from generation to
generation. Amen.

Sermon. V.
13. Jeremy 16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains: and while ye look for light,
or, (left while ye look for light) he shall turn it into the shadow of death,
and make it gross darkness.
GOd is the eternal fountain of honor, and the glorifications to laugh at,
and rejoice in the destruction of a sinner, because he is pleased with the
Economy of his own laws, and the excellent proportions he has made of his
judgments, consequent to our sins. But above all, God rejoiced in his Holy
Son, for he was the image of the Divinity, the character and express image of
his person, in him he beheld his own Essence, his wisdom, his power, his
justice, and his person, and he was that excellent instrument, designed from
eternal ages to represent as in a double mirror, not only the glories of God
to himself, but also or becoming penitent; for this also is called in the Text

For he that has dishonored God by sins, that is, has denied, by a moral
instrument of duty, and subordination, to confess the glories of his power,
and the goodness of his laws, and has dishonored, and despised his mercy,
which God intended as an instrument of our piety, has no better way to
glorify God, then by returning to his duty, to advance the honor of the
Divine Attributes in which he is pleased to communicate himself, and to have
intercourse with man. He that repents, confesses his own error, Whither shall
we go? for thou have the words of eternal life: and by humbling himself,
exalts God by making the proportions of distance more immense, and vast: and as
repentance does

But I shall no longer discourse of the Philosophy of this expression; certain
it is, that in the style of Scripture, repentance is the great glorification of
God; and the Prophet, by calling the people to give God glory, calls upon them
to repent; and so expresses [Glory to God on high, and peace on earth, and good
will toward men] by the sole instrument of repentance. And this was it which
Joshuah said to Achan, [Give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel,
Joshuah 7. 19.
and make confession unto him: that one act of repentance is one act of
glorifying God: and this, David acknowledged, Against Psalm. 51. 4.
thee only have I sinned, ut tu justificeris, that thou might be justified,
or cleared, that is, that God may have the honor of being righteous, and we,
the shame of receding from so excellent a perfection: or as S. Paul quotes and
explicates the place. Let God Romans 3. 4.
be true, and every man a liar, as it is written, that thou might be
justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art judged. But to
clear the sense of this expression of the Prophet, observe the words of S.
John: and men were scorched with great heat, and Revel. 16. 9.
blasphemed the name of God who has power over those plagues, and they
repented not to give him glory.

So that having strength and reason from these so many authorities, I may be
free to read the words of my Text thus, [Repent of all your sins before God
cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains] and then
we have here the duty of repentance, ut dum dies est operemini, that ye may
work while it is to day, lest if we stumble upon the dark mountains, that is,
fall into the ruins of

This exhortation of the Prophet was always full of caution and prudence, but
now it is highly necessary; since men who are so clamorously called to
repentance that they cannot avoid the necessity of it, yet that they may
reconcile an evil life with the hopes of heaven,

1. First therefore, Repentance implies a deep sorrow, as the beginning and
introduction of this duty; not a superficial sigh, or tear, not a calling our
selves sinners, and miserable persons; this is far from that godly sorrow that
works repentance; and yet I wish there were none in the world, or none
amongst us, who cannot remember that ever they have done this little toward
the abolition of their multitudes of sins; but yet if it were not Ezekiel. 27. 31.
Joel: 2. 13.
next after my text, [a weeping with the bitterness of heart; a turning to the
Lord with weeping, fasting, and mourning; a weeping day and night; the sorrow
of heart; the breaking of the spirit; Jeremy when he wept for the sins of his
Nation, the heart-breakings of David when he mourned for his adultery and
murder, and the bitter tears of Saint Peter when he washed off the guilt and
baseness of his fall, and the denying his Master; we shall be sufficiently
instructed in this praeludium or introduction to repentance; and that it is not
every breath of a sigh, or moisture of a tender eye, not every crying [Lord
have mercy upon me] that is such a sorrow as begins our restitution to the
state of grace and see Rule of H. ^iving. D. of repentance. p. 33^.
unless it really produce these effects; that is, 1. That it makes us

But I desire that it be observed, that sorrow for sins, is not Repentance;
Paul: [Godly sorrow works repentance] 2 Cor 7.
sorrow is the Parent, and repentance is the product; and therefore it is a
high piece of ignorance to suppose that, a crying out and roaring for our sins
upon our deathbed can reconcile us to God; our crying to God must be so early,
and so lasting, as to be able to teeme, and produce such a daughter, which must
live long, Judas had so great a sorrow for betraying the innocent blood of his
Lord, that it was intolerable to his Spirit, and he burst in the middle: and if
mere sorrow be repentance, then [there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth for evermore.

Let us therefore beg of God (as Calebs daughter did of her Father) dedisti
mihi terram aridam, da etiam and irriguam, thou have given me a dry land, give
me also a land of waters, a dwelling place in tears, rivers of tears, ut
quoniam non sumus digni oculos orando ad coelum levare, at simus digni oculos
plorando caecare, as Saint Austins expression is, that because we are not
worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven in prayer, yet we may be worthy to weep
our selves blind for sin, the meaning is, that we beg sorrow of excellent; and
that although her sin had abounded; yet Gods grace at dole Saltent quod dolere
non possis, grieve that thou can not grieve: and so must we; always fear
that our trouble for sin is nor great enough, that our sorrow is too remiss,
that our affections are indifferent; but we can only be sure that our sorrow
is a godly sorrow, when it works repentance; that is, when it makes us hate
and leave all our sin, and take up the cross of patience or penance: that is,
confess our sin, accuse our selves, condemn the action by hearty sentence; and
then, if it has no other emanation but fasting and prayer for its pardon, and
hearty industry toward its abolition, our sorrow is

For, sorrow alone will not do it, there must follow a total dereliction of our
sin; and this is the first part of repentance. Concerning which, I consider,
that it is a sad mistake amongst many that do some things toward repentance,
that they mistake the first addresses, and instruments of this part of
repentance for the whole duty it self. Confession of sins is in order to the
dereliction of them; but then confession must not be like the unlading of a
ship to take in new stowage; or the vomits of intemperance, which ease the
stomach that they may continue the merry meeting: but such a confession Saul
reserved after the spoil of Agag: they proclaim the sin, but do nothing toward
its cure; they serve Gods end to make us justly Homer, laid in the mids as the

(...) This is the murderer, this is the Achan, this is he that troubles
Israel;

surprise, and never sinks into it by deliberation; that fights

From hence we are to take our estimate, whence our resolutions of piety must
commence. He that resolves not to live well till the time comes that he must
die, is ridiculous in his great design, as he is impertinent in his
intermedial purposes, and vain in his hope. Can a dying man to any real effect
resolve [Oh spare me a little, that I may recover my strength before I go hence
and be no more seen:] And something like it was the saying of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, Inter vitae negotia and mortis diem oportet spacium
intercedere: When ever our holy purposes are renewed, unless God gives us time
to act them, to mortify and subdue our lusts, to conquer and subdue the whole
kingdom of sin, to rise from our grave and be clothed with nerves and flesh and
a new skin, captive by the Devil at his will, he is fast bound as a slave
tugging at the oar, that he is grown in love with his fetters, and longs to be
doing the work of sin, is it likely that [Confession of sins, praying for their
pardon, and resolutions to lead a new life] should begin, [before our feet slum
le upon the dark mountains,] lest we leave the work only resolved upon to be
begun, which, it is necessary we should in For that we should actually abolish
the whole body of sin and death, that we should crucify the old man with his
lusts, that we should lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily
beset us, that we should cast away the works of darkness, that we should awake
from sleep, and arise from death, that we should redeem the time, that we
should cleanse our hands and purify our hearts, that we should have escaped
the corruption, (all the corruption) that is in the whole world through lust,
that nothing of the old leaven should remain in us, but that we be wholly a new
lump, thoroughly transformed and changed in the image of our mind: these are
the perpetual precepts of the Spirit, and the certain duty of man; and that,
to have all these in purpose only, is merely to no purpose, without the
actual eradication of every vicious habit, and the certain abolition of every
criminal adherence, is clearly and dogmatically decreed every where in the
Scripture; For (they are the words of Saint Paul) they that are Christ's have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts: the Gal. 5. 24.
work is actually done, and sin is dead, or wounded mortally, before they can
in any sense belong to Christ, to be a portion of his He that is in Christ is a
new creature. For in Christ Gal. 6. 15. Gal. 6. ^. 1 Cor. 7. 9.
Jesus nothing can avail but a new creature: nothing but a Keeping the
Commandments of God: Not all our tears, though we should weep like David and
his men at Ziklag, till they could weep no more, or the women of Ramah, or like
the weeping in the valley of Hinnom, could suffice, if we retain the affection
to any one sin, or have any unrepented of, or unmortified. It is true that a
contrite and broken heart, God will not despise. No, he will not. For if it be
a hearty and permanent sorrow, it is an excellent beginning of repentance; and
God will to a timely sorrow

Lastly, suppose all this be done, and that by a long course of strictness and
severity, mortification and circumspection we have Having escaped the
corruption that is in the world thorough lust: And besides this, giving all
diligence, add to your faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge
temperance, to temperance patience, and so on, to godliness, to brotherly
kindness, and to charity: These things must be in you and abound: This is the
sum total of repentance; We must not only have overcome sin, but we must
after great diligence have acquired the habits of all those Christian graces
which are necessary in the transaction of our affairs, in all relations to God,
and our neighbor, and our own person. It is not enough to say, Lord, I thank
thee I am no extortioner, no adulrerer, not as this Publican; all the reward of
such a poenitent escaped the corruption of the world, he has also escaped
those heavy judgments which threatened his ruin.

Nec furtum feci, nec fugi, si mihi dicat
Servus; habes precium; loris non ureris, aio.
Non hominem occidi; non pasces in cruce corvos.
If a servant have not robbed his Master, nor offered to fly from his bondage,
he shall escape the Furca, his flesh shall not be exposed enter into the joy of
our Lord, unless after we have put off the old man with his affections and
lusts, we also put on the new man in righteousness and holiness of life. And
this we are taught in most plain doctrine by S. Paul [Let us lay aside the
weight that does so easily beset us;] that is the one half; and [then Let us
run with patience the race that is set before us. These are the fruits meet for
repentance, spoken of by S. John Heb. 12. 1.
Baptist; that is, when we renew our first undertaking in baptism, and return
to our courses of innocence.

Parcus Deorum cultor, and infrequens,
Insanientis dum sapientiae consultus erro
Nunc retrorsum vela dare, atque iterare cursus
Cogor relictos
The sense of which words is well given us by S. John; Remember Revel. 2.
whence thou art fallen, repent; and do thy first works. For all our hopes of
heaven rely upon that Covenant which God made with us in Baptism; which is,
That being redeemed from our vain conversation, we should serve him in
holiness and righteousness all our days. Now when any of us has
prevaricated our part of the Covenant, we must return to that state, and redeem
the intermedial time spent in sin by our doubled industry in the ways of
grace: we must be reduced to our first estate, and make If the righteous
scarcely be saved, (if it be so difficult to overcome our sins, and obtain
virtuous habits; difficult (I say) to a righteous, a sober, and well living
person) where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? What shall become of him
who by his evil life has not only removed himself from the affections, but
even from the possibilities of virtue? He that has lived in sin will die in
sorrow.

The Invalidity of a deathbed Repentance. Part. II.
BUt I shall pursue this, great and necessary truth, first; by showing what
parts and ingredients of repentance are assigned, when it is described in holy
Scripture. Secondly, by showing the necessities, the absolute necessities of a
holy life, and what it means in Scripture to [live holily]. Thirdly, by
considering what directions or intimations we have concerning the last time of
beginning to repent; and what is the longest period that any man may venture
with safety: And in the prosecution of

First, That repentance is not only an abolition, and extinction of the body
of sin, a bringing it to the altar, and slaying it before God and all the
people; but that we must also (...) mingle gold and rich presents, the oblation
of good works, and holy habits with the sacrifice, I have already proved: but
Faith and Repentance are the whole duty of a Christian. Faith is a sacrifice of
the understanding to God: Repentance sacrifices the whole will: That, gives the
knowing; this, gives up all the desiring faculties: That makes us Disciples;
this, makes us servants of the Holy Jesus. Nothing else was preached by the
Apostles, nothing was enjoined as the duty of man, nothing else did build up
the body of Christian religion. [Repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ] so that whosoever believes Acts. 20. 21.
in Jesus Christ, and repents toward God must make his accounts according to
this standard, that is, to believe all that Christ taught him; and to do all
that Christ commanded: and this is remarked in Saint Paul's Hebr. 6. 1
Catechism where he gives a more particular Catalogue of fundamentals: he
reckons nothing but Sacraments and faith of which he enumerates two principal
articles [resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgement] whatsoever is
practical, [repentance from dead works] which, if we observe the singularity of
the phrase, does not mean [sorrow] For sorrow from dead works, is not sense;
but it must mean mutationem status, a conversion from dead works, which (as in
all motions) supposes two terms; from dead works, to living works, from the
death of sin to the life of righteousness.

I will add but two places more, out of each Testament one; in which I suppose
you may see every lineament of this great duty [But if the wicked will turn
from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.] or as it is
more fully described in Ezekiel. 33. 14. [When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall
surely die; If he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; if
the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed; walk in the
statutes of life without committing iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall
not die.] Here only is the condition of pardon; to leave all your sins, to
keep all Gods statutes, to walk in them, to abide, to proceed, and make
progress in them; and this, without the interruption by a deadly sin, [without
committing iniquity] to make restitution of all the wrongs he has done, all
the unjust money he has taken, all the oppressions he has committed, all that
must be satisfied for, and repayed according to our ability: we must make
satisfaction for all injury to our Neighbors fame, all wrongs done to his
soul; he must be restored to that condition of good things thou did in any
sense remove him from: when this thou shall surely live, thou shall not die for
thy old sins thou have formerly committed. Hebr. 6. 1
Only be pleased to observe this one thing; that this place of Ezekiel is it
which is so often mistaken for that common saying, At what time soever a sinner
repents him of his sins from the bottom of his heart I will put all his
wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord] For although at what time
soever a sinner does repent (as repentance [At what time soever] not upon a
man's deathbed; yet there are no such words in the whole Bible, nor any nearer
to the sense of them then the words I have now read to you, out of the Prophet
Ezekiel. Let that therefore no more deceive you, or be made a color to
countenance a persevering sinner, or a deathbed penitent.

Neither is the duty of Repentance to be bought at an easier rate in the New
Testament. You may see it described in the 2 Cor. 7. 11. Godly sorrow works
repentance. Well? but what is that Behold the self same thing that ye sorrowed
after a godly sort, what carfulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of
your selves, yea what indignation, yea what fear, ye what vehement desire, yea
what zeal, yea what revenge. These are the fruits of that sorrow that is
effectual: these are the parts of repentance; clearing our selves of all that
is past, and great carfulness for the future, anger at our selves for our old
sins, and fear lest we commit the like again, vehement desires of pleasing God,
and zeal of holy actions, and a revenge upon our selves for our sins, called by
Saint Paul in another a judging our selves lest we be judged of the Lord. And 1
Cor. 11. 31.
in pursuance of this truth, the primitive Church did not admit a sinning
person to the public communions with the faithful, till besides their sorrow
they had spent some years in an (...) in doing good works and holy living; and
especially in such actions which did contradict that wicked inclination which
led them into those sins whereof they were now admitted to repent. And
therefore we find that they stood in the station of penitents seven years, 13
years, and sometimes till their death, before they could be reconciled to the
peace of God, and his

Scelerum si been poenitet
eradenda cupidinis pravi sunt elementa
and tenerae nimis mentes asperioribus
Formandae studijs -- Horat. Hierocles. (...). See life of H. Jesus part. 2.
disc. of Repentance.

Repentance is the institution of a philosophical and severe life, an utter
extirpation of all unreasonablenesse and impiety, and an address to, and a
final passing through all the parts of holy living.

Now Consider whether this be imaginable or possible to be Cogimur a suetis
animum suspendere rebus Atque ut vivamus, vivere desinimus. Cornel. Gal.
These men then sin not because they dare not, Nec ad rem pertinet ubi
inciperet, quod placuerat ut fieret.
but if the man dies then, dies when he only declaims against and curses his
sin, as being the author of his present fear, and apprehended calamity; It is
very far from reconciling him to

-- moriensque recepit
Quas nollet victurus aquas --
He curses sin upon his deathbed and makes a Panegyric of virtue

Quae men's est hodie, cur eadem non puero fuit? Hor. l. 4. od. 10.

vel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genae?
I shall end this first Consideration, with a plain exhortation; that since
repentance is a duty of so great and giant-like bulk; let no man crowd it up
into so narrow room, as that it be strangled in its birth for want of time and
air to breath in. Let

And now when any of you is tempted to commit a sin, remember, that sin will
ruin you unless you repent of it. * But this (you say) is no news, and so far
from affrighting you from sin, that (God knows) it makes men sin the rather.
For therefore they venture to act the present temptation, because they know, if
they repent, God will forgive them; and therefore they resolve upon both, to
sin now, and to repent hereafter.

Against this folly I shall not oppose the consideration of their danger, and
that they neither know how long they shall live, nor great fear and tremblings
of heart, lest God should never forgive

And now, suppose that you can repent when you will, that is, that you can
grieve when you will, (though no man can do it, no man can grieve when he
please) though he could shed tears when he list, he cannot grieve without a
real, or an apprehended infelicity, but, suppose it, and that he can fear when
he please, and that he can love when he please, or what he please; that is,
suppose a man to be able to say to his palate, though I love sweet meats, yet
to morrow I will hate and loath them and believe them bitter and distastful
things; suppose (I say) all these impssibilties, yet since, repentance does
suppose a man to be in a state of such real misery

The sum is this. He that commits sins shall perish eternally if he never does
repent. And if he does repent and yet untimely, he is not the better; and if he
does not repent with an entire, a perfect

2. The second general consideration is. The necessity, the absolute necessity
of holy living. God has made a Covenant with us, that we must give up our
selves, bodies and souls, not a Romans 12. 1.
dying, but aliving, and healthful sacrifice. He has forgiven all our old
sins, and we have bargained to quit them, from the time [through Christ which
strengthens me, I can do all things, says S. Paul,] however, we can do to the
utmost of our strength, and beyond that we cannot take thought; impossibilities
enter not into deliberation, but according to our abilities, and natural
powers, assisted by Gods grace, so God has covenanted with us to live a holy
life. [For in Christ Jesus nothing avayleth but a new creature, nothing but
faith working by charity, nothing but keeping the Commandments of God.] They
are all the words of S. Paul before quoted; to which he adds, [and as many as
walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy.] This is the Covenant,
[they are the Israel of God] upon those peace and mercy shall abide; if they
become a new creature, wholly transformed in the image of their mind; if they
have faith, and this faith be an operative working faith, a faith that produces
a holy life, a faith that works by charity; if they keep the Commandments of
God, then they are within the Covenant of mercy, but not else; for, in Christ
Jesus nothing else avayleth. * To the same purpose are those words Hebr. 12.
14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, implies both justice and charity,
without which it is impossible to preserve peace: Holinesse] implies all our
duty toward God, universal diligence; and this must be followed, that is,
pursued with diligence, in a lasting course of life and exercise, and without
this, we shall never see the face of God. I need urge no more authorities to
this purpose; these two are as certain and convincing as two thousand, and
since thus much is actually required and is the condition of the Covenant; it
is certain that sorrow for not having done what is commanded to be done; and a
purpose to do what is necessary to be actually performed, will not acquit us
before the righteous judgment of God. * [For the grace of God has appeared to
all men, teaching us that Tit. 2. 12.
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live godly, justly, and
soberly in this present world.] for upon these terms alone we must [look for
the blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ]. * I shall no longer insist upon this particular, but only
propound it to your consideration, To what purpose are all those Commandments
in Scripture, of living holily, and according to the Commandments of God, of
adorning the Gospel of God, of walking as in the day, of walking in light, of
pure and undefiled religion, of being holy as God is holy, of being humble and
meek, as Christ is humble, of putting on the Lord Jesus, of living a spiritual
life,] but that it is the purpose of God, and the intention and design of
Christ dying for us, and the Covenant made with man, that we should expect
heaven upon no other terms in the world, but of a holy life, in the faith and
obedience of the Lord Jesus.

Now if a vicious person, when he comes to the latter end of his

Peleos and Priami transit, vel Nestoris aetas
and fuerat serum jant tibi desinere.
Eja age, rumpe moras, quo te spectabimus usque
Dum quid sis dubitas, jam potes esse nihil.
Mart. l. 2. ep. 64.

And now it will be a vain question to ask, whether or no God cannot save a
dying man that repents after a vicious life? For it is true, God can do it if
he please; and he can raise children to Abraham out of the stones, and he can
make ten thousand worlds if he sees good, and he can do what he list, and he
can save an ill living man though he never repent at all, so much as upon his
deathbed. All this he can do; but Gods power is no ingredient into this
question: burden is so light, his yoke is so easy, that it is a shameless
impudence to expect so great glories at a less rate then so little a service,
at a lower rate then a holy life. It cost the Eternal Son sow in the flesh,
and would reap in the spirit, live to the Devil, and die to God, and therefore
it is but just in God that their hopes should be desperate, and their craft be
folly, and their condition be, the unexpected, unfeared inheritance of an
eternal sorrow.

Lastly. Our last inquiry is into the time, the last or latest time of
beginning our repentance. Must a man repent a year, or two, 3.
or seven years, or ten, or twenty before his death? or what is the last period
after which all repentance will be untimely and ineffectuall? He has [sworn
Luke 1. 74.
this oath to us, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered from
fear of our enemies, might serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him [all the days of our life]. Now although God will
not (...), forget our infirmities, but pass by the weaknesses of an honest, a
watchful, and industrious person; yet the Covenant he makes with us is from
the day of our first voluntary profession, to our grave: and according as we

2. Scripture describing the duty of repenting sinners, names no [to day. To
day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts. 3. The duty of a
Christian is described in Scripture, to be such as requires length of time, and
a continued industry. [Let us run with patience the ^ace, that is set before
us.] and [Consider Hebr. 12. 1. Ver. 3.
him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be
wearied, and faint in your minds.] So great a preparation is not for the agony
and contention of an hour, or a day, or a week, but for the whole life of a
Christian, or for great parts of its abode. 4. There is a certain period and
time set for our repentance, and beyond that all our industry is ineffectuall.
There is a day of visitation, our own day, and there is a day of visitation,
that is Gods day. This appeared in the case of Jerusalem. [O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, if thou had known the time of thy visitation, at least in this thy
day.] Well! they neglected it, and then there was a time of Gods visitation
which was his day; called in Scripture, [the day of the Lord] and because they
had neglected their own day, they fell into inevitable ruin: No repentance
could have prevented their final ruin. And this which was true in a Nation,
is also clearly affirmed true in the case of single persons. [Look diligently
lest any fail of the grace of God, lest there be any person among you as Esau,
Heb. 12. 15.
who sold his birthright, and afterward when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place for his repentance though he
sought it carefully with tears.] Esau had time enough to repent his bargain as
long as he lived; he wept sorely for his folly, and carfulness sat heavy
upon his soul, and yet he was not heard, nor his repentance accepted; for the
time was past: And [take heed] says the Apostle, lest it come to pass to any
of you to be in the same case. Now if ever there be a time in which repentance
is too late, it must be the time of our deathbed, and the last time of our
life: And after a man is fallen into God will laugh at them when their calamity
comes: they shall call, and the Lord shall not hear them. * And this was the
case of the five foolish virgins when the arrest of death surprised them: they
discovered their want of oil, they were troubled at it, they begged oil, they
were refused, they did

Therefore concerning the time of beginning to repent, no man Mortem venientem
nemo hilaris excipit nisi qui se ad eam diu composuerat, said Seneca. He only
dies cheerfully who stood waiting for death in a ready dress Epist. 30.
of a long preceding preparation. He that repents to day, repents late enough
that he did not begin yesterday: But he that puts it off till to morrow is vain
and miserable.

-- hodie tam posthume vivere serum est
Ille sapit quisquis posthume vixit heri.
Martial. l. 2. ep 90.

sin of despair, but the misery of despair. A man has no ground to hope that
ever he shall be made an Angel, and yet, that not hoping, is not to be called,
despair: and no man can hope for heaven without repentance; And for such a man
to despair, is not the sin, but the misery. If such persons have a promise of
heaven, let them show it, and hope it, and enjoy it; if they have no promise,
they must thank themselves, for bringing themselves into a condition without
the Covenant, without a promise, hopeless

But will not trusting in the merits of Jesus Christ save such a man? For that
we must be tried by the word of God: In which there is no contract at all made
with a dying person that has lived in Name a Christian, in practice a Heathen:
and we shall dishonor the sufferings and redemption of our blessed Savior, if
we make them to be a Umbrello to shelter our impious and ungodly living.

But that no such person may after a wicked life repose himself in his deathbed
upon Christ's merits, observe but these two places of [Our Savior jesus Christ
who gave himself for us] what Titus. 2. 14.
to do? that we might live as we list? and hope to be saved by his merits? No
But [that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar people zealous of good works. These things speak and exhort,] says
Saint Paul. But more plainly yet, in S. Peter [Christ bare our sins in his own
body on the tree.] To what 1 Pet. 2 24.
end? [that we being dead unto sin should live unto righteousness.] since
therefore our living a holy life is the end of Christ's dying that sad and holy
death for us, he that trusts on it to evil purposes,

But why may not we be saved as well as the thief upon the cross? even because
our case is nothing alike. When Christ dies See! se of Jesus Disc. of
Repentance. part 2.
once more for us, we may look for such another instance; not till then. But
this thief did but then come to Christ; he knew him not before; and his case
was as if a Turk or heathen should be converted

And therefore let no Christian man who has covenanted with God to give him
the service of his life, think that God will be answered with the sighs and
prayers of a dying man; for all that great obligation which lies upon us cannot
be transacted in an instant, when we have loaded our souls with sin, and made
them empty of virtue; we cannot so soon grow up to a perfect man in Christ
Jesus. (...) you cannot have an apple, or a cherry, but you must stay its
proper periods, and let it blossom and knot, Arrian. Epictet l. 1. c. 15.
and grow and ripen, [and in due season we shall reap if we faint not] (says
the Apostle) far much less may we expect that the fruits of repentance, and
the issues and degrees of holiness shall

Suffer therefore not your selves to be deceived by false principles, and vain
confidences; for no man can in a moment root out the long contracted habits of
vice, nor upon his deathbed make use of all that variety of preventing,
accompanying and persevering grace, which God gave to man in mercy; because man
would need it all, because without it he could not be saved; nor upon his
deathbed can he exercise the duty of mortification; nor cure his drunkenness

Hunc volo laudari qui sine morte potest.
Mart. ep. l. 1.

Vivere quod propero pauper, nec inutilis annis
Da veniam, proper at vivere nemo satis.
Differat hoc, patrios optat qui vincere census
Atriaqueimmodicis arctat imaginibus.
Mart. l. 2. ep. 90.

Sermon. VII.
17. Jeremy 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked;
FOlly and subtlety divide the greatest part of mankind, and there is no
other difference but this, that some are crafty enough to deceive; Others
foolish enough to be cozened and abused: And yet the scales also turn, for they
that are the most crafty to cozen others, are the veriest Fools and most of
all abused themselves. They rob their neighbor of his money, and loose their
own innocence; they disturb his rest, and vex their

For a man is helpless and vain; of a condition so exposed to calamity, that a
raisin is able to kill him; any trooper out of the Egyptian army, a fly can do
it, when it goes on Gods errand; the most contemptible accident can destroy
him, the smallest chance affright him, every future contingency, when but
considered as possible, can amaze him; and he is encompassed with potent and
malicious enemies, subtle and implacable: what shall this poor helpless ye
shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes. Who then shall we trust
in? in our Friend? Poorman! he may help thee in one thing, and need thee in
ten; he may pull thee out of the ditch, and his foot may slip and fall into it
himself; he gives thee counsel to choose a wife, and himself is to seek how
prudently to choose his religion; he counsels thee to abstain from a duel, and
yet slayes his own soul with drinking, like a person void of all understanding
he is willing enough to preserve thy interest, and is very careless of his
own: for he does highly their friendships, and contracted also their hatred and
quarrels; Heart of a man a man's own heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? And who can choose but know it?

And there is no greater argument of the deceitfulness of our Hearts, then
this, that no man can know it all; it cosens us in the very number of its
cosenage: But yet we can reduce it all to two heads. We say concerning a false
man, trust him not for he will deceive you, and we say concerning a weak and
broken staff, lean not upon it, for that will also deceive you. The man
deceives because he is false, and the staff because it is weak, and the heart

1. The heart is deceitful in its strength; and when we have the unable to
continue in it, so backward to return to it; so without

And yet this weak heart is strong in passions, violent in desires,
unresistable in its appetites, impatient in its lust, furious in anger; here
are strengths enough, one would think: But so have I seen a man in a fever,
sick and distempered, unable to walk, less able to speak sense, or to do an
act of counsel; and yet when his fever Arriart.
It is weakness another way; And so are the strengths of a man's heart; they
are fetters and manacles; strong, but they are the cordage of imprisonment, so
strong, that the heart

This, if it be examined, will prove to be a deceit indeed, a pretense, rather
then true upon a just cause, that is, it is not a natural, but a moral and a
vicious weakness; and we may try it in one or two familiar instances. One of
the great strengths, shall I call it? or weaknesses of the heart is, that it is
strong, violent and passionate in Chastity and Temperance be so easy, that a
man may be brought to either of them with so ready and easy instruments; Let
us not suffer our hearts to deceive us by the weakness of its pretenses, and
the strength of its

But thus it is in every thing else; take an Heretic, a Rebel, a person that
has an ill cause to manage; what he wants in the strength of his reason, he
shall make it up with diligence; and a person that has Right on his side is
cold, indiligent, lazy, and unactive, trusting that the goodness of his Cause
will do it alone; But so, wrong prevails, while evil persons are zealous in a
Bad matter, and others are remiss in a Good; And the same person shall be very
industrious always when he has least reason so to

2. The Heart of man is deceitful in making judgment concerning its own Acts.
It does not know when it is pleased, or displeased, it is peevish and trifling,
it would and it would not, and it is in many Cases impossible to know whether a
man's heart desires such a thing or not. Saint Ambrose has an odd saying,
Facilius inveneris innocentem, quam qui poenitentiani digne egerit, It is
easier to find a man that has lived innocently, then one that repents; Alas!
he so hates it, that he dares not, if he be wise, we be not lead into
temptation? but because we hate the sin, and yet love it too well; we curse it,
and yet follow it; we are angry at our selves, and yet cannot be without it; we
know it undoes us, but we think it pleasant; And when we are to execute the
fierce anger of the Lord upon our sins, yet we are kinde-hearted, and spare the
Agag, the reigning sin, the

These are but ill signs. How then shall I know by some infallible token, that
I am a true Penitent? What and if I weep for my sins? will you not then give me
leave to conclude my heart right with God, and at enmity with sin? It may be
so. But there are some friends that weep at parting; and is not thy weeping a
forrow of affection? It is a sad thing to part with our long companion. Or it
may be thou weepest, because thou would have a sign to cozen thy self
withal; for some men are more desirous to have a sign, then the thing
signified; they would do something to show

Nay our heart is so deceitful in this matter of Repentance, that the Masters
of spiritual life are fain to invent suppletory Arts and stratagems to secure
the duty. And we are advised to mourn, because we do not mourn, to be
sorrowful because we are not sorrowful. Now if we be sorrowful in the first
stage, how happens it that we know it not? Is our heart so secret to our
selves? But if we be not sorrowful in the first period, how shall we be so, or
know it in the second period? For we may as well doubt concerning the sincerity
of the second or reflex act of sorrow, as of the first and direct action. And
therefore we may

Thus many persons think themselves in a good estate, and make no question of
their salvation, being confident only because they are confident; and they are
so, because they are bidden to be so; and yet they are not confident at all,
but extremely timorous and

3. The heart is deceitful in its own resolutions and purposes: for many times
men make their resolutions only in their understanding, not in their wills;
they resolve it sitting to be done, not decree that they will do it; And
instead of beginning to be reconciled to God, by the renewed and hearty
purposes of holy

But suppose our resolutions advanced further, and that our Will and Choices
also are determined; see how our hearts deceive us. 1. We resolve against those
sins that please us not, or where temptation is not present, and think by an
over-acted zeal against some sins to get an indulgence for some others. There
are some their Heart: for it is not love of the virtue; if it were, they would
love Virtue in all its Instances; for Chastity is as much a virtue as
Temperance, and God hates Lust as much as he hates Virtutem unam si vniseris
etsi amiui non potest virtus, sed si unam confessus sueris te non habere,
nullam te esse habiturum] an nescis? Cicer.
But this sin is against my health, or it may be it is against my lust, it
makes me impotent, and yet impatient, full of desire, and empty of strength. Or
else I do an act of Prayer, lest my conscience become unquiet, while it is not
satisfied or cozened with some intervals of Religion: I shall think my self a
damned wretch, if I do nothing for my soul; but if I do, I shall call the one
sin that remains nothing but my Infirmity; and therefore it is my excuse; and
my Prayer is not my Religion, but my Peace, and my Pretense, and my Fallacy.

2. We resolve against our sin, that is, we will not act it in those
circumstances as formerly; I will not be drunk in the streets; but I may sleep
till I be recovered, and then come forth sober; or if I be overtaken, it shall
be in Civil and Gentile company; Or it may be not so much; I will leave my
intemperance and my Lust too, but I will remember it with pleasure, I will
revolve the past action in my mind, and entertain my fancy with a moros
delectation in it, and by a fiction of imagination will represent it present,
and so be satisfied with a little effeminacy, or fantastic pleasure. Beloved,
suffer not your hearts so to cozen you, as if any man can be faithful in much,
that is faithless in a little. He certainly is very much in love with sin, and
parts with it very unwillingly, that keeps its Picture, and wears its Favor,
and delights in the fancy of it, even with the same desire, as a most
passionate widow parts with her dearest husband, even when she can no longer
enjoy him: But certainly her staring all day upon his picture, and weeping over
his Robe, and wringing her hands over his children, are no great signs that
she hated him: And just so do most men hate, and accordingly part with their
sins.

3. We resolve against it when the opportunity is slipped, and Epictetus tells
us of a Gentleman returning from banishment, in his journey toward home called
at his house, told a sad story of an Imprudent life, the greatest part of which
being now spent, he was resolved for the future to live Philosophically, and
entertain no business, to be candidate for no employment, not to go to the
Court, not to salute Caesar with ambitious attendancies, but to study, and
worship the gods, and die Epictetus did not. And he had reason. For (...).
Letters from Caesar met him at the doors, and invited him to Court, and he
forgot all his promises, which were warm upon his lips, and grew pompous,
secular, and ambitious, and gave the gods thanks for his preferment. Thus many
men leave the world, when their fortune has left them, and they are severe and
philosophical, and retired for ever, if for ever it be impossible to return:
But let a prosperous Sunshine warm and refresh their sadnesses, and make it but
possible to break

4. The heart is false, deceiving and deceived in its intensions and designs.
A man hears the precepts of God injoyning us to give Alms of all we possess;
he readily obeys with much cheerfulness and alacrity; And his charity, like a
fair spreading tree, looks beauteously: But there is a Canker at the heart; The
man blows a Trumpet to call the poor together, and hopes the neighborhood
will take notice of his Bounty. Nay he gives Alms privately, Instance, and to
seek Gods glory in a particular, which will also

Here a man would think were enough to abate our confidence and the spirit of
pride, and to make a man eternally to stand upon his guard, and to keep as
strict watch upon his own heart, as upon his greatest enemy from without.
Custodi, libera we de meipso, Deus. It was S. Augustines prayer, Lord keep me,
Lord deliver me from my self. If God will keep a man, that he be not Felo de
se, that he lay no violent hands upon himself, it is certain nothing else can
do him mischief, (...), as Agamemnon said, Neither Pray that ye enter not into
Temptation, said our Blessed Savior, and count it all joy when you enter into
diverse Temptations, said one of Christ's Disciples: The case is easy. When God
suffers us to be (...) he means it but as a trial of our faith, as the exercise
of our virtues, as the opportunity of reward, and in such cases we have reason
to count it all joy; since the Trial of our faith works Patience and Patience
experience, and experience causes hope, and hope makes not ashamed: But yet
for all this, pray against temptations: for when we get them into our hands, we
use them as blind men do their clubs, neither distinguish person nor part; as
soon they strike the face of their friends as the back of the Enemy; our
hearts betray us

No lite, inquit, hospites adire ad me, ilico istic;
No contagio mea umbrave obsit,

There is so much falsenesse and iniquity in man's heart, that it defiles all
the members; it makes the eyes lustful, and the tongue slanderous; it fills the
head with mischief, and the feet with blood, and the hands with injury, and the
present condition of man with folly, and makes his future state apt to inherit
eternal misery. But this is but the beginning of those throws, and damnable
impieties, which proceed out of the heart of man and defile the whole
constitution. I have yet told but the weaknesses of the heart; I shall the
defile it to the ground, and make it desperately, wicked, that is, wicked
beyond all expression.

The deceitfulness of the Heart. Part II.
2 (...): It is the beginning of wisdom to know a man's own weaknesses, and
failings in things of greatest necessity; Epict. Arrian.
and we have here so many objects to furnish out this knowledge, that we find
it with the longest and latest before it be obtained. A man does not begin to
know him self till he be old, and then he is well stricken in death: A man's
heart at first being like a plain table, unspotted indeed, but then there is
nothing legible in it. As soon as ever we ripen toward the imperfect uses of
our reason, we write upon this table such crooked characters, such imperfect

1. Our hearts are blind, wilfully blind. I need not instance in 1.
the ignorance and involuntary nescience of men, though if we speak of the
necessary parts of religion, no man is ignorant of them without his own fault:
such ignorance is always a direct sin, or the direct punishment of a sin. A
sin is either in its bosom, or in its retinue: But meekness, and never
consider concerning Longsuffering? and if you talk to them of growth in Grace,
or the spirit of obsignation, or the melancholy lectures of the Cross and
imitation of, and conformity to Christ's sufferings; or adherences to God, or
rejoicing in him, or not quenching the spirit; you are too deep learned for
them. And yet these are duties set down plainly for our practice, necessary to
be acted in order to our Salvation. We brag of light, and reformation, and
fullness of the spirit: in the mean time we understand not many parts of our
duty. We enquire into something that may make us talk, or be talked of, or
that we may trouble a Church, or disturb the peace of minds; but in things
that concern Holy living and that wisdom bring the 13. Chapter to the Romans to
prove the lawfulness of

But that I may be more particular; the heart of man uses devices that it may
be ignorant.

1. We are impatient of honest and severe reproof; and order the circumstances
of our persons and addresses that we shall never come to the true knowledge of
our condition. Who will endure to hear his curate tell him, that he is
Covetous, or that he is proud? (...). It is Calumny and Reviling if he speak it
to his head, and relates to his person: and yet if he speak only in general,
every man neglects what is not recommended to his particular. But yet if our
Physician tell us you look well, Sir; but a Fever lurks in your spirits, (...)
drink Julips and abstain from flesh; no man thinks it shame or calumny to be
told so: but when we

2. In order to this, we heap up teachers of our own, and they guide us, not
whither, but which way they please: for we are curious to go our own way, and
careless of our Hospital or Inn at night. A fair way, and a merry company,
and a pleasant easy guide will entice us into the Enemies quarters; and such
guides we cannot want. Improbitati occasio nunquam defuit. If we have a mind
to be wicked, we shall want no prompters; and false teachers at first creeping
in unawares have now so filled the pavement of Cicero l. 7. ad Atticum,
undertakes to bargain with them that kept the Sybils books, that for a sum of
money they shall expound to him what he please; and to be sure, ut quidvis
potius, quam Regem proferrent. They shall declare against the government Ad
opinionem imperitorum fictas esse Religiones. Men shall have what Religion De
Divinat. l. 2
they please, and God shall be entitled to all the quarrels of covetous and
Ambitious persons, (...), as Demosthenes wittily complained of the Oracle, An
answer shall be drawn out of Scripture to countenance the design, and God made
to Rebel against

3. But the heart of man has yet another stratagem to secure its iniquity by
the means of ignorance; and that is, Incogitancy or Inconsideration. For there
is wrought upon the spirits of many men great impression by education, by a
modest and temperate nature, by humane Laws, and the customs and severities of
sober persons, and the fears of religion, and the awfulnesse of a reverend man,
his eloquence was stronger then their anger and design: But suddenly super
totam materiam, at all, and does the thing, Indifferency, then a dullness,
then a Lethargy, then a direct Hating the ways of God; and it commonly ends
in a wretchlessenesse of spirit to be manifested on our deathbed; when the man
shall pass hence not like the shadow, but like the dog, that departs,
without when we will not hear our king speak and plead, not to save himself,
but us, to speak for our peace, and innocence and Salvation, to prevent our
ruin, and our intolerable calamity: certainly we are much in love with the
wages of death, when we cannot endure to hear God call us back; and stop our
ears against the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely.

Nay further yet; we suffer the Arguments of Religion to have so little
impression upon our spirits, that they operate but like Theocritus tells of a
Fisherman that dreamed he had taken (...), a Fish of gold, upon which being
over-joyed he made a vow, that he would never fish more: But when he waked, he
soon declared his vow to be null, because he found his golden Fish was escaped
away through the holes of his eyes, when he first opened them. Just so we do in
the purposes of Religion; sometimes in a good mood we seem to see Heaven
opened, and all the streets of Heavenly Jerusalem paved with gold and precious
stones,

The effect of all is this, That we are ignorant of the things of God; we make
Religion to be the work of a few hours in the whole year; we are without fancy
or affection to the severities of holy Living; we reduce Religion to the
Believing of a few Articles, and doing nothing that is considerable; we Pray
seldom, and then but very coldly and indifferently; we Communicate the night,
over Rivers and Rocks, and Precipices without Sun or

2. But the Heart is Hard too. Not only Folly, but Mischief 2.
also is bound up in the Heart of man. If God strives to soften it with sorrow
and sad Accidents, it is like an Ox, it grows callow, Pharaohs. When God makes
the clouds to gather round about us, we wrap our heads in the clouds, and like
the malcontents in Galba's time, Tristitiam simulamus Contumaciae propiores.
We seem sad and troubled, but it is doggednesse and murmur. Or else if our
fears be pregnant, and the heart yielding, it sinks low into pusillanimity and
superstition; and our hearts are so childish, so timorous, or so impatient in a
sadness, that God is weary of making us, and we are glad of it. And yet when
the Sun shines upon us, our hearts are hardened with that too, and God (...) to
be at a loss, as if he knew not

(...) Aristoph: (...): Act. 5. Scen. 4.

(...);
No fortune can save that City to whom neither Peace nor War can do
advantage. And what is there left for God to mollify our

1. The Heart of man is strangely Proud; If men commend us we think we have
reason to distinguish our selves from others, since the voice of discerning men
has already made the separation. If men do not commend us, we think they are
stupid, and understand us not, or envious and hold their tongues in spite. If
we Vox populi, vox Dei. Fame is the voice of God. If we be praised but by few,
then Satis unus, satis nullus. We cry, these are wise, and one wise man is
worth a whole herd of the People. But if we be praised by none at all, we
resolve to be even with all the world, and speak well of no body, and think in
effigy. And Aesops picture was sold two talents, when himself was made a slave
at the price of two Philippicks. And because Humility makes a man to be
honored; Therefore we imitate all its garbs and postures, its civilities and
silence, its modesties and condescensions. And to prove that we are extremely
proud in the midst of all this pagentry, we should be extremely angry at any
man, that should say, we are proud; And that is a sure sign we are so. And in
the midst of all our Arts to seem Humble, we use devices to bring our selves
into talk; we thrust our

The Heart of man is deeply in love with wickedness, and with nothing else:
Against, not only the Laws of God, but against his own Reason, its own
Interest, and its own Securities. transient; that it leaves bitterness upon
the tongue, before it is

For when the heart of man is bound up by the grace of God, and tied in golden
bands, and watched by Angels, tended by those Nurse-keepers of the soul; it is
not easy for a man to wander; Vice first is pleasing, then it grows easy,
then delightful, then frequent, then habitual, then confirmed, then the man
is impenitent, then he is obstinate, then he resolves never to Repent, and then
he is Damned. And by that time he is come half way in this progress, he
confutes the Philosophy of the old Moralists;

Although I can say nothing greater; yet I had many more things to say, if the
time would have permitted me to represent the Falsenesse and Baseness of the
Heart. 1. We are false our selves, Chrysippus did the oracular Lies of Apollo
into a Table; I fear they would seem Remediless, and beyond the cure of
watchfulness and Religion. Indeed they are Great and Many: But the Grace of
God is Greater; and if Iniquity abounds, then does Grace superabound, and that's
our Comfort and our Medicine, which we must thus use.

1. Let us watch our hearts at every turn.

2. Deny it all its Desires, that do not directly or by consequence end in
godliness: At no hand be indulgent to its fondnesses, and peevish appetites.

3. Let us suspect it as an Enemy.

4. Trust not to it in any thing.

5. But beg the grace of God with perpetual and importunate prayer, that he
would be pleased to bring good out of these evils, and that he would throw the
salutary wood of the Cross, the merits

And in order to the mannaging these advises, and acting the purposes of this
prayer; let us strictly follow a rule; and choose a Prudent and faithful guide,
who may attend our motions, and watch our counsels, and direct our steps, and
prepare the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight, apt and imitable. For
without great watchfulness, and earnest devotion, and a prudent Guide, we
shall find that true in a spiritual sense, which Plutarch affirmed of a man's
body in the natural; that of dead Bulls arise Bees; from the old serpent the
devil, for whom is provided the everlasting burning.

Sermon. IX.
1 Peter. 4. 17. For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
God: and if it first begin at us what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel of God?

18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear?


SO long as the world lived by sense, and discourses of natural reason, as they
were abated with humane infirmities, and not at all heightened by the spirit and
divine revelations, So long men took their accounts of good and bad by their
being prosperous

-- Fatis accede deisque
and col^ felices, miseros fuge sidera terra
ut distant and flamma maeri, sic utile recto.
But because God sent wise men into the world and they were treated rudely by
the world, and exercised with evil accidents, and this seemed so great a
discouragement to virtue, that even these wise men were more troubled to
reconcile virtue, and misery, then to reconcile their affections to the
suffering; God was pleased to enlighten their reason with a little beam of
faith, or else heightened lives by faith and not by sense, in the same degree
they might be able to live in virtue even while she lived in trouble, and not
reject so great a beauty because she goes in mourning, and has a black cloud
of cypress the contradiction of sinners and the immission of the sharpnesses
of providence and divine Economy.

First Adam was placed in a Garden of health and pleasure, from natural sorrows
which he and all his posterity till the flood run through: but in all that
period they had the whole wealth of the earth before them, they need not fight
for empires or places for their cattle to grase in; they lived long and felt no
want, no slavery, no tyranny, no war: and the evils that happened were single,
personal, and natural, and no violences were then done, but they were like
those things which the law calls rare contingencies; for free and rich and
long, and they exercised no virtues but natural, and knew no felicity but
natural: and so long their prosperity was, just as was their virtue, because it
was a natural instrument toward all that which they knew of happiness. *But
this public easiness and quiet, the world turned into sin; and unless God
did compel men to do themselves good they would undo themselves: and then God
broke in upon them with a flood and destroyed that generation, that he might
begin the government of the world upon a new stock, and bind

Then God made new laws and gave to Princes the power of the sword, and men
might be punshed to death in certain cases, and man's life was shortened, and
slavery was brought into the world and the state of servants; and then war
began, and evils multiplied upon the face of the earth; in which it is
naturally certain, that they that are most violent and injurious prevailed upon
the weaker and more innocent; and every tyranny that began from Nimrod to this
day, and every usurper was a peculiar argument to show that God began Tyrannies
and usurpations, to be in the world, and to be prosperous, and the rights of
men to be snatched away from the owners, that the world might be established in
potent and settled governments and the sufferers be taught all the passive
virtues of the soul. For so God brings good out of evil, turning Tyranny into
the benefits of Government, and violence into virtue, and sufferings into
rewards: and this was the second change of the world: personal miseries were
brought in upon Adam and his posterity, as a punishment of sin in the first
period: and in the second, public evils were tyrants and usurpers, and God
suffered them as the first elements of virtue, men being just newly put to
school to infant sufferings. But all this was not much.

Christ's line was not yet drawn forth: it began not to appear in what family
the King of sufferings should descend till Abraham's time, and therefore till
then there were no greater sufferings then what I have now reckoned. But when
Abraham's family was chosen from among the many nations, and began to belong to
God, by a special right, and he was designed to be the Father of the Messiah,
then God found out a new way to try him, even with a sound affliction, Isaac;
but this was accepted and being intended by Abraham was not intended by God:
for this was a type of Christ, and therefore was also but a type of sufferings,
excepting the sufferings of the old periods and the sufferings of nature and
accident, we see no change made, for a long while health, and peace, and
victory, and plenty, and riches: and so long as they did not prevaricate the
law of their God, so long they were prosperous: but God kept a remnant of
Cananites in the land like a rod held over them to vex or to chastise them into
obedience, in which while they persevered, nothing could hurt them; and that
saying of David needs no other sense, but the letter of its own expression, I
have been young and now am old, and yet saw I never the righteous for saken nor
his seed begging their bread: The godly generally were prosperous, and a good
cause seldom I saiah, Jeremy, and Zachary were martyrs of the law; but these
were single deaths; Shadrac, Meshec, and Abednego were thrown into a burning
furnace, and Daniel into a den of lions, and Susanna was accused for adultery;
but these were but little arrests Antiochus raised up a sharp persecution in
the time of the Maccabees, in which many passed through the red sea of blood
into the bosom of Abraham; and then Christ came: and that was the third period
in which the changed method of Gods providence was perfected: for Christ was to
do his great work by sufferings, and by sufferings was to enter into
blessedness; and by his passion he was made prince of the Catholickchurch, and
as our Head was, so must the members be: God made the same covenant with us,
that he did with his most holy the servant must not be above his master, it is
well if he be as his Master: if the world persecuted him, they will also
persecute us; and from the days of John the Baptist, the kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: not the violent doers, but
the sufferers of violence for though the old law was established in the
promises of temporal prosperity, yet the gospel is founded in temporal
adversity. It is directly a covenant of sufferings and sorrows; for now the
time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: that's the sense and
design of the text; and I intend prosperous: for though that proposition had
many degrees of truth in the beginning of the law, yet the case is now altered;
God has established its contradictory: and now every good man must look for
persecution, and every good cause must expect to thrive by the sufferings and
patience of holy persons; and as men do well, and

1. Then the state of the Gospel is a state of sufferings, not of temporal
prosperities, this was foretold by the prophets; a fountain shall go out of the
house of the Lord, and irrigabit torrentem spinarum; Joel. 3.
(so it is in the vulgar latin) and it shall water the torrent of thorns; that
is, the state or time of the gospel. which like a torrent shall carry all the
world before it, and like a torrent shall be fullest in ill weather; and by its
banks shall grow nothing but thorns upon the ground of my people shall thorns
and briers Isaiah. 23. 3.
come up, how much more in all the houses of the city of rejoicing; which
prophecy is the same in the style of the prophets, that my text is in the style
of the Apostles: the house of God shall be watered with the dew of heaven, and
there shall spring up briers in it: judgment must begin there: but how much
more in the houses of the city of rejoicing how much more among them that are
at ease in Sion; that serve dwell in the city of rejoicing; they are like Dives
whose portion was in this life, who went in fine linen and fared deliciously
every day; they indeed trample upon their briers and thorns and suffer them not
to grow in their houses; but the roots are in the ground, and they are reserved
for fuel of wrath in the day of everlasting burning. Thus you see it was
prophesied, now see how it was performed: Christ was the captain of our
sufferings and he began.

He entered into the world with all the circumstances of poverty; he had a star
to illustrate his birth but a stable for his bed chamber, and a manger for his
cradle: the angels sang hymns when he was born, but he was cold and cried,
uneasy and unprovided; he lived long in the trade of a carpenter, he by whom
God made the world had in his first years the business of a mean and an
ignoble trade; he did good where ever he went, and almost where ever he went
was abused; he deserved heaven for his obedience, but found a cross in his way
thither; and if ever any man had reason to expect fair usages from God, and to
be dandled in lap of ease, softnes the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world: For he was massacred in Abel, (says Saint Paulinus) he was tossed upon
the waves of the Sea, in the person of Noah; It was he that went out of his
Country, when Abraham was called from Charran, and wandered from his native
soil: He was offered up in Isaac, persecuted in Jacob, betrayed in Joseph,
blinded in Sampson, affronted in Moses, sawed in Esaias, cast into the dungeon
with Jeremy. For all these were types of Christ suffering; and then his passion
continued even after his resurrection; for it is he that suffers in all his
members; it is he that endures the contradiction of all sinners; it is he that
is the Lord of life, and is crucified again, and put to open shame in all the
sufferings of his servants, and sins of rebels, and defiances of Apostates, and
renegados, and violence of Tyrants, and injustice of usurpers, and the
persecutions of his Church. It is he that is stoned in Saint Stephen, flayed in
the person of Saint Bartholomew, he was roasted upon Saint Laurence his
Gridiron, exposed to lions in Saint Ignatius, burned in Saint Polycarpe, frozen
in the lake where stood forty Martyrs of Cappadocia; Unigenitus enim Dei ad
peragendum mortis suae sacramentum consummavit omne genus humanarum passionum
said Saint Hilary. The Sacrament of Christ's death is not to be accomplished,
but by suffering all the sorrows of humanity.

All that Christ came for, was, or was mingled with sufferings: For all those
little joys which God sent, either to recreate his person, or to illustrate
his office, were abated, or attended with afflictions; God being more careful
to establish in him the Covenant of sufferings, then to refresh his sorrows:
Presently after the Angels had finished their Halleluiahs, he was forced to fly
to save his life; and the air became full of shrikes of the desolate Jerusalem.
For this Jesus was like the rain-bowe which God set in the clouds as a
sacrament to confirm a promise, and establish a grace, he was half made of the
glories of the light, and half of the moisture of a cloud; in his best days he
was but half triumph, and half sorrow; he was sent to tell of his Fathers
mercies, and that God intended to spare us; but appeared not but in the
Doctrines were such as expressly and by consequent enjoyne and suppose
sufferings, and a state of affliction; His very promises were sufferings, his
beatitudes were sufferings, his rewards, and his arguments to invite men to
follow him, were only taken from sufferings in this life, and the reward of
sufferings hereafter.

For if we summon up the Commandments of Christ, we shall humility,
mortification, self-denial, repentance, renouncing the world, mourning, taking
up the cross, dying for him, patience and poverty, to stand in the chiefest
rank of Christian precepts, and in the direct order to heaven: He that will be
my Disciple must deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. We must
follow him that was crowned with thorns and sorrows, him that was drenchd in
Cedron, nailed upon the Cross, that deserved all good, and suffered all evil:
That is the sum of Christian Religion, as it distinguishes from all the
Religions of the world. To which we may add the express Precept recorded by
Saint James, [Be afflicted and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned
into mourning, James 4. 10.
and your joy into weeping.] You see the Commandments: Will you also see the
Promises? These they are. In the world ye shall have tribulation; in me ye
shall have peace: and through many tribulations, ye shall enter into heaven:
and he that loses father and mother, wives, and children, houses, and lands
for my Names sake and the Gospel, shall receive a hundred fold in this life,
with persecution: that's part of his reward. [And he chastises every son that
he receives; and if you be exempt from sufferings, ye are bastards and not
sons: These are some of Christ's promises: will blessings, that he gives his
Church: Blessed are the poor: Blessed are the hungry and thirsty. Blessed are
they that Matthew. 5.
mourn. Blessed are the humble. Blessed are the persecuted: Of the eight
Beatitudes, five of them have temporal misery and meannesse, or an afflicted
condition for their subject. Will you at last see some of the reward, which
Christ has propounded to his servants, to invite them to follow him. When I am
lifted up, I will draw all men after me: when Christ is lifted up, as Moses
lift up the serpent in the wilderness, that is lifted upon the Cross, then he
will draw us after him. To you it is given for Christ (says Saint Phil. 1. 28.
Paul) when he went to sweeten and to flatter the Philippians. Well, what is
given to them? Some great favors surely, true. It is not only given that you
believe in Christ, (though that be a great matter) but also that you suffer for
him, that's the highest of your honor. And therefore says Saint James, My
brethren, count it all James 5. 10.
joy when ye enter into diverse temptations. And Saint Peter, Communicating with
the sufferings of Christ rejoice: And Saint James again, We count them blessed
that have suffered: And Saint Paul when 1 Pet. 4. 13.
he gives his blessing to the Thessalonians, he uses this form of prayer: Our
Lord direct our hearts in the charity of God, and in the patience 2 Thessalonians. 1.
and sufferings of Christ. So that if we will serve the King of sufferings,
whose crown was of thorns, whose seepter was a reed of scorn, whose imperial
robe was a scarlet of mockery, whose throne was the Cross; We must serve him
in sufferings, in poverty of spirit, in humility, and mortification, and for
our reward we Heb. 2. 10.
Atque hoc est esse Christianum.

Since this was done in the green-tree, what might we expect should be done in
the dry: Let us in the next place consider how God has treated his Saints and
servants, and the descending ages of the Gospel; That if the best of Gods
servants were followers of Jesus in this covenant of sufferings, we may not
think it strange 1 Pet. 4. 12.
concerning the fiery trial, as if some new thing had happened to us. For as
the Gospel was founded in sufferings, we shall also see it grow in
persecutions: and as Christ's blood did cement the corner

If I begin with the Apostles, who were to persuade the world to become
Christian, and to use proper Arguments of invitation, we shall sinde that they
never offered an Argument of temporal prosperity: they never promised Empires
and thrones on earth, nor riches, nor temporal power, and it would have been
soon confuted, if they who were whipped and imprisoned, banished and Port Latin
in Rome, Tertul. S. Hieron.
and escaped death by miracle, though no miracle was wrought to make him escape
the torture: And besides this, he lived long in banishment, and that was worse
then Saint Peter's chains: Sanctus Petrus in vinculis, and Johannes ante portam
latinam, were both days of Martyrdom and Church Festivals: and after a long
and full of days and sufferings: And when Saint Paul was taken into the
Apostolate, his Commissions were signed in these words; I will show unto him
how great things he must suffer for my Name: and his whole life was a
continual suffering: Quotidie morior was Acts 9. 15.
his Motto, I die daily; and his lesson that he daily learned was to know
Christ Jesus and him crucified; and all his joy was to rejoice in the Cross of
Christ; and the changes of his life were nothing but the changes, of his
sufferings, and the variety of his labors. For though Christ has finished his
own sufferings for expiation of the world, yet there are (...), portions that
are behind of the sufferings of Christ which must be filled up by his body the
Church; and happy are they that put in the greatest symbol: for in the same
measure you are partakers of the sufferings of Christ, in the same shall ye be
also of the consolation. And therefore concerning S. Paul, as it was also
concerning Christ, there is nothing or but very little in

And now began to work the greatest glory of the divine Providence: here was
the case of Christianity at stake. The world was rich and prosperous, learned
and full of wise men, the Gospel was preached with poverty and persecution, in
simplicity of discourse, and in demonstration of the Spirit: God was on one
side, and the Devil on the other; they each of them dressed up their city;
Babylon upon Earth, Jerusalem from above; the Devils city They bound Kings in
chains, and the Nobles with links of iron, and the inheritance of the Earth was
theirs: the Romans were Lords over the greatest parts of the world; and God
permitted to the Devil the Firmament and increase, the wars and the success of
that people, giving to him an entire power of disposing the great changes of
the world, so as might best increase their greatness and power: and he
therefore did it, because all the power of the Roman greatness was a
professed enemy to Christianity: and on the Jerusalem, and the kingdom of the
Gospel: and he chose to build it of hewn stone, cut and broken: the Apostles
he chose for Preachers, and they had no learning; women and mean people were
the first Disciples, and they had no power: the Devil was to lose his kingdom,
and he wanted no malice: and therefore he stirred up, and as well as he could,
he made active all the power of Rome, and all the learning of the Greeks, and
all the malice of Barbarous people, and all the prejudice and the obstinacy of
the Jews, against this doctrine and institution; which preached and promised,
and brought persecution along with scandalum crucis, on the other patientia
sanctorum, and what was the event? They that had overcome the world, could not
strangle Christianity. But so have I seen the Sun with a little ray of distant
light challenge all the power of darkness, and without violence and noise
climbing up the hill, has world into Christian, and persecution into victory.

For Christ who began, and lived and died in sorrows, perceived his own
sufferings to succeed so well, and that for suffering death, he was crowned
with immortality, resolved to take all his Disciples and servants to the
fellowship of the same suffering, that they might have a participation of his
glory; knowing, God had opened no gate of heaven but the narrow gate, to which
the Cross was the key: and since Christ now being our High Priest in heaven,
intercedes for us by representing his passion, and the dolours of the Cross,
that even in glory he might still preserve the mercies of his past sufferings,
for which the Father did so delight in him: he also designs to present us to
God, dressed in the same robe, and treated in the same manner, and honored
with the marks of the Lord Jesus: He has predestined us to be conformable to
the image of his Son: And if under a head crowned with thorns, we bring to God
members circled with roses, and softness, and delicacy, triumphant members in
the militant Church, God will reject us; he will not know us who are so unlike
our elder brother: For we are members of the Lamb, not of the Lion, and of
Christ's suffering part, not of the triumphant part: and for three hundred years
together, the Church lived upon blood, and was nourished with blood; the blood
of her own children: Thirty three baptized into the death of Christ, their very
profession and institution is to live like him; and when he requires it, to die
for him; that is the very formality, the life and essence of Christianity. This
I say lasted for three hundred years, that the prayers and the backs, and the
necks of Christians fought against the rods and axes of the persecutours, and
prevailed the army of Martyrs was vast and numerous, and the number of
sufferers blunted the hangmans sword: For Christ first triumphed over the
princes and powers of the world, before he would admit them to serve him; he
first felt their malice before he would make use of their defense, to show that
it was not his necessity that required it, but his grace Kings and Queens to be
nurses of the Church.

And now the Church was at ease, and she that sucked the blood of the Martyrs
so long, began now to suck the milk of Queens: Indeed it was a great mercy in
appearance and was so intended, but it proved not so. But then the Holy Ghost
in pursuance of the design of Christ, who meant by sufferings to perfect his
Church, as himself was by the same instrument, was pleased now that persecution
did cease, to inspire the Church with the spirit of mortification and
austerity; and then they made Colleges of sufferers, persons who to secure
their inheritance in the world the burden of the Lord, by self denial, by
fastings and sackcloth, and pernoctations in prayer, they chose then to
exercise the active part of the religion, mingling it as much as they could
with the suffering.

And indeed it is so glorious a thing to be like Christ; to be dressed like the
prince of the Catholic church, who was so a man of sufferings, put on the
armor of righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left, that is, in the
sufferings of persecution, or the labors of mortification, in patience under
the rod of God, or by election of our own; by toleration, or self denial, by
actual martyrdom, or by aptness or disposition toward it, by dying for Christ
or suffering for him; by being willing to part with all when he calls for it,
and by parting with what we can, for the relief of his poor members. For know
this, there is no state in the Church, so serene, no days so prosperous, enmity
with the world, that you may preserve friendship with God, to deny the
importunity and troublesome kindness of a drinking friend, to own truth in
despite of danger or scorn, to despise shame; to refuse worldly pleasure when
they tempt your soul, beyond duty or safety; to take pains in the cause of
religion, the labor of love and the crossing of your anger, peevishness and
morosity; these are the daily sufferings of a Christian; and if we perform
them well, will have the same reward and an equal smart and greater labor then
the plain suffering the hangmans sword. This I have discoursed, to represent
unto you, that you cannot be exempted from the similitude of Christ's
sufferings; that God will shut no age nor no man from his portion of the
cross; that we cannot fail of the result of this predestination, nor without
our own fault be excluded from the covenant of sufferings: judgment must begin
at Gods house, and enters first upon the sons and heirs of the kingdom;

1. Let no Christian man make any judgment concerning his condition, or his
cause by the external event of things: for although in the law of Moses, God
made with his people a covenant of temporal prosperity, and his Saints did
bind the kings of the Amorites, and the Philistines in chains, and their
nobles with links of iron, that was the honor which all his Saints had; yet in
Christ Jesus he made a covenant of sufferings: most of the graces of
Christianity are suffering graces, and God has predestined us to sufferings:
and we are baptized into suffering, and our very communions are symbols of our
duty, by being the sacrament of Christ's death and passion; and Christ foretold
to us tribulation, and promised only that he would be with us in tribulation,
that he would give us his spirit to assist us at tribunals, and his grace to
despise the world, and to contemn riches, and boldness to confess every
article of the Christian faith, in the face of armies and armed tyrants; all
things should work together for the best to his servants, that is, he would out
of the eater bring meat, and out of the strong issue sweetness, and crowns and
scepters should spring from crosses, and that the cross it self should stand
upon the globes and scepters of Princes; but he never promised to his servants,
that they should pursue Kings and destroy armies, that they should reign over
the nations, and promote the cause of Jesus Christ by breaking his
commandments: The shield of faith and the sword of the spirit, the armor of
righteousness, and the weapons of spiritual warfare, these are they by which
christianity swelled from a Christ's kingdom was not of this world, and that
their Master should die a sad and shameful death; though that way he was to
receive his crown, and enter into glory: and after Christ's time, when his
Disciples had taken up the cross and were marching the Kings high way of
sorrows, King of sufferings: But now adays we find a generation of men, who
have changed the covenant of sufferings into victories, and triumphs, riches
and prosperous chances, and reckon their Christianity by their good fortunes,
possess their souls by patience.

God was fain to multiply miracles to make Christ capable of being a man of
sorrows; and shall we think he will work miracles to make us delicate? He
promised us a glorious portion hereafter, to which if all the sufferings of the
world were put together, they are not worthy to be compared, and shall we with
Dives choose our portion of good things in this life? If Christ suffered so
many things only that he might give us glory, shall it be strange that we
shall suffer who are to receive this glory? It is in vain to think we shall
obtain glories at an easier rate, then to drink of the brook in the way in
which Christ was drenched. When the Devil appeared to Saint Martin in a bright
splendid shape and said he was Christ, he answered, Christus non nisi in cruce
apparet suis in hac vita. And when Saint Ignatius was newly tied in a chain to
be led to his martyrdom, he cried out, nunc incipio esse Christianus: And it
was observed omnes viri fortes quos Gentiles praedicabant, in exemplum,
aerumnis suis inclytifloruerunt. The Gentiles in their whole religion never
propounded any man imitable, unless the man were poor or persecuted: Brutus
stood for his countries liberty, but lost his army and his life; Socrates was
put to death for speaking a religious truth: Cato chose to be on the right
side, but happened to fall upon the oppressed and the injured; he died together
with his party.

Victrix causa Deis placuit sed vict a Catoni; And if God thus dealt with the
best of Heathens to whom he had made no clear revelation faithful unto the
death. Faith is useless, if now in the midst of so great pretended lights we
If we be planted into the likeness of his death, we shall be also of his
resurrection,

For Christ considers nothing, but souls, he values not their estate or bodies,
supplying our want by his providence, and being secured that our bodies may be
killed, but cannot perish so long as we preserve our duty and our consciences.
sit anima mea cum Christianis, I pray God my soul may be among the Christians;
and yet the Turks have prevailed upon a great part of the Christian world, and
have made them slaves, If the LORD be with us why have these evils apprehended
us? for if to be afflicted be a sign oppresses the widow, and murders the
innocent, and puts the fatherless to death, and follows providence by doing
all the evils that he can, that is, all that God suffers him, he I say is the
only Saint and servant of God: and upon the same ground the wolf and the fox
may boast when they scatter and devour a flock of lambs and harmless sheep.

Sermon. X. Part II.
Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let us talk to thee of
thy Jerem. 12. 1, 2.
judgments: wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all
they happy that deal very treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea they have
taken root: they grow, yea they bring forth fruit Concerning which, in general
the Prophet Malachy gives this account And now we call the proud Mala 3. 14.
happy, and they that work wickedness are set up, yea they that tempt God are
even delivered. They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the
Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before time for
them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name, and they shall be mine
(says the Lord of Hosts) in that day when I bind up my jewels, and I will
spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him: Then shall ye return
and discern between the righteous, and the wicked, between him that serves God,
and him that serves him not. In this interval which is they that sow in tears
shall have no cause to complain, when God gathers all the mourners into his
kingdom, they shall reap with joy.

For innocence and joy were appointed to dwell together for ever. And joy went
not first but when innocence went away, sorrow and sickness dispossessed joy
of its habitation; and now this world Adam planted in the hedges of Paradise;
and that sorrow which was brought in by sin,

God afflicts the godly that he might manifest many of his attributes, and his
servants exercise many of their virtues.

Nec fortuna probat causas sequiturque merentes,
sed vaga percunctos nullo discrimine fertur:
scilicet est aliud quod nos cogatque rogatque
Majus, and in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
For, without sufferings of Saints God should lose the glories of 1. Bringing
good out of evil: 2. Of being with us in tribulation, 3. Of sustaining our
infirmities, 4. Of triumphing over the malice of his enemies: 5. Without the
suffering of Saints, where were the trial of our faith? 7. Or the exercise of
long suffering? 8. Where were the opportunities, to give God the greatest love?
which cannot be but by dying and suffering for him? 9. How should that which
the world calls folly prove the greatest wisdom: 10. and God be glorified by
events contrary to the probability and expectation of their causes: By the
suffering of Saints, Christian religion is proved to be most excellent whilst
the iniquity and cruelty of the adversaries proves the illecebra sectae as
Tertullians phrase is, it invites men to consider the secret excellencies of
that religion, for which and in which men are so willing to die: for that
religion is ascended far above all Angels, and is Heir of a greater glory.
13. Do this, and live, was the covenant of the Law; but in the Gospel it is,
suffer this, and live: He that forsakes house and land, friends and life, for
my sake is my disciple. 14. By the sufferings of Saints God chastises their
follies and levities, and suffers not their errors to climb up into heresies,
nor their infirmities into crimes.

Alterat on makes a fool leave his folly. If David numbers the people of Judea,
God punishes him sharply and loudly: But if Augustus Caesar numbers all the
world he is let alone and prospers.

Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic diadema. And it giving physic we
always call that just, and fitting that is useful and profitable: no man
complains of his Physicians Iniquity, to the wicked; how much more is he to the
godly? And if sparing For if in this life only we had hope, then we were of
all men the most miserable. It is Sain Paul's argument to prove a beatificall
resurrection: And we therefore may learn to estimate, the state of the
afflicted godly to be a mercy great, in proportion to the greatness of that
reward, which these afflictions come to secure and to prove.

Nunc and damna juvant, sunt ipsa pericula tanti, Stantia non poterant tecta
probare Deos. It is a great matter, an infinite blessing to escape the pains of
hell; O death, how bitter Ecclus. 40. 1.
art thou to a man that is at ease and rest in his possessions: but he that is
uneasy in his body, and unquiet in his possessions, vexed in his person,
discomposed in his designs, who finds no pleasure, no rest here, will be glad
to fix his heart, where only he shall have what he can desire, and what can
make him happy. As long Matthew. 5. 12, etc.
like Christ, and then to be afflicted like him. 20. Without this, the miracles
of patience, which God has given to fortify the spirits of the saints would
signify nothing. Nemo enim tolerare tanta velit sine causa, nec potuit sine
Deo, as no man would bear evils without a cause, so no man could bear so much
without the supporting hand of God; and we need not the Holy Ghost to so great
purposes, if our lot were not sorrow and persecution; and therefore without
this condition of suffering, the Spirit of God should lose that glorious
attribute of The Holy Ghost the Comforter. 21. Is there any thing more yet? Yes
They that have suffered or forsaken any lands for Christ, shall sit upon
thrones and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, so said Christ to his Disciples.
Nay the saints shall judge Angels, (says saint Paul) well therefore might
Saint Paul say, I rejoice exceedingly in tribulation. It must be some great
thing that must make an afflicted man to rejoice exceedingly; and so it was.
For since patience is necessary that we receive the promise, and tribulation
does work this: For a short time it works the consummation of our hope, even
an exceeding weight of glory. We have no reason to think it strange concerning
the fiery trial, as if it were a strange thing. It can be no hurt; the Church
is like Moses bush, when it is all on fire, it is not at all consumed, but made
full of miracle, full of splendor, full of God: and unless we can find love
is the soul of Christianity, and suffering is the soul of love. To be innocent,
and to be persecuted, are the body and soul of Christianity. I John your
brother, and partaker of tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus,
said Saint John: those were the titles and ornaments of his profession; that
is, I John your fellow Christian; that's the plain song of the former descant.
He therefore that is troubled, when he is afflicted in his outward man, that
his inward man may grow strong, like the birds into glory; That man knows
nothing of nature, or providence, Christianity, or the rewards of virtue, or
the nature of its constitution, or the infirmities of man, or the mercies of
God, or the arts and prudence of his loving kindness, or the rewards of
heaven, or the glorifications of Christ's exalted humanity, or the precepts of
the Gospel, who is offended at the sufferings of Gods dearest servants, or
declines the honor and the mercy of sufferings in the cause of righteousness;
For the securing of a virtue, for the imitation of Christ, and for the love of
God, or the glories of immortality. It cannot, it ought not, it never will be
otherwise, the world may as well cease to be measured by time, as good men to
suffer affliction. Let as many as are perfect, be thus minded, and if any man
be otherwise minded, God also Phil. 3. 15.
will reveal this unto you, this, of the covenant of sufferings, concerning
which the old Prophets, and holy men of the Temple had many thoughts of heart;
but in the full sufferings of the Gospel, there has been a full revelation of
the excellency of the sufferings. I have now given you an account of some of
those reasons, why God has so disposed it, that at this time, that is, under
the period of the Gospel, judgment must begin at the house of God, and they
are either, (...), or imitation of Christ's

But now besides all the premises, we have another account to make concerning
the prosperity of the wicked: For if judgment first begin at us? what shall the
end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? that is the question of the
Apostle, and is the great instrument of comfort to persons ill treated in the
actions of the world. The first ages of the Church lived upon promises, and
prophecies; and because some of them are already fulfilled for ever, and the
others are of a continual and a successive nature, and are promises and
experience: and although the servants of God have suffered many calamities,
from the tyranny and prevalency of evil men their enemies, yet still it is
preserved as one of the fundamental truths of Christianity; That all the fair
fortunes of the wicked are not enough to make them happy, nor the persecutions
of the godly, able to make a good man miserable; nor yet their sadnesses
arguments of Gods displeasure against them. For when a godly man is afflicted
and dies, it is his work and his business; and if the wicked prevail, that is,
the things of God relate to the world to come: and for our own particulars we
are to be guided by rule, and by the end of all, not by events intermedial,
which are varied by a thousand irregular causes. For if all the evil men in the
world were unprosperous (as most certainly they are) and if all good persons
were temporally blessed (as most certainly they are not) yet this would not
move us to become virtuous: If an angel should come from heaven, or one arise
from the dead and preach repentance,

For why should God work a sign to make us to believe that we ought to do
justice; if we already believe, he has commanded it, no man can need a miracle
for the confirmation of that which he already believes to be the command of
God: And when God has expressly bidden us to obey every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, the King as supreme, and his deputies as sent by him: It is a
strange infidelity to think, that a rebellion against the ordinance of the
authority, and the person, and the law, and the religion: The sin cannot grow
to its height if it be crushed at the beginning; unless it prosper in its
progress, a man cannot easily fill up the measure of his iniquity: but then
that the sin swells to its fullness by prosperity, and grows too big to be
suppressed without a miracle, it is so far from excusing, or lessening the sin,
that nothing does so nurse the sin as it: It is not virtue, because it is
prosperous, but if it had not been prosperous, the sin could never be so great.


Non impune licet, nisi dum facis.
A little crime is sure to smart, but when the sinner is grown rich, and
prosperous, and powerful, he gets impunity.

Jusque datum sceleri -- But that's not innocence, and if prosperity were the
voice of God to approve an action, then no man were vicious, but he that is
punished, and nothing were rebellion, but that which cannot be God has long
suffered it, and with patience in vain expecting the sin that thrives not the
man: and that is the mistake upon this whole question: for the sin cannot
thrive, unless the man goes on without apparent punishment, and restraint. And
all that the man gets by it is, that by a continual course of sin, he is
prepared for an intolerable ruin. The Spirit of God bids us look upon the end
of these men; not the way they walk or the instrument of that pompous death.
When Epaminondas was asked, which of the three was happiest, himself, Chalrias,
Augustine withal his prayers and vows could not obtain peace in his own days,
not so much as a reprieve for the persecution, and then had observed S.
Augustine die with grief that very night, would have perceived his calamity
more visible then the reward of his piety and holy religion. When Lewis
surnamed Pius went his voyage to an afflicted truth, and a prevailing sin: For
I will never more call that sinner prosperous, who after he has been permitted
to finish his business, shall die, and perish miserably:

And what is the prosperity of the wicked? to dwell in fine houses, or to
command armies, or to be able to oppress their brethren,

Bias said well to a vicious person, Non metuo ne non sis daturus paenas, sed
metuo ne id non sim visurus, He was sure the man should be punished, he was not
sure he should live to see it: and though the messenians that were betrayed and
slain by Aristocrates in the slay them not O Lord lest my people forget it
(says David) if punishment were instantly and totally inflicted, it would be
but a sudden and single document: but a slow

We know that when in Henry the eighth, or Edward the sixth the holy Jesus;
and it was so long, that when it did happen, many men attributed it to their
killing S. James their Bishop and seemed to forget the greater crime, but non
eventu rerum sed fide verborum stamus: we are to stand to the truth of Gods
word not to the event of things. Because God has given us a rule but has left
the judgment to himself; and we die so quickly, (and God measures althings by
his standard of eternity, and 1000 years Ducunt Job. 21.
in bonis dies suos and in momento descendunt ad infernum, that's they spend
their days in plenty, and in a moment descend into hell: in the mean time
they drink and forget their sorrow; but they are condemned they have drunk
their hemlock, but the poison does not work yet: the bait is in their mouths,
and they are sportive; but the hook has struck their nostrils, and they shall
never escape the ruin; And let no man call the man fortunate, because his
execution is deferd for a few days, when the very deferring shall increase,
and ascertain the condemnation.

But if we should look under the skirt of the prosperous and prevailing Tyrant,
we should find even in the days of his joys, such allayes and abatements of
his pleasure, as may serve to represent presently miserable, besides his final
infelicities. For I have seen a young and healthful person warm and ruddy under
a poor and a thin garment, when at the same time, an old rich person has been
cold, and paralytick, under a load of sables and the skins of foxes; it is the
body that makes the clothes warm, not the clothes the body: and the spirit of a
man makes felicity and content, not any spoils of a rich fortune wrapped about a
sickly and an uneasy soul. Apollodorus was a Traitor, and a Tyrant, and the
world wondered to see a bad man have so good a fortune; But knew not that he
nourished Scorpions in his breast, and that his liver and his heart come to
judgment; and such a man is not to be feared, nor at all to be envied: and in
the Aurobibitur venenum, No man goes about to poison a poor man's pitcher, nor
lays plots to forage his little garden made for the hospital of two be
hives, and the feasting of a few Pythagorean herb eaters.

(...)
(...)
They that admire the happiness of a prosperous, prevailing Tyrant,

A Christian so long as he preserves his integrity to God and to religion is
bold in all accidents, he dares die, and he dares be poor; but if the
persecutor dies, he is undone. Riches are beholding to our fancies for their
value; and yet the more we value the riches, the less good they are, and by an
overvaluing affection, they become account them happy that suffer; And
therefore that the prevailing oppressor, Tyrant, or persecutor is infinitely
miserable, only let God choose by what instruments he will govern the world,
by what instances himself would be served, a sinner by a sinner And if David
made use of villains and profligate persons to frame an army; and Timoleon
destroyed the Carthaginians by the help of soldiers, who themselves were
sacrilegious; and Physicians use the poison to expel poisons; and all
commonwealths Assyrians to punish the Israelites, and the Egyptians to destroy
the Assyrians, and the Ethiopians to scourge the Egyptians, and at last his own
hand shall separate the good from the bad in the day of separation, in the day
when he makes up his Jewels.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). Soph. Elect.
God has many ends of providence to serve by the hands of violent and vicious
men, by them he not only checks the beginning errors, and approaching sins of
his predestinate, but by them he changes governments and alters kingdoms, and
is terrible among the sons of men: for since it is one of his glories, to
convert evil into good, and that good into his own glory, and by little and
little to open and to turn the leaves and various folds of providence; it
becomes us only to dwell in duty, and to be silent in our thoughts, and wary
in our discourses of God; and let him choose the time when he will prune his
vine, and when he will burn his thorns: how long he will smite his servants,
and when he will destroy his enemies. In the days of the primitive
persecutions, what prayers, how many sighings, how deep groans, how many
bottles of tears did God gather into his repository, all praying for ease and
deliverances, Halcyon days and fine sunshine, for nursing fathers and nursing
mothers, for public assemblies, and open and solemn sacraments: And it was 3
hundred years before God would hear their prayers: and all that while the
persecuted people were in a cloud, but they were safe and knew it not: and God
kept for them the best wine until the last; they ventured for a crown and
fought valiantly, they were faithful to the death, and they received a crown of
life, and they are honored by God, by angels, and by men; whereas in all the
prosperous ages of the Church, we hear no stories of such multitudes of Saints
no record of them, no honor to their memorial, no accident persecuted, and the
persecutors shall be shut out amongst dogs and unbelievers.

the yoke of Christ, from the burden of the Lord, upon his deathbed will have
cause to remember, that by that time all his persecutions would have been past,
and that then there would remain nothing for him, but rest and crowns and
scepters. When Lysimachus, impatient and overcome with thirst gave up his
kingdom to the Getae, and being a captive and having drank a lusty draught of
wine, and his thirst was now gone, he fetched a deep sigh and said, Miserable
man that I am, who for so little pleasure, the pleasure of one draught lost so
great a Kingdom such will be their case, who being impatient of suffering,
illiberalis and ingratae voluptatis causa as Plutarch calls it, for illiberal
and ungrateful pleasure, in which when a man has entered, he loses the rights
and privileges and honors of a good man, and gets nothing that is profitable
and useful to holy purposes, or necessary

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
I end with the advice of Saint Paul, In nothing be terrified of your
adversaries, which to them is an evident token of perdition, but to you Phil.
1. 28.
of salvation and that of God.

Sermon. XI. Part III.
grapes from their thorns, and figs from their thistles, crowns from the
cross, glory from dishonor. As long as they belong to God, it is necessary
that they suffer persecution, or sorrow, no rules can teach them to avoid that;
but the evil of the suffering, and the danger, must be declined, and we must
use such spiritual arts as are apt to turn them into health and medicine: For
it were a hard thing, first to be scourged, and then to be crucified; to suffer
here, and to perish

1. They that suffer any thing for Christ, and are ready to die for him, let
them do nothing against him. For certainly they think too highly of martyrdom,
who believe it able to excuse all the evils of a wicked life. A man may give
his body to be burned, for God is love: And when those who fought in the days
of the Maccabees, for the defense of true Religion, and were killed in those
holy wars, yet being dead, were found having about their necks, (...), or
pendants, consecrated to idols of the Jamnenses, it much allayed the hope,
which by their dying in so good a cause was entertained concerning their
beatificall resurrection. He that overcomes his fear of death does well;
baptism of blood will not wash him clean. Many things may make a man willing
to die in a good cause: Public reputation, hope of reward, gallantry of
spirit, a confident resolution, and a masculine courage; or a man may be vexed
into a stubborn and unrelenting suffering: But nothing can make a man live
well, but the grace and the love of God. But those persons are infinitely
condemned by their last act, who profess their religion to be worth dying for,
and yet are so unworthy, as not to live according to its institution. It were a
rare felicity, if every good cause could be labor to zeal, through all the
regions of duty, to the perfections of sufferings; and therefore it is a sad
thing to observe, how some empty souls will please themselves with being of
such a religion, or such a cause, and though they dishonor their religion, or
weigh down the cause with the prejudice of sin, believe all is swallowed up by
one honorable name, or the appellative of one virtue: If God had forbid a
loyal man, or of a good belief, had been enough; but he that forbad rebellion,
forbids also swearing, and covetousness, rapine, and oppression, lying, and
cruelty: And it is a sad thing to see a man not only to spend his time, and
his wealth and his money, and his friends upon his lust, but to spend his
sufferings too, to let the canker-worm of a deadly sin, devour his Martyrdom:
He therefore that suffers in a good cause, let him be sure to walk worthy of
that honor* to which God has called him; Let him first deny his sins, and
then deny himself, and then he may take up his cross and follow Christ;

2. He that suffers in a cause of God, must be indifferent what the instance
be, so that he may serve God. I say, he must be indifferent in the cause, so it
be a cause of God, and indifferent in the

3. Whoever suffer in a cause of God, from the hands of cruel who endured the
cross, and despised the shame; but let us not take upon us the office of God,
who will judge the Nations righteously, and when he has delivered up our
bodies will rescue our souls from the hands of unrighteous judges. I remember
in the story that Plutarch tells concerning the soul of Qui bonus cum sit,
tyrannide vitam finiet: An excellent Prince, and a good man should be put to
death by a rebel and usurping power; and yet that Prophetic soul could not
tell that those rebels should within three years die miserable and accursed
deaths; and in that great prophecy recorded by Saint Paul, That in the last
days perilous 2 Timothy 3. 1.
times should come, and men should be traitors, and selvish, having forms of
godliness, and creeping into houses,] yet could But they shall proceed no
further, for their 2 Timothy 3. 9.
folly shall be manifest to all men: that is, at long running they shall shame
themselves, and for the elects sake those days of evil shall be shortened. But
you and I may be dead first: And therefore only remember, that they that with
a credulous heart, and a loose tongue are too decretory, and enunciative of
speedy judgments to their enemies, turn their religion into revenge, and
therefore do believe it will be so, because they vehemently desire it

4. Do not trouble your self by thinking how much you are afflicted, but
consider how much you make of it: For reflex acts upon the suffering it self,
can lead to nothing but to pride, or to impatience to temptation, or a postacy.
He that measures the grains and scruples of his persecution, will soon sit down
and call for ease, or for a reward; will think the time long, or his burden
great; will be apt to complain of his condition, or set a greater the crown
that is set before thee; and then consider, if the loss of thy estate has
taught thee to despise the world? whether thy poor fortune has made thee poor
in spirit? and if thy uneasy prison sets thy soul at liberty, and knocks off
the fetters of a worse captivity. For then the rod of suffering turns into
crowns and scepters, when every suffering is a precept, and every change of
condition produces a holy resolution, and the state of sorrows makes the
resolution actual, and habitual, permanent, and persevering. For as the fiat
voluntas tua is our daily prayer, and that is of a passive signification; thy
will be done

5. Let our suffering be entertained by a direct election, not by collateral
ayds and fantastic assistances. It is a good refreshment to a weak spirit to
suffer in good company: and so Phocion encouraged a timorous Greek condemned to
die; and he bid him be confident because that he was to die with Phocion; and
when 40 Martyrs choice, his patience, and confidence in the causes of virtue
and religion, like beams, and warmth, and influence, from the body of the Sun.
Some there are that fall under the burden, when they patience and resignation,
but endeavor to lighten the burden in imagination; and when these temporary
supporters fail, the building that relies upon them, rushes into coldness,
recidivation, and luke warmness: and among all instances, that of the main
question of the Text is of greatest power to abuse imprudent and less severe
persons.

Nullos esse Deos, inane coelum
Affirmat Selius, probatque
Quod se videt dum negat haec beatum.
When men choose a good cause, upon confidence that an ill one cannot thrive,
that is not for the love of virtue, or duty to God, but for profit and secular
interests, they are easily lost when they see the wickedness of the enemy to
swell up by impunity and success to a great evil: for they have not learned to
distinguish a great growing sin, from a thriving and prosperous fortune.

Ulla si juris tibi pejerati
Poena Barine nocuisset unquant:
Dente si nigro fieret vel unto turpior ungui Crederem.
They that believe and choose because of idle fears, and unreasonable fancies,
or by mistaking the accounts of a man for the measures of God, or dare not
commit treason, for fear of being blasted, may come to be tempted when they see
a sinner thrive, and are scandalized all the way, if they begin with choice,
and be confirmed with knowledge, and rely upon love, and the aids of God, and
the expectations of heaven, and the present sense of duty, and then the action
will be as glorious in the event, as it is prudent in the enterprise, and
religious in the prosecution.

6. Lastly, when God has brought thee into Christ's school, and entered thee
into a state of sufferings, remember the advantages of that state: consider how
unsavory the things of the world appear to thee, when thou are under the
arrest of death; remember with what comforts the Spirit of God assists thy
spirit; set down in thy heart all those entercourses, which happen between God
and thy own soul; the sweetnesses of religion, the vanity of sins appearances,
thy newly entertained resolutions, thy longings after heaven, and all the
things of God, and if God finishes thy persecution with death proceed in them;
if he restores thee to the light It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
for thereby I have learned thy commandments: and Paphnutius did not do his soul
more advantage when he lost his right eye, and suffered his left knee to be cut
for Christianity, and the cause of God, then that in the days of Constantine
and the Churches peace, he lived, (not in a confessor of the faith only, but
of the charity of a Christian: we may every one live to have need of these
rules; and I do not at all think it safe to pray against it, but to be armed
for it: and to whatsoever degree of sufferings God shall call us, we see what
advantages God intends for us, and what advantages we our selves may make of
it. I now proceed to make use of all the former discourse, by removing it a
little further even into its utmost spiritual sense; which the Apostle does in
the last words of the text [If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
wicked and the sinner appear.]

These words are taken out of the proverbs 11. chap. 31
according to the translation of the 70. If the righteous scarcely is safe:
where the word (...) implies that he is safe; but by intermedial difficulties:
and (...)] he is safe in the midst of his persecutions they may disturb his
rest, and discompose his fancy, but they are like the fiery chariot to Elias;
he is encircled with fire and rare circumstances, and strange usages, but is
carried up to Heaven in a robe of flames: and so was Noah safe when the flood
came; and was the great type and instance too of the verification of this
proposition, he was judges, of sears and sadder apprehensions are but like the
loud

2. But (...) may also signify raro: If the righteous is seldom safe; which
implies that sometimes he is, even in a temporal sense: God sometimes sends
Halcy on days to his Church, and when he promised Kings and Queens to be their
nurses, he intended it for a blessing; and yet this blessing does of tenimes so
ill succeed, that it is the greater blessing of the two, not to give us that
blessing too freely: but (...) this is scarcly done, and yet sometimes it is,
and God sometimes refreshes languishing piety with such arguments, as comply
with our infirmities, and though it be a shame to us to need such allectives
and infant gauds, such which the heathen world and the first rudiments of the
Israelites did need, God who pitties us and will be wanting in nothing to us,
as he corroborates our willing

(...)
(...)
(...).
Sometimes God destroys their armies, or their strong holds, Sometimes breaks
their ships, but this happens either for the weakness of some of his servants,
and their too great aptness to be offended at a prosperous iniquity, or when
he will not suffer the evil to grow too great, or for some end of his
providence; and yet if this should be very often, or last long, God knows the
danger, and we should feel the inconvenience. Of all the types of Christ only
Joshuah and Solomon were noted to be generally prosperous,

And yet the vvorst of evils that happen to the godly is better, If the
righteous scarcely be saved where shall the ungodly appear? if it be hard with
good men, with the evil it shall be far worse. But see the difference. The
godly man is timorous and yet safe, tossed by the seas, and yet safe at anchor,
impaired by evil accidents and righted by divine comforts: made sad with a
black cloud, and refreshed with a more gentle influence, abused by the world,
and yet an heir of heaven, hated by men, and beloved by God, loses one house
and gets an hundred, he quits a convenient lodging room and purchases a
glorious country, is forsaken by his friends, but he sighs deeply; he heapeth
up riches and cannot tell who shall gather them; he commands an army and is him
self a slave to his passions; he sleeps because he needs it,

(...)
(...). Hesiod

their defense against this man; he is unsafe in his rest, amazed in

(...). Hefiod.
He leaves a generation of blacker children behind him; so the Poet describes
the cursednesse of their posterity, and their memory

Andire est operae pretium procedere recte
Qui maechis non vultis, ut omni part laborent:
vt que illis multo corrupta dolor voluptas
Atque haec rara cadat dura inter saepe pericla.
And let but a sober answer tell me if any thing in the world be more distant
either from goodness or happiness, then to scatter the plague of an accursed
soul, as upon our dearest children; to make an universal curse; to be the
fountain of a mischief, to be such a person, whom our children and nephews
shall hate, and despise and If the righteous scarcely be saved, or escape Gods
angry stroke, the wicked must needs be infinitely more miserable;

(...)
(...)
(...)
Neither I, nor my son (said the oldest of the Greek poets) would be virtuous,
if to be a just person were all one as to be miserable. No, not only in the
end of affairs, and at sun set, but all the day long the Godly man is happy,
and the ungodly and the sinner is very miserable.


Qui vicit, facesque pudet rapuisse Catoni
Nimque hoc dedecus est populi, morumque ruina
Non homo pulsus erat: sed in uno victa potestas
R^manumque decus.
And there needs no other argument to be added, but this one great testimony;
that though the Godly are afflicted, and persecuted, yet even they are blessed
and the persecutors are the most unsafe. They are essentially happy whom
affliction cannot

Quis cur am neget esse te Deorunt
propter quem fuit innocens ruina?
But turns into their advantages, and that's the state of the Godly: and they
are most intolerably accursed, who have no portions in the blessings of
eternity, and yet cannot have comfort in the present purchases of their sin, to
whom even their sunshine brings a drought, and their fairest is their foulest
weather; and that's the portion of The godly are not made unhappy by their
sorrows: and the wicked are such whom prosperity it self cannot make fortunate.

4 And yet after all this it is but (...) not (...) he scapes but hardly here:
it will be well enough with him hereafter Isaac dug three wells: the first
was called contention; for he drank the waters of strife and dug the well
with his sword: the second well was not altogether so hard a purchase, he got
it with some trouble, but that being over, he had some room and his fortune
swelled, and he called his well [enlargement] but his third he called
[abundance] sowes in tears, he first drinks of the bottle of his own tears,
sorrow and trouble, labor and disquiet, strivings and temptations: But if they
pass through a torrent, and that virtue becomes easy and habitual, they find
their hearts enlarged and made spritely by the visitations of God and
refreshment of his spirit; and then their hearts are enlarged, they know how to
gather the down and softnesses from the sharpest thistles.

(...),

(...).
At first we cannot serve God, but by passions and doing violence to all our
wilder inclinations, and suffering the violence of tyrants and unjust persons.

-- (...)
(...),
The second days of virtue are pleasant and easy in the midst of all the
appendant labors; but when the Christians last pit is diged; when he is
descended to his grave, and finished his state of sorrows and suffering, then
God opens the river of abundance, the rivers of life and never ceasing
felicities. And this is that which God promised to his people. I hid my face
from thee for a moment, but with Esaias. 54. 8.
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee says the Lord thy redeemer;
so much as moments are exceeded by eternity and the sighing in the cross of
the Lord Jesus. Every chain is a raie of light, and every prison is a palace,
and every loss is the purchase of a kingdom, sunes ceciderunt mihi in
praeclaris, the cords of my tent, [my ropes and the sorrow of my pilgrimage]
fell to me in a good ground, and I have a goodly heritage; and when persecution
Where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? Even there where Gods face shall
never shine, where there shall be O my God let my soul never come into their
counsels, nor lie down in their sorrows.

Sermon. XII.
2. Romans. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance?


FRom the beginning of Time till now, all effluxes which have come from God,
have been nothing but emanations of his goodness, clothed in variety of
circumstances. He made man as excellent in himself, and profitable to us. For
as the Sun sends forth a benign and gentle influence on the seed of Plants,
that it may invite forth the active and plastic power from its recesse and
secrecy, that by rising into the tallnesse and dimensions of a tree, it may
still receive a greater and more refreshing influence from that do well, but to
all men that they may do well: he is good to make us good; he does us benefits
to make us happy: and if we by despising such gracious rays of light and heat,
stop their progress and interrupt their design, the loss is not Gods but
ours; we shall be the miserable and accursed people: This is the sense and
paraphrase of my Text. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, etc. Thou
do not know, that is, thou considerest not that it is for further benefit
that God does thee this; the goodness of God is not a design to serve his own
ends upon thee, but thine upon him: The goodness of God leads thee to
repentance.

Here then is Gods method of curing mankind, (...). First goodness, or
inviting us to him by sugared words, by the placid arguments of temporal
favor, and the propositions of excellent promises. Secondly (...) at the same
time, although God is provoked every day, yet he does (...), he tolerates our
stubbornness, he forbears to punish, and when he does begin laxamentum, and
inducias too. Thirdly (...)] still, a long putting off, and deferring his
final destroying anger* by using all means to force us to repentance; and
this especially, by the way of judgments; these being the last reserves of the
Divine mercy, and how ever we esteem it, is the greatest instance of the divine
long sufferance that is in the world. After these instruments, we may consider
the end, the strand upon which these land us, the purpose of this variety, of
these laborious and admirable arts, with which God so studies and contrives the
happiness and the treasure of the Divine goodness, the great and admirable
efflux of the eternal beneficence; the (...), the riches of his goodness,
which whosoever despises, despises himself and the great interest of his own
felicity; he shall die in his impenitence, and perish in his folly.

1. The first great instrument, that God chooses to bring us to him is (...),
profit, or benefit, and this must needs be first, for those instruments whereby
we have a being are so great mercies* paul^ minores angelis, a little lower
then the angels: and yet from the meanest of them God can perfect his own
praise; The deeps and the snows, the hail and the rain, the birds of the air,
and the fishes of the sea, they can and do glorify God, and give him praise in
their capacity; and yet he gave them no speech, no reason, no immortal spirit,
or capacity of eternal blessedness; but he has distinguished us from them by
the absolute issues of his predestination, and has given us a lasting and
eternal spirit, excellent organs Chorus with the Angels of light, to sing
Alleluiah to the great Father of men and Angels.

But was it not a huge chain of mercies that we were not strangled in secreto
terrae, told our bones, and kept the order of nature, and the miracles of
creation; and we lived upon that which in the next minute after we were born
would strangle us if it were not removed: but then God took care of us, and his
hands of providence clothed us and fed us. But why do I reckon the mercies of
production which in every minute of our being are alike and continued, and are
miracles in all senses but that they are common and usual? I only desire you
to remember, that God made all the works of his hands to serve him; and indeed
this mercy of to lead us to repentance, but was a design of innocence: he
intended we should serve him as the Sun and the Moon do; as fire and water do:
never to prevaricate the laws he fixed to us, that we might have needed no
repentance. But since we did degenerate, and being by God made better and more
noble creatures then all the inhabitants of the air, the water and the earth
besides, we made our selves baser and more ignoble then any: For no dog,
crocodile, or swine was ever Gods enemy, as we made our selves: yet then from
thence forward, God began his work of leading us to repentance, by the riches
of his goodness. repentance was taught to mankind, and an excellent law given
for distinction of good and evil; and this is a blessing which though possibly
we do not often put into our eucharisticall Letanies to give God thanks for,
yet if we sadly consider, what had become of us, if we had been born under the
dominion of a Turkish Lord, or in America where no Christians do inhabit,
where they worship the Devil, where witches are their priests, their prophets,
their physicians, laws, and examples, and promises, and threatenings do many
things he ought to be ashamed of, and needs to repent of, we can understand the
riches of the Divine goodness best, by considering that by second thoughts to
have our infirmities excused, and our his goodness did not lead them to
repentance: but to us it was that he made this largess of his to be
sorrowful, and to leave all our sins, and to make amends by a holy life. For
that we might be admitted and suffered to do so, God was fain to pour forth all
the riches of [He sits at the right hand of God making intercession for us.]
And that we may know what he prays for, he has sent us Ambassadors to
declare the purpose of all his design, for Saint Paul says, [We are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though he did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God.] The purpose of our Embassy and

And therefore here consider, if it be not infinite impiety to despise the
riches of such a goodness, which at so great a charge, with such infinite
labor, and deep mysterious arts, invites us to repentance; that is, to such a
thing which could not be granted to us unless Christ should die to purchase
it; such a glorious favor, that is

After the enumeration of these glories, these prodigies of mercies and loving
kindnesses, of Christ's dying for us, and interceding for us and merely that we
may repent, and be saved; I shall less need to instance those other
particularities whereby God continues, as by love and obedience, the twinne
daughters of holy repentance; but the poorest person amongst us, besides the
blessing and graces already reckoned has enough about him, and the accidents
of every day to shame him into repentance. Does not God send his angels to keep
thee in all thy ways? are not they ministering spirits sent forth to wait upon
thee as thy guard? art not thou kept from drowning, from fracture of bones,
from madness, from deformities, by the riches of the divine the riches of the
divine goodness which preserves us from such evils which would be full of
horror and amazement if they should happen to us.

meat and drink, health and sleep, proper seasons of the year, in the senses
and an useful understanding, what a great unworthiness it is to be unthankful
to so good a God so benign a Father, so gracious prosperity makes a man love
God, supposing men to have so much humanity left in them, as to love him from
whom they have received so many favors. And Hippocrates said, that although
poor men use to murmur against God, yet rich men will be offering sacrifice to
their Diety whose beneficiaries they are. Now since the riches of the divine
goodness are so poured out upon the meanest of us all, if we shall refuse to
repent, which is a condition so reasonable, that God requiers

(...)
(...)
(...);
If here we have good things and a continual shower of blessings to soften our
stony hearts, and we shall remain obdurat against those sermons of mercy which
God makes us every day, there will come a time when this shall be upbraided to
us that we had not (...) a thankful mind, but made God to sow his seed upon
the sand or upon the stones, without increase or restitution. It was a sad
alarm which God sent to David by Nathan to upbraid I anointed thee king over
Israel, I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, I gave thee thy masters house
and wives into thy bosom, and the house of Israel and Judah, and if this had
been too little, I would have given thee such and such things, wherefore have
thou despised the name of the Lord? but how infinitely more can God say to all
of us then all this came to? he has anointed us kings and priests in the royal
pristhood of Christianity; he has given us his holy spirit to be our guide,
his angels to be our protectors, his creatures for our food and raiment; he
has delivered us from the hands of Satan, has conquered death for us, has
taken Am I a dry tree to the house of Israel? that is, do I bring them no
fruit, do they serve me for naught, and he expects not our duty till first we
feel his go odnesse, we are now infinitely inexcusable to throw away so great
riches, to despise such a goodness.

However that we may see the greatness of this treasure, of goodness God
seldom leaves us thus: for he sees [be it spoken to the shame of our natures,
and the dishonor of our manners] he felicitate corrumpimur, we become worse
for Gods mercy: and think it will be always holiday, and are like the Crystal
of Arabia hardened notby cold, but made crusty and stubborn by the warmth of the
divine fire, by its refreshments and mercies; therefore to demonstrate that God
is good indeed, he con tinues his mercise still to us; but in another instance:
he is merciful to us in punishing us, that by such instruments we may be led to
repentance which will scare us from sin; he delivers us up to the paedagogy of
the divine judgments, and there begins the second

2. (...) for bearance, it is called in the text, which signifies laxamentum or
inducias, that is, when the decrees of the divine judgments temporal are gone
out, either wholly to suspend the execution of them, which is induciae, or a
reprieve; or else when God has laxamentum, an ease of remission of his
judgment, in both these, although in judgment God remembers mercy, yet we are
under discipline, we are brought into the penitential chamber, at least we are
showed the rod of God: and if like Moses rod it turns us into serpents, and
that we repent not but grow more Devils, yet, then it turns into a rod again
and finishes up the smiting or the first designed affliction.

But I consider it first in general, the riches of the divine goodness is
manifest in beginning this new method of curing us, by severity and by a rod.
And that you may not wonder that I expound this forbearance to be an act of
mercy punishing, I observe that besides that the word supposes the method
changed, and it is a mercy about judgments, and their manner of execution; it
is also in the nature of the thing, in the conjunction of circumstances and the
designs of God, a mercy when he threatens us or strike us into repentance.

We think that the way of blessings and prosperous accidents is Benefactor and
Patron God; and we are apt to dream that God will make his Saints reign here
as kings in a millenary kingdom, and give them the riches and fortunes of this
world, that they may rule over men and sing psalms to God for ever. But I
remember what Xenophanes says of God.

(...). God is like to men neither in shape nor in counsel, he knows that his
mercies confirm some, and encourage, more but they convert but few; alone they
lead men to dissolution of manners and forgetfulness of God, rather then
repentance: not but that mercies are competent and apt instruments of grace, if
we would; but because we are more dispersed in our spirits and by a prosperous
accident are melted into joy and garishnesse, and drawn off from the sobriety
of recollection. Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked. Many

Indeirae faciles --
Namque ut opes nimias mundo fortuna subacto
Intulit, et rebus mores cessere secundis
-- Cultus gest are decoros
vix nuribus rapuere mares: totoque accersitur orb
Quo gens quaeque perit.
Lucan.

And let me observe to you that though there are in the new to rich men our
blessed Savior was pleased to make none at all, but to leave them involved in
general comprehensions and to have a title to the special promises, only by
becoming poor in spirit, and in preparation of mind, though not in fortune
and possession. How ever; it is hard for God to persuade us to this, till we
are taught it by a sad experience, that those prosperities which we think will
make us serve God

Repentance is a duty that best complies with affliction, it is a symbolical
estate, of the same complexion and constitution; half the work of repentance is
done by a sad accident, our spirits are made sad, our gayeties mortified, our
wildness corrected, the water springs are ready to run over: but if God should
grant our desires, and give to most men prosperity, with a design to lead them
to repentance, all his pomp and all his employment, and all his affections and
passions, and all his circumstances are so many degrees of distance

And because God knows this well and loves us better then we do our selves,
therefore he sends upon us the 1. scrolls of vengeance, the hand writing upon
the wall to denounce judgment against us: for God is so highly resolved to
bring us to repentance some way or other, goodness he cannot shame us into it,
he will try if by his judgments he can scare us into it; not that he strikes
always as soon as he has sent his warrants out, (...) said Philo. Thus God
sent Jonas and denounced judgments against Niniveh; but with the (...), with
the forbearance of forty days for the time of their escape if they would
repent. When Noah the great preacher of righteousness, denounced the flood to
all the world, it was with the (...) with the forbearance of 120. years, and
when the great extermination of the Jewish nation, and their total

Indeed many times this forbearance makes men impudent, it was I will harden
the heart of pharaoh, that is, I will forbear him, smite him, and then take the
blow off, Sic enim Deus induravit Pharaonis cor, said Saint Basil. For as water
taken off from fire will sooner congeale and become icy, then if it had not
been attenuated by the heat: so is the heart of some men, when smitten by God,
it seems soft and pliable, but taken off from the fire of affliction, it
presently becomes horrid, then stiff and then hard as a rock of Adamant, or as
the gates the riches of Gods goodness; this is to be evil because God is
good; to burn with flames, because we are coold with water; this is to put out
the lamps of heaven, or (if we cannot do it) to put our own eyes out, least we
should behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and be enamoured of his goodness,
and repent and live. O take heed of despising this goodness; for this is one
of Gods latest arts to save us; he has no way left beyond this, but to punish
us with a lasting judgment and a poinant affliction. In the tomb of Terentia
burning and shining lamps, but when God forbearance and lifts us up from the
gates of death and carries us abroad into the open air., that we converse with
prosperity and temptation, we go out in darkness: and we cannot be preserved
in heat and light but by still dwelling in the regions of sorrow: And if such
be our weaknesses, or our folly, it concerns us to pray against such
deliverances, to be afraid of health, to beg of God to continue a persecution,
and not to deny us the mercy of an affliction.

And do not we find all this to be a great truth in our selves? in God that
shall convert him; and he whom fear and sense of pain cannot mend, can never
find any from himself that shall make him wise; This is sad, that nothing from
without, and nothing from within shall move us; nothing in Heaven and nothing
in Hell, neither love nor fear, gratitude to God, nor preservation of our
selves shall make us to repent, (...), that shall be his final sentence: He
shall never escape that ruin from which the greatest art of God could nor
entice, nor his terror scare him: he loved cursing therefore shall it happen
to him, he loved not blessing, therefore shall it be far from him.

Let therefore every one of us take the account of our lives still voice from
Heaven consider what voices of thunder you have heard, and presently that noise
ceased and God was heard in the still voice again; What dangers have any of you
escaped, were you ever assaulted by the rudeness of an ill natured man? have
you never had a dangerous fall, and escaped it? did none of you ever escape
drowning, and in a great danger saw the forbearance of God? goodness and
forbearance, did interpose and abate, or divert a mischief, which was falling
on thy head, it must needs cover thy head with a cloud of shame and blushing at
that ingratitude, and that folly, that neither will give God thanks, nor secure
thy own well

Had thou never any dangerous fall in thy intemperance? then God showed thee
thy danger, and that he was angry at thy sin, but yet did so pity thy person,
that he would forbear thee a little longer, else that fall had been into thy
grave.

When thy gluttony gave thee a surfeit, and God gave thee a remedy, his meaning
then was, that thy gluttony rather should be cured then thy surfeit; that
repentance should have been thy remedy, and abstinence and fasting should be
thy cure: Did ever thy proud or revengefull spirit engage thee upon a Duel, or
a vexatious finger of judgment (for as yet his whole hand is not laid on)
either is consigned to eternal ruin, because God will no more endeavor his
cure, or if his mercy still continues and goes on in long-suffering, it shall
be by such vexatious instruments, such causticks, and corrosives, such
tormenting and desperate medicaments, such which in the very cure will soundly
punish thy folly and ingratitude. For deceive not your selves, Gods mercy
cannot be made mercies of his mercies, or by the mercies of his judgments: he
will either break our hearts into a thousand fragments of contrition, or break
our bones in the ruins of the grave and hell: And since God rejoice in his
mercy the riches of that goodness which is essential, and part of his glory,
and is communicated to us, to bring us to repentance, that we may partake of
that goodness, and behold that glory.

Part II.
(...)] long-suffering; in this one word are contained all the treasures of the
Divine goodness: here is the length and extension of his mercy, pertrahit
spiritum super nos Dominus, so the Syrian Interpreter reads, Luk 18. 7. God
holds his breath: He retains his anger within him, lest it should come forth
and blast us: and here is also much of the Divine justice: For although God
suffers long yet he does not let us alone: he forbears to destroy us, but not
to punish us; and in both, he by many accidents Thou art merciful toward us
all because thou can do all Wisd. 11. 24.
things, and thou passedst by the sins of men that they may repent. And that,
God shall support our spirit, and preserve our patience, and nourish our hope,
and correct our stubbornness, and mortify our pride and bring us to him
whether we will or no, by such gracious violences, and merciful judgments
which he uses toward us as his last remedies, is not only the demonstration
of a the fiery trial, the last purgatory fire, which God uses to burn the
thistles, and purify the dross: When the gentle influence of a Sunbeam will
not wither them, nor the weeding Quicunque non purgatus migrat ad inferos,
jacebit in luto: quicunque vero mitratus illuc accesserit, habitabit cum Deis:
He that dies in his impurities shall lie in it for ever, but he that descends
to his grave purged and mitred, that is, having quitted his vices, and
superinduens justitiam, being clothed with righteousness, shall dwell in light
and immortality. It is sad that we put God to such extremities, and as it
happens in long diseases, those which Physicians use for the last remedies
seldom prevail; and when consumptive persons come to have their heads shaven,
they do not often

How ever, although I say this, and it is highly considerable, to the purpose
that we never suffered things to come to this extremity, yet if it be upon us,
we must do as well as we can: But then we are to look upon it as a design of
Gods last mercy, beyond which if we protract our repentance, our condition is
desperately miserable. The whole state of which mercy we understand by the
parable of the King reckoning with his servants that were in arrears to him:
One was brought to him, which owed him ten thousand talents: but for as much as
he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and
children, and all that he had, and payment to be made: The man you see was
under the arrest; the sentence was passed upon him, he was a condemned man; but
before the execution of it, he fell down and worshipped and said, (...), Lord
suffer me longer a while; have patience with me and I will pay thee all. This
tells its meaning: this is a long-sufferance, by being a forbearance only of
execution of the last sentence; a putting off damnation upon a longer trial of
our emendation; but in the mean time it implies no other ease, but that
together with his long-sufferance God may use all other severities and scourges
to break our untamed spirits, and to soften them with hammers; f^^ death be put
off, no matter else what hardship and loads of suff^^^^ce we have. Hic ure, hic
seca, ut in aeternum parcas, so Saint Austin prayed, Here O Lord cut me, here
burn me, spare me not now, that thou may spare me for ever: And it is just
like the mercy used to a mad man,

I remember what Bion observed wittily of the punishment inflicted upon the
daughters of Danaeus, whom the old Poets fained to be condemned in hell to fill
a bottomless tub with water, and to increase the pain (as they fancied) this
water they were to carry in sieves, and never to leave work till the tub were
full; It is well (says he) since their labor must be eternal, that it is so
Omnes enim poenae non exterminantes sunt medicinales: All punishments
whatsoever which do not destroy us, are intended to save us; they are lancets
which make a wound but to let forth

the (...), or forbearance; but if he smites single persons with a final
judgment, a long-suffering not of him, but toward others: and God has
destroyed my neighbor to make me repent, my neighbors time being expired and
the date of his possibility determined. For a man's deathbed is but an ill
station for a penitent, and a (...) judgment is no good monitor to him, to
whom it is a s^^ere executioner. They that perished in the gainsaying of Corah
were out of the conditions of repentance; but the people that were affrighted
with the neighborhood of the judgment and the expresses of Gods anger
manifested in such visible remonstrances, they were the men called unto
repentance. But concerning

2. And I desire you to observe this, that you may truly estimate the arts of
the Divine justice and mercy: For all the world being one continual and entire
argument of the Divine mercy, we are apt to abuse that mercy to vain
confidences and presumption; First, mistaking the end, as if Gods mercy would
be

3 For if God suffers men to go on in sins and punishes them not, it is not a
mercy, it is not a forbearance; it is a hardening them, a consigning them to
ruin, and reprobation; and themselves give the best argument to prove it; for
they continue in their sin, they multiply their iniquity, and every day grow
more enemy to God, and that is no mercy that increases their hostility and
enmity when he slew them, that sought him, and turned them early and enquired
after God: but as long as they prevailed upon their enemies then they forgot
that God was their strength and the high God was their redeemer. It was well
observed by the Persian Ambassador of old, when he was telling the King a sad
story of the overthrow of all his army by the Athenians; he adds this of his
own; that the day before the fight, the young Persian gallants being confident
they should destroy their enemies, were drinking drunk, and railing at the
timerousnesse and fears of religion, strymon, which was so frozen, that their
boats could not lanch, and yet it began to thaw, so that they feared the ice
would not bear them. Then you should see the bold gallants that the day before
said there was no God, most timorously and superstitiously fall upon their
faces and begged of God that the river strymon might bear them over from
prophet was the most gentle, and God began to forgive, and the and the mourners
go about the streets, this is nothing but the pompa misericordiae, this is the
funeral of our sins, dressed indeed with emblems of mourning, and proclaimed
with sad accents of death, but the sight is refreshing, as the beauties of the
field, which God has blessed, and the founds are healthful

This is that riddle spoken of in the psalm, Calix in manu Psalm. 94. 9.
Dom. vini meri plenus misto; the pure impure, the mingled unmingled cup; for
it is a cup in which God has poured much of his severity and anger, and yet it
is pure and unmingled; for it is all mercy: and so the riddle is resolved, and
our cup is full and made more wholesome lymphatum crescit, dulcescit, laedere
nescit, it is some justice and yet it is all mercy; the very justice of God
being an act of mercy, a forbearance of the man, or the nation, and the
punishing the sin. Psalm. 98. 8.
Thou wast a God and forgavest them, though thou tookest veangeance of their
inventions: for Gods mercy is given to us by parts; and to certain purposes;
sometimes God only so forgives us, that he does not cut us off in the sin, but
yet lays on a heavy load of judgments: so he did to his people, when he sent
them to school under the discipline of 70 years captivity; sometimes he makes a
the Lord has taken away thy sin, thou shall not die, nevertheless the child
that is born unto thee that shall die: sometimes he puts the evil off to a
further day, as he did in the case of Ahab, and Hezekiah: to the first he
brought the evil upon his house, and to the second he brought the evil upon his
kingdom, in his sons days; God forgiving only so as to respite the evil, that
they should have till we chatter like a swallow (as Davide expression is) and
though David was an excellent penitent, yet after he had lost the child
begotten of Bathsheba, and God had told him he had forgiven him, yet he raised
up his darling son against him, and forced him to an inglorious flight, and his
son lay with his Fathers concubins in the face of all Israel: so that when we
are forgiven, yet it is ten to one, but GOD will make us to smart and roar for
our sins, for the very disquietnesse of our souls.

For if we sin and ask God forgiveness and then are quiet, we


Sic luitur juvellis culpa dolor senis.
It may be thy sore eyes are the punishment of thy intemperance seven years
ago, or God cuts thy days shorter and thou shall die in a florid age, or he
raises up afflictions to thee in thine own house, in thine own bowels, or has
sent a gangren into thy estate, or with any arrow out of his quiver he can
wound thee, and the when a man has repented, no man can say that God has
forgiven

But sometimes we find a severer judgment happening upon a people, and yet in
that sad story, Gods mercy sings the triumph which although it be much to Gods
glory, yet it is a sad story to sinning people. 600000. fighting men besides
women and children, and decrepit persons, came out of Egypt and God destroyed
them Gods mercy prevailed over his justice, that he did not destroy the nation;
but still preserved a succession to Jacob, to possess the promise. God drowned
all the world except eight persons his mercy there also prevailed over his
justice, that he preserved a remnant to mankind; his justice devoured all the
world, and his mercy which preserved but eight, had the honor of the
prevailing attribute. God destroyed Sodom, and the five cities of the plain,
and rescued but four from the flames of that sad burning, and of the four lost
one in the flight and yet his mercy prevailed over

And in these senses we are to understand the excellency of the divine mercy
even when he smites, when he rebukes us for sin, when he makes our beauty to
fail and our flesh to consume away like a moth fretting a garment, yet then his
mercy is the prevailing ingredient. If his judgments be but fines set upon our
heads accordto the mercy of our old laws, Salvo contenemento, so as to
preserve our estates, to continue our hopes and possibilities of heaven; and
all the other judgments can be nothing but mercies, excellent instruments of
grace arts to make us sober and wise, to that the spirit may be saved; the
result of all this, is, that Gods mercies are not, ought not, cannot
quotusquisque reperitur qui impunitate proposita abstinere possit injurijs?
Impunitas est maxima peccandi illecebra said Cicero, and therefore the wisdom
of God has so ordered the actions of the world that the most Offic. 3,
fruitful showers shall be wrapped up in a cover of black clouds, the long
suffering of God, the last remedy to our diseased souls, and (...), said
Phalaris, unless we be senseless we shall be brought to sober courses, by all
those sad accidents and wholesome, but ill tasting mercies, which we feel in
all the course and the succession of the divine long sufferance.

The use of all the premises is, that which Saint Paul expresses in the text,
that we do not despise all this: and he only despises incurabili. Plutarch
reports concerning swine that then optic nervs are so disposed to turn their
eyes downwards that they cannot look upwards nor behold the face of heaven

But if this despite runs further, and when the mercies look on us with an
angry countenance, and that God gives us only the mercy of a punishment, if we
despise this too, we increase

But some of these despisers are such as are unmooved when God smites others;
like Gallio when the Jews took Softhenes and beat him in the pleading place, he
cared for none of these longsufferance to strike others to make us afraid. But
however, we sleep in the midst of such alarums, yet know, that there is not one
death in all the neighborhood, but is intended to thee; every crowing of the
cock is to awake thee

That Italian Gentleman was certainly a great lover of his sleep, who was angry
with the lizard that wak't him, when a because they have ill stomachs and
cannot keep the medicine: Ah sinful nation, Isai. 1. 4, 5.
a people laden with iniquity, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the Holy One of Israel; why should ye be stricken any more? This is the (...),
the most bitter curse, the greatest excommunication, when the delinquent is
become a heathen and a publicane, without the covenant, out of the pale of the
Church; for what have I to do with them that are without? said Saint Paul: It
was not lawful for the Church any more to punish them; and this court
Christian is an imitation and parallel of the justice of the court of heaven:
When a sinner is not mended by judgments at long running, God cuts him off
from his inheritance and the lot of sons, he will chastise him no more, but let
him take his course and spend his portion of prosperity, such as shall be
allowed him in the great Economy of the world. Thus God did to his Vineyard
which he took such pains to fence, to plant, to manure, to dig, to cut, Auferam
sepem ejus, Isai. 5. 5.
God had fenced it with a hedge of thorns, and God would take away all that
hedge, he would not leave a thorn standing, not one judgment to reprove or
admonish them, but all the wild beasts, and wilder and more beastly lusts, may
come and devour it, and trample it down in scorn.

And now what shall I say, but those words quoted by Saint Peter in his Sermon:
Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; Acts 13. 14.
perish in your own folly by stubbornness and ingratitude. For it Curavimus
Babylonem and non est sanata, we dressed and tended Babylon, but

Sermon. XIV.
2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen.
WHen Christianity like the day spring from the East, with a new light did not
only inlighten the world, but amazed the minds of men, Saint Paul, that if a
brother walked disorderly, the Christians should avoid his company: He forbad
them not, to accompany with the Heathens that walked disorderly; for then a man
must have gone out of the world. But they were not to endure so much as to eat
with, or to salute a disorderly brother, an ill living Christian: But now if we
should observe this canon of Saint Paul, and refuse to eat, or to converse with
a fornicatour, or a drunkard, or a perjured person, or covetous, we must also
go out of the world; for a pious or a holy person In pontificibus nemo hodre
sanctitatem requirit, optimi putantur si vel leviter mali sint, vel minus boni
quam caeteri mortales esse solent, No man looks for holiness in the Bishops of
Rome; those are the best Popes who are not extremly wicked: the same is too
true of the greatest part of Christians: Men are excellent persons if they be
not traitors, or adulterous, oppressors, or injurious, drunkards, or
scandalous, if they be not as this publican, as the vilest person with whom
they converse:

Nunc si depositum non inficiatur amicus
Si reddat veterem cum tota aerugine fllem
Prodigiosa fides and Thuscis digna libellis
Quaeque coronata lustrari debeat agna.
Juven. Sat. 13.

He that is better then the dregs of his own age, whose religion is [God help]
whose alms are contemptible, and his devotion infrequent, yet as things are
now, he is unus e mitibus, one of a thousand, and he stands eminent and
conspicuous in the valleys and lower grounds of the present piety; for a bank
is a mountain upon a level: but what is rare and eminent in the manners of men
this day would have been scandalous, and have deserved the rod of an Apostle,
if it had been confronted with the fervours and

Men of old looked upon themselves as they stood by the examples and precedents
of Martyrs, and compared their piety to the life of Saint Paul, and estimated
their zeal by the flames of the Boanerges, Saint James and his brother: and the
Bishops were thought reproveable as they fell short of the ordinary government
of Saint Peter, and Saint John; and the assemblies of Christians were so holy,
that every meeting had religion enough to hallow a house and convert it to a
Church; and every day of feasting was a Communion, and every fasting day was a
day of repentance and alms; and every day of thanksgiving was a day of joy, and
alms: and religion begun all their actions, and prayer consecrated them, and
they ended in charity, and were not polluted with design: they despised the
world heartily, and pursued after heaven greedily; they knew no ends but to
serve God, and to be saved; and had no designs upon their neighbors, but to
lead them to God, and to felicity; till Satan full of envy to see such
excellent days, mingled covetousness, and ambition within the throngs and
conventions of the Church, and a vice crept into an office, and then the
mutual confidence grew less, and so charity was lessened; faith began to be
sullied, and pride crept in; and then men snatched at offices, not for the
work, but for the dignity; and then they served themselves more then God and
the Church; till at last it came to the pass where now it is, that the Clergy
live lives no better then the Laity, and the Laity are stooped to imitate the
evil customs of strangers and enemies of Christianity; so that we should think
Religion in a good condition, so that men did offer up to God but the actions
of an ordinary, even, and just life, without the scandal and allayes of a
great impiety: But because such is the nature of things, that either

But grow in grace] That's the remedy, and that would make us all wise and
happy, blessed in this world, and sure of heaven: Concerning which, we are to
consider first; what the estate of grace is, into which every one of us must be
entered, that we may grow in it; secondly the proper parts, acts and offices of
growing in grace, 3. The signs, consequences, and proper significations, by
which if we cannot perceive the growing, yet afterward we may perceive that we
are grown, and so judge of the state of our duty, and concerning our

1. Concerning the state of grace, I consider that no man can be said to be in
the state of grace, who retains an affection to any one sin. The state of
pardon and the divine favor, begins at the first instance of anger against our
crimes, when we leave our fondnesses and kind opinions, when we excuse them
not, and will not endure their shame; when we feel the smarts of any of their
evil consequents; for he that is a perfect lover of sin, and is sealed up to a
reprobate sense, endures all that sin brings along with it, and is reconciled
to all its mischiefs, can suffer the sickness they come to spy the good
things of that way that leads to heaven, fellow worker with God, he must
entertain the spirit, attend his inspirations, receive his whispers, obey all
his motions, invite him further, and utterly renounce all confederacy with his
enemy, sin; at no hand suffering any root of bitterness to spring up, not
allowing to himself any reserve of carnal pleasure, no clancular lust, no
private oppressions, no secret covetousness, no love to this grow in grace and
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. And now the first part of this duty is to make religion to be the business
of our lives; for this is the great instrument, which will naturally produce
our growth in grace, and the perfection of a Christian. For a man cannot after
a state of sin be instantly a Saint: the work of heaven is not done by a flash
of lightning, or a dash of affectionate rain, or a few tears of a relenting
pity; God the price of our high calling; while our eatings are actions of
temperance, our labors are profitable our humiliations are acts of obedience,
and our alms are charity: our marriages are chaste, and whether we eat or
drink, sleep or wake we may do all to the glory of God, by a direct intuition
or by a reflex act, by design or by supplement, by fore sight or by an after
election: and to this purpose

I will not turn this discourse into a reproof, but leave it represented up
in avaritious and vain attendances, and we shall not attend wise men, the
second year, Philosophers, the third, Orators, and the fourth were but
Plebeians and understood nothing but their own ignorance.

And just so it happens to some in the progresses of religion: at first they
are violent and active; and then they satiate all the appetites of religion;
and that which is left, is, that they were soon weary, and sat down in
displeasure, and return to the world and dwell in the business of pride, or
money; and by this time they understand that their religion is declined, and
passed from the heats and follies of youth, to the coldness and infirmities of
old age; The remedies of which is only a diligent spirit and a busy religion
a great industry and a full portion of time in holy offices; that as the Oracle
said to the Cirrheans, noctes diesque belligerandum,

2. The second step of our growth in grace is, when virtues grow habitual, apt
and easy in our manners, and dispositions. For although many new converts have
a great zeal, and a busy spirit, apt enough as they think to contest against
all the difficulties of a

(...)
(...).
It is an easy thing to commit a wickedness, for temptation and infirmity are
always too near us: But God has made care and sweat, prudence and diligence,
experience and watchfulness, wisdom

The way is long and difficult at first; but in the progress and pursuit we
find all the knots made plain, and the rough ways made smooth.

Now, the spirit of grace is like a new soul within him, and he has new
appetites and new pleasures, when the things of the world grow unsavory and the
things of religion are delicious; when his temptations to his old crimes return
but seldom, and they prevail not at all, or in very inconsiderable instances,
and stay not at all, but are reproached with a penitential sorrow, and speedy
amendment; when we do actions of virtue quickly, frequently, Sextius Romanus
resigned the honors and offices of the city, and betook himself to the
severity of a Philosophical life. But when his unusual diet and hard labor
began to pinch his flesh, and he felt his propositions smart, and that which
was fine in discourse at a Symposiack, or an Academical dinner, began to sit
uneasily upon him in the practice; he so despaired that he had like to have
cast himself into the sea, to appease the labors of his religion; Because he
never had gone further then to think it a fine thing to be a wise man: he would
commend it, but he was loath to pay for it at the price that God and grown in
grace and has made religion habitual to his spirit, is not at ease but when he
is doing the works of the new man, he rests in religion and comforts his
sorrows with thinking of his prayers, and in all crosses of the world he is
patient, because his joy is at hand to refresh him when he list, for he cares
not so he may serve God: and if you make him poor here, he is rich there, and
he counts that to be his proper service, his work, his recreation, and reward.

3. But because in the course of holy living, although the duty affectionate,
the labor be more cheerful and more active; and if

4. To discern our growth in grace, we must inquire concerning our passions,
whether they be mortified and quiet, complying with our ends of virtue and
under command. For since the passions are the matter of virtue and vice
respectively, he that has brought into his power all the strengths of the
enemy, and the forts from whence he did infest him, he only has secured his
holy walking with God. But because this thing is never perfectly a good man may
be incident to a violent passion, and that without sin, yet a perfect man is
not; a wellgrown Christian has seldom such sufferings; to suffer such things
sometimes may stand with the being of virtue, but not with its security: For if
passions range up and down and transport us frequently and violently, we may
keep in our forts, and in our dwellings, but our enemy is master of the field,
and our virtues are restrained, and apt to be starved, and will not hold out
long; a good man may be spotted with a violence, but a wise man will not: and
he that does not add wisdom to his virtue, the knowledge of Jesus Christ to
his virtuous habits, will be a good man but till a storm comes. But beyond
this, inquire after the state of your passions, in actions of religion: Some
men fast to mortify their lust, and their fasting makes them peevish: some
reprove a vice

And although no man must take accounts of his being in, or out of the state of
grace, by his being dispassionate, and free from all the assaults of passion,
yet as to the securing his being in the state of grace, he must provide that he
be not a slave of passion, so to declare his growth in grace, he must be sure
to take the measures of his affections, and see that they be lessened; more apt
to be suppressed; not breaking out to inconvenience and imprudencies, not
rifling our spirit and drawing us from our usual and more and knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ: This only; in the scruting and consequent judgment
concerning our passions, it will concern the curiosity of our care, to watch
against passions in the reflex act; against pride, or lust, complacency, and
peevishness attending upon virtue. For he was noted for a vain person, who
being overjoyed for the cure of his pride (as he thought) cried out to his
wife, Cerne Dionysia deposui fastum, behold I have laid aside all my pride: and
of that very dream the silly man thought he had reason to boast; it was an act
of pride, and levity besides. If thou have given a noble present to thy friend,
if thou have rejected the unjust desire of thy Prince; if thou have endured
thirst and hunger for religion or continence; if thou have refused an offer
like that which was made to Joseph, sit down and rest in thy good conscience,
and do not please thy self in opinions, and fantastic noises abroad, and do
not despise him that did not do so as thou have done; and reprove no man with
an upbraiding circumstance: for it will give thee but an ill return, and a
contemptible reward, if thou shall over-lay thy infant-vertue, or drown it with
a flood of

Sermon. XV. Part II.
5. HE is well grown in, or toward the state of grace, patient, and even, not
apt to excuse his fault, that is less apt to anger, or to scorn him that
snatches him rudely from the flames of hell, he is virtues Confessor, and
suffers these lesser stripes for that interest which will end in spiritual and
eternal benedictions.

They who are furious against their monitors are incorrigible: but it is one
degree of meekness to suffer discipline: and a meek man cannot easily be an
ill man, especially in the present instance: he appears, at least, to have a
healthful constitution; he has natural, easy, and habitual. Some men chide
themselves for all their misdemeanors, because they would be represented to
the censures Sion, or at the gates of the temple; never pleased but in virtue
and religion: Then he knows the state of his soul, and the state of his danger,
he reckons it no objection to be abased in the face of man, so he may be
gracious in the eyes of God: And that is a sign of a good grace, and a holy
wisdom; That man is grown in the grace of God, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Justus in principio sermonis est accusator sui, said the Wise
man, The righteous accuses himself in the beginning: that is, quickly, lest he
be prevented: And certain it is, he cannot be either wise or good that had
rather have a real sin within him, then that a good man should believe him to
be a repenting sinner; that had rather keep his crime, then lose his
reputation; that is, rather to be so, then to be thought so, rather be without
the favor of God, then of his neighbor. Diogenes once spied a young man
coming out of a Tavern, or place of entertainment; who perceiving himself
observed by the Philosopher, with some confusion stepped back again, that he
might (if possible) preserve his fame with that severe person. But Diogenes
told him, Quanto magis intraveris tanto magis eris in caupona: The more you go
back, the longer you are in the place where you are ashamed to be seen; and he
that conceals his sin, still retains that which he counts his shame, and his
burden. Hippocrates was noted for an ingenious person, that pious, for writing
his book of retractations, in which he published his former ignorances and
mistakes, and so set his shame off to the world, invested with a garment of
modesty, and above half changed before they were seen. I did the rather insist
upon this particular, because it is a consideration of huge concernment, and
yet much neglected in all its instances and degrees. We neither confess our
shame, nor endure it; we are privately troubled, and

When God sent his Prophets to the people, and they stoned them with stones,
and sawed them asunder, and cast them into dungeons, and made them beggars, the
people fell into the condition of Babylon, Quam curavimus and non est sanata;
We healed her (said But she would not be cured: Derelinquamus eam, that is her
doom; let her enjoy her sins and all the fruits of sin laid up in treasures of
wrath against the day of vengeance and retribution.

6. He that is grown in grace, and the knowledge of Christ esteems no sin to be
little or contemptible; none fit to be cherished or indulged to. For it is not
only inconsistent with the love of God, to entertain any undecency or
beginning of a crime, any thing that displeases him, but he always remembers
how much it cost him to arrive at the state of good things, whether the grace
of a state of life contrary to that which with so much danger Alas Lord, is it
not a little one and my soul shall live? And it is not therefore to be
entertained because it is little; for it is the more without excuse, if it be
little; the temptations to it are not great; the allurements not mighty; the
promises not insnaring, the resistance easy; a greater danger (I say) not
directly, but accidentally; not in respect of the crime, but in relation to the
person: for he that cannot overcome a small crime, is in the state of
infirmity, so great, that he perishes infallibly, when he is arrested by the
sins of a stronger temptation: But he that easily can, and yet will not; he is
in love with sin, and courts his danger, that he may at least kiss the apples
of Paradise, or feast himself with the parings: since he is by some displeasing
instrument affrighted from glutting himself with the forbidden fruit, albes of
baptism are sullied in many places with the smoke and filth of Sodom and
uncleanness, cares not in what paths he treads, and a shower of dirt changes
not his state, who already lies wallowing in the puddles of impurity; It makes
men negligent and easy, when they have an opinion or certain knowledge that
they are persons extraordinary in nothing; that a little care will not mend
them; that another

7. He that is grown in grace pursues virtue for its own interest, purely and
simply without the mixture and allay of collateral designs, and equally
inclining purposes; God in the beginning of our returns to him entertains us
with promises and threatenings, the apprehensions of temporal advantages, with
fear and shame, and with reverence of friends and secular respects, with
reputation and coercion of humane laws and at first men snatch at the lesser
and lower ends of virtue and such rewards are visible, and which God preach
Christ out of envy, or to lessen the authority and fame of others: some of
these lessen the excellency of the act, others spoil it quite: it is wax and
his bag with honey; that is, with the useful parts of virtue not babes, but men
in christ Jesus. In this progress of grace I have not yet expressed, that
perfect persons should serve God all that, is but heaven in another sense, and
under another name; just as the mystical Theology

8. Some men there are in the beginning of their holy walking with God, and
while they are babes in Christ, who are presently busied in delights of
prayers, and rejoice in public communion, amoris at morsum qui vere senserit,
he that has felt the stings of a sharp and very dear affection is impatient in
the absence of his beloved object, the soul that is sick and swallowed up with
holy fire loves nothing else; all pleasures else seem unsavory, company is
troublesome, visitors are tedious, homilies of comfort are flat and useless.
The pleasures of virtue to a good and perfect man are not like the perfumes
hunger and thirst it must be satisfied or we die; and when we feel great
longings after religion and faintings for want of holy nutriment, when a famine
of the word and sacraments is more intolerable; and we think our selves really
most miserable, when the Church doors are shut against us, or like the
Christians in the persecution of the Vandals, who thought it worse then death,
that there Bishops were taken from them; If we understand excommunication, or
Church

in peace, or in the strength of the spirit. It is good that we will not seek
out opportunities to sin; but are not we too apprehensive of it, when Naphtha
or prepared Nitre? or can we like the children of the captivity walk in the
midst of flames and not be scorched or consumed,? Many men will (not like
Judah) go into high ways and untie the girdles of harlots; But can you reject
the importunity of a beauteous and an imperious Lady, as Joseph did we had need
pray that we be not led into temptation; that is, not only into the
possession, but not into the allurements and neighborhood of it, least by
little and little our strongest resolutions be untwist, and crack

10. No man is grown in grace but he that is ready for every index of a good
proficient in the ways of Godliness. The heart of a man is like a wounded
hand or arm, which if it be so cured that it can only move one way and cannot
turn to all postures and natural uses it is but imperfect, and still half in
health, and half wounded: so is our spirit; if it be apt for prayer and close
sifted in alms, if it be sound in faith and dead in charity, if it be
religious to God and unjust to our neighbor, bonum exintegra causa malum
exqualibet particulari, every fault spoils a grace. But one grace alone cannot
make a good man. But as to be universal in our obedience is necessary to the
being in the state of grace: so readily to change employment from

This is not to be expected of beginners; for they must be enticed with apt
employments; and it may be, their office and work so fits their spirits, that
it makes them first in love with it, and then with God for giving it; and many
a man goes to heaven in the days of peace, whose faith, and hopes, and
patience would have been dashed in pieces, if he had fallen into a storm or
persecution. Oppression will make a wise man mad (says Solomon): there are
some usages that will put a sober person out of all patience, such Nero durst
not die, yet when his servants told him that the Senators had condemned him to
be put to death more Majorum, that is, by scourging like a slave, he was forced
into a preternatural confidence, and fell upon his own sword; but when God so
changes thy estate that thou art fallen into accidents to which thou art no
otherwise disposed, but by grace and a holy spirit, and yet thou can pass
through them with quietness, and do the work of suffering as well

11. Lastly, some there are who are firm in all great and foresoen changes and
have laid up in the storehouses of the spirit (reason and religion) arguments
and discourses enough to defend them against all violencies and stand at watch
so much, that

These are the parts, acts, and offices of our growing in grace, and yet I have
sometimes called them signs; but they are signs, as eating and drinking are
signs of life, they are signs so as also parts of life; and these are parts
of our growth in grace, so that a man can grow in grace to no other purpose but
to these or the like improvements.

Concerning which I have a caution or two to interpose. 1. The growth of grace
is to be estimated as other moral things are, not in single instances, or in
single graces. all single acts are to be done after the manner of men, and
therefore are not always capable of increasing; and they have their terms
beyond which easily they cannot swell: and therefore if it be a good act and
zealous, it may proceed from a well grown grace, and yet a younger and weaker
person may do some acts as great and as religious as it; But neither do single
graces always greater love then this no man has, that he lay down his life
for God: he cannot easily grow in the substance of that act; and if other
persons, or himself, in process of time do it more cheerfully, or with fewer
fears, it is not always a sign of a greater grace, but some times of greater
collateral assistances, or a better habit of body, or more fortunate
circumstances: for he that goes to the block tremblingly for Christ, and yet
endures his death certainly, and endures his trembling too, and runs through
all his infirmities to improve every grace; and the passive virtues of a
Christian are not to be expected to grow so fast in prosperous, as in suffering
Christians: but in this case we are to take accounts of our selves by there
where God has appointed our work and in our instances,

3. Be careful to observe that these rules are not all to be understood
negatively, but positively, and affirmatively, that is, that a man may conclude
that he is grown in grace if he observes these characters in himself, which I
have here discoursed of; but he must not conclude negatively, that he is not
grown in grace, if he cannot observe such signal testimonies: for sometimes
God covers the

4. In considering concerning our growth in grace, let us take more care to
consider matters that concern justice, and charity, then that concern the
virtue of religion: because in this there may much, in the other there cannot
easily be any illusion, and cosenage. That is a good religion that believes,
and trusts, and hopes in God through Jesus Christ, and for his sake does all
justice, and all charity, that he can; and our Blessed Lord gives no other
deseription of love to God, but obedience and keeping his commandments:
Justice and charity are like the matter, religion is the form of Christianity;
but although the form be more noble and the principle of life, yet it is less
discernable, less material, and less sensible; and we judge concerning the
form by the matter, and by material accidents, and by actions: and so we must
of our religion,

I am much prevented in my intention for the perfecting of Proh! quam virtute
praeditos omnia decent! thinking all things becomes a good man; even his
gestures not understand his own condition, must be content to work on super
totam materiam, without considerations of Particulars; he must pray earnestly,
and watch diligently, and consult with prudent Guides, and ask of God great
measures of his Spirit, and hunger and thirst after righteousness: for he that
does so, shall certainly be satisfied: and if he understands not his present
good condition, yet if he be not wanting in the down right endeavors of piety,
and in hearty purposes, he shall then find that he is grown in grace when he
springs up in the resurrection of the just, and shall be ingrafted upon a tree
of Paradise, which bears fruit for ever, Glory to God, rejoicing to Saints
and Angels, and eternal

Prima sequentem, honestum est in secundis aut tertijs consistere. Cicero.


And of some have compassion, making a difference: * And others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire.
MAn has but one entrance into the world, but a thousand ways to pass from
thence; and as it is in the natural, so it is in the spiritual; nothing but the
union of faith and obedience habits and degrees of perverseness, that the very
kinds of them Ut omnium misereatur, that he might have mercy upon all; that
light may break forth from the deepest enclosures of darkness, and

I [of some have compassion] and these I shall reduce to four heads or orders
of men and actions; all which have their proper cure pro portionable to their
proper state, gentle remedies to the lesser irregularities of the soul. The
first are those that sin without observation of their particular state; either
because they are uninstructed in the special cases of conscience, or because
they do an evil against which there is no express commandment. It is a sad
calamity that there are so many milions of men and women that modesty is
sometimes abused by a false name and called clownishnesse, and want of
breeding; and contentedness and temperate living is suppressed to be want of
courage and noble thoughts; and severity of life is called imprudent and
unsociable; and simplicity and hearty honesty is counted foolish and
unpolitick, they are easily tempted to honor prodigality and foolish
dissolution of their liberal and noble usages, timorousness is called caution,
rashness is called quickness of spirit, covetousness, is frugality,
amorousnesse is society, and gentile; peevishness and anger is courage,
flattery is humane, and courteous; and under these false vails virtue sli^s
away (like truth from under the hand of them that fight for her) and leave
vices dressed up with the same imagery, and the fraud not discovered, till the
day of recompenses, when men are distingushed by their rewards. But so men
think they sleep freely when their spirits are laden with a Lethargy and they
call diet; their consciences must be made tender and their Catechism

But the other in this place are more considerable; Men sin without observation
because their actions have no restraint of an express Commandment, no letter
of the law to condemn them by an express sentence. And this happens, when the
crime is comprehended under a general notion without the instancing of
particulars; for if you search over all the Scripture you shall never find
incest named and marked with the black character of death; and there are
diveres sorts of uncleanness, to which Scripture therefore gives

2. Men sin without an express prohibition when they commit a thing that is
like a forbidden evil. And when Saint Paul had reckoned many works of the flesh
he adds [and such like] all that have the same unreasonablenesse and
carnallity. For thus, poligamy is unlawful; for if it be not lawful for a
Christian to put away his wife and marry another (unless for adultery) much
less may he keep a first and take a second, when the first is not put away; If
a Christian may not be drunk with

3. A man is guilty, even when no law names his action, if he does any thing
that is a cause or an effect, a part or unhandsome adjunct of a forbidden
instance; he that forbad all intemperance, is as much displeased with the
infinite of foolish talk that happens at such meetings, as he is at the
spoiling of the drink and the destroying the health. If God cannot endure
wantonness, how can he day of salvation also, are against God and against
religion. He that is commanded to be charitable it is also intended he should
not spend his money vainly, but be a good husband and provident that he may be
able to give to the poor, as he would be to purchase a Lordship, or pay his
daughters portion: and upon this stock it is that Christian religion forbids
jeering, and immoderate laughter and reckon jestings amongst the things that
are unseemly. This also would be considered.

4. Besides the express laws of our religion, there is an universal line and
limit to our passions and designs, which is called the anology of
Christianity; that is, the proportion of its sanctity and strictness of (...)
holy precepts. This is not forbidden, but does this become you? Is it decent to
see a Christian live in plenty and ease and heap up money and never to partake
of Christ's passions, there is no law against a Judge, his being a dresser of
gardens or a gatherer of Sycamore fruits, but it becomes him not, and deserves
a reproof. If I do exact justice to my neighbor and cause him to analogy of
our religion; It does not become a Disciple of so gentle a master to take all
advantages that he can. Christ, that quitted all the glories that were
essential to him, and that grew up in his nature when he lodged in his Fathers
bosom, Christ that suffered all the evils due for the sins of mankind, himself
remaining most innocent, Christ, that promised persecution, injuries and
affronts as part of our present portion, and gave them to his Disciples as a
legacy, and gave us his spirit to enable us to suffer injuries; patience of
fortitude of long animity and perseverance; he that of eight beatitudes made
that five of them should be instanced in the matter of humiliation and
suffering temporal inconvenience, that blessed Master was certainly desirous
that his Disciples should take their crowns from the cross, not from the
evennesse and felicities of the world; He intended swallowed up but nothing can
fill it but God, who has no bound. Christianity is a law for sons, not for
servants; and God that gives full measure, (...) together, pressed down, heaped
up, and running over; for God does so to us; and when we have done so to him,
we are infinitely short of the least measure of what God does for us; we are
still unprofitable servants. And therefore as the breaking any of the laws of
Christianity provoks God to anger, so the prevaricating in the analogy of
Christianity stirs him up to jealousy: He has reason to suspect our hearts
are not right with him, when we are so reserved in the matter and measures of
our services: and if we will give God but just what he calls for by express
mandate, it is just in him to require all of that at our hands without any
abatement and then we are sure to miscarry. And let us remember that when God
said he was a jealous God he expressed the meaning of it to be, he did punish
to the third and fourth genoration. Jelousie is like the rage of a man: but if
it be also like the anger of God, it is insupportable and will crush us into
the ruins of our

But because these things are not frequently considered, there are very many
sins committed against religion, which because the commandment has not marked
men, refuse to mark, and think God requires no more. I am entered into a sea of
matter, which I must not now prosecute; but I shall only note this to you that
it is the proportions as well as by the express rules, of our religion;
because in humane and civil actions all the nations of the world use so to call
their subjects to account. For that which in the accounts of men is called
reputation and public honesty, is the same which in religion we call analogy
and proportion; in both cases there being some things, which are besides the
notices of laws, and yet are the most certain consignations of an excellent
virtue. He is a base person that does any thing against public honesty and yet
no man can be punished if he marries a wife the next day after his first wives
funeral: and so he that prevaricates the proportions and excellent reasons of
Christianity, without zeal, and without love: and unless care be taken of him
he will quickly be without religion. But yet these I say are a sort of persons
which are to be used with gentleness, and treated with compassion; for no man
must be handled roughly to force him to do a kindness: and coercion of laws
and severity of Judges, sergeants and executioners are against offenders of
commandments; But the way to cure such persons is the easiest and genteliest
remedy of all others. They are to be instructed in all the parts of duty, and
invited forward by the consideration of the great rewards which are laid up for
all the sons of God, iron bands of laws and yet to break the golden chains of
love but all those instruments which are proper to enkindle the love of God and
to turn fear into charity are the proper instances of that compassion which is
to be used toward these men.

2. The next sort of those who are in the state of sin, and yet to be handled
gently and with compassion are those who entertain Nemo simul malus fit and
malus esse cernitur; sicut nec scorpijs tum innas^untur stimuli cum pungunt No
man is discerned to be vicious so soon as he is so, and vices have their
infancy and their childe-hood and it cannot be expected that in a child's age
should be the vice of a man; that were monstrous as if he wore a beard in his
cradle; the thorns of Dauphine will never fetch blood if they do not scratch
the first day: and we shall find that the little undecencies and riflings of
our souls, the first openings and disparkings of our virtue differ only from
the state of perdition, as infancy does from old age, as sickness from death;
It is the entrance into those regions whether whosoever passes finally, shall
lie down and groan with

He that means to be temperate and avoid the crime and dishonor Baie and
bathed often in Avernus, and from thence hurried to the companies and dressings
of Lucrinus, she quenched her honor, and gave her virtue and her body as a
spoil to the follies and intemperance of a young gentleman. For


Those men are in a condition in which they may if they please pity themselves;
keep their green wounds from festering and uncleanlinesse and it will heal
alone, non procul absunt, they are not far from the kingdom of Heaven, but they
are not within its portion; and let me say this, that although little sins have
not yet made our condition desperate but left it easily recoverable, yet it is
a condition that is quite out of Gods favor: although they are not far
advanced in their progress to ruin, yet they are not at all in the state

3. There are some very much to be pitied and assisted because they are going
to hell and (as matters stand with them) they cannot, or they think they cannot
avoid it. Quidam ad alienum dormiunt Seneca.
somnum ad alienum edunt appetitum: amare and odisse (res omnium maxim
liberas) jubentur. There are some persons whose life is so wholly in dependence
from others, that they sleep when others please; they eat and drink according
to their Masters appetite, or intemperance: they are commanded to love or hate,
and are not Miserum est servire sub Dominis parum felicibus, for suppose the
Prince or the Patron be vicious, suppose he calls his servants to bathe their
souls in the goblets of intemperance: if he be also imperious (for such persons
love not to be contradicted in their vices) it is the loss of that man's
fortune, not to lose his soul: and it is the servants excuse and he esteems it
also his glory, that he can tell a merry tale, how his Master and himself did
swim in drink, till they both talked like fools, and then did lie down like
beasts


There is then no difference, but that the one is the fairest bull and the
master of the heard. And how many Tenants and Relatives are known to have a
servile conscience and to know no affirmation or negation but such as shall
serve their Landlords interest? Alas the poor men live by it, and they must
beg their bread if ever they turn recreant, or shall offer to be honest. There
are some trades whose very foundations is laid in the vice of others; and in
many others if a thread of deceit

Those persons which cause these vicious necessities upon their brethren will
lie low in hell; but the others will have but small comfort in feeling a lesser
damnation.

Of the same consideration it is, when ignorant people are Catechized into
false doctrine, and know nothing but such principles which weaken the nerves,
and enfeeble the joints of holy living; they never heard of any other; those
that follow great and evil qua itur, non qua enndum est, there where the
popular misery has made the way plain before their eyes, though it be uneven
and dangerous to their consciences. In these cases I am forced to reckon a
Catalogue of mischiefs; but it will be hard to cure any of them. Aristippus in
his discourses was a great flatterer of Dionysius of Sicily, and did own
doctrines which might give an easiness to some vices, and knew

1. Let every man consider that he has two relations to serve, If you be freed
by the blood of the Son of God, then you are free indeed: and then consider how
dishonorable it is to lie,

2. The next advise to persons thus tempted is, that they would learn to
separate duty from mistaken interest; and let them be both served in their just
proportions, when we have learned to make a difference. A wife is bound to her
husband in all his just designs, and in all noble usages and Christian
comportments: But a wife is no more bound to pursue her husbands vicious
hatreds, then to serve and promote his unlawful and wandering loves: friend is
turned a flatterer if he does not know, that the limits of Accept no person
against Ecclus. 4. 22.
thy soul, and let not the reverence of any man cause thee to fall.

3. When passion mingles with duty, and is a necessary instrument of serving
God, let not that passion run its own course and pass on to liberty, and
thence to license and dissolution: but let no more of it be entertained, then
will just do the work. For no zeal of duty will warrant a violent passion to
prevaricate a duty. I have seen some officers of War in passion and zeal of
their duty have made no scruple to command a soldier with the dialect

4. Let every such tempted person remember, that all evil comes from our
selves, and not from others; and therefore all pretenses and prejudices, all
commands and temptations, all opinions and necessities, are but instances of
our weakness, and arguments of our [He that knows not how to dissemble, knows
not how to reign. [He that will not do as his company does, must go out of the
world, and quit all society of men: We create necessities of our own, and then
think we have reason to serve their importunity. Non ego sum ambitiosus, sed
nemo aliter Romae potest vivere, non ego sumptuosus, sed urbs ipsa magnas
impensas exigit. Non est meum vitium quod iracundus sum, quod nondum constitui
certum vitae genus adolescentia haec facit. The place we live in makes us
expensive, the state of life I have chosen renders me ambitious, my age makes
me angry or lustful, proud or peevish. These are nothing else but resolutions
never to mend as long as we can have excuse for our follies, and until we

Sermon. XVII. Part II.
4. THe last sort of them that sin, and yet are to be treated with compassion,
is of them that interrupt the course of an honest life with single acts of sin,
stepping aside and starting like a broken bow; whose resolution stands fair,
and their hearts are toward God, and they sojourn in religion, or rather,
dwell there; but that like evil husbands they go abroad, and enter into places
of dishonor and unthriftinesse. Such as these, all stories remember with a sad
character; and every narrative Bathsheba: and the Holy Ghost has called him a
man after Gods own heart, save in the matter of Uriah; there indeed he was a
man after his own heart; even then when his reason was stolen from him by
passion, and his religion was sullied by the beauties of a fair woman. I wish
we lived in an age in which the people were to be treated with, concerning
renouncing the single actions of sin, and the seldom interruptions of piety:
Men are taught to say, that every man sins in every action he does; and this is
one of the doctrines, for the believing of 1.
accounts of David's life reckon but one great sin, *and in Zachary 2.
and Elizabeth gave a testimony of an unblameable conversation; his confession
when he prayed to God in his sickness and said he had walked uprightly before
God,* and 3.
therefore Saint Paul after his conversion designed and labored hard, and
therefore certainly with hopes to accomplish it, that he might 4.
keep his conscience void of offense both toward God and toward man,* and one
of Christ's great purposes is to present his whole 5.
Church pure and spotless to the throne of grace, and* Saint John the 6.
Baptist offended none but Herod, *and no pious Christian brought a bill of
accusation against the holy Virgin Mother; *certain it is, 7.
that God has given us precepts of such a holiness and such a 8.
by the grace of God and yet not persuaded, and then persuaded conquerours till
by the long possession of virtues it is a strange and unusual, and therefore an
uneasy and unpleasant thing to act a crime. When Polemon of Athens by chance
coming into the schools of Xenocrates peregninatus est hujus animus in
nequitia, non habitavit, his mind wandered in wickedness and traveled in it,
but never dwelt there; the same is the case of some men; they make inroads into
the enemies country, not like enemies to spoil, but like Dinah to be satisfied
with the stranger beauties of the land, till their virtues are defloured and
they enter into tragedies, and are possessed by death, and intolerable sorrows;
but because this is like the fate of Jacobs daughter and happens not by
design, but folly, not by malice, but surprise, not by the

First let us consider, that for a good man to be overtaken in a single crime
is the greatest dishonor and unthriftinesse in the whole world. As a fly in a
box of ointment, so is a little folly to him who is accounted wise, said the
Son of Sirach: No man chides a fool for his weaknesses, or scorns a child for
playing with flies and preferring Socrates ride upon a cane; and when Solomon
laid his wisdom at the foot of Pharaohs daughter, and changed his glory for the
interest of wanton sleep, he became the discourse of heaven and earth: and men
think themselves abused, and their expectation cousened when they see a wise
man do the actions of a fool, and a good man seized upon by the dishonours of a
crime. But the loss of his reputation is the least of his evil. It is the
greatest improvidence in the world to let a healthful constitution be destroyed
in the surfeit of one night. the acceptance of the grace, and makes the man
naturally, but the value of it is wholly taken away: and in this sense is that
of Josephus (...) which Saint James well renders. He that 2 Chap. 11.
keeps the whole law and offends in one point is guilty of all; that is, if he
prevaricates in any commandment, the transgression of which by the law was
capital, shall as certainly die as if he broke the whole law; and the same is
the case of those single actions which the school calls deadly sins, that is,
actions of choice in any sin that has a name, and makes a Kind and has a
distinct matter. And sins When the righteous man turns from his
righteousness and commiteth iniquity, all his righteousness that he has done
shall not be remembered, in the trespass Ezekiel. 18. 24.
that he has trespassed, and in the sin that he has sinned, in them shall he
die. Now then consider how great a fool he is who when he has with much labor
and by suffering violence contradicted his first desires; when his spirit has
been in agony and care, and with much uneasinesse has denied to please the
lower man, he hopes when he dies to go to God, and that he shall never enter
into the possession of Devils; and this state, which then when he is ready to
reap the fruits of his labors, by one indiscreet action, to set fire upon his
corn fields, and destroy all his dearly earned hopes, for the madness and
loose wanderings of an hour; This man is an indiscreet gamester; who doubles his
stake as he thrives, and at one throw is dispossessed of all the prosperities
of a luckie hand.

They that are poor (as Plutarch observes) are careless of little becoming
none but such persons who are to be kept under Tutors

(...)
(...).
Hom. I li. ^
These men sow much, and gather little, stay long and return empty, and after
a long voyage they are dashed in pieces when their vessels are laden with the
spoils of provinces. Every redeemed them from their vain conversation and from
death, and from hell, and consigned them to the inheritance of sons and given
them his grace and his spirit, and many periods of comfort, and a certain hope
and visible earnests of immortality; nothing is baser then that such a person
against his reason, against his interest, against his God, against so many
obligations, against his custom, against his very habits and acquired
inclinations should do an action.

Quam nisi Seductis nequeas committere Divis
Which a man must for ever be ashamed of, and like Adam must run from God
himself to do it, and depart from the state in which he had placed all his
hopes, and to which he had designed all his labors. The consideration is
effective enough, if we sum up the particulars; for he that has lived well and
then falls into a deliberate sin, is infinitely dishonored, is most imprudent,
most unsafe, and most unthankful.

2. Let persons tempted to the single instances of sin in the midst
drunkenness has a little honesty derived unto it by the examples of Noah, and
Adultery is not so scandalous and intolerably dishonorable, since Bathsheba
bathed, and David was defiled and

Pompeio fugiente timent Well might all the gowned Romans fear when Pompey
fled, and who is there that can hope to be more righteous then David, or
stronger then Samson, or have less hypocrisy then Saint Peter, or be more
temperate then Noah? These great examples bear men of weak discourses and
weaker resolutions from the severity Si quid Socrates, aut Aristippus contra
morem et consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne arbitretur licere. Magnis enim
illi and divinis bonis hanc licentiam assequebantur. If Socrates did any
unusual thing, it is not for thee who art of an ordinary virtue to assume the
same license; For he by a divine and excellent life has obtained leave or
pardon respectively, for what thou must never hope for, till thou have arrived
to the same glories. First be as devout as David, as good a Christian as Saint
Peter, and then thou will not dare with design to act that, which they fell
into by surprise; and if thou do fall as

3. Remember, that since no man can please God or be partakers of any promises,
or reap the reward of any actions in the taught, and so tempted, and so
assisted, such a person must be curious that he be not cozened with the duties
and performances of any one relation, 1. Some there are that think all our
religion consists in prayers and public or private offices of devotion, and
not in moral actions or entercourses of justice and temperance, of kindness
and friendships of sincerity and liberality, of chastity and humility, of
repentance the power of Godliness, and the energy and vivacity of a holy life.
God will not suffer us to commute a duty, because all is his due; and religion
shall not pay for the want of temperance: if the devoutest Hermit be proud, or
he that fasts thrice in the week be uncharitable once; or he that gives much to
the poor, gives also too a rare judge and a good commonwealths man in the
streets, and public meetings, and a just man to his neighbor, and charitable
to the poor; for in all these places the man is observed and kept in awe by the
Sun, by light and by voices; But this man is a Tyrant at home, an unkind
husband and ill Father, an imperious Master, and such men are like prophets in
their own countries, Hic ubi dissuetae sylvis in carcere clausae

Mansuevere ferae, and ^ultus posuere minaces

Atque hominem didicere pati si torrida parvu^

Venit in ora cruor, redeunt rabiesque, furorque.


not honored at home and can never be honored by God, who will not endure
that many virtues should excuse a few vices, Or that any of his servants shall
take pensions of the Devil, and in the profession of his service do his enemy
single advantages.

4. He that has past many stages of a good life to prevent his being tempted
to a single sin must be very careful that he never entertain his spirit with
the remembrances of his past sin, nor amuse it with the fantastic
apprehensions of the present. When the Israelites fancied the sapidnesse and
relish of the flesh pots they longed to

So when a Libian Tiger drawn from his wilder forragings is shut up and taught
to eat civil meat and suffer the authority of a man, he sits down tamely in his
prison and pays to his keeper fear and reverence for his meat: But if he
chance to come again

Admonitae tument gustato sanguine fauces,
Feruet and a trepido vix abstinet ira Magistro.
He scarce abstains from eating those hands that brought him discipline and
food: so is the nature of a man made tame and gentle by the grace of God, and
reduced to reason, and kept in awe by religion and laws and by an awful
virtue is taught to forget those alluring and sottish relishes of sin: but if
he diverts from his path, and snatches handfuls from the wanton vineyards, and
remembers the lasciviousness of his unwholesome food that pleased his childish

By these and all other arts of the Spirit, if we stand upon our guard, never
indulging to our selves one sin, because it is but one; as knowing that one sin
brought in death upon all the world, and one sin brought slavery upon the
posterity of Cham: and always fearing lest death surprise us in that one sin;
we shall by the grace of God, either not need, or else easily perceive the
effects and blessings of that compassion which God reserves in the secrets of
his mercy, for such persons whom his grace has ordained and disposed with
excellent dispositions unto life eternal.

making a difference] so says the Text, and it is of high concernment that we
should do so, that we may relieve the infirmities of the men, and relieve their
sicknesses, and transcribe the copy of the Divine mercy, who loves not to
quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed. For although all sins are
against Gods Commandments, directly, or by certain consequents, by line, or by
analogy, yet they are not all of the same tincture and mortality.


Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti
Ut qui nocturnus Diuum sacra legerit.
He that robs a garden of Coleworts, and carries away an armfull of Spinach,
does not deserve hell as he that steals the Chalice from the Church, or
betrays a Prince; and therefore men are distinguished accordingly:

Est inter Tanaim quiddam socerunique Viselli.
The Poet that Sejanus condemned for dishonouring the memory of Agamemnon, was
not an equal criminal with Cataline, or Graechus: and Simon Magus and the
Nicolaitans committed crimes which God hated, more then the complying of S.
Barnabas, or the dissimulation of S. Peter; and therefore God does treat these
persons severally: Some of these are restrained with a fit of sickness, some
with a great loss; and in these there are degrees, and some arrive at death.
And in this manner God scourged the Corinthians for their irreverent and
disorderly receiving the Holy Sacrament.

-- assit
Regula quae poenas peccatis irroget aequas,
Nec seutica dignum horribili sectere flagello.
Let us be sure that we neglect no sin, but repent for every one, judge our
selves for every one, according to the proportion of the malice, or the
scandal, or the danger. And although in this there is no fear that we would be
excessive; yet when we are to reprove a brother we are sharp enough, and either
by pride, or by animosity, by the itch of government, or the indignation of an
angry mind, we run beyond the gentleness of a Christian Monitor; we must
remember that by Christ's law some are to be admonished privately, some to be
shamed and corrected publicly, and beyond these, there is an abscission, or a
cutting off from the communion A delivering over to Satan. And to this purpose
is that old reading of the words of my Text, which is still in some Copies,
(...); Reprove them sharply, when they are convinced, or separate by sentence.
But because this also is a design of mercy, acted with an instance of
discipline, it is a punishment of the flesh, that the soul may be saved in the
day of the Lord, it means the same with the usual reading, and with the last
words of the Text, and teaches us our usage toward the worst of recoverable
sinners.

Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire.] Some sins there are,
which in their own nature are damnable, and some are such as will certainly
bring a man to damnation; the first are curable, but with much danger; the
second are desperate and irrecoverable; when a man is violently tempted, and
allured with an object that is proportionable and pleasant to his vigorous
appetite, and his unabated, unmortified nature, this man falls into death,

Nemo repent fuit turpissimus -- and although such actions may have in them
the malice and the mischief, the disorder and the wrong, the principle and the
permanent effect, of a habit and a long course of sin, yet because they never
or Lift up your hands to Almighty God, and pray him to be merciful to you in
all things when you sin unwillingly; that is, in which you sin with an
imperfect choice: for no man sins against his will directly, but when his
understanding is abused by an inevitable, or an intolerable weakness, our
wills follow their blind every day. For in many things we offend all, said
Saint James, that is, in many smaller matters, in matters of surprise, or
inevitable infirmity: And therefore Posidices said, that Saint Austin was used
to say, That he would not have even good and holy Priests go from this world
without the susception of equal and worthy penances: and the most innocent
life I am guilty of nothing, (said Saint Paul) that is, of no ill intent, or
negligence in preaching the Gospel, yet I am not hereby justified, for God it
may be knows many little irregularities, and insinuations of sin: In this case
we are to make a difference; but humility, and prayer, and watchfulness, are
the direct instruments of the expiation of such sins.

But then secondly, whosoever sins without these abating circumstances,

1. I say his pardon is uncertain, because there are some sins which are
unpardonable, (as I shall show) and they are not all named in particular, and
the degrees of malice being uncertain, the salvation of that man is to be
wrought with infinite fear and trembling. It was the case of Simon Magus,
Repent and ask pardon Acts 7. 22.
for thy sin, if peradventure the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. If
peradventure;] it was a new crime, and concerning its possibility of pardon no
revelation had been made, and by analogy to other crimes it was very like an
unpardonable sin; for it was a thinking a thought against the Holy Ghost, and
that was next speaking a word against him. Cains sin was of the same nature; It
is greater then it can be forgiven, his passion and his fear was too severe and
decretory: it was pardonable, but truly we never find that God did pardon it.

2. But besides this, it is uncertain in the pardon, because it 2.
may be the time of pardon is passed, and though God has pardoned thy day is
past, as was Jerusalems in the day that they crucified the Savior of the world.

3. Pardon of such habitual sins is uncertain, because life is uncertain; 3.
and such sins require much time for their abolition and expiation. And
therefore although these sins are not necessario mortifera, that is,
unpardonable, yet by consequence they become deadly, because our life may be
cut off before we have finished or performed those necessary parts of
repentance, which are the severe great single crime, but the habit of any sin
is dangerous; and therefore these persons are to be snatched from the fire, if
you mean to rescue them, (...), if you stay a day, it may be you stay too long.

4. To which I add this fourth consideration, that every delay 4.
of return is in the case of habitual sins an approach to desperation, because
the nature of habits is like that of Crocodiles they grow as long as they live;
and if they come to obstinacy, or confirmation, they are in hell already, and
can never return back. For so the Pannonian

But as the pardon of these sins is uncertain, so the conditions of restitution
are hard, even to them who shall be pardoned: their pardon and themselves too,
must be fetched from the fire; water will not do it, tears and ineffective
sorrow cannot take off a habit, or a great crime.

O nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina cadis,
Tolli fluminea posse putatis aqua.
indices, but no perfect instruments of restitution. Saint James plainly
declares the possibilities of pardon to great sins, in the cases Chap. 4. 1, 3.
of contention, adultery, lust, and envy, which are the four great indecencies
that are most contrary to Christianity; and in the 5. Chap. he implies also a
possibility of pardon to an habitual sinner, whom one that erres from the
truth, that is, from the life of a Christian, the life of the Spirit of truth
and he adds, that such a person may be reduced and so be pardoned, though he
have sinned long; he that converts such a one, shall Cha. 4. ver. ult.
hide a multitude of sins: But then the way that he appoints for the
restitution of such persons is humilty, and humiliation, penanoes. and sharp
penitential sorrows, and afflictions, resisting the Devil, returning to God,
weeping and mourning, confessions and prayers, as you may read at large in the
4. and 5. Chapters; and there it is, that you shall find it a duty, that such
persons should be afflicted, and confess to their brethren; and these are
harder conditions then God requires in the formet cases; these are a kind of
fiery trial.

I have now done with my Text, and should add no more but that the nature of
these sins is such that they may increase in their weight, and duration, and
malice, and then they increase in mischief, and fatality, and so go beyond the
Text. Cicero said well, Ipsa consuetudo assentiendi periculosa esse videtur and
lubrica. l. 4. Acad. Qu. The very custom of consenting in the matters of
civility is dangerous and slippery, and will quickly engage us in error, and
then we think we are bound to defend them, or else we they tread under foot the
blood of the everlasting covenant; those persons are in the fire too, but they
will not be pulled out: concerning whom Gods Prophets must say as once
concerning Babylon, Curavimus and non est sanata, derelinquamus eam, We would
have healed them, but they would not be healed, let us leave them in their
sins, and they shall have enough of it; Only this, those that put themselves

But besides all this, I shall name one thing more unto you; for

-- nunquam adeo foedis adeoque pudendis,
Utimur exemplis, ut non pejora supersint.
There are some single actions of sin of so great a malice, that in their own
nature they are beyond the limit of Gospel pardon: they are not such things for
the pardon of which God entered into covenant; because they are such sins which
put a man into perfect indispotisions, Atheism was of that nature; it was
against their whole religion; and the sin is worse now, against the whole
religion still, and against a brighter light. In the ages after the flood
idolatry was also just such another: for as God was known first only creator,
then he began to manifest himself in special contracts with men, and he quickly
was declared the God of Israel and idolatry perfectly destroyed all that
religion, and therefore was never pardoned entirely; but God did visit it upon
them that sinned; and when he pardoned it in some degrees yet he also punished
it in so me; and yet rebellion against the supreme power of Moses and (...) was
worse; for that also is a perfect destruction of the whole religion, because it
refused to submit to those hands upon which God had placed all the religion,
and all the government. And now if we would know in the Gospel what answers
these precedent sins? I answer, first the same sins acted by a resolute hand
and heart Apostasy or or a voluntary malicious renouncing the faith: The Church
has often declared that sin to be unpardonable: witchcraft or final
impenitence, and obstinacy in any sin are infallibly desperate: and in general,
and by a certain parity of reason, whatsoever does destroy charity or the good
life of a Christian with the same general venom and deletery as Apostasy
destroys faith; and he that is a Renegado from charity, is as unpardonable as
he that returns to solemn Atheism or infidelity: for all that, is directly the
sin against the holy Ghost, that is a throwing that to speak a word against the
holy Ghost in the Pharisees, was declared unpardonable, because it was such a
word which if it had been true, or believed, would have destroyed the whole
religion; for they said that Christ wrought by Beelzebub, and by consequence
did not come from God: He that destroys all the whole order of Priesthood,
destroys one of the greatest parts of the religion, and one of the greatest
effects of the holy Ghost: He that destroys government destroys another part;
but that we may come nearer to our selves; to quench the spirit of God is worse
then to speak some to grieve the spirit of God is a part of the same impiety,
to resist the holy Ghost is another part; and if we consider, that every great
sin does this in its proportion, it would concern us to be careful, lest we fall
into presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over us; out of this that I
have spoken you may easily gather what sort of men those are, who cannot be
snatched from the fire; for whom as S. John says, we are not to pray, and how
near men come to it that continue in any known sin; if I should descend to
particulars, I might lay a snare to scrupulous and nice consciences. This only
every confirmed

Sermon. XVIII.
Matthew 16. Ver. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul?
WHen the eternal mercy of God had decreed to rescue


vitam quae faciunt beatiorem.
These are the measures of good and evil, the object of our hopes and fears,
the securing our content and the portion of this world; and for the other, let
it be as it may. But the Blessed Jesus having made revelations of an immortal
duration, of another world; and of a strange restitution to it, even by the
resurrection of the body, and a new investiture of the soul, with the same
upper garment, clarified, and made pure so as no Fuller on earth can whiten it;

What shall it profit a man? or what shall a man give? is there any

The blood of the son of God was given to recover it or as an (...) to God; and
when our souls were forfeit to him, nothing less then the life and passion of
God and man could pay the price (Isay) to God, who yet was not concerned in the
loss save only that such was his goodness, that it pitied him to see his eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, and all that a man has will he give for his life:
and this

Here then first we will consider the propositions of the exchange the world
and a man's soul, by way of supposition, supposing all that is propounded were
obtained; the whole world. Secondly we will consider what is likely to be
obtained really, and indeed of the world, and what are really the miseries of a
lost soul? For it is propounded in the text by way of supposition: If a man
should gain the world which no man ever did, nor ever can; and he that gets
most, gets too little to be exchanged for a temporal life. And thirdly I shall
apply it to your practice and make material considerations.

1. First, then suppose a man gets all the world, what is it that he gets? It
is a bubble, and a Phantasme, and has no reality beyond a present transient
use; a thing that is impossible to be enjoyed, because its fruits and usages
are transmitted to us, by parts and by succession; (He that has all the world,
(if we can suppose

2. I consider that he that is the greatest possessor in the world enjoyes its
best and most noble parts and those which are of most excellent perfection but
in common with the inferior persons, and the most despicable of his kingdom.
Can the greatest Prince enclose the Sun, and set one little star in his cabinet
for his own use? or secure to himself the gentle and benign influence of any
one constellation? Are not his subjects fields bedewed with the same

Nay those things which he esteems his ornament and his singularity of his
possessions, are they not of more use to others then to himself. For suppose
his garments splendid and shining like the robe of a cherub or the clothing of
the fields, all that he that wears them enjoyes, is that they keep him warm,
and clean and modest; and all this is done by clean and less pompous
vestments; and the beauty of them which distinguishes him from others, is made
to please the eyes of the beholders; and he is like a fair bird, or the
meretricious painting of a wanton woman made wholly to be

The poorest Artizan of Rome walking in Caesar's gardens, had the same pleasures
which they ministered to their Lord: and although province, which the poor man
had for nothing.

3. Suppose a man Lord of all the world, (for still we are but in supposition)
yet since every thing is received, not according to its own greatness and
worth, but according to the capacity of the receiver, it signifies very little
as to our content; or to the riches of our possession. If any man should give
to a Lion a fair meadow full of hay, or a thousand quince trees, or should give
to the goodly Bull, the master and the fairest of the whole heard, a thousand
fair Stags; If a man should present to a child a ship laden with Persian
carpets, and the ingredients of the rich scarlet, all these being either
disproportionate to the appetite or to the understanding,

4. The greatest vanity of this world is remarkable in this, that all its joys
summed up together are not big enough to counterpoise the evil of one sharp
disease, or to allay a sorrow. For imagine a man great in his dominion as
Cyrus, rich as Solomon, victorious as David, beloved like Titus, learned as
Trismegist, powerful as all the Roman greatness, all this, and the results of
all this, give him no more pleasure in the midst of a fever, or the tortures
of the stone, then if he were only lord of a little dish, and a dishfull of
fountain water. Indeed the excellency of a holy conscience is a comfort

For what can all the world minister to a sick person? If it represents all the
spoils of nature and the choicest delicacies of land and sea. Alas his appetite
is lost, and to see a pibble stone is more pleasing to him: For he can look
upon that without loathing, but not so upon the most delicious fare that ever
made famous the Roman luxury. Perfumes make his head ache; if you load him with
jewels, you press him with a burden as troublesome as his gravestone:

5. Suppose a man lord of all this world, an universal Monarch, as some princes
have lately designed, all that cannot minister content to him; not that content
which a poor contemplative man by the strength of Christian Philosophy, and the
support of a very small of his condition in having a proud and indiscreet and a
vicious

And if we consider the supposition of the Text, the thing will demonstrate it
self. For he who can be supposed the owner and purchaser of the whole world,
must either be a King or a private person. A private person can hardly be
supposed to be the man. For if he be subject to another, how can he be Lord of
the whole world? But if he be a King, it is certain, that his cares are greater

Privatusque magis vivam to Rege beatus. Hor. l 1. ^at. 3.

Servants live the best lives; for their care is single, only how to please
their Lord; but all the burden of a troublesome providence, and ministration,
makes the outside pompous and more full of ceremony; but they intricate the
condition and disturb the quiet of the great possessor.

And imagine a person as blessed as can be supposed upon the stock of worldly
interest; when all his accounts are cast up, he Rare volte ha fame chjsta
sempre a tavola
condition contribute to him. In which he is not further gone beyond

And that is a sad condition when like Midas all that the man touches shall
turn to gold: and his is no better to whom a perpetual full table not recreated
with fasting, not made pleasant with intervening scarcity ministers no more
good then a heap of gold does, that is, he has no benefit of it, save the
beholding of it with his eyes. Cannot a man quench his thirst as well out of an
Urn or Chalice, as out of a whole River? It is an ambitious thirst,

-- eo sit
Plenior ut si quos delectet copia justo,
Cum ripa simul vulsos ferat Aufidus acer.
For so I have heard of persons whom the river has swept away, together with
the Turf they pressed when they stooped to drown

6. But this supposition has a lessening term. If a man could be born heir of
all the world, it were something: But no man ever was so; except him only who
enjoyed the least of it, the Son of man, that had not where to lay his head:
but in the supposition it is; [If a man could [gain] the whole world,] which
supposes labor and sorrow, trouble and expense, venture and hazard, and so
much time expired in its acquist and purchase, that besides the possession is
not secured to us for term of life, yet our lives are almost expired, before
we become estated in our purchases. And indeed that the unhappy party is but to
begin a new game, then to see

But I told you all this while, that this is but a supposition Regalia beyond
the rest; But the feudall right of subjects does Regalia does the Prince more
honor; and these that hold the fees in subordinate right, transmit it also to
their Tenants, and beneficiaries, and dependants to public uses, to charity,
and hospitality; all which is a lessening of the lords possessions and a
cutting his river into little streams, not that himself alone, but that all his
relatives may drink and be refreshed. Thus the Well where the woman of Samaria
sat was Jacobs Well, and he drank of it, but so did his wives, and his
children, and his cattle; so that what we call ours, is really ours, but for
our portion of expense and use; we have so little of it, that our

But secondly, consider how far short of the whole world the greatest Prince
that ever reigned did come. Alexander that wept because he had no more worlds
to conquer, was in his knowledge deceived, and brutish, as in his passion; he
overrun much of Asia, but he could never pass the Ganges, and never thrust
his sword in the bowels of Europe, and knew nothing of America. And the

But why do I talk of great things in this Question of the exchange of the soul
for the world? Because it is a real bargain, which many men (too many God
knows) do make, we must consider it as applicable to practice. Every man that
loses his soul for the purchase of the world, must not look to have the
portion

3. Although these premises may suffice to show that the supposed

Dives eget gemmis, Cereali munere pauper,
Sed cum egeant ambo pauper egens minus est.
If the greatness of the worlds possessions produce such fruits, vexation, and
care, and want, the ambitious requiring of great estates, is but like the
selling of a fountain, to buy a fever, a parting with content, to buy
necessity, and the purchase of an unhandsome condition, at the price of
infelicity.

4. He that enjoyes a great portion of this world has most commonly the allay
of some great cross, which although sometimes

5. And lastly, his soul so gets nothing that wins all this world, if he loses
his soul, that it is ten to one but he that gets the one, therefore shall lose
the other; For to a great and opulent fortune

I omit to speak of the habitual intemperance, which is too commonly annexed to
Festival and delicious tables, where there is no other measure or restraint
upon the appetite, but its fullness and satiety, and when it cannot or dare not
eat more. Oftentimes it happens, that the intemperance of a poor table is more
temperate and has less of luxury in it, then the temperance of a rich. To
this are consequent all the evil accidents and effects of fullness; pride,
lust, wantonness, softnesses of disposition and dissolution of manners, huge
talking, imperiousness, despite and contempt of poor he scapes burning, that
is inflamed from within and set on fire from without it is a greater miracle

And although the grace of God is sufficient to great personages, and masters
of the world, and that it is possible for a young man to be tied upon a bed of
flowers and fastened by the arms and band of a curtesan and tempted wantonly and
yet to escape the danger and the crime, and to triumph gloriously: (for so
Saint Hierome

Add to this last, that most men get so little of the world that it is all
together of a trifling and inconsiderable interest, that they who have the most
of this world, have the most of that but in

Part II.
ANd lose his own soul or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul] And
now the question is finally stated, and the dispute is concerning the sum of
affairs.

And therefore when the soul is at stake, not for its temporal, but for its
eternal interest, it is not good to be hasty in determining, without taking
just measures of the exchange. Solomon had the good things of the world
actually in possession, and he tried the touchstone of prudence and natural
value and found them allayed with vanity and imperfection, and we that see
[lose] for he gives gold for cloth or precious stones for bread

But we shall better understand the nature of this bargain if we consider the
soul that is exchanged, what it is in it self in order not of nature but to
felicity and the capacities of joy, secondly what price the Son of God paid
for it, and thirdly what it is to lose it, that is, what miseries and tortures
are signified by losing

First if we consider what the soul is in its own capacity to happiness, we
shall find it to be an excellency greater then the sun; of an angelical
substance, sister to a cherubin, an image of the divinity, and the great
argument of that mercy, whereby God did distinguish us from the lower form of
beasts and trees and minerals.

For so it was the scripture affirms, that God made man after his own image,
that is, secundum illam imaginem and ideam quam concepitipse, not according to
the likeness of any of those creatures

But the soul is all that whereby we may be, and without which we

In the mean this consideration is gone high enough when we understand the soul
of a man to be so excellently perfect, that we cannot understand how
excellently perfect it is: that being the best way of expressing our
conceptions of God himself; and therefore I shall not need by distinct
discourses to represent that the will of man is the last resort and sanctuary
of true pleasure, which in its formality can be nothing else but a conformity
of possession or of being to the will; that the understanding being the chanel
and it would follow that to lose a soul, which is designed

Secondly if we consider the price that the Son of God paid for the redemption
of a soul, we shall better estimate of it, then from the weak discourses of our
imperfect and unlearned Philosophy: not the spoil of rich provinces, not the
aestimate of kingdoms, not the price of Cleopatra's draught, not any thing that
was corruptible or perishing; for that, which could not one minute retard a
soul, which is the glory of the creation; a soul, with whom God had made a
contract, and contracted excellent relations, it being one of Gods
appellatives, that he is [the lover of souls.]

When God made a soul, it was only, faciamus hominem ad imaginem nostram; He
spoke the word and it was done; but when man had lost this soul which the
spirit of God breathed in him, it was not so soon recovered. It is like the
resurrection which has troubled the faith of many who are more apt to believe,
that God made a man from nothing, then that he can return a man from dust and
finite, yet there were many infinites which an infinite excellence could
satisfy for a soul who was lost to infinite and eternal ages, who was to be
afflicted with insupportable and indetermined that is next to infinite pains,
who was to bear the load of an infinite anger from the provocation of an
eternal God: and yet if it be possible that infinite can receive degrees, this
is but one half of the abyss, and I think the lesser: for that this person who
was God eternal, should be lessened in all his appearances, to a span, to the
little dimensions of a man, and that he should really become essential, natural
and necessary felicity should turn into an intolerable, violent and immense
calamity to his person, that this great God should not be admitted to pay the
price of our redemption unless he would suffer that horrid misery, which that
lost soul should suffer, as it represents the glories of his goodness, who
used such rare and admirable instruments in actuating the designs of his
mercy: so it shows our condition to have been very desperate, and our loss
invaluable.

A soul in Gods account is valued at the price of the blood, and yet there is
something to be pretended in the bargain,

3. But it may be some natures, or some understandings care not for all this,
therefore I proceed to the third and most material consideration, as to us; and
I consider what it is to lose a soul? which Hierocles thus explicates, (...).
An immortal substance can die, not by ceasing to be, but by losing all being
well, by becoming miserable. And it is remarkable, when our blessed Savior
gave us caution, that we should not fear them that can kill the him that is
able to destroy the body, and soul in hell; which word signifies not death but
tortures. Matthew. 10. 27.
For some have chosen death for sanctuary, and fled to it to avoid intolerable
shame, to give a period to the sense of a sharp grief, or to cure the
earthquakes of fear; and the damned perishing souls shall wish for death, with
a desire impatient as their calamity; But this shall be denied them, because
death were a deliverance, a mercy, and a pleasure, of which these miserable
persons must despair of for ever.

I shall not need to represent to your considerations those expressions Hell
fire] is the common expression; for the Eastern nations accounted burnings the
greatest of their miserable punishments: and burning malefactors was frequent,
[brimstone and fire] to Saint John Revel. 14. 10. calls the state of
punishment, prepared for the Devil and all his servants, he adding the
circumstance of brimstone, for by this time the Devil had taught the world more
ingenious pains, the outer darkness, that is, not only an abjection from the
beatifick regions, where God, and his Angels, and his Saints dwell for ever,
but then there is a positive state of misery expressed by darknesses, (...), as
two Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Jude call it, The blackness of darkness
for ever. In which although it is certain, that God whose Justice there rules,
will inflict but just so much as our sins deserve, and not superadde

But I shall choose to represent this consideration in that expression Mark the
9. the 44. verse; which himself took out of the Prophet Esaias, the 66. verse the
24. Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched; this is the (...),
spoken of by Daniel the Prophet; for although this expression was a prediction
of that horrid calamity and abscision of the Jewish Nation, when God poured out
a full vial of his wrath upon the crucifiers of his Son, and that this which
was the greatest calamity which ever did or ever shall happen to a Nation,
Christ with great reason took to describe the calamity of accursed souls, as
being the greatest instance to signify the greatest torment: yet we must
observe

And that we may understand it fully, observe the places. In the 34. Esa. 8.
The Prophet prophecies of the great destruction of Jerusalem for all her great
iniquities. It is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses,
for the controversy of Sion, and the streams thereof shall be turned into
pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become
burning pitch. It shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoke thereof shall
go up for ever, from generation to generation. It shall lie wast, none shall
pass through it for ever and ever. This is the final destruction of the Nation;
but this destruction shall and all the sons of God. And this also was the
period of their worm, as it is of their fire, The fire of the Divine vengeance
upon the Nation; which was not to be extinguished till they were destroyed, as
we see it come to pass. And thus also in Saint Jude, the Angels who kept not
their first state, are said to be reserved by God in everlasting chains under
darkness: which word [everlasting] signifies not absolutely to eternity, but
to the utmost end of that period, for so it follows [unto the judgment of the
great day] that [everlasting] lasts no longer; and in verse the seventh, the
word [eternal] is just so used: The men of Sodom and Gomorrha are set forth for
an example suffering the vengeance of [eternal fire,] that is, of a fire, which
burned till they were quite destroyed, and the cities and the country

That these words [for ever, everlasting, eternal, the never-dying worm, the
fire unquenchable,] being words borrowed by our blessed Savior and his
Apostles from the style of the old Testament, must have a signification just
proportionable to the state in which they signify; so that as this worm when
it signifies a temporal infliction means a worm that never ceases, giving
torment, till the body is consumed: So when it is translated to an immortal
[eternal,] that everlasting, has no end at all: because the soul cannot be
killed in the natural sense, but is made miserable and perishing for ever; that
is, the worm shall not die so long as the soul shall be unconsumed: the fire
shall not be quenched, till the period of an immortal nature comes, and that
this shall be absolutely for ever without any restriction, appears unanswerably
in this, because the same (for ever) that is, for the blessed souls, the same
for ever, is for the accursed souls; but the blessed souls that die in the
Lord, henceforth shall die no more; death has no power over them; for death is
destroyed, it is swallowed up in victory (says Saint Paul) and there shall be
no more death, says Saint John, Revel. 21. 4. So that because for ever has no
end, till the thing or the duration it self have end, in the same sense in
which the Saints and Angels give glory to God for ever, in the same sense the
lost souls shall suffer the evils of their sad inheritance; and since after
this death of nature, which is a separation of soul and body, there remains no
more death, but this second death, this eternal perishing of miserable accursed
souls, whose duration must be eternal; It follows that the worm of conscience,
the unquenchable fire of hell have no period at all; but shall last as long as
God lasts, or the measures of a proper eternity; that they who provoke God to
wrath, by their base, unreasonable, and sottish practices, may know what their
portion shall be in the everlasting habitations: and yet suppose that Origens
opinion had been true; and that accursed souls should have ease and a period to
their tortures after a thousand years; I pray let it be considered, whether it
be not a great madness to choose the pleasures, or the wealth of a few years
here, with trouble, with danger, with uncertainty, with labor, with intervalls
of a small candle, or a drop of water amounts to in a fever, is a

If a man were condemned but to lie still, or to lie a bed in one posture
without turning, for seven years together, would he not buy it off with the
loss of all his estate? If a man were to be put upon the rack, for every day,
three months together, (suppose him able to live so long) what would he do to
be quit of his torture? Wouldany man curse the King to his face, if he were
sure to have both his hands burnt off, and to be tormented with torments three
years together? Would any man in his wits accept of a thousand years. But then
when we cast up the minutes, and years, and ages of eternity, the consideration
it self is a great hell to those persons who by their evil lives

A thousand years is a long while to be in torment; we find a fever of 21.
days to be like an age in length: but when the duration of an intolerable
misery is for ever in the height, and for ever beginning, and ten thousand
years has spent no part of its term, but it makes a perpetual efflux, and is
like the center of a circle, which ever transmits lines to the circumference;
this is a consideration so sad that the horror of it and the reflection upon
its abode and duration, make a great part of the hell; for hell could not be
hell without the despair of accursed souls; for any hope were a refreshment,

And I desire you to consider that although the Scripture uses the word [fire]
to express the torments of accursed souls, yet fire can no more equal the
pangs of hell then it can torment a material substance; the pains of perishing
souls being as much more afflictive then the smart of fire, as the smart of
fire is troublesome beyond the softness of Persian carpets, or the sensuality
of the Asian Luxury: for the pains of hell; and the perishing or losing of the
our God is a consuming fire: that is the fire of hell, when God takes away all
comfort from us, nothing to support our spirit is left us, when sorrow is our
food and tears our drink; when it is eternal night without Sun or star, or
lamp, or sleep; when we burn

We may guess at it by the terrors of a guilty conscience, those verbera and
laeniatus, those secret lashings and whips of the exterminating Angel, those
thorns in the soul, when a man is haunted by an evil spirit; those butcheries
which the soul of a Tyrant, or a violent, or a vicious person, when he falls in
to fear or any calamity does feel, are the infinite arguments, that Hell which
there is enlarged by the greatness of infinite and the aboads of eternity. How
great these tormens of conscience are here, let any man imagine that can but
understand what despair means; despair upon just reason: let it be what it
will, no misery can be greater then despair: and because I hope none here have
felt those horrors of an evil conscience, which are consignations to eternity,
you may please to learn it by your own reason, or else by the sad instances of
story. It is reported of Petrus Ilosuanus, A Polonian are which here I have
heard with an insupportable amazement: this

That you take care, lest for the purchase of a little, trifling,
inconsiderable portion of the world you come into this place and state of
torment. Although Homer was pleased to complement the beauty of Helena to such
a height as to say it was a sufficient price for all the evils which the Greeks
and Trojans suffered in ten years.

(...).

But let not us have such a hardiness against the threats and representments
of the divine vengeance as to take the little imposts

There is a sort of men who because they will be vicious and Atheistical in
their lives, have no way to go on with any plaisance and without huge
disturbances, but by being also Atheistical in their opinions and to believe
that the story of hell is but a bugbear to affright children and fools, easy
believing people to make them

Our youth, and our manhood and old age are all of them due to God, and
justice and mercy are to him equally essential, and as this life is a time of
the possibilities of mercy so to them that neglect it, the next world shall be
a state of pure and unmingled justice.

[it is appointed to all men once to die and after death comes judgement] and
if any of us were certain to die next morning, with what earnestness should we
pray, with what hatred should we remember our sins, with what scorn should we
look upon the licentious pleasures of the world then nothing could be welcome
unto us but a prayer book, no company but a Comforter and a Guide of souls, no
employment but repentance, no passions but in order to religion, no kindness
for a lust that has undone us; and if any of you have been arrested with
alarmes of Lo this is the goodly change you have made, you had your good things
in your life time, and how like you the portion that is reserved to you for
ever? The old Rabbis those Poets of religion report of Moses that when the
courtiers of Pharaoh were sporting with the child Moses in the chamber of
Pharaohs daughter, they presented to his choice an ingot of gold in one hand,
and a cole of fire in the other; and that the child snatched at the coal,
thrust it roar and blaspheme, blaspheme and roar for ever. And suppose God
surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium, place your selves by meditation every
day upon your deathbed, and remember what thoughts shall then possess you;
and let such thoughts dwell in your understanding for ever, and be the parent
of all your resolutions and actions. The Doctors of the Jews

Hell is wide open to every impenitent persevering sinner, to every unpurged
person.

Noctes atque dies patet atri Janua Ditis. And although God has lighted his
candle and the lantern of his word and clearest revelations is held out to us,
that we can see hell in its worst colors, and most horrid representments yet
we run greedily after bables into that praecipice which swallows up the
greatest part of man kind; and then only we begin to consider, when all
consideration is fruitless.

He therefore is a huge fool that heaps up riches, that greedily heaps of wrath
to himself against the day of wrath; when sickness and death arrests him, then
they appear unprofitable and himself extremely miserable: and if you would know
how great that misery is you may take account of it by those fearful words and
killing Rhetoric of Scripture, It is a fearful things to fall into the hands
of the living God and who can dwell with the everlasting burning? That is, No
patience can abide there one hour where they must dwell for ever.


Matthew 10. latter part of Ver. 16. Be ye therefore wise as serpents and
harmless as doves.
sent forth as sheep among wolves, innocent and silent, harmless, and
defencelesse, certainly exposed to sorrow, and uncertainly guarded in their
persons; their condition seemed nothing else, but a designation arts of Orators
and informers, nor break prisons, nor any thing but wit and violence, prudence
and rudeness, learning and the sword, the strong hand took it first, and the
strong head possessed it last: the strong man first governed, and the witty man
succeeded him, and lasted longer; it came to pass that the wisdom of the
Father has so ordered it, that all his Disciples should overcome prudence and
innocence should become the mightiest guards; and the Christian although
exposed to persecution, yet is so secured that he shall never need to die But
when the circumstances are so ordered that his reason is convinced that then it
is fit he should; fit (I say) in order to Gods purposes and his own.

For he that is innocent is safe against all the rods and the axes of all the
Consuls of the world, if they rule by justice; and he that is prudent will also
escape from many rudenesses and irregular violences, chance and irregularities
there is no provision less then infinite, that can give security; and although
prudence alone cannot do this; yet innocence gives the greatest title to that
providence which only can if he pleases, and will if it be fitting. Here then
are the two arms defensive of a Christian: Prudence against the evils of men,
Innocence against the evils of Devils and all that relates to his kingdom.

Prudence fences against persecution, and the evil snares, against

But in order to the following discourse and its method, we are first to
consider whether this be, or indeed can be a commandment, or what is it? For
can all men that give up their names in baptism, be enjoined to be wise and
prudent? It is as if God would command us to be eloquent, or witty men, fine
speakers, or strait bodied, or excellent scholars, or rich men: If he please
to make us so, we are so; and prudence is a gift of God, a blessing of an
excellent nature, and of great leisure, and a wise opportunity,

To this I answer, That Christian prudence is in very many instances a direct
duty; in some an instance and advice, in order to degrees and advantages: where
it is a duty, it is put into every man's power; where it is an advice it is
only expected according to what a man has, and not according to what he has
not: and even here, although the events of prudence are out of our power, yet
do prudent things, though not to be prudent persons; if they have not the
prudence of advice, and conduct, yet they may have the prudence of obedience,
and of disciples: and the event is this; without prudence their virtue is
unsafe, and their persons defenselesse, and their interest is unguarded; for
prudence is a handmaid waiting at the production and birth of virtue: It is a
nurse to it in its infancy, its patron an assaults, its guide in temptations,
its security in all portions of chance and contingency: And he that is
imprudent, if he have many accidents and varieties, is in great danger of being
none at all, or if he be, at the best he is but a weak and an unprofitable
servant, useless to his neighbor, vain in himself, and as to God, the least
in the kingdom: his virtue is contingent, and by chance, not proportioned to
the reward of wisdom, and the election of a wise religion.

(...)
(...).
No purchase, no wealth, no advantage is great enough to be

1. It is the duty of Christian prudence to choose the end of a Christian, that
which is perfective of a man, satisfactory to reason, the rest of a Christian,
and the beatification of his spirit; and that is, to choose and desire, and
propound to himself heaven, and the fruition of God, as the end of all his acts
and arts, his designs and purposes. For in the nature of things that is most
eligible, and delivers from death; and temperance though it be in the matter of
meat, and drink, and pleasures, yet has an effect upon the understanding

And now let the voluptuous person go and try whether putting his wanton hand
to the bosom of his Mistress will get half such honor as Scaevola put upon his
head, when he put his hand into the fire. Let him see whether a drunken meeting
will cure a fever, or make him wise? A hearty and a persevering prayer will.
yesterday, that is in forgetfulness, and annihilation, unless its only
child, sorrow, shall marry, and breed much to be preferred before little,
certainty before danger, public good things, before private evils, eternity
before moments, then let us set down in religion, and make heaven to be our
end, God to be our Father, Christ our elder Brother, the Holy Ghost the earnest
of our inheritance, Malim prudentiae guttam quam foecundioris fortunae pelagus:
One drop of prudence is more useful, then an ocean of a smooth fortune; for
prudence is a rare instrument toward heaven; and a great fortune is made
oftentimes the highway to hell and destruction. However, thus far, prudence
is our duty; every man can be so wise, and is bound to it, to choose heaven and
a cohabitation with God, before the possessions and transient vanities of the
world.

2. It is a duty of Christian prudence to pursue this great end, with apt means
and instruments in proportion to that end. No wise man will sail to Ormus in a
cock-boat, or use a child for his interpreter; and that General is a Cyclops
without an eye, who chooses the sickest men to man his Towns, and the weakest
to fight his battles. It cannot be a vigorous prosecution unless the means
have an efficacy or worth commensurate to all the difficulty, and something of
the excellency of that end which is designed. And indeed men use not to be so
weak in acquiring the possessions of their temporals; But in matters of
religion they think rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of
carfulness, to become richer then their neighbors; and are amazed at every
loss, and impatient of an evil accident, and feel a direct storm of passion,
if they suffer in their interest: But in order to heaven they are cold in their
religion, wisdom, delivery from sickness, his holy Spirit, the forgiveness of
sins, the grace of chastity, restitution to his favor, or the like, do we hope
to obtain them without a high opinion of the things we ask? and if we value
them highly, must we not desire them earnestly? and if we desire them
earnestly, must we not pray for them fervently? and whatsoever we ask for
fervently, must not we beg for frequently? and then because prayer is but one
hand toward the reaching a blessing, and God requires our cooperation and
endeavor; and we must work with both effectual, servent, frequent,
continual, holy, passionate, that must get a grace, or secure a blessing: The
love that we must have to God must be such as to keep his commandments, and to
make us willing to part with all our estate, and all our honor, and our life
for the testimony Our charity to our neighbors must be expressive in a
language of a real friendship, aptness to forgive, readiness to forbear, in
pitying infirmities, in relieving necessities, in giving our goods and our
lives, and quitting our privileges to save his soul, to secure and support his
virtue. Our repentance must be full of sorrows and care, of diligence and
hatred against sin, it must drive out all, and leave no affections toward it;
it must be constant and persevering, fearful of relapse, and watch-full of all
accidents: Our temperance must sometimes turn into abstinence, and most
commonly be severe, and ever without reproof: He that striveth for masteries is
temperate (says Saint Paul) in all things; he that does all this, may with
some pretense and reason say, he intends to go to heaven: But they that will
not deny a lust, nor refrain an appetite, they that will be drunk when their
friends do merrily constrain them, or love a cheap religion and a gentle and
lame prayer, short and soft, quickly said, and soon passed over, seldom
returning, and but little observed, How is it possible that they should think
themselves persons disposed to receive such glorious crowns and scepters, such
excellent conditions, which they have not faith enough to believe, nor
attention heaven upon conditions, which we can perform with greatest diligence;
a reward, but a gift, and an infinite favor: but yet it is not reached forth
but to persons disposed by the conditions of God; which conditions when we
pursue in kind, let us be very careful we do not fail of the mighty price of
our high calling, for want of

3. It is an office of prudence so to serve God that we may at the same time
preserve our lives and our estates, our interest and reputation for our selves,
and our relatives, so far as they can consist together. Saint Paul in the
beginning of Christianity was careful to instruct the forwardness and zeal of
the new Christians into good husbandry, and to catechize the men into good
trades, and the women into useful employments, that they might for the mighty
price of our salvation: and this is that part of prudence, which is the
defensative and guards of a Christian in the time of persecution; and it has
in it much of duty. He that through an indiscreet zeal casts himself into a
needless danger, has betrayed his life to tyranny and tempts the sin of an
enemy, provision for them of his own house, and he that fails in this duty by
his own fault, is worse then an infidel, and denies the faith, by such
unseasonably dying, or being undone, which by that testimony he did intend
gloriously to confess; he serves the end of ambition and popular services, but
not the sober ends of religion, he Quem fata cogunt, ille cum venia est miser,
He whom God by an inevitable necessity calls to sufferance, he has leave to be
undone, and that ruin of his estate or loss of his life shall secure first a
providence, then a crown.

At si quis ultro se malis offert volens.
seque ipse torquet, perdere est dignus bona

But he that invites the cruelty of a Tyrant by his own follyes or the
indiscretions of an unsignificant and impertinent zeal, suffers as a wilful
person, and enters into the portion and reward of fools. And this is the
precept of our Blessed Savior, next after my text: Beware of men: use your
prudence to the purposes of avoiding their snare, (...) Man is the most harmful
of all the wild beasts: ye are sent as sheep among wolves, be therefore wise
as serpents; when you can avoid it suffer not men to ride over your heads, or
trample you under foot; that's the wisdom of Serpents; and so must we; that is
by all just complyances, and toleration of all indifferent changes in which a
duty is not destroyed and in which we were not active, so to preserve our
selves that we might be permitted to live, and serve God, and to do advantages
to religion; so purchasing time to do good in, by bending in all those flexures
of fortune, and condition, which we cannot help, and which we do not set
forward, and which we never did procure; and this is the direct meaning of
Saint Paul; see then that ye walk Ephesians. 5. 16.
circumspectly, not as fools but as wise, Redeeming the time because the days
are evil; that is, we are fallen into times that are troublesome, dangerous,
persecuting and afflictive, purchase as much respite as you can: Buy or redeem
the time by all honest arts, by humility, by fair carriage and sweetnesses of
society, by civility, and a peaceful conversation, by good words, and all
honest offices, by praying for your persecutors, by patient sufferance of what
is unavoidable: And when the Tyrant draws you forth from all these guards and
retirements, and offers violence to your duty or tempts you to do a dishonest
act, or to omit an act of obligation, then come forth into to walk in wisdom
toward them that Col. 4. 5.
are without redeeming the time: for so Saint Paul renewes that permission, or
commandment: Give them no just cause of offense; with all humility and as
occasion is offered represent their duty, who was the God of the Christians?
answered (...); If you be disposed with real and hearty desires of learning,
what you ask you shall quickly know; But if your purposes be in direct, I shall
not preach to you, to my hurt and your no advantage. Thus the wisdom of the
primitive Christians was careful not to profane

(...)
(...)
As knowing that even in this sense, time was very precious and the
opportunity of giving glory to God by the offices of an excellent religion,
was not too dear a purchase at that rate. But then when the wolves had entered
into the folds and seized upon a lamb the rest fled, and used all the innocent
arts of concealment. Saint Athanasius being overtaken by his persecutors, but
not known, and asked whether he saw Athanasius passing that non long abest
Athanasius; the man is not far off; a swift footman will easily overtake him.
And Saint Paul divided the council of his Judges, and made the Pharisees his
parties by a witty insinuation of his own belief of the resurrection, which was
not the main question, but an incident to the matter of his accusation. And
when Plinius secundus in the face of a Tyrant court was pressed so invidiously
to give his opinion concerning a good man in banishment and under the
disadvantage of an unjust sentence he diverted the snare of Marcus Regulus by
referring his answer to a competent judicatory

For in this case the rule is easy; If we are commanded to be wise and redeem
our time, that we serve God and religion, we must not use unlawful arts which
set us back in the accounts of our time, no lying Subterfuges, no betraying of
a truth, no treachery to a good man, no insnaring of a brother, no secret
renouncing of any part or proposition of our religion, no denying libellatici,
Libellers; and were excommunicate and cast off from the society of Christians
and the hopes of Heaven, till they had returned to God by a severe repentance;
optanduum est ut quod libenter facis din facere possis. It is good to have time
long to do that which we confession of Christ, of which Saint Paul says, by
the mouth confession is made unto salvation And our Blessed Savior, he that
confesses me before men. I will confess him before my Heavenly Father; and if
here he refuses to own me, I will not own him hereafter: it is also expressly
against Christian fortitude and nobleness; and against the simplicity and
sincerity of our religion, and it turns prudence into craft, apostasy: and it
is well that the man is tempted no further; for if the persecutors could not be
corrupted with money, it is ods but the complying man would, and though he
would with the money hide his shame, yet he will not with the loss of all his
estate redeem his religion (...): some men will lose their lives rather then a
fair estate: and do not almost all the armies of the world (I mean) those
that fight in the justest causes, pretend to fight and die for their lands to
die; and he was a fool that being in Portugal run to God has no pleasure in
fools, to the latter, If you gain the whole world and lose your own soul: your
loss is infinite and intolerable.

Sermon. XXI. Part II.


But as our necessary duty is bound upon us by one ligament more people that
are liberal in their excommunications make men think

Thus Christ reproved the Pharisees, for straining at a gnat and swallowing a
Camel; the very representation of the manner and matter of fact discovers the
vice by reproving the folly of it. They the Jew spends all in his passover,
the Moore in his marriage, and the Christian in his law suits? that, what the
first sacrifice to religion, and the second to public joy, we should spend
Pudet haec opprobria nobis and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli. But
among our selves also, we serve the Devils ends, and minister to an eternal
disunion, by saying and doing things which look unhandsomely. One sort of men
is superstitious, fantastical, greedy of honor, and tenacious of propositions
to fill the purse, and his religion is thought nothing but policy, and opinion.
Another says he has a good religion, but he is the most indifferent and cold
person in the world, either to maintain it, or to live according to it; the one
dresses the images of Saints with fine clothes, the other lets the poor go

One thing I desire should be observed, that here the Question being concerning
prudence, and the matter of doing reputation to our religion, it is not enough
to say, we can with learning justify all that we do, and make all whole with
3. or 4. distinctions; for possibly the man that went to visit the Corinthian
Lais, if he had been asked why he dishonored himself with so unhandsome an
entrance, might find an excuse to legitimate his act, or at least to make
himself believe well of his own person; but he that intends to do himself
honor, must take care that he be not suspected,

To this rule appertains that we be curious in observing the circumstances of
men, and satisfy all their reasonable expectations, undecencies rather then
sins, such which may become a just Heathen, but not a holy Christian; a man of
the world, but not a man professing godliness. Because when the greatness of
the man, or the excellency of the Law, engage us upon great severity, or an
exemplar virtue, whatsoever is less then it renders the man unworthy of the
religion, or the religion unworthy of its fame: Men think themselves abused,
and therefore return shame for payment. We never read of an Apostle that went
to law; and it is

But above all things those sects of Christians whose professed doctrine brings
destruction and diminution to government, give the most intolerable scandal,
and dishonor to the institution; and it had been impossible that Christianity
should have prevailed over the wisdom and power of the Greeks and Romans, if it
had not been humble to superiors, patient of injuries, charitable to the
needy, a great exactour of obedience to Kings, even to heathens, that they to
persecutours that they might be sweetened in their anger, or upbraided for their
cruel injustice: for so does the humble vine creep at the foot of an oak, and
leans upon its lowest base, and begs shade and protection, and leave to grow
under its branches, and to give and take mutual refreshment, and pay a
friendly influence for a mighty patronage, and they grow and dwell together,
and are the most remarkable of friends and married pairs of all the leavie
nation. Religion of it self is soft, easy and defenselesse, and God has made
it grow up with empire, and to lean upon the arms of Kings, and it cannot well
grow alone; and if it shall like the Ivy suck

There are some persons whose religion is hugely disgraced, because they change
their propositions according as their temporal necessities or advantages do
return. They that in their weakness and beginning cry out against all violence
as against persecution: at first they were pusillanimous, or at last
outrageous; that their doctrine at first served their fear, and at last served
their rage, and that they did not at all intend to serve God: and then who
shall believe them in any thing else? Thus some men declaim against the faults
of Governors, that themselves may govern; and when the power was in their
hands, what was necessity; as if a sin could be hallowed for coming into their
hands. Some Greeks at Florence subscribed the Article of Purgatory, and
condemned it in their own Diocesses: And the Kings supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, was earnestly defended against the pretenses of the Bishop of
Rome, and yet when he was thrust out, some men were, and are violent to submit
the King to their Consistories, as if he were Supreme in defiance of the Pope,
and yet not Supreme over his own Clergy. These Articles are managed too
suspitiously.

You lose all the advantages to your cause, if you lose your reputation.

5 It is a duty also of Christian prudence that the teachers of others by
authority, or reprovers of their vices by charity, should also make their
persons apt to do it without objection.

Lori pedem rectus derideat, Aethiopemalbus. Gracchi preaching against
sedition, nor Uerres prating against theevery, or Milo against homicide: and if
Herod had made an oration of humility, or Antiochus of mercy, men would have
thought, it had been a design to evil purposes. He that means to gain a soul,
must not make his Sermon an ostentation of his Eloquence, but the law of his
own life. If a Gramarian should speak solaecismes, or a Musician sing like a
bittern, he Gorgias went about to persuade the Greeks to be at peace, he had
eloquence enough to do advantage to his cause, and reason enough to press it:
But Melanthius was glad to put him off, by telling him that he was not fit to
persuade peace, who could not agree at home with his wife, nor make his wife
agree with her maid; and he that could not make peace between three single
persons, was unapt to prevail for the reuniting fourteen or fifteen
Commonwealths: And this thing Saint Paul remarks by -- Facinus quos inquinat,
aequat, to reprove, belongs to a Superior; and as innocence gives a man

Hither also it appertains that in public or private reproofs, we observe
circumstances of time, of place, of person, of disposition. The vices of a King
are not to be opened publicly; and Princes must not be reprehended as a man
reproves his servant; but

A zealous man has not done his duty, when he calls his brother drunkard and
beast, and he may better do it, by telling him

6. It is a duty of Christian prudence not to suffer our souls to Uae soli and
singulari, said the Wise man, Woe to him that is alone: and if we consider how
much God has done to secure our souls, and after all that, how many ways
there are for a man's soul to miscarry, we should think it very necessary to
call to a spiritual man to take us by the hand, to walk in the ways of God,
and to lead us in all the regions of duty, and through the labyrinths of danger.
For God who best loves, and best knows how to value our souls, set a price no
less upon it then the lifeblood of his

But because we are in the question of prudence, we must consider whether it be
necessary to do so: For every man thinks himself wise enough as to the conduct
of his soul, and managing of his eternal interest; and divinity is every man's
trade, and the

But then is the soul the only safe and the only trifling thing about us? Are
not there a thousand dangers, and ten thousand difficulties, and innumerable
possibilities of a misadventure? Are not all the congregations in the world
divided in their doctrines, and all of them call their own way necessary and
most of them call all the his duty and renew his holy principle, and actuate
his spiritual pleasure and pain, the two great fountains

But what advantage shall we receive by a spiritual Guide? much every way. For
this is the way that God has appointed who in every age has sent a succession
of spiritual persons, whose office is stewards of Gods household, shepherds of
the stock, dispensers of the mysteries, under mediators, and ministers of
prayer, preachers of the law, expounders of questions, monitors of duty,
conveiances of blessings, and that which is a good discourse in the mouth of
another man is from them an ordinance of God; and besides its natural efficacy
and persuasion, it prevails by the way of blessing, by the reverence of his
person, by divine institution, by the excellency of order, by the advantages of
opinion and assistances of reputation, by the influence of the spirit who is
the president of such ministeries, and who is appointed Sophocl.
Holy men ought to know all things from God, and that relate to

Sermon. XXII. Part III.
7. AS it is a part of Christian prudence to take into the conduct

Concerning which it will be impossible to give characters and significations
particular enough to enable a choice without the interval assistances of
prayer, experience and the Grace of God; He that describes a man can tell you
the color of his hair, his stature and proportions, and describe some general
lines, enough to distingush him from a Cyclops or a Saracen, but when you
chance

When Saint John was to separate false teachers from true, he took no other
course but to remark the doctrine which was of God, and that should be the mark
of cognizance to distinguish right shepherds from robbers and invaders: every
spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: He
that denies it is not of God. By this he bids his scholars to avoid the
present sects of Ebion, confess Jesus Christ come in the flesh, and the
following sects did avoid that rock over which a great Apostle had hung out so
plain a lantern.

In the following ages of the Church men have been so curious to

1. Some men distinguish error from truth by calling their adversaries
doctrine, new, and of yesterday; and certainly this is a good era for our
faith and parts of religion by the period of their preaching: our account
begins then, and whatsoever is contrary to what they taught is new and false,
and whatsoever is besides, what they taught, is no part of our religion (and
then no man can be prejudiced for believing it or not) and if it be adopted
into the confessions of the Church, the proposition is always so uncertain,
that its not to be admitted into the faith; and therefore if it be old in
postliminium, if it was from the first, though the Holy fire has been buried,
or the river ran under ground, yet that we do not call that new; since newness
is not to be accounted of by a proportion to our short lived memories, or to
the new though it be pressed with a new zeal and discoursed of by unheard of
arguments; that is though men be ignorant and need to learn it, yet it is not
therefore new or unnecessary.

2. Some would have false teachers sufficiently signified by a name or the
owning of a private Appellative as of Papist, Lutheran, Calvenists Zuinglian,
Socinian; and think it is enough to denominat them the flock of God, and the
Novatians called the Catholics traditors, and the Eustathians called
themselves Catholics and the worshippers of images made Iconoclast to be a
name of scorn, and men made names as they listed, or as the fate of the market
went. And if a Doctor preaches a doctrine which another man likes not, but
preaches the contradictory, he that consents and he that refuses have each of
them a teacher by whose name, if they please to wrangle, they may be signified.
It was so in the Corinthian Church with this only difference that they divided
themselves by names which signified the same religion. I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo and I am of Peter, and I of Christ; these Apostles were ministers of
Christ; and so does every teacher new or old among the Christians pretend
himself to

3. Amongst some men a sect is sufficiently thought to be reproved, if it
subdivides and breaks into little fractions, or changes its own opinions:
indeed if it declines its own doctrine, no man has reason to believe them upon
their word, or to take them upon the stock of reputation, which (themselves
being judges) they have forfeited and renounced in the changing that which at
first they obtruded passionately. And therefore in this case there that
doctrine is certainly true, in which the generality that doctrine is also
sufficient since it is certain that because in all Communions and Churches
there are some very good men, that do all their duty to the getting of truth,
God will not fail in any thing that is necessary to them that honestly and
heartily desire to obtain it: and therefore if they rest in the heartinesse of
that, and live accordingly, and superinduce nothing to the destruction of that,
they have nothing to do but to rely upon Gods goodness: and if they perish, it
is certain they cannot help it, and that is demonstration enough that they
cannot perish,

4. Whoever break the bands of a Society, or Communion, and go out from that
Congregation in whose Confession they are baptized, do an intolerable scandal
to their doctrine and persons, and give suspicious men reason to decline their
Assemblies, and not to choose them at all for any thing of their authority, or
outward circumstances: and Saint Paul bids the Romans to mark them that cause
divisions and offenses. But the following words make their caution prudent and
practicable, [contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them]
they that recede from the doctrine which they have learned, they cause the
offense, and if they also obtrude this upon their congregations, they also make
the division. For it is certain, if we receive any doctrine contrary to what
Christ gave, and the Apostles taught, for the authority of any man, then we
call men Masters, and leave our Master which is in heaven; and in that case we
must separate from the Congregation and adhere to Christ; but this is not to be
done, unless with their mouths not to confess unto salvation, what with
their hearts they believe unto righteousness. The best way of remedying both
the evils is, that Governors lay no burden of doctrines or laws but what are
necessary, or very profitable: and that Inferiors do not contend for things
unnecessary, nor call any thing necessary that is not: till then there will be
evils on both sides; and his authority destroy his truth. But in this case
also, although separating be a suspicious thing and intolerable, unless it be
when a sin is imposed, yet to separate is also accidental to truth: for some
men separate with reason, some men against reason; therefore here all the
certainty that is in the thing, is when the truth is secured, and all the
security to the men will be in the humility of their persons, and the
heartinesse and simplicity

5. The ways of direction which we have from holy Scripture All that confess
Jesus incarnate are of God said Saint John; those men that deny it are
heretics; avoid them: and Saint Paul bids to observe them that cause divisions
and offenses against the doctrine delivered. Them also avoid, that do so. And
we might do so as easily as they, if the world would only take their
depositum, that doctrine which they delivered to all the Creed, and superinduce
nothing else, but suffer Christian faith to rest in its own perfect simplicity,
unmingled with arts, and opinions, and interests. This course is plain and
easy, and I will not intricate it with more words, but leave it directly in
its own truth and certainty, with this only direction. That when we are to
choose our doctrine, or our side, we take that which is in the plain
unexpounded words of Scripture; for in that only our religion can consist.
Secondly choose that which is most advantageous to a holy life, to the proper
graces of a Christian, to humility, to charity, to forgiveness and alms, to
obedience, and Let ours be careful to maintain goodworks for necessary uses,
for he that heartily pursues these proportions cannot be an ill man, though he
were accidentally and in the particular applications deceived.

6. But because this is an act of wisdom, rather then prudence, and supposes
science or knowledge rather then experience, therefore it concerns the prudence
of a Christian to observe the practice,

7. Therefore those teachers that pretend to be guided by a private spirit are
certainly false Doctors. I remember what Simmias in Plutarch tells concerning
Socrates, that if he heard any man say he saw a divine vision, he presently
esteemed him vain and proud; but if he pretended only to have heard a voice or
the word of ye saw no figure, but ye heard a voice, said Moses to the people
concerning God: and therefore if any man pretends to speak the word of God, we
will enquire concerning it; the man may the better be heard, because he may be
certainly reproved if he speaks amiss: visions and revelations, to a private
spirit and a mission extraordinary, the man is proud and unlearned, vicious and
impudent. No Scripture is of private interpretation (says S. Peter) that is,
of private emission or declaration. Gods words were delivered indeed by single
men, but such as were publicly designed Prophets, remarked with a known
character, approved of by the high Priest, and Sanhedrim, endued with a public
spirit, and his doctrines were always agreeable to the other Scriptures. But
if any man pretends now to the spirit, either it must be a private or public;
if it be private, it can but be useful to himself If I bear witness of my
self, my witness is not true, said Truth it self, our Blessed Lord. But
secondly, they that intend to teach by an extraordinary spirit, if they pretend
to teach according to Scripture must be examined by the measures of Scripture,
and then their extraordinary must be judged by the ordinary spirit, and stands
or falls by the rules of every good man's religion, and public government; and
then we are well enough. But if they For if an Angel from heaven (he certainly
is a spirit) preach any other doctrine, let him be accursed.

But this pretense of a single and extraordinary spirit is nothing else but the
spirit of pride, error, and delusion, a snare to catch easy and credulous
souls, which are willing to die for a gay word and a distorted face; it is the
parent of folly, and giddy doctrine, impossible to be proved, and therefore
useless to all purposes of religion, reason, or sober counsels; it is like an
invisible color, or music without a sound, it is, and indeed is so intended
to be, a had declared the whole truth of God, and told all the will of God: and
it is an affront to the Spirit of God, the Spirit of wisdom, and knowledge, of
order and public ministeries. But the will furnishes out malice, and the
understanding sends out levity, and they marry, and produce a fantastic
dream, and the daughter sucking wind instead of the milk of the word, grows
up to madness and the spirit of reprobation. Besides all this, an
extraordinary Apostles and Evangelists, Prophets and Pastors, Bishops and
Priests, the spirit of Ordination, and the spirit of instruction, Catechists,
and Teachers, Arts and Sciences, Scriptures and a constant succession of
Expositors, the testimony of Churches, and a constant line of tradition, or
delivery of Apostolical Doctrine in all things necessary to salvation. And
after all this, to have a fungus arise from the belly of mud and darkness, and
nourish a gloworm, that shall the stars in Christ's right hand, is to annull
all the excellent, established, orderly, and certain effects of the Spirit of
God, and to worship the false fires of the night. He therefore that will follow
a Guide that leads him by an extraordinary spirit, shall go an extraordinary
way, and have a strange fortune, and a singular religion, and a portion by
himself, a great way off from the common inheritance of the Saints, who are all
led by the Spirit of God, and have one heart, and one mind, one faith, the
earnest of their inheritance.

Concerning the pretense of a private spirit, for interpretation of the
confessed doctrine of God (the holy Scriptures) it will not so easily come into
this Question of choosing our spiritual Guides; Because every person that can
be Candidate in this office, that can be chosen to guide others, must be a
public man, that is, of a holy calling, sanctified or separate publicly to
the office; and but the more holy and the more learnd the man is, his
interpretation

8. Those are to be suspected for evil guides, who to get authority among the
people pretend a great zeal, and use a bold liberty in reproving Princes and
Governors, nobility and Prelates; for such homilies cannot be the effects of a
holy religion, which lay a snare for authority, and undermine power, and
discontent the people Tempter have insinuated privately.

But if ever you enter into the seats of those Doctors that speak reproachfully
of their Superiors, or detract from government, 2 Timothy 3. 4. 5.
and avoiding societies of heretics, false guides and bringers in of strange
doctrines, still they reckon treason and rebellion; so S. Paul, In the last
days perilous times shall come, the men shall have the form of Godliness,
and deny the power of it; they shall be Traitors, heady, high minded: that's
their characteristic note. So Saint Peter the Lord knows how to deliver the
Godly out of temptations and to reserve the 2 Pet. 2. 10.
unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. But chiefly them that walk
after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness and despise government;
presumptuous are they, self willed they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities. The same also is recorded and observed by Saint Jude, verse. 8. ep.
Jude.
likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion and
speak evil of dignities. These three testimonies are but the declaration of one
great contingency; they are the same prophesy declared by three Apostolical
men, that had the gift of prophecy: and by this character the Holy Ghost in all
ages has given us caution

9. But the Apostles in all these prophecies have remarked lust to they are
filthy dreamers, they defile the flesh; so Saint Jude: they walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness, so Saint Peter they are lovers of pleasure
more then lovers of God, incontinent and sensual. So Saint Paul and by this
part of the character, as the Apostles remarked the Nicolatians, and Gnostics,
the Carpocratians and all their impure branches which began in their days and
multiplied after their deaths, so they prophetically did foresignifie al such
sects to be avoided who to catch silly women laden with sins preach doctrines
of ease and licenciounesse, apt to countenance and encourage vile lust and
treason together; because the former is so shameful a crime and renders a man's
spirit naturally averse to government that if it falls upon the person of a
Ruler, it takes from him the spirit of government, and renders him diffident,
pusillanimous, private, and ashamed; if it happen in the person of a subject,
it makes him hate the man that shall shame him and punish him: it hates the
light and the Sun, because that opens him, and therefore is much more against
government because that chastity is sometimes used for the Eloquia Domini casta
eloquia
whole religion, and to do an action chastely signifies purity of intention,
abstraction from the world and separation from low and secular ends, the
virginity of the soul, and its union with God; and all deviations and
estrangements from God and adhesion to forbidden objects is called fornication
and adultery. Those sects therefore that teach, encourage, or practice impious
or unhallowed mixtures and shameful lusts are issues of the impure spirit and
most contrary to God who can behold no unclean thing.

10. Those prophets and Pastors that pretend severity and live Nihil est
hominum inepta persuasione falsius, nec ficta severitate ineptius. All ages of
the Church were extremely curious to observe when any new teachers did arise,
what kind of lives they lived: and if they pretended severely and to a strict
life, then they knew their danger doubled: for it is certain all that teach
doctrines contrary to the established religion, delivered by pride, or their
revenge, their envy or their detraction, their scorn or their complacency in
themselves, their desire of pre-eminence and their impatience of arrival, shall
place carnal sinner, whom they shall load with censures and an upbraiding
scorn; but themselves are like Devils, the spirits of darkness the spiritual
wickednesses in high places. Some sects of men are very angry against servants
for recreating and easing their labors with a less prudent and an unsevere
refreshment; but the patron of their sect shall oppress a wicked man and an
unbelieving person; they shall chastise a drunkard and entertain murmurrers;
they shall not abide an oath and yet shall force men to break three or four.
This sect is to be avoided, because although it is good to be severe against
carnal or bodily sins, yet a bodily sin to make way for a spiritual, or reprove
a servant, that his Lord may sin alone, or punish a stranger and a beggar that
will not approve their sins, but will have sins of his own. Concering such
persons Saint Paul has told us that they shall not proeecd far, but their
folly shall bemanifest. (...) said Lysias. Cito ad naturam sicta reciderunt
sua. They that dissemble their sin and their manners, or make severity to serve
loosnesse, and an imaginary virtue to minister to a real vice; they that abhor
Idols and would commit sacrilege: chastise a drunkard and promote sedition,

11. The substance of al is this, that we must not chose our doctrine by our
guide; but our guide by the doctrine, and if we doubt concerning the doctrine
we may judge of that by the lives and designs of the Teachers: By their fruits
you shall know them, and by the plain words of the scripture, by the Apostles
Creed, and by the commandments, and by the certain known and established forms
of government; These are the great indices, and so plain, apt and easy; that he
that is deceived is so because he will be so; he is betrayed into it by his own
lust and a voluntary chosen folly.

1.
Questions, 2. when they causelessly retire from the universal customs 2.
of Christendom, 3. And cancel all the memorials of the greatest 3.
mysteries of our redemption, 4. When their confessions and Catechismes 4.
and their whole religion consist (...) in speculations and 5.
outward guises and material solemnities and imperfect forms drawing the heart
of the vine forth into leaves and irregular fruitless suckers, turning the
substance into circumstances, and the love of God into gestures, and the effect
of the spirit into the impertinent offices of a burdensome ceremonial: For by
these two particulars the Apostles reproved the Jews and the Gnostics, or those
that from the school of Pythagoras pretended conversation with Angels and great
knowledge of the secrets of the spirits; chosing tutelar Angels and assigning
them offices and charges, as in the Church of Colos. 2
Rome to this day they do to Saints: to these add, 6. that we observe whether
the guides of souls avoid to suffer for their religion, 6.
for then the matter is foul, or the man not fit to lead, that dares not die in
cold blood for his religion: will the man lay his life and his soul upon the
proposition? If so, then you may consider him upon his proper grounds, but if
he refuses that, refuse his conduct sure enough, 7. You may also watch whether
they do not chose 7.
their proselyts amongst the rich and vicious; that they may serve 8.
their doctrines evidently and greatly serve the interest of wealth or honor,
and are ineffective to piety, 9. If they strive to gain 9.
any one to their confession, and are negligent to gain them to good life, 10.
If by pretenses they lessen the severity of Christ's precepts, 10.
and are easy in dispensations and licencious glosses: 11. If they invent 11.
suppletories to excuse an evil man and yet to reconcile his bad life with the
hopes of heaven, you have reason to suspect the

Here indeed is the great necessity that we should have the prudence and
discretion, the (...) of serpents,

-- ut cernamus acutum
Quam aut aquila aut serpens Epidaurius.
For so serpents as they are curious to preserve their heads from contrition or
a bruise, so also to safeguard themselves that they be not charmed with sweet
and enticing words of false prophets; who charm not wisely, but cunningly,
leading aside unstable souls; against

1. We cannot expect that by these or any other signs we shall be enabled to
discover concerning all men whether they teach an error or no. Neither can a
man by these reprove a Lutheran, or a Zuinglian, a Dominican or a Franciscan, a
Russian or a Greek, a Muscovite or a Georgian, because those which are certain
signs of false teachers, do signify such men, who destroy an article of faith
or a commandment; God was careful to secure us from

2. In all discerning of sects, we must be careful to distinguish the

Multos Thyrsigeros, paucos est cernere Bacchos: Many men of holy calling and
holy religion that are of unholy lives; homines ignava oper a Philosopha
sententia: But these must be separated from the institution: and the evil of
the men is only to be noted, as that such persons be not taken to our single
conduct, and personal ministry; I will be of the man's religion if it be good,
though he be not; but I will not make him my confessor (...). If he be not wise
for himself, I will not sit down at his feet lest we mingle filthiness instead
of being cleansed and instructed.

3. Let us make one separation more and then we may consider and act according
to the premises: If we epsy a design or an evil mark upon one doctrine let us
divide it from the other that are not so spotted, Try all things and retain
that which is good: from every sect and community of Christians take any thing
that is good, that advances holy religion, and the Divine honor; For one has
a better government, a second a better confession, a third has excellent
spiritual arts for the conduct of souls, a fourth has fewer errors, and by
what instrument soever a holy

These are the general rules of Christian prudence which I have chosen to
insist upon; there are many others more particular indeed, but yet worth not
only the enumerating, but observing also, and that they be reduced to
practice. For the prudence of a Christian does oblige and direct respectively
all the children of the institution; * and vigorous in our prosecutions, * that
we suffer not good nature to Christian prudence is accounted folly by humane
prudence, and so it is ever accounted when our duty leads us into a
persecution. * Hither also appertain; that we never do a thing that we know we
must repent of, * that we do not admire too many things, nor any thing too
much, * that we be even in prosperity * and patient in adversity; but
transported with neither into the regions of despair or levity, pusillanimity
or Tyranny, dejection or Garishnesse, * always has four ears, Reason
Religion, wisdom and experience, * rather to lose a benefit then to suffer a
detriment and an evil, * to stop the beginnings of evil, * to pardon and not to
observe all the faults of friends or enemies; * of evils to choose the least, *
and of goods to choose the greatest, if it be also safest; * not to be insolent
in success, but to proceed according to the probability of humane causes and
contingencies, * ever to be thankful for benefits, * and profitable Insignis
enim est prudentiae, ut quod non facere non possis, id facere ut libenter
fecisse videaris, * not to pursue difficult uncertain and obscure things with
violence and passion. These if we observe we shall do advantage to our selves
and to the religion, and avoid those evils which fools and unwary people suffer
for nothing, dying or bleeding without cause and without pity. I end Socrates.
(...) Virtue is but a shadow and a servile employment unless Plut. Phaedon
it be adorned and instructed with prudence which gives motion and conduct,
spirits and vigourousnesse to religion, making it not only humane and
reasonable but Divine and caelestial.


Matthew 10. latter part of Ver. 16. And harmless as doves.]
OUR Blessed Savior having prefac'd concerning Prudens simplicitas, is
Martial's character of a good man: a wary and cautious innocence, a harmless
providence, and provision: Vera simplicitate bonus, a true simplicity, is that
which leaves to a man arms defensive; Et homines simplices, minime malos, the
Romans called parum cautos, saepe stolidos, unwary fools, and defenselesse
people were called simple: and when the innocence of the old simple Romans in
Junius Brutus time, in Fabritius, and Camillus began to degenerate, and to need
the Aquilian law to force men to deal honestly, quickly the mischief increased,
till the Aquilian law grew as much out of power, as honesty was out of
countenance. And there, and every where else men thought they got a purchase,
when they met with an honest man, and (...) Aristotle calls (...), and (...). A
fool is a profitable person, and he that is simple is little better then mad:
And so it is, when simplicity wants prudence. Orat. 21.
simplicity, so he calls it for reverence, but indeed it was folly, for it was
zeal without knowledge: But it was a better temper, which he observed in his
own father, (...), such a simplicity which only wanted craft, or deceit, but
wanted no prudence or caution, and that is truly Christian simplicity, or the

We do not live in an age in which there is so much need to bid men be wary, as
to take care that they be innocent: Indeed in religion we are usually too
loose, and ungirt, exposing our selves to temptation, and others to offense,
and our name to dishonor, and the cause it self to reproach, and we are open
and ready to every evil but persecution: from that we are close enough, and
that Leporina resolved to die, being troubled for her husbands danger, and he

Tuta frequensque via est -- This is an usual and a safe way to cozen, upon
color of friendship Dio Chrysostomus calls it; (...); Dissert. 1. de regno.
for the most timorous and the basest of beasts and every man else; and above
all, lying, or craftiness, and unfaithful Every soul loses truth very
unwillingly: Every man is so great a lover of truth, that if he has it not he
loves to believe he has, and would fain have all the world to believe as he
does; either presuming that he has truth, or else hating to be deceived, or to
be esteemed a cheated and an abused person. Non licet suffurari mentem hominis
etiam Samaritani, said R. Moses, sed veritatem Can. Eth.
loquere atque age ingenue, If a man be a Samaritan, that is, Qui ignotos
loedit, latro appellatur, qui amicos, paulo minus quam parricida. He that hurts
strangers is a thief, but he that hurts his friends is little better then a
parricide: That Is the brand and stigma of hypocrisy and lying: it hurts our
friends, mendacium in damnum potens, and makes the man that owns it guilty of a
crime, that is,

1. The first office of Christian simplicity consists in our religion and
manners: that they he open and honest, public and justifiable, the same at
home and abroad; for besides the ingenuity and honesty of this, there is an
indispensable, and infinite necessity it should be so, because whoever is a
hypocrite in his religion, mocks God, presenting to him the outside, and
reserving

Vita fallax, abditos sensus gerens,
Nimisque pulchram turpibus faciem induens.
It is a crafty life that men live, carrying designs, and living upon secret
purposes; Pudor impudentem celat, audacem quies, piet as nefandum, vera
fallaces probant; simulantque molles dura. Men pretend modesty, and under that
red vail are bold against Superiors, saucy to their betters upon pretenses of
religion, invaders of others rights by false propositions in Theology,
pretending humility they challenge superiority above all orders of men, and for
being thought more holy, think that they have title to govern the world; they
bear upon their face great religion, and are impious in their relations, false
to their trust, unfaithful to their friend, unkind to their dependants; (...),
turning up the white of their eye, and seeking for Asperum cultum, and intonsum
caput and negligentiorem barbam and nitidum argento odium, and cubile humi
positum and quicquid aliud ambitionem via perversa sequitur: being the softest
persons under an austere habit, the loosest livers under a contracted brow;
under a pale face, having the reddest and most spritely livers; these kind of
men have abused all ages of the world, and all religions, it being so easy in
nature, so prepared and ready for mischiefs, that men should creep into
opportunities of devouring the flock upon pretense of defending them, and to
raise

Introrsum turpes speciosi pelle decora. Men that are like painted sepulchers,
entertainment for the eye, but images of death, chambers of rottenness, and
repositories of dead men's bones. It may sometimes concern a man to seem
religious; Gods glory may be showed by fair appearances, or the edification of
our brother, or the reputation of a cause; but this is but sometimes; but it
always concerns us that we be religious, and we may reasonably think, that if
the colors of religion so well do advantage to us, the substance and reality
would do it much Nunquam est peccare utile quia semper est turpe, said Cicero.
It is never profitable to sin because it is always base and dishonest: and if
the face of religion could do a good turn, which the heart and substance does
destroy, then religion it self were the greatest hypocrite in the world, and
promises a blessing which it never can perform, but must be beholding to its
enemy to verify its promises. No. We shall be sure to feel the blessings is,
conversing with men as in the presence of God, and in our private Ornat hunc
maguitudo animi quae nihil ad ostentationem, omnia ad conscientiam refert:
recteque facti, non ex populi sermon mercedem, sed ex facto petit. And this
does well state the question of a sincere religion, and an ingenuous goodness;
It requires that we do nothing for ostentation, but every thing for conscience;
and we may be obliged in conscience to publish our manner of lives, but then it
must be, not that we may have a popular noise for a reward, but that God may

Neither does the sincerity of our religion require that we should not conceal
our sins, for he that sins and dares to own them publicly may become impudent:
and so long as in modesty we desire our shame should be hid, and men to think
better of us then we deserve, I say for no other reason, but either because we
would not derive the ill examples to others, or the shame to our selves, we are
within the protection of one of virtues sisters, and we are not far from the
gates of the kingdom of heaven; easy and apt to be invited in, and not very
unworthy to enter.

But if any other principle draws the vail, if we conceal our vices because we
would be honored for sanctity, or because we would not be hindered in our
designs, we serve the interest of pride and ambition, covetousness, or
vanity; if an innocent purpose hides the ulcer, it does half heal it; but if it
retires into the secrecy of sin and darkness, it turns into a plague, and
infects the heart, and it dies infallibly of a double exulceration. The
Macedonian boy that kept the coal in his flesh, and would not shake his arm,
lest he should disturb the sacrifice, or discompose the ministry before

Quid quod olet gravius mistum dia pasmate virus.
Atque duplex animae longius exit odor.
When Fescenia perfumed her breath that she might not smell of wine, she
condemned the crime of drunkenness: but grew ridiculous when the wine broke
through the cloud of a tender perfume

Notas ergo nimis frauds, deprensaque furta
Jam tollas, and sis ebria simpliciter.
A simple drunkard has but one fault, But they that avoid discovery, that they
may drink on without shame or restraint add Sic quae nigrior est cadente moro;
Cerussata sibi placet Lycoris: for so the most easy and deformed woman, whose
girdle no foolish young man will unloose, because she is blacker then the
falling mulbery; may please her self under a skin of Cerusse, and call her self
fairer then Pharaohs daughter, or the hinds living upon the snowy mountains.

One thing more there is to be added as an instance to the simplicity neque
enim id est celare cum quid reticias, sed cum quod tuscias, id ignorare
emolumenti tui causa velis eos, quorum inter est id scire: So Cicero So Cicero.
lib. 3. offic.
determins the case of prudence and simplicity. The discovery of pious frauds,
and the disclaiming of false but profitable and rich propositions; it is the
breath of God, and as it is purer then the beams of the the faith read at Nice,
and used all arts and all violence, and all lying, and all diligence to
discountenance it, yet it could not be, it was the truth of God and therefore
it was stronger then all the gates of hell, then all the powers of darkness:
and he that tells a lie for his religion or goes about by fraud and imposture
to gain proselytes, either dares not Emperor Verus) it is morum simplicium and
quae adumbrare nihil possit: it covers indeed a multitude of sins by curing
them, and obtaining pardon for them, but it can dissemble nothing of it self,
it cannot tell or do a lie: but it can become a sacrifice; a good man can quit
his life but never his integrity. That's the first duty; the sum of which is
that which Aquilius said concerning fraud and craft, bona sides cum aliud
simulatum aliud actum sit, when either we conceal what we ought to publish, or
do not act what we pretend.

2. Christian simplicity or the innocence of prudence relates to laws both in
their sanction and execution; that they be decreed with equity and proportioned
to the capacity and profit of the subjects and that they be applied to practice
with remissions and reasonable interpretations agreeable to the sense of the
words and the mind of the lawgiver; but laws are not to be cosened and abused
by contradictory glosses, and fantastic elusions as knowing that

3. Christian simplicity relates to promises and acts of grace and favor; and
its caution is, that all promises be simple, ingenuous, agreeable to the
intention of the promiser, truly and effectually expressed and never going
less in the performance, then in the promise, secundum aequum and bonum: and
though they may oblige to some small inconvenience, yet never to a great one:
and I will visit you to morrow morning, because I promised you, and therefore.
I will come etiamsi non concoxero, although I have not slept my full sleep, but
Si febricitavero if I be in a fever or have reason to fear one, I am
disobliged. For the nature of such promises bears upon them no bigger burden,
then can be expounded in matters of justice or in matters of grace as from a
superior to they should sit upon twelve thrones, they presently thought they
had his bond for a kingdom, and dreamt of wealth, and honor, power and a
splendid court; and Christ knew they did, but did not disintangle his promise
from the enfolded and intricate sense of which his words were naturally
capable; but he performed his promise, to better purposes, then they hoped for;
they were presidents in the conduct of souls, Princes of Gods people, the chief
in sufferings stood nearest to the cross, had an elder brothers portion in the
Kingdom of grace, were the founders of Churches, and dispensers their names
were written in heaven; and this was infinitely better, then to groan and wake
under a head pressed with a golden crown and pungent cares, and to eat alone,
and to walk in a crowd and to be vexed with all the public and many of the
private evils of the people, which is the sum Total of an earthly Kingdom.

When God promised to the obedient that they should live long in the land,
which he would give them, he meant it of the land of

But in this part of simplicity we Christians have a most especial obligation,
for our religion being ennobled by the most and the greatest promises, and our
faith made confident by the veracity bigger mischief, to cozen the more: for so
does the Devil: He

Sermon. XXIV. Part II.


(...).
There are men in the world who love to smile, but that smile is more dangerous
then the furrows of a contracted brow, or a storm in Adria; for their purpose
is only to deceive; they easily speak what they never mean, they heap up many
arguments to persuade that to others, which themselves believe not; they praise
that vehemently which they deride in their hearts, they declaim against a thing
which themselves covet, they beg passionately for banquets, and the good
natured kidnesses of festival chalices, for [De asciscendis principibus de
pace and bello in conviviis consultant, tanquam nullo magis tempore ad
simplices cogitationes pateat animus, aut ad magnas incalescat: as if then they
were more simple when they were most valiant, and were least deceitful, when
they were least themselves.

But it is an evil condition that a man's honesty shall be owing to his wine,
and virtue must live at the charge and will of a vice. The proper band of
societies and contracts is, justice and necessities, religion and the laws; the
measures of it are equity and our selves and our own desires in the days of
our need, natural or forced; But the instruments of the exchange and conveyance
of the whole intercourse is, words and actions, as they are expounded by
custom, consent, or the understanding of the interested person; in which if
simplicity be not severely preserved, it is impossible that humane society can
subsist, but men shall be forced to snatch at what they have bought, and take
securities that men swear truly, and exact an oath, that such is the meaning of
the word, and no man shall think himself secure, but shall fear he is robbed if
he has not possession first; and it shall be disputed who shall trust the
other, and neither of them shall Lib. 8. in^^it.
desires it, yet cannot be confident of the man that pretends truth yet tells a
lie and is deprehended to have made use of the sacred name of friendship or
religion, honesty or reputation to deceive his brother.

But because a man may be deceived by deeds and open actions as well as words;
therefore it concerns their duty, that no man by an Pythius the Sicilian had a
mind to sell his garden to Cannius he invited him thither, and caused
fishermen (as if by custom) to fish in the channel by which the gardens stood,
and they threw a great store of fish into their arbours, and made Cannius
believe it was so every day, and the man grew greedy of that place of pleasure,
and gave Pythius a double price, and the next day perceived himself abused.
Actions of pretense and simulation are like snares laid, into which the beasts
fall though you pursue them not, but walk in the inquiry for their necessary
Vir bonus est, qui prodest quibus potest, nocet nemini, when we do all the good
we can, and do an evil to no man, then only we are accounted good men. But
this pretense of an action signifying otherwise then it looks for, is only
forbidden in matter of contract, and the material interest of a second person.
But when actions are of a double signification, or when a man is not abused or
defeated of his right by an uncertain sign, it is lawful to do a thing to
other purposes then is commonly understood. Flight is a sign of fear; but it
is lawful to fly when a man fears not. Circumoision was the seal of the Jewish
religion, proper and natural, by an offer to give an occasion to another to do
a good action; and in case it succeeds not, then to do what we intended not,
and so the offer was conditional. But in all cases of bargaining, although the
actions of themselves may receive naturally another sense, yet I am bound to
follow that signification which may not abuse my brother, or pollute my own
honesty, or snatch, or rifle his interest: Because it can be no ingredient into
the commutation, if I exchange a thing

But secondly, as our actions must be of a sincere and determinate
signification in contracts, so must our words: in which the rule of the old
Roman honesty was this: Uterque si ad eloquendum venerit non plus quam semel
eloquetur; Every one that speaks is to speak but once; that is, but one thing;
because commonly that is truth; truth being but one; but error and falsehood
infinitely various and changeable; and we shall seldom see a man so stiffned
into little particles, and swallowed the lie by crumbs, so that no truth, with
a collateral design to cozen and abuse; and therefore at no hand can it be
permitted to lie or equivocate, to speak craftily, or to deceive by
smoothness, or intricacy, or long discourses.

But this precept of simplicity in matter of contract has one step of severity
beyond this: In matter of contract it is not lawful Caveat emptor is a good
caution for him that buys, and it secures the seller in public Judicature,
but not in court of conscience; and the old laws of the Romans were as nice in
this affair, as the conscience of a Christian. Titus Claudius Centimalus was
commanded by the Augures to pull down his house in the Coelian mountain,
because it hindered their observation of the flight of birds; he exposes his
house to sale, Publius Calpurnius buys it, and is forced to pluck it down; But
complaining to the Judges had remedy, because Claudius did not tell him the
true state of the inconvenience. He that sels a house infected with the plague,
or haunted with evil spirits, sels that which is not worth such a price which
it might be put to if it were in health and peace: and therefore cannot demand
it but openly and upon publication of the evil. To which also this is to be
added, that in some great faults and such as have danger, (as in the cases now
specified) no diminution of the price is sufficient to make the Merchant just
and sincere, unless he tells the appendant mischief; Marcus Gratidianus bought
a house of Sergius Orata, which himself had sold before; But because Sergius
did not declare the appendant vassalage and service, he was recompensed
Gratidianus knew it, because it had been his own, yet Oportuit ex bona fide
denunciari said the law; it concerned the ingenuity of a good man to have
spoken it openly. In all cases it must be confessed in the price, or in the
words; But when the evil may be personal, and more then matter of interest and
money, it ought to be confessed, and then the goods prescribed, lest by my act
I do my neighbor injury, and I receive profit by his damage. Certain it is,
that ingenuity is the sweetest and easiest way, there is no difficulty or cases
of conscience in that, and it can have no objection in it but that

God sent justice into the world, that all conditions in their several
proportions should be equal; and he that receives a good, should pay one, and
he whom I serve is obliged to feed and to defend me in the same proportions as
I serve; and justice is a relative term, and supposes two persons obliged, and
though fortunes are unequal, and estates are in majority and subordination, and
men a wise man to snatch a plank from a drowning fool, or if the Master of the
ship should challenge the board upon which his passenger swims for his life, or
to obtrude false moneys upon others, which we first took for true, but at last
discovered to be false; or not to discover the gold which the merchant sold for
alchimy: The reason of all these is, because the collateral dearer to himself,
and to be preferred before Kings, and republics, in the kingdom of the just,
who shall call us to judgment for every word, and render to every man
according to his works: and what is the hope of the hypocrite though he has
gained when the Lord takes away his soul, Tollendum esse ex rebus contrahendis
omne mendacium. That Is the sum of this rule: no falshod or deceit is to be
endured in any Cicero.
contract.

5. Christian simplicity has also its necessity and passes obligation upon us
toward enemies in questions of law or war. Plutarch commends Lysander and
Philopaemen for their craft and subtilty in war, but commends it not as an
ornament to their manners, but that which had influence into prosperous events;
just as Ammianus nullo discrimine virtutis ac doli prosperos omnes laudari
debere bellorum eventus: whatsoever in war is prosperous, men use to commend:
But he that is a good soldier is not always a good man. Callicratidas was a
good man and followed the old way of downright hostility, (...): But Lysander
was (...), (...), a crafty man, full of plots but not noble in the conduct of
his arms. I remember Euripides brings in Achilles commending the ingenuity of
his breeding and the simplicity and nobleness of his own heart (...). The good
old man Quae. 10. super Joshuam lib. 1. de sacerdotio.
commends it. These Good men supposed that a crafty victory was better then a
bloody war; and certainly so it is, if the power gotten by craft be not
exercised in blood: But this business (as to the case of conscience) will
quickly be determined. Enemies are no persons bound by contract and society,
and therefore are not obliged to open hostilities and ingenuous prosecutions of
the war; Hist l. 16. cap. 6
was a particular and private quarrel, there is no rule of conscience but that
it be wholly laid aside, and appeased with charity; for the opennesse of the
quarrel was but the rage and indiscretion of the It is just and pleasant,
profitable and glorious, but to call a parley and fall in upon the men that
treat; to swear a peace and watch advantage; to entertain Heralds and then to
torment them, to get from them notices of their party; these are such which are
dishonorable and unjust, condemned by the laws of nations and essential
justice, and by all the world and the Hungarian army was destroyed by a divine
judgment at the prayer and appeal of the Mahumetan enemy, for their violating
their faith and honor and profaning the name of Christ by using it in a
solemn oath to deceive their enemies, (...): that is to despise some few
persons have been found so noble as to scorn to steal a

6. Thus we see how far the laws of ingenuity and Christian simplicity have put
fetters upon our words and actions and directed them in the paths of truth and
nobleness, and the first degrees of permission of simulation is in the arts of
war, and the cases of just hostility. But here it is usually inquired whether
it be lawful to tell a lie, or dissemble to save a good man's life, or to do him
a great benefit? a Question which Saint Austine was much troubled withal
affirming it to be of the greatest difficulty: for he saw generally

1. It is certain that children may be cozned into goodness, and sick men to
health, and passengers in a storm into fafety; and the reason of these is,
because not only the end is fair and charitable and just, but the means are
such which do no injury to the persons which are to receive benefit: Because
these are persons who

2. Sinners may not be treated with the liberty we take to children and sick
persons, because they must serve God with choice



4. And now upon the grounds of this discourse, we may more before or besides
the commandment, not at all against it: and since the law of Moses forbad lying
in judgment only, by that law we are to judge of those actions in the old
testament which were committed after its publication: and because in the
sermons of the prophets and especially in the new testament Christ has
superadded or enlarged the law of ingenuity and hearty simplicity, we are to
leave the old scripture precedents upon the ground of their own permissions,
and finish our duty by the rules of our religion: Let every man speak the truth
to his neighbor, putting away lying, for we are members one of another: and be
as harmless as doves says our blessed Savior Ephesians. 4. 25.
in my text: which contain the whole duty concerning the matter of truth and
sincerity; in both which places truth and simplicity

These cases are intricate enough, and therefore I shall return plainly to
press the doctrine of simplicity which ought to be so sacred alieni facinoris
munus culum non repudiaverunt, refused not to receive a present made them by
another crime; but so they entered upon a moiety of the estate and the biggest
share of the dishonor: we must not be crafty to another injury so much as by
giving countenance to the wrong; for Tortoises and the Estrich hatch their
eggs with their looks only; and some have designs which a dissembling face
or an acted gesture can produce; but as a man may commit adultery with his eye
so with his eye also he may tell a lie, and steal with one finger and do injury
collaterally and yet design it with a direct intuition upon

7. One thing more I am to add, that it is not lawful to tell a lie in jest.
It was a virtue noted in Aristides and Epaminondes that they would not lie
(...) not in sport: and as Christian simplicity forbids all lying in matter of
interest and serious rights: so there is an appendix to this precept forbidding
to lie in mirth; for of every idle word a man shall speak he shall give account
in the day of judgment: and such are the jestings which S. Paul reckons amongst
things uncomly; But amongst these; fables, apologues, parables or figures of
Rhetoric, and any artificial instrument of instruction, or innocent pleasure
are not to be reckoned; But he that without any end of charity or institution
shall tell lies only to become ridiculous in himself or mock another, has set
some thing upon his doomsday book which must be taken off, by water or by fire,
that is, by repentance

Nothing is easier then simplicity and ingenuity, it is open and ready without
trouble and artificial cares, fit for communities and the proper virtue of men,
the necessary appendage of useful speech, without which language were given to
men as nails and teeth to Lions, for nothing but to do mischief; it is a rare
instrument of institution, and a certain token of courage, the companion of
goodness and a noble mind, the preserver of friendship, the band of society,
dignus quicum in tenebris mices to whom in respect of his fair treatings,

Apocal: 22. 15.

For without shall be dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and and whosoever
loves and makes a lie.


Psalm. 86. 5. For thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in
mercy to all them that call upon thee.
MAN having destroyed that which God delighted in, that is, the beauty of his
soul, fell into an evil portion, and being seized upon by the divine justice,
grew miserable, and condemned to an incurable sorrow. Poor Adam being banished
and undone, went and lived a sad life in the mountains of India, and turned his
face and his prayers toward Gods power was armed against him; and poor man,
whom a fly, or a fish could kill, was assaulted and beaten with a sword of fire
in the hand of a Cherubim. Gods eye his omniscience was man's accuser, his
severity was the Judge, his justice the executioner. It was a mighty calamity
that man was to undergo, when he that made him, armed himself against his
creature, which would have died or turned to nothing, if he had but withdrawn
the miracles and the Almightinesse of his power. If God had taken his arm from
under him, man had perished; but it was therefore a greater evil when God laid
his arm upon him and against him, and seemed to support him that he might be
longer killing him. In the midst of these sadnesses God remembered his own
creature, and pitied it, and by his mercy rescued the hand of his power, and
the sword of his justice, and the guilt of his punishment, and the disorder of
his sin, and placed him in that order of good things where he ought to have
stood: It was mercy that preserved the noblest of Gods creatures here below; he
who stood condemned and undone under all the other attributes of God, was only
saved and rescued by his mercy: that it may be evident that Gods mercy is above
all his works, and above all ours, greater then the creation, and greater then
our sins; as is his Majesty, so is his mercy, that is, without measures, and
without rules, sitting in heaven and filling all the world, calling justice
bowed down to his mercy, and all his power passed into mercy, and his
omniscience converted into care and watchfulness, into providence, and
observation for man's avail, and Heaven gave its influence for man, and rained
showers for our food and drink, and the Attributes and Acts of God sat at the
foot of mercy, and all that mercy descended upon the head of man: For so the
light of the world in the morning of the creation was spread abroad like a
curtain, and dwelt no where, but filled the expansum with a dissemination
expansum and a huge Ocean, from eternal ages it dwelt round about the throne
of God, and it filled all that infinite distance and space, that has no
measures but the will of God; until created Angels, that he might have persons
capable of huge gifts, and man, who he knew would need forgiveness; for so the
Angels our elder Brothers dwelt for ever in the house of their Father, and
never brake his commandments; but we the younger our life is repentance, and
forgiveness is all our portion: and though Angels were objects of Gods bounty,
yet man only is (in proper speaking) the object of his mercy. And the mercy
which dwelt in an infinite circle, became confined to a little ring, and dwelt
here below, and here shall dwell below,

But for him that considers Gods mercies, and dwells a while in that depth, it
is hard not to talk wildly and without art, and order of discoursings: Saint
Peter talked he knew not what, when he entered into a cloud with Jesus upon
mount Tabor, though it passed over him like the little curtains that ride upon
the Northwinde, and pass between the Sun and us: And when we converse with a
light greater then the Sun, and taste a sweetness more delicious run over,
though they be not much in themselves, yet they tell that the vessel was full,
and could express the greatness of the shower no otherwise, but by spilling,
and inartificiall expressions and runnings upon us, and toward us, and
concerning us, which we neither feel, nor see, nor understand as yet; but yet
we are blessed by them, and are preserved and secured; and we shall then know
them, when we come to give God thanks in the festivities of an eternal
sabbath. But that I may confine my discourse into

1. That mercy being an emanation of the Divine goodness upon us, and supposes
us, and found us miserable; In this account concerning the mercies of God, I
must not reckon the miracles and graces of the creation, or any thing of the
nature of man; nor tell how great an endearment God passed upon us that he made
us men, capable of felicity, apted with rare instruments of discourse, and
reason, passions, and desires, notices of sense, and reflections

Our excellent bodies, and useful faculties, the upright motion, and the
tenacious hand, the fair appetites, and proportioned satisfactions, our speech
and our perceptions, our acts of life, the rare invention of letters, and the
use of writing, and speaking at distance, the intervals of rest and labor,
(either of which if they were perpetual would be intolerable) the needs of
nature, and the provisions of providence, sleep, and business, refreshments of
the body, and entertainment of the soul; these are to be reckoned as acts of
bounty rather then mercy; God gave us these when he rack is changed into an ax,
and the ax into an imprisonment, and the imprisonment changed into an
enlargement, and the enlargement into an entertainment in the family, and this
entertainment passes on to an adoption, these are steps of a mighty favor, and
perfect redemption from our sin: and the returning back our own goods is a
gift, and a perfect donative, sweetened by the apprehensions of the calamity,
from whence every lesser punishment began to free us; and thus it was, that God
punished us and visited the sin of Adam upon his posterity. He threatened we
should die, and so we did, but not so as we deserved; we waited for death and
stood sentenced, and are daily summoned by sicknesses and uneasinesse; and
every day is a new reprieve, and brings a new that death, is changed into a
sleep, and that sleep is in the bosom of Christ, and there dwells all peace and
security, and it shall pass forth into glories and felicities. We looked for a
Judge, and behold a Savior; we an accuser, and behold an Advocate; we sat
down in sorrow, and rise in joy; we leaned upon Rhubarb and Aloes, and our
aprons were made of the sharp leaves of Indian fig trees, and so we fed, and so
were clothed: But the Rhubarb proved medicinal, and the rough leaf of the tree
brought its fruit wrapped up in its foldings; and round about our dwellings was
planted a hedge of thorns, and bundles of thistles, the Aconite, and the
Briony, the Nightshade, and the Poppy, and at the root of these grew the
healing Plantain, which rising up into a tallness, by the friendly invitation
of a heavenly influence, turned about the tree of the cross, and cured the
wounds of the thorns, and the curse of the thistles, and the malediction of
man, and the wrath of God. Si sic irascitur, quomodo convivatur? If God be thus
kind when he is Angry, what is he when he feasts us with caresses of his more
tender Kindness? All that God restored to us after the fo^feiture of Adam grew
to be a double Kindness; for it became the expression of a bounty which knew
not how to repent, a graciousnesse that was not to be altered, though we were,
and that was it which we needed. That Is the first general: all the bounties of
the creation became mercies to us, when God continued them to us

2. But as a circle begins every where, and ends no where, so do the mercies of
God: after all this huge progress, now it began anew: God is good and
gracious, and God is ready to forgive. Now that he had once more made us
capable of mercies God had what he desired, and what he could rejoice in,
something upon which he might pour forth his mercies; and by the way, this I
shall observe, (for I cannot but speak without art, when I speak of that which
has no measure) God made us capable of one sort of his mercies, and we made
our selves capable of another: God is good and gracious, that is, desirous to
give great gifts; and of this, God made us receptive, first by giving us
natural possibilities, that is, by giving those gifts he made us capable of
more; and next, by restoring us to his favor, that he might not by our
provocations be hindered from raining down his mercies. But God is also ready
to forgive] and of this kind of mercy we made our selves capable, even by not
deserving it; Our sin made way for his grace, and our infirmities called upon
his pity; and because we sinned, we became miserable, and because we were
miserable, we became pitiable, and this opened the other treasure sin abounds,
his grace may superabound. In this method we must confine our thoughts;

1. Giving, Thou Lord art good* and ready to forgive, plenteous in mercy to all
them that call upon thee. 2. Forgiving, Thou Lord art good* and ready to
forgive, plenteous in mercy to all them that call upon thee.
3. Gods mercies, or the mercies of his giving, came first upon us by mending
of our nature: For the ignorance we fell into is the liberty of the sons of
God, and Christ has done us more grace and advantage then we lost in Adam; and
as man lost Paradise and got Heaven, so he lost the integrity of the first, and
got the perfection of the second Adam: his living soul is changed into a
quickening spirit, our discerning faculties are filled with the spirit of faith,
and our passions and desires are entertained with hope, and our election is
sanctified with charity; and his first life of a the tree of life. But I
instance in two great things in which humane nature is greatly advanced, and
passed on to greater perfections; The first is, that besides body and soul,
which was the sum total of Adams constitution. God has superadded to us a
third principle, the beginner of a better life; I mean, the Spirit: so that
now, man has a spiritual and celestial Vide Sermon. II.
nature breathed into him, and the old man, that is, the old constitution is
the least part and in its proper operations is dead, or dying, renewed in us
day by day. But secondly, Humane nature is so highly exalted, and mended by
that mercy which God sent immediately upon the fall of Adam, the promise of
Christ, that when he did come, and actuate the purposes of this mission, and
ascended up into heaven, he carried humane nature above the seats of Angels; to
the place whither Lucifer the son of the morning aspird to ascend, but in his
attempt fell into hell. For (so said the Prophet) the son of the morning said,
I will ascend into heaven, and sit in the sodes of the North, a relative
dignity greater, and an equal honor of being fellow servants. This mystery is
plain in Scripture, and the real effect of it we read in both the Testaments.
When Manoah the Judges 13.
father of Sampson saw an Angel, he worshipped him; and in the old Testament it
was esteemed lawful; for they were the lieutenants of God, sent with the
impresses of his Majesty, and took in his Name the homage from us, who then
were so much their inferiors. But when the man Christ Jesus was exalted, and
made the the testimony of Jesus. And therefore when an Angel appeared to Saint
John, and he according to the Custom of the Jews fell down and worshipped him,
as not yet knowing or not considering any thing to the contrary, the Angel
reproved him, saying, see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant and of thy
brethren the prophets and of them John Revel. 22. 9. de bono patientiae
which keep the sayings of this book: worship God; or as Saint Cyprian reads
it, worship Jesus. God and man are now only capable of worship: Quid est quod
ante Redemptoris adventum adorantur ab hominibus [Angeli] and tacent, Homil. 8.
in Evange.
postmodum vero adorarirefugiunt: why did the Angels of old receive
worshippings and were silent, but in the new testament decline it and fear to
accept it? Nisi quod naturam nostram quam prius despexerant, postquam hanc
super se assumptam aspiciunt prostratam sibi videre pertimescunt, nec jam sub
se velut insirmam contemnere ausi sunt, quam super se viz. in caeli Rege
venerantur: the reason is, because they seeing our nature which they did so
lightly value raised up above them they fear to see humbled under them, neither
do they any more despise the weakness which themselves worship in the King of
heaven. The same also is the sense of the Gloss, of Saint Ambrose, Ansbertus,
Haymo, Rupertus and others of old; and Ribera, Salmeron, and Lewis of Granada
of late; which being so plainly consonant to the words of the Angel and
consigned by the testimony of such men, I the rather note, that those who
worship Angels and make religious addresses to them, may see what privilege
themselves lose and how they part with the honor their King is our Brother.

4. To this for the likeness of the matter I add, that the divine distances,
or characters of fame and nobleness. Christ is the great while all that follow
the lamb, and that are accounted worthy of that resurrection shall be assessors
in the judgment. Know ye not, (says, S. Paul) that ye shall judge Angels? And
Tertullian 1 Cor. 6. 3.
speaking concerning Devils and accursed spirits [de cultu foeminarum] says,
Hi sunt Angeli quos judicaturi sumus, Hi sunt Angeli quibus in lavacro
renunciavimus. Those Angels which we renounced

5. The next order of Divine mercies that I shall remark is also an improvement
of our nature or an appendage to it: for whereas our constitution is weak, our
souls apt to diminution and impedite faculties, our bodies to mutilation and
imperfection, to blindness and crookedness, to stammering and sorrows, to
baldness in sorrow they shall bring forth children, yet God has so attempered
that sorrow, that they think themselves more accursed if they want that sorrow,
and they have reason to rejoice in that state, the trouble of whic is
alleviared by a promise, that they shall be saved in bearing children. He that
wants one eye has the force and vigorousnesse of both united in that which is
left him; and when ever any man is afflicted with sorrow his reason and his
religion, himself and all his friends, persons that are civil, and persons that
are obliged, run in to comfort him, and he may, if he will observe wisely,
find so many circumstances of ease and remission, so many designs of
providence and studied favors, such contrivances of collateral advantage and
certain reserves of substantial and proper comfort, that in the whole sum of
affairs, it often happens that a single cross is a double blessing, it is
better to go to the house of mourning, then of joys and festival egressions.
Is not the affliction of poverty better then the prosperity of a great and
tempting fortune? does not wisdom dwell in a mean estate and a low spirit
retired thoughts and under a sad roof? and is it not generally true that
sickness it self is appayed with religion and holy thoughts with pious
resolutions and penitential prayers, with returns to God and to sober councels?
and if this be true, that God sends sorrow to

God has sent no greater evil into the world, then that in the sweat of our
brows we shall eat our bread, and in the difficulty and agony, in the sorrows
and contention of our souls we shall work out our salvation. But see how in the
first of these God has out done his own anger and defeated the purposes of his
wrath by mercy; for this labor and sweat of our brows is so far from being a
curse that without it our very bread would not be so great a blessing. It is
not labor that makes the Garlic and the pulse, the Sycamore and the Cresses,
the cheese of the Goats and the butter of the sheep to be savoury and pleasant,
as the flesh of the Roe-buek or the milk of the Kine, the marrow of Oxen or the
thighs of birds? If it were not for labor, men neither could eat so much, nor
relish so pleasantly, nor sleep so soundly nor be so healthful, nor so useful,
so strong nor so patient, so noble, or so untempted, and as God has made us
beholding to labor for eat their bread in the sweat of their brows, yet this
is but an overrunning and an excess of the divine mercy; God did more for us
then we did absolutely need; for he has disposed of the circumstances of this
curse, that man's affections are so reconciled to it, that they desire it, and
are delighted in it; and so the Anger of God is ended in loving Kindness, and

But then for the other part of the severe law and laborious imposition, that
we must work out our spiritual interest with the labors of our spirit, seems
to most men to be so intolerable, that rather then pass under it they quit
their hopes of heaven, and pass into the portion of Devils; and what can there
be to alleviate this sorrow, that a man shall be perpetually solicited with an
impure tempter, and shall carry a flame within him, and all the world is on
fire round about him, and every thing brings fuel to the flame, and full tables
are a snare, and empty tables are collateral servants to a choice and election,
and nothing can enoble the choice but love, and nothing can exercise love but
difficulty, and nothing can make that difficulty but the contradiction of our
appetite and the crossing of our natural affections; and therefore when ever
any of you is tempted violently or grow weary in your spirits with resisting
the petulancy of temptation, you may be cured if you

So that whoever can complain that he serves God with pains and mortifications,
he is troubled because there is a distinction of things such as we call virtue
and vice, reward and punishment, and if he will not suffer God to distinguish
the first he will certainly

6. As an appendage to this instance of divine mercy, we are to account that
not only in nature; but in contingency and emergent events of providence, God
makes compensation to us, for all the evils of chance, and hostilities of
accident* and brings good out of evil, which is that solemn triumph which mercy
makes over justice, when it rides upon a cloud and crowns its darkness with a
robe of glorious light. God indeed suffered Joseph to be sold a bondslave into
Egypt, but then it was that God intended to crown and reward mercy, it was to
make way to bring him to Pharaohs court; and God brought famine upon Canaan,
and troubled all the souls of Jacobs family, and there was a plot laid for
another mercy; this was to bring them to see and partake of Joseph's glory: and
then God brought a great evil upon their posterity and they groaned under
taskmasters, but this God changed into the miracles of his mercy, and suffered
them to be afflicted that he the mercies of God which then will be made
public, when we shall hear such afflicted people sing Inconvertendo
captivitatem Sion with the voice of joy and festival eucharist, among such as
keep holy day; and when peace shall become sweeter and dwell the longer; and in
the mean time it serves religion, and the affliction shall try the children

Had not David suffered more if he had suffered less, and had he not been
miserable unless he had been afflicted? he understood It is good for me that I
have been afflicted. He that was rival to Crassus, when he stood candidate to
command the Legions in the Parthians war was much troubled that he missed the
dignity, but he saw himself blessed that he escaped the death, and the dishonor
of the overthrow, by that time the sad news arrived at Rome. The Gentleman at
Marseilles cursed his stars that he was absent when the ship set sail to sea,
having long waited for a wind, and missed it; but he gave thanks to the
providence that blessed him with the cross, when he knew that the ship perished
in the voyage, and all the men were drowned: And Blessed is the womb that never
bare, and the paps that never gave suck. And the world being governed with a
rare variety, and changes of accidents, and providence; that which is a
misfortune in the particular, in the whole order of things becomes a blessing
bigger then we hoped for, then when we were angry with God for hindering us, to
perish in pleasant waves, or when he was contriving to pour upon thy head a
mighty blessing. Do Stand still and see how it will be in the whole event of
things; let God speak his mind out; for it may be, this sad beginning is but
an art to bring in, or to make thee to esteem, and entertain, and understand
the blessing.

They that love to talk of the mercies of the Lord, and to recount He is the
Father of the fatherless, and an avenger of the widows cause, he stands at
the right hand of the poor to save his soul from unrighteous Judges, and he is
with us in tribulation: And upon this ground, let us account whether mercy be
not the greater ingredient in that death and deprivation, when I lose a man and
get God to be my Father; and when my weak arm of flesh is cut

Sermon. XXVI. Part II.
endearment, and tie, and expression, of a natural, unalterable, and
essential kindness, he next makes provisions for us to supply all those
necessities which himself has made. For even to make necessities, was a great
circumstance of the mercy, and all the relishes of wine, and the savourinesse
of meat, the sweet and the fat, the pleasure and the satisfaction, the
restitution of spirits, and the strengthening of the heart, are not owing to
the liver of the vine, or the kidneys of wheat, to when desire fails,
presently the mourners go about the streets. But then, Eccles. 12.
that these desires are so provided for by nature and art, by ordinary and
extraordinary, by foresight and contingency, according Eden, which were
permitted to feed our miserable father: Is not all the earth our orchard, and
our granary, our vineyard, and our garden of pleasure? and the face of the Sea
is our traffic, and the bowels of the Sea is our vivarium, a place for fish
to feed us, and to serve some other collateral appendant needs; and all the
face of heaven is a repository for influences and breath, fruitful showers and
fair refreshments; and when God made provisions for his other creatures, he
gave it the food of Angels, and the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the
earth; and every part of his body has a provision made for it, and the
smoothness of the olive, and the juice of the vine refresh the heart and make
the face cheerful, and serve the ends of joy, and the festivity of man, and
are not only to cure hunger or to allay thirst, but to appease a passion, and
allay a sorrow. Benjamin, we Own labor, and our Brothers charity* and our
faith in this affair is confirmed by all our own, and by all the

But that which I shall observe in this whole affair is, that there are both
for the provision of our tables, and the relief of our sicknesses, so many
miracles of providence that they give plain demonstration what relation we bear
to heaven: and the poor man need Manna of Calabria, the medicinal waters of
Germany, the Musles at Sluice at this day, and the Egyptian beans in the
marshes of Albania, and the salt at Troas of old; which God to defeat the
covetousness of man, and to spread his mercy over the face of the indigent, as
the Sun scatters his beams over the bosom of the whole earth, did so order
that as long as every man was permitted to partake, the bosom of heaven was
open; but when man

8. But because such is the bounty of God, that he has provided a better life
for the inheritance of man, if God is so merciful in making fair provisions
for our less noble part, in order to the transition toward our Country, we
may expect that the mercies of God has rare arts to secure to us his designed
bounty, in order to our inheritance, to that which ought to be our portion for
ever. And here I consider, that it is an infinite mercy of the Almighty Father
of mercies that he has appointed to us such a religion that leads us to a huge
felicity, through pleasant ways. For the felicity that is designed to us is so
above our present capacities If you will obey, ye shall eat the good things of
the land: Ye shall possess a rich country, ye shall triumph over your
enemies, ye shall have numerous families, blessed children, rich granaries,
overrunning wine-presses; for God knew the cognation of most of them was so
dear, between their affections and the good rich, and pleased, and healthful
and wise and beloved in the whole world. I shall now remark only two or three
instances; for the main body of this truth I have other Life of H. Jesus. part
3. Disc. 14.
where represented.

1. The whole religion of a Christian as it relates to others is nothing but
justice and mercy, certain parents of peace and benefit: injury and violence,
our religion has also made as good provisions against that too, as the nature
of the thing will suffer; for by patience we are reconciled to the sufferance,
and by hope and faith we see a certain consequent reward; and by praying for
the persecuting man we are cured of all the evil of the mind, the envy and the
fretfulnesse that uses to gall the troubled and resisting man; and when we turn
all the passion into do good works for necessary uses, that is to be able to be
beneficial to the public and not to be burdensome to any, where it can be
avoided, what can be wished to man in relation to others, and what can be more
beneficial to themselves then that they be such whom other men will value for
their interest, such whom the public does need, such whom Princes and Nobles
ought to esteem, and all men can make use of according to their several
conditions; that they are so well provided for that unless a persecution
disables them they cannot only maintain themselves, but oblige others to their

This is a temporal good which all wise men reckon as part of that felicity
which recompenses all the labors of their day, and sweetens the sleep of their
night, and places them in that circle of neigbour-hood and amity where men are
most valued and most secure. 4. To this we may add this material
consideration. That al those graces which oblige us to do good to others are
nothing else but certain instruments of doing advantage to our selves. It is a
huge nobleness of charity to give alms not only to our Brother, but for him,
It is the Christian sacrifice, like that of Job who made Particeps sum omnium
timentium te; I am a partner, a companion of all them that fear thee, I share
in their profits. If I do but rejoice at every grace of God which I see in my
Brother, I shall be rewarded for that grace; and we need not envy the
excellency of another; It becomes mine as well as his: and if I do rejoice, I
shall have cause to rejoice so excellent, so full, so artificial is the mercy
of God in making and seeking and finding all occasions to do us good. 5. The
very charity and love and mercy that is commanded in our religion is in it self
a great excellency, not only in order to heaven, but to the comforts of the
earth too and such without which revels of the Sirian star; but two torches do
not divide but increase

And now upon this account which is already so great I need not reckon
concerning the collateral issues, and little streams of comfort which God has
made to issue from that religion to which God has obliged us; such as are
mutual comforts, visiting sick people, instructing the ignorant and so becoming
better instructed and fortified and comforted our selves by the instruments of
our Brothers case and advantages; the glories of converting souls, of rescuing
a sinner from hell, of a miserable man from the grave the honor and nobleness
of being a good man, the noble confidence, and the bravery of innocence, the
ease of patience, the quiet of contentedness, the rest of peacefulnesse, the
worthiness of forgiving others, the greatness of spirit that is in despising
riches, and the sweetness of spirit that is in meekness and humility; these
are Christian graces in every sense; favors of God and issues of his bounty

9. God that he might secure our duty and our present and consequent felicity
has tied us with golden chains and bound us not only with the bracelets of
love, and the deliciousness of hope, but with the ruder cords of fear and
reverence, even with all the restraining grace. For it is a huge aggravation of
humane calamity to consider that after a man has been instructed in the love
and advantages of his Religion, and knows it to be the way of honor and
felicity, and that to prevaricate his holy sanctions is certain death and
disgrace to eternal ages, the flood of waters. But thus God suffers but few
adulteries in the world in respect of what would be if all men that desire to
be adulterers had power and opportunity; and yet some men and very many women
are by modesty and natural shamefacednesse chastised in their too forward
appetites: or the laws of man or public reputation or the undecency and
unhandsome circumstances of sin check the desire and make it that it cannot
arrive at act: for so have I seen appendant mischiefs and its constituent
disorder and irregularity*

And the mercy of God is not less then infinite in separating men from the
occasions of their sin, from the neighborhood and temptation; for if the
Hyaena and a dog should be thrust into the same Kennel, one of them would soon
find a grave, and it may as far as the East is from the West not only putting
away the guilt, but setting the occasion far from us, extremely far; so far
that sometimes we cannot sin and many times, not easily, has magnified his
mercy, by giving us safety in all those measures in which we are untempted. It
would be the matter of new discourses, if I should consider concerning the
variety

10. The next order of mercies is such, which is of so pure, and unmingled
constitution, that it has at first no regard to the capacities and disposition
of the receivers, and afterward when it has, it relates only to such
conditions, which it self creates and produces in the suscipient, I mean the
mercies of the divine predestination. bring me up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, and I was not exposed to the carelessness of an irreligious
guardian, and taught to steal, we sitting in glory, shall see some of the
partners of our sins carried into despair and the portions of the left hand,
and roaring

II. Lastly, All the mercies of God are concentred in that which is all the
felicity of man; and God is so great a lover of souls that he provides
securities and fair conditions for them, even sins, is taught a way not to fear
the doing of an act, for which he soon, fo certainly, and so easily performed:
But these are notorious doctrines in the Roman Church, and yet God so loves the
souls of his creatures that many men who trust to these doctrines in their
discourses, dare not rely upon them in their lives. But while they talk as if
they did not need to live strictly, many of them live so strictly as if they
did not believe so foolishly. He that tells, that antecedently God has to all
humane choice decreed man to heaven or to hell, takes God has provided better
things for them, that they without us, that is, without our assistances, shall
be made perfect.

Sermon. XXVII. Part III.
THere are very many more orders and conjugations of mercies, a few more, and
them also without order; for that they do descend upon us, we see and feel, but
by what order of things, or causes, is as undiscerned as the head of Nilus, or
a sudden remembrance of a long neglected and forgotten proposition. 1. But upon
this account it is, that good men have observed, that the providence of God is
so great a provider for holy living, and does so certainly minister to
religion, that nature and chance, the order of the world, and the influences of
heaven are taught to serve the the Spirit of God, and the spirit of a man. I do
not speak of the miracles that God has in the several periods of the world
wrought for the establishing his laws, and confirming his promises, and
securing our obedience; though that was all the way the overflowings and
miracles of mercy as well as power: but that which I consider is, that besides
the extraordinary emanations of the Divine power upon the first and most solemn
occasions of an institution and the first beginnings of a religion, such as
were, the wonders God did in Egypt and in the wilderness, preparatory to the
sanction of that law, and the first covenant; and the miracles wrought the new
covenant: God does also do things wonderful and miraculous, for the promoting
the ordinary and less solemn actions of our piety, and to assist and accompany
them in a constant and regular succession. It was a strange

To this observation the Jews add, that in Jerusalem no man ever had a fall
that came thither to worship; that at their solemn festivals there was
reception in the Town for all the inhabitants of a beggar, but all the variety
of humane chances, were overruled to the purposes of providence, and
providence was measured by the ends of the religion, and the religion which
promised them plenty, performed the promise till the Nation and the religion
too began to decline, that it might give place to a better ministry, and a
more excellent dispensation of the things of the world.

But when Christian religion was planted and had taken root, and had filled all
lands, then all the nature of things, the whole creation became servant to the
kingdom of grace, and the Head of the religion is also the Head of the
creatures, and ministers all the things of the world in order to the Spirit of
grace: and now Angels are ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for the
good of them that fear the Lord, and all the violences of men, and things of
nature and choice, are forced into subjection and lowest ministeries, and to it
self is one, as in the case of repentance; and death ministers to life, and
bondage is freedom, and loss is gain, and our enemies are our friends, and
every thing turns

2. But that which is next to this, and not much unlike the design of this
wonderful mercy, is, that all the actions of religion, though mingled with
circumstances of differing and sometimes of contradictory relations are so
concentred in God their proper center, and conducted in such certain and pure
channels of reason and rule, that no one duty does contradict another; and it
can never be necessary for any man in any case to sin. They that bound
themselves whatsoever is not of faith is sin; But yet Gods mercy has taken
care to break this snare in sunder, so that he may neither sin against the
commandment, nor No man can serve two Masters, but therefore he must hate the
one and cleave to the other. But then if we consider what infinite
contradiction there is in sin, and that the great long suffering of God is
expressed in this, that God suffered the contradiction of sinners, we shall
feel the mercy of God in the peace of our consciences and the unity of
religion, so long as we do the work of God. It is a huge affront to a covetous
man that he is the further off from

3. After all this we may sit down and reckon by great sums and conjugations of
his gracious gifts, and tell the minutes of eternity by the number of the Divine
mercies: God has given his laws to rule us, his word to instruct us, his
spirit to guide us, his Angels to protect us, his ministers to exhort us; he
revealed all our duty concealed whatsoever can hinder us, he has affrighted
our follies with fear of death and engaged our watchfulness by its secret
coming; he has exercised our faith by keeping private the state of souls
departed, and yet has confirmed our faith by a promise of a resurrection and
entertained our hope by some general significations of the state of interval:
His mercies make contemptible means instrumental to great purposes, and a small
herb the remedy of the greatest diseases; he impedes the Devils rage and
infatuates, his counsels, he diverts his malice, and defeats his purposes, he
binds him in the chain of darkness and gives him no power for asking, and
commands us to ask, and theatens us if we will not ask, and punishes us for
refusing to be happy. This is that glorious attribute that has made order, and
health, and harmony and hope, restitutions and variety, the joys of direct
possession, and the joys, the artificial joys of contrariety and comparison;
he comforts the poor, and he brings down the rich, that they may be safe in
their humility and sorrow, from the transportations of an unhappy and-
uninstructed prosperity; he gives necessaries to all, and scatters the
extraordinary provisions so, that every nation may traffic in charity, and
commute for pleasures; He was the Lord of hosts, and he the God of peace,
because he was terrible in that, but he is delighted in this. His mercy is his
glory, and his glory is the light of heaven; his mercy is the life of the
creation and it fills all the earth, and his mercy is a sea too; and it fills
all the abysses of the deep; it has given us admire and love and worship, and
magnify this mercy for ever and ever; that we we may dwell in what we feel, and
be comprehended by that which is equal to God, and the parent of all felicity.

And yet this is but the one half. The mercies of giving I have now told of,
but those of forgiving are greater, though not more. [He is ready to forgive]
and upon this stock thrives the interest of our great hope, the hopes of a
blessed immortality; for if the mercies of giving have not made our
expectations big enough to entertain forgiving, we may with more readiness
hope to escape hell, and then we cannot but be blessed by an eternal
consequence: we have but small opinion of the Divine mercy, if we dare not
believe concerning it, that it is desirous and able and watchful and passionate
to keep us or rescue us respectively from such a condemnation the pain of which
is insupportable, and the duration is eternal, and the extension is misery upon
all our faculties, and the intension is great beyond patience or natural or
supernatural abilities, and the state is a state of darkness, faith be pure
and our love unfeigned, if the degree of it be great God will accept it into
glory: if it be little he will accept it into grace, and make it bigger. For
that is the first instance of Gods readiness to forgive: he will upon any
terms, that are not unreasonable and that do not suppose a remanent affection
to sin keep us from the intolerable pains of hell. And indeed if we consider
the constitution of the conditions which God requires, we shall soon lust, to
drunkenness and anger, and pride and covetousness, and unthankefulnesse and
disobedience: Most men that are tempted with lust, could easily enough
entertain the mortification and self denial.

Certain it is; There are very many men in the world that would fain commute
their severity in all other instances for a license in their one appetite; they
would not refuse long prayers after a drunken meeting, or great alms to gether
with one great lust; but then consider how easy it is for them to go to
heaven; God demands of them for his sake and their own to crucify but one
natural lust, or one evil habit, (for all the rest they are easy enough to do
themselves) and God will

2.
part in whose only power it is to give pardon, and in whose desire it is that
we should be pardoned, and who commands us to lay hold upon the offer; he has
done all that belongs to God; that is all that concerns the pardon: there it
lies ready, it is recorded in the book of life, it wants nothing, but being
exemplified and taken forth, and the Holy spirit stands ready to consigne and
pass the privy signet, that we may exhibit it to devils and evil men when they
tempt

3. Nay God is so ready in his mercy that he did pardon us even 3.
before he redeemed us: for what is the secret of the mystery, that the
eternal Son of God should take upon him our nature, and die our death and
suffer for our sins and do our work, and enable us to do our own? he that did
this is God: he who thought it no robbery to be equal with God: he came to
satisfy himself, to pay to himself the price for his own creature: and when he
did this for us that he might pardon us, was he at that instant angry with us?
God, the Son of God, should die for us: here was reconciliation before pardon:
and God that came to die for us did love us first before he came: this was
hasty love. But it went further yet.

4. God pardoned us before we sinned; and when he foresaw our 4.
sin, even mine and yours, he sent his son to die for us; our pardon Redeemer
to Adam, in the beginning of the worlds sin; and the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world; and the covenant of the Gospel though it was not made
with man yet it was from the beginning performed by God as to his part, as to
the ministration of pardon; The seed of the woman was set up against the dragon
as soon as ever the Tempter had won his first battle; and though God laid his
hand, and drew a vail of types and secresy before the manifestation of his
mercies, yet he did the work of redemption, and saved us by the covenant of
faith, and the righteousness

Adam fell by his folly and did not perform the covenant of one little work, a
work of a single abstinence; but he was restored by faith in the seed of the
woman; and of this righteousness Noah was a preacher; and by faith Enoch was
traslated, and by faith a remnant was saved at the flood: and to Abraham this
was imputed for righteousness and to all the Patriarks, and to all the
righteous the seed of the woman by God incarnate by the lamb slain from the
beginning of the world; not by works, for we all failed of them; that is, not
by an exact obedience, but by faith working by love, by sincere, hearty
endeavors and believing God and relying upon his infinite mercy, revealed in
part, and now fully manifest by the great instrument and means of that mercy
Jesus Christ. So that here is pardon before we asked it; pardon before Christ's
coming, pardon before redemption; and pardon before we sinned: what greater
readiness to forgive us can be imagined? yes: there is one degree more yet;
and that will prevent a mistake in this.

5. For God so pardoned us once, that we should need no 5.
more pardon; he pardons us by turning every one of us away from our
iniquities; that's the purpose of Christ, that he might safely pardon us before
we sinned; and we might not sin upon the confidence of pardon, he pardoned us
not only upon condition we would sin no more, but he took away our sin, cured
our cursed inclinations, instructed our understanding, rectified our will,
fortified us against temptations, and now every man whom he pardons he also
sanctifies, and he is born of God, and he must not, will not, cannot sin, so
long as the seed of God remains within him, so long as his pardon continues.
This is the consummation of pardon. For if God had so pardoned us, as only to
take away our evils which are

6. And yet there is a necessity of having one degree of pardon 6.
more beyond all this. For although we do not abjure our covenant and renounce
Christ and extinguish the spirit, yet we resist him, and we grieve him: and we
go off from the holiness of the covenant, and return again, and very often
step aside, and need the Author, and finisher of our faith and pardon, sits in
heaven in a perpetual advocation for us, that this pardon once wrought may be
for ever applied to every emergent need, and every tumor of pride, and every
broken heart, and every disturbed conscience, and upon every true and sincere
return of a hearty repentance: And now upon this title no more degrees can be
added: it is already greater, and was before all our needs, public miseries by
secret grace, into eternal glories. But now upon other circumstances it is
remarkable and excellent, and swells like an hydropick cloud when it is fed with
the breath of the morning tide, till it fills the bosom of heaven, and
descends in dews and gentle showers, to water and refresh the earth.

7. God is so ready to forgive that himself works our dispositions 7.
toward it, and either must in some degree pardon us before we are capable of
pardon, by his grace making way for his mercy, preventing grace, is a mercy of
forgiveness contrary to that severity by which some desperate persons are
given over to a reprobate sense; that is, a leaving of men to themselves, so
that they cannot pray effectually, nor desire holily, nor repent truly, nor
receive any of those mercies which God designed so plenteously, and the Son of
God purchased and these crimes must be ministered to by their lesser relatives,
by preventing grace; and if there be but a necessity of it, that is enough to
ascertain us we shall have it: But unless God should begin to pardon us first,
for nothing, and against our own dispositions, Salvus sum quia pereo, si non
peream plane inteream, we may say of some of Gods judgments: We perish when we
are safe, because our sins are not smitten, and if they be, then we are worse
undone; because we grow worse for being miserable; but we can be relieved only
by a free mercy; for pardon is the way to pardon: and when God gives us our
penny, then we can work for another, and a gift is the way to a grace, and all
that we can do toward the pardon, and the way to find it, and the hand to
receive it, and the eye to search it, and the heart to desire it; being busy
and effective as Elijah's fire, which intending to convert the sacrifice into
its own more spiritual nature of flames and purified substances; stood in the
neighborhood of the fuel, and called forth all its enemies, and licked up the
hindering moisture, and the water of the trenches, and made the Altar send
forth a fantastic smoke before the sacrifice was enkindled: So is the
preventing grace of God, it

These are the great degrees of Gods forwardness and readiness to forgive,
for the expression of which no language is sufficient, is great, his mercies
are many, his mercy reaches unto the heavens, it fills heaven and earth, it is
above all his works, it endures for ever, God pitieth as a Father does his
children; nay he is our Father, and the same also is the Father of mercy, and
the God of all comfort: So that mercy and we have the same relation; and well
it may be so, for we live and die together; for as to man only, God shows the
mercy of forgiveness, so if God takes away his mercy, man shall be no more, no
more capable of felicity, or of

1. God is long-suffering, that is, long before he be angry, and 1.
God is provoked every day, by the obstinacy of the Jews, and the folly of the
Heathens, and the rudeness and infidelity of the Mahumetans, and the
negligence and vices of Christians; and he that can behold no impurity is
received in all places with perfumes of mushromes, and garments spotted with
the flesh, and stained souls, and the actions and issues of misbelief, and an
evil conscience, and with accursed sins that he hates, upon pretense of
religion which he loves; and he is made a party against himself by our
voluntary mistakes, and men continue ten years, and 20. and 30. and 50. in a
course of sinning, and they grow old with the vices of their

2. Besides this long-sufferance and for-bearing with an unwearied 2.
patience, God also excuses a sinner oftentimes and takes a little thing for an
excuse, so far as to move him to intermediall favors first; and from thence to
a final pardon. He passes by the sins of our youth with a huge easiness to
pardon, if he be entreated and reconciled by the effective repentance of a
vigorous manhood; he takes ignorance for an excuse, and in every degree of its
But I found mercy of the Lord because I did it in ignorance, says S. Paul; he
pities our infirmities and strikes off much of the account upon that stock; the
violence of a temptation and restlesnesse of its motion, the perpetuity of its
solicitation, the weariness of a man's spirit, the state of sickness, the
necessity of secular

3. When God perceives himself forced to strike, yet then he 3.
takes off his hand and repents him of the evil; It is as if it were against
him, that any of his creatures should fall under the strokes of an
exterminating fury.

4. When he is forced to proceed, he yet makes an end before 4.
he has half done; and is as glad of a pretense to pardon us, or to strike
less, as if he himself had the deliverance and not we: When himself, saying,
See thou not how Ahab humbles himself? What was the event of it? I will not
bring the evil in his days, but in his sons days the evil shall come upon his
house.

5 God forgets our sin and puts it out of his remembrance, that 5.
is, he makes it as though it had never been; he makes penitence to be as pure
as innocence to all the effects of pardon and glory: the memory of the sins
shall not be upon record, to be used to any after act of disadvantage, and
never shall return unless we force

6. God sometimes gives pardon beyond all his revelations 6.
and declared will, and provides suppletories of repentance, even then when he
cuts a man off from the time of repentance, accepting a temporal death instead
of an eternal: that although the Divine anger might interrupt the growing of
the fruits, yet in some cases, and to some persons, the death and the very
cutting off shall go no further, but be instead of explicit and long
repentances. Thus it happened to Uzzah, who was smitten for his zeal, and

But these suppletories are but seldom, and they are also great troubles, and
ever without comfort, and dispensed irregularly, and that not in the case of
habitual sins that we know of, or very great sins, but in single actions, or
instances of a less malignity;

7. God pardons the greatest sinners, and has left them upon 7.
Samuel to Zecharias: And Jonas thought he had reason on his side, to refuse to
go to threaten Nineveh; he knew Gods tenderness in destroying his creatures,
and he should be thought to be but a false Prophet; and so it came to pass
according to his belief. Jonah prayed unto the Lord and said, I pray thee Jonah
4. 2.
Lord was not this my saying when I was yet in my country; therefore I fled
for I knew thou were a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness and repentest thee of the evil: He told before hand what the event
would be; and he had reason to know it; God proclaimed it in a cloud before the
face of all Israel, and Miserator and misericors Deus. The Lord, Exodus 34. 6.
the Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc.

You see the largeness of this treasure; but we can see no end, for we have
not yet looked upon the rare arts of conversion; nor that God leaves the
natural habit of virtues, even after the acceptance is interrupted; nor his
working extraregular miracles, besides the sufficiency of Moses and the
Prophets, and the New Testament, and thousands more which we cannot consider
now.

But this we can, when God sent an Angel to pour plagues upon the earth, there
were in their hands Phialae aureae, golden phials: is precious and costly, and
it is an expense that God delights not in; but they were Phials, that is, such
vessels as out of them no great evil could come at once; but it comes out with
difficulty, sobbing and troubled as it passes forth; it comes through a narrow
neck, and the parts of it crowd at the port to get forth, and are stifled by
each others neighborhood; and all strive to get out, but few can pass, as if
God did nothing but threaten, and draw his judgments to the mouth of the Phial
with a full

The result of this consideration is, that as we fear the Divine judgments, so
that we adore and love his goodness, and let the golden chains of the Divine
mercy tie us to a noble prosecution of our duty and the interests of religion;
For he is the worst of men whom Kindness cannot soften, nor endearments oblige
whom gratitude cannot tie faster then the bands of life and death: He is an ill
natured sinner if he will not comply with the sweetnesses of heaven, and be
civil to his Angel guardian, or observant of his Patron God, who made him, and
feeds him, and keeps all his faculties, Fear is stronger then death, and Love
is more prevalent then Fear, and kindness is the greatest endearment of Love;
and yet to an ingenuous person gratitude is greater then all these, and obliges
to a solemn duty when love fails, and fear is dull and unactive, and death it
self is despised: but the Let us take heed: for Mercy is like a rainbowe, which
God set in the clouds to remember mankind; it shines here as long as it is not
hindered; but we must never look for it after it is night, and it shines not in
the other world; if we refuse mercy here, we shall have justice to eternity.

October the 9th. 1650. at her House Golden-Grove in CARMARTHEN-SHIRE.
To the right Honorable, and truly Noble, RICHARD Lord VAVGHAN, Earl of
Carbery, Baron of Emlim and Molinger, Knight of Bath.
My Lord,
I Am not ashamed to profess that I pay this part of service to your Lordship
most unwillingly: for it is a sad office to be the chief Minister in the house
of mourning, and to present an interested person with a branch of Cypress and
a bottle of tears. And indeed, my Lord, it were more proportionable to your
needs to bring something that might alleviate your sorrow, then to dress the
hearse of your Dear Lady, and to furnish it with such circumstances, that it
may dwell with you, and lie in your closet, and make your prayers and your
retirements more sad and full of weepings. But because the Divine providence
has taken from you a person so excellent, a woman fit to converse with Angels,
and Apostles, with Saints and Martyrs give me leave to present you with her
picture; drawn in little and in watercolors, sullied indeed with tears and
the abrupt accents of a real and consonant sorrow; but drawn with a faithful
hand, and taken from the life: and indeed it were too great a loss, to be
deprived of her example and of her rule, of the original and the copy too. The
age is very evil and deserved her not; but because it is so evil, it has the
more need to have such lives preserved in memory to instruct our piety, or
upbraid our wickedness. For now that God has cut this tree of Paradise down
from its seat of earth, yet so the dead trunk may support a part of the
declining Temple, or at least serve to kindle the fire on the altar. My Lord, I
pray God this heap of sorrow may swell your piety till it breaks into the
greatest joys of God and of religion: and remember, when you pay a tear upon
the grave, or to the memory of your Lady (that dear and most excellent soul)
that you pay two more: one of repentance for those things that may have caused
this breach; and another of joy for the mercies of God to your Dear departed
Saint, that he has taken her into a place where she can weep no more. My Lord,
I think I shall, so long as I live, that is so long as I am

Your Lordships

2 Samuel 14. 14.
WHen our blessed Savior and his Disciples viewed the Temple, some one amongst
them cried out, Magister aspice, quales lapides! Master behold what fair, what
great stones are here! Christ made no other Adam [the time shall come, that
there shall not be left one stone upon another.] The whole Temple and the
Religion, the ceremonies ordained by God, and the Nation beloved by God and the
fabric erected for the service of God, shall run to their own period and lie
down in their several graves. Whatsoever Adam in his artificial immortality:
Immortality was not in his nature, but in the hands, and arts, in the favor
and superadditions of God. Man was always the same mixture of heat and cold,
of dryness and moisture; ever the same weak things, apt to feel rebellion in
the humors, and to suffer the evils of a civil war in his body natural: and
therefore health and life was to descend upon look like health and beauty, and
in the evening, they are sick, and we might have died if we had not been
preserved by the continual flux of a rare providence: so now that we are
reduced to the laws of our own nature, we must needs die. It is natural, and
therefore necessary; It is become a punishment to us, and therefore it is
unavoidable, and God has bound the evil upon us by bands of natural and
inseparable propriety, and by a supervening unalterable decree of Heaven: and
we are fallen from our privilege, and are returned to the condition, of beast,
and buildings, and common

-- Phario nutantia pondera saxo
Quae cineri vanus dat ruitura labor,
and becomes as friable and uncombined dust as the ashes of the Sinner or the
Saint that lay under it, and is now forgotten in his bed of darkness: And to
this Catalogue of mortality Man is enrolled with a [Statutum est] It is
appointed for all men once to die, and after death comes judgment; and if a
man can be stronger then nature, or can wrestle with a degree of Heaven, or can
escape from a Divine punishment by his own arts, so that neither the power nor
the providence of God, nor the laws of nature, nor the bands of eternal
predestination can hold him, then he may live beyond the fate and period of
flesh, and last longer then a flower: But if all We must needs die] That Is our
sentence. But that is not all.

We are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again] Stay.
1. We are as water, weak and of no consistence, always descending abiding in
no certain place, unless where we are detained with violence: and every little
breath of wind makes us rough and tempestuous, and troubles our faces: every
trifling

2. But besides the weaknesses and natural decayings of our bodies, Lepidus and
Aufidius stumbled at the threshold of the Senate and fell down and died, the
blow came from heaven in a cloud but it struck more suddenly then upon the poor
Quod quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis cautum est in horas. There are
sicknesses that walk in darkness, and there are exterminating Angels that fly
wrapped up in the curtains of immateriality and an uncommunicating nature; whom
we cannot see, but we feel their force and sink under their sword, and from
heaven the vail descends that wraps our heads in the fatal sentence. There is
no age of man but it has proper to it self some posterns and outlets for
death, besides those infinite and open ports out of which myriads of men and
women every day pass into the dark Infancy has life but in effigy, or like
a spark dwelling in a pile of wood: the candle is so newly lighted, that every
little shaking of the taper, and every ruder breath of air, puts it out, and it
dies. Childhood is so tender, and yet so unwary; so soft to all the impressions
of chance, and yet so forward to run into them, that God knew there could be no
security without the care and vigilance of an Angel-keeper: and the eyes of

3. But all the middle way the case is altered. Nature is strong, 3.
and art is apt to give ease and remedy: but still, there is no security; and
there, the case is not altered. 1 For there are so many diseases in men that
are not understood. 2. So many new ones every year. 3 The old ones are so
changed in circumstance, and intermingled with so many collateral
complications. 4 The Symptoms are oftentimes so alike. 5 Sometimes so hidden
and fallacious. it falls away and runs apace; if its current be stopped, it
swells and grows troublesome, and spils over

4. In all the process of our health we are running to our grave: we open our
own sluices by vitiousnesse, and unworthy actions; we pour in drink, and let out
life; we increase diseases and know not how to bear them; we strangle our
selves with our own intemperance; we suffer the fevers and the inflammations
of lust, and we quench our souls with drunkenness; we bury our understandings
in loads of meat and surfets: and then we lie down upon our beds and roar with
pain and disquietnesse of our souls: Nay, we new mortality upon our selves;
wars and vexatious cares, and private duels, and public disorders, and every
thing that is unreasonable, and every thing that is violent: so that now we may
add this fourth gate to the grave: Besides Nature and Chance, and the mistakes
of art, men die with their own sins, and then enter into the grave in haste and
passion, and pull the heavy stone of the monument upon their own heads. And
thus we make our selves like water spilt on the ground: we throw away our lives
as it cannot be gathered up again.

There is no redemption from the grave.
-- inter se mortales mutua vivunt
Et quasi cursores vitai lampada tradunt.
Lazarus, and the widows son of Naim, and Tabitha, and the Saints that appeared
in Jerusalem at the resurrection of our blessed Lord, arose; they came into
this world, some as strangers only to make a visit, and all of them to
manifest a glory: but none came upon the stock of a new Dives would fain have
returned to his brothers house; but neither he, nor any from him could be sent:
but all the rest in the New Testament (one only excepted) were expressed to
have been holy persons, or else by their age were declared innocent. Lazarus
was Tabitha raised by Saint Peter was a charitable and a holy Christian: and
the maiden of twelve years old, raised by our blessed Savior, had not entered
into the regions of choice and sinfulness: and the only exception of the
widows son, is indeed none at all; for in it the Scripture is wholly silent;
and therefore it is very probable that the same process was used, God in all
other instances having chosen to exemplify his miracles of

This consideration I intend to you as a severe Monitor, and an advice of
carfulness, that you order your affairs so that you may be partakers of the
first resurrection, that is, from sin to grace, from the death of vicious
habits, to the vigor, life and efficacy of Blessed are they that have part in
the first resurrection, upon them the second death shall have no power: meaning
that they who by the power of Christ and his holy Spirit were raised to life
again, were holy and blessed souls, and such who were written in the book of
God; and that this grace happened to no wicked and vicious person: so it is
most true in the spiritual and intended sense: You only that serve God in a
holy life; you who are not dead in trespasses the resurrection of the body to
everlasting life. The wicked indeed shall be haled forth from their graves,
from their everlasting prisons, where in chains of darkness they are kept unto
in sensu favoris, a resurrection, but the solennities of the eternal death; It
is nothing but a new capacity of dying again; such a dying as cannot signify
rest; but where death means nothing but an intolerable and never ceasing
calamity: and therefore these words a gathering, but a scattering from the face
and presence of God. But the godly also come under the sense of these words.
They descend into their graves, and shall no more be reckoned among the living;
they have no concernment in all that is done under the Sun. Agamemnon has no
more to do with the Turks armies invading and possessing that part of Greece
where he reigned, then Cicero has no more interest in the present evils of
Christendom, then we have to do with his boasted discovery of Catilines
conspiracy. What is it to me that Rome was taken by the Gauls? and what is it
now to Camillus if different religions be tolerated amongst us? These things
that now happen concern the living, and they are made the scenes of our duty or
danger respectively: and when our wives are dead and sleep in charnel houses,
they are not troubled when we laugh loudly at the songs sung at the next
marriage feast; nor do they envy when another snatches away the gleanings

It is true they envy not, and they lie in a bosom where there can be no
murmr, and they that are consigned to Kingdoms, and to the feast of the
marriage-supper of the Lamb, the glorious and eternal Bridegroom of holy
souls, they cannot think our marriages here, our lighter laughings, and vain
rejoycings considerable as to them. And yet there is a relation continued
still. Aristotle said, that to affirm the dead take no thought for the good of
the living is a disparagement to the laws of that friendship which in their
state of separation they cannot be tempted to rescind. And the Ambrose gave
some things in charge to his dying brother Satyrus, that he should do for him
in the other world: he gave it him (I say) when he was dying, not when he was
dead. And certain it is that though our dead friends affection to us is not to
be estimated according to our low conceptions, yet it is not less, but much
more then ever it was; it is greater in degree, and of another kind.

But then we should do well also to remember, that in this world communion, by
actions of intercourse with them, and yet proper Paul prayed in behalf of
Onesiphorus) that God would show them 2 Timothy 1. 18.
mercy in that day, that fearful, and yet much to

But we are not yet passed the consideration of the sentence: This descending
to the grave is the lot of all men. [neither does God respect the person of any
man] The rich is not protected for favor, nor the poor for pity, the old man
is not reverenced for his age, nor the infant regarded for his tenderness;
youth and beauty, learning and prudence, wit and strength lie down equally in
the dishonours of the grave. All men, and all natures, and all persons resist
the addresses and solennities of death, and strive to preserve a

Donec certa dies omni compage soluta
Ipsum cum rebus subruat auxilium,
till the determined day comes, and then the burden sunk upon the pillars, and
disordered the aids and auxiliary rafters into a common ruin and a ruder
grave: so are the desires and weak arts of man, with little aids and
assistances of care and physic we strive to support

Let not us think to be excepted or deferred. If beauty, or wit, or youth, or
Nobleness, or wealth, or virtue could have been a defense, and an excuse from
the grave, we had not met here to day to mourn upon the hearse of an excellent
Lady; and God only knows for which of us next the mourners shall go about the

(...)
(...). Il. (...).

We have lived so many years; and every day and every minute we make an escape
from those thousands of dangers and deaths that encompasse us round about: and
such escapings we must reckon to be an extraordinary fortune, and therefore
that it cannot last long. Vain are the thoughts of Man, who when he is young or
healthful, thinks he has a long thread of life to run over, and that it is
violent and strange for young persons to die; and natural and more natural
for young Men and Women to die, then for old; because that is more natural
which has more natural causes; and that is more natural which is most
common: but to die with age is an God regards no man's person.

Well! but all this you will think is but a sad story. What? we be gathered up
no more. Is there no comfort after all this? shall we go from hence, and be no
more seen, and have no recompense.

Miser, o miser, aiunt, omnia ademit
Una die infausta mihi tot praemia vitae.
Shall we exchange our fair dwellings for a coffine, our softer beds [yet] in
the Text: [For all this, yet does God devise means that his banished be not
expelled from him.] All this sorrow and trouble is but a phantasme, and
receives its account and degrees from our present conceptions and the
proportion to our relishes and gust.

When Pompey saw the Ghost of his first Lady Julia, who vexed his rest and his
conscience for superinducing Cornelia upon her bed within the ten months of
mourning, he presently fancied it, either

Aut nihil est sensus animis in morte relictum,
Aut morsipsa nihil --
Either my dead wife knows not of my unhandsome marriage, and forgetfulness of
her; or if she does, then the dead live.

-- longae, canitis si cognita, vitae
Mors media est --
Death is nothing but the middle point between two lives between this and
another: concerning which comfortable mystery the holy God of Abraham, Isaak,
and Jacob; for all do live to him: and the souls of Saints are with Christ: I
desire to be dissolved (says S. Paul) and to be with Christ, for that is much
better: and, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: they rest from their
Vide 1 Cor. 15. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. Revel. 14. 13. John 5. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 8. and
6.
labors, and their works follow them: For we know, that if our earthly house
of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens: and this state of separation S. Paul
calls, a being absent from the body, and being present with the Lord: This is
one of Gods means which he has in the hands of Christ; they are in his
presence; they are, or shall be clothed with a house of Gods making; they rest
from all their labors; all tears are wiped from their eyes, and all
discontents from their spirits;

I will not venture to determine what are the circumstances of the abode of
Holy Souls in their separate dwellings; and yet possibly that might be easier
then to tell what or how the soul is and works in this world, where it is in
the body tanquam in aliena domo, as in a prison, in fetters and restraints: for
here the soal is discomposed and hindered, it is not as it shall be, as it
ought to be, as it was intended to be; it is not permitted to its own freedom,
and proper operation; so that all that we can understand of it here, is that it
is so incommodated with a troubled and abated instrument, that the object we
are to consider cannot be offered to us in a right line, in just and equal
propositions or if it could, yet because we are to understand the soul by the
soul, it becomes not only a troubled and abused object, but a crooked
instrument; and we here can consider it, just as a weak eye can behold At cum
exierit and in liberum coelum quasi in domum suam venerit, when the soul is
entered into her own house, into the free regions of the rest and the
neighborhood of heavenly joys, then its operations are more spiritual,
proper, and proportioned to its being; and though we cannot see at such a
distance, yet the object is more fitted if we had a capable

Certain it is, that the body does hinder many actions of the soul: it is an
imperfect body, and a diseased brain, or a violent passion that makes fools: no
man has a foolish soul; and the reasonings of men have infinite difference and
degrees by reason of the bodies constitution. Among beasts which have no
reason, there is a greater likeness then between men, who have: and as by
faces it is easier to know a man from a man, then a sparrow from a sparrow, or
a squirrel from a squirrel: so the difference is very great in our and if it
has any any act of life, it is much more noble and

That the soul is alive after our death, S. Paul affirms [Christ died for us,
that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with 1 These. 5. 10.
him.] Now it were strange that we should be alive, and live with Christ, and
yet do no act of life: the body when it is asleep does many: and if the soul
does none, the principle is less active then the instrument; but if it does
any act at all in separation, it must necessarily be an act or effect of
understanding; there is nothing else it can do. But this it can. For it is but
a weak and an unlearned proposition to say, That the Soul can do nothing of it
self, nothing the Spirit of grace, which is a principle of life and action and
in many instances does not all at communicate with matter, as in the infusion,
superinduction and the creation of spiritual graces. 2. As nutrition,
generation, eating and drinking are actions proper to the body and its state:
so, ecstasies, visions, raptures, intuitive knowledge, and consideration of its
self, acts of volition, and reflex acts of understanding are proper to the
soul. 3. And therefore it is observable that S. Paul said that he knew not
whether his visions and raptures were in or out of the body: for by that we see
his judgment of the thing, that one was as likely as the other, neither of
them impossible or unreasonable; and therefore that the soul is as capable of
action alone as in conjunction. 4. If in the state of blessedness there are
some actions of the soul which do not pass through the body, such as
contemplation of God, and conversing with spirits, and receiving those
influences and rare immissions which coming from the Holy and mysterious
Trinity make up the crown of glory; it follows that the necessity of the bodies
ministry is but during the state of this life, and as the operations of the
soul by reason of its dependence on the body are animal, natural and material:
so in the resurrection, the body shall be spiritual by reason of the
preeminence, influence, and prime operation of the soul. Now between these

To all which I add this consideration. That our souls have the same condition
that Christ's soul had in the state of separation; because he took on him all
our nature, and all our condition; and it is certain, Christ's soul in the three
days of his separation did exercise acts of life, of joy and triumph, and did
not sleep, but visited the souls of the Fathers, trampled upon the Prisoners of
hope; and from all this we may conclude that the souls of all the servants of
Christ are alive, and therefore do the actions of life, and proper to their
state; and therefore it is highly probable that the soul works clearer, and
understands brighter, and discourses wiser, and rejoices louder, and loves
noblier, and desires purer, and hopes stronger then it can do here.

But if these arguments should fail, yet the felicity of Gods Saints cannot
fail. For suppose, the body to be a necessary instrument but

2. God will restore the soul to the body, and raise the body to such a
perfection, that it shall be an Organ fit to praise him upon; Simonides and
Theodectes, of Hortensius and Seneca, of Sceptius Metrodorus and Carneades, of
Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, are only the Records better kept, and less
disturbed by accident and desease. For even the memory of Herod's son of Athens,
of Bathyllus and the dullest person now alive is so great, and by God made so
sure a record of all that ever he did, that as soon as ever God shall but tune
our instrument, and draw the curtains, and but light up the candle of
immortality, there we shall find it all, there we shall see all, and all the
world shall see all; then we shall be made fit to converse with God after the
manner of Spirits, we shall be like to Angels.

In the mean time, although upon the persuasion of the former Paul said)
whether present or absent, whether sleeping or waking, whether perceiving or
perceiving not, we may be accepted of him: that when we are banished this
world, and from the light of the sun, we may not be expelled from God, and from
the light of his countenance, but that from our beds of sorrows, our souls may

Amen
I Have now done with my Text, but yet am to make you another Sermon. I have
told you the necessity and the state of death; it may be too largely for such a
sad story; I shall therefore now Martha and Mary went to weep over the

I chose, not to declare her extraction and genealogy. It was indeed fair and
Honorable; but having the blessing to be descended from

2. She had a strict and severe education, and it was one of Gods graces and
favors to her. For being the Heiresse of a great fortune, and living amongst
the throng of persons in the sight of vanities and empty temptations, that is,
in that part of the Kingdom where greatness is too often expressed in great
follies, and great vices, God had provided a severe and angry education to
chastise the forwardnesses

3. She was married young; and besides her businesses of religion seemed to be
ordained in the providence of God to bring to this Honorable family a part of
a fair fortune, and to leave behind her a fairer issue worth ten thousand
times her portion: and as if this had

4. In passing through which line of providence, she had the art to secure her
eternal interest, by turning her condition into duty, and expressing her duty
in the greatest eminency of a virtuous, prudent and rare affection, that has
been known in any example. I will not give her so low a testimony, as to say
only that she was chaste; She

5. But that which I shall note in her, is that which I would have exemplar to
all Ladies, and to all women. She had a love so great for her Lord, so entirely
given up to a dear affection, that she thought the same things and loved the
same loves, and hated according to the same enmities, and breathed in his soul,
and lived in his presence,

Si gaudet, si slet, si tacit, hunc loquitur.
Coenat, propinat, poscit, negat, innuit, unus
Naevius est: --
and although this was a great enamel to the beauty of her soul, yet it might
in some degrees be also a reward to the virtue of her Lord: For she would often
discourse it to them that conversed with her; that he would improve that
interest which he had in her affection to the advantages of God, and of
religion: and she would delight to say, that he called her Solomon: She forsook
not the guide of her youth, nor brake the Covenant of her God. Prove. 2. 17.


6. As she was a rare wife: so she was an excellent Mother. For in so tender a
constitution of spirit as hers was, and in so great a

7. But if we examine how she demeaned her self toward God, there also you
will find her, not of a common, but of an exemplar piety. She was a great
reader of Scripture, confining her self to great portions every day; which she
read, not to the purposes

8. She was a very constant person at her prayers, and spent all a very great
love to hear the word of God preached; in which because I had sometimes the
honor to minister to her, I can give this certain testimony, that she was a
diligent, watchful and attentive hearer: and a constant Reader of Sermons, and
readily furnished and instructed to every good work. But God prevented that,
and has filled her desires not out of cisterns and little aquaeducts, but has
carried her to the fountain, where she drinks of the pleasures of the river,
and is full of God.

9. She always lived a life of much Innocence, free from the violences of
great sins: her person, her breeding, her modesty, her honor, her religion,
her early marriage, the Guide of her soul, and the Guide of her youth, were as
so many fountains of restraining grace to her, to keep her from the dishonours
of a crime. Bonum est portare jugum ab adolescentia: it is good to bear the
yoke of the Lord from our youth; and though she did so, being guarded by a
mighty providence, and a great favor and grace of God from staining her fair
soul with the spots of hell, yet she had strange fears and early cares upon
her; but these were not only for her self, but in order to others, to her
nearest Relatives. For she was so great a lover of this Honorable family of
which now she was a Mother, that she desired to become a chanel of great
blessings to it unto future ages, and was extremely jealous lest any from her
thoughts, and delighted to see her estate of a clear and disintangled interest:
she would have no mingled rights with it; she would not receive any thing from
the Church, but religion and a blessing: and she never thought a curse and a
sin far enough off, but would desire it to be infinitely distant; and that as
to this family God had given much honor and a wise head to govern it, so he
would also for ever give many

10. And though her accounts to God was made up of nothing

But in this course of hers there were some circumstances, and some appendages
of substance, which were highly remarkable.

1. In all her Religion, and in all her actions of relation toward God, she
had a strange evennesse and untroubled passage, sliding toward her Ocean of God
and of infinity with a certain and silent motion. So have I seen a river deep
and smooth passing with a still foot and a sober face, and paying to the
Fiscus, the great Exchequer of the Sea, the Prince of all the watery bodies, a
tribute

2. The other appendage of her religion, which also was a great ornament to all
the parts of her life, was a rare modesty and humility of spirit, a confident
despising and undervaluing of her self. For though she had the greatest
judgment, and the greatest experience of things and persons that I ever yet
knew in a person of sullies the beauty of the fairest virtues, and makes our
understanding like one that hides the wind, and covers the ointment of her
right hand.

I know not by what instrument it happened; but when death drew near, before it
made any show upon her body, or revealed it self by a natural signification,
it was conveyed to her spirit: she had a strange secret persuasion that the
bringing this Child should be her last scene of life: and we have known, that
the soul when she is about to disrobe her self of her upper garment, sometimes
speaks Magnifica verba: mors prope admota excutit; sometimes it is prophetical;
sometimes God by a superinduced persuasion wrought by instruments, or accidents
of his own, serves the ends of his own providence and the salvation of the
soul: But so it was, that the thought of death dwelt long with her, and grew
from the first steps of faney and fear, to a consent, from thence to a strange
credulity, and expectation of it; and without the violence of sickness she
died, as if she had done it voluntarily, and by design, and for fear her
expectation should have been deceived, or that she should Cato) sic abiit e
vita ut causam moriendi nactam se esse gauderet, she died, as if she had been
glad of the opportunity.

And in this I cannot but adore the providence and admire the wisdom and
infinite mercies of God. For having a tender and soft, a delicate and fine
constitution and breeding, she was tender to pain, and apprehensive of it, as a
child's shoulder is of a load and burden: Grave est tenerae cervici jugum; and
in her often discourses of death, which she would renew willingly and
frequently, she would tell, that she feared not death, but she feared the sharp
pains Emori nolo, me esse mortuam non curo: The being dead, and being freed
from the troubles and dangers of this world, she hoped would be for her
advantage; and therefore that was no part of her fear: But she believing the
pangs of death were great, and the use and aids of reason little, had reason to
fear left they should do violence to her spirit and the decency of her
resolution. But God that knew her fears, and her jealousy concerning her self,
fitted her with a death so easy, so harmless, so painlesse, that it did not
put her patience to a severe trial. It was not (in all appearance) of so much
trouble, as two fits of a common ague; so careful Blessed be that goodness of
God, who does so careful actions of mercy for the ease and security of his
servants. But this one instance was a great demonstration that the apprchension
of death is worse then the pains of death: and that God loves to reprove the
unreasonablenesse of our fears, by the mightiness, and by the arts of his mercy.

She had in her sickness (if I may so call it, or rather in the solemnities, and
graver preparations toward death) some curious and wellbecoming fears,
concerning the final state of her soul. But from thence she passed into a
deliquium, or a kind of trance, and as soon as she came forth of it, as if it
had been a vision, or that she had conversed with an Angel, and from his hand
had received a label or scroll of the book of life, and there seen her name
enrolled, she cried [Glory be to God on high: Now I am sure I shall be saved.]
Concerning which manner of discoursing we are wholly ignorant, what judgment
can be made: but certainly there are strange things in the other world; and so
there are in all the immediate preparation to it; and a little glimps of
heaven, a minutes conversing with an Angel, any ray of God, any communication
extraordinary from the spirit of comfort which God gives to his servants in
strange and unknown manners, are infinitely far from illusions; and they shall
then be understood by us, when we feel them, and when our new and

But I must be forced to use summaries and arts of abbreviature in the
enumerating those things in which this rare Personage was dear to God and to
all her Relatives.

If we consider her Person, she was in the flower of her age, Jucundum cum
aetas florida ver ageret; of a temperate, plain and natural diet; without
curiosity or an intemperate palate; she spent less time in dressing, then many
servants; her recreations were little and seldom, her prayers often, her
reading much: she was of a most noble and charitable soul; a great lover of
honorable actions and

If we look on her as a Wife, she was chaste and loving, fruitful and discreet,
humble and pleasant, witty and complyant, rich and fair, and wanted nothing to
the making her a principal and a precedent to the best Wives of the world, but
a long life, and a full age.

If we remember her as a Mother; she was kind and severe, careful and prudent,
very tender, and not at al fond, a greater lover of her childrens souls, then
of their bodies, and one that would value them more by the strict rules of
honor and proper worth, then by their relation to her self.

Her servants found her prudent, and fit to Govern, and yet openhanded and apt
to reward; a just Exactor of their duty and a great Rewarder of their
diligence.

She was in her house a comfort to her dearest Lord, a guide to her children, a
Rule to her Servants, an example to all.

But as she related to God in the offices of Religion, she was even and
constant, silent and devout, prudent and material: she loved what she now
enjoyes, and she feared what she never felt, and God did for her what she never
did expect. Her fears went beyond all her evil; and yet the good which she has
received was, and is, and ever shall be beyond all her hopes.

She lived as we al should live, and she died as I fain would die --

Et cum supremos Lachesis perneverit annos,
Non aliter cineres mando jacere meos.
I pray God I may feel those mercies on my deathbed that she felt, Nemo parum
diu vixit qui virtutis perfectae perfecto functus est munere: and as now in the
grave it shall not be enquired concerning her, how long she lived, but how
well? so to us who live after her to suffer a longer calamity, it may be some
ease to our sorrows, and some guide to our lives, and some security to our
conditions, to consider that God has brought the piety of a young Lady to the
early rewards of a never ceasing, and Mors illos consecrat, quorum exitum and
qui timent, laudant: Death consecrates and makes sacred that person whose
excellency was such, that they that are not

The end.
CLERVS DOMINI: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE DIVINE INSTITUTION, Necessity,
Sacredness, and Separation OF THE OFFICE MINISTERIAL.

TOGETHER WITH THE NATURE AND MANNER OF its Power and Operation.

WRITTEN By the special command of our late KING.

BY JER. TAILOR D. D.

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane.
1651.

THE Divine institution and necessity
SECT. I.
WHen several Nations, and differing Religions have without any famous mutual
intercourse reason be the principle, then it is more regular and 1.
lasting, and admits of no other variety, then as some men grow unreasonable,
or that the reason ceases; If tradition be the fountain, then it is not only
universal, and increases as the world is peopled, the Law of Nature, it is
either a custom of all the world derived from Noah or Adam; or else it is
therefore done, because natural reason teaches us to do it in the order to
the preservation of our selves and the public.

But imitation of the customs of a wise nation, is something less, 2.
and yet it has produced great consent in external rites and offices of
Religion. And since there is in ceremonies so great indifferency, Custom or a
Law according as they are capable; For if a wise Prince, or a Governor, or a
Nation, or a famous family has chosen rites of common Religion, such as were
consonant to the Analogy of his duty, expressive of his sense, decent in the
expression, grave in the form, or full of ornament in their representment,

Thus the Jews and the Gentiles used Valor. Maxim. l. 1. c. 1. Philostr. lib. 2.
white garments in their 3.
holy offices, and the Christians thought it reasonable enough from so united
example to do so too. Example was reason great enough for that. The Dion hist.
li. 54
Gentile Priests were forbid to touch a dead body, to A. Gell. lib. 10. c. 15.
eat leavened bread, to Ibid.
mingle with secular employments during Philostratus:) the Primitive Lib. 3.
Bishops did so too; and in the highest detestation of their follies thought
they might wisely enough imitate their innocent customs and Priestly
ornaments, and hoped they might better reconcile their minds to the Christian
Religion by compliance in ceremonials, then exasperate them by rejecting their
ancient and innocent ceremonies: for so the Apostles invited and enticed
Judaisme into

And Tertullian complains of the Devils craft, who by imitating the Christian
rites reconciled men's minds with that compliance to a more charitable opinion
of the Gentile superstition. The Devil intending to draw the professors of
truth to his own portion, or to preserve De praescript. c. 40.
his own in the same fetters he first put upon them, imitates the rites of
Hujus sunt parts invertendi veritatem, qui ipsas quoque res sacramentorum
divinorum in idolorum mysteriis aemulatur. Tingit and ipse quosdam utique
credentes and fideles suos: expiationem delictorum de lavacro re-promittit, and
sic adhut initiat Mithrae: signat illic in srontibus milites suos, celebrat and
panis oblationem and imaginem resurrectionis inducit, and sub gladio redimit
coronam. Quid, quod and summum Pontificem in unis nuptiis statuit? habet and
virgins, habet and continentes. Qui ergo ipsas res de quibus sacramenta
Christi administrantur tam amulanter affectavit exprimere in negotiis
idololatriae, utique and idem and eodem ingenio gestiit, and potuit instrumenta
quoque divinarum rerum et sanctorum Christianorum sensum de sensibus, verba de
verbis, parabolas de parabolis, profanae and aemulae sidei attemperare.
our religion, adopting them into his superstition. He baptizes some of his
disciples, and when he initiates them to the worship of Mithra promises them
pardon of sins, by that rite, he signs his soldiers in their forehead, he
represents the oblation of bread, and introduces representments of the
resurrection, and laboriously gets martyrs to his cause. His Priests marry but
once; he has his virgins and his abstemious and continent followers: that what
Christians love and the world commends in them, being adopted into the rituals
of Idolatry, may allure some with the beauty and fair imagery, and abuse others
with color and fantastic faces.

And thus also all wise men that intended to persuade others to 4.
their religion, did it by retaining as much as they innocently could of the
other, that the change might not be too violent, and the

Censor. de die natal. c. 1.
The Gentiles offered first fruits to their Gods, and their tithes 5.
to Hercules, Sueton. in Vesp^s.
kept vigils and anniversaries, forbad marriages without the consent of
Parents, and clandestine contracts; these were observed with some variety
according as the people were civil or learned; and according to the degree of
the tradition, or as the thing Livi. decad. 1. lib. 10.
was reasonable, so these customs were more or less universal.

6.
the current, but it must either be a command which God has given to all the
world; (and so Socrates in Xenophon, Quod ab omnibus gentibus observatum est,
id non nisi a Deo sancitum esse dicendum est) or Lib. 4. de factis and dict.
Socr.
a tradition, or a law descending from our common parents, or a reason derived
from the nature of things; there cannot in the world be any thing great enough
to take away such a rite, except an express divine commandment: and a man by
the same reason may marry his nearest relative as he may deny to worship God by
the recitation

I have instanced in two things in which I am sure to find the fewest
adversaries, (I said the fewest; for there are some men which 7.
have lost all humanity) but these two great instances are not attested with so
universal a tradition and practice of the world as this that is now in
question. For in some nations they have married their Tatianus in Clemens
Alexandrinus, Stromat. 3.
and Bardisanes Syrus in Eusebius. And the Greeks worshipped Hercules by
railing, and Mercury by throwing stones at him. Lib. 4. praepar. Evangel.
But there was never any people but had their Priests and Presidents of
religious rites, and kept holy things within a mure, that the people might not
approach to handle the mysteries: and therefore besides that it is a recession
from the customs of mankind, and charges us with the disrespect of all the
world (which is an incuriousnesse next to infinite) it is also a doing against
that which all the ex post facto, and he must have a strange understanding, who
is not persuaded by that which has determined all the world.

For religion cannot be at all in communities of men without some to guide, to
minister, to preserve and to prescribe the offices and ministeries: What can
profane holy things but that which makes them common? and what can make them
common more Jacob worshipped upon a stone, offered upon a turfe, and the Arc
rested in Obed-Edoms house, and was holy in Dagons Temple; and hills and groves,
fields and orchards, according to the several customs of the nations, were
the places of address; But a common person ministering, was so near a
circumstance, and Holy place is something, a separate time is something, a
prescript form of words is more, and separate and solemn actions are more yet;
but all these are made common by a common person, and therefore without a
distinction of persons have not a natural and reasonable distinction of
solemnity and exterior religion.

And indeed it were a great disreputation to religion, that all great and
public things, and every artifice or profitable science should 8.
in all the societies of men be distinguished by professors, artists and proper
ministers; and only religion should lie in common, apt to be bruised by the
hard hand of mechanics, and sullied by the ruder touch of undiscerning and
undistinguished persons; for although the light of it shines to all, and so
far every man's interest is concerned in religion, yet it were not handsome
that every man should take the taper in his hand: and religion is no more to be
handled by all men, then the laws are to be dispensed by all, by whom they are
to be obeyed; though both in religion and the laws, all men have a common
interest.

For since all means must have some equality or proportion toward their end,
that they may of their own being or by institution 9.
be symbolicall, it is but reasonable that by elevated and sublimed instruments
we should be promoted toward an end supernatural and divine; now besides,
that of all the instruments of distinction, the person is the most principal
and apt for the honor of religion (and to make our religion honorable is part
of the religion it self) it is also apt for the uses of it; such as are,
preserving the rights, ordering, decent ministration, dispensing the laws of
religion, judging causes, ceremonies and accidents; and he that appoints not
offices

10.
of persons in order to the ministration; for besides that every man is not fit
to approach to God with all his sordes and adherent indispositions; an
assignment in reason must be made of certain persons, whose calling must be
holy, and their persons taught to be holy, by such a solemn and religious
assignment; that those persons being made higher then the people by their
calling and religion, and yet our brethren in nature, may be intermediall
between God and the people, and present to God the peoples needs, and be
isntrumental to the reconveying Gods blessing upon those whose

And this consideration is not only good reason, but true divinity, and was a
consideration in the Greek Church, and affixed to the 11.
head of a prayer as the reason of their address to God in designing O Lord
God who because man's nature cannot of it self approach to thy glorious Deity,
(...). In ordinat. Episc. (...), etc.
have appointed Masters and Teachers of the same passions with our selves, whom
thou have placed in thy throne, viz. in the ministry of the kingdom, to bring
sacrifices and oblations in behalf of thy people, etc. And indeed if the
greatness of an employment separates persons from the vulgus, either we must
think the immediate offices of religion and the intercourse with God to be the
meanest of employments, or the persons so officiating to receive their estimate

And thus it was amongst the Jews and Gentiles before Christ's time, amongst
whom they not only separated persons for the service 12.
of their Gods respectively, but chose the best of men and the Princes of the
people to officiate in their mysteries, and adorned them with the greatest
honors and special immunities. Among the Jews, the Priesthood was so
honorable, that although the expectation Levi to marry with the Kingly Tribe
of Judah, that they also might have the honor and portion of the Messias's
most glorious generation; and for the Priesthood of Aaron it was (...), says
Philo, a celestial honor, not an earthly, a heavenly profession, and it grew
so high and was so naturalized into that nation to honor their Priests and
mystic persons, that they made it the pretense of their Honor sacerdotii
firmamentum potentiae assumebatur, says Tacitus, speaking of their wars
against Antiochus; the honor of their Priesthood was the strength of their
cause, and the pretense of their arms; and all the greatest honor they could
do to their Priesthood they fairly derived from a divine precept, that the
Prince and the People and the Elders and the Synagogue should go in and out,
that is, should commence and finish their greatest and most solemn actions at
the voice and command of the Priest; And therefore King Agrippa did himself
honor in his Epistle to Cajus Caesar. (...).
I had Kings that were my ancestors, and that Priesthood to be greater then the
kingdom, as God is greater then men.

And this great estimate of the Ministers of their religion derived 13.
it self from the Jews unto their enemies the Philistines that dwelt upon
their skirts; insomuch that in the hill of God where there was a garrison of
the Philistines, there was also a college of Prophets 1 Samuel 10. 5. and 10.
newly instituted by Samuel (from whom because he was Peter reckoned the
ordinary descent from Samuel) Acts 3. 24.
unharmed and undisturbed though they were enemies to the nation; and when
David fled from Saul, he came to Naioth where the Prophets dwelt, and thought
to take sanctuary there, knowing it was a privileged place; there it was where
Saul's messengers, and Saul himself 1 Samuel 19. 18.
turned Prophets, that they might estimate the place and preserve its
privilege, himself becoming one of their society.

For this was observed amongst all nations that besides the band 14.
of humanity forbidding soldiers to touch unarmed people, as by all religions
and all nations Priests ever were, the very sacredness fossarii in the
Primitive Church, no soldiers durst touch them; they had the privilege of Hos
quae necabant non erant purae manus; and therefore it grew up into a proverb,
when they intended to express a most destructive and unnatural war, (...),
not so much as the Priests that carried fire before the army did escape; the
same with that in Homer in the case of messengers,

(...) Iliad. m. vide 1. li. Eustath.

(...)
Not so much as a messenger returned into the City: These were sacred and
therefore exempt persons, and so were the Elei Jupiter, safe from the hostility
of a professed enemy; the same which was observed amongst the Romans,

Quis homo est tanta confidentia
Qui sacerdotem audeat violare! Plautus in Rudent.

At magno cum malo suo fecit Hercule.
But this is but one instance of advantage.

The Gentiles having once separated their Priests, and affixed 15.
them to the ministeries of religion, thought nothing great enough either to
express the dignity of their employment, or good Cicero, in the case of the
Roman Augures, Maximum autem and Cicero lib. 2. de leg.
praestantissimum in Rep. jus est Augurum, cum est authoritati conjunctum;
neque vero hoc quia sum ipse Augur ita sentio, sed quia sio existimare nos
necesse est. Quid enim majus est, si de jure quaerimus, quam posse a summis
imperiis and summis potestatibus comitia tollere? concilia vel instituta
dimittere, vel habita rescindere? Quid magnificentius quam posse decernere ut
magistratu se abdicent consules? quid religiosius quam cum populo, cum plebe
agendi jus aut dare aut non dare? It was a vast power these men had, to be in
proportion to their greatest honor: they had Been autem quod and Episcopi
Tertulli. adv. psychicos c. 13.
universae plebi mandare jejunia assolent; non dico industria stipium
conferendarum, ut vestrae capturae est, sed interdum, and aliqua sollicitudinis
Ecclestasticae causa. The Bishops also called public conventions
Ecclesiastical. Aguntur praecepta per Graecias illas certis in locis concilia
ex universis Ecclesiis, per quae et altior a quaeque in commune tractantur Ibid.
and ipsarepraesentatio totius nominis Christiani magna veneratione celebratur.
Antistites, the presidents of rites and guides of consciences had great
immissions and influences into the republic, and communities of men, and they
verified the saying of Tacitus, Deum munere summum pontisicem, etiam summum
hominem esse, non aemulatione, non odio, aut privatis affectionibus obnoxium.
Lib. 3. Annal.
The chief Priest was ever the chief man, and free from the envies, and
scorns, and troubles of popular peevishness and contumacy; Tacitus, utque
glisceret dignatio sacerdotum, (for all the great traverses of the republic
were in their disposing) atque ipsis promptior animus foret ad capessendas
ceremonias, the very lower institutions of their religion were set up with the
marks of special laws and privileges; insomuch that the seat of the Empress
in the Theater was among the Vestall virgins. Lib. 4. Annal.


But the highest had all that could be heaped upon them, till 16.
their honors were as sublimed as their functions. Strabo Geogr. lib. 17.
Amongst the Ethiopians the Priests gave laws to their Princes, and they used
their Aelian: var. hist. lib. 14. c. 34. Joseph. antiq. lib. 14. c. 16. Caesar
com. de bello Gall. li. 6.
Among the Egyptians the Priests were their Judges; so they were in Athens; for
the Areopagites were Priests; and the Druids among the Gauls were Judges of
murder, of titles of land, of bounds, and inheritances, magno apud eos sunt
honor, nam fere de omnibus controversiis publicis privatisque constituunt; and
for the Magi of Persia and India, Strabo reports (...), they conversed with
Kings, meaning they were their counselors and guides of their consciences.
And Herodotus in Eustathius tells us of Eustath. in Il. a.
the (...), the divine order of Prophets or Priests in Delphos, (...), they did
eat of the public provisions together with Kings. By these honors they gave
testimony of their religion, not only separating certain persons for the
service of their Temples, but also separating their condition from the
impurities and the contempt of the world; as knowing, that they who were to
converse with their Gods, were to be elevated from the common condition of men
and vulgar miseries.

(...) Porphirius citat ex Eurip. 4. (...).

(...),
(...).
As soon as I was made a Priest of Idaean Jupiter, all my garments were white,
and I declined to converse with mortals. Novae sortis oportet illum esse qui
jubente Deo canat, said Seneca. He had need be of a distinct and separate
condition that sings to the honor and at the command of God: thus it was among
the Jews and Heathens.

SECT. II.
NOw if Christian Religion should do otherwise then all the 1.
world has done, either it must be because the rites of Christianity are of no
mystery and secret dispensation, but common actions of an ordinary address,
and cheap devotion, or else The first is dishonorable to Christianity, and
false as its greatest enemy; The second, is shame to us; and both so
unreasonable and unnatural, that if we separate not certain persons for the
ministeries of Christianity, we must confess we have the worst religion, or
that we are the worst of men.

But let us consider it upon its proper grounds. When Christ had 2.
chosen to himself twelve Apostles, and was drawing now to the last scene of
his life, he furnished them with commissions and abilities to constitute and
erect a Church, and to transmit such powers That he would be with them until
the end of the world; they might presonally be with him until the end of the
world, but he could not be here with them, who after a short course run, were
to go hence, and be no more seen: and therefore for the verification of the
promise it is necessary that since the promise was made for the benefit of the
Church, and to them as the ministers of the benefit, so long as the benefit was
to be dispensed, so long they were to be succeeded to, and therefore assisted
by the Holy Jesus according to Not only to the Apostles, but absolutely and
indefinitely to all Christ's disciples, their successors, he promised to abide
for ever, even to the consummation of the world, to the whole succession of the
Clergy: so Theophylact upon this place.

And if we consider what were the power and graces Jesus committed 3.
to the dispensation of the Apostles, such as were not temporary, binding and
loosing remitting and retaining sins, which Christ gave them together with his
breathing on them the holy Spirit, and a legation, and a special commission,
as appears in S. John; which John 20. 21.
power, what sense soever it admits of, could not expire with the persons of
the Apostles, unless the succeeding ages of the Church had no discipline, or
government, no scandals to be removed, no weak persons offended, no corrupt
members to be cut off, no heretics rejected, no sins, or no pardon; and that
were a more heresy, Novatians, for they only denied this ministry in some
cases; not in all: saying, Priestly absolution was not fit to be dispensed to
them, who in time of persecution had sacrificed to idols. (...). Vide Socrat.
li. 1. c. 7. Sozom. l. 1. c. 20.
[(...), To these] only, pardon is to be dispensed without the ministry of
the Priest, To these] who were (...), sacrificers, and mingled the table of the
Lord with the table of devils. Against other sinners they were not so severe.
But however, so long as that distinction remains, of sins unto death, and
sins not unto death; there are a certain sort of sins which are remediable,
and cognoscible, and judicable, and a power was dispensed to a distinct sort of
persons, to remit or retain those sins; which therefore must remain with the
Apostles for ever, that is, with their persons first, and then with the (...)
with their successors; because the Church needs it for ever; and there was
nothing in the power that by relating to a present and temporary occasion did
insinuate its short life and speedy expiration.

In execution of this power and pursuance of this commission, for which the
power was given; the Apostles went forth, and all 4.
they upon whom this signature passed, (...), executed this power in
appropriation and distinct ministry: it was the sword of their proper
ministry; and S. Paul does almost exhibit his commission and reads the words
when he puts it in execution, and does highly verify the parts and the
consequence of this argument; God has reconciled us to himself 2 Cor. 5. 20.
by Christ Jesus, and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation; and it
follows, now then we are Ambassadors for Christ. The ministry It is
committed to us; we are Ambassadors, it is appropriate by virtue of Christ's
mission, and legation. He has given to us, he has made and deputed certain
Ambassadors whom he has sent upon the message, and ministry of
reconcilement; which is a plain exposition of the words of his commission,
before recorded; John 20. 21.

And that this also descended lower we have the testimony of S. James, who
advises the sick person to send for the Elders of the 5.
Church, that they may pray over him, that they may anoint him, James 5.
that in that society there may be consession of sins by the clinick or

all that, was promised should descend upon them after Christ's ascension, and
was verified in Pentecost; for to that purpose to bring all things to their
mind, all of Christ's doctrine and all that was necessary of his life and
miracles, and a power from above to enable them to speak boldly and learnedly,
and with tongues, all that, besides the other parts of ordinary power, was
given them ten days after the Ascension. And therefore the breathing the holy
their ordinary mission, a sending them as ordinary Pastors, and Curates of
souls, with a power to govern, (binding and loosing can mean no less: and they
were the words of the promise) with a power to minister reconciliation: (for so
S. Paul expounds remitting and retaining) which two were the great hinges of
the Gospel, the one to invite and collect a Church, the other to govern it,
the one to dispense the greatest blessing in the world, the other to keep them
in capacities of enjoying it. For since the holy Ghost was now actually given
to these In John 20.
S. Cyrill, Ibid.
S. Chrysostom, In 1 Timothy 4.
S. Ambrose, Homil. 26. in Evang.
S. Gregory, and the Quest. 93.
Author of the questions of the old and new Testament, who unless by their
calling shall rather be called persons Augustine gives to all public
penitents, Veniant ad Antistites per quos illis in Ecclesia claves
ministrantur, and a praepositis sacrorum accipiant satisfactionis suae modum,
let them come to the Presidents

SECT. III.
THe second power I instance in is preaching the Gospel: for 1.
others also were appointed for the same work forever, to all generations of
the Church. This Commission was signed immediately before Christ's ascension;
All power is given to me in heaven Mat. 28. 19, 20.
and in earth, Go ye therefore and teach all nations, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you
always even unto the end of the world. First, Christ declared his own [all
power is given him into his hand] he was now made King of all the creatures,
and Prince of the Catholic Church; and therefore as it concerned his care and
providence to look to his cure, and flock, so he had power to make deputations
accordingly [Goe ye therefore,] implying that the sending them to this
purupose was an issue of hispower, either because the authorizing certain
persons was an act of power, or else because the making them doctors of the
Church and teachers of the Nations, was a placing them in an eminency above
their scholars; and converts, and so also was an emanation of that power which
derived upon presidency and authority; for sinco all dominion is naturally
founded in the understanding; although civil government accidentally, and by
inevitable public necessity relies upon other titles, yet where the greatest
understanding and power of teaching is, there is a natural pre-eminence and
superiority eatenus, that is according to the proportion of the excellency; and
therefore in the instance of S Paul we are taught the style of the court, and
Disciples sit at the feet of their Masters, as he did at the feet of his
Gamaliel, which implies duty, submission, and subordination; and indeed it is
the highest of any kind, not only because it is founded upon nature, but
because it is a submission of the most imperious faculty we have, even of that
faculty which when we are removed from our Tutors, is submitted to none but
God; for no man has power over the understanding faculty; and therefore so
long as we are under Tutors and instructors, we give to them that duty, in the
succession of which claim, none can succeed but God himself, because none else
can satisfy the understanding but he.

Now then because the Apostles were created Doctors of all the hoc ipso they
had power given them over the understandings 2.
of their disciples, and they were therefore fitted with an infallible spirit,
and grew to be so authentic that their determination was the last address of
all inquiries in questions of Christianity: and although they were not absolute
Lords of their faith and understandings, their Lord was, yet they had, under
God, a supreme care, and presidency, to order, to guide, to instruct, and to
satisfy their understandings; and those whom they sent out upon the same
errand, according to the proportion and excellency of their spirit, had also a
degree of superiority and eminency; and therefore they who were (...) Laborers
in the word and doctrine, were also (...) Presbyters that were Presidents and
Rulers of the Church; and this eminency is for ever to be retained according as
the unskilfulnesse of the Disciple retains him in the form of Catechumens, or
as the excellency of the instructor still

Upon this ground it is, that learning amongst wise persons is 3.
esteemed a title of nobility and secular eminency: Ego enim quid aliud
munificentiae adhibere potui, ut studia, ut sic dixerim, in umbr a educata e
quibus claritudo venit, said Seneca to Nero. And Aristotle and Apud Tacitum
lib. 18. Arist. lib. 4. Polit. c. 4. A. Gellius. lib. 19. c. 10.
A. Gellius affirm that not only excellency of extraction, or great noble;
circumundique sedentibus multis doctrina, aut genere, aut fortuna nobilibus
viris: and therefore the Lawyers say, that if a legacy be given pauperi nobili,
the executors, if they please, may give it to a Doctor. I only make this use
of Barthol. in l. Judices. Cod. de dignit. l. 12. Baldus in l. nemini. C. de
advo. diverse. judic.
it, that they who are by public designation appointed to teach, are also
appointed in some sense to govern them: and if learning it self be a fair
title to secular opinion, and advantages of honor, then they who are
professors of learning, and appointed to be public teachers, are also set
above their disciples as far as the chair is above the Area or floor, that
is, in that very relation of teachers and de mysteriis, sometimes bore a
scepter.

(...). Upon which verse of Homer Eustathius observes, (...), The scepter was
not only an ensign of a King, but of a Judge and of a Prophet; it signified a
power of answering in judgment, and wise sentences. This discourse was
occasioned by our blessed Saviors illative; All power is given me, go ye
therefore and teach; and it concludes, that the authority of Preaching is more
then the faculty, that it includes power and presidency, that therefore a
separation of persons is ex abundanti inferred, unless order and authority be
also casual, and that all men also may be Governors as well as Preachers.

Now that here was a plain separation of some persons for this ministry, I
shall not need to prove by any other argument besides the 4.
words of the Commission; save only that this may be added, that here was more
necessary, then a commission; great abilities, special Joel fulfilled, Old men
dreamed dreams, and young men saw visions, and sons and daughters did prophecy;
now the case was altered; and the disciples themselves start up doctors, and
women prayed and prophesied, and Priscilla sat in the chair Aquila, and
Apollos sat at their feet: and now all was common again; and therefore although
the commission went out first to the Apostles, yet when by miracle God
dispensed great gifts to the Laity, and to women, he gave probation that he
intended that all should prophecy and preach, lest those gifts should be to no
purpose. This must be considered.

1. These gifts were miraculous verifications of the great promise 5.
of the Father, of sending the holy Ghost, and that all persons were capable of
that blessing in their several proportions, and that Christianity did descend
from God were ex abundanti proved by those

2. These gifts were given extraregularly; but yet with some difference of
persons; for all did not prophecy, nor all interpret, 6.
nor all speak with tongues; they were but a few that did all this; we find
but the daughters of one man only, and Priscilla among all the nations of the
Jews that ever did prophecy, of the women; and of Laymen I remember not one but
Aquila and Agabus; and these will be but too straight an argument to blend a
whole order of men in a popular and vulgar indiscrimination.

3. These extraordinary gifts were no authority to those who had them, and no
other commission, to speak in public. And therefore 7.
S. Paul forbids the women to speak in the Church, and yet it was not denied
but some of them might have the spirit of prophecy. Speaking in the Church was
part of an ordinary power, to which not only ability but authority also and
commission are required: That was clearly one separation; women were not
capable of a clericall employment, no not so much as of this ministry of
preaching. And by this we may take speedier account concerning Deaconesses in
the Primitive Church; de Diaconissa ego Bartholomaus dispono; O Lib. 8. c. 26.
Episcope, impones ei manus praesentibus Presbyteris, Diaconis and Diaconissis,
and dices, Respice super hanc famulam tuam; so it is in the constitutions
Apostolical under the name of S. Clement: By which it should seem they were
ordained for some Ecclesiastical ministry; In exhort. ad castitatem.
igitur and quae in Ecclesiis ordinari solent, quae Deo nubere maluerunt? And
Sozomen tells of Olympias, Hanc enim cum genere esset nobilissimo, Lib. 4. c. 9.
quamvis juvenculam ex quo vidua facta erat, quia ex praescripto Ecclesiae
egregie philosophatur, in Ministram Nectarius ordinat: and such a one it was,
whom S. Basil called impollutam sacerdotem; whatsoever Lib. de virg.
these Deaconesses could be, they could not speak in public unless they did
prevaricate the Apostolical rule, given to the Corinthian and Ephesian
Churches: And therefore though Olympias was an excellent person, yet she was no
preacher; she was a Philosopher, Philosophata ex ecclesiae praescripto, and
that could not be by preaching: but these Deaconesses after the Apostolical
age, were the same with the (...), the good women, that did domestic offices
and minister to the temporal necessity of the Churches in the days of the
Apostles; Such a one was Phoebe of Cenchrea; but they were not admitted to any
holy or spiritual office: so we have certain testimony from antiquity, whence
the objection comes. For so the Nicene council expressly: (...) etc. (...). c.
19.
Deaconesses are to be reckoned viz. for any spiritual office. For they had
imposition of hands in some places to temporal administrations about the
Church, and a solemn benediction, but nothing of the (...); the same were the
(...), the Presbyteresses who were Here Is. 79.
the (...), or the governesses of women, in order to manners and religion; but
these, though (as Tertullian affirms, and Zonaras and Balsamo confess) they
were solemnly ordained and set over the women in such offices, yet pretended to
nothing of the Epiphanius: There is an order of deaconesses in the (...).
Church, but not to meddle, or to attempt any of the holy offices. And in this
sense it was that S. Ambrose reckons it In 1 Timothy c. 3.
amongst the heresies of the Cataphrygians, that they ordained their
Deaconesses, viz. to spiritual ministeries; but those women that desire to be
meddling are not moved with such discourses; they care for none of all these
things; therefore I remit them to the precept of the Apostle. But I suffer not
a woman to teach but to be in 1 Timothy 2. 12.
silence.

as for the men who had gifts extraordinary of the Spirit, although they were
permitted at first in the Corinthian Church (before 8.
there was a Bishop, or a fixed college of Clergy) to utter the inspired
dictates of the Spirit, yet whether they were Lay or Clergy is not there
expressed; and it is more agreeable to the usual dispensation that the
prophets of ordinary ministry, though now extraordinarily assisted should
prophecy in public; but however, Paul [Whereunto I am ordained a Preacher,]
they might not invade the office. To be able to perform an office, though it
may be a fair disposition to make the person capable to receive it orderly, yet
it does not actually invest him; every wise man is not a Counselor of State,
nor every good Lawyer a Judge. And I doubt not but in the Jewish religion there
were many persons as able to pray as their apud Deum and reciting offices in
behalf of the people: Orabit pro eo sacerdos was the order of Gods appointing,
though himself were a devout person and of an excellent spirit. And it had need
be something extraordinary that must warrant an ordinary person to rise higher
then his own evennesse; and ability or skill is but a possibility, and must be
reduced to act by something that transmits authority, or does establish order,
or distinguish persons, and separate professions. And it is very remarkable
that when Judas had miscarried and lost his Apostolate, it was said, that it
was necessary for Jesus, might either have had, or received at Pentecost, yet
the authority and grace was more: the first they had upon experience, but this
only by divine election: which is a demonstration that every person that can
do offices clericall is not permitted to do them, and that besides the
knowledge and natural or artificial abilities, a divine qualification is
necessary.

And therefore God complains by the Prophet, I have not sent them, and yet they
run; and the Apostle leaves it as an established 9.
rule, How shall they preach except they be sent? which two places, I shall
grant to be meant concerning a distinct and a new message; Prophets must not
offer any doctrine to the people or pretend a doctrine for which they had not a
commission from God. But which way soever they be expounded, they will conclude
right in this particular. For if they signify an ordinary mission, then there
is an ordinary mission of preachers which no man must usurp unless he can
prove give him the right hand of fellowship, and wish him good speed. But if
these words signify an extraordinary case, and that no message must be
pretended by Prophets non missi those whom God sent not, they go on their own
errand, and must pay themselves their wages.

But besides that, the Apostles were therefore to have an immediate 10.
mission, because they were to receive new instructions: these instructions
were such as were by an ordinary, and yet by a distinct ministry to be
conveyed for ever after, and therefore did design an ordinary, successive, and
lasting power and authority. Nay our blessed Lord went one step further in this
provision, even to remark into the lot of this ministry; and they were the
seventy two whom Christ had sent (as probationers of their future preaching)
upon a short errand into the Cities of Judah: But by this assignation of more
persons then those to whom he gave immediate commission, he did declare that
the office of preaching was to be dispensed by a separate and peculiar sort of
men, distinct from the people, and yet by others then those who had the
commission extraordinary; that is, by such who were to be called to it by an
ordinary vocation.

As Christ constituted the office and named the persons, both extraordinary 11.
and ordinary, present and successive; so he provided gifts for them too; that
the whole dispensation might be his and might be apparent. And therefore Christ
when he ascended up on high gave gifts to men, to this very purpose; and these
gifts coming from the same Spirit made separation of distinct ministeries
under the same Lord. So S. Paul testifies expressly. Now there are 1 Cor. 12. 4.
diversities of gifts, but the same spirit, (...) [there are different
administrations] differencies of ministeries; it is the proper word for Church
offices; the ministry, is distinguished by the gift; It is not a gift for the
ministry, but the ministry it self is the gift* and distinguished
accordingly. An extraordinary ministry needs an extraordinary and a miraculous
gift; that is a miraculous calling and vocation and designation by the holy
Ghost; but an ordinary gift cannot sublime an ordinary person to a
supernatural employment; and from this discourse of the differing gifts of the
Spirit, S. Paul without any further artifice, concludes that the Spirit
intended a distinction of Church officers God has set some in the Church,
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, Verse. 28.
thirdly Teachers; and lest all Gods people should usurp these offices, which
God by his Spirit has made separate and distinguished, he adds, Are all
Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? If so, then were all the body one
member, quite contrary to nature and to Gods Economy.

And that this designation of distinct Church officers is for ever, S. Paul
also affirms as expressly as this question shall need; He gave 12.
Ephesians. 4. 11.
some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, (...), for the work of the ministry, till we all arrive at the unity
of faith, which as soon as it shall happen, then comes the end. Till the end
be, the (...) the work of the Ministry must go forwards, and is incumbent
upon the Pastors and Teachers; this is their work, and they are the ministers,
whom the holy Ghost designed.

1. For, I consider that either to preach requires but an ordinary or an
extraordinary ability; if it requires an extraordinary, they who 13.
are illiterate and unlearned persons are the unfittest men in the world for
it; if an ordinary sufficiency will discharge it, why cannot they Learned men
are not so forward; and those are most confident who have least reason.

2. Although as Homilies to the people are now used according to the smallest
rate, many men more preach then should, yet besides 14.
that to preach prudently, gravely, piously and with truth, requires more
abilities then are discernible by the people, such as make even a plain work
reasonable to wise men, and useful to their hearers, and acceptable to God;
besides this, I say, the office of teaching is of larger extent then making
homilies or speaking prettily enough to respondere de jure, give account of
their faith in defiance of the numerous armies of Heretics; they must watch
for their flock, and use excellent arts to arm them against all their
weaknesses from within, and hostilities from without; Pastors for the interests
of Religion, and Teachers to determine or advise in. (...). Eustath. in Iliad.
(...).
The preachers Mediators by their sacrifices, and they were interested in their
counsels, and greater causes; And if religion can have influences into
counsels of Princes and public interest of kingdoms, and that there can be
any difficulty, latent senses, intricacy of question, or mysteriousnesse in
Divinity, it will be found that there are other parts of the Preachers office,
besides making homilies, and that when so great skill is required it will not
be easy to make pretenses to invade it; unless a man cannot be an excellent
Lawyer without twenty years skill and practice, besides excellency of natural
indowments, and watch over their flock, over whom the holy Ghost has made them
overseers. The inconvenience that this discourse is like to meet withal is,
that it concerns those men who are sure not to understand it: for they that
have not the wisdom of Prophets and wise men, cannot easily be brought to

3. Besides the consideration of the ability that a separate number 15.
of men should be the teachers, and it be not permitted promiscuously to every
person of a confident language and bold fancy, is prudence and duty too. Of
Prudence, because there can be no security against all the evil doctrines of
the world in a promiscuous unchosen company of Preachers. For if he be allowed
the pretense of an extraordinary, he shall belie the holy Spirit, to cosen
you, when he has a mind to it: If you allow him nothing but an ordinary
spirit, that is, abilities of art and one head and two members shall make a
distinct body, and all shall pretend to Christ, without any other common term
of union. And this which is disorder in the thing, is also dishonorable to
this part of religion; and the divine messages shall be conveyed to the people
by common Curriers or rather messengers by chance, and as they go by; whereas
God sent at first Ambassadors extraordinary, and then left his Leigers in his
Church for ever. But there is also a duty too to be secured; for they that have
the guiding of souls must remember must render an account; and that cannot be
done with joy, when it shall be indifferent to any man to superseminate what he
please: and (by the way) I suppose, they who are apt to enter into the Chair
of Doctors and Teachers, would be unwilling to be charged with a cure of souls;
If they knew what that means, they would article more strictly before they
would stand charged with it; and yet it is harder to say that there is no such
thing as the cure of souls; that Christ left his flock to wander and to guide
themselves, or to find shepherds at the charges of accident and chance.
Christ has made a better provision, Peter the care of feeding his lambs and
sheep, S. Peter did it carefully, and thought it part of the same duty to
provide other shepherds who should also feed the flocks by a continual
provision and attendance; The Presbyters which are among you, I who also am a
Presbyter exhort, feed the flock of God which is among you, (...), 1 Pet. 5. 1,
2.
doing the office of Bishops over them, taking supravision or oversight of them
willingly and of a ready mind. The Presbyters and Bishops, they are to feed
the flock, there was a (...) a flock to be distinguished from the (...), the
shepherds, the flock among you, distinguished by a regular office of teaching
and a relation of shepherds and sheep.

But this discourse would be unnecessarily long unless I should omit many
arguments, and contract the rest. I only shall desire it 16.
be considered, concerning the purpose of that part of divine providence, in
giving the Christian Church commandments concerning provisions to be made for
the preachers; Let the Elders that rule well have a double honor, an elder
brothers portion at least, both of honor 1 Timothy 5.
and maintenance, especially, if they labor in the word and doctrine; and the
reason is taken out of Moses Law, but derived from Bovi trituranti non ligabis
os. For God has ordained that those that labor in the Gospel should live of
the Gospel. This argument will force us to distinguish persons, or else our
purses will; and if all will have a right to preach the Gospel that think
themselves able, then also they have a right to be maintained too.

the cure of souls, 3 given them commission to go into all the world, 4 given
them gifts accordingly, 5 charged the people to attend and to obey, 6 has
provided them maintenance and support, and 7 separated them to reading, to
exhortation, and to doctrine from the affairs of this world, that they may
attend to these, by the care of the whole man. If any man in charity or duty
will do any ghostly offices to his erring or weak brother, he may have a
reward of charity: for in this sense it is that Tertullian says, that in remote
and barbarous countries the Sacerdotio aliquatenus fungi. But if he invades the
public chair he may meet with the curse of Corah, if he intends maliciously;
or if he have fairer, but mistaken purposes, the gentler sentence passed upon
Uzzah may be the worst of his evil portion.

SECT. IV.
I Instance next in the case of Baptism, which indeed has some 1.
difficulty and prejudice passed upon it, and although it be put in the same
Commission, entrusted to the same persons, be a sacred ministry, a Sacrament
and a mysterious rite:

In opposition to which, I first consider, that the ordinary minister 2.
of baptism is a person consecrated; the Apostles and their Epist. ad Heron.
Ignatius, Lib. de bapt.
Tertullian, Epist. 1. c. 9.
S. Gelasius, Haeres. 79.
S. Epiphanius, and Dial. ad Lucifer.
S. Hierom; who affirm in variety of senses, that Bishops, Priests and Deacons
only are to baptize; some by ordinary right, some by deputation; of which I
shall afterward give account; But all the Jius ordinarium they intend to fix
upon the Clergy according to divine institution and commandment. So that in
case lay-persons might baptize (...) and (...), upon urgent necessity, schism
and pride, the two greatest enemies to charity in the world.

But now for the thing it self, whether indeed any case of necessity can
transmit to lay persons a right of baptizing, it must be 3.
distinctly considered. Some say it does. For Ananias baptized Paul, who yet
(as it is said) was not in holy orders; and that the 3000 Converts at the first
Sermon of S. Peter were all baptized by the Apostles, is not easily credible,
it being too numerous a body for so few persons to baptize; and when Peter had
preached to Cornelius and his family, he caused the brethren that came along
with him to baptize them; and whether hands had been imposed on them or no, is
not certain: And in pursuance of the instance of Ananias, and the other
probabilities the Doctors of the Church have declared their opinions (...), In
cases of necessity, a lay person may baptize. So Tertullian in his book of
baptism, Alioqui and Laicis jus est baptizandi. Quod enim ex aequo accipitur,
ex aequo dari potest. The Dial. adv. Lucifer.
reason is also urged by S. Hierome to the same purpose, only requiring that
the baptizer be a Christian, supposing whatsoever they have received they may
also give; but because the reason concludes Presbyter cannot collate his
Presbyterate, it must therefore rest only upon their bare authority; if it
shall be thought strong enough to bear the weight of the contrary reasons. And
the Fathers in the council of Eliberis determined, Peregre navigantes, aut si
ecclesia in proximo non fuerit, posse fidelem, qui lavacrum suum integrum
habet, nec sit bigamus, baptizare Can. 38.
in necessitate infirmitatis positum Catechumenum, it a ut si supervixerit, ad
Episcopum eum producat, ut per manus impositionem proficere possit. The Synod
held at Alexandria under Alexander their Bishop approved the baptism of the
children by Athanasius, being but a Nicene Fathers ratifying the baptism made
by heretics Ruffin. lib. 10. c. 14.
(amongst whom they could not but know in some cases, there was no true
Priesthood or legitimate ordination) must by necessary consequence suppose
baptism to be dispensed effectually by laypersons. And S. Hierome is plain.
Baptizare si necessitas cogat, scimus etiam licere Laicis; the same almost with
the Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage, Mulier baptizare non praesumat
nisi necessitate Can. mulier de consecr. did. li. 4. sent. did. 6.
cogente: though, by the way, these words of [cogente necessitate] are not in
the Canon, but thrust in by Gratian and Peter Lombard. And of the same opinion
is S. Ambrose, or he who under his name wrote the Commentaries upon the fourth
to the Ephesians, Epist. 1.
P. Gelasius, Lib. 2. Contr. Epist. Parmen. c. 13.
S. Augustine and Lib. 2. de di. vin. off. c. 24.
Isidor, and generally all the Scholars after their Master.

But against this doctrine were all the African Bishops for about 150 years;
who therefore rebaptized persons returning from heretical conventicles;
Because those heretical Bishops being deposed 4.
Basils canonical Epistle to Amphilochius, where he relates their reason, and
refutes it not. And however Firmilian and S. Cyprian might be deceived in the
thinking heretics, quite lost their orders; yet in this they were untouched,
that although their supposition was questionable, yet their superstructure was
meddled with, viz. that if they had been Lay persons, their baptizations were
null and invalid.

I confess the opinion has been very generally taken up in these last ages of
the Church, almost with a Nemine contradicente; the 5.
Nicephorus of C. P. If the own Father baptizes the child, or any other
Christian man, it is no sin. Lib. 2. Contr. Epist. Parmen. c. 13.
S. Augustine is almost of another (...).
mind, and si Laicus necessitate compulsus baptismum dederit, nescio an pie
quisquam dixerit, Baptismum esse repetendum: Nulla enim cogente necessitate si
fiat, alieni muner is usurpatio est; si autem necessitas urgeat, aut nullum aut
veniale delictum est. And of this mind are all they who by frequent using of
that saying have made it almost proverbiall, Factum valet, fieri non debet. If
they do not sin, then women and Lay men have as much right from Christ to
baptize as Deacons or Presbyters; then they may upon the same stock and right
do it as Deacons do: for if a Bishop was present it was not lawful for
Deacons, as is expressly affirmed by S. Ignatius in his Epistle to Heron the
Deacon; and S. Epiphanius with the same words denies a sus baptizandi, to women
and to Deacons; and both of them Haeres. 19.
Tertullian and De bapt. adv. Lucifer.
S. Hierom deny a power to Presbyters to do it without Episcopal
dispensation. Now if Presbyters and Deacons have this power only by leave and
in certain cases, then it is no more then women have; only that they are
fitter persons to be entrusted with the deputation; a less necessity will
devolve it upon Presbyters then upon Deacons, and upon Deacons then Lay men,
and a less yet will Lay men then women; and this difference is in respect of
humane order and positive constitution, but in the nature of the thing
according to this doctrine all persons are equally receptive of it: And
therefore to baptize is no part of the grace of Orders, no fruit of the holy
Ghost, but a work which may be done by all, and at some times must; and if
baptism may, then it will be hard to keep all the other rites from the common
inrodes, and then the whole office will perish.

But if Lay persons baptizing, though in case of necessity, do sin, as S.
Augustine seems to say they do, then it is certain, Christ never 6.
gave them leave so much as by insinuation; and then neither

3. And indeed the pretense of cases of necessity may do much toward the
excusing an irregularity in an exterior rite, though of 7.
divine institution, (...). But it will not be easily proved that God has made
any such necessities, it is Eurip.
certain that for persons having the use of reason God has provided a remedy
that no lay persons should have need to baptize a Catechumen; for his votum or
desire of Baptism shall serve his turn; And it will be unimaginable that God
has made no provision for infants,

4. If a Lay person shall baptize, whether or no shall the person baptized
receive benefit, or will any more but the outward act be done? 8.
for that the Lay person shall convey rem Sacramenti or be the minister of
sacramental grace, is no where revealed in Scripture, and is against the
Analogy of the Gospel; for the verbum reconciliationis, all the whole
ministry of reconciliation is entrusted to the Priest, Nobis, De captivit.
Babyl. c. de ordine, and in l. deinstituendis ministris and senatum Pragensem
in l. de missa abroganda, in l. de notis ecclesiae.
(says S. Paul) to us who are Ambassadors. And what difference is there, if
cases of necessity be pretended in the defect of other ministeries, except
there be a case of necessity; and that there may be a case of necessity for the
blessed Can. 13.
Nicene council; which calls the Sacrament in the article of death (...)
viaticum, the most necessary provision for our journey: and if a lay person
absolves, there is as much promise of the validity of one as of the other,
unless it be said, that there may be absolute necessity of baptism, but not
so of absolution; which the maintainers of the other opinion are not apt to
profess. And therefore S. Augustine did not know whether baptism administered
by a lay person be to be repeated or no; Nescio an pie quisquam dixerit, he
knew not; neither do I. But Simeon of Thessalonica is confident No man
baptizes but he that is in holy orders; the baptism is null; I cannot say so;
nor can I say (...), Let it be received. Only I offer this to consideration;
if a Deacon can do no ministerial act with effect, but a lay person may do
the same with effect upon the person suscipient, what is that supernatural
grace and inherent and indelible character which a Deacon has received in his
ordination? If a Deacon can do no supernatural act which were void and null
if done by him that is not a Deacon, he has no character, no spiritual
inherent power; and that he is made the ordinary minister of it, is for order
sake;

But I consider that the instances of Scripture brought for the 9.
lawfulness of lay administration, if they had no particular exception, yet
are impertinent to this question: for it is not with us pretended in any case
to be lawful, but in extreme necessity: And Peter's deputing the brethren who
come with him to Cornelius to baptize his family, is nothing to our purpose,
and best answers it self; for either they were of the Clergy, who came with
them, or else lay persons may baptize by the right of an ordinary deputation,
without a case of necessity: for here was none; S. peter might have done it
himself.

And as for Ananias, he was one of the seventy two; and if that be nothing, yet
he was called to that ministration about Paul as 10.
Paul himself was to the Apostleship even by an immediate vocation, and
mission from Christ himself. And if this answer were not Ananias tells him, he
was sent to him that he might lay his hands on him that he might receive the
holy Ghost: and to do that was more then Philip could do, though he was a
Deacon, and in as great a necessity as this was: And yet besides all this this
was not a case of necessity, unless there was never a Presbyter or Deacon in
all Damascus, or that God durst not trust any of them Paul, but only Ananias,
or that Paul could not stay longer without baptism, as many thousand converts
did in descending ages.

And for the other conjecture it is not considerable at all; for the 11.
Apostles might take three or four days time to baptize the 3000; there was no
hurt done if they had stayed a week: the text insinuates nothing to the
contrary; The same day about 3000 were added to the Church; then they were
added to the Church, that is, by virtue and efficacy of that Sermon, who, it
may be, considered some while of S. Peter's discourse, and gave up their names
upon mature deliberation and positive conviction. But it is not said they were
baptized the same day; and yet it was not impossible for the twelve Apostles to
do it in one day, if they had thought it reasonable.

For my own particular I wish we would make no more necessities then God made,
but that we leave the administration of the Sacraments 12.
to the manner of the first institution, and the Clericall offices be kept with
their cancells, that no Lay hand may pretend a reason to usurp the sacred
ministry; and since there can be no necessity for unbaptized persons of years
of discretion, because their desire may supply them, it were well also, if our
charity would find some other way also, to understand Gods mercy toward

The Church of England has determined nothing in this particular, 13.
that I know of; only when in the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, a
rubric was inserted permitting midwives to baptize in cases of extreme danger,
it was left out in the second Liturgies, Epiphanius objects it against the
Marcionites, and Tertullian against the Gnostics, that they did permit De
praescript. haeres. 42.
women to baptize: I cannot say but they made it an ordinary employment, and a
thing besides the case of necessity: I know not whether they did or no. But if
they be permitted it is considerable whither the example may drive: Tertullian
de baptismo.
Petulans mulier quae usurpavit docere, an non utique and tingendi jus sibi
pariet? that I may turn Tertullians Thesis into an Interrogative. The women
usurp the office of teaching, if also they may be permitted to baptize, they
may in time arrogate and invade other ministeries; or if they do not by reason
of the natural and political incapacity of their persons, yet others may upon
the same stock: for necessity consists not in a Mathematical point, but has
latitude which may be expounded to inconvenience; and that I say truth and
fear reasonably, I need no other testimony then the Greek Church, for amongst
them a [(...)] the absence of the Priest is necessity enough for a woman to
baptize; for so says Gabriel Philadelphiensis Tractat. de sacramento cap. de
baptismo. (...).
. In the absence of a Priest a Christian Laick may baptize whether it be man or
woman; either may do it; and whether that be not only of danger in the
sequel, but in it self a very dissolution of all discipline, I leave it to the
Church of England to determine as for her own particular, that at least the
Sacrament be left entirely to clericall dispensation according to divine
commandment.

One thing I offer to consideration; that since the keys of the 14.
kingdom of heaven be most notoriously and signally used in baptism, in which
the kingdom of heaven the Gospel, and all its promises, is opened to all
believers, and though as certainly yet less principally in reconciling
penitents, and admitting them to the communion Peter used his keys, and opened
the kingdom of heaven Acts 2. 38.
first, when he said, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the
holy Ghost. However as to the main question, we have not only the universal
doctrine of Christendom, but also express authority to baptize all nations,
and to entertain them into the services and institution of the holy Jesus.

SECT. V.
I Shall instance but once more, but it is in the most solemn, sacred and
divinest mystery of our Religion; that in which the Clergy 1.
in their appointed ministry do (...) stand between God and the people, and
do fulfill a special and incomprehensible ministry, which the Angels
themselves do look into with admiration; to which the people if they come
without fear, cannot come without sin; and this is of so sacred and reserved
mysteriousnesse, that but few have dared to offer at with unconsecrated hands:
some have. But the Eucharist is the fullness of all the mysteriousnesse of our
religion; and the Clergy when they officiate here, are most truly in the phrase
of Saint Paul dispensatores mysteriorum Dei dispensers 1 Cor. 4. 1.
of the great mysteries of the kingdom. For (to use the word of S. Cyprian.)
Jesus Christ is our high Priest, and himself became our sacrifice which he
finished upon the cross in a real performance, and now Ad Caecil. Ep. 63. Si
Jesus Christus dominus and Deus noster ipse est summus sacerdos Dei patris and
sacrificium Patri seipsum primus obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui commemorationem
praecepit, utique ille sacerdos vice Christi vere sungitur qui id quod Christus
fecit, imitatur: and sacrificium verum and plenum tunc offert in Ecclesia Deo
Patri, si incipiat offerre secundum quod ipsum Christum videat obtulisse.
in his office of Mediatorship makes intercession for us by a perpetual
exhibition of himself, of his own person in heaven, which is a continual,
actually represented argument to move God to mercy to all that believe in, and
obey the Holy Jesus.

Now Christ did also establish a number of select persons, to be ministers of
this great sacrifice, finished upon the cross; that they 2.
also should exhibit and represent to God (in the manner which their the action
and suffering of the great Priest; and by way of prayers and impetration,
offering up that action in behalf of the people, (...) Orat. 11.
(as Gregory Naz. expresses it) sending up sacrifices to be laid upon the Altar
in heaven, that the Church might be truly united unto Christ their head, and in
the way of their ministry may do what he does in heaven; for he exhibites the
sacrifice, that is, himself, actually and presentially in heaven: the Priest
on earth commemorates the same, and by his Christ himself, in a high the
ministers of his priesthood (as it becomes ministers) humbly, sacramentally,
and according to the energy of humane advocation and intercession; This is the
sum and great mysteriousnesse of Christianity, and is now to be proved.

This is expressly described in Scripture; that part concerning 3.
Christ is the doctrine of S. Paul who disputes largely concerning Christ's
priesthood; affirming that Christ is a Priest for ever; he has therefore an
unchangeable priesthood, because he continues for ever, and he lives for ever
to make intercession for us; this he does as Heb. 7. 23. etc.
Priest, and therefore it must be by offering a sacrifice [for every high
Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices] and therefore it is necessary
And 8. v. 2, 3. etc.
he also have something to offer, as long as he is a Priest, that is, for ever,
till the consummation of all things; since therefore he has nothing new to
offer, and something he must continually offer, it is evident, he offers
himself as the medium of advocation, and the instance and argument of a
prevailing intercession: and this he calls [a more excellent ministery] and by
it, Jesus is a minister of the Sanctuary and of the true Tabernacle, that is,
he as our high Priest officiates in heaven, in the great office of a Mediator,
in the merit and power of his death and resurrection. Now what Christ does
always giving thanks, and celebrating a perpetual Eucharist for it, and by
declaring the death of Christ, and praying to God in the virtue of it, for all
the members of the Church and all persons capable; it is in genere orationis a
sacrifice, and an instrument of propitiation, as all holy prayers are in their
several proportions.

And this was by a precept of Christ; Hoc facite, Do this in remembrance 4.
of me. Now this precept is but twice reported of, in the new Testament, though
the institution of the Sacrament, be four times. Paul thus represents it; [Take
eat -- This do in remembrance of me] plainly referring this precept to all
that are to eat and drink the symbols: for they also do in their manner
enunciate, declare, or represent, the Lords death till he come. And S. Paul
prosecutes it with instructions particular to the (...), to them that do
communicate, as appears in the succeeding cautions against unworthy manducation
and for due preparation to its reception. But S. Luke reports it, plainly to
another purpose, [and he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave
it unto them, saying: This is my body which is given for you; Hoc facite, This]
do in remembrance of me: [This] cannot but relate to accepit, gratias egit,
fregit, distribuit; Hoc facite. Here was no manducation expressed, and
therefore Hoc facite concerns the Apostles in the capacity of ministers, not as
receivers but as Consecrators and Givers; and if the institution had been
represented in one scheme without this mysterious

And this being the great mystery of Christianity and the only remanent
express of Christ's sacrifice on earth, it is most consonant 5.
to the Analogy of the mystery, that this commemorative sacrifice be presented
by persons as separate, and distinct in their ministry, as the sacrifice it
self is from, and above the other parts of our religion.

Thus also the Church of God has for ever understood it, without 6.
any variety of sense or doubtfulnesse of distinguishing opinions. It was the
great excellency and secret ministry of the religion, to consecrate and offer
the holy symbols and sacraments: I shall transcribe a passage out of Justin
Martyr giving the account of it to Antoninus Pius in his oration to him; and it
will serve in stead of many; for it tells the religion of the Christians in
this mystery, and gives a full account of all the ceremony. (...), etc. When
the prayers are done, then Vide etiam Justin. in Apol. 2.
is brought to the President of the brethren [the Priest] the bread, and the
Chalice of wine mingled with water, which being received he gives praise and
glory to the Father of all things, and presents them in the name of the Son and
the Holy Spirit, and largely gives thanks, that he has been pleased to give
us these gifts: and when he has finished the prayers and thanksgiving, all the
people that is present, with a joyful acclamation, say Amen. Which when it is
done by the Presidents and people, those which amongst us are called Deacons
and Ministers, distribute to every one that is present, that they may partake
of him, in whom by the prayers of his word, which is from him the food in which
thanks are given, or the consecrated food by which our flesh This one testimony I
reckon as sufficient: who please to see more, may observe the tradition full,
testified and entire, in Epist. ad Trallian.
Ignatius, Lib. 1. c. 31. and lib. 8. c. ult.
Clemens Romanus, or who ever wrote the Apostolical constitutions in his name,
De praescript.
Tertullian, Lib. 1. Ep. 2. and 9. and lib. 3. Epist. 15.
S. Cyprian, Apol. 2. cum de Ischira rationem reddit cum calice sacro uti non
potuisse.
S. Athanasius, Haeres. 79.
Epiphanius, Lib. 2. de bapt. c. 8.
S. Basil, Lib. 3. and 6. de sacerd. Homil. 51. and 83. in Matthew. and hom. 60.
ad pop. An. ioch.
S. Chrysostom, (almost every where) Contr. Lucifer. and Ep. 1. ad. Heliodor.
and 85. ad Evagrium and ad Hedito. 150. 9. 2.
S. Hierome, Lib. 20. de Civ. c. ^0.
S. Augustine: and indeed we cannot look in vain, into any of the old writers:
The sum of whose doctrine in this particular, I Ignatius, saying that he is
worse then an infidel that offers to officiate about the holy Altar unless he
be a Bishop or a Priest.

And certainly he could upon no pretense have challenged the 7.
Appellative of Christian, who had dared either himself to invade the holy
rites within the Cancels, or had denied the power of celebrating this dreadful
mystery to belong only to sacerdotall ministration. blasphemous, they count
the blood of the Lord (...), (as S. Paul calls it in imitation of the words of
institution) The blood of the Covenant or new Testament, a Heb. 10. 26.
profane or common thing; they discern not the Lords body; they know not that
the bread that is broken is the communication of Christ's body: But if it be a
holy, separate, or divine and mysterious thing, who can make it (ministerially
I mean) and consecrate or sublime it from common and ordinary bread, but a
consecrate, separate, and sublimed the true Tabernacle where Jesus himself
does the same thing, in a higher and a more excellent manner.

This is the great secret of the kingdom, to which in the Primitive Church,
many who yet had given up their names to Christ by 8.
Catechumens, the Audientes, the Poenitentes, Neophytes, and Children: and the
ministry of it was not only reserved for sacred persons, but also performed
with so much mysterious secrecy, that many were not permitted so much as to
see. This is that rite, in which the Priest intercedes for, and blesses the
people; offering in their behalf, not only their prayers, but applying the
ministerial Priesthood in the Church, might according to the nature of all
great employments, pass an excellency and a value upon the ministers.

And therefore according to the natural reason of religion and the devotion of
all the world, the Christians, because they had the 9.
greatest reason so to do, did honor their Clergy with the greatest
veneration, and esteem. It is without a Metaphor regale sacerdotium Peter;
which although it be spoken in 1 Pet. 2. 9.
general of the Christian Church, and in an improper large sense, is verified
of the people, yet it is so to be expounded, as that parallel place of the
books of Moses, from whence the expression is borrowed, Ye shall be a kingdom
of Priests and an Holy Nation; which plainly by the sense and Analogy of the
Mosaic law, signifies a Exodus 19. 6.
nation blessed by God with rites and ceremonies of a separate religion; a
kingdom in which Priests are appointed by God; a kingdom, in which nothing is
more honorable then the Priesthood; for it is certain, the nation was famous
in all the world, for an honorable to a better Covenant, may with greater
argument be accounted excellent, honorable, and royal; and all the Church be
called a royal Priesthood, the denomination being given to the whole, from the
most excellent part; because they altogether make one body under Christ the
head, the medium of the union being the Priests, the collectors of the Church,
and instrument of adunation; and reddendo singula singulis a peculiar people,
the Clergy a holy Priesthood: and all in conjunction, and for several
excellencies a chosen Nation: so that (...) is the same with (...) the
Priesthood of the kingdom, that is, the ministry of the Gospel: for in the
new Testament the kingdome] signifies the Gospel: and (...) is the same with
(...), Kingly is of, or belonging to the Gospel: for therefore it is
observable, it is not (...) but (...), not well rendered by the vulgar Latin
regale sacerdotium; as if Kingly were the Appellative or Epithete of this
Priesthood; it is regium, a Priesthood the kingdom of the Gospel; and the
Priest being enumerated distinctly from the people, the Priests of the kingdom
and the people of the kingdom are all holy and chosen; but in their several
manner: the Priests of the kingdom those, the people of the kingdom, these;
these to bring or design a spiritual sacrifice, the Priest to offer it; or
altogether, to sacrifice; the Priest by his proper ministry, the people by
their assent, conjunction and assistance, chosen to serve God, not only in
their own forms, but under the ministrations of an honorable Priesthood.

And in all the descent of Christian religion it was indeed honorable, (...), 10.
says S. Chrysostom the Christian Priesthood does its ministry and is
perfected on earth, but has the beauty, order, and excellency of the heavenly
Lib. 3. de saccr.
hosts: so that I shall not need to take notice of the Lamina Apud Eusebius. hist.
lib. 5. c. 25.
aurea which Polycrates reports S. John to have worn in token of his royal
Priesthood, a wreath of Gold; (so also did S. James Bishop of De script. in
Iacobo Haeres. 78.
Jerusalem, as S. Hierome and Epiphanius report) nor the exemption of the
Clergy from tribute, their authority with the people, their great donatives and
titles of secular advantage: these were accidental to the Ministry, and
relied upon the favor of Princes, and devotion of the people; and if they had
been more, yet are less then the honors God had bestowed upon it: for
certainly there is not a greater degree of power in the world then to remit and
retain sins, and to consecrate the sacramental symbols into the
mysteriousnesse of Christ's body and blood; nor a greater honor, then that God

(...),
(...)
(...).
So Gregory Nazienzen describes the honor and mysteriousnesse of the Priests
power: They minister the spiritual and unbloudy sacrifice, they are honorable
Guardians of souls, they bear the work of God in their hands. And S. Hierom
speaking of these words of S. Paul, I am ordained a preacher and an Apostle;
Quod Paulus ait, [Apostolus Jesu Christi] tale mihi videtur quasi dixisset,
praefectus praetorio Augusti Caesaris, magister exercitus Tiberii imperatoris.
And a little after, grandem 1 Timothy 1. 3.
inter Christianos sibi vindicans dignitate^ Apostolorum se Christi titulo
praenotavit, ut ex ipsa lecturos nominis autoritate deterreret, indicans omnes
qui Christo crederent, debere esse sibi subjectos. And therefore S. Chrysostom
says it is the trick of heretics not to give to Bishops titles of their
eminency and honor which God has vouchsafed them: Ut Diabolus it a etiam
quilibet facit haereticus vehementissimus in tempore persecutionis, loquens cum
Pontisice, nec eum vocat Pontisicem, It is (...) and (...), A separating and
purifying order of men, so Dionysius calls it: but Nazianzen speaks greater and
more glorious words yet; and yet what is no more then a sober truth; for he
calls the Priest (...). Orat. 1.
He stands with Angels and is magnified with Archangels; he sends sacrifices to
celestial altar, and is consecrated in the Priesthood of Christ, a divine
person, and an instrument of making others so too. I shall add no more as to
this particular. The express precepts of God in Scripture are written in great
characters, there is a double honor to be given to the Ecclesiastical 1 Timothy
5. 17.
Rulers. Rulers that also labor in the word and doctrine: There is obedience
due to them, obedience in all things, and estimation, and Heb. 13. 17.
2 Cor. 2. 9.
love, (...), very abundantly; esteem such very highly for 1 These. 5. 12. Gal.
6. 1.
their work sake; a communicating to them in all good things; and their
offices are described to be great, separate, busy, eminent and profitable,
(...)
they are Rulers, Presidents, set over us in the Lord, taking care for us,
laboring in doctrine, spiritual persons, restorers of them that were
overtaken in a fault, curates of souls, such as must give an account for them,
the salt, the light of the world, shepherds; and much more signifying work,
and rule and care and honor. But next to the words of Scripture there can no
more be said concerning the honor of the sacred order of the Clergy, then is
said by S. Chrysostom in his books Desacerdotio, and S. Ambrose De dignitate
sacerdotali, and no the Ministers of God, in the great conveyances of grace,
and instruments of God in the pardon of sins, in the consecration of Christ's
body and blood, in the guidance and conduct of souls. And this was the style of
the Church, calling Bishops and Priests according to their respective capacity,
Stewards of the grace of God, leaders (...).
of the blind, a light of them that sit in darkness, instructors of the
ignorant, teachers of babes, stars in the world, amongst whom ye shine as
lights in the world, and that is Scripture too; stars in Christ's right hand,
lights set upon the candlesticks: And praecognitum, a principle of the
institution. I end this with the words of the 7th general Council: It is
manifest to all the world that in the Priesthood Can. 14. (...).
there is order and distinction, and to observe the ordinations and elections
of the Priesthood with strictness and severity is well pleasing to God.


As Soon as God began to constitute a Church and fix the Priesthood, which
before was very ambulatory, and dispensed into all families, but ever
officiated by the Major domo, God gives the power and designs the person. And
therefore Moses consecrated Aaron agitatus a Deo consecrationis Principe says
Dionysius, Eccles. Hierarch.
Moses performed the external rites of designation, but God was the
consecrator, (...). Moses appointed Aaron to the Priesthood, and Dionys. ibid.
gave him the order, but it was only as the Minister and Deputy of God, under
God the chief consecrator. And no man takes upon him this honor but he that
was called of God as was Aaron, says S. Paul. For in every Priesthood God
designed and appointed the ministry, and collates a power, or makes the person
gracious: either gives him a spiritual ability of doing something which others
have not, or if he be only employed in praying and presenting sacrifices of
beasts for the people, yet that such a person should be admitted to a nearer
address, and in behalf of the people, must depend upon Gods acceptance, and
therefore upon divine constitution; for there can arbitrary, preternaturall and
chosen, must derive from the divine election: For God cannot be prescribed unto
by us, whom he shall

And this is divinely taught us by the example of the high Priest 2.
himself; who, because he derived all power from his Father, and all his
gratiousnesse and favor in the office of Priest and Mediator, was also
personally chosen and sent, and took not the honor but as it descended on him
from God, that the honor and the Heb. 5. 5.
power, the ability, and the ministry, might derive from the same fountain.
Christ did not glorisie himself to become high Priest. Honor may be deserved
by our selves, but always comes from others; honor then to be ordained for men
in things pertaining to God, every man must say as our blessed High Priest said
of himself: If I honor my self, my honor is nothing; it is God that honors
me; For Christ being the fountain of Evangelicall ministry, is the measure of
our dispensations, and the rule of Ecclesiastical economy; and therefore we
must not arrogate any power from our selves, or from a less authority then our
Lord and Master

And the Apostles understood their duty in this particular, as in 3
all things else; for when they had received all this power from above they
were careful to consign the truth, that although it be (...), a divine grace
in a humane ministry, and that although (...) yet (...), (...).
that is, He that is ordained by men, yet receives his power from God; not at
all by himself; and from no man as from the Heb. 5.
fountain of his power; And this I say the Apostles were careful to consign in
the first instance of Ordination in the case of Mathias. Thou Lord show which
of these two thou have chosen: God was the Elector, Acts 1. 24.
and they the Ministers; and this being at the first beginning of Christianity,
in the very first designation of an ecclesiastical person, was of sufficient
influence into the religion for ever after; and taught us to derive all
clericall power from God; and therefore by such means and Ministeries which
himself has appointed, but in no hand to be invaded, or surprised in the
entrance, or polluted in

This descended in the succession of the Churches doctrine for ever. Receive
the holy Ghost, said Christ to his Apostles, when he enabled 4.
them with Priestly power; and S. Paul to the Bishops of Asia said, The holy
Ghost has made you Bishops or Overseers; because no mortal Chrysostom. lib. 3.
de Sacerdot. Quippe non mortalis quispiam, non Angelus, non Archangelus, non
alia quaevis creat a potentia, sed ipse Para^l^tus ordinem esusmodi disposuit.
man, no Angel, or Archangell, nor any other created power, but the Holy Ghost
alone has constituted this order, says S. Chrysostom. And this very thing,
besides the matter of fact, and the plain donation of the power by our blessed
Savior, is intimated by the words of Christ otherwhere; Pray ye therefore the
Lord of the vineyard that he will send laborers into his harvest; Now his
mission is not only a

(...)
(...) James 1. 17.

S. James has adopted it into the family of Evangelicall truths perfect gift,
and therefore every perfecting gift, which in the style of the Church is the
gift of Ordination, is from above, the gifts of perfecting the persons of the
Hierarchy, and ministry Evangelicall; Paul, Now he which stablisheth us with
you [(...)] in order to Christ [and Christian Religion] is God, 2 Cor. 1. 21.
and that his meaning be understood concerning the (...) of establishing him in
the ministry, he adds (...), and he which anointeth us is God, and has
sealed us with an verse 22.
earnest of his Spirit [unction] and [consignation] and [establishing by the
holy Spirit:] the very style of the Church for ordination (...), it was said of
Christ, Him has the Father John 6. 27.
sealed, that is, ordained him the Priest and Prophet of the world; and this he
plainly spoke as their Apostle and President in religion. (...), etc.
Not as Lords over your faith, but fellow-workers; he spoke of himself and
Timothy, concerning whose Ministry in order to them, he now gives account:
(...): God anoints the Priest, and God consigns him with the holy Ghost, that
is the Principale quaesitum, that is the main question.

And therefore the Author of the books of Ecclesiastical hierarchy, 5.
giving the rationale of the rites of Ordination, says that the Priest is made
so (...) by way of proclaiming and publication of the person, signifying, That
the holy man that consecrates is but (...).
the proclaimer of the divine election, but not by any humane power or proper
grace does he give the perfect gift and consecrate the person. And In Ora. in
laudem sui patris. (...).
Nazianzen, speaking of the rites of ordination has this expression, with
which the divine grace is proclaimed: (And Billius renders it ill by
superinvocatur.) He makes the power of consecration to be declarative; which
indeed is a lesser expression of a fuller power, but it signifies as much as
the whole comes to; for it must mean, God does transmit the grace [at] or [by]
or [in] the exterior ministry, and the Minister is (...) a declarer] not by
the word of his mouth, distinct from the ministry, he declares the work of
God, then wrought in the person suscipient. And thus in absolution the Priest
declares the act of God pardoning, not that he is a Preacher only of the
pardon upon certain conditions, but that he is not the principal agent, but by
his ministry declares and ministers the effect and work of God. And this
interpretation is clear in the instance of the blessed Sacrament, where not
only the Priest but the people do (...) declare the Lords death, not by a
Homily, but by virtue of the mystery which they participate. And in the
instance of this present question, the consecrator does declare

But thus the whole action being but a ministry is a declaration 6.
of the effect and grace of Gods vouchsafing; and because God does it not
immediately, and also because such effects are invisible and secret operations,
God appointing an external rite and ministry, does it, that the private
working of the Spirit may become as perceived as it can be, that is, that it
may by such rites be declared to all the declares, that is, he does not do it
by collation of his own grace or power, but the grace of God and power from
above.

And this doctrine we read also in S. Cyprian toward the end of his Epistle to
Cornelius: ut Dominus qui Sacerdotes sibi in ecclesia sua eligere and
constituere dignatur, electos quoque and constitutos sua voluntate Epist. 45.
atque opitulatione tueatur: It is a good prayer of ordination; [that the Lord
who vouchsafes to choose and consecrate Priests in his Church, would also be
pleased by his aid and grace to defend them whom he has so chosen and
appointed] Homo manum imponit, and De dignit. Sacer. c. 5. and in comment. in 1 Timothy c. 2. and in 1 Cor. 12. in illud [Divisiones gratiarum.]
Deus largitur gratiam: Sacerdos imponit supplicem dextram, Deus benedicit
potenti dextra, says S. Ambrose, man imposes his hand, but God gives the
grace: the Bishop lays on his hand of prayer, and God blesses with his hand of
power. The effect of this discourse is plain; the grace and powers that enable
men to minister in the mysteries of the Gospel is so wholly from God, that
whosoever assumes ineffective hand, save only that he disturbs the appointed
order, and does himself a mischief.

SECT. VII.
BY this ordination the persons ordained are made ministers of the Gospel,
stewards of all its mysteries, the light, the salt 1.
of the earth, the shepherd of the flock, Curates of souls; these are their
offices, or their appellatives (which you please) for the Clericall ordination
is no other, but a sanctification of the person in both senses; that is, 1 a
separation of him to do certain mysterious actions of religion: which is that
sanctification by which Jeremy and S. John the Baptist were sanctified from
their mothers wombs. 2 It is also a sanctification of the person, by the
increasing or giving respectively to the capacity of the suscipient, such
graces as make the person meet to speak to God, to pray for the people, to
handle the mysteries, and to have influence upon the cure.

The first sanctification is a designation of the person; which 2.
must of necessity be some way or other by God: because it is a nearer approach
to him, a ministry of his graces, which without his must not, cannot any more
do, then a messenger can carry pardon to a condemned person, which his Prince
never sent. But this separation of the person, is not only a naming of the
man, (for so far the separation of the person may be previous Mathias and the
seven Deacons; The Apostles (...) they appointed two, before God chose by lot;
and the whole Church chose the seven Deacons before the Apostles imposed
hands;) but the separation, or this first sanctification of the person, is a
giving him a power to do such offices, which God has appointed to be done to
him, and for the people, which we may clearly see and understand in the
instance of Job and his friends: For when God would be entreated in behalf of
Eliphaz and his companions, he gave order that Job should make the address;
Go to my servant, he shall pray for you, and Job 42. 8.
him will I accept; this separation of a person for the offices of advocation,
is the same thing which I mean by this first sanctification; God did it, and
gave him a power and authority to go to him, and put him into a place of trust
and favor about him, and made him a minister of the sacrifice; which is a
power and eminency above the persons for whom he was to sacrifice, and a power
or grace from God to be in neernesse to him. This I suppose to be the great
argument for the necessity of separating a certain order of men for
ecclesiastical ministeries: And it relies upon these propositions. 1. All
power of ordination descends from God, and he solemn, rituall, and public, the
appointed Minister only must do. And if any man shall say, because the Priests
ministry is by prayer, every man can do it, and so, no need of him; by the
same reason he may say also that the Sacraments are unnecessary, because the
same effect which they produce is also in some degree the reward of a private
piety, and devotion. But the particulars are to be further proved and
explicated as they need.

Now what for illustration of this article I have brought from the Job, is true
in the ministers of the Gospel, with the superaddition 3.
of many degrees of eminency. But still in the same kind, for the power God
has given, is indeed mystical; but it is not like a power operating by way of
natural or proper operation; it is not vis but facultas, not an inherent
quality that issues out actions by way of direct emanation, like natural or
acquired habits, but it is a grace or favor done to the person, and a
qualification of him in genere politico,

And this explication will easily be verified in all the particulars of the
Priests power; because all the ministeries of the Gospel are 4.
in genere orationis, (unless we except preaching, in which God speaks
intercessor with God, and the word used in Scripture for the Priests
officiating, signifies his praying [(...)] as they were ministering or doing
their Liturgy, the work of their supplications and intercession; and therefore
the Apostles positively included all their whole ministry in these two: [but
we will give our selves to the word of God and to prayer; the prayer of
consecration, the prayer of absolution, the prayer of imposition of hands: they
had nothing else to do, but pray and preach. And for this reason it was, that
the Apostles in a sense nearest to the letter did verify the precept of our
blessed Pray continually, that is, in all the offices, acts, parts and
ministeries of a daily Liturgy.

This is not to lessen the power, but to understand it; for the Priests
ministry is certainly the instrument of conveying all the 5.
blessings of the people, which are annexed to the ordinary administration of
the Spirit. But when all the office of Christ's Priesthood in heaven is called
intercession for us, and himself makes the sacrifice of the Cross, effectual
to the salvation and graces of his Church, by his prayer, since we are
ministers of the same Priesthood, can there be a greater glory then to have our
ministry like to that of Cap. ult. de Eccles. Hier. (...).
lifted up from the common bread and wine by mystical prayers and solemn
invocations of God. And therefore S. Dionysius calls the forms of consecration
(...) prayers of consecration, and Cyrill in his 3 mystagogique Catechism says
the same. The Eucharisticall bread [after the invocations of the holy Ghost] is
not any longer common bread, but the body of Christ.

For although it be necessary that the words which in the Latin Church have
been for a long time called the words of consecration 6
In Exposit. Liturg.
Cabasil. mistakes;) so also in the most ancient Liturgies, they were not only
read (...), or as a mere narrative, but also with the form of an address, or
invocation: Fiat hic panis corpus Christi, and fiat hoc vinum sanguis Christi,
Let this bread be made the body of James his Liturgy, S. Clement, S. Marks, and
the Greek Doctors: And in the very recitation of the words of institution, the
people ever used to answer [Amen] which intimates it to have been a
consecration in genere orationis, called by S. Paul benediction, or the bread
of blessing, and therefore S. Austin expounding those words of S. Paul [Let
prayers and supplications and intercessions, and giving of thanks be made]
says, Eligo in his verbis Epist. 59. q. 5.
hoc intelligere, quod omnis vel pene omnis frequent at ecclesia, ut
[precationes] accipiamus dictas quas fecimus in celebratione sacramentorum
antequam illud quod est in Domini mensa accipiat benedici: [orationes] cum
benedicitur, and ad distribuendum comminuitur: quam totam orationem pene omnis
ecclesia Dominica oratione concludit. The words and form of consecration he
calls by the name of [orationes] supplications; the prayers before the
consecration [preces] and all the whole action [oratio:] and this is according
to the style and practice, and sense of the whole Church or very near the
whole. And S. Basil says, that there is more necessary to consecration then
the words recived by the Apostles and by the Evangelists. * The words of
invocation in the showing the bread of the Cap. 27. de spi. S. (...)
Eucharist, and the cup of blessing, who of all the Saints but both before and
after, we say other words, having great power toward the mystery, (...) which
we have received by tradition. These words set down in Scripture they retained
as a part of the mystery cooperating to the solemnity, manifesting the
signification of the rite, the glory of the change, the operation of the
Spirit, the death of Christ, and the memory of the sacrifice; but this great
work which all Christians knew to be Proclus of C. P. speaking of the tradition
of certain prayers used in the mysteries, and indicted by the Apostles (as it
was said) but especially in S. James his Liturgy: By these prayers (says he)
they expected the coming of the holy Ghost, that his divine presence might make
the bread and the wine mixed with water to become the body and blood of our
blessed Savior.

And S. Justin Martyr very often calls the Eucharist food made 7.
sacramental and eucharisticall by prayer; and Origin, Apol. 2. pro
Christianis li. 8 contra Cells. (...). Matthew. 15.
we eat the bread (...)
holy, and made the body of Christ by prayer: Verbo Dei and per obsecrationem
sanctificatus, bread sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer, viz. the
prayer of consecration: prece mystica is S. Austins expression of it: Lib. 3.
de Tri. cap. 4.
Corpus Christi and sanguinem dicimus illud tantum, quod ex fructibus terrae
acceptum and pree mystica consecratum rite sumimus. That only we call the body
and blood of Christ which we receive of the fruits of the earth and being
consecrated by the mystical prayer, we take according to the rite. And S.
Hierom chides the insolency of some Quis patiatur ut mensarum and viduarum
minister supra cos se tumidus esserat, ad quorum process, Christi corpus
sanguisque consicitur? ^ Lib. 4. de side cap. 14. (...). Vide Optat. Mil^vit.
lib. 6. contra Parmenian.
Who can suffer that the Ministers of widows and tables should advance
themselves above those [at whose prayers] the body and blood of Christ are
exhibited or made presentiall. I add only the words of Damascen The bread and
wine are changed into the body and blood of Christ supernaturally by invocation
and coming of the Holy Ghost.

Now whether this consecration by prayer, did mean to reduce 8.
the words of institution to the sense and signification of a prayer, or S.
Cyprian lib. 5. c. ult. Eusebius Emissen. Sermon. 5. de Paschate.
that they mean, the consecration was made by the other prayers annexed to the
narrative of the institution, according to the several senses of the Greek and
Latin Church, yet still the ministry of the Priest whether in the words of
consecration, or in the annexed prayers is still by way of prayer. Nay further
yet, the whole mystery it self is operative in the way of prayer, says
Cassander, in behalf of the School and of all the Roman Church; and indeed S.
Ambrose and De Iteratione in consultat.
others of the Fathers in behalf of the Church Catholic. Nunc Christus
offertur, sed offertur quasi homo, quasi recipiens passionem, and offert
seipsum quasi Sacerdos ut peccata nostra dimittat hic in imagine [ibi in
veritate, ubi apudpatrem quasi advocatus intervenit] So that what the Priest
does here, being an imitation of Christ does in heaven, is by the sacrifice of
a solemn prayer, and by the representing the action and passion of Christ,
which is effectual in the way of prayer, and by the exhibiting it to God by a
solemn prayer, and advocation, in imitation of, and union with Christ. All the
whole office is an office of intercession, as it passes from the Priest to God,
and from the people to God; And then for that great mysteriousnesse, which is
the sacramental change, which is that which passes from God unto the people by
the Priest, that also is obtained and effected

For since the Holy Ghost is the consecrator, either he is called 9.
down by the force of a certain number of syllables, which that he will
verify, himself has no where described; and that he means not to express the
sense of the mystery, but yet of so much difference and variety as will show,
this great change is not wrought by such certain and determined words, [The
blood of the New Testament] so it is in S. Matthew and S. Mark, [The new
Testament in my bloud] so S. Paul and S. Luke, My body which is broken, My body
which is given, etc. and to think otherwise is so near the Gentile rites, and
the mysteries of Zoroastes, and the secret operations of the Enthei and heathen
Priests, that unless God had declared expressly such a power to be affixed to
the recitation of such

But if the Spirit descends not by the force of syllables, it follows 10.
he is called down by the prayers of the Church, presented by the Priests,
which indeed is much to the honor of God and of religion, an endearment of our
duty, is according to the analogy of the Gospel, and a proper action or part
of spiritual sacrifice, that great excellency of Evangelicall religion.

For what can be more aptand reasonable to bring any great blessing from God
then prayer, which acknowledges him the fountain 11.
bless God, and bless the symbols, and ask that God may bless us, and by
which every thing is sanctified, viz. by the word of God and prayer, that is,
by Gods benediction and our impetration; according to the use of the word in
the saying of our blessed Savior, Man lives [by every word] that proceeds out
of the mouth of God: that is, by Gods blessing; to which, prayer is to be
joined, that we may cooperate with God De iteratione. Atque hinc adeo credo
Apostolicas ipsas jam inde ab initio Ecclesias aliquas, hujusmodi preces ad
mysteriorum celebrationem adhibuisse; imo Christum ipsum non sola verborum
recitatione, sed etiam eulogia ante ipsam mysteriorum confectionem, and postea
hymmo usum fuisse manifestum est.
Cassander has said to the purpose; Some Apostolical Churches from the
beginning used such solemn prayers to the celebration of the mysteries, and
Christ himself beside that he recited the words (of institution) he blessed the
Symbols before and after, sung an Ecclesiastical hymn. And therefore the Greek
Churches which have with more severity kept the first and most ancient forms of
consecration, then the Latin Church; affirm that the consecration is made by
solemn invocation alone, and the very recitation of the words spoken in the
body of a prayer are used for argument to move God to hallow the gifts and as
an expression and determination of the desire. And (...).
Gabriel of Philadelphia observes out of an Apostolical Liturgy, The words of
our Lord [(...)] antecedently and by way of institution, and incentive are the
form, together with the words which the Priest afterward recites according as
it is set down in the divine Liturgy. It is supposed he means the Liturgy
reported to be made by S. James, which is of the most ancient use in the Greek
Church, and all Liturgies

Now if this great ministry be by way of solemn prayer it will easier be
granted that so the other are. For absolution and reconciliation 12.
of penitents I need say no more, but the question of S. Austin, Lib. 3. de
bap. contr. Donat. c. 16.
Quid est aliud manus impositio, quam or atio super hominem? And the Priestly
absolution is called by Saint Leo Sacerdotum supplicationes, the prayers of
Priests: and in the old Ordo Romanus, and in the Pontifical Epist. 92.
the forms of reconciliation were [Deus te absolvat] the Lord pardon thee, etc.
But whatsoever the forms were (for they may be optative, or indicative, or
declarative,) the case is not altered as to this question; for whatever the act
of the Priest be, whether it be the act of a Judge, or of an Ambassador, a
Counselor, or a Physician, or all this, the blessing which he ministers is by
way of a solemn [Ego benedico, and Deus benedicat] is the same, and was no more
when God commanded the Priest in express terms to bless the people; only the
Church of late, chooses the indicative form, to signify that such a person is
by authority and proper designation appointed the ordinary minister of
benediction. For in the sense of the Church and Scripture, none can give
blessing but a superior, and yet every person may say in charity God bless
you; He may not be properly said to bless, for the greater is not blessed of
the lesser by Saint Paul's rule; the Priest for the penitent to God is by way of
prayer, and by the mediation of intercession; for there is none else in this
imaginable; and the other of passing Gods act upon the penitent is by way of
interpretation and enunciation, as by the word of his ministry; in persona
Christi condonavi, I pardon in the person of Christ: says S. Paul, in the
first he is (...); in the second he is (...); in both, a minister of divine
benediction the anointing from above descends upon Aarons beard, and so by
degrees to the skirts of the people; and yet in those things which the Priest
or the Prophet does but signify by divine appointment, he is said to do the
thing, which he only signifies and makes public as a Minister of God: thus
God sent Jeremie, he set him over the Nations to root out, and to pull down,
and to destroy, to 1 Jer. 10.
throw down, and to build, and to plant; and yet in all this his ministry was
nothing but Prophetical: and he that converts a sinner is said to save him,
and to hide a multitude of sins; that is, he is isntrumental to it and
ministers in the employment; so that here also, Verbum est oration, the word of
God and prayer do transact both the parts of this office. And I understand,
though not the degree and excellency, yet the truth of this manner of operation
in the instance of Isaac blessing Jacob, which in the several parts was
expressed in all forms, indicative, optative, enunciative, and yet there is no
question but it was intended to do Jacob benefit by way of impetration; so that
although the Church may express the acts of her ministry in what form she
please, and with design to make signification of another article, yet the
manner of procuring blessings and graces for the people is by a ministry of
interpellation and prayer, we having no

17. I shall not need to instance any more, S. Austin sums up all the
Ecclesiastical ministeries in an expression fully to this purpose; 13.
Si ergo ad hoc valet quod dictum est in Evangelio, Deus peceatorem Lib. 31. de
bapt. con. Donat. c. 20.
non audit, ut per peceatorem sacramenta non celebrentur, Quomodo exaudit --
deprecantem vel super aquam baptismi, vel super oleum, vel super Eucharistiam,
vel super capita eorum super quibus manus imponitur? with S. Austin, praying
over the symbols of every Sacrament, and sacramental, is all one with
celebrating the mystery. And therefore in That he may be worthy to ask things
of thee for the salvation of the people, that is, to celebrate the Sacraments
and (...) in consecrat. Episc. (...).
Rites, and that thou will hear him: which fully expresses the sense of the
present discourse, that the first part of that grace of the holy Spirit which
consecrates the Priest, the first part of his sanctification, is a separation
of the person to the power of intercession, for the people, and a ministerial
mediation, by the ministration of such rites and solemn invocations which God
has appointed or designed.

will boldly enter within this vail, nisi qui vocatur sicut Aaron, unless
Nazianzen calls him, a Minister cooperating with Christ, he does without leave
call himself a man of God, a Mediator between God and the people under Christ,
he boldly thrusts himself into the participation of that glorious mediation
which Christ officiates in heaven; all which things as they are great honors
to the person, rightly called to such vicinity and indearments with God, so
they depend wholly upon divine dignation of the grace and vocation of the
person.

2 Now for the other part of spiritual emanation or descent of 15.
graces in sanctification of the Clergy, that is in order to the performance
that God who is the lover of souls may grant a pure and unblameable
Priesthood; and certainly they who are honored with so great a grace as to be
called to officiate in holy and useful Ministeries have need also of other
graces to make them persons holy in habit and disposition, as well as holy in
calling, and therefore God has sent his Spirit to furnish his Emissaries with
excellencies proportionable to their need and the usefulness of the Church. At
the beginning of Christianity God gave gifts extraordinary, as boldness of
spirit, fearless the Priestly function, were such as

And therefore Ordination is a collation of holy graces of sanctification; 16.
of a more excellent faith, of fervent charity, of providence and paternall
care: Gifts which now descend not by way of miracle, as upon the Apostles, are
to be acquired by humane industry, by study and good letters, and therefore are
presupposed in the person to be ordained; to which purpose the Church now
examines the abilities of the man, before she lays on hands; and therefore the
Church does not suppose that the Spirit in ordination descends in

And this is so certainly true, that even when the Apostle had ordained 17.
Timothy to be Bishop of Ephesus, he calls upon him to stir up the gift of
God, which was in him by the putting on of his hands, and that gift is a rosary
of graces; what graces they are he enumerates in the following words: God has
not given us the spirit of fear but of power, of love, (...), and of a modest
and sober mind (and these words are made part of the form of collating the
Episcopal order in the church of Eng.) Here is all that descend from the
Spirit in ordination, power, that is, to officiate and intercede with God in
the parts of ministry, and the rest are such as implie duty, such as make him
fit to be a Ruler in paternal and sweet government, modesty, sobriety, love;
And therefore in the forms of ordination of the Gr. Church (which are therefore
highly to be valued, because they are most ancient, have suffered the least
change, and been polluted with fewer interests) the mystical prayer of
ordination names graces in order to holiness. We pray thee that the grace of
the ever holy Spirit may descend upon him, (...).
Fill him full of all faith and love and power and sanctification by the
illumination of thy holy and life-giving Spirit: and the reason why these
things (...).
that he may be worthy to stand without blame at thy Altar, to preach the
Gospel of thy Kingdom, to minister the words of thy truth, to bring to thee
gifts, and spiritual sacrifices, to renew the people with the laver of
regeneration.

And therefore S. Gratiam Apostolis a Christo collatam qua sanctificarentur: ut
per spiritum sanctum a propriis peccatis absolverenture. Lib. 12. in 10. cap.
56.
Cyrill says that Christ's saying [receive ye the 18.
Holy Ghost] signifies grace given by Christ to the Apostles, whereby they were
sanctified: that by the Holy Ghost they might be absolved from their sins,
says Homil. in 8uas. Paschae.
Haymo; and Saint Lib. 2. cap. ult. de adulter. conjug.
Austin says, that many persons that were snatched violently to be made Priests
or Bishops, who had in their former purposes determined to marry Moses law, all
that was used in consecration of the Priest, who was to receive the greatest
measure of sanctification. Eadem item vis etiam Sacerdotem augustum and
honorandum facit novitate benedictionis a communitate vulgi segregatum. Cum
enim heri unus e plebe esset, repent redditur praeceptor, praeses, Doctor
pietatis, mysteriorum latentium Praesul etc. Invisibili quadam vi, ac gratia
invisibilem animam in melius transformatam gerens, that is, improved in all
spiritual graces; which is highly expressed by Sozo. l. 7. c. 10.
Martyrius who said to Nectarius; Tu o beat recens baptizatus and purificatus,
and mox insuper sacerdotio auctus es; utr aque autem haec peccatorum expiatoria
esse Deus constituit: which are not to be expounded as if ordination did
confer the first grace, which in the Schools is understood only to be
expiatorious; but the increment of grace, and

Now that these graces being given in ordination are immediate 19.
emanations of the holy Spirit, and therefore not to be usurped or pretended to
by any man, upon whom the holy Ghost in ordination has not descended, I shall
less need to prove, because it is certain upon the former grounds, and will be
finished in the following discourses; and it is in the Greek Ordination given
as a reason of the former prayer, (...),

SECT. VIII.
THe holy Ghost was the first consecrator, that is made evident; and the
persons first consecrated were the Apostles, 1.
who received the several parts of the Priestly order, at several times; the
power of consecration of the Eucharist, at the institution of it; the power of
remitting and retaining sins in the octaves of Easter; the power of baptizing
and preaching, together with universal jurisdiction, immediately before the
Ascension, when they were commanded to go into all the world preaching and
baptizing. This is the whole office of the Priesthood, and nothing of this

Now all these powers which Christ had given to his Apostles were by some means
or other to be transmitted to succeeding persons, 2.
because the several Ministeries were to abide for ever. All nations were to
be converted, a Church to be gathered and continued, the new Converts to be
made Confessors, and consigned with baptism, sins to be remitted, flocks to be
fed and guided, and the Lords death declared, represented, exhibited, and
commemorated until

The extraordinary calling was first, that is, the immediate; for 3.
God to create man. The species or kind the breath of the life-giving spirit;
and that breath was to be continued in a perpetual, univocall production; they
who had received, they were also to give; and they only could.

Grace cannot be conveyed to any man, but either by the fountain 4.
or by the channel; by the Author, or by the Minister. God only is the
fountain and Author; and he that makes himself the Minister whom God appointed
not, does in effect make himself the the Author, or an Usurper, either the
fountain, or a dry cloud, which in effect calls him either blasphemous, or
sacrilegious.

But the first and immediate derivation from the fountain, that 5.
only I affirm to be miraculous, and extraordinary; as all beginnings of
essences and graces of necessity must; those persons who receive the first
issues, they only are extraordinarily called; all that Adam was; it is to
suppose God will multiply beeings and operations without necessity. God called
at first, and if he had not called, the grace, and leaves this as a Depositum
to the Church, faithfully to be kept till Christ's second coming; and this
Depositum is the doctrine and discipline of Jesus; he opens the door, and then
left it open, commanding all to come in that way, into the Ministry and tuition
of the flock, calling all that came in by windows, thieves and robbers. And it
is observable, that the word vocation or calling in Scripture when it is
referred Acts 13. 2. 16. 10.
to a designation of persons to the Ministry, it always signifies that which
we term, calling extraordinary; it always signifies, an immediate act of God;
which also ceased when the great necessity expired, that is, when the fountain
had streamed forth abundantly, and made a current to descend without
interruption. The purpose of Heb. 5. 4. 5. 10.
this discourse is, that now no man should in these days of ordinary Ministry,
look for an extraordinary calling nor pretend in order to vainer purposes any
new necessities.

They are fancies of a too confident opinion, and over-valuing of 6.
our selves, when we think the very being of a Church is concerned in our
mistakes; and if all the world be against us, we are not ashamed of our folly,
but think truth is failed from among the children of men, and the Church is at
a loss, and the current derived from the first emanations is dried up, and
then he that is boldest to publish his follies is also as apt to mistake his
own boldness for a call from God, as he did at first his own vain opinion for
a necessary truth; and then he is called extraordinarily, and so ventures into
the secrets of the Sanctuary. First, he made a necessity more then ever

But God by promising that his Church should abide forever, and that the gates
of hell should not prevail against it, but that himself 7.
would be with her to the end of the world, has sufficiently confuted the
vanity of those men, who that they might thrust themselves into an office,
pretend the dissolution of the very being of the peace, and modesty, and
truth, and necessity.

2. And there is no need of an extraordinary calling to amend such 8.
things which are certain, foreseen events; and such were heresies and
corruption in doctrine and manners, for which God appointed an ordinary
Ministry to take cognizance and make a remedy, for which himself when he had
told us, heresies must needs be, yet made no provisions extraordinary, but left
the Church sufficiently instructed

3 When Christ means to give us a new Law, then he will give us a new
Priesthood, a new Ministry: One will not be changed 9.
without the other; God now no more comes in a mighty rushing wind, but in a
still voice, in the gentle homilies of ordinary Prophets; and now that the Law
by which we are to frame our understandings and our actions is established, we
must not expect an Apostle to correct every abuse; for if they will not hear
Moses and the Prophets, if one should come from the dead or an Angel come from
heaven, it is certain they will not be entertained, but till the

Against this, it is pretended that Christ promised to be with his Church for
ever, upon condition the Church would do their duty; 10.
Volket lib. 6. cap. 18.
but they being but a company of men, have power to choose, and they may choose
amiss; and if all should do so, Christ's promises may fail us, though not fail
of their intentions; and then in this case the Church failing, either there
must be an extraordinary calling of single persons, or else any man may enter
into the ordinary way, which is all one with an extraordinary: for it is
extraordinary that common persons should by necessity be drawn into an
employment

Against this we can (thanks be to God for it) pretend the experience of 16
ages; for hitherto it has ever been in the Christian 11.
Church, that God has preserved a holy Clergy in the same proportion as he
has preserved a holy people; never yet were the Clergy all Antichristian, in
the midst of Christian Churches; and we have no reason to fear it will be so
now, after so long an experience to expound the promises of our Lord to the
sense of a perpetual Ministry and a perpetual Church, by the means of
ordinary ministrations.

12.
Ibid. cap. 19.
the Church be renewed and Christianity restored? Not by Scripture? For we have
no certainty that the Scriptures which we have this day, are the same which the
Apostles delivered, and shall remain so for ever; but only 1. the reputation
and testimony of all Christian Churches, (which also must transmit the same by
a continual

But then that all the Clergy should consent to corrupt Scripture, 13.
or to loose their faith, is a most unreasonable supposition; for supposing
there is a natural possibility, yet it is morally impossible; and we may as
well fear that all the men of the world will be vicious Antistites, the
Teachers, Doctors, and public Ministers of religion should. And when all men
turn Mariners, or Apothecaries, or that all men will live single lives, and
turn Monks, and so endanger the species of mankind to perish, (for there is a
great fear of that too) that is, when all the world choose one thing (for if
two men do, two thousand may do it if they will, and so may all

The Spirit of God in Scripture has drawn a line, and chalked 14.
out the path that himself meant to tread in giving the graces of Evangelicall
ministrations. At first, after that Christ had named

But when the Holy Ghost descended, then the work was to begin; 15.
the Apostles wanted no power necessary for the main work of the Gospel; but
now also they received Commissions to dispense the Spirit to all such purposes
to which he was intended. They before had the office in themselves, but it was
not communicable to others, till the Spirit, the anointing from above, ran
over to the fringes of the Priests garments; they had it but in imperfection
and unactive faculties; So says Theophylact: He breathed, not now giving to
them Theophylact. in 20. Johan. (...).
the perfect gift of the Holy Ghost, for that he intended to give at Pentecost:
but he prepared them for the fuller reception of it. They had the gift before,
but not the perfect consummation of it, that was reserved Priestly order, it
was the proper emanation of this days glory, then was the (...), the perfection
of what power Christ had formerly consigned. For of all faculties, that is not
perfect which produces perfect and excellent actions in a direct line, actions
of a particular sort; but that which produces the actions, and enables others
to do so too; for then the perfection is inherent, not only formally, but
virtually and eminently; and that is the crown of habits, and natural
faculties. Now besides the reasonableness of the thing, this is also verified
by a certainty ex postfacto; For as we do not find the Apostles had before
Pentecost a productive power, which made them call for a miracle, or a special
providence by lots, so we are sure that immediately after Pentecost they had
it: for they speedily began to put it in execution and it is remarkable, that
the Apostles did not lay hands upon Mathias he being made Apostle before the
descent of the Holy Ghost: they had no Ministers of the Spirit; which because
afterward presently they did, concludes fairly that at Pentecost they were
amongst other graces made the ordinary Ministers of Ordination.

This I say is certain, that the holy Ghost descending at Pentecost, they
instantly did officiate in their ministerial offices, they preached, they
baptized, they confirmed and gave the holy Spirit of obsignation, and took
persons into the Lot of their Ministry, doing of it by an external rite and
solemn invocation: and now the extraordinary way did cease; God was the
fountain of the power, but man Paul who was the only exception from the common
way, takes notice; calling himself an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by
Jesus Christ; implying that he had a special honor done, to be chosen an
Apostle in an extraordinary way; therefore others might be Apostles, and yet
not so as he was; for else his expression had been all one, as if one should
say Titius the son of a man, not begotten of an Angel, or Spirit, nor
produced by the Sun or Star, but begotten by a man of a woman: the
discourse had been ridiculous, for no man is born otherwise; and yet he also
had something of the ordinary too; for Paul was called to an account for so
much of it as was extraordinary; and was tied to do that which every man now
is bound to do, that shall pretend a calling extraordinary, viz. to give an
extraordinary proof of his extraordinary calling: which when he had done in the
College of Jerusalem, the Apostles gave him the right hand of fellowship, and
approved his vocation; which also shows, that now the way of Ordination was
fixed and declared to be by humane ministry; of which I need no other proof
but the instances no instances to the contrary, but of Saint Paul, whose
designation was as immediate as that of the 11 Apostles, though his Ordination
was not. I end this with the saying of Job the Monk: Concerning the Order of
Priesthood it is supernatural and unspeakable. He that yesterday and the day
before was Tract. de Sacrament. (...).
in the form of Idiots, and private persons, to day by the power of the Holy
Ghost, and the voice of the chief Priest, and laying on of hands, receives so
great an improvement and alteration, that he handles and can consecrate the
divine mysteries of the holy Church, and becomes (under Christ) a Mediator
[Ministeriall] between God and man, and exalted to hallow himself and sanctify
others: The same almost with the words of Gregory Nyssen, in his book De sancto
baptismate.

17.
wonderful; the power great and secret; the office, to stand between God and
the people, in the ministry of the Evangelicall rites; the calling to it
ordinary, and by a settled Ministry, which began after the descent of the holy
Ghost in Pentecost.

This great change was in nothing expressed greater, then that 18.
Saul upon his Ordination changed his name, which Saint Chrysostom Homil. 28.
in Acta 18.
observing, affirms the same of S. Peter. I conclude, Differentiam inter
ordinem and plebem constituit Ecclesiae authoritas and honor per Exhort. ad
castitat.
ordin is consessum sanctificatus a Deo, says Tertullian. The authority of the
whole Church of God has made distinction between the person ordained and the
people, but the honor and power of it is derived from the sanctification of
God: It is derived from him, but conveyed by an ordinary Ministry of his
appointing: Whosoever therefore with unsanctified, that is, with unconsecrated
hands shall dare to officiate in the ministerial office, separate by God, by
gifts, by graces, by public order, by an established rite, by the institution
of Jesus, by the descent of the holy Ghost, by the word of God, by the practice
of the Apostles, by the practice of sixteen ages of the Catholic Church, Corah
brings an unhallowed Censer, which shall never send up a right cloud of incense
to God, but yet that unpermitted, and disallowed smoke shall kindle a fire,
even the wrath of God which shall at least destroy the sacrifice: His work
shall be consumed, and when upon his repentance himself escapes, yet it shall
be so as by fire that is, with danger, and loss, and shame, and trouble. For
our God is a consuming fire.

Remember Corah and all his company.

(...).
The Printer to the Reader.
THe absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, has
occasioned some lesser escapes in the impression of these Sermons, and the
Discourse annexed. The Printer thinks it the best instance of pardon if his
Escapes be not laid upon the Author, and he hopes they are no greater then an
ordinary understanding may amend, and a little charity may forgive.

A Table to both the Volumes of Sermons.
A.
WHo shall be the Accusers of sinners, that belong not to life in the great
judgment, Vol. 1. p. 23

Alms: wherein and how far our respects to the duties of justice may withhold
our hands from giving alms, 1. 183

Of the Angel Guardian, 1. 263. C

Athanasius being overtaken by his persecutors in his flight from them, how he
concealed himself, 2. 260

Atheism; the folly of it, 1. 262. B

B.
Bishop: whether the calling of a King or a Bishop is to be preferred, 1. 174

C.
Celibate: a comparison between it and marriage, 1. 223

Certainty of salvation: how to confute such vain confidences, 1. 87

Comfort: we must in our discourse comfort our brethren where there is cause,
1. 327

Complying: of complying with superiors in their sins, by imitation of them, 2.
206. B

Conscience: the torments of an unquiet conscience described and considered, 1.
20

Confession: of revealing secrets delivered under the seal of Confession, 1.
306. D

Covetousness in Scripture has other names besides its own, 1. 302. A

Cursing, 1. 317

Custom; its ill effects upon man. 1. 267

D.
Dreams; the vanity of them, 1. 121

Deceit: various sorts of men, that do the work of the Lord deceitfully, 1.
155. and seq.

Despise: who despise the mercies of God, 2. 167. D. their condition dangerous,
168

Detraction, 1. 312. E

Doctrines; how we are to try them, 2. 285 and 275

E.
Eccles. 12. 5. explicated, 1. 115

Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. explicated, 2. 301

(...); what St. Paul meant by it, 1. 301. D

Evil nature; how one may cure it in himself, 1. 147

F.
Faith: diverse sorts of insufficient faith, 1. 169

Fasting, 1. 188

Fear; its several acceptions, 1. 86. the properties of a religious fear, 1.
88. and seq. of fear in times of persecution, 1. 102

Flattery, 1. 318 several ways of it, 1. 320

Flesh; the weakness of flesh, and its natural powers, 1. 128

Fortune: disadvantages of a great fortune, 1. 179

G.
God: a scheme of what he has done for us in order to our salvation, 1. 24.
the manner of jealousy in God, 2. 29. B. that it is not injust in God to
punish one for the sin of another, 2. 35. D. his ends in doing it, 2. 36. B. in
what instances he punishes one person for the sin of another, 2. 37. D. how God
can be glorified by us, 2. 53. the goodness of God toward us, 2. 146, and
148, and 149. how great impiety to despise such goodness, 2. 150. E. his long
suffering toward us, 2. 153, and 159. his not punishing sinners, sometimes no
mercy, 2. 163.

Gospel; the mysterious articles thereof, 2. 2. that they could be revealed by
none but the Spirit, Ib. nor can be received but by the help of the Spirit, 2.
3. why the Gospel is called Spirit, 2. 4. the Gospel a covenant of sufferings,
2. 107. C. and 108, and seq.

Grace: what is the state of grace, 2. 155. he is not in the state of grace,
who retains affections to any one sin, 2. 155. degrees of increasing grace, 2.
178. how to discern our growth in grace, 2. 180. and seq. the manner of its
growth, 2. 192. E. a caution to be taken with the rules of discerning our
growth in grace, 2. 194. signs of growth in grace given by some, 2. 195

H.
Heart; reasons why God chooses to be served by it principally, 1. 155.
weakness of the heart in relation to good actions, 2. 83. its strength in
lusts and sinful passions, 2. 84. its deceitfulness, 2. 102. and vol. 2. ser.
7. per tot. it is deceitful in its purposes and resolutions, 2. 87. in its
designs, 2. 89. our hearts are blind, 2. 92. by what means the heart of man
procures its own ignorance, 2. 94. the hardness of the heart, 2. 98. the
heart is proud, lb. it is deeply in love with wickedness, 2. 99. how we are to
treat our hearts, 2. 102. D

Hell; the opinion of some of the primitive Fathers concerning the eternity of
the pains of hell, 1. 39.

Husband, the rules of his love to his Wife, 1. 234. and seq.

I.
Idle words, how far forbidden or lawful, 1. 292

Jesting, 1. 301. and seq. against profane jesting, 1. 305

Jealousy, the circumstances of it in God, 2. 29. B

Impunity, not always an argument of mercy, 2. 163

Ignorance, an effect of sin, 1. 26

Instruction; that we ought to teach and instruct others, 1. 325

Intemperance in eating and drinking, an enemy to health, 1. 198, destructive
of wisdom, 1. 107. the measures of temperance in eating and drinking, 1. 109

Intercession in prayer, vol. 1. ser. 6. per tot. Joy, what the joy of the
ungodly is, 1. 145

1 Ioh. 3. 9. explained. 2. 9

Judgment, the necessity of a day of universal Judgment, 1. 2. signs of the
day of Judgment, which the Jews give, 1. 11 to be unmoved at the judgments of
God on others, how dangerous a folly, 2. 168. E

K.
King: whether the calling of a King or Bishop is to be preferred in our
choice, 1. 174

L.
Life: the necessity of holy life, 2. 72

Luke 11. 47. explicated, 2. 43. A

Lukewarmnesse, in what sense God hates it, 1. 165. the reasons why, 1. 166

M.
(...), 2. 159

Man; God has provided better for the natural appetites of man then other
earthly creatures, 1. 193. the vanity of man's life and strength, 2. 81.

Mat. 12. 36. explicated, 1. 291

Marriage; a comparison between it and celibate, 1. 223. rules for deportment
of married persons, 1. 225 and seq.

Minister; of the efficacy of prayer made by an evil Minister, 1. 79

Miracles; of the probation of Religion by them, 1. 46

Mirth, 1. 304

P.
Pardon of sin; the signs of it, 1. 99. not obtained without difficulty, 1. 97

Pleasures of the world no proper instruments of felicity, 1. 193. pleasures of
sin considered, 1. 247. found to be troublesome in their acquisition, 1. 250.
the Spirit of God is given as a preservative against it.

Perseverance, 1. 176

Persecution; the benefit and usefulness of persecution and suffering, 1. 120,
121. rules for the practice of them, that are under persecution, 2. 133. and
seq.

Poverty, its benefits, 2. 129. E

Popes of Rome, a character of them given by one. 2. 173. D

Prayer; of frequency in it, 179. a caution concerning frequency of prayer, 1.
181. E why the prayers of good men often prevail not. 1. 59

Prosperity, no argument of a just cause, 2. 125. E. we must not expect it in
this life, 2. 116. prosperity of the wicked what it is, how vain, 2. 127

R.
Recidivation, 1. 109. and seq

Railing and reviling, 1. 313

Religion, how far it is to be preferred before secular business, 1. 173. how
far delight in works of Religion is required, 1. 177. against compulsive
courses in the propagating of Religion. 1. 185

Repentance, broken into fragments is to be suspected, 1. 92. how it glorifies
God, 2. 54. A. what it is in its essence and necessary properties, 2. 55. and
seq. and 66. sorrow alone is not repentance, 2. 57. there must be a dereliction
of sin, 2. 58. B. a deathbed repentance insufficient, 2. 63, 64. and ser. 5.
per tot. and 2. 68. E. there is a kind of repentance, that is consistent with
the greatest affection to sin, 2. 69. B. it ought not to be delayed, 2. 70. B.
of them that are bold in sin, upon a resolution to repent, 2. 70. of what use
it is, to make that question, Whether God can save a dying man that then begins
to repent, 2. 74. C. when is the latest time of beginning repentance, 2. 75.
how this doctrine is to be separated from despair, 2. 77. how contradicted by
the mercies of Christ, 2. 78. A. the thief upon the Cross no objection against
this, 2. 78

Reproof; it is a duty, 1. 328. the rules of managing it, 1. 330. of bearing
reproof, 2. 183

Resolving to live a good life, what efficacy it has (as a part of repentance)
without performance, 2. 60

Restitution: of that restitution which those sons are to make, who are made
rich by the rapine and oppression of their Ancestors, 2. 44

S.
(...), what it is, 1. 289 D

Secrets; of revealing them, 1. 305

Sins; how far faith and charity prevail to the blotting out of sins, 1. 160

Sin; its pleasures considered, 1. 247. found to be troublesome in their
acquisition, 1. 250. its solly, 1. 263. it makes a man morally weak, 1. 265.
the custom of it prevails against the interest of man, 1. 268. A. and against
his experience, Ibid. C. it introduces baseness upon the spirit, 1. 270. many
sins directly shameful in their nature, 1. 273. the shame that follows sin, 1.
275. and seq. sin cannot be concealed, 1. 276. C God punishes sin with sin, 1.
278. the horrid punishments of sin, 1. 280. and seq. the punishment of some
sins is foreseen and usual, 1. 282. D. whether we sin in every action, 2. 210.
E. of sins of infirmity, 2. 22. and seq. we do not sufficiently beware of sin,
2. 28. how the guilt and punishment of it is propagated, 2, 31. D. upon whom
the punishment of sin descends by propagation, 2. 34. why this guilt and
punishment of sin is thus propagated, 2. 35. E. that it is not in just in God
to do so, Ib. D. Gods ends in doing it, 1. 36. B. in what cases one person is
punished for the sin of another, 2. 37. D. what remedies there are against the
danger of such punishments 2. 40. to be used by such sons, etc. as are partners
in the guilt, Ib. and seq. by such as are innocent, 2 46. C

Silence; the praise of it, 1. 296, and 1. 341. C. its moderation, 1. 296. E

Sinners; how God treats them, 2. 197. the orders of lesser sinners explicated,
who are to be treated gently by men, 2. 199. rules and helps for the use of
them, that are good men generally, but interrupt their state by some failings,
2. 214. and seq. how the hopes of their pardon stands that are gross sinners,
2. 220

Slander, 1. 311. and 319

What is the Sign of the Son of man, mentioned, Mat. 24. 30. 1. 10

Soul; how great a charity to save the soul of a Brother, 1. 184

Spirit; what it is to grieve him, 1. 210. what it is to be in the Spirit, 2.
5. all that belong to Christ have the Spirit of Christ, 2. 6. how the Spirit is
given in the Gospel, 2. 7. B. it is given as a remedy against worldly pleasure,
2. 8. as a remedy against sorrow, 2. 10. as an antidote against evil
concupiscences, 2. 12. the measure of the Spirit in Christians compared with
those measures which the Jews had, 2. 13. the effects of the Spirit in a
Christian, 2. 14, 15. He helps our infirmities in prayer, 2. 15. of praying in
the Spirit, 2. 15. E. the spiritual man, and natural man compared, 2. 23

Speaking: of much speaking, 1. 290 examples of men that abstained from
speaking a long time, 1. 294. E. St. Gregory Naz. abstained from speaking one
whole Lent, 1. 295. B. St. Paul the Hermit was so ashamed of a foolish
question, that he spoke not for 3 years after, 1. 295. C. Cicero affirmed,
that he never spoke that of which he repented, 1. 297. C. censured for it by
St. Augustine, Ibid. Remedies against such speaking considered and prescribed,
1. 298. Stultiloquy, 1. 300. Scurrility, 1. 301. and seq. contentious speaking,
1. 309. the Duties of the Tongue in speaking, 1. 325

Sufferings; Gods method in bringing them into the world, 2. 105. the Gospel a
covenant of sufferings, 2. 107. C. reasons of Gods providence for the
sufferings of his Children, 2. 120. C. and 130. C. the advantages of them, 2.
138. D. the end of them, 2. 144

State of separation. 2. 367

Superstition, 1. 114. and seq. per tot.

Success, no argument of a just cause, 2. 125. E. and 1. 155

Sword, not a competent instrument to propagate Religion by it, 1. 186

Swearing, 1. 307. common swearing makes perjury common, 1. 308

T.
Temperance; the measures of temperance in eating and drinking, 1. 209

Teachers: of false teachers, 2. 94. D. how to discern them from good, 2. ^74

W.
Wife: the rules of her obedience to the husband, 1. 240. and seq. of her
compliance with him, 1 242

V.
Virtue is to be loved for it self, not for the consequent reward, 2. 187
Understanding; how it was impaired in the fall of man: not by a change of its
essential faculties, but by impeding them, 1. 261. D

Z.
Zeal; its rules, 1. 173 and excesses, 1. 185

THE END.

