THE SPEECH OF Sr Edw: Turnor Knight Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS, To
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, on February 9.
1664.

AT The Passing of the Act, entitled, An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto the
Kings Majesty, of Twenty four hundred threescore and seventeen thousand and
five hundred pounds, to be Raised, Levied and Paid in the space of Three years.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and the Scottish unicorn

LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

THE SPEECH OF Sr Edward Turnor Knight. Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS,
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, Febr. 9.
1664.
AT The Passing of the Act, entitled, An Act for granting a Royal Aid unto
the Kings Majesty, of Twenty four hundred threescore and seventeen thousand and
five hundred pounds, to be Raised, Levied and Paid in the space of Three years.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
THE last Session of this Parliament, the Lords and Commons did humbly
represent unto Your Majesty, the many Wrongs and Indignities that were done to
Your Majesty, and the many Injuries done to your Merchants, by the Subjects of
the United Provinces; and did most humbly beseech Your Majesty, that some
effectual Course might be taken for Redress thereof.

Your Majesty at the opening of this Session was graciously pleased to acquaint
Your Two Houses, That in pursuance to their Desires, You had by Your Agent
required Satisfaction; but that Way proved ineffectual, and many fresh
Provocations were offered, whereby Your Majesty was necessitated to a Warlike
preparation; by the speedy Dispatch whereof, You had let Your Neighbors see,
That You could defend Your Self, and Your Subjects against their Insolence,
upon the Stock of Your own Credit, before Your Parliament came together.

And now SIR, Give me leave to say, Your Neighbors may see how a great King is
made greater by His Parliament. Your Loyal Commons, after they Convened, did
not suffer full Four and Twenty hours to pass, before they most cheerfully gave
Your Majesty more then Four and twenty hundred thousand pounds.

Historians tell us, That in Biscay, a Signiory of Spain, when the King enters
into the Frontiers of the Country, the Lords and Gentlemen there dwelling,
proffer him some few Brasspieces, called Maravides, in a leathern Bag, hanged
at the end of a Lance; but withal they tell him, that he must not take them.

Great SIR, England present unto Your Majesty this Bill; whereby we have given
unto Your Majesty a Royal Aid of Four and twenty hundred seventy seven
thousand and five hundred pounds, to be paid in three years by twelve quarterly
Payments, to begin from the Five and twentieth of December last. And we do
humbly beseech Your Majesty to accept it as a pregnant Demonstration of our
most unfeigned Duty and Thankfulness to Your Majesty.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


