The several SPEECHES OF Sr. EDWARD TURNER Knight.

Speaker of the honorable House of Commons, to the KING'S most excellent
Majesty, delivered on Friday the tenth day of May, 1661.

regal crown

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the sign of the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

May it please your most excellent Majesty.
THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament being
there assembled by virtue of your Majesty's most gracious Writ, have bin
pleased (I dare not say to choose, but) to name me their Speaker.

It is an undoubted privilege of every Member in that House, to be heard
speak, much more when he speaks for, or against himself. But Sir, whether more
out of favor to me, or injury to themselves, I cannot tell, they were not
pleased to hear, at least they would not accept my just Apology and Excuse from
this Service.

Therefore from this their Judgment, if I must call it so, I do most humbly
appeal to your Sovereign Justice, beseeching your Majesty for the errors that
are too visible and apparent in their Proceedings, that you will review and
reverse the same.

My inexperience in the Customs and Orders of the House, my inability to
collect their fence and state the Questions rising upon long and arduous
Debates, do justly render me unfit, and therefore unworthy of this weighty
employment.

Your Majesty well knows, when a Ship puts forth to Sea she should be provided
with Mariners of all sorts; in case a Storm does arise, some must trim and
lore the sails, some must watch aloft the Decks, some must work at the Pump,
but he had need be a very good Sea man that is the Pilot. Sir, I hope I may be
useful to this your Sovereign Vessel in some of these inferior places, but I
dare not undertake to be their Steersman.

I do most humbly therefore beseech your Majesty, that you will not take us at
our first word, our second thoughts are best, pray therefore be pleased to
command the Members of the House of Commons to return into their House, to
recollect themselves, and to present your Majesty with a better choice.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SPEECH, AFTER THE LORD CHANCELLOR Had declared the KING's
Approbation of the Choice of the House of COMMONS.
HE that knows his Masters Will, and does it not, is worthy to be beaten with
many stripes: I shall therefore humbly and cheerfully, to the best of my poor
skill and knowledge, apply my self to the performance of my Duty; not doubting
therein to obtain Your Majesty's Gracious Pardon for all involuntary
Transgressions; for it is a Rule in Law, and in Conscience too: Actus non facit
reum, nisi men's sit rea.

And since I have found this Favor in the sight of my Lord the King, pray let
me beg Your Majesty's patience for a while, to make a stand, and from this
place to look about me: Sir, a weak head is soon giddy, but the strongest brain
may here be turned; the Presence of this Glory, and the Glory of this Presence,
do transport me: whilst I contemplate the incomparable beauty of this Body
Politic, and the goodly Order of this High Court of Parliament, where at once
I behold all the glory of this Nation, I am almost in the condition of St.
Paul, when he was taken up into the third Heavens, all he could say upon his
return, was, He saw things unutterable.

God, that made all things for the use of Man, and made him Governor over all
his Works, thought it not fit to leave him to himself; nor to live without a
Law and Government. The Forms and Species of Governments are various,
Monarchical, Aristocraticall, and Democraticall; but the first is certainly
the best, as being nearest to Divinity it self. Aristocracy is subject to
degenerate and run into Faction; but Democracy naturally runs into Confusion:
then every man becomes a Tyrant over his Neighbor, Homo Homini Lupus: Homo
Homini Demon.

This famous Island, Historians tell us, was first Inhabited by the Britains,
then by the Romans, then by the Saxons, then by the Danes, then by the Normans;
and during all these Successions of Ages, and variety of Changes, though there
was sometimes Divisum Imperium, yet every Division was happy under a
Monarchical Government.

Since the Entrance of the Norman Race 25 Kings and Queens famous in their
generations, from whom Your sacred Majesty is lineally descended, have swayed
the Royal Scepter of this Nation.

The Children of Israel, when they were in the Wilderness, though they were fed
with Gods own hand, and ate the food of Angels, yet they surfeited, and
murmured, and rebelled against Moses.

The same unthankful spirit dwelt in this Nation for diverse years last past;
the men of that Age were weary of the Government, though it was refined to the
wonder and envy of all other Nations: they quarrelled with our Moses, because
he was the Lords Anointed; Nolumus hunc regnare, was their first quarrel; but
levelling Parity and Confusion followed, then tyranny and usurpation was the
Conclusion.

We read of the Emperor Adrian, when he lay a dying, he complained that many
Physicians had destroyed him; meaning, that their contrary Conceits and
different Directions for his Recovery, had hastened his Death.

So it was with us, we were sick of Reformation; our Reformers were of all
Ages, Sexes, and Degrees, of all Professions and Trades: The very Cobbler went
beyond his Last: These new Statesmen took upon them to Regulate and Govern our
Governors: This was the Sickness and Plague of the Nation: Their new Laws
were all written in bloody Letters, the cruelty of their Tribunals made the
Judgment Seat little differ from a Slaughter house: The Rich man was made an
Offender for a word, Poor men were sold for Slaves, as the Turks sell Heads,
twenty for an Asper: Yet for all this Villainy there was at length found a
Protector.

No amendment at length would serve these Reformers turns; no Concessions,
though the most Gracious that could be imagined, would satisfy these Usurpers;
but Root and Branch, all must go; our late Sovereign Lord, of blessed memory,
must be offered up a Sacrifice to their Lusts; Your sacred Person (Great Sir)
proscribed, and all the Royal Family exiled: Monarchy it self was voted
burdensome; and therefore they must try a Commonwealth, and the better to
digest it, the People were intoxicated with a belief that they should all like
themselves be Princes in their turns.

Amongst the Persians, after the death of their Governor, there was used to be
(...) a five days Lawlessnesse, in which time every man might do what he
listed: during those five days there was such killing and robbing, and
destroying one another, that before they were ended, the People longed again
for their old Government.

After the death of Your Majesty's most Royal Father, here was the like
Licentiousness; but alas, it continued more than twice five years: Liberty
they called it, but it was Libertas quidlibet audendi. Your Loyal Subjects were
a Prey to Wolves and Tygres, and to the most cruel of all Beasts, unreasonable
men: every man did what seemed good in his own eyes, for in those days there
was no King in our Israel.

But as the former Spirit of Reformation at first brought us into this misery;
so the spirit of giddiness which God sent amongst our Reformers, at length
cured us. The brazen Serpent was the best cure for those that were bitten by
the fiery Serpent: the divisions and subdivisions of those that exercised
dominion over us, weakened their own power, and stirred up the hearts, and
strengthened the hands of your loyal Subjects, to restore our ancient
Government, and to bring your Sacred Majesty back to your Royal Throne in
peace, as to the joy of all our hearts we see it is this day.

This was the work of God alone, and it is admirable in our eyes. And as we
have cause at all times to bless God that he has thus brought your Majesty to
your People; so we have just cause at this time to return our hearty thanks
unto your Majesty, that you have thus brought your People to your Self.

The Sun exhales the vapors from the earth, and then sends them down again in
showers of plenty: So we to our great joy, do find that our obedience and
affection to your Majesty are returned upon our heads in plenty, peace and
protection.

The last meeting here in Parliament was happy in healing the bleeding wounds
of this Nation; they were blessed also, even for their Works sake, your sacred
Majesty did bless them, and therefore they shall be blessed to all posterity.

But Sir we hope you have a blessing left for us too: That was your Parliament
by Adoption, but this is yours by Birthright; this Parliament is Freeborn: I
hope this honor will beget in us an Emulation to exceed the actions of our
Predecessors, and not only to meet your Majesty as our Sovereign, with the duty
of Subjects, but with the love of Sons to a most indulgent Father.

Next to the glory of your Majesty's Royal Throne, I cannot but observe the
brightness of this -- second orb, this Firmament is richly decked with Stars of
several magnitudes, each star appears like the morning star, and yet each star
differs from another in glory.

You cannot want Commanders, either by Sea or Land, to manage your designs,
whilst all these Sons of Mars stand candidate to serve you in the wars.

You cannot want Counselors to advise you in the great affairs of the Nation,
whilst all these Senators, each fit to be a Consul, contend who shall most
ease you in the thorny cares of the Government.

Amidst these Noble English Barons, and at your Majesty's feet are placed the
Reverend Judges of the Land, the Sages of the Law, Men so learned and expert in
the Customs, and statutes of this land, that if Wat Tyler, or Jack Cade, or the
new Phanaticks of this latter age had burned our books, they were able to
restore our laws in purity and perfection.

And next to these, though in a lower Orb, appear the worthy Knights, the
prudent Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, being the third estate
of Parliament.

When the fame of Solomon's wisdom had filled the neighbor Nations, the Queen
of Sheba could not contain her self at home, but with many Camels laded with
Spices, with Gold and precious stones in abundance, she comes to Solomon to
commune with him of all that was in her heart. Great Sr. whilst this your
native Country was unworthy of you, foreign Nations were made happy in the
knowledge of your Person, your piety and your wisdom: And now the Lord our God
has brought you home, and set you on your Throne, your Subjects long to see
you.

What striving and rejoicing was there at your first landing, to see our rising
Sun?

What striving was there at your Coronation to see the Imperial Crown set upon
your Royal head?

What striving has here lately been, in all the Counties, Cities and Buroughs
of this Nation, who should be sent up to hear your wisdom, and confer with you
in Parliament?

Royal Sr. these chosen worthy Messengers are not come empty handed, they are
laden, they are sent up to you, heavy laden, from their several Counties,
Cities and Buroughs.

(...)
