THE SPEECH OF Sr. Edw. Turnor, Knight. SPEAKER of the Honorable House of COMMONS,
TO THE KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.

Delivered on Monday the Seven and twentieth day of July, 1663. at the
Prorogation of the Parliament.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwel, for Robert Pawlet, at the sign of the Bible in
Chancery Lane.

THE SPEECH OF Sr. EDW. TURNOR, Knight Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons*
TO THE KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
Delivered on Monday the Seven and twentieth day of July 1663. at the
Prorogation of the PARLIAMENT.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty.
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of PARLIAMENT, have
since their last Meeting, in many weighty and arduous Affairs, presented Your
Majesty with their humble Advice; which with all Thankfulness they acknowledge,
never wanted a most Gracious Reception. Never any Prince did so freely commune
with his people, and never any people did with more joy and duty commemorate
their happiness.

The last Session of Parliament our care was chiefly to secure the Being of
this Nation under our ancient happy, Monarchical Government. This Session we
have endeavored to advance the Peace and Welbeing both of Church and State.

Material Structures are best secured by deep Foundations in the Earth, but the
Foundations of true Happiness are from above: We have therefore in the first
place perused the Laws, which do enjoin the observation of the Lord's Day, and
where we found any defect, either in Rules or Penalties, we have with great
Care supplied them: Well knowing, That he who does not remember on the first
day of the Week, to observe a Christian Saboth, will hazard, before the week
comes round, to forget he is a Christian.

We read in the Story of Lewys the ninth of France, when he took his Voyage
into the Eastern Empire, to assist the distressed Christians: The fame of his
Holiness moved the King of Tartary to send his Ambassadors to offer him
friendship, and to acquaint him, he had a desire to become a Christian:
Whereupon Lewys sent him Preachers, to instruct him in the Christian Religion:
But the Tartarians observing the Lives of the Christians were not answerable to
their Profession; they returned, with the shame of their own ill lives upon
them, whose Doctrines were so famous.

That which in those days was the Reproach of those Christians, is much more at
this day the shame of this Nation: We know more, but practice less then they
did: We generally love a Skeptical rather then a Practical Religion, and are
contented to spend that time in study of curious deceiptful Notions, which
ought to be employed in the practice of known Truths. Too many amongst us are
of the Sect of the Gnostics, hunting after Novelties and Phantasms, till
variety of Notions makes them mad: Hence do arise all those Sects and Schisms
in the Church, which being nursed up in Pride, refuse to conform to any Laws,
and make Religion it self the Cloak for all their Separations: Whereas true
Religion is the Band of Society, the sinews that hold fast the joints of the
Body Politic: If these be broken, the Body must be dismembered; if they be but
sprained, the whole body is in pain, and the Member made unuseful.

At the Opening of this Session, Your MAJESTY was most graciously pleased to
call upon us to prepare some Laws for the prevention of the growth of Popery;
and we have heartily labored therein, both to prevent the growth of Popery,
and all sorts of Sectaries and Nonconformists; But as the rankest Corn, and the
fullest Ears are aptest to be laid; so fares it in this matter, these Fruits
are not yet ready for the harvest; But we are confident, by the wisdom of Your
Majesty's Government, and the readiness of your faithful Subjects to support
it, by the just and due Execution of the Laws, (especially if such persons be
entrusted with the Execution of the Laws; as do love them) these persons will
either be persuaded to Conformity, or forced into a peaceable and orderly
Conversation.

To this purpose, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Commons House of PARLIAMENT, humbly in their Name, to beseech Your Majesty,
That You will be pleased to issue out Your Proclamation for the putting those
Laws which now are in force, against the Popish Recusants, Sectaries, and
Non-Conformists, in effectual Execution.

I am likewise commanded to desire Your Majesty, That You will be pleased to
issue out another Proclamation for the prevention of that Profaneness,
Debauchery, and Licentiousness, which to the high displeasure of Almighty God,
the dishonor of Your Majesty's Government, and the grief of all good men, is
now practiced amongst us.

And for the better securing the Peace of the Nation against the United
Counsels of all the Dissenters to our Religion, and established Discipline, we
have prepared an Additional Bill for the Ordering the Forces of the Kingdom,
whereby Your Majesty's Lieutenants, and their Deputy Lieutenants will be
enabled to Train, Discipline, and keep together such a Party as will be able to
prevent Disorders, and sufficient to check any Insurrections, till the Great
Body of the Militia can come in to their assistance.

During the late unhappy Wars in this Nation, our Neighbors Eyes were open to
spy out all advantages of spoiling our Trade, and to advance their own; but by
the several good Bills made ready for Your Majesty's Royal Assent, we hope we
shall restore and increase the flourishing Trade of this Nation.

Great SIR,

I have but one word more, and that is by command from Your Majesty's loyal and
dutiful Subjects, the Commons of England: They have duly considered the present
unsettled condition of this Nation, and the great expense which must attend such
Distractions: And do humbly beseech Your Majesty to accept an aid from them,
consisting of Four entire Subsidies; Two of which are to be paid by the First
of November next, and the other Two by the First of May next following.

FINIS.
I Do appoint Robert Pawlet to print this Speech, and that no other do presume
to print the same.

Edw. Turnor.


