THE SPEECH OF Sr Edw: Turnor Knight Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS, To
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, AT THEIR
Prorogation, The second of March, 1664.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon, surmounted
by a crown and flanked by the English lion and the Scottish unicorn

LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

THE SPEECH OF Sr Edward Turnor Knight Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS,
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, March 2.
1664. AT THEIR Prorogation.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament,
having in the beginning of this Session applied themselves to the aiding Your
Majesty in Your Naval Preparations, have of late considered of some Bills, that
may be most grateful to the People, either in redressing things that are
grievous to them, or in advancing their Trade and Commerce, which are the soul
and life of the Nation.

Evil manners produce good Laws, but the best Laws in time may grow obsolete;
and such is the wicked nature of Man, that when he cannot by force break
through a Law, he will by fraud and tricks endeavor to evade it.

I may with great truth affirm, the Common Law of England is the best Municipal
Law in the World; and yet if the Legislative power were not ready to
countermine the Works, and make up the Breaches that are daily made upon it,
the sons of Zeruiah would be too strong for us.

We have now presented Your Majesty with several Bills, for the Regulation of
the Law, which will serve to prune some exuberant branches, and to pull away
the Ivy that robbed this Tree of her just nourishment: And if Your Majesty now
be pleased graciously to shine upon her, she will yield her fruit in great
abundance, to the content of Your Majesty, and all Your people.

Cosmographers do agree, that this Island is incomparably furnished with
pleasant Rivers, like Veins in the natural Body, which convey the Blood into
all the parts, whereby the whole is nourished, and made useful: but the Poet
tells us, he acts his part best, -- Qui miscuit utile dulci: Therefore we have
prepared some Bills for making small Rivers Navigable: A thing that in other
Countries has been more experienced, and has been found very advantageous; it
eases the people of the great Charge of Land-Carriages, preserves the
Highways, which are daily worn out with Wagons, carrying excessive Burdens;
it breeds up a Nursery of Watermen, which, upon occasion, will prove good
Seamen; and with much facility maintains Intercourse and Communion between
Cities and Countries.

We have been much affected with the cries and wants of the Poor this hard
season, especially those about this Town, who are ready to starve for want of
Fuel, the price of Coals being so unreasonably enhansed by the extorting
Engrossers; We have therefore for their present and future ease, prepared a
Bill, authorizing the Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen in the City of
London; and Three Justices of Peace in the Country, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, from time to time to set the Prices of Coals; having regard to the
Price paid to the Importer, and other emergent Charges.

And now Great SIR, having finished our present Counsels, we hope Your Majesty
will give us leave to return for a time into our Countries, where, in our
several Spheres, we shall be ready to serve You with our Persons and our
Purses, and also with our Prayers to the Great God of Hosts, that he will be
pleased to strengthen Your Hands in the day of Battle, and make Your Majesty
victorious over all Your Enemies both at home and abroad.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


