A Funeral Sermon, PREACHED At the Obsequies of the Right Honble and most
virtuous Lady, THE LADY FRANCES, Countess of CARBERY:

Who deceased October the 9th. 1650. at her House GOLDEN-GROVE in
CARMARTHEN-SHIRE.

By JER. TAILOR, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by I. F. for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane. M.DC.L.

To the right Honorable, and truly Noble, Richard Lord Vaughan, Earl of
Carbery, Baron of Emlim and Molinger, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath.
My Lord,
I Am not ashamed to profess that I pay this part of service to your Lordship
most unwillingly: for it is a sad office to be the chief Minister in a house of
mourning, and to present an interested person with a branch of Cypress and a
bottle of tears. And indeed, my Lord, it were more proportionable to your needs
to bring something that might alleviate or divert your sorrow, then to dress
the hearse of your Dear Lady, and to furnish it with such circumstances, that
it may dwell with you, and lie in your closet, and make your prayers and your
retirements more sad and full of weepings. But because the Divine providence
has taken from you a person so excellent, a woman fit to converse with Angels,
and Apostles, with Saints and Martyrs, give me leave to present you with her
picture; drawn in little and in watercolors, sullyed indeed with tears and
the abrupt accents of a real and consonant sorrow; but drawn with a faithful
hand, and taken from the life: and indeed it were too great a loss, to be
deprived of her example and of her rule, of the original and the copy too.
The age is very evil and deserved her not; but because it is so evil, it has
the more need to have such lives preserved in memory to instruct our piety, or
upbraid our wickedness. For now that God has cut this tree of paradise down
from its seat of earth, yet so the dead trunk may support a part of the
declining Temple, or at least serve to kindle the fire on the altar. My Lord, I
pray God this heap of sorrow may swell your piety till it breaks into the
greatest joys of God and of religion: and remember, when you pay a tear upon
the grave, or to the memory of your Lady (that Dear and most excellent Soul)
that you pay two more: one of repentance for those things that may have caused
this breach; and another of joy for the mercies of God to your Dear departed
Saint, that he has taken her into a place where she can weep no more. My Lord,
I think I shall, so long as I live, that is so long as I am

Your Lordships most humble Servant TAILOR.

A Funeral Sermon, etc.
2 SAMUEL 14. 14. For we must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground
which cannot be gathered up again: neither does God respect any person: yet
does he devise means that his banished be not expelled from him.
WHen our blessed Savior and his Disciples viewed the Temple, some one amongst
them cried out, Magister aspice, quales lapides! Master behold what fair, what
great stones are here! Christ made no other reply but foretold their
dissolution and a world of sadness and sorrow which should bury that whole
Nation when the teeming cloud of Gods displeasure should produce a storm which
was the daughter of the biggest anger, and the mother of the greatest calamity
which ever crushed any of the sons of Adam. [ The time shall come, that there
shall not be left one stone upon another.] The whole Temple and the Religion,
the ceremonies ordained by God, and the Nation beloved by God, and the fabric
erected for the service of God, shall run to their own period and lie down in
their several graves. Whatsoever had a beginning can also have an ending, and
it shall die, unless it be daily watered with the purles flowing from the
fountain of life, and refreshed with the dew of Heaven and the wells of God.
And therefore God had provided a tree in Paradise to have supported Adam in his
artificial immortality: Immortality was not in his nature, but in the hands,
and arts, in the favor and superadditions of God. Man was always the same
mixture of heat and cold, of dryness and moisture; ever the same weak thing,
apt to feel rebellion in the humors, and to suffer the evils of a civil war
in his body natural: and therefore health and life was to descend upon him
from Heaven, and he was to suck life from a tree on earth; himself being but
ingraffed into a tree of life, and adopted into the condition of an immortal
nature: But he that in the best of his days was but a Cien of this tree of
life, by his sin was cut off from thence quickly, and planted upon thorns,
and his portion was for ever after among the flowers, which to day spring and
look like health and beauty, and in the evening they are sick, and at night are
dead, and the oven is their grave. And as before, even from our first spring
from the dust of the earth, we might have died if we had not been preserved by
the continual flux of a rare providence; so now that we are reduced to the
laws of our own nature, we must needs die. It is natural, and therefore
necessary; It is become a punishment to us, and therefore it is unavoidable,
and God has bound the evil upon us by bands of natural and inseparable
propriety, and by a supervening unalterable decree of Heaven: and we are fallen
from our privilege, and are returned to the condition of beasts, and buildings,
and common things: And we see Temples defiled unto the ground, and they die by
Sacrilege: and great Empires die by their own plenty and ease, full humors, and
factious Subjects: and huge buildings fall by their own weight, and the
violence of many winters eating and consuming the cement which is the marrow of
their bones: and Princes die like the meanest of their Servants: and every
thing finds a grave and a tomb; and the very tomb it self dies by the bigness
of its pompousness and luxury, -- Phario nutantia pondera saxo
Quae cineri vanus dat ruitura labor,
and becomes as friable and uncombined dust as the ashes of the Sinner or the
Saint that lay under it, and is now forgotten in his bed of darkness: And to
this Catalogue of mortality Man is enrolled with a [ Statutum est] It is
appointed for all men once to die, and after death comes judgment; and if a man
can be stronger then nature, or can wrestle with a decree of Heaven, or can
escape from a Divine punishment by his own arts, so that neither the power nor
the providence of God, nor the laws of nature, nor the bands of eternal
predestination can hold him, then he may live beyond the fate and period of
flesh, and last longer then a flower: But if all these can hold us and tie us
to conditions, then we must lay our heads down upon a turfe and entertain
creeping things in the cells and little chambers of our eyes, and dwell with
worms till time and death shall be no more. We must needs die] That Is our
sentence. But that is not all.

We are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again] Stay.
1. We are as water, weak and of no consistence, always descending, abiding in
no certain place, unless where we are detained with violence: and every little
breath of wind makes us rough and tempestuous, and troubles our faces: every
trifling accident discomposes us; and as the face of the waters wafting in a
storm so wrinkles it self that it makes upon its forehead furrows deep, and
hollow like a grave: so do our great and little cares and trifles, first make
the wrinkles of old age, and then they dig a grave for us: And there is in
nature nothing so contemptible, but it may meet with us in such circumstances,
that it may be too hard for us in our weaknesses: and the sting of a Be is a
weapon sharp enough to pierce the finger of a child, or the lip of a man: and
those creatures which nature has left without weapons, yet they are armed
sufficiently to vex those parts of men which are left defenselesse and
obnoxious to a sun beam, to the roughness of a sour grape to the unevenness
of a gravel-stone, to the dust of a wheel, or the unwholesome breath of a star
looking awry upon a sinner.

are but few persons upon whose foreheads every man can read the sentence of
death written in the lines of a lingering sickness, but they (sometimes) hear
the passing bell ring for stronger men, even long before their own knell calls
at the house of their mother to open her womb and make a bed for them. No man
is surer of tomorrow then the weakest of his brethren: and when Lepidus and
Aufidius stumbled at the threshold of the Senate and fell down and dyed, the
blow came from heaven in a cloud but it struck more suddenly then upon the poor
slave that made sport upon the Theater with a praemeditated and foredescribed
death: Quod quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis cautum est in horas. There are
sicknesses that walk in darkness, and there are exterminating Angels that fly
wrapped up in the curtains of immateriality and an uncommunicating nature; whom
we cannot see, but we feel their force, and sink under their sword, and from
heaven the vail descends that wraps our heads in the fatal sentence. There is
no age of man but it has proper to it self some posterns and outlets for
death, besides those infinite and open ports out of which myriads of men and
women every day pass into the dark and the land of forgetfulness. Infancy
has life but in effigy, or like a spark dwelling in a pile of wood: the
candle is so newly lighted, that every little shaking of the taper, and every
ruder breath of air, puts it out, and it dies. Childhood is so tender, and yet
so unwary; so soft to all the impressions of chance, and yet so forward to run
into them, that God knew there could be no security without the care and
vigilance of an Angel-keeper: and the eyes of Parents and the arms of Nurses,
the provisions of art, and all the effects of Humane love and Providence are
not sufficient to keep one child from horrid mischiefs, from strange and early
calamities and deaths, unless a messenger be sent from heaven to stand
sentinel, and watch the very playings and the sleepings, the eatings and the
drinkings of the children; and it is a long time before nature makes them
capable of help: for there are many deaths, and very many diseases to which
poor babes are exposed; but they have but very few capacities of physic; to
show, that infancy is as liable to death as old age, and equally exposed to
danger, and equally incapable of a remedy: with this only difference, that old
age has diseases incurable by nature, and the diseases of childhood are
incurable by art; and both the states are the next heirs of death.

the case is altered. Nature is strong, and art is apt to give ease and remedy:
but still, there is no security; and there, the case is not altered. 1 For
there are so many diseases in men that are not understood. 2 So many new ones
every year. 3 The old ones are so changed in circumstance, and intermingled
with so many collateral complications. 4 The Symptoms are oftentimes so alike.
5 Sometimes so hidden and fallacious. 6 Sometimes none at all (as in the most
sudden and the most dangerous imposthumations.) 7 And then, the diseases in the
inward parts of the body, are oftentimes such, to which no application can be
made. 8 They are so far off, that the effects of all medicines can no otherwise
come to them, then the effect and juices of all meats, that is, not till after
two or three alterations, and decoctions, which change the very species of the
medicament. 9 And after all this, very many principles in the art of Physic
are so uncertain, that after they have been believed seven or eight ages, and
that upon them much of the practice has been established; they come to be
considered by a witty man, and others established in their stead; by which, men
must practice, and by which three or four generations of men more (as happens)
must live or die. 10 And all this while, the men are sick, and they take things
that certainly make them sicker for the present, and very uncertainly restore
health for the future: that it may appear of what a large extent is humane
calamity; when Gods providence has not only made it weak and miserable upon
the certain stock of a various nature, and upon the accidents of an infinite
contingency; but even from the remedies which are appointed, our dangers and
our troubles are certainly increased: so that we may well be likened to water;
our nature is no stronger, our abode no more certain; If the sluices be opened,
it falls away and runs apace; if its current be stopped; it swells and grows
troublesome, and spils over with a greater diffusion; If it be made to stand
still it putrefies: and all this we do. For

4. In all the process of our health we are running to our grave: we open our
own sluices by vitiousness and unworthy actions; we power in drink, and let out
life; we increase diseases and know not how to bear them; we strangle our
selves with our own intemperance; we suffer the fevers and the inflammations
of lust, and we quench our souls with drunkenness; we bury our understandings
in loads of meat and surfets: and then we lie down upon our beds and roar with
pain and disquietness of our souls: Nay, we kill one another souls and bodies
with violence and folly, with the effects of pride and uncharitableness; we
live and die like fools, and bring a new mortality upon our selves; wars and
vexatious cares, and private duels, and public disorders, and every thing that
is unreasonable, and every thing that is violent: so that now we may add this
fourth gate to the grave: Besides Nature and Chance, and the mistakes of art,
men die with their own sins, and then enter into the grave in haste and passion
and pull the heavy stone of the monument upon their own heads. And thus we make
our selves like water spilt on the ground: we throw away our lives as if they
were unprofitable, (and indeed most men make them so) we let our years slip
through our fingers like water; and nothing is to be seen, but like a shower of
tears upon a spot of ground; there is a grave dug, and a solemn mourning and
a great talk in the neigbourhood, and when the days are finished, they shall
be, and they shall be remembered, no more: And that is like water too, when it is
spilt, it cannot be gathered up again.

There is no redemption from the grave.

-- inter se mortales mutua vivunt
Et quasi cur sores vitai lampada tradunt.
Men live in their course and by turns: their light burns a while, and then it
burns blew and faint, and men go to converse with Spirits, and then they reach
the taper to another; and as the hours of yesterday can never return again, so
neither can the man whose hours they were, and who lived them over once, he
shall never come to live them again, and live them better. When Lazarus, and
the widows Son of Naim, and Tabitha, and the Saints that appeared in Jerusalem
at the rusurrection of our blessed Lord, arose; they came into this world, some
as strangers only to make a visit, and all of them to manifest a glory: but
none came upon the stock of a new life, or entered upon the stage as at first,
or to perform the course of a new nature: and therefore it is observable that
we never read of any wicked person that was raised from the dead: Dives would
fain have returned to his brothers house; but neither he, nor any from him
could be sent: but all the rest in the New Testament (one only excepted) were
expressed to have been holy persons, or else by their age were declared
innocent. Lazarus was beloved of Christ: those souls that appeared at the
resurrection were the souls of Saints: Tabitha raised by S Peter was a
charitable and a holy Christian: and the maiden of twelve years old, raised by
our blessed Savior, had not entered into the regions of choice and sinfulness:
and the only exception of the widows son, is indeed none at all; for in it the
Scripture is wholly silent; and therefore it is very probable that the same
process was used, God in all other instances having chosen to exemplify his
miracles of nature to purposes of the Spirit, and in spiritual capacities. So
that although the Lord of nature did not break the bands of nature in some
instances, to manifest his glory to succeeding, great and never failing
purposes; yet (besides that this shall be no more) it was also instanced in
such persons who were holy and innocent, and within the verge and
comprehensions of the eternal mercy. We never read that a wicked person felt
such a miracle, or was raised from the grave to try the second time for a
Crown; but where he fell, there he lay down dead, and saw the light no more.

This consideration I intend to you as a severe Monitor and an advice of
carefulness, that you order your affairs so that you may be partakers of the
first resurrection, that is, from sin to grace, from the death of vicious
habits, to the vigor, life and efficacy of an habitual righteousness: For
(as it happened to those persons in the New Testament now mentioned, to them (I
say) in the literal sense) Blessed are they that have part in the first
resurrection, upon them the second death shall have no power: meaning that they
who by the power of Christ and his holy Spirit were raised to life again, were
holy and blessed souls, and such who were written in the book of God; and that
this grace happened to no wicked and vicious person: so it is most true in the
spiritual and intended sense: You only that serve God in a holy life; you who
are not dead in trespasses and sins; you who serve God with an early diligence
and an unwearied industry, and a holy religion, you and you only shall come to
life eternal, you only shall be called from death to life; the rest of
mankind shall never live again but pass from death to death; from one death to
another, to a worse; from the death of the body, to the eternal death of body
and soul: and therefore in the Apostles Creed there is no mention made of the
resurrection of wicked persons: but of the resurrection of the body to
everlasting life. The wicked indeed shall be haled forth from their graves,
from their everlasting prisons, where in chains of darkness they are kept unto
the judgment of the great day: But this therefore cannot be called in sensu
favoris, a resurrection, but the solennities of the eternal death; It is
nothing but a new capacity of dying again; such a dying as cannot signify
rest; but where death means nothing but an intolerable and never ceasing
calamity: and therefore these words of my text are otherwise to be understood
of the wicked, otherwise of the godly: The wicked are spilt like water and
shall never be gathered up again; no not in the gatherings of eternity; They
shall be put into vessels of wrath and set upon on the flames of hell; but that
is not a gathering, but a scattering from the face and presence of God. But the
godly also come under the sense of these words. They descend into their graves,
and shall no more be reckoned among the living; they have no concernment in all
that is done under the sun. Agamemnon has no more to do with the Turks armies
invading and possessing that part of Greece where he reigned, then had the
Hippocentaur, who never had a being: and Cicero has no more interest in the
present evils of Christendom, then we have to do with his boasted discovery
of Catilines conspiracy. What is it to me that Rome was taken by the Gauls?
and what is it now to Camillus if different religions be tolerated amongst us?
These things that now happen concern the living, and they are made the scenes
of our duty or danger respectively: and when our wives are dead and sleep in
charnel houses, they are not troubled when we laugh loudly at the songs sung at
the next marriage feast; nor do they envy when another snatches away the
gleanings of their husbands passion.

It is true they envy not, and they lie in a bosom where there can be no
murmr, and they that are consigned to Kingdoms, and to the feast of the
marriage supper of the Lamb, the glorious and eternal Bridegroom of holy
souls, they cannot think our marriages here, our lighter laughings and vain
rejoycings considerable as to them. And yet there is a relation continued still.
Aristotle said, that to affirm the dead take no thought for the good of the
living is a disparagement to the laws of that friendship which in their state
of separation they cannot be tempted to rescind. And the Church has taught in
general that they pray for us, they recommend to God the state of all their
Relatives, in the union of the intercession that our blessed Lord makes for
them and us: and S. Ambrose gave some things in charge to his dying brother
Satyrus, that he should do for him in the other world: he gave it him (I say)
when he was dying, not when he was dead. And certain it is that though our dead
friends affection to us is not to be estimated according to our low
conceptions, yet it is not less, but much more then ever it was; it is greater
in degree, and of another kind.

But then we should do well also to remember, that in this world we are
something besides flesh and blood; that we may not without violent necessities
run into new relations, but preserve the affections we bear to our dead when
they were alive: We must not so live as if they were perished, but so as
pressing forward to the most intimate participation of the communion of Saints.
And we also have some ways to express this relation, and to bear a part in
this communion, by actions of intercourse with them, and yet proper to our
state: such as are strictly performing the will of the dead, providing for, and
tenderly and wisely educating their children, paying their debts, imitating
their good example, preserving their memories privately, and publicly keeping
their memorials, and desiring of God with hearty and constant prayer that God
would give them a joyful resurrection, and a merciful judgment, (for so S.
Paul prayed in behalf of Onesiphorus) that God would show them 2 Timothy 1.18.
mercy in that day, that fearful, and yet much to be desired day, in which the
most righteous person has need of much mercy and pity, and shall find it. Now
these instances of duty show that the relation remains still; and though the
Relict of a man or woman has liberty to contract new relations; yet I do not
find they have liberty to cast off the old; as if there were no such thing as
immortality of souls. Remember that we shall converse together again: let us
therefore never do any thing of reference to them which we shall be ashamed of
in the day when all secrets shall be discovered, and that we shall meet again
in the presence of God: In the mean time, God watches concerning all their
interest, and he will in his time both discover and recompense. For though, as
to us, they are like water spilt, yet, to God, they are as water fallen into
the sea, safe and united in his comprehension, and enclosures.

But we are not yet passed the consideration of the sentence: This descending
to the grave is the lot of all men, [ neither does God respect the person of
any man] The rich is not protected for favor, nor the poor for pity, the old
man is not reverenced for his age, nor the infant regarded for his tenderness;
youth and beauty, learning and prudence, wit and strength lie down equally in
the dishonours of the grave. All men, and all natures, and all persons resist
the addresses and solennities of death, and strive to preserve a miserable and
an unpleasant life; and yet they all sink down and die. For so have I seen the
pillars of a building assisted with artificial props bending under the
pressure of a roof, and pertinaciously resisting the infallible and prepared
ruin, Donec certa dies omni compage soluta
Ipsum cum rebus subruat auxilium,
till the determined day comes, and then the burden sunk upon the pillars, and
disordered the aides and auxiliary rafters into a common ruin and a ruder
grave: so are the desires and weak arts of man, with little aides and
assistances of care and physic we strive to support our decaying bodies, and
to put off the evil day; but quickly that day will come, and then neither
Angels nor men can rescue us from our grave; but the roof sinks down upon the
walls, and the walls descend to the foundation; and the beauty of the face, and
the dishonours of the belly, the discerning head and the servile feet, the
thinking heart and the working hand, the eyes and the guts together shall be
crushed into the confusion of a heap, and dwell with creatures of an equivocall
production, with worms and serpents, the sons and daughters of our own bones,
in a house of dirt and darkness.

Let not us think to be excepted or deferred. If beauty, or wit, or youth, or
Nobleness, or wealth, or virtue could have been a defense, and an excuse from
the grave, we had not met here to day to mourn upon the hearse of an excellent
Lady: and God only knows for which of us next the Mourners shall go about the
streets or weep in houses.

(...).
(...)
(...).
We have lived so many years; and every day and every minute we make an escape
from those thousands of dangers and deaths that encompasse us round about: and
such escapings we must reckon to be an extraordinary fortune, and therefore
that it cannot last long. Vain are the thoughts of Man, who when he is young or
healthful, thinks he has a long thread of life to run over, and that it is
violent and strange for young persons to die; and natural and proper only for
the aged. It is as natural for a man to die by drowning as by a fever: And
what greater violence or more unnatural thing is it, that the horse threw his
Rider into the river, then that a drunken meeting cast him into a fever; and
the strengths of youth are as soon broken by the strong sicknesses of youth,
and the stronger intemperance, as the weakness of old age by a cough, or an
asthma, or a continual rheum: Nay, it is more natural for young Men and
Women to die, then for old; because that is more natural which has more
natural causes; and that is more natural which is most common: but to die
with age is an extreme rare thing; and there are more persons carried forth to
burial before the five and thirtieth year of their age, then after it. And
therefore let no vain confidence make you hope for long life. If you have lived
but little, and are still in youth, remember that now you are in your bigg'st
throng of dangers both of body and soul; and the proper sins of youth to which
they rush infinitely and without consideration, are also the proper and
immediate instruments of death. But if you be old you have escaped long and
wonderfully, and the time of your escaping is out: you must not for ever think
to live upon wonders, or that God will work miracles to satisfy your longing
follies, and unreasonable desires of living longer to sin and to the world. Go
home and think to die, and what you would choose to be doing when you die, that
do daily: for you will all come to that pass, to rejoice that you did so, or
wish that you had: that will be the condition of every one of us; for God
regards no man's person.

Well! but all this you will think is but a sad story. What? we must die, and
go to darkness and dishonor; and we must die quickly, and we must quit all
our delights, and all our sins, or do worse, infinitely worse; and this is the
condition of us all from which none can be excepted; every man shall be spilt
and fall into the ground, and be gathered up no more. Is there no comfort after
all this? shall we go from hence, and be no more seen, and have no recompense?

Miser, o miser, aiunt, omnia ademit
Una die infausta mihi tot praemia vitae.
Shall we exchange our fair dwellings for a coffin, our softer beds for the
moistened and weeping turfe, and our pretty children for worms, and is there no
allay to this huge calamity? yes, there is. There is a [ yet] in the text: [
For all this, yet does God devise means that his banished be not expelled from
him.] All this sorrow and trouble is but a phantasme, and receives its account
and degrees from our present conceptions and the proportion to our relishes and
gust.

When Pompey saw the Ghost of his first Lady Iulia who vexed his rest and his
conscience for superinducing Cornelia upon her bed within the ten months of
mourning, he presently fancied it, either to be an illusion, or else that death
could be no very great evil, Aut nihil est sensus animis in morte relictum,
Aut mors ipsa nihil --
Either my dead wife knows not of my unhandsome marriage, and forgetfulness of
her; or if she does, then the dead live.

-- longae, canitis si cognita, vitae
Mors media est --
Death is nothing but the middle point between two lives between this and
another: concerning which comfortable mystery the holy Scripture instructs our
faith and entertains our hope in these words. God is still the God of Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacob; for all do live to him: and the souls of Saints are with
Christ: Eccle 1 Cor. 15. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. Rev. 14.13 John 5.24.
I desire to be dissolved says S. Paul) and to be with Christ, for that is
much better: and, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them: For we know, that if our earthly
house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens: and this state of separation S. Paul
calls, a being absent from the body, and being present with the Lord: 2 Cor. 5.
8. and 6.
This is one of Gods means which he has devised, that although our Dead are
like persons banished from this world, yet they are not expelled from God: They
are in the hands of Christ; they are in his presence; they are, or shall be
clothed with a house of Gods making; they rest from all their labors; all
tears are wiped from their eyes, and all discontents from their spirits; and in
the state of separation before the soul be reinvested with her new house, the
spirits of all persons are with God, so secured and so blessed, and so sealed
up for glory, that this state of intervall and imperfection is in respect of
its certain event and end, infinitely more desirable then all the riches and
all the pleasures, and all the vanities, and all the Kingdoms of this world.

I will not venture to determine what are the circumstances of the abode of
Holy Souls in their separate dwellings; and yet possibly that might be easier
then to tell what or how the soul is and works in this world, where it is in
the body tanquam in aliena demo, as in a prison, in fetters and restraints: for
here the soul is discomposed and hindered, it is not as it shall be, as it ought
to be, as it was intended to be; it is not permitted to its own freedom, and
proper operation; so that all that we can understand of it here, is that it is
so incommodated with a troubled and abated instrument, that the object we are
to consider cannot be offered to us in a right line, in just and equal
propositions; or if it could, yet because we are to understand the soul by the
soul, it becomes not only a troubled and abused object, but a crooked
instrument; and we here can consider it, just as a weak eye can behold a staff
thrust into the waters of a troubled river; the very water makes a refraction,
and the storm doubles the refraction, and the water of the eye doubles the
species, and there is nothing right in the thing, the object is out of its just
place, and the medium is troubled, and the organ is impotent: At cum exierit
and in liberum coelum quasi in domum suam venerit, when the soul is entered
into her own house, into the free regions of the rest and the neighborhood of
heavenly joys, then its operations are more spiritual, proper, and
proportioned to its being; and though we cannot see at such a distance, yet the
object is more fitted if we had a capable understanding; it is in it self in a
more excellent and free condition.

Certain it is, that the body does hinder many actions of the soul: it is an
imperfect body, and a diseased brain, or a violent passion that makes fools: no
man has a foolish soul; and the reasonings of men have infinite difference and
degrees by reason of the bodies constitution. Among beasts which have no
reason, there is a greater likeness then between men, who have: and as by faces
it is easier to know a man from a man, then a sparrow from a sparrow, or a
squirrel from a squirrel: so the difference is very great in our souls; which
difference because it is not originally in the soul (and indeed cannot be in
simple and spiritual substances of the same species or kind) it must needs
derive wholly from the body, from its accidents and circumstances: from whence
it follows, that because the body casts fetters and restraints, hindrances and
impediments upon the soul, that the soul is much freer in the state of
separation; and if it has any act of life, it is much more noble and expedite.

That the soul is alive after our death, S. Paul affirms [ Christ died for us,
that whether we wake or sleep, 1 These. 5.10.
we should live together with him.] Now it were strange that we should be
alive, and live with Christ, and yet do no act of life: the body when it is
asleep does many: and if the soul does none, the principle is less active then
the instrument; but if it does any act at all in separation, it must
necessarily be an act or effect of understanding; there is nothing else it can
do. But this it can. For it is but a weak and an unlearned proposition to say,
That the Soul can do nothing of it self, nothing without the phantasmes and
provisions of the body. For 1. In this life the soul has one principle
clearly separate, abstracted and immateriall, I mean, the Spirit of grace,
which is a principle of life and action, and in many instances does not at all
communicate with matter, as in the infusion, superinduction and the creation of
spiritual graces. 2. As nutrition, generation, eating and drinking are actions
proper to the body and its state: so, ecstasies, visions, raptures, intuitive
knowledge, and consideration of its self, acts of volition, and reflex acts of
understanding are proper to the soul. 3. And therefore it is observable that
S. Paul said that he knew not whether his vision; and raptures were in or out
of the body: for by that we see his judgment of the thing, that one was as
likely as the other, neither of them impossible or unreasonable; and therefore
that the soul is as capable of action alone as in conjunction. 4 If in the
state of blessedness there are some actions of the soul which do not pass
through the body, such as contemplation of God, and conversing with spirits,
and receiving those influences and rare immissions which coming from the H. and
mysterious Trinity make up the crown of glory; it follows that the necessity of
the bodies ministry is but during the state of this life, and as long as it
converses with fire and water, and lives with corn and flesh, and is fed by
the satisfaction of material appetites; which necessity and manner of
conversation when it ceases, it can be no longer necessary for the soul to be
served by phantasmes and material representations. 5. And therefore when the
body shall be reunited, it shall be so ordered that then the body shall
confess it gives not any thing, but receives all its being and operation, its
manner and abode from the soul, and that then it comes not to serve a
necessity, but to partake a glory. For as the operations of the soul in this
life, begin in the body, and by it the object is transmitted to the soul: so
then they shall begin in the soul and pass to the body; and as the operations
of the soul by reason of its dependence on the body are animal, natural and
material: so in the resurrection, the body shall be spiritual by reason of
the preeminence, influence, and prime operation of the soul. Now between these
two states, stands the state of separation, in which the operations of the
soul are of a middle nature, that is, not so spiritual as in the
resurrection, and not so animal and natural as in the state of conjunction.

To all which, I add this consideration. That our souls have the same
condition that Christ's soul had in the state of separation; because he took on
him all our nature, and all our condition; and it is certain, Christ's soul in
the three days of his separation did exercise acts of life, of joy and
triumph, and did not sleep, but visited the souls of the Fathers, trampled upon
the pride of Devils, and satisfied those longing souls which were Prisoners of
hope; and from all this we may conclude that the souls of all the servants of
Christ are alive, and therefore do the actions of life, and proper to their
state; and therefore it is highly probable that the soul works clearer, and
understands brighter, and discourses wiser, and rejoices louder, and loves
noblier, and desires purer, and hopes stronger then it can do here.

But if these arguments should fail, yet the felicity of Gods Saints cannot
fail. For suppose, the body to be a necessary instrument but out of tune, and
discomposed by sin and anger, by accident and chance, by defect and
imperfections, yet, that it is better then none at all; and that if the soul
works imperfectly with an imperfect body, that then she works not at all when
she has none; and suppose also that the soul should be as much without sense
or perception in death, as it is in a deep sleep which is the image and shadow
of death; yet then God devises other means that his banished be not expelled
from him. For,

2 God will restore the soul to the body, and raise the body to such a
perfection, that it shall be an Organ fit to praise him upon; it shall be made
spiritual to minister to the soul, when the soul is turned into a Spirit; then
the soul shall be brought forth by Angels from her incomparable and easy bed,
from her rest in Christ's Holy Bosom, and be made perfect in her being, and
in all her operations; And this shall first appear by that perfection which the
soul shall receive as isntrumental to the last judgment: for then she shall
see clearly all the Records of this world, all the Register of her own memory.
For all that we did in this life, is laid up in our memories: and though dust
and forgetfulness be drawn upon them, yet when God shall lift us from our dust,
then shall appear clearly all that we have done, written in the Tables of our
conscience, which is the souls memory. We see many times, and in many
instances, that a great memory is hindered and put out, and we thirty years
after come to think of something that lay so long under a curtain; we think of
it suddenly and without a line of deduction, or proper consequence: And all
those famous memories of Simonides and Theodectes, of Hortensius and Seneca, of
Sceptius Metrodorus and Carneades, of Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, are
only the Records better kept, and less disturbed by accident and disease. For
even the memory of Herod's son of Athens, of Bathyllus and the dullest person
now alive is so great, and by God made so sure record of all that ever he did,
that as soon as ever God shall but tune our instrument, and draw the curtains,
and but light up the candle of immortality, there we shall find it all, there
we shall see all, and all the world shall see all; then we shall be made fit to
converse with God after the manner of Spirits, we shall be like to Angels.

In the mean time, although upon the persuasion of the former discourse it be
highly probable that the souls of Gods servants do live in a state of present
blessedness; and in the exceeding joys of a certain expectation of the
revelation of the day of the Lord, and the coming of Jesus; yet it will concern
us only to secure our state by holy living, and leave the event to God; that
(as S. Paul said) whether present or absent, whether sleeping or waking,
whether perceiving or perceiving not, we may be accepted of him: that when we
are banished this world, and from the light of the sun, we may not be expelled
from God, and from the light of his countenance, but that from our beds of
sorrows, our may pass into the bosom of Christ, and from thence to his right
hand in the day of sentence: For we must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, and then if we have done well in the body, we shall never be
expelled from the beatificall presence of God, but be domestics of his family,
and heirs of his Kingdom, and partakers of his glory. Amen.

I Have now done with my Text, but yet am to make you another Sermon. I have
told you the necessity and the state of death; it may be too largely for such a
sad story; I shall therefore now with a better compendium teach you how to live
by telling you a plain narrative of a life, which if you imitate and write
after the copy, it will make, that death shall not be an evil, but a thing to
be desired, and to be reckoned amongst the purchases and advantages of your
fortune. When Martha and Mary went to weep over the grave of their brother,
Christ met them there and preached a Funeral Sermon, discoursing of the
resurrection, and applying to the purposes of faith, and confession of Christ,
and glorification of God: We have no other, we can have no better precedent to
follow: and now that we are come to weep over the grave of our Dear Sister,
this rare personage, we cannot choose but have many virtues to learn, many to
imitate, and some to exercise.

I chose, not to declare her extraction and genealogy. It was indeed fair and
Honorable; but having the blessing to be descended from worthy and Honored
Ancestors, and her self to be adopted and ingraffed into a more Noble family,
yet she felt such outward appendages to be none of hers, because not of her
choice, but the purchase of the virtues of others, which although though they
did engage her to do noble things, yet they would upbraid all degenerate and
less honorable lives then were those which began and increased the honor of
the families. She did not love her fortune for making her noble; but thought it
would be a dishonor to her if she did not continue a Nobleness and excellency
of virtue fit to be owned by persons relating to such Ancestors. It is fit for
all us to honor the Nobleness of a family: but it is also fit for them that
are Noble to despise it, and to establish their honor upon the foundation of
doing excellent things, and suffering in good causes, and despising
dishonorable actions, and in communicating good things to others. For this is
the rule in Nature: Those creatures are most Honorable which have the greatest
power, and do the greatest good: And accordingly my self have been a witness
of it, how this excellent Lady would by an act of humility, and Christian
abstraction strip her self of all that fair appendage of exterior honor which
decked her person and her fortune; and desired to be owned by nothing but what
was her own, that she might only be esteemed Honorable according to that
which is the honor of a Christian, and a wise person.

2 She had a strict and severe education, and it was one of Gods graces and
favors to her. For being the Heiresse of a great fortune, and living amongst
the throng of persons in the sight of vanities and empty temptations, that is,
in that part of the Kingdom where greatness is too often expressed in great
follies, and great vices, God had provided a severe and angry education to
chastise the forwardnesses of a young spirit, and a fair fortune; that she
might for ever be so far distant from a vice, that she might only see it and
loath it, but never taste of it, so much as to be put to her choice whether she
would be virtuous or no. God intending to secure this soul to himself, would
not suffer the follies of the world to seize upon her by way of too near a
trial, or busy temptation.

3 She was married young; and besides her businesses of religion seemed to be
ordained in the providence of God to bring to this Honorable family a part of
a fair fortune, and to leave behind her a fairer issue, worth ten thousand
times her portion: and as if this had been all the public business of her
life; when she had so far served Gods ends, God in mercy would also serve hers,
and take her to an early blessedness.

4 In passing through which line of providence, she had the art to secure her
eternal interest, by turning her condition into duty, and expressing her duty
in the greatest eminency of a virtuous, prudent and rare affection, that has
been known in any example. I will not give her so low a testimony, as to say
only, that she was chaste; She was a person of that severity, modesty, and
close religion (as to that particular) that she was not capable of uncivil
temptation; and you might as well have suspected the sun to smell of the poppy
that he looks on, as that she could have been a person apt to be sullyed by the
breath of a foul question.

5. But that which I shall note in her, is that which I would have exemplar to
all Ladies, and to all women. She had a love so great for her Lord, so entirely
given up to a dear affection, that she thought the same things, and loved the
same loves, and hated according to the same enmities, and breathed in his soul,
and lived in his presence, and languished in his absence: and all that she was
or did, was only for and to her Dearest Lord, Si gaudet, si flet, si tacet,
hunc loquitur.
Coenat, propinat, poscit, negat, innuit, unu;


Naevius est: -- and although this was a great enamell to the beauty of her
soul, yet it might in some degrees be also a reward to the virtue of her Lord:
For she would often discourse it to them that conversed with her; that he would
improve that interest which he had in her affection to the advantages of God,
and of religion: and she would delight to say, that he called her to her
devotions, he encouraged her good inclinations, he directed her piety, he
invited her with good books: and then she loved religion, which she saw was not
only pleasing to God, and an act or state of duty, but pleasing to her Lord,
and an act also of affection and conjugall obedience: and what at first she
loved the more forwardly for his sake; in the using of religion left such
relishes upon her spirit, that she found in it amability enough, to make her
love it for its own. So God usually brings us to him by instruments of nature
and affections, and then incorporates us into his inheritance, by the more
immediate relishes of Heaven, and the secret things of the Spirit. He only was
(under God) the light of her eyes, and the cordial of her spirits, and the
guide of her actions, and the measure of her affections, till her affections
swelled up into a religion, and then it could go no higher, but was confederate
with those other duties which made her dear to God. Which rare combination of
duty and religion, I choose to express in the words of Solomon: She forsook not
the guide of her youth, nor brake the Covenant of her God. Prove. 2. 17.


6 As she was a rare wife: so she was an excellent Mother. For in so tender a
constitution of spirit as hers was, and in so great a kindness toward her
children, there has seldom been seen a stricter and more curious care of
their persons, their deportment, their nature, their disposition, their
learning, and their customs: And if ever kindness and care did contest, and
make parties in her, yet her care and her severity was ever victorious; and she
knew not how to do an ill turn to their severer part, by her more tender and
forward kindness. And as her custom was, she turned this also into love to
her Lord. For she was not only diligent to have them bred nobly and
religiously, but also was careful and sollicitous, that they should be taught
to observe all the circumstances and inclinations, the desires and wishes of
their Father; as thinking, that virtue to have no good circumstances which was
not dressed by his copy, and ruled by his lines, and his affections: And her
prudence in the managing her children was so singular and rare, that when ever
you mean to bless this family, and pray a hearty and a profitable prayer for
it, beg of God, that the children may have those excellent things which she
designed to them, and provided for them in her heart and wishes, that they may
live by her purposes, and may grow thither, whither she would fain have brought
them. All these were great parts of an excellent religion as they concerned her
greatest temporal relations.

7 But if we examine how she demeaned her self toward God, there also you will
find her, not of a common, but of an exemplar piety. She was a great reader of
Scripture, confining herself to great portions every day; which she read, not
to the purposes of vanity, and impertinent curiosities, not to seem knowing, or
to become talking, not to expound and Rule; but to teach her all her duty, to
instruct her in the knowledge and love of God and of her Neighbors; to make
her more humble, and to teach her to despise the world, and all its gilded
vanities; and that she might entertain passions wholly in design and order to
heaven. I have seen a female religion that wholly dwelt upon the face and
tongue; that like a wanton and an undressed tree spends all its juice in
suckers and irregular branches, in leafs and gum, and after all such goodly
outsides you should never eat an apple, or be delighted with the beauties, or
the perfumes of a hopeful blossom. But the religion of this excellent Lady
was of another constitution; It took root downward in humility, and brought
forth fruit upward in the substantial graces of a Christian, in charity and
justice, in chastity and modesty, in fair friendships and sweetness of
society: She had not very much of the forms and outsides of godliness; but she
was hugely careful for the power of it, for the moral, essential, and
useful parts; such which would make her be, not seem to be religious.

8 She was a very constant person at her prayers, and spent all her time which
Nature did permit to her choice, in her devotions, and reading and meditating
and the necessary offices of household government, every one of which is an
action of religion, some by nature, some by adoption. To these also God gave
her a very great love to hear the word of God preached; in which because I had
sometimes the honor to minister to her, I can give this certain testimony,
that she was a diligent, watchful and attentive hearer: and to this had so
excellent a judgment, that if ever I saw a woman whose judgment was to be
revered, it was hers alone: and I have sometimes thought that the eminency of
her discerning faculties did reward a pious discourse, and placed it in the
regions of honor and usefulness, and gathered it up from the ground, where
commonly such homilies are spilt, or scattered in neglect and inconsideration.
But her appetite was not soon satisfied with what was useful to her soul: she
was also a constant Reader of Sermons, and seldom missed to read one every
day; and that she might be full of instruction and holy principles, she had
lately designed to have a large Book in which she purposed to have a stock of
Religion transcribed in such assistances as she would choose, that she might be
readily furnished and instructed to every good work. But God prevented that,
and has filled her desires not out of cisterns and little aquaeducts, but has
carried her to the fountain, where she drinks of the pleasures of the river,
and is full of God.

9. She always lived a life of much Innocence, free from the violences of
great sins: her person, her breeding, her modesty, her honor, her religion her
early marriage, the Guide of her soul and the Guide of her youth, were as so
many fountains of restraining grace to her, to keep her from the dishonors of a
crime. Bonum est portare jugu^ ab adolescentia: it is good to bear the yoke of
the Lord from our youth; and though she did so, being guarded by a mighty
providence, and a great favor and grace of God from staining her fail soul
with the spots of hell, yet she had strange fears and early cares upon her; but
these were not only for her self, but in order to others, to her neer'st
Relatives. For she was so great a lover of this Honorable family of which now
she was a Mother, that she desired to become a chanel of great blessings to it
unto future ages, and was extremely jealous lest any thing should be done, or
lest any thing had been done, though an age or two since, which should intail a
curse upon the innocent posterity; and therefore (although I do not know that
ever she was tempted with an offer of the crime) yet she did infinitely remove
all sacrilege from her thoughts, and delighted to see her estate of a clear and
disintangled interest: she would have no mingled rights with it; she would not
receive any thing from the Church, but religion and a blessing: and she never
thought a curse and a sin far enough off, but would desire it to be
infinitely distant; and that as to this family God had given much honor and a
wise head to Govern it, so he would also for ever give many more blessings; And
because she knew that the sins of Parents descend upon Children, she endeavored
by justice and religion, by charity and honor to secure that her chanel should
convey nothing but health, and a fair example and a blessing.

10. And though her accounts to God was made up of nothing but small parcels,
little passions, and angry words, and trifling discontents, which are the
allayes of the piety of the most holy persons, yet she was early at her
repentance; and toward the latter end of her days, grew so fast in religion as
if she had had a revelation of her approaching end; and therefore that she must
go a great way in a little time: her discourses more full of religion, her
prayers more frequent, her charity increasing, her forgiveness more forward,
her friendships more communicative, her passion more under discipline, and so
she trimmed her lamp, not thinking her night was so near, but that it might
shine also in the day time, in the Temple, and before the Altar of incense.

But in this course of hers there were some circumstances, and some appendages
of substance, which were highly remarkable.

1. In all her Religion, and in all her actions of relation toward God, she
had a strange evenness and untroubled passage, sliding toward her ocean of God
and of infinity with a certain and silent motion. So have I seen a river deep
and smooth passing with a still foot and a sober face, and paying to the
Fiscus, the great Exchequer of the Sea, the Prince of all the watery bodies, a
tribute large and full: and hard by it a little brook skipping and making a
noise upon its unequal and neighbor bottom; and after all its talking and
bragged motion, it paid to its common Audit no more then the revenues of a
little cloud, or a contemptible vessel: So have I sometimes compared the issues
of her religion to the solemnities and famed outsides of another piety. It
dwelt upon her spirit, and was incorporated with the periodicall work of every
day: she did not believe that religion was intended to minister to fame and
reputation, but to pardon of sins, to the pleasure of God, and the salvation of
souls. For religion is like the breath of Heaven; if it goes abroad into the
open air, it scatters and dissolves like camphyre: but if it enters into a
secret hollownesse, into a close conveyance, it is strong and mighty, and comes
forth with vigor and great effect at the other end, at the other side of this
life, in the days of death and judgment.

2. The other appendage of her religion, which also was a great ornament to all
the parts of her life, was a rare modesty and humility of spirit, a confident
despising and undervaluing of her self. For though she had the greatest
judgment, and the greatest experience of things and persons that I ever yet
knew in a person of her youth, and sex, and circumstances; yet as if she knew
nothing of it she had the meanest opinion of her self; and like a fair taper
when she shined to all the room, yet round about her own station she had cast a
shadow and a cloud, and she shined to every body but her self. But the
perfectness of her prudence and excellent parts could not be hid; and all her
humility, and arts of concealment, made the virtues more amiable and
illustrious. For as pride sullies the beauty of the fairest virtues, and makes
our understanding but like the craft and learning of a Devil: so humility is
the greatest eminency, and art of publication in the whole world; and she in
all her arts of secrecy and hiding her worthy things, was but like one that
hides the wind, and covers the ointment of her right hand.

I know not by what instrument it happened; but when death drew near, before it
made any show upon her body, or revealed it self by a natural signification,
it was conveyed to her spirit: she had a strange secret persuasion that the
bringing this Child should be her last scene of life: and we have known, that
the soul when she is about to disrobe her self of her upper garment, sometimes
speaks rarely, Magnifica verba mors prope admo^a excutit; sometimes it is
Prophetical; sometimes God by a superinduced persuasion wrought by
instruments, or accidents of his own, serves the ends of his own providence and
the salvation of the soul: But so it was, that the thought of death dwelt long
with her, and grew from the first steps of fancy and fear, to a consent, from
thence to a strange credulity, and expectation of it; and without the violence
of sickness she died, as if she had done it voluntarily, and by design, and
for fear her expectation should have been deceived, or that she should seem to
have had an unreasonable fear, or apprehension; or rather (as one said of
Cato) sic abiit e vita ut causam moriendi nactam se esse gauderet, she died, as
if she had been glad of the opportunity.

And in this I cannot but adore the providence and admire the wisdom and
infinite mercies of God. For having a tender and soft, a delicate and fine
constitution and breeding, she was tender to pain, and apprehensive of it, as a
child's shoulder is of a load and burden: Grave est tenerae cervici jugum; and
in her often discourses of death, which she would renew willingly and
frequently, she would tell, that she feared not death, but she feared the sharp
pains of death: Emori nolo, me esse mortuam non curo: The being dead, and being
freed from the troubles and dangers of this world, she hoped would be for her
advantage; and therefore that was no part of her fear: But she believing the
pangs of death were great, and the use and aids of reason little, had reason to
fear lest they should do violence to her spirit and the decency of her
resolution. But God that knew her fears and her jealousy concerning her self,
fitted her with a death so easy, so harmless, so painlesse, that it did not
put her patience to a severe trial. It was not (in all appearance) of so much
trouble, as two sits of a common ague; so careful was God to remonstrate to
all that stood in that sad attendance, that this soul was dear to him: and
that since she had done so much of her duty toward it, he that began, would
also finish her redemption, by an act of a rare providence, and a singular
mercy. Blessed be that goodness of God, who does so careful actions of mercy
for the ease and security of his servants. But this one instance was a great
demonstration that the apprehension of death is worse then the pains of death:
and that God loves to reprove the unreasonablenesse of our fears, by the
mightiness, and by the arts of his mercy.

She had in her sickness (if I may so call it, or rather in the solemnities,
and graver preparations toward death) some curious and well-becoming fears,
concerning the final state of her soul. But from thence she passed into a
deliquium, or a kind of trance, and as soon as she came forth of it, as if it
had been a vision, or that she had conversed with an Angel, and from his hand
had received a labell or scroll of the book of life, and there seen her name
enrolled, she cried out aloud, [ Glory be to God on high: Now I am sure I shall
be saved.] Concerning which manner of discoursing we are wholly ignorant what
judgment can be made: but certainly there are strange things in the other
world; and so there are in all the immediate preparations to it; and a little
glimps of heaven, a minutes conversing with an Angel, any ray of God, any
communication extraordinary from the Spirit of comfort which God gives to his
servants in strange and unknown manners, are infinitely far from illusions; and
they shall then be understood by us, when we feel them, and when our new and
strange needs shall be refreshed by such unusual visitations.

But I must be forced to use summaries and arts of abbreviature in the
enumerating those things in which this rare Personage was dear to God and to
all her Relatives.

If we consider her Person, she was in the flower of her age, Iucundum cum
aetas slorida ver ageret; of a temperate, plain and natural diet, without
curiosity or an intemperate palate; she spent less time in dressing, then many
servants; her recreations were little and seldom, her prayers often, her
reading much: she was of a most noble and charitable soul; a great lover of
honorable actions, and as great a despiser of base things; hugely loving to
oblige others, and very unwilling to be in arrear to any upon the stock of
courtesies and liberality; so free in all acts of favor, that she would not
stay to hear her self thanked, as being unwilling that what good went from her
to a needful or an obliged person should ever return to her again; she was an
excellent friend, and hugely dear to very many, especially to the best and most
discerning persons, to all that conversed with her, and could understand her
great worth and sweetness: she was of an Honorable, a nice and tender
reputation; and of the pleasures of this world which were laid before her in
heaps she took a very small and inconsiderable share, as not loving to glut her
self with vanity, or to take her portion of good things here below.

If we look on her as a Wife, she was chaste and loving, fruitful and discreet,
humble and pleasant, witty and complyant, rich and fair, and wanted nothing to
the making her a principal and a precedent to the Wives of the world, but a
long life, and a full age.

If we remember her as a Mother, she was kind and severe, careful and
prudent, very tender, and not at all fond, a greater lover of her Childrens
souls, then of their bodies, and one that would value them more by the strict
rules of honor and proper worth, then by their relation to her self.

Her Servants found her prudent, and fit to Govern, and yet open-handed and apt
to reward; a just Exactor of their duty and a great Rewarder of their diligence.

She was in her house a comfort to her dearest Lord, a Guide to her Children, a
Rule to her Servants, an example to all.

But as she related to God in the offices of Religion, she was even and
constant, silent and devout, prudent and material: she loved what she now
enjoyes, and she feared, what she never felt, and God did for her what she
never did expect. Her fears went beyond all her evil; and yet the good which
she has received was, and is, and ever shall be beyond all her hopes.

She lived as we all should live, and she died as I fai^ would die -- Et cum
supremos Lachesis perneverit annos, Non aliter cineres mando jacere meos.
I pray God I may feel those mercies on my deathbed that she felt, and that I
may feel the same effect of my repentance which she feels of the many degrees
of he^ innocence. Such was her death that she did not die too soon; and her
life was so useful and so excellent that she could not have lived too long.
Nemo parum diu vixit qu^ virtutis perfectae perfecto functus est munere: and as
now in the grave it shall not be inquired concerning her, how long she lived,
but how well? so to us who live after her to suffer a longer calamity, it may
be some ease to our sorrows, and some guide to our lives, and some security to
our conditions, to consider that God has brought the piety of a young Lady to
the early rewards of a never ceasing, and never dying eternity of glory. And we
also, if we live as she did, shall partake of the same glories; not only having
the honor of a good name and a dear and honored memory, but the glories of
these glories, the end of all excellent labors, and all prudent counsels and
all holy religion, even the salvation of our souls in that day, when all the
Saints, and amongst them this excellent Woman shall be shown to all the world
to have done more, and more excellent things then we know of or can describe.
Mors illos consecrat, quorum exitum and qu^ timent, laudant: Death consecrates
and makes sacred that person whose excellency was such, that they that are not
displeased at the death, cannot dispraise the life; but they that mourn sadly,
think they can never commend sufficiently.

FINIS.

