THE CASE OF THE BANKERS And their CREDITORS.

Stated and Examined; By the Rules of Laws, Policy, and common Reason, as it
was enclosed in a Letter to a Friend.

By a true Lover of his King and Country, and a Sufferer for Loyalty.

Ad Reges potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas, Seneca de
Benificijs,

Lib. 7. Cap. 4. and 5. Rex ad tutelam Legis, Corporum, and Bonorum erectus
est. Lord Chancellor Fortescue,

cap. 13.7. Rep. Calvin's Case, 5. a Concilia callida and audacia, prima froute
laeta, tractatu dura, eventu tristia.

Erasmus in Epistolis. That State is in ill condition, where the justly accused
shall take Revenge of the just Accuser, and where he that would save his Prince
must ruin himself. Sir Walter Rawleigh's Prerogative of Parliament.

Printed in the Year, 1674.

Dear Sir,
IN Obedience to your Command, I have committed to Paper some Notions I had
conceived of the Bankers business, and the calamitous dependants thereon. I
remember you thought me (though concerned enough) pretty warm in this Argument
last time I discourst it with you; and truly if hard usages will make a wise
man mad, the Effect it has upon a Fool (as I am) may well want a name. I have
I praise-God weathered out all those dreadful storms which fell some years
since upon the Loyal par y, (as you know) though with the Shipwreck of my
person and Estate, and this (if I may speak it without Ostentation) I did with
constancy and joy, for though I could see then nothing but Tempests and
Hurricanes without me, Plin. in Pany^er. ad Trajanum imperat. ^^psy^polit. Lib.
4. Cap 11. Raleighs Prerog. of Parliament in finc.
yet my mind was always refresht with sereneties and calmness, triumphing that
I was thought worthy at any rate, to suffer for so glorious a cause. After his
Majesty's Happy Restoration, though neglected and despised, as many of far
greater merit than my self likewise were, we did all however possess our souls
with patience (though wise men tell us that it was never accounted the best
policy to dismiss (...) deservers in point of Recompense with the satisfaction
only of their Consciences, and the rewards ^f the next world). And now when we
and our miserable Families had thought to have protracted (at least) a
contemptible life with those poor remainders, and broken pieces of our
Fortunes, behold in one moment those also are ravished from some of us by our
friends. By what name shall I express this treatment? shall I call it a
violation of the Widows Mite? or a breaking into the Alms-basket? no these
reach it not, all nature cannot furnish me with a similitude.

Sir mistake me not, I would not be thought here to lay so great a calamity at
the door of my dread Sovereign (a Prince in his own free nature, and unforc't
inclination not to be paralleld for all Royal Graces) no Sir, the Law teaches
me to conceive more Honorably of the King's Justice (by which his Throne is
Established) and te^^ me that whatsoever wrong is done to the Subject, is
effected by misinformations of his Majesty, Pro. 16.12.
and pernicious Counsels.

Nihil aliud potest Rex in tearis (says Bracton) cum sit Dei minister and
vicarius nisi id solum quod de jure potest. Bracton lib. cap. 9.
The King can do nothing seeing he is God 's Vicegerent, but that which he may
lawfully do. Rex hoc solum non potest facere, Cook d. 11. Rep. 72. a Magdalen
col case.
quod non potest injuste agere (say the Judges in another Case) This one thing
only the King cannot do, that he cannot do injustice (which yet is so far from
impotency or imperfection, that it is a Character also of the Divinity). And
therefore Markham Chief Justice of England told King Edward the 4th. that he
could not Arrest any man for a misdemeanour (as a Subject might) because if
the King did wrong, 1 Hen. 7.4 b pet Hussy chapter Justice d'An gliter.
the party could not have his Action against him; we receive Life and Vigor
from the influences of Heaven, but Distempers proceed from the Vapors of the
Earth, which vapors yet can convey no infection into those Calestial bodies:
Even so sometimes the countenance of Princes may concur in the Execution of
illegal advices, without sharing in the Obliquity and injustice of them.

The Poets have a witty Fable of Tiresias, the great Southsayer, that he
foretold future events by the flying of birds, not that he did see the birds
(for he was blind) but (say they) he had always his Daughter Manto near at
hand, who informed him of the manner of their flights, and according to her
advertisements, the Father evermore divined: The Mythology or Moral of this
Fable is oftentimes applicable to the best and most virtuous Princes, they hear
with other men's Ears, they see sometimes thorough the spestacles of other men's
eyes, and according to the color of the glass, so is the object represented to
them; black or red, or perhaps white, whereas the true tincture of the thing
may be clearly otherwise; and yet all this while the fault is not in the eye,
but in the deceptive glass. If a false Light-house be erected near a dangerous
Rock in the Sea, and in a dark and tempestuous night the Ship is steered that
way, as to a safe Port, and thereupon suffers wrack, no body can with any
reason imp^te this misfortune to the error or incogitancy of the Pilot, or
governor of the Vessel, but rather to the malice and falsity of this wicked
invention. Seneca de Ben ficio lib 3. cap. 30.
Upon this ground it is that Seneca (a wise man, Tutor to an Emperor, and one
that well understood what he wro^e) breaks forth into that passionate
interrogation, Quid omnia possidentibus deest? ille qui verum dicat. What thing
only do they want which possess all things? Even (answers he) a person that
will give them honest Advertisements. And therefore the Lord Chancellor Bacon
(among many other his excellent Counsels to the late Duke of Buckingham) urges
this following document to him with a warmer zeal then ordinary. Cabala of
Letters fol. 41.
In respect of the King your Master (says he) you must be very wary that you
give him true information, and if the matter concern him in his government,
that you do not flatter him; if you do, you are as great a Traitor to him, in
the Court of Heaven, as he that draws his Sword against him.

This grievance of our has been represented to his Majesty under the pretense
and umbrages of Royal Prerogative (which in truth he is obliged to maintain)
and of public Emolument and advantage (which certainly are the most glorious
Objects of Royal prudence). With these and the like Blandishments Sir this
Crystal Fountain of Justice has been poisoned and contaminated. This is the
Coloquintida with which so unspeakable a sweetness has been imbittered, these
are the Paintings with which so deformed an Advice has been sophisticated. But
let me tell you Sir, if in the sequel of this discourse I shall not clearly
wipe off all these Varnishes and false colors, and effectively prove this
advice to be as mischievous to his Sacred Majesty as his people, I shall think
I have very meanly acquitted my self in this business.

I hope I shall not be thought to reflect herein, upon any person whatsoever,
any farther then his own Conscience may scourge him in this particular. And I
know there be many great and illustrious Hero's near his Majesty, (to whose
service I could willingly sacrifice an hundred lives had I them) that do
abominate so pernicious a Council. It Is not for me rashly to touch heads
irradicated with the Beams of Royal favor: For my part I meddle not with the
person, but with the Advice abstracted, Amo hominem, odi vitia, is a good Rule

And I praise God and the King, we live not now in an Age wherein it is more
hazardous to discover, an evil action, than to commit it, or wherein the justly
accused shall take Revenge of the just Accuser.

Neither would I be understood here to erect my self into an Advocate for the
Trade and mystery of Banking, A God's name where the Vsuries of those people
are by the King found outrageous and illegal, let them be regulated and reduced
to just moderations. All that I contend for is, that the Bankers (whose
concernments are now apparently become ours) may by Opening the Exchequer be
enabled to satisfy their just debts to their Creditors, that so the good and
bad, the nocent and innocent may not thus be overwhelmed together in one and
the same common Ruin.

Sir, let us not flatter our selves, posterity will assuredly discourse our
Actions, with the same freedom that we do those of our Ancestors. Annalium
lib. 4.
Irridenda est eorum socordia (says Tacitus) qui presenti potentia credunt
extingui posse sequentis aevi memoriam. The improvidence of those persons
(says he) is ridiculous, who think by present power to extinguish the memory
of future Ages. No this cannot be, the voluminous Histories of all Nations
which we daily read and handle, prove this project altogether idle and
impracticable. Certainly there abides in mankind an immortal principle, a Ray
of the Divinity which natrually inclines us to a desire of Glory, and to have
our names gilded to all Ages in the eternal Records of Far^e.

Now Sir because you shall see with what Candor and fairness I will prosecute
secute this Argument, I shall deduce my following Observations from the wisest
Historians and Statesmen, from the greatest and most glorious Princes that the
world has at any time afforded, from justictaries of the most profound
Learning, and chastest integrity, nay from bodies of the wisest men of this and
other nations in conjunction, from Parliaments and their Determinations
remaining with us upon Record, Bacons Essay of Council. Alphonso King of
Cortile: Lipsis Epistola ad porit. Ad Nicoclem.
and (because I would take off all imaginable objection ^o the credit of my
Authors) I shall produce only such which have long since departed this lise,
which for that reason (as a wise King was used to say) were the most faithful
Counselors. Such as these (as Isocrates tells) cannot be daunted with fear, or
blinded with affection, or corrupted with preferments.

These have indeed the character of true Counselors, Cast^llanus de Officio
Regis Lio. 1. cap. 55.
which is, Ut non modo ne quid fa si dicere audeant, sed etiam ne quid very non
audeant, that they will neither dare to tell a falsity, or conceal a truth.

That would rather (as Seneca tells Nero) Veris offendere quam placere
adulando. De elem^ntia Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Offend by telling Truth, then please by destructive adulations and flattery.
And lastly, such which Demetreus Phalereus advised King Ptolomy to converse
with often; Stobeus sermon 46.
because quoth he, ibi quae amici monere non audeant Reges, ea sacile omnia
possint reperire. There Kings may discover those matters themselves, which
possibly their best friends sometimes dare not advise them to.

Sir, I fear I have trespast too far upon your patience by way of Letter
already, I shall therefore for your farther satisfaction in all these
particulars refer you to the ensuing discourse, deteining you here no longer
then while I subscribe my self,

Dear Sir, Your most Faithful friend and Servant Sma. To.

THE Introduction.
THE Kings Debt to the Bankers, with the miserable consequences thereof, has
now (for little less then three years together) exercised the world with
matter, not only of discourse, but astonishment For indeed who will not be
startled to see the common Faith of a Nation violated, and a forcible breach
made upon all that may be card Religious and binding, and this also in great
measure, to the Ruin of Orphans and Widows, and several, even of those who
with unwearied constancy resisted unto blood, and loss of whatsoever was dear
unto them in defense of the Crown of England. I shall not here lanch out into
the story of particular cases, that Theme will be infinite, and of force to
endue stones with speech, and (by a contrariety of Miracle) to overwhelme the
most eloquent with silence.

I doubt not but I have already Arrested my Reader with frequent amusements,
and he is by this time impatient to know what may be the reason of all these
words? and wherefore a private passenger in the Ship of the Commonwealth,
should in this manner concern himself in the sailing thereof?

I answer, First that every Subject is obliged to vindicate, and propugne the
Honor and Innocence of his Sovereign; and to cast the Envies and Malignancy of
Pestilent Councels, upon the Donors and contrivers thereof, and perhaps this
duty could never be more seasonably exerted then in this present Case. For I
should be sorry that this Advisor (as a person of great Honor and worth, said
not long since, of one of them openly) should like a Rabbit start out of his
Borough, and look about him, and then run in again, and hide himself, and think
no body observed him. Certainly he is no good Minister or Servant that will
throw the odium of his own evil actions upon his Lord and Master.

I answer, Secondly that all men are interressed in the safety of the Vessel
they are imbarqut in, though all ought not to preside at the Helm: And
pernicious Advices (like the falcities of the Turkish Alchoran) oftentimes gain
strength by the prohibitions of disputing them. I know I shall be thought to
broach a Paradox, if I should affirm that some moderate freedoms of this
nature, have been sometimes Characters and marks of the happiest and most
peaceable Ages of the world; and yet if this assertion be not in some measure
true, E^ay of Sedition and troubles
we must abandon faith to all History: For (as the Lord Bacon well notes) such
Liberties give vent and discharge oftentimes to popular discontentments, and
besides the Prince is hereby instructed in what part the Subject is pincht and
grieved, when perhaps he shall attain this information no other way. And
therefore Augustus Caesar (one of the happiest and greatest Prince it may be
that the Sun ever saw) when he was told at any time, Eutropius lib. 8.
that even his own person, and his Edicts were too boldy discourst of in Rome,
Boterus de politia. lib. 7. c. 8.
Quod in Civitate libera, linguas quoque civium liberas esse oportere. That in
a free City, the Citizens discourse ought also to be free. And this candid
profession of his, might possibly be no mean ingredient in the composition of
his own felicities. Thuanus writing to the great Henry the 4th. of France,
Thuani Epistola ante Historiam suam ad Hen. 4. Franciae.
unto other Laudatives of that Princes Reign, adds this, as none of the
meanest. Ea est Domine rarae tuorum temporum faelieitas (says he) in quibus
unicuique sentire quae velit, and quae sentiat eloqui licet. Such (Great Sir)
is the rare happiness of your times, that in them every man may think what he
pleases, and speak what he thinks And of the same complexion was that serene
Age, in which the excellent Emperor Trajan Reigned, as Cornelius Tacitus (who
was then living) affirms from whom the said Thuanus seems to have borrowed the
very individual words before recited. Taciti Hist. lib. 1. in proemio.
I write not this in countenance of clamor, and scurrilities against those
things which I have always reverenced and held sacred; but under favor, in
our present case, where all nature is big, and in travail to be delivered of
speech, I hope her voice shall not be stifled and suppressed.

Thirdly, I shall redargue this Objector, with that principle (which the
Advisers of this calamity have thought so puissant) I mean exigences, and
invincible necessity, a necessity of no ordinary nature neither, but of near
alliance to that thing which we proverbially say breaks through stone walls,
that in hard winterly weather infuseth boldness even into Brutes, that also
where nature languisheth, and the means wherewith she should be supported are
unjustly subtracted from her. The old Comicke says well (...) pecunia Anima,
and sanguis est mortalibus. Money is the lise and blood of mankind. To deprive
a man wrongfully then of that little money which he possesses, what is it but
to deprive him of his blood, yea of his life? I know the great and opulent men
of the world cannot descend so low as to conceive how much it imports poor
men and their Families to be in a moment dispoild of all their subsistence, and
to be bereaved perhaps of a few poor weather-beaten, water-drencht Relics,
which they had rescued out of the wrecks of their Fortunes in the late dreadful
storm of Rebellion, but yet they may please to believe, that we are as much
paind with the pressures of our Little fortunes, as they are with those of
their great ones. I speak this not out of any pride I take in comparing great
things with small, but only to dispose my Reader to a favorable construction
of my words, if my zeal may seem to transport me beyond the bounds of decency.

Lastly I am not altogether without hope, but that something possibly may
happen to be said in this Scribble, that may conduce to the healing up this
wound again. For the Physicians have a good Aphorism, Primus gradus sanitatis,
est novisse morbum. The first degree of health is to know the nature of the
disease.

I know some men are apt enough to allege, that this case is the less
considerable, because but a few persons are therein concerned. In this place I
shall say no more, but that this Assertion is a great mistake. For first, out
Money being expended for the defense of the Kingdom, it was laid out upon the
public utility, and certainly it will be very disproportionable that the
common advantage should be maintained by a private contribution, and upon this
reason a person of great Honor and prudence not long since in an Audience of
the whole Kindome doubted not to affirm, That this concern was little less then
national

But because this may seem to many to be but a precarious and begging Argument,
and being founded upon a consideration of service and advantage, some time
since done, may (in this ungrateful Age) prove but of mean regard. I will
therefore Secondly, demonstrate this matter to be of Epidemical concernment in
point of continuing and permanent interest: In order to this, I will suppose
that the King owes a Banker 1000 l. this Banker owes me the like sum, I ow as
much to a third, be to a fourth, and so in infinitum, and the Banker, my self,
and the third person, have little else to satisfy our Creditors than this 1000
l. which is owing severally to us. (which case may be well supposed to have
happened since the stop of the Exchequer) In this case then I say, it will be
most evident, that if the King never pays the Banker, the Banker can never
pay me, or I the third person, or he the fourth, so that by a necessary chain
of consequences, the 4th. person and his Creditors in infinitum, are as much
grieved by the King's non-payment of the Banker, as I may self, who am the
Bankers immediate Credi^or. For as (I said before) money is the blood of the
Body Pollitique, and we know if the circu^at on thereof be stopped in one Member,
that blood can never be transmitted to the ^eigh^ ouring Vein, and thereupon
not only that part, but the whole body in fine becomes Feavourish and
languishant. The like may be said of Rents, Executorships, Legacies, etc. And I
doubt not but every man's consideration, and the particular interests of most
persons, will furnish them with infinite instances of like nature, in a very
little time.

But if this Reason prove not sufficiently praevalent in this matter, I must be
enforced to go a step higher, and to say, Thirdly, That if this proceeding fall
out to be an invasion of property (as I think I shall anon prove it is) then I
say every individual person will be interressed in the Fate of this Cause. The
Principal Creditours of the Bankers have been computed to a number, little
inferito this. The Creditors by consequence are far more.
For by the same reason that the Rights of Ten thousand men may be violated,
the Rights of Twenty thousand men may, and so in infinitum. And I think it is
obvious to every man, that the public and Parliamentary Cares, and wisdom of
this State have been extended in point of redressing Grievances, not only to
bodies of men, in number much infeririour to ours; but oftentimes even to
particular persons, where the presures have been enormous.

This is the Answer I shall give to this Allegation at present, in the sequel
of this discourse, very probably I may add more.

These things premised, I shall now forthwith address my self to the main
business. In the Argument whereof I shall observe these Gradations, or steps.

1. First, I shall shortly put the ease (as it now stands) between the King and
the Bankers. 2. Secondly, I shall prove that by this Council of stopping
payments in the Exchequer, the Subjects property is invaded at Common Law. 3.
Thirdly, that hereby it is invaded contray to the Statute Law. 4. Fourthly,
that this Council is expressly contray to his Majesty's gracious promises and
Declarations. Printed and promulgated by His own especial command. 5. Fifthly,
I shall at large answer the grand Objection of necessity, and National danger
(supposing too our fears to be at that time just) And shall prove by sundry
Records and otherwise that the Subjects property is not violable but by his own
consent, in cases of far greater National Danger then this was. I shall answer,
the Rapines of Ed. 1. and 3d. (and because I would take up this Objection by
the Roots) I shall then show what courses the Law has provided for
preservation of the Kingdom, where the danger is instant and cannot stay for a
Parliament. 6. Sixthly I shall prove that this Council is contray to the
Policies hitherto used by the wisest Foreign States of the World, in far
greater Exigencies then ours. I shall answer the Objection of some Princes not
repaying Money lent them by their Subjects, to retain them in better Obedience.
7. Seventhly, I shall prove this Council to be contrary to common Reason, and
in some respects to violate the Rules of Humanity. That it is pernicious to the
credit of his Majesty's Exchequer. Then I shall truly state the case between
Phillip the 2d. of Spain and the Bankers of Genoa, and shall prove that case
essentially different from ours. And Lastly, shall frame a Conclusion upon the
whole matter.
SECT. 1. The Case put between the King and the Bankers.
I think it is now evident enough to every man that understands any thing, that
the concernment of the Bankers is now become the concernment of their
Creditors, and that both their interests are common, and so inseperably twisted
together, that the prosperity of the latter, will depend altogether upon the
Fate of the former. Insomuch that if the Banker never receive his debt, I do
not in probability see how he will be able to satisfy his Creditor: we are
therefore by invincible necessity obliged to maintain the right of the Banker,
and in order thereunto I will now put his Case, which in short is no more but
this.

A Banker lends to the King an hundred thousand pounds, more or less; this
money is secured to the said Banker upon the Customs, or any other Branch of
the King's Revenues, etc. by Order Registered in the Exchequer, or by Talley of
Loan, or both, and then the King (upon the Warlike preparations of our
neighbor Princes and States) is advised to make stop of all payments out of
the Exchequer, which is executed accordingly; whether by this Council executed
the Subjects property be invaded? and I clearly conceive it is.

SECT. 2. That by this Council of stopping Payments out of the Exchequer, the
Subject, prop^rt^is in vaded at Common Law.
IT is an Essential principle of the Law of this Realine. That the Subject has
an undoubted property in his Goods and Possessions. Otherwise there shall
remain no more industry, no more Justice, no more valor, for who will labor?
who will hazard his person in he day of B^tta^ for that which is not his own?
How can the Subject ^y any Act of Boun^y ingratiate himself with his Sovereign?
Neither was this Right of propriety introduc there by any Charter or Edict of
Princes, but was the old Fundamental Law, Lambards Archaion, Fortes. de
laudibus Legum Angliae. cap. 17. Dugdales Origines Jurid ciales. Insinite
Authorities there quoted to prove this, See there Fol. 5.6.
springing from the Original, Frame, and first Architecture of the Kingdom.
There were manifest Footsteps of this Law in the Brit^ish, Roman, Saxon and
Danish Governments here, nay it was of that vigor and puissance to survive
even the very Norman Conquest. To prove which I shall crave leave to produce
this following short memorable Record. One Shirboorn a Saxon at the time of the
Conquest, being seized of a Castle and Lands in Norfolk, William the Conqueror
gave the same to one Warren a Norman, of principal Quality; Shirboorn dying,
his Heir showed to the Conqueror that he was his Subject, and that he ought to
Inherit the said Castle and Land, by virtue of that Law which he himself had
established in England. In this Case the Conqueror gave Judgment for Shirboorn
against Warren, and pronounced his own former gift void. See for this Cambden
in his Description of Norfolk. And Sir John Davis Rep. 41, a. The Case of
Tanistry. And there it is said by Judge Calthrop, that he himself had seen an
Authentic Copy of this Judgment.

For indeed the Common Law is not more solicitous of any one thing then to
preserve the property of the Subject from the inundation of the Prerogative.
And therefore where a custom is to pay Toll for all Cattle that shall be
driven over a common Bridge, this Custom shall bind the Subject but not the
King; but where a Custom is to pay Toll for all Cattle that shall be driven
over a man's private Freehold, there the Custom shall prevail against the
Prerogative, and what is the Reason? why, because the Law will not allow the
King to invade the Subjects Inheritance and Property without consent and
compensation. For this see the expre^s book of 46 of Ed, 3. cited in Plowden
236. a. The Lord Barkley's case. Many other cases of this nature are there
recited, and in other Books of our Law, which for brevity I for bear to mention.

To come then to the Hinge upon which this point turns. I do lay this down for
an indisputeable ground. That the Law of the Court of Exchequer is the
universal Law of this Land, and so is Plowden 320. b. and 321. b. The case of
Mines, and Cooks 2d Report 16. b. Lanes case adjudg'd. Now then by the Law of
the Exchequer, when the King has charged himself to the Subject by Talley and
liberate (as in our case) to pay a sum of money out of his Customs or any
other branch of his Revenue, and his Collector has received this Revenew; this
money though at first it appertains in property to the King, yet as soon as
ever the Kings Creditor comes to this Collector, and shows him his Talley and
Liberate, and demands payment accordingly, the property of this money (to the
proportion of the Debt) by mere operation of Law, is transferred out of the King
into the Collector or Receiver, and in an instant becomes the proper and
personal Money of the said Collector, or Receiver; in respect of his charge
over to the party. And so it is clearly affirmed by all the Judges of both
Benches Plowden 186. a. Lord Darcyes case.

And therefore if the King grant a sum of money to I. S. to be received out of
his Customs of London, I say that by the delivery of the Talley Liberate, and
assets in the hands of the Customer, the Customer is become a Debtor to I. S.
and he may bring his Action of Debt upon this matter against the Customer.
Coke's 4 Institutes, 116. F. N. B 121. F. 21. H. 6. Fitzh. Debt 43.27. H. 6.9.
Fitzh. Bar. 314. Brook Talley d'Exchequer. 1.37. H. 6.15. Brook ibid. 3.

Nay in such case if the Receiver dye, the Action will lie against his
Executor. And therefore where the King had granted a Fee by Patent to the
Clercke of the Parliament to be received out of the profits of the Hanapar, and
the Clercke of the Hanapar dyed, yet adjudged that debt would well lie against
his Executor, because so much of the Kings money was altered in property in the
hands of the Testator, and yet here was no contract, privity in word, suit or
Execution of Law between the King and Testa or, or Executor, 2. Hen. 7.8. b.
etc. Fitzh. Bar. 124. Ploxden 36. b. and 186. a. So if the King assign Talleys
upon the Dismes (granted him by Parliament) to his Creditors, and they show
them to the Collectors of the Dismes, the King is hereby discharged, and the
Collecto s are charged, and the King cannot pardon the Collectors, or the
Clergy which granted the Dismes. 1. Hen. 7.8. a. Brook Charter de pardon, 37.
Nay so careful is the Law of the Subjects property in such case, that if after
a like grant of the Disms, the King should dye, yet the Collectors are
chargeable to the King's Grantee and not to his Successor. 1. Hen. 7.8. a. per
omnes Justitiaries, Brook Quinzime 7. Fitzh. Quinzime. 2. Brook Talley d'
Exchequer, 5.

Ob. Now if any man shall say to me. Sir you have abundantly proved the
stopping of the Exchequer, to be an invasion of Property as to the Collector
and Customer, and the like by the Common Law, but nothing at all as to the
Banker or his Creditor, which was the position you undertook to maintain.

To this Objection, I give this plain Answer. That the stop of the Exchequer to
the Collectors, Customers, etc. is by inevitable consequence a stop to the
Bankers and their Crediors, (and so likewise their property violated) because
by this Obstruction the Collector, etc. is disabled to satisfy the Banker, and
the Banker his Creditor, and that Creditor his Creditor, and so in an infinite
rotation throughout the Kingdom: just as a wrongful disinheritance of the
Grandfather, is an injury to the Father, and Son, and so to all their Line in
succession to the worlds end. Or (because this is the Hinge of the case as to
the Common Law, and I would make it plain) I will suppose twenty Mills to be
built upon one River, each of them in sequence one below the other, a person
comes and damms up this River, or diverts the current thereof into a new
Channel; I do say that by this diversion or Obstruction of the Stream the 20th
Mill is injured as well as the first, because (if there were no Impediment)
that water which comes to the first Mill would at the long run arrive to the
twentieth.

In so plain a case I need not make any Application, or indeed use any farther
Argument as to the Common law-part of this discourse. I shall therefore cite
but one other case, and that a far stronger one then ours, and then discharge
my self of this Section.

The Case is Mich. 1. Hen. 7. Fol. 3. b. and abridg'd by Fitzherbert Bar. 122.
Touts les Justices fueront al White Friars pur lour Fees, etc. (says the Book)
All the Judges were assembled at White Friars to consult about the payment of
their Salleries which were behind. And their Case was this. By a Statute made
18. Hen 6. it is Enacted that the Customers shall pay the Judges their
Salleries, out of the first Moneys arising out of the Customs of London. And
then Richard the third grants License to certain Merchants to carry Wools, and
to retain the Customs thereof in their own hands (which was as it were a little
diminutive stopping of the Exchequer as to the Judges in this Case) And the
question was whether the Customers shall be chargeable to the Judges for those
reteinments of the Merchants, and after mature debate, Resolved by them all,
That the Customers were chargeable even for those recemments, though they never
came to their hands; and in the end of that case, it is said, that the Judges
designed each of them to bring his Action against the Customers, which they
perceiving, they forthwith agreed with the Judges to pay them their galleries.

Now any man that shall well consider this case will find the Reason thereof to
be, because though the King had granted the Priveledge of reteining the
Customs to these Merchants, yet in contemplation of Law, the Customers did
still actually receive those Customs, and so were chargeable to the Judges
(like the case I put before of Hen. 7.8. a. where the King remitred the Dismes
to the Collector, or Clergy) and the rather in this case, because this private
License of the Kings shall not prevail over an act of Parhament, which had
secured unto them their Salaries out of the Customs, which leads me to the
next position which I have proposed to assert, which is.

SECT. 3. That by this Council of stopping Payments in the Exchequer, the
Subjects Property is invaded against Statute Law.
OUr Books tell us (and not without Reason) That the Parliament Est un Court de
tresgrand honor and justice, Plowden 398. b Earl of Leicesters case.
de que null doyt imaginer chose dishonorable, is a Court of thrice great
Honor, and Justice, of which no man may presume to think a dishonorable
thing. And we cannot but suppose (says the Lord Chance lour Fortescue) that
Statute Laws carry with them no mean force as well as Wisdom. Dum non unius
aut centum folum consultorum prudentia, sed plusquam trecentorum electorum,
Fortescue de laudebus legum Angliae. ca. 8.
etc. When they are the results not of the prudence of one or two or three
hundred only of the Select men of the Kingdom, but of a far greater number. In
this Orb. the King like the Sun shines in the Exaltation of Majesty and
grandeur, environed by the illustrious members of both Houses, and from the
conjunction of this great and lesser lights, propitious and refreshing
influences are derived to the whole Kingdom. Hobart 256. Duncombs case. 21
Hen. 7. a per Vavasor.
The Acts of this Court are the highest securities this Nation can give, and
such securityes that do in themselves comprehend the universal consent of all
mankind in this Realm, as well future as present.

I shall not here insist upon the Grand Charter, or upon any other Bulworks of
propriety of that nature (though possibly pertinent enough to my purpose) but
shall rather choose at present to apply my self to a Statute. Law of much
fresher date and memory, and designed for the Relief of this very particular
case. And that is the Statute of 190 of his now Majesty, Chap. 12. which I
shall recite (so far as it concerns my purpose) verbatim.

Whereas it has been found by experience upon the late Act for Twelve hundred
and fifty thousand pounds, made at Oxford, and other Acts of Parliament since
that time, that the power of Assigning of Orders in the Exchequer upon those
Acts, without Revocation, has been of great use and advantage to the persons
concerned in them, and to the Trade of this Kingdom, and given great Credit to
His Majesty's Exchequer: Be it Enacted and it is hereby Enacted by the King's
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, That
every person or persons, Native or Forreigner, Bodies Politic or Corporate,
to whom any Moneys shall be due in your Majesty's Exchequer, and shall have any
Order Registered in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt, for the payment
thereof out of any branch of your Majesty's Revenue; That such person or
persons, Native or Forreigner, Bodies Politic, or Corporate, their
Successors, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, respectively, by Endorsement
of their Order, may Assign and transfer their Right, Title, Interest and
Benefic of such Order, or any part thereof, to any other; which being notified
in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt aforesaid, and an Entry and
Memorial thereof also made in the Book of Registry aforesaid for such Orders
(which the Officers shall on request accordingly make) shall Entitle such
Assignee, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or Successort
respectively, to the benefit thereof, and payment thereon. Now it will be plain
to any man that shall consider this Statute, that the Parliament does therein
admit an unquestionable duty of the Money, to the Lenders in the Exchequer (for
so are the words, Every person to whom any money shall be due in your Majesty's
Exchequer etc.) and the makers of this Act, could never mean that nothing
should be transferd to the Assignee: For indeed all the Powers of the Universe
can never make me Donor of that which never appertained to me, nor I never had
in me to give, And therefore this money must first of necessity vest in my self
in point of property, Nit dat quod non habet
before I can transfer it to another person, so then if this Law secure this
money to my Assignee, a multo fortiori to my self. Now that this Statute
secures this money to my Assignee, I shall prove by three unanswerable reasons
(as I suppose) all drawn out of the Bowels of this very Law it self.

First, the Inducements of this Statute appear in the preamble thereof to be.
Advantage to the persons concerned. To the Trade of the Kingdom, and also
great credit to the Exchequer. Therefore the makers of this Law could never
design a transferring of the husk or shell only, that is of the Order or Paper,
but even of the fruit it self, I mean the money in specie, for that is it which
carries the Advantage, the Trade, and the credit with it and not the Order or
writings as many of us find by woeful Experience.

Secondly, there is no man doubts but that the moneys lent upon the Oxford Act
of 17. Car. 2. cap. 1. for 1250000 l. And upon the Pole-mony, Bill 18. Car. 2.
cap. 1. And upon the Act of 19. Car. 2. cap. 8. for 1256000 l. were
unquestionably secured to the Assignees of the Lenders by those several Acts;
why then I say that all moneys since that time Lent into the Exchequer, and
charged upon any branch of the King's Revenue, are equally secured to them by
this Act, and that not only first because this Act in the preamble thereof
refers expressly to those other Acts; But Secondly, (then which I think nothing
can be plainer) because the moneys secured by this Act to the Assignees are
secured with almost all the same numerical, identical words, with which the
moneys lent upon the three other Acts are secured: And this will be obvious to
any person that shall curiously compare all these Acts together, to the which
for brevity sake I am enforced to refer my Reader.

Lastly, this Act declares in express terms that the Assignees of such Orders
for money due in the Exchequer, their Executors Administrators and Assigns in
infinitum shall be Entitled To the Benefit of such Orders, and Payment
thereon, which words being so plain, that he that runs may read, and wrote as
it were with a Beam of the Sun, I think there can be no place left for farther
cavil or subterfuge in this matter.

I had almost forgot to observe that this Law (the King being therein
concerned) is a general Act of Parliament, Cooks 4th. Rep. 77. a. Hollands
Case. Plowd. Lord Barkley's case, ibid. Wimbishes case.
of the which not only the Judges, but even every individual Subject of this
Kingdom ought to take knowledge of course; for as the inferior Members (says
the Book) cannot estrange themselves from the actions and passions of the head,
no more can any Subject be a stranger to the concernments of his Sovereign.
This I would add to those Answers I gave before to the Objection, that this
affair was private, and that few persons were concernd in the present Case of
the Bankers and their Creditors, now I proceed.

SECT. 4. That this Counsel of stopping up the Exchequer, is expressly contrary
to His Majesty's gracious promises, and Declarations Printed and published by
His own especial Command.
MY design all along in this discourse being to discover the pestilence and
mischief of this Council, in relation as well to his Majesty as his people. I
cannot with better advantage discharge my self of the Province I have
undertaken in this Section, and manifest how unhandsomly his Majesty has been
treated by this Adviser, then by considering a while the sanctimony of promises
among Princes.

Nothing then I say is more sacred or tremendous among Princes then their
publik Faiths and Declarations. This the Emperor Tiberius understood well when
he said Caeteris mortalibus in eo stant concilia quod sibi conducere putant,
Tacit. Ann. lib. 4.
principum vero, etc. Inferior persons may order their Councels, as they best
sort with their advantages, but the condition of Potentates is different, whose
actions are principally to be directed to Fame and Glory. Cambden and Baker
vita Elizab. Regina.
And for this reason Q. Elizabeth in her private Letters to K James, was used
to admonish him that a Prince must be such a lover of Truth, that more credit
may be given to his bare Word, than to another Oath.

And we know that the man after God's own heart, and a King too, writes, He
that promises to his Neighbor, and disappointeth him not, though it were to
his own hindrance. Psalm. 15.5.
I do never without Admiration think of that great saying of Charles the 5th.
Emperor, when he was pressed to break his word with Luther, for his safe return
from Worms. Fides rerum promissarum (quoth he) etsi toto mundo exulet tamen
apud imperatorem eam consistere oportet. Xenocarus vita Caroli 5.
Though the faith of promises should be banished out of the world, yet it ought
always to find Sanctuary in an Emperors breast. And to this virtue even
Campanella the Jesuit does vigorously advise Phil. the 2d. of Spain, Spanish
Monarchy c. 27.
for nothing says he does more effectually oblige the Subject to the Prince
then fidelity of promises. By this means (continues he) Alexander Farnese Duke
of Parma, contained the Netherland in Obedience to Spain, Cicero 1 Offic.
whereas the Duke of Alva by the contrary course lost them. And this will not
seem strange to a man that shall consider, that sides (as Tully says) est
justicia fundamentum. Faith is the Foundation upon which Justice is built,
Boterus de politia. Lib. 2. c. 9.
Justitia vero nulla esse potest (says Boterus) nisi conventionum fuerit, and
promissorum certa fides, ac necessaria solutio rerum creditarum. But there can
be no Justice without performance of promises, and fair satisfaction of Debts.
And this most of all in the case of Princes, De Repu. Lib. 1. cap. 8. Fortescue
c. 37.
for (as Bodine affirms) Cum summus Princeps mutuae fidei inter privatos ac
Legum omnium ulicr and vindex est, quanto magis datam a se fidem ac promissa
servare tenetur. For when a Prince is himself to avenge the violations of Faith
and Laws among his Subjects, how much more then ought he himself to observe
his own Faith and Promises: And in this very point he voucheth there a
judgment of the Parliament of Paris against Charles the 9th. of France, and a
little after adds, Itaque in judiciis cum Fides principis agitur, etc.
Therefore says he, when the Faith of a Prince happens to be debated in
Judicature, we are rather to consult the benefit of the Subject, and in such
case to treat the Prince more severely.

And this indeed is no more then what the municipal Laws of this Kingdom
warrant, which say, Cooks 11. Rep. Magdalen College case.
that the Grants of the King are to be Expounded liberally, and withal
imaginable favor to the Subject, for the Honor and Dignity of the King, as
also that the King's Test meipso is Recordum Suparlativum, a Record of the
highest puissance and grandeur. I have the more largely here dilated upon this
Subject, that I might with a greater clearness disclose the Poison of this
Advice, it being so apparently contrary to his Majesty's most gracious Promises
and Declarations Printed and promulgated by his own immediate Order, and
particularly that of the 18th. of June 1667 (of the which several Copies then
Printed were preserved by my self and others, as the highest Muniments and
Securities for our Moneys in the Bankers hands.)

This is styled His Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects to
preserve inviolably the Securities by him given for moneys, See this
Declaration, in the end of this Treatise
and the due course of payments thereon in the Receipt of the Exchequer. In
this Declaration (about the middle) these very numerical wo^ds following are
inserted. And that we will not upon any occasion whatsoever, permit or suffer
any Alteration, Anticipation, or Interruption to be made of our said Subjects
(that is, of the Bankers) Securities, but that they shall from time to time
receive the moneys so secured unto them ( upon several branches of the Roy^l
Revenue, and other late Acts of Parliament says the preamble) in the same
course and method, as they were charged and ought to be satisfied. Immediately
after follow these remarkable words, which Resolution we shall likewise hold
firm and sacred in all Future Assignments and Securities to be by Us granted
upon any Other advance of money by any of our Subjects (note this is general)
upon any Futute Occasion for Our service. And we cannot doubt upon the
Publishing this Our Royal Word and Declaration of Our Sincere Intention, but
that all reasonable persons will rest satisfied, etc.

Now I would fain know what more adaequate or preventive words could have been
devised by the Wit or Providence of men and Angels to have stifled so great a
calamity in the Birth.

Neither will it be an Observation perhaps altogether immaterial and
impertinent, that in the very next Session of Parliament, viz. in the October
immediately following the Statute of the 19th. of his now Majesty, cap. 12.
(which I have before recited) was made, as it were in Buttress and support of
this Royal Edict and Declaration.

These things standing thus as I have represented them, however the King's
Honor and Justice (like a Rock of Diamonds) remains still impenetrable,
neither is his Sacred Majesty in this case any more to be accused of the
breaches of fidelity, then the chaste Lucretia was guilty of incontinence, when
wearied out and forced by the Adulterer. St. Austin.
Duo fuerunt (says the holy Father) at unus commisit Adulterium. Two they
were, and yet but one of them committed Adultery.

When Judge Thorp was condemned to death in Parliament for Bribery The reason
of that judgment is given, Quia (says the Record) predictus Willielmus Thorpe
sacramentum domini Regis quod erga populum suum haebuit custodiendum, Ro^t.
Parl. 24. Ed. 3. part. 3. Memb. 2. in Dorso. Et Fot. Parl. 25 Ed 3. Pars 10.
memb. 17.
maliciose false and rebelliter fre^git etc. Because the said William Thorp had
broken the Kings Oath, it does not say his own Oath, but the Kings Oath, that
solemn and grand obligation, which is the security of the whole Kingdom, and
the knot of the Diadem, so that as the Kings Oath may be broken by others, (his
own unspotted honor and justice unviolated) so likewise may his Royal Faith
and gracious promises as in our case.

SECT. 5. The grand Objection of necessity and National Danger supposing also
our Fears to be at that time just) considered at large and Answered. That the
Subjects property is not violable in this State, but by his own consent, in
cases of far greater National danger then this was, proved by sundry Records
and otherwise, the Rapines of Edw. the 1st. and 3d. upon the Subjects Moneys in
Churches, etc. considred and answered. What courses the Law has provided for
the preservation of the Kingdom, where the danger is instant and cannot stay
for a Parliament.
I am now at length arrived to the grand Objection of this case, the validity
of which I am necessitated (though with reluctance in my self) to consider,
because if this Objection prove impregnable, the Council of stopping the
Exchequer may seem to be built upon a good, or at leastwise an exccusable
foundation, and so in all that I have hitherto said, I shall seem to have
trifled with and eluded my Reader. And herein (because I pretend not to any
Arcanums of State) I shall handle this point by way of Admittance, and shall
suppose that the fears and jealousies which at the time of shutting the
Exchequer did possess this State were just, and such as might well fall upon
constant and deliberating minds. The Objection then will run thus.

That our Neighbor Princes and States were making vast preparations for War,
that the Heavens about us were black and Cloudy, and where the storm might fall
no man could Divine. That Necessitas est Lex temporis, Quae non habet Legem.
That necessity and self preservation superintend all Laws. That it is more
eligible to lop off one member from the Body Politic, or at least wise to let
an Arm, or perhaps a finger thereof blood, then that the whole should be
endangered, etc.

Sol. The Objection I must confess is important and weighty, and will deserve a
substantial Answer. In order thereunto I must in the first place mind my Reader
that I have (as I suppose) by irrafregable Argument proved the property of the
Subject in this case violated. I will then add, that it is a Fundamental Law of
this Realm, that the Subjects propriety is not violable, no not in cases of
National Danger, without his own free and voluntary consent, and that, First by
the consent of his own individual person, or Secondly by that of his
Representatives in Parliament, to whom ^e has delegate^ his consent. To prove
this I could produce infinite Records of Parliament and other Courts, but (for
brevities sake) shall content my self with some few, doing herein like one that
chooses 5 or ^ full ears of Wheat out of a select sheaf, who must necessarily
leave behind him as good as he takes.

The first Record therefore that I shall insist upon, will be that memorable
one of 14. Ed. 2. in a Writ of Error upon a judgment given in Durham in
Trespass by Heyburne against Keylow, for entering his house, breaking his Chest,
and taking away 70 l. in money upon a special verdict, the case was this.

The Scots had entered the Bishopric with a formidable Army, making great
burnings and spoil, Mich. 14. Fd. 2. B R. Rot. 60.
the Commonalty of Durham (whereof the Plaintiff was one) apprehensive of the
common danger, consulted together, and at length agreed to send their agents to
compound with the Scots, for money to depart, and were all sworn (the Plaintiff
being one) to perform such composition, and also what Ordinance should be made
in that behalt, thereupon they compounded with the Scots for 1600 Marks, but
because this Money was to be paid without the least delay, they all consented
that Keylow the Defendant and others, should go into every man's house, to
search for ready Money, to make up the said sum, and that it should be repayd
by the same Commonalty, and thereupon the Defendant entered the Plaintiffs
house, and took the said 70 l, which was paid toward that Fine. The Jury were
demanded whether the Plaintiff was present and consented to the taking of the
Money, they said no. Whereupon the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover the 70 l.
upon this Judgment the Defendant brings his Writ of Error in the Kings Bench,
and assigns error in point of Law, and there the Judgment was reverst,
because Heyburn (whose Money it was) had agreed to this Ordinance, and was
sworn to perform it, and Keylow had done nothing but by the express consent of
Heyburn, and therefore was no Trespassor, and that Heyburn had no other remedy
for his Money, but against the Commonalty of Durham. By which it appears,
that if the owner of the money had not particularly concented, such Ordinance
could not have bound him, and yet this was in a case of imminent danger, and
for public defense.

The next is a Record of the Parliament of 20 Ri. 2. some little time before
this Session, Rot. Parl. 2. Fi. 2. pars 1. ^.
the French had actually invaded this Realm, they had burnt Portsmouth,
Dertmouth, Plymouth, Rye and Hastings, they had possessed themselves of the Isle
of Wight, beseiged Winchelsy, and at length entering the Thames with their
victorious Fleet, came up to Graves end, and burnt most part of that Town, and
(which was yet worse) in the North, the Scots had burnt Roxborough, and were
ready to over run all the North of England, the Realm being thus beset both by
Sea and Land with the united puissance of two mighty Kingdoms, and like a
Candle burning at both ends, the public Treasure also exhaust; a great
Council was forthwith called of the Prelacy, Baronage, and other great men, and
Sages (or Judges) of the Nation, to consult about these difficulties, they came
at length to a final resolution, the which Scroop, then Lord Chancellor,
delivered to all the Lords in the ensuing Parliament, which (as the Roll above
quoted says) was thus. That unce the last Parliament, the said Council met,
and considering the great danger the Kingdom was in, and how money might be
raised for the Common Defense, which could not wait the delay of a Parliament,
and how the Kings Coffers had not sufficient in them, they all concluded that
money could not be had for such defense, without laying a charge upon the
Commonalty, and that such charge could not be imposed without a Parliament; and
the Lords thereupon supplied the present necessity with their own money, and
advised a Parliament for farther supply, and Repayment of themselves, which was
accordingly done.

I think no man will pretend that our late danger (to say no more) was greater
than this; and yet because there was no other course in those times thought
lawful for the raising Treasure upon the Subjects Goods then by their own
ascent in Parliament, only that course was then thought fittest to be
practiced, which was such as ought to be obeyed.

The next Record is the Statute of 31. Hen. 8. cap. 8. some years before, this
King had dissolved the lesser, Old book of Statutes 31. He. 8. cap. 8.
and in the year of this Statute the greater Monasteries; which being a new
precedent made a great noise, and the event thereof was apprehended with
terror and amazement all over the Christian world, this administered secret
seeds of discontent to many of the people, which after broke out into open
Rebellions (as our Chronicles declare) in several parts of the Kingdom; this
King (though standing as much upon his praerogative as any of his Predecessors)
to provide against the like sudden eruptions of this Torrent, which would not
stay for Parliaments, procures a Statute to be made, that the King for the time
being, with the Advice of his Council, two Bishops, two chief Justices, and
diverse others, might by His Proclamation, make Ordinances for punishing
offenses, and imposing penalties, which should have the force of a Law, but
with this proviso [that thereby no man's life, or property, Lands or Goods
should be touched or impeacht] so then though the Royal Power was thus
corroborated by this Statute, yet the Parliament took care, that no man's Life
or Property should be ravished from him. However notwithstanding the said
Restriction, this Statute was thought inconvenient, and thereupon repealed soon
after, in 1. Ed. 6. cap. 12.

This Kingdom never labored under a juster fear then in the Year 88. when it
was assaild by that invincible Armada, or Sea-Gyant (as the Lord Bacon His War
with Spain.
calls it) and yet every man's Right was then preserved inviolable. Nay the
Queen was so tender in that particular, that (as our Historians say) She gave
Express Order that not so much as an Ear of Corn should be burnt, Cambden in
vita Elizab. 1588.
or other Goods of her Subjects devastated, until the Enemy had actually
Landed, and was even upon the very point of possessing the^ himself. And
therefore where the case of 8. Ed. 4. of plucking down the Suburbs of a City
without the consent of the owners, in time of War, is Law, 8. Ed. 4.
it must be understood of an actual Invasion of the Enemy, when the danger is
in potentia proxima, and the Fire ready to take. And this manifestly appears by
the Record of 11. Edw. 2. where the Mayor and Citizens of Dublin pulled down the
Suburbs of that City, Claus 11. Ed 2. Memb. 19 Dorso pro majore and civibus
Dublin.
but it was (says the Record) Super imminentem hostilem irruptionem scottorum
inimicorum infra Hiberniam, and pro salvatione Civitatis praedictae, and ne
dictis inimicis ad Civitatem praedictam facilior pateret ingressus etc. And yet
this Corporation neither would not trust to this point of Law, but for their
better security procured the King's Pardon, which yet was cautiously enough
drawn, for it was Pardonamus eis and euilibet de communitate Civitatis
praedictae id quod ad nos pertinet de prostratione praedicta, etc. We Pardon as
much as in us lies, etc. as appears by Pat. de anno 12. Edw. 2. Memb. 30. intus
de pardonacione pro majore and Civibus Dublin.

And so of the case of Gravesend Barge. Mich. 6. Jacobe Cokes. 12. Rep. 63.
If the Ferry-man may justify to throw my Goods overboard to lighten the
Vessel, it must be upon an instant Tempest, and inevitable peril; but if the
Ferry-man shall say, I see a Cloud yonder my Masters, its like to be a great
storm, and thereupon shall throw them over, I doubt that is not at all
justifiable in Law.

I shall now draw nearer our own times, Cokes 3d Inst. 3.
and present you with a Triumvirate of precedents (to say nothing of the
Petition of Right) in one and the self same Parliament (no less then that which
attained the name of Parliamen um Benedictum) I mean that of 3. Caroli primi.

First the Judgment of the two Houses in that Parliament in Dr. Manwarings
case, Rushw Hist. Collect. 3. Carol
who was sentenced by them principally for declaring in a Sermon (which he
afterward Printed) that the King in Cases of imminent danger to the Kingdom,
might without Parliament Levy Money upon the Subject. There were other
collateral charges against him its true, but this was the principal, Journal of
both Houses.
and to this he chiefly applied his Defense, and would have excused this
Assertion by limiting it only to Cases of National Extremity, but that would
not serve his turn, he himself submitting, and the Sentence afterward affirmed
by the Kings Proclamation for suppressing the Book.

The second is the Commission for Loan, Rushw. Hist. Collect 3. Caroli
to carry on the War for the Palatinate, in which was suggested the safety and
very subsistence of the King, People, and Religion to be in instant danger,
that his Majesty's Coffers were exhausted, that the supply could not stay for
a Parliament, that the King upon his Accession to the Crown, found himself
engaged in this War, and that by advice in Parliament (which I think may
deserve some remark) and only lending a little Money for prevention required,
Now I would fain know what suggestions could have possibly been more
substantial or persuasive, But because this course was compulsary, and without
consent, these Commissions in the same Parliament were resolved to be illegal,
and so consented to be by his Majesty, Poultons Statutes 3. Car. 1. cap, 1.
and so declared a little after in the same Parliament in the Petition of Right.

The third is the Commission of Excise issued to 33. Rushw. Hist. collect. 30.
Car.
Lords and others of the Privy Council in which they are commanded to raise
Moneys by impositions or otherwise, as in their judgments they shall find to
be most convenient. The Suggestions here, were for the most part the same with
those in the above mentioned Commission of Loan, and yet adjudged by both
Houses contrary to Law; and the Lords desired his Majesty that this Commission
of Excise might be canceld, and shortly after it was canceld by the King, and
thereupon brought so canceld into the Lords House by the Lord Keeper, and by
the Lords so sent to the Commons.

In the last place I shall cite the Statute of 17. Car. 1. cap. 14. For the
Reversal of the Judgment in the case of the Ship-writs, I am not willing (as
well of brevity as other reasons) to recite this Statute at large, but I dare
engage that no man shall read that Law, but will say it is a most direct
Judgment in the point against the violation of propriety in case of National
danger. If any man however, shall for reasons best known to himself, Arraign or
Calumniate this Act of Parliament, I shall say no more then this. If it be Law,
why may I not vouch it? If it be not, why is it not Repeald? why does it still
cumber our Statute Books?

I am heartily sorry to have had so invincible an occasion administered to me
here, of disturbing the Rest of these sleeping Muniments of propriety; but this
presumption also must be added to the black train of those Calamities which
follow this pernicious Council. It is but natural to mankind to bring in what
Arguments they can to preserve their undoubted Rights, Juvenal Saty. 3. versus
152.
especially when irritated by that unhappy Thing which renders men not only
miserable, but (as the Poet says) Ridicule and contemned. Neither have I here
(I hope) invaded the just Regalities of his Sacred Malesty (for which no person
has an higher veneration then my self) but rather confirmed them. 1.
Resusuta^i. fol. 65.
For (as Sir Francis Bacon then Attorney General said) whilst the Praerogative
runs within its ancient and proper Banks, the main Channel thereof is so much
the stronger, for Overflowes (he adds) evermore hurt the River. Guilme Jermyes
Commentary on the Customier of Normandy.


If any man after all this Evidence be yet unsatisfyed in this point, I will
send him to France (for I would rather find a President there) and advise him
to consider the case of Normandy. That Duchy had be^^^^^ some time raked with
Exactions contrary to their Franchise and Customs, and thereupon complain to
Lewis the 10th. the then French King, he by his Charter in the year 1314.
recognizing the Right and Priveledges of these people, and the injustice of
their Grievances, grants that from that time forward, they shall be discharged
from all Subsidies and Impositions to be laid upon them by him or his
Successors, yet with this deadly sting in the tail of all [Si necessity grand
ne le requiret, Unless in cases of great necessity] which Minute and almost
insensible exception we see has eaten up (upon the matter) all their
immunities, Comines Hist. of France, Lib. 13. Fortescue cap. 35.
for though these States do annually assemble, yet their Conve^tion is little
better then the carcass of a Parliament, and they are become but the necessary
Executioners of the Royal pleasure.

Ay, but did not our Ed. 1. and Edw. 3. do greater things then stopping the
Exchequer? are not our Chronicles full, of their breaking even into the
Churches and Abbeys, and ravishing the Treasure of the Subject for Supply of
their Wars.

Admitting this Allegation to be true, I Answer.

de facto, but what may be done de Jure. And to counterballance these, we may
put other Princes of this Realm of a contrary complexion into the other Scale.

Edward the Confessor restored the Danegeld Money (a grievous Tax formerly in
use here) to the persons from whom it was exacted, Polydore Virgil. Riba^^^^ra
Copgrave Surius.
it seeming to him (as no mean Authors write) that he saw the Devil danceing
and triumphing upon that vast heap of Treasure, when he was conducted by his
Officers to view the same. And (by the way) this Act of singular piety he did,
S^lden's Mare clausum, Lib 2 Spi^m Glossary title Danegueld
when his people labored under a dreadful Famine.

King Henry the Second (say our Chronicles) maintained great Wars, and obtaind
a larger Dominion then pertain'd at any other time to this Realm of England,
and notwithstanding never demanded Subsidy of his Subjects; Speed, Baker,
Haywards Hen 4.1. part p. 56
and yet his Treasure after his death was found to be, Nine hundred thousand
pounds beside, his Jewels and Plate. Certainly a prodigious sum in those
days!

It is notorious also that Queen Mary did by her Letters Patents, of her mere
Grace and great Clemency for the succor and relief of her loving Subjects
(says that Record) pardon and remit a whole Subsid^ given by them to her
Predecessor, Old Statutes 1 Maria sessio 2. cap. 17.
which release was afterward confirmed by Parliament. And Queen Elisabeth also
remitted one Subsidy of four granted to her saying, Cambden vita Elizabeth^.
It w^^ all one toher, whether the Money were in Her Subjects Coffers or her own

Secondly these Depredations begot many good Laws for the firmer munition of
property for future time, and particularly this violence of Edw. 1. was
executed in the 25th. year of his Reign, and in that very year (and not in 340
as our Printed Statute Books say) was made the Statute de Tallagio non
concedendo, De Repub. lib. 1. cap. 8.
with which the English defend themselves (faith Bodine) quasi Clypeo, as with
a Buckler against their Prince.

Thirdly, this King (as our Chronicles affirm) laid this outrage much to heart,
and that before his Royal Palace at Westminster, environed with infinite
numbers of his people, thither by him purposely summoned, and being raised upon
an Ascent or Pedestal, the better to be heard and seen, Lib. 3. cap. 9. columna
2510.
the Prince, Archbishop of Canterbury and the Earl of Warwick also standing
with him. Rogavit populum accepta licentia (says Knighton) ut omnia
condonaretur ei, and orarent pro eo. He earnestly entreated the people that
they would forgive him, and pray for him. And Matthew Westminster goes yet
farther Kex erumpentibus lacrymis (says he) veniam de commissis humillime
postulavit. The King bursting forth into Tears, Math. Westminster. page 409.
410.
did most humbly ask pardon for what he had done (a passionate transport of a
Prince that before that time had rendered himself redout table among the
Saracens as well as the French, and that had triumphed over Scotland and Wales!)
And after he had excused himself to them, with all the sweetness of Expression
adds. Et omnia oblata reddam vobis. Math. Westminster. ibid.
And I will restore all that I have forct from you And in pursuance of this
promise forthwith makes an Bundelae Brevium de privato Sigillo in Turre London.
Anno 25. Ed. 1. and pat. 26 Ed. 1. Mem. 21.
Ordination of Council (which have seen in French, and can produce the Copy) to
issue forth Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, into all the Counties of England,
to enquire what things had been forcibly taken by his Officers, out of the
Churches or else where, from the Clergy or Laytye, either to guard the Seas, or
for any other purpose, with Warrants or without, during his Wars with France,
and to determine those matters. Et et qu serra pris, seit return a ceaux, qe
le damage ont receu (says the Record) And that those things that were forct
away might be returned to them that had received the damage, and to punish the
parties offending, which Pat. 26. Ed. 1. Memb. 21. inquirendo super
gravaminibus popu lo Regnifacti etc.
Commissions were accordingly executed (many of which I have seen, and can
produce the Copies) in which are contained many excellent particulars, too long
here to be recited. And for those small Remainders of Moneys which happened not
to be restored or satisfied by virtue of those Commissions, they were two or
three years after recovered in the very ordinary Courts of Justice, to prove
which (among many others) I will eite this one Record. Coia. Pa. 29. Edw. 1.
Rot. 18. The King pro urgentissimis Regni negotiis, and pro defentione totius
Regni (says the Record) had seized diverse sums of money in all the Abbeys,
Cathedrals, and Religious Houses within the Realm, and (quo citius commode
poterit) promised repayment: In the Parliament of 29 Edw. 1. at Lincoln the
King is Petitioned for repayment, who promises payment. Ita quod Regis
conscientia super hoc exoneretur, and there, and Rot. 19. Diverse sums are
adjudged to be repaid. Again it is not at all probable this Prince would be
negligent in paying his own, that was so just in satisfying his Fathers Debts
(as we find by our Records) so that upon the whole matter, Pot. 4. Ed. 1. Memb.
19. intut
notwithstanding this Objection; I think we may concur well enough with Sir
William Herle Chapter Justice of the Common Pleas, who in 5. of Edw. 3. says of
this Ed. 1, Pasch. 5. Ed 3 casus 5.
(in whose time he lived) Que fuit pluis sage Roy que unques fuit. That he was
one of the wisest Kings that ever was in the World.

For Ed. 3. his Rapines likewise produced very benificial Laws to the Subject,
as will be manifest to any man that shall peruse the Statutes of that time.
Fot. Alminiae 12. Ed. 3 Mem. 22 in Dorso De excusando R^ge populam versut.
They were actions which he never justified, but excused always with singular
Resentments. As appears by his Letter (extant upon Record) to John Stratford
then Archbishop of Canterbury, in the which he recounts the Tallages and
Exactions with which he had burdened his people which (be faith) he could not
mention without inexpressible grief of mind, and there excuses himself upon
the inevitable necessity of his wars, and desires the Archbishop to satisfy
the people, and to stir them up to pray for him, hoping ere long he should make
them compensation, and give them comfort.

There remains yet one Objection with which I am infore't to encounter, se
defendendo, because I perceive it ready to assail me. And that is, that the
Parliament is a great Body, (I speak it with all due reverence) and moves
slowly, and therefore if the Law allow not some other course (as this of
stopping the Exchequer or the like) in raising money in case of sudden Danger,
the Kingdom may be lost before the Parliament can supply.

I shall (to avoid Cavil) agree may be sudden (though a great Statesman tells
us, Comines fol. 79.
that these Clouds are commonly visible afar off before the Tempest fall) I say
if by Foreign Invasion, then first the impulse of self-preservation (an
indelible Character wrote on every man's mind by the very band of Nature) will
dispose all Mankind to expose their Lives and Estates, which otherwise they
must inevitably lose. And this seems to be the case of this Kingdom in the
Year 88. ^ambden vi^^ Eliza.
for there was then no Parliament sitting, but many of the Worthies of that
time, (some of whose names are transmitted to Posterity) at their own private
charges, brought in men and Ships to the Common Defense.

But Secondly, if we are to suppose that men must be dragged and haled to their
own preservation; I say then the Law has provided, that in case of Foreign
invasion, every Subject within the Land, high or low, whether he hold of the
King or not, may be compelled at his own charge, to serve the King in person. To
prove this I can vouch Authorities from Common Law. Statutes and Records which
for brevity I will not quote at large, but (least any man should doubt hereof)
will only point where they may be found.

Common Law, see 7. H. 4. Brook Tenures 44. and 73. Fitch. Protection 100. Coke
7. Re. 7. b. Calvin's case. 2 Rolls Title Imposition 165. etc. 1 Inst. 69. b. in
fine.

For Statute Laws see (among many others) 1. Ed. 3. cap. 5.11. H. 7. cap. 1.11.
H. 7. cap. 18. etc.

For Records (among many others that I have seen) I will crave leave to vouch
two.

The First is 14. Johannis Regis, Math. Paris 223. Matthew. Westminster. 92.
where upon an imminent French invasion, King John issues our Writts, in which
he summons all his Subjects, high and low to repair forthwith to Dover. Ad
defendendum caput nostrum (says the Record) and capita suae, and quod nullue
remaneat qui Arma portare possit sub nomine Base Cowardice or Turwail so the
glossaries
Culvertagij, and perpetuae servitutis etc.

The other is upon a French invasion too, designed against this Kingdom in 26.
Ed. 3. the which being a Record so apposite to my purpose I shall recite
somewhat more at large. Rot. Franciae Anno 26. Ed. 3. Memb. 5.


Rex dilecto consanguineo and fideli suo Henrico Duci Lancastriae salutem. Quia
Adversarij nostri Franciae nos and Regnum nostrum Angliae invadere machinantes,
ad nos and Dominium nostrum, and totam nationem Anglicanam pro viribus
destruend. Nos considerantes omnes Incolas dicti Regni cujuscunque conditionis
extiterint, cum versetur commune periculum teneri de jure pro patria pugnare,
and eam contrae hostiles aggressus defensare. -- vobis mandamus quod omnes
homines defensabiles tam milites and Armigeros quam alios quoscunque de dicto^
ducatu cujuscunque status seu conditionis fuerint arraiari, and quemlibet eorum
iuxta statum and faculates suas, Equitaturis and Armit competentib us muniri
etc.

I shall conclude this Section with a case of very recent Memory, and of
singular Notoriety throughout the whole Kingdom, I mean that of the
Conflagration of our Ships by the Dutch not many years past in the River of
Chatham. There prevailed at that time an universal jealoufy among the people
that upon this occasion some sudden stop might be put upon the Exchequer, and
thereupon the Bankers were exercised with restless solicitations for the speedy
payment of their Debts. The King for the sedation of these Fears and
apprehensions, See the Declaration at the end of this Treatise.
is advised (and not without infinite prudence) to issue forthwith his
Declaration to preserve inviolable the course of payments in the Exchequer,
which was accordingly done. Now (...) see what were the grounds of this
Declaration. Why truly they are expressed there to be. First, Least the Credit of
the Bankers (who had been so useful to the King) might be weakened. Secondly,
Least the King's Securities might be undervalued. Lastly, Least in consequence
the public Safety might be endangered. Now all that I shall say is this. That
(of what value in reason of State it may be, I know not, but) to men of vulgar
Negotiation it seems a Riddle and matter inextricable, that these
considerations which at that time appeard to have been of so politic and
valuable Regard, within the space of two or three years, upon a like occasion,
should be thought by this Advisor clearly Obsolete, and altogether void of
Prudence; And the Credits of the Exchequer, Royal securities, and the public
safety so little by him consulted. Idem manens idem, semper facit idem.

I have at length discharged my self of this grand and Colossus Objection, in
how tolerable measure I must leave to the Candor of my intelligent Reader; But
if it happen that I have herein given a substantial and effective answer
thereunto, I dare say this pernicious Council has then no farther support, but
must of necessity fall to the ground.

However I am to enter my Protestation, that I would gladly have declined so
sublime and important an Argument, if the nature of this discourse had not
(much against my own inclination) compeld me to the contrary.

SECT. 6.
That this Council is contrary to the Policies that have been practiced
heretofore by the wisest Foreign States of the World, in far greater
Exigencies then ours. The Objection (of Princes not repaying money lent them by
their Subjects to keep them in better Obedience) Answered. The inconvenience
that happened at Rome upon an Impeachement of the Bankers and Usurers. That
persons concerned here in the Stop of the Exchequer, will be losers by loss of
opportunities for bargains, etc. in this interval.
ALL men agree that Rome (whether Monarchical or Republique) was a State
founded upon the choicest Polities that ever were practiced in the world. In
proemio ad Historiam.
And (as Florus says) he that reads their Atcheivements contemplates not the
Gests and Actions of one single people, but even of all mankind. Let us then
consider, what expedients this so prudent a Nation exercised in cases of like
nature.

It is plain this State was never under a streighter duress or pinch then after
their dismal defeat at the Battle of Cannae, for then had Hanibal broke into
Italy like a Deluge of the Sea, bearing down all before him, and at length this
Tempest of War had begirt the very walls even of Rome, with his triumphant
Army, and which was yet worse, the Roman Treasury was totally exhaust.

In this Extremity Levinus and Marcellus the Consulls declare forthwith by
Edict, That each private person of such an Estate (and so others
proportionably) should furnish out a Soldier at their own charge for thirty
days. Ad id-edictum (says Livy) Tantus fremitus hominum, Livii. Lib. 26.
tantaque indignatio fuit, ut magis Dux quam materia seditionis, deesset. Upon
this Edict so hot was the rage and petulancy of the people, that there wanted
nothing but a Leader, to have put all into a cumbustion: The Commonalty crying
out that they had now for many years been loaded with Tributes that their Lands
lay fresh and devastated, and that they could not by any force be compelled to
give that, which they had not to give: And this and much more they spoke, not
in corners, but even in the Marketplace, and in the hearing of the very
Consuls themselves. In so great an Agony of the Body Politic, the Lords of
the Senate Assembled, to consult how they might with more security Levy Money,
and string themselves a fresh with new Sinews of War; after many temerarious
courses proposed and rejected, Livii lib. 26. Flori lib. 2.
they thus reasoned (as Livy and Florus relate) amongst themselves. Omne aurum
(say they) Argentum Aes signatum ad Triumviros Mensarios deferamus, nullo ante
senatus consulto facto, ut voluntaria oblatio, etc. Let us our selves that be
Senators first bring into the public Treasury all our Gold Silver and Money,
and this too without any formal Decree, that so this voluntary Oblation of ours
may excite an emulation of supplying the Commonwealth, first in those of the
Equestrian Order, and then of the Commonalty; In pursuance of this proposal,
the Lords of the Senate brought in all their Treasure accordingly: Now see what
the consequence hereof was. Livii lib. 26. Flori. Lib. 2.
Hereupon (say the same Historians) the Knights and Gentlemen followed the
example of the Senators, and the Commoners that of the Knights and Gentlemen;
And the Contributions were so large, and the Conflicts so sharp for priority
of registring names, that the Exchequer had hardly Books and Clerks enough to
enter the particulars. Bodin de Repub. lib. 6. ca. 2d Aerario.
Bodine commenting upon this prosperous Council, has these very words. Cum
Annibal Italiam quateret, urbemque ipsam obsideret, Senatus diruto aerario nova
tributa subditis aut sociis imperari noluir. Nihilenim prementibus hostibus tam
periculosum. When Hannibal had made Italy to tremble, and had besieged Rome it
self, the Senate, though the public Treasure were spent, would not impose new
Tributes upon their Subjects and Colleagues; For nothing (says he) can be more
hazardous upon an instant impression of an Enemy. Neither is it to be
forgotten, that the same Historians add, that parta^ victoria^ etc. That after
Victory obtained, Livii Lib. 26. and Lib. 31. Boden Lib. 6. cap. 2.
and the Carthaginians discomfited, the Senate had decreed the Repayment of
every Lenders Money justly and honorably, which was Executed accordingly.

The Learned Bo^erus Relates a Story very apposite to this purpose. Ladislaus
Dux Neopolitanus victus (says he) fugatusque ab host, Boterus de politia
Illusterium etc. Lib. 7. ca. 3.
etc. Ladislaus Duke of Naples being vanquished of the Enemy, flies to Naples,
and there consults about raising Money for the reinforcing of his Army, and had
resolved (by the Advice of persons more factious then wise, faith that Author)
to effect this by imposition of new and unusual Taxes, this being intimated to
one Gorellus (a person of singular Prudence and Gravity) he forthwith repairs
to the Duke, and bespeaks him after this manner, I am afraid (GREAT SIR) that
whilst you are solicitous of repelling the Enemy, you take no care of falling
into the hatred and Malevolence of your own Subjects, by this imposition of a
new Tribute: I beseech you Sir, what can your greatest Enemies breath after
with a warmer zeal then that you should follow a Council, that will assuredly
dispotle you of the Love and fidelity of your people. Banish then GREAT SIR,
out of your Royal Breast so pernicious a determination; for that money which
you want, my self with some other of your servants (who are to run the same
Risques of Fortune with your Majesty) will presently supply you; And taking a
Pen in his hand, he put down what each person (himself principally) was to pay,
and the Money was in a moment brought in, Prudentissimum sane prore and
tempore, etc. says Boterus. A most prudent Council for the matter and
occasion, given by Gorellus, and approved by the Duke, by which (says he) the
wiles of the Enemy were prevented, and the popular quiet and contentment
consulted.

Now because contraries appear best by opposition, I will produce one instance
a little diverse from this. Augustus Caesar had sudden news brought him of a
vast Army in the raising by Mark Antony to encounter with him; The Prize to be
sought for was no less then the Empire of the World. Augustus (being young, and
instigated by evil Council) squeeses the people with Taxes toward the surport
of this War. The people hereupon began to Mutiny, Invita Antonii.
insomuch that (as Plutarch Reports) the wisest men of that time took it for
granted, that if Antony in this conjuncture had approacht nearer with his Army,
the Romans would have assuredly revolted, and delivered up Caesar into the
hands of his Enemy. But (as he says) the imprudent delays of Antony gave time
to the people of concocting their discontents, and of the sedation of their
Passions; neither is it to be neglected that this Illustrious person, after the
defeat of Antony, and his own access to the Empire, took such warning by this
hazzardous mistake, that ever after he abandoned all Councels of this Nature.
And unto that degree that in the last twenty years of his Reign, he laid out
upon the Public Benefits and Emoluments of the Commonwealth (as Seutonius
writes) little less then Quater decies Millies See for this valuation Budaens
de Ass. Hackwel's Apology and Savil's notes on Tacitus History, Lib. 1 c. 6.
sestcrtium, vita Octavii cap. Ultimo.
That is, Eleven Millions, Eighty thousand five hundred thirty three pounds six
shillings eight pence Sterling: Befides his two paternal patrimonies, and other
his Inheritances. Others report, thirty five Millions of Gold, besides the two
aforesaid patrimonies.

Obj. Many other examples of like naturel could produce out of History and
Policy, which yet (for brevity sake) I forbear to do, and hasten to answer an
objection, viz. That (as certain Authors affirm) some Princes have by great
Vsuries Decoyed vast sums of their Subjects Moneys into their Exchequers, and
forborne afterward to repay them, Life of Augustus bound up with Plutarche
Lives.
on purpose to oblige their people to a stricter Obedience and fidelity to the
Crown, And this Artifice (as Bodine Reports) was recommended as a subtle
project to the French Kings, and accordingly practiced by them.

Sol. I shall answer this Objection in the very words of the same Bodine, De
repub. lib. 6. cap. 2.
in an other place. He quidem tolerabilia viderentur (says he) Si quod
Regibus nostris persuasum erat, Civitates, obsequie and fide majore, acceptis
mutuo pecuniis, devincire potuissent, sed nullis temporibus graviores in Gallia
tumultus, aut plures Civitatum defectiones, extiterunt. These Councels had been
tolerable (says he) if as these State-Mountebanks would persuade our Kings,
the people by this deteiner of their Money would have been conteind in better
Obedience, but alas, there were never more dangerous Tumults in France, or
more frequent Revolts of Cities known, then in those very times. Essays.


All States have tolerated Vsuries in one kind or Rate or other, And it is
impossible (says the Lord Bacon) to conceive the inconveniences that will
ensue not only to Merchants but all other persons if the borrowing of Moneys
should be cramped and discouraged: Therefore consideration for Moneys lent bath
been entertaind (as the Scripture says) of the Judaical Divorces) for the
Hardness of men's hearts. And the Endeavors of abolishing thereof have proved
sometimes inconvenient and dangerous to the States where it has been
attempted; Annalium l. 6.
To prove which I shall produce but one Example reported by Cornelius Tacitus,
who tells us, that in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar. Magna vis accusatorum in
eos irrupit qui pecunias saenore auctitabant, etc. That a great Rabble of
Informers rose up against those persons which took excessive Usury, and
thereupon every man calling in his Debts, on a sudden ensued a great want and
scarcity of money, and an universal discontent, and the aspect of affairs seem
d not very propitious, which being perceived by that prudent Empero^r, he
forthwith caused an hundred Million of l. (...) s d. 791466 13.4. sterling.
Sesterces of his own to be put into the Bank to be lent to all men that had
occasion for three years without interest, and thereupon all things-became calm
and sedate again.

Lastly, though the Exchoquer here be again opened (as in good time I hope it
will) yet the persons therein concerned will notwithstanding sustain infinite
damage, in point of irreparable loss of those opportunityes of advantageous
Bargains, Marriages, and sundry other particulars, which in this interval save
been offered unto them.

SECT. 7.
That this Council is contrary to the Common Reason of Mankind, and in some
respects against the Rules of humanity. That it is pernicious to the credit of
his Majesty's Exchequer. The case between Phillip the Second of Spain, and the
Banker of Genoa, truly stated, and demonstrated to be essentially different
from our case. Campanella's Advice to King Phillip to make speedy payment of
that Debt.
IT is a Rule that has prevailed among all Nations (as well Barbarous as
Civil) That Quod Omnes tangit ab omnibus debet supportari. And again. Qui
sentit commodum, sentire debet and onus. Where the utility and peril is common,
there the charge and contribution ought to be common also. But I doubt if this
Council happen to be weighed in this Balance it will prove light, for as it is
plain that the Defense of the Kingdom was an utility to the whole, so it is as
evident that the charge thereof was fastened upon a Part. What is this but as if
the States of Holland should impose the expense of defending their Country
from the Sea, upon a parcel of their people? Or (if we may compare great things
with small) as if the Banks and Walls of the great Level of the Fenns, should
be maintained by a small number of the Proprietors? And yet this seems to be
the present case, and how far this proceeding is contrary to the common Reason
of Mankind. I leave to the world to judge.

But this is not all neither, For this charge is not laid only upon a Part, but
in great measure upon the most impotent and necessitous part of the Kingdom,
and upon many of those glorious Worthies which maugre all the Temptations and
menaces of wicked men preserved their Virgin Loyalty chaste and undeslowred.

I have observed that some persons in Parliaments have used it as a motive to
supply our Kings with Money, because say they, that which you give, is but like
a vapor exhaled by the Sun, which gathers into a cloud, and in short time
distills again upon the Earth in gentle dews, and fructifying showers. But this
Advice, what was it but to draw up the Tears of Orphans and Widows, the milk
of helpless Babes, the sweat of the Laborers brow, and the heart blood of
several poor Loyallists, (among others) to fertilitate the Lands of many
persons which (not to say worse) wallow in all Afluence and Riches? Amos 3.12.
compared with 2 Samuel 12.2.
Or (if I may use a Scripture Metaphor) to take two Legs, or a piece of an Ear
of a Lamb, which we had rescued out of the Jaws of the Cromwell Sequestrators,
Committee men's decimators, etc
Lion, and give it to the Rich men that have many Flocks and. Herds. For
nothing is more evident, then that many of those wretched person; that had but
one hundred pound in all the world, had that All taken from them toward the
Defense of the Kingdom, when many others that were worth hundred thousands,
expended not a farthing at that time. And now what I shall say more -- Pudet
haec opprobia nobis Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.

Now for the Influences this Council may have upon his Majesty's Exchequer, in
all likelihood they cannot prove very propitious and benign. Few things have
been more dear to Princes then the Reputation and Glory of their Exchequers,
And Queen Elizabeth wars so punctual in this particular, that in her time (they
say) it went for a Proverb. As sure as Check. Lord Herberts H. 8.
For (as a great Author Writes) Outward esteem and Reputation is the same to
great persons and Things, which the Skin is to the Fruit, which though it is
but a slight and delicate cover, yet without it the Fruit will be subject to
discolor and Rot. He that has a mind to contemplate the Consequences of a
discredited Treasury let him but consider the Cases of Henry the second of
France, Reported by Bodine, Bodine Lib 2. cap 4 in fine, Lord Herberts Hen 8.
last leaf but one.
and of our King Henry the 8th. by the Lord Herbert (for I would rather they
should declare them then I) And I am afraid that when men shall be importuned
to lend money upon any future Occasion, they will be apt enough to discourse
within themselves, That that which has been done may be done again, and that
the Moneys of other men were secured unto them by Declarations and Acts of
Parliaments, and that they cannot expect higher securities then these, etc. It
is true indeed when the Exchequer is again opened, this Objection will be in
good measure answered, but till that time I fear it will remain not
inconsiderable.

I shall no farther pu^sue the Pestilence of this C^uncel in this particular
(it being so obvious to the meanest understanding) but shall now state the Case
between Phillip the Second of Spain, and the Bankers of Genoa, as I have
extracted it out of the best Authors I could find, which treat upon that
Subject.

Charles the Fifth Emperor of Germany, had for a long season revolved in his
mind how he might render the State of Genoa obsequious and dependant upon
himself, Thuani First lib. 61. anno Dom. 1575. Metarani Hist. Belgica Lib. 5.
Bodine de repu Lib. 6. Campanella Spanesh Monarchy c. 21. Helyns Colmography in
Genoa. Lassels. Voyage into Italy, 1 part. pa. 99. cum multis alus.
and this he did (among other reasons) that he might as occation served with
the greater fa^ility Transport his Armies out of Spain thorough this Territory
into Italy. In order to this, sundry Experiments had he made, which yet by the
jealousies of that people were always readred improsperous. Charles (being as
he was a Prince of prodigious Subtility) falls upon new Councels, he considered
he had to do with a people that dealt much in Money, and were generally great
Bankers, and Merchants, and therefore concluded that if by extraordinary
Vsuries he could allure their Money into his Exchequer, he should then be in
possession of the best Hostages they could give him for their Fidelity and
Observance. This Emperor dying, Phillip his Son, after his Fathers Example (to
make these birds more confident, and less jealous of the Snare) proceeds for
some time to feed these unhappy money changers with excessive Usury, till by
this fine Dexterity he had conveyed into his bands no less then 420. Datch Tun
of Gold, some say eleven, others eighteen millions of Gold, and then secures
this Debt to them very fairly upon the Tribu^es of Spain and the Indies. The
filly Birds were now very secure, and Sat fair, and there wanted nothing but
the drawing the Net. Thereupon King Phillip (being exhausted with his
Low Country Wars and with all) sensible of the weight of so ponderous a Debt,
takes occasion at first to cavil at some little misreckonings in the Accounts,
and a while after insisted that he had hereto^o^e paid them more Interest money
then they ought to have received, and therefore (quoth he) that overplus ought
in all reason to be deducted out of the Principal, and thereupon by public
Edict (taking the Opportunity likewise of some Civil discords, which at that
time raged among them) forthwith stops their Pensions issuable out of the said
Tributes. And then to forti^y this Act, by secret Combination with the Pope (to
render the Action more specious) procures a Bull from his Holiness to confirm
all that he had done, however for so much Principal Money as was afterward
agreed to be due (which in the year 1600. I find was One Million and half of
Gold) the Crown of Spain has ever since to this day justly and Honurably
satisfied the Interest.

This is the true state of this Case (according to my discovery thereof). Now
it will be evident to any person that shall compare these two cases together,
that they differ each from other in sundry essential circumstances.

For,

First, this Severity of King Phillip was not exerted upon Children and
Subjects, but upon a Foreign State, of which Spain had then just causes of
Apprehension and Jealousy, and so the Action well enough consistent with the
Rules of Policy.

Secondly the Envy and Enormity of this Feate, was by a curious Legerdemain
juggled upon his Holiness, and King Phillip to all outward appearance rendered
innocent thereof: Helin's Cosmograph.
This Debt (says Peter Heylin) was cut off by the Pope's Authority, that so
King Phillip might be obliged to that See. Hoc debitum (says Metaranus) per
pontificis decretum propter ingentes usuras fuit diminutum, and moderatum.
Bodin. de Rep. lib. 9. cap. 2
This Debt by the Pope's Decree was moderated upon pretense of excessive Usury.
And Bodine Droling facetiously upon the proceeding, Metarini Hist. Belg. Lib. 5.
sed risu dignares est (says he) quod non modo Genuensibus verum etiam
Philippo, etc. It was thought very pleasant and ridicule that not only the
Genoeses but Phillip also should be interdicted, he, because he took money to
Usury, they, because they lent it. However they were both (this being done only
by compact, and to give the better grace to this neat Emuncture or wipe) in a
little time absolved again.

Thirdly, in this case the Interest Money was and is punctually satisfied, and
I wish I could affirm as much in ours.

Fourthly, I do not find that this Debt of the Genoeses was secured unto them
by any Act of the Cortes or Parliament of Spain and so the Common Faith of that
Nation inviolate. But in our case, our Debt is secured to the Bankers and their
Assignees by National Obligation, As I have (I think) above most evidently
proved.

Lastly, Campanella the Jesuit a man of infinite subtility, Campanella Span.
Mon. chap. 21.
and one that seems to be even anxious, and eaten up with zeal for the Grandeur
and prosperity of Spain, the which he cultivates with a singular diligence in
his Discourse of that Monarchy. This very man, I say, does with all his vigor,
not only advise, but importune King Phillip with all speed to pay this Debt to
the Genoeses. Least says he (among other reasons there given) if there should
happen any Rising in Italy to the prejudice of that King the Genoan Banners
might march also along with them for company.

The Conclusion.
I shall (I hope) auspiciously take the rise of my Conclusion from two
memorable Records. The one relating to Widows and Orphans, the other to those
Worthies who with their Lives and Fortunes had many years ago propugn'd the
Rights of the English Crown.

That which concerns the former I shall for the excellency thereof (so far as
it concerns my purpose) transcribe verbatim.

Die veneris proxime ante Festum beati Edwardi, Anno Regni Regis Henrici tertii
34. venit Dominus Rex cum suo Concilio ad scaccarium and ibidem proprio ore
praecepit omnibus vicecomitibus Angliae, InterCommunia termino Mich. 35. Hen.
3. in Officio Remen. These. in Scac. Rot. 2. Intus. praeceptum Doms. Regis
tunc ibidem existentibus. Imprimis quod modis omnibus observarent and
manutenerent libertates sanctae Ecclesiae, and similiter manutenerent Pupillos
Orphanos, and viduas and celerem eis justiciam exhbierent, etc. Here we have,
it Registered in the Records of Fame, that the glorious King Henry the Third,
came in his own person into his Court of Exchequer, environed with his
Illustrious Counselors, Prove. 29.14.
and there with his own mouth gave it in charge to all the Sheriffs of England.
That in the first place (next after holy Church) they should Defend the Orphans
and Widows, and do unto them speedy Justice.

The other Record is that of 11. Hen. 6. where that Renowned King gives express
Order that a Roll should be forthwith made of such persons which had spent
their Youths and Estates in the service of his Royal Grandfather, Rot. Parl.
11. Hea. 6. Memh 6. Cok 54th. Inst ^6. Rot. Parl. 8. Hen. 6. Memb. 11.
Father and Himself, to the intent that such of them (I shall give you the very
words of the Record) which are without any Livelihood, or Reward.
Guerdon, and so in great mischief and necessity, and some but easily
Guerdoned, and naught like to their Desert and Service, may, when Offices and
Benefices fall, have them conferred upon them, etc. I hope no body will think me
so presumptuous or vain, as to prescribe this for an Example; I know when we
have served God and the King with our Lives and Fortunes, we are
notwithstanding unprofitable Servants, and have still done but our
indispensable duties, only this I shall say (and I speak it with an humble
modesty) That I hope we that were Sufferers for our Loyalty, shall be thought
now, as worthy of enjoying those poor Remnants and Scraps of our Fortanes, as
these persons before us were of receiving their Guerdons and Rewards. I do
never without a secret exaltation of Mind consider this following Memoire that
I find of Aug sius Caesar: upon the Defeat (says my Author) of Mark Antony
(...) famous Battle of Actium, Augustus commenced Emperor of the World, vita
Octavis Augusti, bound up in Plutarch's Lives.
some few yeaas after, a certain old Soldier (that in this Battle had done
^^^sar good service) happened to be impleaded for his Life before his Imperiat
Majesty, and the Senate; The Soldier implores Caesar (then present) to help him
in this Disiress, Caesar recommended him to an able Adoccate, the routh Soldier
not contented with this, forthwith rips open his bosom, and exposing to the
view of the whole Court the marks of the Wounds which he had received at the
said Battle of Actium; These wounds (quoth he) O Caesar have I received on my
mangled body in thy defense, and subs^^uted no Deputy in my place! Augustus
hereupon (overwhelmed with the Passionateness of this Action) presently stood
up and pleaded the Soldiers Cause himself, and carried it. An Action certainly
well beseeming an Emperor of the World! And are there not many miserable
persons concerned now with the Bankers, whose Fathers, Husbands, Children, and
other Relations have asserted the Crown of England with their dearest Lives and
Fortunes? nay, are not several of that kind yet surviving, which do yet bear in
their miserable bodies the Scars and glorious Remarks of their Loyalty,
received in the Battails of Edge-hil, Newberry, Nasby, Worcester, and indeed
where not? And shall we imagine that our Caesar (a Prince of such eminent
Clemency and Justice) will suffer these persons and their Families to starve
for want of that which is their own? And that he will not proceed (as he has
begun) to be an Advocate and Intercessor for them in so just a Cause.

I dare be confident his Majesty is inexpressibly sensible of this Calamity,
which is fallen upon us, and his Royal Bowels yerne with Compassion toward us.
Neither is the Delay of Payment hitherto any Defect in His Majesty's innate
Justice, but an Excressence and unhappy superfetation of the first pernicious
Council of Shutting the Exchequer; to think otherwise were to blaspheme the
greatest sweetness of Nature in the world, And to profane that Illustrious
Prince, of whom no man ever yet formed a thought, but his mind was presently
filled with the Idea of all that is Great, and Just.

For my part I am no Projector, and I have always in my own Nature abhominated
all Vermin of that kind; But yet me thinks it is not impossible to design a
Course how to pay off this Debt of the Bankers, and that by ways not only
practicable and Legal, but Grateful also to the Kingdom.

I am not ignorant that I have here all along in this Discourse dealt in an
Argument of sublimity and importance, of which a man can hardly write perhaps
without being in some measure Sacrilegious, Matthew. 12.3 and 4.
But yet we find that our Savior Christ excused the servants of King David,
when they were ready to perish for want of food, though they broke into the
House of God, and made bold with the holy Bread. Stamfords Pleas of the Crown.
And the Law of this Land acquits the person that steals viands to pacify the
present Languishments of nature. Where the purturbations of the Judgment and
Reason are so great, as in presumption of Law, man's Nature cannot overcome,
such necessity carries a Privilege in it self; Ld. Bacon's Maxims of Law, pa.
29.
(says no mean Author) And I hope that man shall not be thought pragmatical or
busy that deals in a matter in which the Fates of his Ruin or Happiness are
imbarck't.

There be many things which possibly I have forgot, and some things which I
have perhaps industriously omitted. If any matter have fallen from me
inconsiderately, (as in so long a Discourse may easily happen) I do with
unspeakable humility and Prostration beg Pardon, requesting this one Favor,
that no persons would censure me, or those worthy persons in my condition,
until they have first represented our Cases to them selves, as their own.

Protesting in the last place that I have written nothing but with a mind at
all times ready to sacrifice the Body it dwells in to the Honor and Safety of
my Gracious Sovereign and his Kingdoms, And upon that glorious account,
prepared always to suffer more, then He or They deserve; that advised His
Majesty to the stopping the Exchequer.

Illud omnium maxim tenendum erit a Princip^, ut fortunis alienis temper atum
fuisse cognoscatur: Nam citius parentum cadem oblivioni dant Homines; quam
Fortunarum suarum direptione^.

Nic. Machiavelli princeps, Cap. 17. His Majesty's Declaration To all His
Loving Subjects, to preserve Inviolable the Securities by Him given for Moneys,
and the due Course of Payments thereupon in the Receipt of the EXCHEQUER.
WHereas We are given to understand, That diverse of Our good and Loyal
Subjects, Goldsmiths and others, who have advanced to Us great Sums of Money
for the Public Service, which are sufficiently secured unto them upon several
Branches of Our Revenue, and other moneys arising by several late Acts of
Parliament, have upon occasion taken from the late Attempt of the Dutch Fleet,
and the false Reports spread thereof, been pressed in an unusual manner, with
many sudden Demands by their Creditors, for present Payment, through Fears and
Apprehensions; which may weaken the Credit of Our said Subjects,
who have been so useful to Us bring an undervalue on Our said Securities, and
in consequence endanger the Public Safety in this present Conjunctur: We have
therefore thought fit (as well for satisfying the minds of our good Subjects,
whose fears so transported them to call for their moneys in such a manner; as
for the allaying such Jealousies and misapprehensions as may be taken up by
those concerned in the said Securities) to Declare, as we do hereby declare,
that as the Course of Payments in our Exchequer has hitherto been punctual,
and according to the due Order, even in this time of disturbance and
interruption of Payments amongst our Subjects; so Our steadfast resolution for
preserving inviolable to all such Our good Subjects, who have Lent or Advanced
any moneys for Our service as aforesaid, All and every the Securities and
Assignements any ways made by Us for and toward the Repayment and
satisfaction of the said several sums of money:
And that We will not upon any occasion whatsoever permit or suffer any
Alteration, Anticipation, or Interruption to be made of our said Subjects
Securities; but that they shall from time to time receive the Moneys so secured
unto them, in the same Course and Method, as they were charged,
and ought to be satisfied. Which resolution we shall likewise hold firm and
sacred, in all Future Assignements and Securities to be by Us Granted upon any
other Advance of Money by any of our Subjects upon any Future Occasion for Our
Service. And we cannot doubt upon the publishing this our Royal Word and
Declaration of our sincere Intention, but that all reasonable persons will rest
satisfied that their fe^^s were causeless, and their respective Interests in no
danger at all, and that no evil can happen to them on this Occasion; since the
Securites by Us to them given being inviolable, we doubt not but that our said
Subjects will satisfy every person both their Principal and Interest, as they
have formerly done with untainted Reputation. And of this our Declaration we
straightly charge and Command our High Chancellor of England, the Lords
Commissioners of our Treasury, the Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of our
Exchequer, and all other our Officers and Ministers whatsoever whom it does or
may concern, to take notice and duly to observe the same, as they will be
answerable to Us at their utmost perils.

Given at Our Court at whitehall, this 18th. day of June 1667. And in the
Nineteenth year of Our Reign.

THE Postscript TO THE Letter.
THus (Sir) I have (as you see according to the Model of my weak Talent)
discovered the Enormity and pernicious Influences of this Advice, I ^ake God to
witness I have done this, without the least Malice or Design against any man's
person, of what Degree or Quality soever; Indeed if any man shall come from
behind the Curtain and with a bare and open face shall say I am the Man that
gave this Advice. That person I must confess (and only that person) has not
escapt my Animadversions, and from him only, and no body else I hope I can with
Reason, expect Reproof. And then let all Mankind judge, whether of the two is
more to be blamed, he that has lead his Prince out of the old via Regia or
King's high way, into by and untrodden Paths, unknown to the Law, and to walk
upon Precipices, or he that has given an honest Alarm or Outcry of this evil
Dealing.

The Lord Treasurer Burleigh (under whose old English Councels this Kingdom
flourisht, and became formidable to all the world, Cottoni posthuma p. 313.
and one perhaps that better understood the Genius and temper of this Nation
then this Advisor) was used to tell his Queen. Madam (says he) Win Hearts and
you will be sure of Hands and Purses. vita Dionis^.
And Dion (in Plutarch) does admonish the Son of King Dionysius. That the Love
of the subject (obtaind by virtue and Justice) is the strongest guard and
security of a Prince.

The great God of Heaven and Earth and my own Conscience will be my
Compurgators and Witnesses, that whatever I have said in this Discourse, I have
done it with a most ardent and passionate Desire of the Prosperity of my dread
Sovereign, and an unfeined Love to my dear Countrymen, and to raise and
enkindle (as well as I could) an universal Disposition in this Kingdom toward
the Payment of this Debt; That thereupon so considerable a part of the English
Nation (as are concerned with the Bankers) may not be overwhelmed with an
inevitable Ruin, and that so great a Member thereof may not be ravished and
torn limbmeal from the Body of this Commonwealth.

I shall probably be thought by some persons to have prosecuted this Argument
with a warmer Zeal then became me, and to have sallied out sometimes perhaps
into Extravagancies and Inconsideration: I can only Reply, that the Authors and
Testimonies by me vouched, are Authentic, and of approved Credit, and by me
truly and carefully quoted, That after I have sacrificed my Person and Fortunes
to mine Allegiance in the Late Rebellion; no man I hope will suppose that I
should now become Apostate or Renegado to so glorious a Cause, That Necessity,
and the want of a man's own, are spurs sharp and invincible; And Lastly that I
have been actuated all along in this Discourse with no other Impulses of mind,
then those which loosened the Tongue of the Dumb Son of King Craesus, when he
saw a Soldier ready to offer violence to his Father crying out, It is the King!
At whose Royal Feet I am always ready upon Occasion to lay down my Life,
together with that poor Mite or Fragment of Estate, which the Rebbeis and this
Advisor have left me: Praying (in the Scripture Language) That God would strike
through the Loins of all them that hate His Majesty, but that upon his own Head
his Crown may for ever flourish.

I am Sir your most Affectionate Servant, S. R.

Errata.
Reader,
Some faults thou art desired to amend, which by reason of the absence of the
Author, and haste, have escaped the Press. As in the third page of the Letter
in the first sheet, Line 18. for irradicated read irradiated, etc. The
Poyntings also in many places are to be amended.

FINIS.

