THE Dying Speeches, LETTERS and PRAYERS, etc. Of those EMINENT Protestants Who
Suffered in the WEST of ENGLAND, (And Elsewhere,) UNDER THE CRUEL SENTENCE Of
the late Lord Chancellor, THEN Lord Chief Justice JEFFERYS: WITH An Account of
their Undaunted Courage at the Bar, and afterward; and the most remarkable
Circumstances that attended their EXECUTION.

Never before Published.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, over
against the Compter; and are to be Sold by R. Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in
Paternoster Row. 1689.

To the Memory of those Worthy Protestants who Suffered in the West and
elsewhere, in the Year 1685.
SInce that free Agent who conducts the World,
His Wheels of Providence has backward whirled,
And by the Turn men to their Senses brings,
To loath their Idol-Priests, and Idol-Kings,
(Finding a Popish promise proves all one
From an Ignatian Chair and from a Thron^,)
Since over Indulgent Heaven has been so kind
To op'en our Eyes by Miracles, we find
All men admiring they have so long been blind;
Surpised they should so long their Friends oppose,
And with a credulous trust caress their foes.
Amidst the numerous Wonders of the time,
It Is no small wonder (not to say a Crime)
We reverence no more their memory
Who for their Countrey's welfare dared to dye;
Whose quartered Limbs imbrued with Native gore,
Still cry for vengeance on the Western shore.
Why should we with ignoble triumph tread
Upon the silent Ashes of the dead?
And with insulting feet their dust profane
Whose freeborn Souls spurned at a slavish Chain;
Souls (not so senseless, so supine as ours)
That early saw the drift of Romish Powers,
Early disdained those yoaks with generous s^orn
Which our more servile necks have tamely born;
That saw the hovering Storm approach from far
Threatening a thousand mischiefs (worse than war)
And boldly rushed upon the impetuous Waves,
Rather to dye like men than live like Slaves;
To save their native Country bravely tried,
Failed in the attempt, and then as bravely died.
In vain would envious clouds their Fame obscure,
Which to eternal Ages must endure.
In vain do virulent Tongues attempt to stain
The solid Glory noble Patriots gain.
If ill designs some to the Battle drew,
It Is Impious to condemn all for a few:
If fawning Traitors in their Councils fate,
It Is base to mock, rather lament their fate:
Tho God (for England's sins) refused to bless
Their brave designs with the desired success,
It Is an unequal Brutish argument
Always to judge the Cause by the Event;
Thus the unthinking giddy Multitude
A suffering Jesus Criminal conclude.
Well, it is enough, Heaven now crowns with Applause,
And gives protection to that righteous Cause;
Nay, did ordain that Spot to be the Scene
Where the Cause died, for it to revive again.
Great Nassau favored by the Powers above,
(Their special care, and their peculiar love,)
An Atlas to our sinking State does prove;
Auspicious Stars on all his Councils smile,
That breathe vast Blessings on our joyful Isle.
And now methinks their Manes who of late
Fell worthy Martyrs of our bleeding State,
Reproach us with Ingratitude, and say,
"Is nothing due unto our murdered Clay?
"Unto our murdered Names is nothing due,
"Who sacrificed both Lives and Names for you?
"Does no Tongue daign to move in the defense
"Of wounded Honor, and wronged Innocence?
"If the All-wise God (tho Just) do'nt yet see good
"With swift revenge to appease our crying Blood,
"Save us at least from Envy's darker Grave,
"And let our Fame a Resurrection have.
Great Souls, too great for our Inferior Praise!
You for your selves the noblest Trophyes raise;
Your Dying Words your Monuments become
More Bright, more Lasting than a Marble Tomb,
To future Times your Fame shall freshly bloom,
And speak aloud, till it strike Envy dumb.
THE Dying Speeches, LETTERS and PRAYERS, etc. OF Those Eminent Protestants who
Suffered in the West of England, and elsewhere.
Some Passages of Henry Cornish, Esquire before his Sufferings.
COming into the Press-yard, and seeing the Halter in the Officers hand, he
said, Is this for me? the Officer answered, Yes; he replied, Blessed be God,
and Kissed it, and after said, O blessed be God for Newgate, I have enjoyed God
ever since I came within these Walls, and blessed be God who has made me fit
to dye. I am now going to that God that will not b^ mocked, to that God that
will not be imposed upon, to that God that knows the Innocence of his poor
Creature: And a little after he said, Never did any poor Creature come unto God
with greater Confidence in his Mercy, and Assurance of Acceptance with him,
through Jesus Christ, than I do; but it is through Jesus Christ, for there is
no other way of coming to God but by him, to find acceptance with him; there is
no other Name given under. Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the Name of
Jesus: Then speaking to the Officers, he said, Labor every one of you to be
fit to dye, for I tell you, you are not fit to dye: I was not fit to dye my
self 'till I came in hither; but O blessed be God, he has made me fit to dye,
and has made me willing to dye! In a few moments I shall have the fruition of
the Blessed Jesus, and that not for a day, but for ever: I am going to the
Kingdom of God, to the Kingdom of God, where I shall enjoy the presence of God
the Father, and of God the Son, and of God the Holy Spirit, and of all the Holy
Angels, I am going to the general Assembly of the Firstborn, and of the
spirits of just Men made perfect: O that God should ever do so much for me! O
that God should concern himself so much for the good of poor Creatures, for
their salvation, blessed be his Name! for this was the design of God from all
Eternity, to give his only Son to dye for poor miserable sinners. Then the
Officers going to tie his Hands, he said, What, must I be tied then? well, a
brown Thread might have served the turn; you need not tie me at all, I shall not
stir from you, for I thank God I am not afraid to dye: As he was going out, he
said, Farewell Newgate, Farewell all my fellow prisoners here, the Lord comfort
you, the Lord be with you all.

The Crowd and Noise of People being so great that what was spoken at the Place
of Execution could not be exactly taken, it was not thought convenient to
Publish it.

Mr. Richard Nelthrope's LETTER TO HIS Parents, Brothers and Sister.
Dearest Parents, and ever loving Brothers, and tender hearted and beloved
Sister,
THrough the Infinite Goodness of God, the nearer I approach my end, the more
Joy and Comfort I find in my suffering Estate, (that I may so call it:) I can
through Mercy say, that I have found more true Delight and Content this Night
than in all the Days and Nights of my whole life; and I hope the Lord will
continue it, that his Name may be glorified by me the meanest and poorest of
all his Servants, but through Free Grace faithful unto the end: My Soul is
ravished* I can hardly write, and my Comforts are more unspeakable than my
Terrors were. I did this Evening see my dearest Brother and Companion; his Face
was to me as that of an Angel, and he gave me that Comfort, that I cannot but
say my Love to him is beyond what I ever had to my dearest Relations. When God
comes, every thing has a beauty and luster upon it; here is an Answer of
Prayers, and such an Answer as Dearest Relations, must engage you all to be
constant in performance of that Duty, which like Jacob's Ladder, though it
stand upon the Earth, yet it reaches up to Heaven: Here Is the Love of God made
manifest to a poor Sinner at the last hour; like the Thief upon the Cross, he
that never knew before what the Love of God was to his Soul, finds it now
filled with it, and running over. Now bless the Lord, O my Soul! yea all that
is within me, Bless his holy Name for this Dispensation: Now light appears out
of darkness in the face of Jesus; now all worldly Joy and Comforts seem to me
(as they are) things not hard to part with; Father, Mother, Brothers, Sister,
Wife, Children, House and Lands are (as my Dear Savior says,) to be parted
with for him, or we are not worthy of him: I Bless his Name, I find no
reluctance to do it; he has brought me to his footstool, and I can say
heartily, the Will of the Lord be done in this Matter. I never before but saw a
beauty in worldly Comforts, but now those seem so faded by the greater luster
and beauty that I see in God in Christ Jesus, that I am astonished where I have
been wandering all my days, spending my time and my money for that which is
not Bread. O strive to get a taste of this Love of God in Christ Jesus! and it
will perfectly wean you from this deceitful foolish World: What is worldly
Honor and Riches! O set not your hearts upon them, but get a Treasure in
Heaven, that your hearts may be there also: O lose no time! for if you ever
knew the sweetness of it, you would never be at rest 'till you found him whom
your Soul loved; it will be more, yea infinitely more than all worldly
Enjoyments can afford you, though in their greatest perfection; it will make
your Life sweet, and your Death most comfortable: It is the Bread which this
World knows not of, and therefore makes little or no enquiry after it.
Dearest Relations, whilst you and my other dear Friends are like Aaron and Hur,
holding up the hands of Moses, I am through Grace getting Victory over the
Amalakites. I can embrace my dear and beloved Brother and Companion with more
Joy in the field of Suffering, than ever I could have done, had I met him
crowned with the Laurels of Victory: Oh the Mercy to dye with such a Friend,
and such a valiant Soldier of Jesus, who has kept his garments clean. I now
begin to pity you that stay behind, who have many Temptations to conflict with;
for a little, yea a very little time, and my warfare will be accomplished; and
if God continue his Love and Influence upon my Soul, it will be both short and
sweet. I have little of this World about me, I leave you all the Legacy of what
was ever dearest to me, the best of Wives, and five poor Children, who must
pass through an evil and sinful World; but I have committed them to God, who
has commanded to cast our Fatherless Children and Widows upon him. Dear
Parents, Brothers, Sister, all adieu, my time draws on, my Paper is finished,
and your dying Child and Brother recommends you all to him who is alsufficient,
to the God of Peace that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, the great
Shepherd of the sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, who will
make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

Richard Nelthrope.
From the Palace of Newgate, October the 30th. 1685. Two of the Clock in the
Morning.
Mr. Richard Nelthrope's Letter to his Children.
My dear Children,
THE Providence of God has so ordered it, that your poor and ever loving
Father is taken from you in such a manner as may cast both worldly Loss and
Reproach upon you; but I charge you let not this be a Stumbling Block to you in
the way of God, but that you remember your Creator in the days of your Youth:
That you never neglect a day without reading the Holy Scripture, wherein you will
find your Duty both to God and Man; there you will find the way to everlasting
Life; there you will find Christ Jesus instructing you, and dying for you. Seek
first the Kingdom of Heaven, and all other things will be added to you: After
your Duty to God Almighty, your dying Father charges and conjures you, as you will
answer it at the great day of Appearance of our dearest Savior, that you be
dutiful and loving to the best of Mothers, as long as God shall continue that
great Mercy to you: Hearken to her Voice, and be obedient to the words of her
Mouth, for she will be faithful to your Souls and Bodies; and remember that
Obedience to Parents has the Promise of this Life, as well as of Eternal Life.
Pay a great Duty and Obedience to your Grandfather and Grandmother, Unkles and
Aunt, who all of them have not only testified the greatest Love to your dying
Father, but from whom, if you carry your selves as becomes you, you may expect
both the good things of this World, and Advice and Counsel for what is far
beyond all temporal Blessings. Diligence in your lawful Callings to which God
shall in his Providence appoint you, is both commendable, and a Duty; but let
not the eager pursuit of the things of this World, justle out the Time allotted
for better things: Prayer will bless what you get in your Employments, and so
at once you obtain Gods Blessing upon worldly mercies, and find God manifesting
himself to you in his dear Son Christ Jesus, in the Pardon of your sins, and
receiving worldly things in the Covenant. Your tender years in which I leave
you in this wicked and deceitful world, may render you subject to many
temptations, but I commit you to the Father of the Fatherless, who is able to
preserve you both in Soul and Body: your poor Father has no Legacy to leave
you but the Blessing of the great Jehovah, which he begs for you upon the
bended knees of his Soul. The Lord God bless you with the Dew of Heaven, and if
he sees good, give you Jacob's Portion, Food and Raiment; and if the Lord bless
you with any temporal Goods, remember they are Talents, employ them well to the
Masters use: No Duty so acceptable to God as Charity, that is it which our
Savior exalts so far, that he says, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom, for I was an hungry and ye fed me, naked and ye clothed me, sick and
in prison and ye visited me. I die and leave you, but if you keep close to God
and his ways, he will never leave you nor forsake you: The sum of the whole
is, Fear God and keep his Commandments: Do that to all others that you would
they should do to you, is the golden Rule of the Gospel, and will be a great
Preservative to you from offending either God or Man. Eternity calls me away,
and I have neither Time nor Opportunity to add more: Your Duties may be various
in the World, as Servants, as Masters, as Husbands, as Wives, as Parents: There
is no Condition of life but has its Comforts and its Troubles; the Lord fit
you for whatsoever Condition he calls you to, whether Honor or Dishonor,
Riches or Poverty: But remember, whatsoever it be, it is God's Providence
orders and governs the World. Dear James, as thou art the eldest, strive to be
the best, and a good Example to the rest, a dutiful and a loving Son: Whatever
thou or the rest have lost by me, God can make up even in this Life. My dear
Babes, who have been all Pledges of my Love, by the best and most affectionate
Wife; I do once more beg it of you, as my last Request, that you obey, love and
honor her, who has been the greatest worldly Blessing to your Father, and
will never think any thing too much to do for you. My dear Children, Farewell,
I must now take my leave both of you and all worldly Comforts: I trust and hope
I am going to the Eternal Inheritance, where Sin and Sorrow cease; and that I
may meet you at the right hand of my blessed Savior, is the dying Prayer of

Dear Children, Your affectionate and loving Father, Richard Nelthrope.
Newgate, 29 October. 1685.
Mr. Nelthrope's last Speech.
THE great and inexpressible trouble and distraction I have been under since I
came into trouble, especially since my close Confinement in Newgate, has so
broken my Reason, that for many weeks last past, till the day my Sentence was
passed, I have not had any composure of mind, and have been under the greatest
trouble imaginable: Since my dearest Wife has had the favor granted her of
coming to me, I am at present under great composedness of mind, through the
infinite goodness of the Lord. As to what I stand Outlawed for, and am now
sentenced to Dye, I can with comfort appeal to the great God, before whose
Tribunal I am to appear, that what I did was in the simplicity of my heart,
without seeking any private advantage to my self, but thinking it my Duty to
hazard my Life for the preservation of the Protestant Religion and English
Liberties, which I thought invaded, and both in great danger of being lost. As
to the design of Assassinating the late King, or his present Majesty, it always
was a thing highly against my Judgment, and which I always detested; and I was
never in the least concerned in it, neither in Purse nor Person, nor never knew
of any Arms bought for that Intent, nor did I believe there was any such
design, nor ever heard of any disappointment in such an Affair, or Arms, or
Time or Place, save what after the discovery of the General design, Mr. West
spoke of, as to Arms bought by him: And as to my self, I was in the North when
the late King was at New Market, and the first news I had of the Fire, was at
Beverly in Yorkshire. As to my coming over with the late Duke of Monmouth, it
was in prosecution of the same ends; but the Lord in his holy and wise
Providence has been pleased to blast all our undertakings; tho there seemed to
be a very unanimous and zealous spirit in all those that came from beyond the
Seas: And as to the Duke of Monmouth's being declared King, I was wholly
passive in it, I never having been present at any public Debate of that
affair, and should never have advised it, but complained of it to Coll. Holms
and Captain Patchet. I believe the Lord Gray and Mr. F -- the chief Promoters
of it. As to the Temptation of being an Evidence, and bringing either into
trouble or danger any the meanest Person of his Life, upon the Account for
which I suffer, I always abhorred and detested the thoughts of it, both when in
and out of danger, and advised some very strongly against it; except when under
my distractions in Prison, that amongst other temptations did violently assault
me; but through the goodness of my dearest God and Father, I was preserved from
it, and indeed was wholly incapable, and could never receive the least shadow
of comfort from it, but thought Death more eligible, and was some time before,
out of my distracted and disquieted condition, wholly free from it; tho not
without other Temptations far more Criminal in the sight of men. I bless the
Father of all mercies, and God of all Consolations, that I find a great
Resignedness of my Will to his, finding infinitely more comfort in Death, than
ever I could place in Life, tho in a Condition that might seem honorable,
every hour seeing the Will of God in ordering this Affair more and more cleared
up to me. God has given, God has taken, blessed be his holy Name, that has
enabled me to be willing to suffer, rather than to put forth my hand to
Iniquity, or to say a Confederacy with those that do so. I am heartily and
sincerely troubled for what has happened, many men's Lives being lost, and many
poor distressed Families rained; the Lord pardon what of sin he has seen in
it. He in his wonderful Providence has made me and others concerned,
Instruments, not only for what is already fallen out, but I believe, for
hastening some other great work he has to do in these Kingdoms; whereby he
will try and purge his People, and winnow the Chaff from the Wheat: the Lord
keep those that are his, faithful unto the end.

I dye-in Charity with all the World, and can readily and heartily forgive my
greatest Enemies, even those that have been Evidences against me; and I most
humbly beg the Pardon of all I have any wise in the least injured; and in a
special manner most humbly ask Pardon of the Lady Loyl's Family and Relations,
for that my being succored there one night with Mr. Hicks, brought that worthy
Lady to suffer Death: I was wholly a Stranger to her Ladyship, and came with
Mr. Hicks; neither did she (as I verily believe) know who I was, or my Name,
'till I was taken: And if any other have come to any loss or trouble, I humbly
beg their Pardon; and were I in a Condition, I would, as far as I was able,
make them a requital. As to my Faith, I neither look nor hope for mercy, but
only in the Free Grace of God, by the Application of the Blood of Jesus my
dearest and only Savior, to my poor sinful Soul: my Distresses have been
exceeding great as to my eternal State, but through the infinite Goodness of
God, tho I have many sins to answer for, yet I hope and trust, as to my
particular, that Christ came for this very end and purpose, to relieve the
Oppressed, and to be a Physician to the sick. I come unto thee, O blessed
Jesus, refuse me not, but wash me in thine own Blood, and then present me to
thy Father as righteous! What tho my sins be as Crimson, and of a Scarlet dye,
yet thou can make them as white as Snow. I see nothing in my self but what
must utterly ruin and condemn me, I cannot answer for one action of my whole
Life, but I cast my self wholly upon thee, who art the Fountain of Mercy, in
whom God is reconciling himself to the World, the greatest of Sins and Sinners
may find an All Sufficiency in thy Blood to cleanse them from all sin. O
dearest Father of Mercy, look upon me as righteous in and through the imputed
righteousness of thy Son; he has paid the debt by his own offering up himself
for sin, and in that thy Justice is satisfied, and thy Mercy is magnified.
Grant me thy love O dearest Father, assist me and stand by me in the needful
hour of Death, give thy Angels charge over my poor Soul, that the Evil One may
not touch nor hurt it. Defend me from his power, deliver me from his rage, and
receive me into thine Eternal Kingdom, in and through the alone Merits of my
dearest Redeemer, for whom I praise thee: To whom with thy self and Holy Spirit
be ascribed all Glory, Honor, Power, Might and Dominion, for ever and for
ever, Amen.

Dear Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit, Amen. R. Nelthrope.
Newgate, October 29. 1685.
Mrs. Gaunt's Speech, written the day before her Sufferings.
NOT knowing whether I should be suffered or able, because of weaknesses that
are upon me through my hard and close Imprisonment, to speak at the place of
Execution; I writ these few lines to signify, That I am well reconciled to the
way of my God toward me, though it be in ways I looked not for, and by
terrible things, yet in righteousness; having given me Life, he ought to have
the disposing of it, when and how he pleases to call for it; and I desire to
offer up my All to him, it being but my reasonable Service; and also the first
Terms that Jesus Christ offers, that he that will be his Disciple must forsake
all and follow him, and therefore let none think hard or be discouraged at what
has happened unto me; for he does nothing without cause, in all he has done
unto us, he being holy in all his ways, and righteous in all his works; and
it is but my lot in common with poor desolate Sion at this day: Neither do I
find in my heart the least regret for what I have done in the service of my
Lord and Master Jesus Christ, in succouring and securing and of his poor
Sufferers, that have showed favor to his righteous Cause; which Cause though
now it be fallen and trampled upon, as if it had not been anointed, yet it
shall revive, and God will plead it at another rate than ever he has done yet,
and reckon with all its opposers and malicious haters; and therefore let all
that love and fear him, not omit the least Duty that comes to hand, or lies
before them; knowing that now it has need of them, and expects they shall
serve him: And I desire to bless his holy Name, that he has made me useful in
my generation, to the comfort and relief of many desolate ones, and the
blessing of those that are ready to perish has come upon me, and being helped to
make the Heart of the Widow to sing. And I bless his holy Name, that in all
this, together with what I was Charged with, I can approve my Heart to him,
that I have done his Will, though it does cross Man's Will: and the Scriptures
that satisfy me are Isa. 16. 4. Hide the Outcasts, bewray not him that
wandereth: And Obad. 13, 14. Thou should not have given up those of his that
did escape in the day of his distress: But Man says, you shall give them up, or
you shall dye for it; now who to Obey, Judge ye: So that I have cause to
rejoice and be exceeding glad, in that I suffer for righteousness sake, and
that I am accounted worthy to suffer for well doing, and that God has accepted
any service from me, which has been done in sincerity, though mixed with
manifold infirmities, which he has been pleased for Christ's sake to cover and
forgive. And now as concerning my Fact, as it is called, alas it was but a
little one, and might well become a Prince to forgive; but he that shows no
Mercy, shall find none: And I may say of it in the language of Jonathan, I did
but taste a little honey, and lo I must dye for it; I did but relieve an
unworthy, poor, distressed Family, and so I must dye for it: Well, I desire in
the Lamb-like Gospel spirit, to forgive all that are concerned, and to say,
Lord lay it not to their Charge; but I fear he will not: nay, I believe when he
comes to make inquisition for Blood, it will be found at the door of the
furious Judge; who because I could not remember things, through my dauntedness
at Burden's Wife and Daughters vileness, and my ignorance, took advantage
thereat, and would not hear me, when I had called to mind that which I am sure
would have invalidated their evidence; though he granted something of the same
kind to another at that time, yet denied it unto me. My Blood will also be
found at the door of the unrighteous Jury, who found me guilty upon the single
Oath of an Outlawed Man; for there was none but his Oath about the Money, who
is no legal Witness, though he be Pardoned, his Outlawry not being recalled;
and also the Law requires two Witnesses in point of Life: And then about my
going with him to the place mentioned, 'twas by his own words, before he was
Outlawed, for 'twas two Months after his absconding; and though in a
Proclamation, yet not High Treason, as I have heard; so that I am clearly
Murdered by you. And also bloody Mr. A. who has so unsatiably hunted after my
Life, and though it is no Profit to him, through the ill will he bore me, left
no stone unturned as I have ground to believe, 'till he brought it to this; and
showed favor to Burton, who ought to have dyed for his own fault, and not
bought his Life with mine; and Capt. R. who is cruel and severe to all under my
Circumstances, and did at that time, without all Mercy or Pity hasten my
Sentence, and held up my hand, that it might be given; all which, together with
the great One of all, by whose Power all these, and a multitude more of
Cruelties are done, I do heartily and freely forgive, as against me; but as it
it is done in an implacable mind against the Lord Christ, and his righteous
Cause and Followers, I leave it to him who is the avenger of all such wrongs,
who will tread upon Princes as upon mortar, and be terrible to the Kings of the
Earth: And know this also, that though ye are seemingly fixed, and because of
the Power in your hand are writing out your Violence, and dealing with a
despiteful hand, because of the old and new hatred; by impoverishing and every
way distressing of those you have got under you, yet unless you can secure
Jesus Christ and all his Holy Angels, you shall never do your business, nor
your hands accomplish your Enterprises, for he will be upon you e're you are
aware; and therefore O that you would be wise, instructed and learn, is the
desire of her that finds no Mercy from you,

Elizabeth Gaunt.
Such as it is, you have it from her who has done as she could, and is sorry
she can do no better, hopes you will pity and consider weakness, shortness, and
any thing that is wanting: And beggs that none may be weakened or troubled at my
lowness of spirit, for God designs to humble and abase us, that he alone may be
exalted in this day; and I do hope he will appear in the needful time; and it
may be he reserves the best Wine 'till the last, as he has done for some
before me: None goes a Warfare at his own Charges, and the Spirit blows not
only where but when it lists; and it becomes me who have so often grieved and
vexed it, quenched and resisted it, to wait for and upon its motions, and not to
murmur; but I may mourn though, because through want of it I honor not my God
nor his beloved Cause, which I have so long loved and delighted to serve; and
repent of nothing about it, but that I have valued it and him no better.

E. G.



Mr. J. Hicks's last Speech, 1685.
I Suppose the Spectators here present may expect I should speak something
before I leave this sanguinary Stage, and passage through my bloody Sufferings,
by which my immortal Spirit will be speedily transported into an invisible and
eternal World, and I conclude that they have different Resentments hereof; some
resent them with much joy, high exultation and triumph, others with equal grief
and sorrow; that to the one I am a most pleasant spectacle, that they behold me
with high Complacency and Delight; but to the other I am a mournful and
unpleasant one, and they behold me with no less pity and compassion: Concerning
the first, I can say, I freely and heartily forgive them, and heartily Pray
that God would most mercifully and graciously prevent their mourning through
Misery, not only here, but eternally hereafter: Concerniug the other, I will
say, Weep for your own sins, and for the sins of the Nation, for the highest
Rebellions that ever were committed against the great and eternal God; lament
bitterly for those sins that have been the meritorious Cause of the late
terrible Judgment, that which I fear will cause God to break in upon this
Nation with an overflowing deluge of Judgments, which are far more tremendous
and dreadful: As for sympathizing with me in drinking this bitter Cup appointed
for me, I return you most humble and hearty thanks, earnestly desiring God to
come unto you, and fill your Souls with all celestial Comforts and spiritual
Consolations. Something I must say to purge and clear my self from a false
Accusation laid to my Charge; as that I was engaged with Coll. Blood in
rescuing Coll. Mason, near Boston, when he was sent down with a Guard from
London to York, to be Tried for High Treason; and that I was the Man that
killed the Barber of that City; and that also I was with him when he stole the
Crown: Now as I am a dying Man, and upon the very brink' of a very stupendous
Eternity, (the truth and reality whereof I firmly believe) without any
reservation or the least equivocation, I do declare in the Presence of the
all-seeing God, that impartial Judge, before whom in a very little time I must
appear, I never saw nor Conversed with Mr. Tho. Blood, from 1656. till after he
stole the Crown, which was in 71, or 72. nor was ever engaged with him in any
of his treasonable Plotts or Practices. It Is true, I being involved in great
trouble of another Nature, (of which I have given to the World a Narrative, and
which is notoriously known in the Country where I then lived, by some that
were Enemies to me for my Preaching) I was persuaded to apply my self to Mr.
Blood, to procure by his Intercession his late majesty's gracious Favor;
accordingly he brought me into his Royal Presence; while I was there, his
Majesty carried it with great Clemency, without expressing one word of that
which I am now charged with: Mr. Blood continued with his Majesty a little
longer than I did; then he told me that he had granted me a Pardon, which I did
thankfully accept of, knowing it would free me from all Penalties and Troubles
that I was obnoxious to, and were occasioned to me by my Nonconformity; then
engaging him to take out my Pardon, he told me that he got it out with several
others that had been engaged with him in several treasonable Designs and
Actions, at which I was troubled, supposing it might be imputed to me thereby;
yet God knows I have often since reflected upon it with great regret and
dissatisfaction: if Mr. Blood did inform the late King to make himself the more
considerable, and to bring as many of his Party as he could to accept of their
Pardons, that he might be rendered utterly incapable of Plotting any further
mischief against his Government, or any other ways that I was engaged with him
in any of his treasonable Attempts; I now appeal to God as a dying Man
concerning it, that he has done me an irreparable wrong. I also in the same
manner do declare, that I was never engaged with any Party in Plotting or
Designing, or Contriving any Treason or Rebellion against the late King; and
particularly that I was altogether unconcerned in, and unacquainted with that
for which my Lord Russel and others suffered, and as much a Stranger to any
against the present King. And whereas it is reported of me, that at Taunton I
persuaded the late Duke of Monmouth to assume the Title of King, I do once more
solemnly declare, that I saw not the said Duke, nor had any Converse with him
'till he came to Shipton-Mallet, which was thirteen days after he Landed, and
several days after he had been at Taunton: And it is as false, that I rid too
and fro in the West to stir up and persuade Men to go into his Army, and rebel
against his present Majesty; for I was in the East Country when the Duke
Landed, and from thence I went directly to him, when he was at Shipton-Mallet,
not one Man accompanying me from thence. But hitherto as I lived, so now I dye
owning and professing the true Reformed Christian (commonly called the
Protestant) Religion, which is founded on the pure written Word of God only,
and which I acknowledge likewise to be comprehended in the Articles of the
Doctrine of the Church; this Religion I have made a reasonable and free Choice
of, and have heartily embraced, not only as it protests against all Pagan and
Mohammedan Religion, but against the Corruption of the Christian; and I humbly
and earnestly Pray to God that by his Infinite Wisdom and Almighty Power, he
will prevent not only the utter extirpation but diminition thereof, by the
height and influence of what is contrary thereto; and for that end the Lord
make the Professors of it to live up more to its Principles and Rules, and
bring their Hearts and Conversations more under the Government and Power of the
same. I dye also owning my Ministry, Nonconformity, for which I have suffered
so much, and which does now obstruct the Kings Grace and Mercy to be manifested
and extended to me: For as I chose it not constrainedly, so I appeal to God as
a dying Man, not moved from sullenness or humor, or factious temper, or
erroneous Principles of Education, or from secular Interests, or worldly
advantages, but clearly from the Dictates of my own Conscience, and as I judged
it to be the Cause of God, and to have more of Divine Truth in it than that
which is contrary thereto; so now I see no Cause to repent of it, nor to recede
from it; not questioning but God will own it at the last Judgment-day: If no
more had been required after the late King's Restoration to qualify Ministers
for public Preaching, than was after the first Restoration from the time of
Charles the first, probably I might have satisfied my self therewith, and not
scrupled Conformity thereto; but the Terms and Conditions thereof by a
particular Law made in 1662. being not only new, but so strict and severe that
I could never have satisfaction in my own Conscience, after all endeavors used
for a Compliance therewith and a Conformity thereto: to say nothing of the
Covenant, which I never took, but the giving my Assent and Consent, have been
too difficult and hard for me to comply with: And I very well remember that
about fourteen years ago, entering into a Discourse with Mr. Patrick Heldore
and Irishman, who was Contemporary with me in Dublin, concerning Conformity,
which he much endeavored to persuade me to, I urged the severity of the
forementioned Conditions against it, and after some Debates and Reasons with
him, I told him I did believe they were contrived and designed on purpose to
prevent our public Preaching, and to keep us out of the Church: to which he
ingenuously replied, he judged it was so; For, said he, a Bishop in Ireland
(whose Name I have forgot) told me the very same. But though I could not wade
through and conquer this Difficulty, yet I censure not those that did it; and I
believe after all the hottest Disputes, and most vehement Debates, and violent
Contests between Conformist and Nonconformist, there are of both Parties will
be glorified in Heaven hereafter. According to the 29th. Article of the Church
of England, a visible Church is a Congregation of faithful Men, in the which
the pure Word of God is Preached, the Sacraments of the Lord duly administered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, and all those things that of necessity are
requisite and necessary to salvation; so with such a Church I have held the
most intimate Communion, and with such (did I live) could hold it: I would not
therefore be so Incorporated with any Church as to exclude me from, and render
me incapable of holding Communion with other Churches; I was never strongly
bound up to any form of Ecclesiastical Government, but that under which a pure
and undefiled Religion does flourish, and that which contains and really
practices Holiness, and advances the Kingdom of God in the World, that can I
approve of, and submit to, and willingly live under, were I to live.

I did approve of the ancient and present form of Civil Government, English
Monarchy; I am fully satisfied with, and do also declare, that it is not
warrantable for any Subject to take up Arms against, and resist their lawful
Sovereigns and rightful Princes: And therefore had I not been covinced by
several things that I have read and heard, to believe that the late Duke of
Monmouth was the Legitimate Son of his Father Charles the second, I had never
gone into his Army, judging that without this I could not be freed from the
guilt of Rebellion, which I always resolved to keep my self clear from: And tho
his Father denied that he was married to his Mother, I thought it might be
answered with this: That Kings and Princes, for State-reasons, often cannot be
fathomed by their Subjects, affirming and denying things which otherwise they
would not do, and make even their natural Affections to truckle and stoop
thereto. I exhort all, to abhor all treasonable Plots, and pretenses of all
Rebellion, with the highest Detestation, and to take the plain Text of sacred
Scripture to walk by, in honoring and obeying, and living in Subjection to
rightful Kings, and not readily to Receive, or suddenly to be Impressed with
evil Reports and Defamations of them, also not Rashly to be propagators of the
same.

I desire God to forgive all mine Enemies, and to give me an heart to forgive
them, which are many, some mighty, and all most malicious: Particularly Barter
of Lisnel, who betrayed me, and proved such a Traitor to James D. of M. his old
and intimate Friend. I am grievously afflicted that I should prove the occasion
of the great sufferings of so many Persons and Families: But this has fallen
under the Just and wise ordering of Divine Providence, as David's going to
Abimelech, when he proved the occasion of the Death of all the Persons, Men,
Women, and Children, in the City: But who shall say unto God, What do thou?
The care of my most dear Wife and a great many Children, I cast upon God, who I
hope will be better than the best of Husbands unto her, and the best of Fathers
unto them: God knows how Just and Legal Right my Wife has unto her Estate; to
him therefore I commit her, to defend her from the violence and oppression of
men; particularly from a most inhumane and unnatural Brother: But no wonder if
he will lay violent hands upon his Sisters Estate, that has so often laid them
on his own Father. I dye a deeply humbled, self-judging and self-condemning
Sinner, loathing and abhorring my many and great Iniquities, and my self for
them, earnestly desiring full Redemption from the bonds of Corruption, under
which I have groaned so many years, longing for a most perfect Conformity to
the most glorious and holy God, the only Infinite pure Being; thirsting for a
perfect Diffusion of his Grace through all the Powers and Faculties of my Soul,
panting after perfect Spiritual Life and Liberty, and a Consummate Love to my
dearest Jesus, who is an All-comprehensive Good, and to be satisfied with his
Love for ever: A vigorous and vehement Zeal for the Protestant Religion, with a
Belief I had of the Dukes Legitimacy, has involved me into this ignominious
Death; yet blessed be God, that by sincere Repentance and true Faith in the
Blood of Jesus, there is a passage from it to a glorious Eternal Life, and from
these bitter sorrows to the fullness of sweetest Joys that are in his Presence,
and from these sharp bodily pains to those more pure Pleasures that are at his
Right hand for evermore; and blessed be God, that such a Death as this cannot
prevent and hinder Christ's changing of my vile Body, and fashioning it like
unto his Glorious Body, in the general Resurrection-day. I am now going into
that World, where many dark things shall be made perfectly manifest and clear,
and many doubtful things fully Resolved, and a plenary Satisfaction given
concerning them; all Disputes and Mistakes concerning Treason, Rebellion and
Schism, shall be at an end and cease for ever: many things that are Innocent,
Lawful and Laudable, which have foul Marks and black Characters stamped and fixed
upon them here, they shall be perfectly purified and fully cleansed from there;
where at one view, more shall be known of them, than by all wrangling Debates
and eager Disputes, or by Reading all Polemick Books concerning them here. I
greatly deplore and bewail the greedy Appetite and insatiable thirst, that
Professing Protestants have after the Blood of their Brethren, and the high
pleasure they take in the Effusion thereof. But what will not Men do, when they
are either Judicially blinded, or their secular worldly Interest insensibly
insinuates and winds it self into their Religion? Is so twisted and
incorporated with it, that it animates and acts it, is the Life and Soul, the
vital Form and Power, and made wholly subservient thereunto.

I bless God for all my Sufferings, and particularly for this last, for the
benefit and fruit of it, by Gods sanctifying of them to me, have been great;
hereby I have been effectually convinced of the Vanity of the World, and my own
sinfulness by Nature and practice, and to see that to be sin which I never saw
before; and to be more thoroughly humbled for what I know to be sin, not only of
Commission, but of Omission also: Hereby I have been brought to a more
thorough, deep inward sense and feeling of the absolute necessity of the
Righteousness of Christ to justify me, and he has been made much more dear
and precious to my Soul, than ever he was before. Hereby my Soul has been more
Refined from the Dross of Sensuality, wrought into a more heavenly Frame,
raised up to a higher pitch of Spirituality; hereby I am made more Meek and
Humble, and so Judge more charitably of others that differ from me in Opinion
and Judgment: so though by God's most Righteous Judgment I have been
apprehended, and most Justly and deservedly undergo this Suffering for my Sins,
yet I hope they have wrought for me a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, fitting and preparing me, making me a better qualified Subject for, and
far more meet to be a Partaker of the same. By the Grace and Strength of God, I
will not purchase my Life by the Death and Blood of my Protestant Brethren, but
choose to dye rather than be a Betrayer of them; the Impetuous and violent
assault of this, I dreaded more than Death it self. Blessed be God I was not
exposed unto it, and conquered by it, as some have been: having such full
bodily vigor and strength, being in such perfect Health, notwithstanding my
Age, predominating in me, it has made it more difficult to dye, than if I had
been Clogged and Encumbered with Infirmities, made to bow and stoop under them
by prevailing Diseases and Distempers, gradually worn out therewith, which many
times makes Men weary of Life, and to desire to dye; and this in Conjunction
with many things, (which I forbear to mention) highly gratifying and pleasing
to sense, which I must leave for ever, strengthens and heightens the
Difficulty, and begets a greater Regret and Reluctance in my Will, to have the
Earthly Tabernacle of my Body dissolved, and my Soul to dislodge and quit the
same. But now when the black and gloomy Shades of Death do overspread me, I can
say to the Glory of God's most Free and Powerful Grace, True Faith in some
measure has changed the difficulty into a Facility and easiness of Dying: It
has very much subdued the Reluctance of my Will against it; for it makes
Future things present, and Invisible things visible, and does Realize and
substantiate the same to me; and as by it I penetrate and pierce into Eternity,
and behold Invisible and Immortal things, so hereby, blessed be God, I have
obtained a greater Victory over Sense: The World is crucified to me, and I to
the World, and all the most pleasant delightful Objects therein, all finite
fading Creatures, Comforts and Enjoyments, are become minute and small,
Despicable and Contemptible to me, in comparison thereof, being infinitely
Contained and Comprehended therein: Shall my Soul clasp and cling about these
Mortal and Perishing things? Shall it cleave and be glued to them? Shall it be
confined and captivated into what is kept in the narrow bounds of Time, and in
this lower World? Shall it earnestly desire and thirst for muddy Streams, yea
Rivers of Flesh-pleasing Good; when by an Eye of Faith I can look into the
Indeficient, Inexhaustible purest Fountain; the Immense, Imensurate Ocean of
Divine Good; hoping to Drink thereof, to Swim and Bathe my Soul therein for
ever and ever? And when I consider how long my Ears have been bound up, and
tied to their innumerable and horrid Oaths, and Cursed Blasphemies, and my Eyes
to see the profanation of the day of God; and when I behold such an
overflowing Flood of most prodigious Impiety, such an Inundation of most
monstrous Iniquity, and so much Hell upon Earth, and that there is so much
decay of holy Zeal, and true Piety, and Christian Religion among the Professors
of it, such seeming incurable Breaches and Divisions, such expiring Love and
Charity and partings among them; it has powerful influence on my Soul to
reconcile it more to Death, and makes it electively, and from choice to leave
this present World, and to take up my abode in that which is Unseen and Future,
were there shall be nothing but perfect Love and Holiness; a sinless state, and
serving God with all unweariedness, and perfection, with the highest
complacency and delight that immortal Souls can be capable of: there is perfect
Peace and Concord, the innumerable company of Angels, and the Spirits of Just
men made perfect, all fastened together with indissolvable and uninterrupted
Chains of most pure Love, and all continually wrapped up in, and transported with
the highest Admiration of Gods Love, his infinite and incomprehensible
excellencies and perfections, singing Hallelujahs to him without ceasing, and
triumphing in his praise for ever and ever. The Consideration also, that I know
so little of these sublime profound and divine mysteries; of the most glorious
mystery of Salvation by Jesus Christ; that I am so incapable to fathom the
depth of the Providence of God, whose ways are in the Sea, and whose paths are
in the deep waters, and whose footsteps are not known, and particularly in the
late stupendous and amazing one; and that I am so ignorant of the Nature of
Angels and Spirits, with their Offices and Operations, and of their high and
glorious excellencies; and that I am so little acquainted with the Nature of my
own Soul, as at present dwelling in, and united to my Body, and as disunited
and separated from it; how without corporeal Organs, it shall most vivaciously,
and vigorously perform all its proper Functions and Offices, and more than ever
strongly and indefatigably serve the Lord Jesus, most fervently and abundantly
love him, and delight in him, every way much more obtain the supreme and
highest end of its Creation and being; and this makes me much more willing to
dye, that I may have the knowledge hereof, with innumerable other things, that I
am now either ignorant of, or do but imperfectly know, and so be made happy by
a plenitude of fullness of enjoying intellectual Pleasures, which are of all
other most suitable, sweet and satisfactory to immortal Souls: And also I see
that he that departs from Iniquity makes himself a prey, and so many plunging
themselves into the ways of Iniquity, lest they should accounted odious and
vile, which makes them so much degenerate not only from Christianity, but from
Humanity it self, as if they were scarce the excrement of either; contemning
even that most Noble, Generous Heroic Spirit that dwelt in many Heathens, who
accounted it most honorable and glorious to contend for their Rights and
Liberties, yea to suffer Death and the worst of Deaths in Defense of the same;
and judge them accursed and most execrable in the World that do so; and not
only so, but for their own profit and advantage have many of them inslaved
their posterity by it, and are most industrious and laborious, most fierce and
furious to destroy them, whereby they are become as unnatural as Children that
seek the ruin of their Parents that begot them and brought them forth, or them
that lay violent hands upon themselves, dashing out their own Brains, cutting
their own Throats, hanging and drawing themselves, ripping up their own
Bellies, tearing out their own Bowels, they being in diffirent senses Children
and Members of that Body politic they design and attempt the Destruction of;
and when I know not how long the Duration and Continuance of these things shall
be, or a Conclusion or End by God shall be put thereto, who by Divine and
Unerring Wisdom governs the World; why shall my Soul be unwilling to take it is
flight into the unseen and eternal World? where no sullied, sordid or impious
thing, most incongruous and unbecoming Nature, shall be seen and found, and
where I shall behold no narrow conclusive contracted Soul there, habitually
preferring their private before a public good, but all most unanimously and
equally center in one common universal good; and where the sighs, and groans
and cries of the afflicted and persecuted, shall be heard no more for ever.

I earnestly exhort all, most highly to prize and value Time, and diligently
improve it for Eternity; to be wise, seriously and seasonably to consider of
their latter End; for by the Irrepealable and Irreversable Law of Heaven we
must all dye, yet we know not how, where or when: live with your Souls full of
solicitude and care, with a most deep concernedness, and most diligent
Industriousness, whilst you have time, and opportunity, and the means of Grace,
Health and Strength, make sure of these two great things, (viz.)

1. What Merits for you a Right and Title to Eternal Life and Glory, and the
future unchangeable Blessedness, as the Redeemers most precious Blood and
Righteousness; that thereby a real Application and Imputation may be unto you
by sincere believing. (2.) That that which makes you qualified Subjects for it,
is the great work of Regeneration, wrought in your Souls, being renewed in the
Spirit of your Minds, the Divine Nature being impressed upon them, repairing of
the depraved Image of God in you; that being transformed into his own likeness,
thereby in the World you may mind and savor more the things of the Spirit than
the things of the Flesh, Celestial and Heavenly more than Terrestial and
Earthly, Superior more than Inferior things: And therewith have a Holy Life
and Conversation conjoined, that results and springs from the same as Fruit
from the Root, and Acts from the Habits. Let all in order thereto, seriously
consider these few Texts of sacred Scripture, let them predominantly possess
you, let them be deeply and Indelibly Transcribed upon your Souls, let them be
assimulated thereunto, and made the written Epistles, the lively Pictures
thereof. Mat. 5. 8, 20. Blessed be the pure in Heart, for they shall see God.
v. 20. For I say unto you, except your Righoeousness exceed the Righteousness
of Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
John 3. 3. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10,
11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, etc.
Gal. 5. 19, 20, to 23. Now the works of the Flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, etc. Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will hegat he us with the Word of
Truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his Creatures. 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant Mercy, has begotten us again to a lively hope by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. Verse. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your Minds, etc. Colos.
3. 1, 2. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, set
your affections on things above, not, etc. Gal. 5. 24. And they that are
Christ's have Crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts, etc. Ephesians. 2. 1.
And you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. Rev. 20. 6.
Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the
second Death has no Power. Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no Condemnation,
etc. 1 Pet. 1. 15. But as he that has called you is holy, so be ye, etc. V.
23. Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, etc. Psalm. 4. 3. But know that
the Lord has set apart him that is Godly for himself, etc. I shall mention now
no more, the whole Bible abounds with these Texts, with what a Renovation, and
change of our carnal and corrupt Hearts and Natures, there must be, with
Holiness of Life and Conversation, before we can be capable of a future and
blessed Immortality, and of inheriting the Kingdom of God for ever and ever.
Amen.

Captain Abraham Ansley's Speech.
I Am come to pay a Debt to Nature; it is a Debt that all must Pay, though some
after one manner, and some after another: The way that I pay it, may be thought
by some few Ignominious, but not so by me; having long since, as a True
Englishman, thought it my Duty to venture my Life in Defense of the Protestant
Religion against Popery and Arbitrary Power: For this same Purpose, I came from
my House to the Duke of Monmouth's Army: At first I was a Lieutenant, and then
a Captain; and I was in all the Action the Foot was Engaged in, which I do not
Repent: For had I a Thousand Lives, they should all have been Engaged in the
same Cause, although it has pleased the Wise God (for Reasons best known to
himself) to blast our Designs; but he will deliver his People by ways we know
nor think not of: I might have saved my Life, if I would have done as some
Narrow-Soul'd Persons have done, by Impeaching others; but I abhor such ways of
Deliverance, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than
to enjoy Life with Sin. As to my Religion, I own the Way and Practice of the
Independent Church, and in that Faith I die, Depending on the Merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ, for my Eternal Salvation: His Blessing be with you all.
Farewell to thee, Poor England, Farewell.

Abraham Ansley.

Mr. Jenkin's Letter to Mrs. Scott, on the 26th of September, 1685.
Dear Sister,
THE News which came in my Brothers Letter, of the 22d. instant, to Mr. Duewy,
did not at all surprise me, for indeed I expected no other; and seeing all
hopes of saving my Life are blasted, I thought my self bound to write a Line or
two to so near a Relation as your self, wherein I may take my Leave of you: I
bid you farewell till we shall meet again in Glory, and never be separated more.
As for my own part, though such a sort of Death as I am like to suffer, be that
which I always dreaded at a Distance, when I have sometimes thought on it; yet
I thank my God, now it draws very near, even but a few hours off, I find my
self supported under the thoughts of it, and I hope by his Strength who will
never forsake his own, I shall be enabled to undergo it with Glory to his Name,
and my Comfort, and to my own and other Souls good, that are more nearly
concerned for me: And as I have made it my own endeavor to submit to the Will
of God, in this sad Dispensation, without murmuring and repining. I hope you
have been sensible of your Duty in the same Respects, which is patiently to
submit to his Will, and eye his Hand in this severe Stroke. Though God has
been pleased to deny success to your Endeavors for the saving of my Life, yet
I am satisfied nothing has been wanting on your parts; and for all the Trouble
you have been at on my Account, though I do not live to show my Gratitude, yet
I render you my dying Thanks, and beg your Prayers for my support in the last
moment of my Life, if you receive this before my Death, the certainty of which
I have not yet notice of. Remember my Love to my Brother, and Thanks for all
kindnesses. And as for my young Relations, my Prayer for them shall be, That
they may see more happy Days than I have done, and Die more peaceably; I cannot
say, A more happy Death: And now my Dear Sister, I take my leave of you, and I
commit you to the Protection of that God, who has made every thing Beautiful
in its time, and will show you the meaning of this sad Providence, which now we
do not understand, to whom I trust I am now going, and in the Enjoyment of
whose Presence, I doubt not but ever long, you will meet your Affectionate
Brother,

William Jenkins.

Mr. Jenkins's Letter to his Mother, on the 29th of September, at Midnight.
1685.
Dear and Honored Mother,
I Have even now received News of my Execution to morrow, which though I have
such short Notice of, yet I am prepared for it, and by Gods strength enabling
of me, I shall be joyfully carried through it. The Kindness you have been
pleased to show in your great Concern for me, since I have been under this
trouble, as well as the Duty I owe to so near a Relation as your self, ingages
me to acquaint you with my present Condition, for your Satisfaction; which
truly is such, as I must beg you to accept this present Letter as my last
farewell; and though the sad Providence cannot but be grievous to so near and
Affectionate a Relation, yet I hope it already has, and still does yield the
peaceable Fruits of Righteousness to your self and me, who had been severely
exercised with it: As for my own part, I hope I can truly say, that God by his
Providence has weaned me from the World, and made me willing to leave it, and
to be dissolved, that I might be with Christ, which is far better; and now I am
come to die, I hope I can truly say, I have nothing to do but to die; I having
fought a good Fight, and finished my Course, I am now in expectation of that
Crown of Reward which God, the Righteous Judge of the whole Earth, has
promised to all those that love his appearance: And as it is my great Work to
be now every moment fitting my self for my great and last Change, so it is the
Duty that belongs to you, and the rest of my Dear Relations, to resign me up
into the Hands of that God, whose I am, and to whom I am going: and not to
repine at his Righteous Will, which we ought quietly to submit unto. But now
being at last leaving the World, Dear and Honored Mother, I take my leave of
you also, hoping I shall again meet you in a place of Happiness, where ^ll
Tears shall he Wiped from our Eyes, and we shall Sorrow no more. I have nothing
more to say, but to return you my Dying Thanks for all the Trouble and Care you
have been at for saving my Life, which God has not thought fit to make
successful; yet my Thankfulness is equally due to you for your Endeavors, as
if it had. I shall end, with Subscribing my self, (Dear and Honored Mother)
your Dutiful Son,

William Jenkins.

Mr. Jenkins's Letter to Mrs. Gourden, on the 30th of September, 1685.
Dear Sister,
THough you be at a great Distance from me, yet you are very near my Heart, so
that to leave the World, before I have writ a Line or two to you, to bid you
farewell, and to comfort you under this sad Providence, would be uncomfortable
to me: I hope you have by this time learned, how to welcome Evil as well as
good Tidings, and submit to the wise Disposer of all things, who knows what is
best for us, better than we do our selves; though I question not, but the News
of my Death, especially in such a violent manner, as within a few hours I am to
suffer, will be afflictive to you; yet I would beg of you to consider the
Happiness I am going to, and that I am but a few Years sooner taken out of a
troublesome wicked World, unto the Quire of Triumphant Martyrs in Glory; which
place of Happiness, though I have not deserved by any Merit of my own, yet for
the Merits of my Mediator and Redeemer, who has purchased more for me, than
can enter into my Heart to conceive, I doubt not, but I have a Mansion prepared
for me in that place, where the Wicked cease from Troubling, and the Weary are
at Rest. And now Dear Sister, I have nothing more to do in this World, but to
be preparing and fitting my self for this place of Rest, which in a few Hours I
am going to; and therefore leave you and yours to the Protection of God, who is
able to keep and support you, under this and all other his afflictive
Providence, and bring a good Issue out of them; and who will in his own due
time, conduct you safe to that place of Happiness, where you will meet above
for Christ's sake. (Dear Sister,) our Loving and Affectionate Brother,

William Jenkins.

An Account of the Behavior of Mr. William and Benjamin Hewling, before and at
their Execution; with several Letters to diverse of their Relations.
THe Gracious Dealings of God manifested to some in their dying hours, have
been of great Use to those living that heard the same, giving them occasion
thereby to reflect on their own Estate, and to look for the things of their
Peace before they are hid from their Eyes: As also a great encouragement to
strengthen the Faith of those that have experienced the Grace of God to them at
the End; it is thought necessary by Parents, especially to preserve to their
Children what remains of those Blessed Experiences that such have had, that God
has taken to himself; you have here a true Account presented of the Admirable
Appearance of God toward two young Men, Mr. Benjamin Hewling, who dyed when he
was about 22 years of Age: And of Mr. William Hewling, who dyed before he
Arrived to 20 years, which for reasons best known to themselves, engaged with
the Duke of Monmouth; for which Mr. William Hewling was Executed at Lyme,
September 12; and Mr. Benjamin Hewling at Taunton, September 30. 1685.

However severe Men were to them, yet the Blessed Dispensation of God toward
them was such, as has made good his Word, That out of the Mouth of Babes, he
has ordained strength, that he may still the Enemy and Avenger.

After the Dispersing of the Duke's Army, they fled and got off to Sea, but
were driven back again, and with the hazard of their lives, got on Shore over
dangerous Rocks, where they saw the Country filled with Soldiers; and they
being unwilling to fall into the hands of the Rabble, and no way of defense or
escape remaining with them, they surrendered themselves Prisoners to a
Gentleman, whose House was near the place they Landed at; and were from thence
sent to Exeter Goal, July the 21; where remaining some time; their behavior
was such, that being Visited by many, caused great Respect toward them, even
of those who were Enemies to the Cause they engaged in: And being on the 15th
of July put on Board the Swan Frigot, in order to their being brought up to
London, their Carriage was such as caused the Commander and the rest of the
Officers in the Ship to show great kindness to them; and being brought into the
River, Captain R. by Order, came down to take them into his Custody, and
carried them to Newgate, putting great Irons upon them, and put them into rooms
apart, without giving Liberty for any near Relation to see them, though in the
presence of a Keeper, which did greatly increase the Grief and Sorrow of their
Relations. But although men were cruel and severe to them, God, who wisely
orders all things for good to all those whom he intends Grace and Mercy upon,
made this very Restraint and hard Usage, a Blessed Advantage to their Souls, as
appears by their own Words; when after great Importunity and Charge, some of
their near Relations had an opportunity to speak a few words to them before the
Keeper; to which they replied, That they were content with the Will of God
whatsoever it should be. Having been in Newgate three Weeks, there was orders
given to carry them down into the West in order to their Trials; which being
told them* they answered they were glad of it; and the morning they went out of
Newgate, several that beheld them so Cheerful, said, Surely those Yonng Men
have their Pardons in their Pockets, or else they could never carry it with
that Cheerfulness as they do. This must be observed, that from first to last,
whatever hopes they received from their friends of their Pardon, they still
thought the contrary, never being much affected with the hopes of it, nor cast
down at the worst that might attend them in their Journey to Dorcester. The
Keepers that went with them, have given this Account of them, That their
Carriage was so Grave and Serious, that made them admire to see and hear what
they did from such young men. The first opportunity their Sister had to speak
with them, was at Salisbury, August the 30th, who gives the following Account
of them:

I found them in an excellent Composure of Mind, declaring their Experience of
the Grace and Kindness of God to them in all their Sufferings, in supporting,
strengthening, and providing for them; turning the Hearts of all them whose
Hands they had been in, both at Exon, and on Shipboard, to show pity and
favor to them, although since they came to Newgate they were hardly used; and
how in their Journey laden with heavy Irons, and more Inhumanely dealt with;
they with great Cheerfulness professed they were better, yea, and in a more happy
Condition then ever in their lives, from the sense they had of the Pardoning
Love of God in Jesus Christ to their Souls, with only referring themselves to
the Wise and Gracious God, to chose for them Life or Death; expressing
themselves thus, Any thing what pleases God, what He sees best, so be it, we
know He is able to deliver; if not, Blessed be His Name, Death is not terrible,
but desirable.

My Brother Benjamin in particularly added, As for the World, there is nothing
in it to make it worth while to live, except we may be Serviceable to God
therein; And after said, GOD is a strong Refuge, I have found him so indeed.
The next opportunity was at Dorcester, where they were both carried and put in
Prison, and by reason of their strait Confinement, our Converse was much
interrupted; but this I found from them, that they had still the same presence
and support from God as formerly, no ways being discouraged at the near
approach of their Trial, nor of the issue of it, though it might appear to
Flesh and Blood to be terrible. The 6th of September my Brother Benjamin was
ordered at Taunton to be Tried; then taking my leave of him, he cheerfully
said, Blessed be God, for Afflictions I have found such happy Effects of them,
that I would not have been without them for all this World: I remaining still
at Dorcester, to see the issue of my Brother William; to whom, after he was
Tried, before his Sentence, I had free Liberty to go to; whose Mouth was filled
with Admiration of the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, that had been manifested
unto him, in calling him out of his natural Estate, suddenly seizing on his
Heart when he thought not of it; in his Abode in Holland, finding secret
Whisperings in his Heart to seek the Face of God who enabled him to answer his
Gracious Call, and to reflect upon his own Soul; whereby he came to see the
Evil of Sin, and his need of Christ; from that time carrying him on to a
sensible Adherence to Christ, for Pardon and Peace of Soul; where he said, He
found a Spring of Joy and Sweetness, beyond all the Comfort of the whole Earth.
He further said, He could not but admire the wonderful goodness of God, in
preparing him for what he was bringing him unto, which then he thought not of,
giving hope of Eternal Life before he called him to look Death in the Face; So
that he did Cheerfully resign his Life to God, before he came, having sought
his Guidance in it; and that the Cause did appear to him both then and now very
Glorious; notwithstanding all that which he had suffered in it, or further
might, although God had withheld those good things from us. As to himself, he
said, God had carried on his Work in his Soul, in and by all sufferings; and
whatever the will of God were, Life or Death, he knew it would be best for him.
After he had received his Sentence, when he returned to Prison, he said,
Methinks I find my Comfort in God increase since my Sentence: there is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, it is God that Justifies, who
shall condemn? When I came to him the next morning, when he had received News
of the time of his Execution, and in order to it, was to be carried to Lyme;
that day I found him in a most excellent Spiritual Frame, more then ever before
he was in; he said, He was satisfied God had done best for him, he knew what
the Temptation of Life might be; I might have lived and forgotten God, but now
I am going where I shall Sin no more; O it it is a Blessed thing to be free
from Sin, and to be with Christ! O how great were the Sufferings of Christ for
us, beyond all that I can undergo! How great is that Glory to which I am going!
It will now swallow up Sorrow here.

When he was at Dinner, just before his going from Dorcester to Lyme, he dropped
many Expressions of his inward Joy, such as these, O the Grace of God, the Love
of Christ! O the Blessed Supper of the Lamb, to be for ever with the Lord! He
further said, When he went to Holland, You knew not what Snares, Sins, and
Miscarriages I might have fallen into, or whether we might ever meet again: Now
you know whether I am going, and that we shall certainly have a most joyful
meeting, and never part more for ever: He said, Pray give my Recommendations to
all Relations, with Acknowledgments for all their Kindness; I advise them all
to make sure of an Interest in Christ, for he is the only Comfort when we come
to dye. One of the Prisoners seemed to be troubled at the manner of Death they
were to dye; to whom he replied, I bless God, I am Reconciled unto it all. Just
at his going, he writ these few Lines to his Mother, being hardly suffered to
stay so long. I am going to Lanch into Eternity; I hope and trust into the Arms
of my Blessed Redeemer, to whom I commit you and all my Relations: My Love to
my Dear Sister, and the rest of my Friends.

William Hewling.



As they passed through the Town of Dorcester to Lyme, multitudes of People
beheld them with great Lamentation and bitter Cries, admiring at his Carriage
and Behavior at his parting with his Sister. As they passed along the Road
betwixt Lyme and Dorcester, his Discourse was exceeding Heavenly and Spiritual,
as those present have since declared, taking occasion from every thing to speak
of the Journey they were going; looking out upon the Country as they passed
along, he said, This is a Glorious Creation; but what then is the Paradise of
God, to which we are going? When he was come to Lyme, one reading the 14. of
John and the 18 Verse. I will not leave you Comfortless, I will come to you:
said Christ will come unto us, he will be with us to the very last: At Lyme,
that morning he was Executed, one taking Leave of him, he said, Farewell till
we meet in Heaven; presently I shall be with Christ; I would not change
Conditions with any; I would not stay behind for Ten Thousand Worlds. To
another that asked him how he did, he said, Very well, I Bless God; and farther
asked him if he could look Death in the Face with Comfort, now it approached so
near; He answered, I can, I bless God, with Comfort; God has made this a good
Night to me, my Comforts are much increased since I left Dorcester. Then taking
leave of him, said, Farewell, I shall see you no more: To which he repiyed,
How, see me no more? Yes, I hope to meet you in Glory.

To another which was by him to the last, he said, Pray Remember my Love to my
Dear Brother and Sister, and tell them I would desire them to Comfort
themselves, that I am gone to Christ, and we shall quickly meet in the Glorious
Mount Zion above. Afterward he Prayed for about three quarters of an hour with
the greatest Fervency, exceedingly blessing God for Christ Jesus, Adoring the
Riches of his Grace, in all the Glorious Fruits of it toward him; Praying for
the Peace of the Church of God, and for this Nation in particular, with such
Eminent Assistance of the Spirit of God, that it Astonished, Convinct, and
Melted the most Malicious Adversaries, forcing Tears and Expressions of Sorrow
from them; some saying, They knew not what would become of them after Death;
but it was evident he was going to great Happiness: When he was just going out
of the World, with a Joyful Countenance he said, O now my Joy and Comfort is, I
have a Christ to go to; and so sweetly Resigned his Spirit to Christ, September
the 12th. 1685.

An Officer who had showed so Malicious a Spirit, as to call the Prisoners
Devils, when he was Guarding them down, was now so concerned, that he after
told a Person of Quality, that he was never so Affected, as by his Cheerful
Carriage and Fervent Prayer, such as he believed never was heard, especially
from one so young; and said he believed that had the Lord Chief Justice been
there to see and hear what he did, he could not have let him die.

The Sheriff having given his Body to be Buried, although it was brought from
the place of Execution without the knowledge of his Friends, yet very many of
the Town came to his Funeral, to the number of about two hundred; and several
young Women of the best of the Town laid him in his Grave in Lyme Churchyard,
September the 13th. 1685.

After which his Sister Writ this following Letter to her Mother.
ALthough I have nothing to Acquaint my Dear Mother withal, but what is most
Afflictive to Sense, both as to the Determination of Gods Will, and as to my
present Apprehension concerning my Brother Benjamin, yet remaining; yet there
is such abundant Consolation mixed in both, that I only wanted an opportunity to
pay this Duty; God having wrought so Glorious a work on both their Souls,
revealing Christ in them, that Death is become their Friend. My Brother William
having already with the greatest Joy, declared to those that were with him to
the last, that he would not change Conditions with any that were to remain in
this World; and he desired that his Relations would comfort themselves, that he
is gone to Christ.

My Brother Benjamin expects not long to continue in this World, and is
exceeding willing to leave it when God shall Call, being fully satisfied that
God will choose that which is best for him and us all; by these things God does
greatly support me; and I hope you also, my Dear Mother, which was and is my
Brothers great desire, there is still room for Prayer for one; and God having
so answered, though not in kind, we have encouragement still to wait on him.

Honored Mother, your Dutiful Daughter, HANNAH HEWLING.

When I came to Taunton, my Brother Benjamin had received the News of my
Brother William 's being gone t^ die with so much Comfort and Joy, and
afterward of the continuance of the goodness of God, in increasing unto the
end; He Expressed himself to this effect, We have no cause to fear Death, if the
Presence of God be with us; there is no Evil in it, the sting of it is taken
away; it is nothing but our Ignorance of the Glory that the Saints pass into by
Death, which makes it appear Dark to our selves or Relations; if belonging to
Christ, what is this World, that we should desire any Abode in it? It is all
Vanity and Vnsatisfying, full of Sin and Misery. Intimating also his own
Cheerful expectation now to follow, discovering then, and all along, great
seriousness and sense of Spiritual things; complaining of nothing in his
present Circumstances, but the want of a place of Retirement, to Converse more
Uninterruptedly with God and his own Soul; saying, That his little time in
Newgate, was the sweetest in his whole Life: He said, God having before struck
his Heart, when he thought of the hazard of his Life, and the great Consequence
of Death and Eternity, showing that they were the only happy Persons that had
secured their Eternal Estate; and the folly and madness of the ways of Sin, and
his own Thraldom therein, with his utter Inability to deliver himself; also
the necessity of Christ to Salvation: He said, It was not without sorrow and
amazement; for some time the thoughts of Unpardoned Sin, with Eternity before
him was a great surprise; but God wonderfully opened to him the Riches of his
free Grace in Christ Jesus, for poor Sinners to fly unto, enabling him alone to
look unto a Crucified Christ for Salvation. He said, That this Blessed Work was
in some measure carried on upon his Soul under his business and hurry in the
Army, but never sprung forth so fully and sweetly, till his close Confinement
in Newgate; then he saw an All-spiritual Object more clearly, and embraced it
more strongly; there he experienced the Blessedness of a Reconciled Estate, the
Excellency of the ways of Holiness, of Communion with God, which remained very
deep and apparent impressions on his Soul; which he frequently expressed with
Admiration of the Grace of God to him: He said, Perhaps my Friends may think
this some of the sadest time of my Life, but I bless God it has been the
sweetest and most happy of all; nay, there is nothing else worth the name of
happiness: I have formerly, but in vain, sought happiness in the things of this
World, but I never found it; but now I have found Rest for my Soul in God
alone: O how great is our blindness by nature, that we cannot see an Excellency
in spiritual things; we spend our precious time in pursuing of shadows, and are
deaf to the Invitations of Grace, and the Glorious Offers of Christ in the
Gospel? How just is God in depriving us of that we have so much slighted and
abused? O his infinite Patience and Goodness, that after all, he should yet
take any method to bring a poor Sinner to himself! O Electing Love!
Distinguishing Grace! What cause have I to Admire and Adore it? He said, What
an amazing Consideration is the Sufferings of Christ for Sin, to bring us to
God? His sufferings were exceeding great; but alas, what was that to the
dolours of his Soul under the infinite Wrath of God? The great mystery of
Grace and Love is enough to swallow up our thoughts to Eternity. As to his own
Death, he would often say, He saw no reason to expect any other; I know God is
infinitely able to deliver, and I am sure will do it, if it be for his Glory
and my Good; for which I bless God I am fully satisfied; it is all my desire he
would choose for me; that I am sure will be best whatever it be, for truly;
except God has some work for me to do in this World, for his Service and
Glory, I see nothing else to make Life desirable in this present state of
things; there is nothing to cast our Eye upon, but Sin, Sorrow and Misery; and
truly were things never so much according to our desire, it is but the World
still, which will never be a Resting Place; Heaven is the only state of Rest
and Happiness, where we shall be perfectly free from Sin and Temptation, and
enjoy God without Interruption, for ever. Speaking of the disappointment of
their Expectation of the work they had undertaken, he said, with Reference to
the Glory of God, and Prosperity of the Gospel, and Deliverance of the People
of God, We have great reason to lament; but for the outward Prosperity, that
would accompany it, it is but of small moment in it self; as it would never
satisfy, so neither could it be abiding, for at longest, Death would put an
end to it. Also adding; Nay perhaps we might have been so foolish as to have
been taken with that part, in the neglect our Eternal Concerns, then I am sure
our present Circumstances are incomparably better for us. He frequently Expressed
grrat concern for the Glory of God, and affection to his People; saving, If my
Death may be for the Glory of God, and hasten the D^liverance of his People, it
will be enough; and that it was great Comfort to him to think of so great a
Privilege, as to have an Interest in all their Prayers.

In his particular Converse, he greatly delighted in, and valued those Persons
where he saw most shining Holiness; he also showed great pity to the Souls of
others, saying, That the Remembrance of our Vanity may well cause Compassion to
others in that Estate; and in his Conversation, promoting others to a
Seriousness, telling them that Death and Eternity are such weighty concerns,
that they deserved the greatest intentions of our Mind; for the way to receive
Death Cheerfully, is to prepare for it seriously; and if God should please to
save our Lives, we have the same reason to be serious, and to spend our
remaining days in his Fear and Service. He also took great care that the
Worship of God, which they were in capacity of performing, as Reading Prayer,
and Singing Psalms, might be duly performed; in which he took great delight for
those three or four days before his Death. When there was a general Report no
more should dye, he said, I do not know what God has done beyond our
expectation; if he do prolong my Life, it is all his own; and by his Grace I
will wholly devote it to him: But the 29th of September, about Ten or Eleven at
Night, we found the deceitfulness of that Report; for they were then told, they
must dye the next Morning; which though unexpected, as to the suddenness of it,
yet he often therein Blessed God for his Power, Grace and Faith, in giving
suitable support by his Blessed Presence, which appeared in him upon my coming
to him; at that time finding him greatly composed he said, Though Man has a
design to surprise, yet God does and will fulfill his Word to be a present help
in time of trouble: Next Morning when I saw him again, his Cheerfulness and
Comfort was much increased, waiting for the Sheriff with the greatest sweetness
and serenity of mind, saying, Now the will of God is determined, to whom we have
referred it; and he has most certainly chosen that which is Best.

Afterward with a smiling Countenance, Discoursing of the Glory of Heaven,
there in the 3. 4, 5. Verse of the 22 of the Revelations. And there shall be no
more Curse; but the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and his
Servants shall serve him. And they shall see his Face; and his Name shall be in
their Forehead. And there shall be no Night there, they need no Candle, neither
Light of the Sun; for the Lord God gives them Light, and they still Reign for
ever and ever. Then he said, What a happy state is this, shall we be loath to
enjoy this? Then he desired the Second Book of the Corinthians, 5 Chapter and 1
Verse to be read to him, For we know, that if our Earthly House of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God; an House not made with
Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. All along his Comforts still increasing,
expressing his hope and full assurance in this Glorious Inheritance; and being
now going to the Possession of it: Seeing the happiness of this Blessed Change,
he said, Death is more desirable then Life; and as to the manner of this Death,
when I have considered others under these Circumstances, I have thought it very
dreadful; but now God has called me to it, I have quite other Apprehensions of
it: I can now cheerfully Embrace it as an easy Passage into Glory; and though
Death separates us from enjoying each other; it will be but for a short time,
and then we shall meet in such Enjoyment as now we cannot conceive, and for
ever rejoice in that Happiness: O! How great a thing is Redemption from Wrath
to come, to an Eternity of Happiness! Then Reading of the Scriptures and musing
with himself, he imitated the great Comfort that God c^nveighed to his Soul in
it; saying, What an invalidate Treasure is this Blessed Word of God in all
Conditions? Here is store of strong Consolation. One desiring his Bible, he
said, Nay, This shall be my Companion to the last moment of my Life.

Thus Praying, Reading, and Conversing together, waiting for the Sheriffs
coming, who when he came, void of all Pity or Civility, hurried them away,
scarce suffering them to take leave of their Friends; but notwithstanding this
and the doleful Mourning of those about them, the Joyfulness of his Countenance
was increased, that as he left the Prison, thus he appeared in the Sledge, when
they sat about half an Hour before the Officers could force the Horses to draw,
at which they were greatly Enraged, there being no visible Obstruction from
Weight or Way, but at last they Haled them forward; the Mayor and Sheriff
Balaam-like, driving the Horses, when they came to the Place of Execution, was
surrounded with Spectators: Many that waited their coming with great Sorrow,
said, That when they saw him and them come with such Cheerfulness, Joy, and
Evidence of the presence of God with them, it made Death appear with another
Aspect.

They first Embraced each other with great Affection, then two of the Eldest
Persons Prayed Audibly, they joining with great Seriousness: Then he desired
leave of the Sheriff to Pray particularly, but he would not grant it; but only
asked him, If he would Pray for the King; To which he Answered, I Pray for all
Men: He then Requested they might sing a Psalm, the Sheriff told them, It must
be with Ropes about them, which they cheerfully accepted, and sung with such
heavenly Joy and Sweetness, that many present said, it broke and joyed their
Hearts: Thus in Expressing the Delightfulness of Praising God on Earth, he
w^llingly closed his Eyes on a vain World, and past to the Eternal Employment,
Sept. the 30th 1685.

All present of all sorts, were exceedingly affected and amazed: Some Officers
that had before insultingly said, Sure these Persons have no thoughts of Death,
but will find themselves surprised by it; after said, That they now saw, that
he and they had something extraordinary within, that carried them through with
such Joy. Others of them said, They were so convinced of their Happiness, that
they would be glad to change Conditions with them. All the Soldiers in general,
and all others wept and lamented about them, and for him in particular, saying,
It was so sad a thing to see such excellent Persons so cut off, they scarce
knew how to ^ear it. Some of the most malicious in the place, from whom nothing
but Railing was expected, said, (as they were carried to their Graves in
Taunton-Church, Voluntarily accompanied by most of the Town,) That these
Persons had given sufficient Evidence, that they were Glorified Saints in
Heaven. A great Officer in the Kings Army has been heard to say, If you will
learn to Die, go to the Young Men in Taunton. Much more was uttered by him,
showing the Blessed and Gracious frame of his Soul; but this is what occurs to
Memory. About two Hours before his Death he Wrote this following Letter, which
showed the great Composure of his Mind.

Mr. Hewlings last Letter a little before his Execution.
THat News which I know you have a great while feared and we expected* I must
now acquaint you with, that notwithstanding the hopes you gave in your last
Letter; Warrants are come down for my Execution, and within these few hours I
expect it to be performed. Blessed be Almighty God, that gives Comfort and
Support in such a day; how ought we to Magnify his Holy Name for all his
Mercies, that when we were running on in a course of Sin, he should stop us in
our full Career; and show us that Christ whom we had pierced; and out of his
free Grace enabled us to look upon him with an Eye of Faith; believing him able
to save to the uttermost, all that come to him.

O Admirable long Suffering and Patience of God! That when we were a
dishonouring his Name, he did not take that time to Glorify himself by our
Destruction; for he delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but had rather he
should turn to him and Live. And he has many ways of bringing his own to
himself; Blessed be his holy Name, that through Affliction he has taught my
Heart to be in some measure conformable to his Will; which works Patience,
Patience Experience, Experience Hope, which makes not ashamed.

I Bless God I am not ashamed for the Cause for which I lay down my Life; and
as I have Engaged in it, and Fought for it, so I am now going to Seal it with
my Blood.

The Lord carry on the same Cause that has been so long on foot; and though I
die in it, and for it, I question not but in his own good time, he will raise
up other Instruments more worthy to carry it on for the Glory of his Name, and
the Advancement of his Church and People. I know there has been nothing left
undone by you or the rest of my Friends, for the saving of my Life, for the
which I return my hearty acknowledgments to your self and them all; and it is
my dying request to you and them, to pardon all Undutifulness in every
Relation; pray give my Duty to every Relation; and to every Friend a particular
Recommendation; pray tell them all how precious an Interest in Christ is when
we come to die, and advise them never to rest in a Christless state; for if we
are his, it is no matter what the World does with us, they can but kill the
Body; and Blessed be God, the Soul is out of their reach; for I question not
but their Malice wishes the Damnation of the Soul, as well as the Destruction
of the Body; which has evidently appeared by their deceitful flattering
Promises. I commit you all to the Care and Protection of God, who has promised
to be a Father to the Eatherless, and a Husband to the Widow, and to supply the
wants of every Relation; the Lord God of Heaven be your comfort under these
Sorrows, and your Refuge from those Miseries which we may easily foresee
coming upon poor England, and upon the poor distressed People of God in it: The
Lord carry you through this Vale of Tears with a resigning submissive Spirit,
and at last bring you to himself in Glory, where I question not but you will
meet,

Your Dying Relation and Friend, Benjamin Hewling. Executed at Taunton,
September 30th. 1688.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
There will speedily be Published a second Collection of the Dying Speeches,
Letters, and Prayers, etc. of those Eminent Protestants who Dyed in the West of
England (and elsewhere) under the Cruel Sentence of the late Lord Chancellor.

There is now Published a very Useful Book, Entitled, The Joy of Faith; Or a
Treatise, opening the true nature of Faith; it is lowest Stature and Distinction
from Assurance, with a Preliminary Tract, evidencing the Divinity of the Sacred
Scriptures. By Samuel Lee, M. A. Both to be sold at the Black-Raven in the
Poultrey.


