THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH DEFENDED: Against a Crying Evil in these Times of the
Antisabitarians of our Age: Wherein is showed that the Morality of the fourth
Commandment is still in force to bind Christians unto the Sanctification of
the Sabbath Day. Written by that learned Assertor of the Truth, William Twisse
D. D. late Prolocutor to the Assembly of Divines.

Exodus 20 8. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy.

Matthew. 5.17. Think not I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets: I am not
come to destroy but to fulfill.

Verse 18. For verily, I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or
one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled

Verse 19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments,
and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

LONDON. Printed for Thomas Pierrepont, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Sun in Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

AVANCEZ

ROWLAND HILL A.M.



The Contents of the chief matters handled herein.
IN the answer to the Prefacer.

Section. 1. 1. The ancients are alleged in vain to oppose the Institution
of the Sabbath, as from the beginning. Section 2. 2. The untruth of the
Praefacers legends concerning Peter Bruis, Fulco, and Eustathius and others,
discovered. Section 3. 3. Calvin abused by the Prefacer, and misconstrued.
Section 3. 2. What credit Barclay deserves, relating a consultation of Calvin,
about transferring the Sabbath to the Thursday. Section. 3. 3. Of the force of
Apostolical example. Section 4. 4. The vanity of the Prefacers pretense, in
saying Catarinus opposed Tostatus with ill success, while he maintained the
Institution of the Sabbath from the Creation. It is made apparent, that his
success was far beyond that of Tostatus. Section 4. 2. Whether Adam fell the
first day wherein he was created. 1. Pererius his arguments for the negative.
Sect. 4. 2. Doctor Willet his arguments for the affirmative. Sect. 4.
Section 4. 3. Pererius his reasons against the institution of the Sabbath from
the Creation, answered. Section 4. 4. Two Digressions in answer to Rivetus in
two particulars. 1. By way of reply upon his answer to Walaeus his arguments,
justifying the morality of one day in seven. 2. To his arguments opposing the
morality of one day in seven to be consecrated to the Lord.
Section 5. Pa. 78.
5. A consideration of Walaeus his discourse in answer to those, who conceave
the institution of the Lords Day, to have been ordered by Christ himself.
Section 5. Pa. 70.
2. An examination of that phrase of some of our Divines, affirming the
ancients to have changed the Jews Sabbath unto the Lords Day for a probable
cause: wherein it is showed that the cause hereof was more then probable.
Section 6. 6. An examination of Chemnitius his discourse, concerning the
authority of the Lords Day. Section 6. 2. A reply upon Doctor Rivets answer to
Master Perkins his arguments standing for the Divine authority of the Lords
Day. 3. That the Lords Day, and the Lords Supper are so called in the same
notion. 1. affirmed by Doctor Andrews, Perkins, Thysius. 2. justified by good
reason.
Section. 7. 7. A brief of the arguments on each side for every point. 1. As
touching the original institution of the Sabbath. 2. As touching the Morality
of one day in seven to be consecrated to Gods solemn worship. 3. As touching
the authority of the celebration of the Lords Day, and the immutability thereof.
8. The Prefacer, and M. Rogers opposing D. Bownde are showed in every
particular to oppose D. Andrews.

IN the consideration of D. Prideaux his Lecture.

Section 2. 1. How far light of nature does direct, as touching the time which
ought to be set apart for Gods solemn service. Section 2. and 6. 2 Reasons why
the Creator should prescribe the proportion of time to be consecrated unto
himself. Section 2. and 6. 3. How far light of nature does direct as touching
the particularity of the day under the proportion of one in seven, Sect. the
same. Section 3. 4. That Enosh with his holy company apparting themselves from
others, had a set time for divine worship. Section. 5. 5. That it becomes not
us to affect liberty to design the day for the Sabbath. Section. 6. 6 The
danger of leaving it to man to make choice of the day. Section 7. 7. That the
celebration of the Lords Day is of divine institution, and how far justified by
the old Testament, and particularly by the fourth Commandment. Section 8. 8.
That it is nothing strange, the Lords Day should be called by the name of the
sabbath. Section 8. 2. Sensual pleasures are cleanly carried under the title of
recreation.
The Preface.
I Have now a long time taken notice of much difference and contention about
the morality of the fourth Commandment, but I never gave my self to look
into the bottom of it till now. I ever conceived it for the substance to be
Moral; otherwise, what should it make among the ten Commandments, which all
account the Law moral, in distinction both from the law judicial, and the law
ceremonial given by Moses unto the Jews. These ten Commandments the
Lordspake from the top of mount Sina, in the hearing of all the people; and by
way of preparation to so notable a service, as to meet with God, and to hear
him speak unto them, Exodus 19.10.
two days were given them to sanctify themselves and to wash their clothes;
11.
that they might be ready on the third day: for the third day the Lord would
come down on mount Sina. And so it came to pass. For when Moses brought forth
the people out of the Camp to meet with God, 17.
and they stood at the nether part of the Mount: 18.
Mount Sina was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in
fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole
mount quaked greatly. And all the people saw the thundrings and the lightnings,
and the noise of the trumpet, Exodus 20.18.
and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed and stood
a far off. In such heavenly state was this Law delivered, and remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy, amongst the rest, without all example of the like,
in all the generations that went before. And the Lord thought it fit, to mind
them hereof by his servant Moses: Deuteronomy. 4.32.
Ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day
that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side of heaven unto
the other, whether there has been any such thing as this great thing is, or
has been heard like it. Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of
the midst of the fire, 33.
as thou have heard, and live. Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice,
36.
that he might instruct thee; and upon the earth he showed thee his great fire,
and thou heardst his words out of the midst of the fire: And because he loved
thy Fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them. And in his last blessing
upon the people, when now he was going out of the world, Moses, as a King,
puts them in mind of this, saying: Deuteronomy. 33.2, 3, 4, 5.
The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them, he shined forth
from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of Saints: from his right hand
went a fiery law for them. Yea, he loved the people: all his Saints are in thy
hands, and they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words.
Moses commanded a Law, even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. And
he was King in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people, and the Tribes of Israel
were gathered together It is true, there is an hole picked in the fourth
Commandment, concerning the sanctifying of the Sabbath; as if that among all
the rest, were not moral, but ceremonial. Yet this honor it has from God,
that immediately after the Creation, the Lord resting on the seventh day from
his works, therefore he blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. Genesis 2.3.
And therefore Doctor Andrews, ere he died Bishop of Winchester, in his
pattern of Catecheticall doctrine (I commonly cite it under his name, because
it is commonly received to be his) and as I have heard upon diverse good
grounds, treating upon this Commandment; and having proposed this question;
But is not the Sabbath a Ceremony, and so abrogated by Christ? Makes answer to
it in this manner, Do as Christ did in the cause of divorce; look whether it
were so from the beginning; Now the beginning of the Sabbath was in Paradise,
before there was any sin, and so before there needed any Savior, and so
before there was any Ceremony or figure of a Savior. And if they say, it
prefigured the rest that we shall have from our sins in Christ, we grant it,
and therefore the day is changed, but no ceremony proved. And yet we are not
ignorant, how Papists have practiced to raze the second commandment also out
of the Law given on mount Sina, as if that also were out of date, being (as
they conceive) but of a positive nature at first, so little evidence do they
find for it by the light of Nature; and now the world is grown so wise, that
they know how to worship God by Images, without committing any idolatry at all;
though this mystery of religious state is not thought fit to be communicated
unto the vulgar. But do we not all acknowledge the light of Nature to be much
corrupted since the fall of Adam? how much more our judgment of moral things;
wherein Aristotle confesses that (...), Eth. 1. c. 3.
demonstration is not to be expected, but only (...) persuasion. And if way be
given to men's wanton wills for the gratifying of corrupt affections, more
breaches than these are like to be made in the Decalogue. I have heard that
Cardinal Cusanus undertook to justify the sin of Sodom. Sure I am, amongst
the Lacedaemonians wives were common: And Brennus that Ancient Invader of other
Nations made profession, that he knew no other Law of Nature but this, that The
weaker should be in subjection to the stronger; like as King Pyrrhus, in his
deathbed, being demanded, who should succeed him in the Kingdom, made answer,
even He whose sword is the longest. Carneades I think was the man, who having
on a day made a singular speech in commendation of Justice; afterward
discoursed as eloquently to the contrary, showing that there was no justice at
all by the law of nature; every natural thing seeking to maintain it self by
the destruction of others. So the fire maintains it self by the combustion of
each combustible thing whereunto it approaches; and the water overflowes all
naturally, and beats down all dammes, it can, to make room for it self. And
the greatest Beasts maintain themselves by praying on those that have no power
to resist them. The more cause have we to bless God for giving us the Law
Moral in writing, which grew so miserably defaced in the hearts of men. And
that herein the sanctifying of the Sabbath is mentioned among the rest, this
has ever satisfied me, and assured that the substance thereof is Moral; and
that accordingly we ought to inure our selves to the sanctification of the
Sabbath, though naturally we find in our selves no greater reluctation to any
Commandment than to this: Pardon me if I judge of others by my self in this
particular. Nay, upon this very consideration have we not the more cause to
strive against this intestine corruption of ours? His Majesty is much delighted
in hunting; it is a recreation mixed with manly exercise, well becoming a King;
but I hear he never uses to hunt on the Lords day. And so much the rather
should the Lords Sabbaths be dear unto us, because the goodness and mercy of
God appears no where more, than in giving us his Sabbaths; calling upon us
thereby to rest from the world unto him (and God knows, a Christian soul
finds no rest any where but in him) and to walk with him in holy meditation,
as he is pleased to walk in the midst of us, as Hos. 11.9.
the Holy One of Israel: so to draw us away from worldly cares and pleasures,
to the entertaining of heavenly and holy cares, to enrich our selves with the
knowledge of God, and to recreate our souls in the Lord, as he solaceth
himself in us, according to that, Prove. 8.31.
He took his solace in the compass of the earth, and his delight was in the
children of men. On the Lords day it is, that in special sort we Christians
take hold of that holy Communion, which God in great mercy in his Son Jesus
Christ vouchsafes unto us with himself, speaking unto us as from heaven in
his holy Word, and giving us liberty to speak unto him. The Lord pitcheth his
Tabernacle amongst us here on earth, and we are as it were taken up into the
mount of God, there to be transfigured before him. When the Lord appeared unto
Jacob in a vision by night, when he fled from his brother Esau, and he saw a
ladder erected between heaven and earth, and the Lord on the top of it, the
Angels ascending and descending by it; when he awoke, How dreadful (says he)
is this place; Genesis 28.16, 17.
The Lord was here, and I was not a ware; surely it is no other than the house
of God, and the gate of heaven. And are not our Temples the houses of God? are
they not the very gates of heaven? In our solemn assemblies is not a ladder
erected between earth and heaven? is not the Lord on the top of it, Deuteronomy. 33.3.
and are not we humbled at his feet to hear his Word? The gracious
instructions which we receive from him, are they not as so many Angels
descending unto us, the gracious motions that arise in our hearts, upon
meditation of his Word, of thankesgiving to him, of rejoicing in him yea, of
sorrowing for our sins, are they not as so many Angels ascending to him? Our
tears have a double motion, one natural, downwards, another spiritual,
upwards, for the Lord puts them into his bottels: the hairs of our head are
numbered, how much more the sighs of our heart, and groans of our spirit? And
have we not great cause to inure our selves betimes thus to sabbatize with God,
as he sabbatizeth with us? that we may be the fitter to keep our eternal
Sabbath with him: (for so is our eternal happiness represented unto us) in
the enjoying of him for ever, Es. 66.23.
and being filled with his glory; which Austin calls De civit. Dei. lib. 22. c.
30.
Sabbatum maximum, our greatest Sabbath; and Quaest. supra Exo. quaest. 173. 1
Cor. 15.24.28.
Plenitudo Sabbati; and to that purpose casts his eye upon that Sabbatum
Sabbatorum, Sabbath of Sabbaths, Revel. 25. For when Christ has put down all
rule, and all authority and power, then shall he deliver up the Kingdom to
God, even the Father, and God shall be all in all.

Yet I willingly confess, that in my observation, two things there are, which
seem to be of great moment, in opposition to the morality of the fourth
Commandment: 1. The change of the day. 2. The general opinion of the Fathers
pronouncing in an indefinit manner the fourth Commandment to be ceremonial.
Yet notwithstanding, the registring of it in the Decalogue, which is generally
accounted the Law moral, I say, this consideration has even prevailed more
with me, to account the substance thereof moral. Nevertheless for the honor
I owe, and respect I bear to Antiquity, I have endeavored to understand the
Ancients aright, and to enquire in what respect they accounted it ceremonial.
For to my understanding, the sanctification of the rest, or the service of the
day, especially unto us Christians is merely moral. But as concerning the
rest it self, it may be, some ceremoniality may be found therein, especially
considered in conjunction with the time appointed for the worship and service
of God. And herein I thank God, I have found good satisfaction unto my self,
at last; how I shall satisfy others I know not. And when sometimes I had waded
through the Epistle to the Romans unto the fourteenth Chapter; there occasion
was given me to consider further of this controversy, so far, as a few days
would give liberty to provide my next Sermon: and therein I made use of
Hospinian, and of Pererius, and no more as I remember; but in Pererius I came
acquainted with Tostatus his Arguments, directed against the ancient
institution of the Sabbath from the Creation, which till then I imagined had
been generally received without contradiction; according to that which the
story of Genesis at first sight seems to commend unto us. And by this occasion
my mind working hereupon in my meditations, I thought fit, for opening a way,
to the better clearing of the truth, to distinguish three things, in
subordination, the latter to the former. 1. The first was a time in general to
be set apart for Gods service. 2. The second was the proportion of this time.
3. The third, the particularity of the day according to the specified
proportion. 1. The first seemed to me of necessary duty by the very light of
nature, to as many as know God, and acknowledge him to be their Creator: and
this I took, and do take to be the highest degree of morality in this
precept, and herein hitherto I have found no opposition. 2. As touching the
second, by light of nature we are somewhat to seek, as whether one day in a
week or more; or one day in a month or more; or one day in a year or more,
ought to be set apart for the solemn worship and service of God. So that
herein it is fit we should expect direction from God, the Lord of the Sabbath.
1. Because the service of the day is his, and it seems fit he should cut out
what proportion of time he thinks convenient. 2. For the maintenance of
uniformitie therein; and lest otherwise there might be as many divisions
hereabouts, as there are Churches in the world, and contentions also
consequently, each standing for their own election. For reason of a
conjecturall nature is very various, and therein commonly affection bears the
greatest sway, and draws the judgment to comply with it. But when God has
determined a certain proportion of time, it may be we shall find great
congruitie therein, even to natural reason, and far more than in any other.
D. Field, as Master Broad reports, professes, that to one who knows the story
of the Creation, it is evident by light of nature, that one day in seven is to
be consecrated to Gods service. Part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 2.
And Azorius the Jesuit in his moral Institutions acknowledges that It is
most agreeable to reason, that after six work days, one day should be
consecrated to divine worship. The least division of days is into a week, the
next greater division is into a month, the next into a year. Now by light of
nature it seems far more reasonable, that one day in seven should be
employed in Gods service, than one day in a month. And if a seventh part of
our time be to be consecrated unto God, better a seventh day, than a seventh
part of every day, because the worldly occupations of each of those days, must
needs cause miserable distraction. Thus reason may discourse in probable
manner, when God has gone before us to open a way unto us. Certainly, when God
has once determined the proportion of time, it is so far from being
accounted moral, as perpetual, and still to hold, until God himself shall
alter it. 3. As for the particularity of the day according to the forenamed
proportion; therein we should be far more to seek, were we left unto our
selves; time consisting in a continual flux and succession, one part before,
and another after. As namely, supposing one day in seven is to be consecrated
to Gods service; yet we shall still be to seek, which day of the seven is to
be set apart for an holy use. And no marvel; for in it self it is nothing
material. For a proportion of service being required within a certain
compass, so it be done within that compass, every Master rests satisfied with
his servants work. But as for difference in the proportion, every one accounts
that a matter of great moment. God himself acknowledges this; therefore to
whom he gives but little, at their hands he expects but little; to whom he
gives much, of them he expects much, as our Savior teaches. And Saint John
exhorts Christians so to carry themselves in the Lords service, that they may
receive a full reward. 2 John. 8
Yet both for our assurance that our service shall be acceptable with God (for
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to sin, we read, that He offered
upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the fifteenth day of the eighth
month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart, which latter
clause undoubtedly is added by way of exprobration) as also to prevent
divisions by reason of different opinions thereabouts, and as different courses
therein; it is fit that herein we should wait for the Lords direction, and
designation of the particular day. And even this also was so ordered by God
himself, and that in great congruitie, as appears to as many, as are
acquainted with the story of the Creation. For the Lord having dispatched all
his works in six days, and resting on the seventh, commanded man to imitate
him. For in this respect it was, that at the first the Lord blessed the seventh
day and sanctified it: and some thousand of years after gives this reason, why
after six days of labor the seventh being the Sabbath of the Lord our God, no
manner of work should be done therein: which being once thus ordered by the
Lord of the Sabbath, it must be in force of perpetual observation, as a
requisite determination of the morality of this Law; and not of an alterable
nature, save only by the same authority whereby it was ordained. Now to my
understanding, by the fourth Commandment it is clear: First, that God
commanded some time to be set apart, and sanctified unto his service.
Secondly, that the proportion of this time he has defined to be one day in
seven. Thirdly, that the particular day under this proportion was designed to
be the seventh, and that unto the Jews in correspondencie to the seventh day
from the first creation, whereon God commanded them to rest from all their
works, like as on that day the Lord rested from his works. And I think, there
is no question amongst Christians, but that all this ought to be religiously
observed by the people of God, until the Lord himself manifest his pleasure
for alteration, and no farther, in any particular, than God shall manifest his
pleasure for alteration. As for example. First for the time, then son the rest,
lastly, for the service of the day it self. First, If God has not manifested
his will for any alteration, of setting apart some time for divine service; we
must still continue to set some time apart for divine service. Likewise, if God
has not manifested his pleasure, to have the proportion of time altered, which
has bin originally allotted unto his service; we must not presume to allow a
less proportion of time for his service, than has been formerly prescribed by
him. Only both Gomarus and Rivet concur in this, that we may allow more; and
that in reason, it is fit now under the Gospel to allow more time for Gods
service, rather than less, in comparison to that which he would have allowed
him under the Law. And as for the particularity of the day, if God has
manifested his pleasure to have it altered, it must be altered, (as in case it
appear to have been ceremonial, in respect of the rest commanded thereon) and
another in the seven substituted in the place thereof, and that according to
Gods direction, and not otherwise. Secondly, so as touching the rest of the day
commanded upon Mount Sina unto the Jews (not so unto Adam upon the Creation;
but only we read that God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, which
sanctification yet on man's part draws a rest with it) if there be found a just
distinction between a rest moral, (so far forth as the sanctification of the
day requires) and a rest ceremonial, of a more rigorous nature, and that
prefiguring some thing in Christ; it will follow herehence that the rest moral
still continues, together with the sanctification of the day, as much as ever,
and that the rigorous rest must fall and be abolished. Thirdly, so in the last
place, as touching the service of the day; whatsoever was prescribed unto the
Jews thereon as ceremonial, is at end; as namely the Sabbath sacrifice which
doubled the daily sacrifice. Only the public ministry of the Word and
Prayer, as moral, still continues, together with our Sacramental ceremonies
which Christ has given unto his Church, Baptism and the Lords Supper; and
therefore the Lords day was called by the Ancients the day of light, in
reference unto Baptism, Baptism being called (...), illumination, the first
work of grace, and the day of Bread, in reference to the Lords Supper. Now all
this I hope to make appear, before I give over this task which I have taken
in hand. And I was the more confirmed in my meditations, when I heard by one of
my Auditors, a Divine, that in this doctrine of mine concerning the Sabbath, as
touching the substance of that which was delivered by me, I nothing differed
from the opinion of D. Prideaux, whose discourse on that argument, at that time
I had not been acquainted with. But since I find that Sect. 8. of that his
Lecture, be professes that the Jewish rest cannot stand with our Christian
liberty; I say so too, and withal endeavor to give evidence for the
abrogation thereof. Further, the same Reverend Doctor professes, That we only
are so far to abstain from work, as it is an impediment to the performance
of such duties as are then commanded. I am not only of his opinion herein, but
withal desire no more than this to be granted for the maintenance of the
moral rest of the fourth Commandment.

But I have observed some to deny any thing in the Jewish Sabbath to have been
ceremonial, yet will not have that fourth Commandment moral, but positive
rather, as touching both the observation of one day in seven, and as touching
the particularity of the day. And therefore they deny it to be moral, because
it has not evidence by light of nature. But was it evident to the Jews by
light of nature, that the God of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
that brought them out of the land of Egypt, was the true God of the world, and
that therefore they ought to have no other gods but him? Is it evident by the
light of nature that God is not to be worshipped by an Image? Or if natural
evidence hereof fail us in this state of corrupt nature wherein we are, shall
these laws be denied to be the moral Law of God? yet I nothing doubt but the
proportion of time allowed for Gods service, much more the particularity of the
day appointed thereunto, is alterable at the pleasure of God. And ceremonials,
I confess, are in such a sense positive, or rather more than positive; namely,
such as not only may, but must like shadows fly away when the body of them
comes in place. And yet I find that Cajetan in this point confounds ceremonial
with positive; though I think he would not call it ceremonial, unless he
conceived, that this which he calls positive, had some ceremoniality in it. But
their reason whereupon they deny the ceremoniality of it, in my judgment is not
sufficient. 1. Because they ground it upon a supposition very questionable,
namely, that the Sabbath was instituted before the fall, which some deny, and
that with very great probability in my judgment. 2. Their consequence is not
good. For though it were no ceremony at the first; yet others say it might be
afterward, and give instance in the rainbow, which though in course of nature
extant before, yet was not a sign till after the Flood: and though I know some
who would not admit of this instance, yet the Thesis seems very possible; and
clearly of such a condition was matrimony, ordained without all question
before the fall. 3. What is that which they say is not ceremonial? is it the
service of the day in the sanctifying of it? None that I know, maintains that
to be necessarily ceremonial. Or is it the rest of the day? Observe well, and
you shall find no rest expressly commanded at the first, but only it is
signified, that God dedicated it to his service; which yet, I confess
willingly, draws after it a rest from all works opposite or impedimentall to
the sanctification of it. 4. Thus they take little care to satisfy the
Fathers, who generally concur in acknowledging the ceremoniality of it. And
we are too weak in these days, to bear up an opinion in flat contradiction to
the Ancients, and to keep our selves blameless. Yet Doctor Andrews (Bishop of
Winchester, ere he died) in his pattern of Catechetical doctrine professes
against the ceremoniality of it; but so as acknowledging it to prefigure the
rest we shall have from our sins in Christ, and that therefore the day is
changed, though (as he thinks) the ceremony not thereby proved. Yet page 241.
having proposed such a question, Whether we must observe the Sabbath as the
Jews did, not to kindle a fire, nor to dress any meat on that day, answers
thus; We say No; for this was but ceremonial, and belonged only unto them. 5.
Upon this ground (to wit, upon the denying of the ceremoniality of the
particular day) they will hardly be able to justify the abrogation of it. For
albeit, they find some ground for observation of the Lords day, yet no ground
at all for the abrogation of the seventh. And that which is only positive, must
still continue, till it be abrogated by as good authority, as whereby it was
made. 1. And we find the practice of the Church for the observation of both
some hundreds of years continued. 2. And it seems congruous to reason in the
judgment of those, who oppose both the institution of it forthwith after the
creation, and the morality of one day in seven, that we should consecrate to
Gods service rather more days than fewer.

And surely to discover as good ground, for observation of the Lords day now,
as for observation of the seventh formerly, is the greatest difficulty that I
find in this argument, if not insuperable; whereof yet we shall find our
selves in greater measure eased, if we can show manifest evidence for the
abrogation of the seventh, which was sabbaticall to the Jews. Now first, this
is clearly performed by acknowledgeing the ceremoniality of it, which yet I do
not affect should be acknowledged without proof. Secondly, thus also the
Fathers shall fairly be satisfied. Thirdly, and the Introduction of the Lords
day in the place thereof advanced. Fourthly, especially if the ceremoniality be
so cleared, as plainly to manifest, that the body thereof was Christ, which is
a very hard task to perform of all other ceremonies, yea, of all other
Sabbaths or any other Sabbath save of the weekly Sabbath. But of all these, to
wit: 1. Of the original institution of it. 2. Of the morality of one day in
seven, as perpetually to be observed. 3. Of the authority of the Lords day,
introduced into the place of the seventh, by more than Ecclesiastical or
Humane constitution, we shall speak more by occasion of the several passages
in this discourse, which comes to be examined, so to make way to enquire about
the sanctification of the Lords day, whether in opposition as much to worldly
sports and pastimes (or more rather) as to the works of our calling. For to the
consideration hereof we are now driven; it being now held that they who speak
or write against such sports and pastimes upon the Lords day, our Christian
Sabbath, do oppose truth. Now whether we do oppose truth in standing for the
sanctification of the Lords day, and maintaining these pastimes specified to be
an impediment thereunto; we desire to commend our selves to the judgment of
every Christian conscience, upon consideration of our reasons herein
represented. Our Savior commands us to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's,
and unto God the things that are Gods; and we hold our selves bound to hearken
unto his voice, as we hope to be saved by his grace. And because in some cases
it may be doubtful, what belongs unto Caesar, and what belongs unto God, by
reason of the darkness of our understanding, and weakness of our judgment;
it behooves us so much the more to labor in the investigation of this
difference, and carefully look unto it, that under color of giving unto
Caesar, that which is Caesar's, we do not give unto Caesar that which is not
Caesar's, and not give unto God that which is Gods: and under color of giving
unto God that which is Gods, we do not give unto God that which is not Gods,
and not give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. And albeit D. Prideaux his
Lecture was neither delivered (as I am persuaded) by word of mouth, nor
afterward set forth in print to strengthen so sharp proceedings against the
Ministers of God as now are in course; yet seeing it has been of late
translated and published in English, with a Preface, to the justifying of the
same proceedings, even then (as it seems) intended; and that neither according
to any Law or Canon that we know of; therefore I am driven, (who otherwise, I
am verily persuaded, should never have set hand unto this work, but lest it
unto others, who are better versed in practical and pastoral Divinity than my
self) to give my self to the examination, both of the Preface, and of the
Book it self: for we labor, as it were, for life under the burden of it;
and this is set forth, as it seems, to promote our condemnation.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH DELIVERED in the Act at Oxenford, Anno 1622. By D.
PRIDEAUX, His Majesty's Professor in Divinity in that UNIVERSITIE. And now
translated into English for the benefit of the common people, Mark 2.27. The
Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. Together with an Examination
thereof.
The Preface of the Translator to the Christian Reader. Preface.

1 OF all the Controversies which have exercised There rose up certain of the
Sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise
the people, and to command them to keep the Law of Moses, whereof the Sabbath
was a part: which in the general, as the Apostles labored to suppress in the
first general Council holden in Jerusalem. 2. So did Saint Paul the Jews
Sabbath, Gal. 4.10, 11.
or observed days, and months, and times, as if he had bestowed his labor in
vain upon them. But more particularly in his Epistle to the Colossians, Let no
man judge you in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath
days, which were a shadow of things to come, but the body was of Christ. Both
which expressions of Saint Paul are in this following discourse produced to
this very purpose. Yet notwithstanding all this care, both generally of the
Apostles, and more especially of Saint Paul to suppress this error, it grew
up still and had its patrons Ebion and Cerinthus, two of the wretchedest
Heretics of the Primitive times, See August. de Haeres. and Epiph.
and after them Apollinaris, are said to countenance and defend it, which
doubtless made the Ancient Fathers declare themselves fully in it, as a
dangerous point: which seemed to confirm the Jews in their incredulity, and
might occasion others to make question of our Irenaeus, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian and Eusebius, men of renown for learning in the primitive times
(three of which are cited in the text of this following discourse, and the
fourth quoted in the margin) affirm for certain, that never any of the
Patriarchs before Moses Law did observe the Sabbath: which questionless they
must have done, had that Law been moral, and dictated Epiphanius, in his
Confutation of the heresies of the Ebionites; and by the resolutions of
Theodoret on the 20. of Ezech. Procopius Gazaeus on the 2. of Genesis by Damascen,
and our Venerable Bede, (which two last are here also cited, Sect. 2.)
concurring with the former Fathers, all talk and observation of the Jewish
Sabbath vanished utterly; and the Lords day which had from the Apostles times
been instituted by the Church, in the place thereof, was hallowed without
Gregory tells us, how some in Rome were so superstitious in this kind, that they
would neither work upon the Saturday, no nor so much as wash upon the Sunday.

Exam.
I observe in the title first, that the Translator professes, he has performed
his part, for the benefit of the common people. I do not envy them that
benefit, if it be a benefit: but if it be not so, but prove contrary, I shall
grieve rather. No doubt the Translator thinks he has an advantage thereby, so
did Rabshakeh, when he refused to speak in the Aramites language, but chose
rather to speak in the Jews tongue in the audience of the people that were on
the wall; that if they did not harken unto him, they might eat their own dung,
and drink their own piss, with the rest. What will be the condition of some
of them who do not hearken to this Praefacer; I know not, but according to my
poor judgment, my opinion is, that as many as hearken to this Praefacer, if
Christ's coming shall be on his own day as Austin hoped, Sermon. de tem.
sermon. 154.
it would be (and what day more likely in all probability?) and at his
coming on the Lords day he should take them in their sports, their own hearts
would misgive them, that their comfort should be as little as that the Orator
threatened unto the Jews upon the wall, in case they did not hearken unto him.
In a book printed not long ago I hear, there is alleged a passage of one of
the Theodoret.
Fathers, for the free use of scripture by all sorts of the vulgar people; and
it is translated also into English, belike, for the benefit of the common
people, but in a second edition the Greek sentence is and by inquiry I find it
true
said to be retained, but the English translation quite omitted. Did the Author
report of gratifying the people thus, and quench his care of providing for
their benefit? This observation is none of mine, but accidentally brought unto
my hands by one of some quality, by occasion of mutual communication between
us. But since, I hear the Author has made amends for that another way. For
having in the first edition professed, that Popish errors are not damnable in
themselves, which with what respect it should be delivered for the benefit of
the common people, amongst Protestants, I know not; in the second edition it is
corrected thus, popish errors are not damnable in the issue. But where
corrected? not in the text, (that continuing the same still, that such errors
are not damnable in themselves) but among the Errata at the end of the book,
although the Author was warned of the strangeness of that assertion (as I
hear) and that in contradiction to the doctrine of the Bishop of Canterbury in
his Treatise of Councels, professing that the Papists withholding the cup from
the people.
people, is a damnable error. Here is brave juggling in the Text to comply with
some, and in the Errata, to provide against afterclaps for himself, and to
comply with others, and betray deep dissimulation in both, enough to make some
man (when such courses are discovered) to be abhorred of al. But to proceed,
the Translator does not say, he has performed this task fot the benefit of
himself, yet he plainly deals upon an advantageous argument. But if his
Majesty shall be pleased out of his gracious disposition (whereof he has
given many remarkable documents) to vouchsafe to receive information concerning
the honor of the Lords day, in way of a just and necessary Apology, which we
are driven to make, I trust (through Gods goodness (in whose hands are the
hearts of Kings) it shall be neither advantageous to him, nor disadvantagious
to us; and his Majesty may perhaps be found to absolve us in the Court of his
own conscience. But what is that benefit of the common people, whereof this
Translator is so zealous? I guess it is in freeing them from superstition; and
that hereafter they may not be so peevishly foolish, as out of any Cabalismes
of conscience, to forbear their may-games; and usual dancings on the Lords
day; yet some, and they no small ones, as I have heard, do profess them no
otherwise to be allowed then as they may be done to the praise and glory of
God. Which calls to my remembrance what a Scotchman sometimes said, as he was
going in one of London streets, and spying one of his acquaintance on the other
side: for calling him aloud by his name; O Sir, says he, when shall we meet at
a Tavern, to give God thanks for our deliverance out of the I Will de Re? But how
comes that to be accounted superstitious, which all the Bishops of the land,
and the whole Kingdom accounts the profanation of the Sabbath, not to speak
of particular Bishops, though as great for learning and place, as Bishop
Andrews, who in his pattern of catecheticall doctrine, tells us of some, who
on the Lords day, vacant nugis, specta^ulis, theatris, choreis, and approves
the stiling of such a Sabbath, Sabbatu^ aurei vituli, the Sabbath of the golden
Calf; I make bold to translate it for the benefit of the common people; and B.
Downham bestows the like denomination upon such a Sabbath. Bishop Andrews
over and above cites Austin for the like saying, but that is more then any
quotation of his does make good, for ought I find hitherunto. But what should I
allege one or two Doctors opinions hereupon though never so great, when an
whole Kingdom stands for the same in my judgment, even the Kingdom of
England, as may appear by the Act of Parliament 1. Caroli, concerning the
Sabbath. The introduction thereunto, manifests three grounds whereupon they
proceed to make that Act. 1 That there is nothing more acceptable to God, then
his holy worship and service. 2 That the due sanctification of the Lords day,
is a great part of Gods holy woship and service. 3 That men are very prone to
profane it. Now to prevent this profanation of the Sabbath, many things are
there prohibited; and one amongst the rest is this, that none shall come forth
out of his own parish about any sports or pastimes; whence I conclude, that to
come out of a man's parish on the Lords day, about any sports or pastimes is to
profane the Sabbath. For to prevent the profanation of our Christian Sabbath
and to maintain the sanctification thereof is this law made. Now to come out
of a man's own parish about what business soever, no wise man will say that it
is to profane the Sabbath; but according to the nature of the business,
whereabout he comes forth of his own parish, so shall he be found, either
to profane the Sabbath, or not to profane it. As for example, for a man to
come forth of his own parish to hear a sermon, no man I think, will say,
that it is to profane the Sabbath. In like manner, to come forth of his own
parish, into an other parish to fetch a Physician or Surgeon in case of
necessity, no man will say that this is to profane the Sabbath, because the
business about which he comes is not to profane the Sabbath. But for a man
to come out of his own parish to buy or sell, to trade or traffic, no
necessity urging thereunto, this is to profane the Sabbath; because in such
sort to trade on the Sabbath day, is to profane the Sabbath. In like sort, for
a man to come out of his own parish about any sports or pastimes, is therefore
to Profane the Sabbath in the judgment of the Parliament, because the keeping
and performing of these sports and pastimes, is a manifest profanation of the
Sabbath in the judgment of the King and his Parliament. Now if all sports and
pastimes on the Lords day be a profanation of the Lords day our Christian
Sabbath; it follows that may-games and moricings, and dancings, at such times
usual, are also a manifest profanation of the Sabbath. And hererin we speak,
as I conceive, in his Majesty's meaning, assisted with the great Council of
his Kingdom, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the House of Commons: and
whosoever shall account it superstition to say so, shall therewithal charge
his royal Majesty, and all the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal; and in a
word, the whole Parliament with superstition. Yet if it were only the benefit
of the common people, that this Translator did intend, I for my part should be
content to suffer him to enjoy the honor of seeking the benefit of the people;
only admonishing the people committed to my charge, to consider well whether
there be any such benefit to be reaped thereby as is pretended. 2 Pet. 3.
And seeing Saint Peter exhorts us to give diligence, that we may be found of
Christ in peace, when he comes in flaming fire to render vengeance on all them
that know not God, nor obey not the Gospel of Christ Jesus: Let every one
examine himself, whether he could be content to be taken dancing about a
may pole on the Lords day, when the Lord, even the Lord of the Sabbath shall
come, and that to be found of him in this condition, were to be found of him
in peace. But seeing this translation, and especially the Preface of this
Author tends to the promoting of the most rigorous censures against many; it
stands us upon to plead our own cause, and to labor herein as for life: even
in examination of the doctrine here delivered, that we may find upon how just
ground it proceeds; otherwise we may be justly condemned of all: and in the
censures that pass upon us whether of Excommunication, or Suspension, or
Deprivation, find none to plead our cause, or to commiserate us. The second
thing I observe in this title, is the passage of Scripture here mentioned, as
justifying the doctrine here delivered out of Mark. 2.27. The Sabbath was made
for man, not man for the Sabbath. Now none of us makes question but that the
Sabbath was made for man: Nay we nothing doubt but that all the days of the
week were made for man, that is, for the good of man, but the Sabbath for the
best good, not the basest good of man in following his worldly pleasures. The
six days of the week are given us to labor in our ordinary callings, for the
maintenance of our life temporal: but the seventh is sanctified by God, that
is, dedicated to holy exercises in the service of God, and to inure us to
recreate our selves and to delight in the Lord; that as his soul takes
pleasure in us, so our souls might be accustomed to take pleasure in him; and
to make his Sabbaths our delight, to consecrate them as glorious unto the Lord.
It is true, there is another end of the Sabbath, and that was ut vires
recolligeret, to recollect his strength which had been spent and wasted in the
six days of labor; whence it follows evidently, that when a man was hungry
as the disciples were, when they plucked the ears of corn, they were not
bound by any religion of the Sabbath to abstain from such a course, whereby a
man's strength would become more and more weakened and impaired. Not that these
things were commanded on the Sabbath day, but permitted; as is often signified
by the word (...) it is lawful; and for good reason. Matthew. 12.10.12. Mar 3.4.
Luke 6.9.
For the Sabbath being ordained to promote a man's been esse, his well being;
and that in the best things it supposes liberty to provide for his esse in
case of necessity; lest otherwise he shall be found incapable of those things
that concern his been esse, his well being. For our nature wanting necessary
refreshment does thereby many times become the more unfit for holy excerises,
and to perform that duty which God requires, and has deserved at our hands.
How were Ionathans eyes enlightened upon the tasting of a little honey, 1 Samuel
14.29. But this Translator desires, as it seems, from the generality of man's
good to seal up an opinion in the minds of his Readers, that the Sabbath was
made not only for the service of God, and for the promoting of a man in the
knowledge and fear of God, but for the furthering of his carnal pleasures
also. But never was it known that our Savior justified any liberty to such
courses on the Sabbath: Neither were any such things, as it seems in course,
in the days of the Prophet Amos, who reprehends them for saying, Am. 8.5. When
will the Sabbath be gone, that they might return to their worldly courses?
Rather they could wish their sun might stand still on that day, as sometimes it
did in the days of Joshua, if liberty were given to sports, pastimes, and
pleasures on that day: and it wvre wondrous strange that liberty should be
debarred them from kindling a fire to set forward the structure of the
Sanctuary, Exodus 35 3. Luke 33.25. ^ast.
made to this very end that the Lord might dwell among them: And from so
precious a work as the embalming of the body of Christ, the Lord of the
Sabbath, and that at the very end of the day, if at that time they were not
restrained from any sensual course of recreation, according to the common
fashion of the world. Undoubtedly, howsoever it stands now with us Christians;
in the days of our Savior, they that rested on their Sabbath from embalming
the body of Christ, Luke 23.56.
and that according to the appointment, which is as much as to say, according
to the Law of God; surely they, by the same Law of God were much more
restrained from worldly pleasures, these standing far more in opposition to the
sanctification of the Lords Sabbath, then the embalming of the body of the
Son of God, who was Lord of the Sabbath. And therefore this text is most
unseasonably and impertinently alleged by the Translator to serve his turn,
being far more fit to cross his purposes, then any way to promote them. So
from the consideration of the title, I come to the preface.

Moses? Was not the law of sanctifying the name of God, the law forbidding
images, the law commanding them to have no other Gods but him, that brought
them out of the land of Egypt: the law commanding to honor parents, to
abstain from murder, adultery, theft, were not all these the Law of Moses? Is
not the law of sanctifying the Sabbath one of the ten Commandments delivered
by God from Mount Sinai as well as the other nine? and was it not kept in the
Arc as well as the rest? Circumcision was no law of Moses, and therefore
albeit it be said Ioh. 7.22. That Moses gave unto them Circumcision, yet
forthwith it is added, not because it is of Moses, but of the Fathers: so that
Moses rather confirmed it, then was the first giver of it. So that the Law of
Moses in this place is to be understood of the ceremonial law, not of the
moral law contained in the Decalogue, and among these ten Commandments,
that of the Sabbath is one, and commended unto them in that state as none so
much, Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it; and not only before Moses, but
before Abraham and Noah also, we read, Genesis 2.^, ^.
that the seventh day God rested from all the works that he had made, and
that therefore God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it.

Of any Minister or Pastor in the Church of England that a shadow of things to
come, the body whereof is of Christ, I never heard or read. Yet for some
hundred years in the Ebion and Cerinthus only, but by pious Christians also,
as Baronius writes and Gomarus confesses, and Rivet also, that we are bound
in conscience under the Gospel, to allow for Gods service a better proportion
of time, than the Jews did under the law, rather than a worse. And further it
is well known, that besides the weekly Sabbath, there was variety of
observation of times amongst the Jews, and diverse of them called Sabbaths
also, as some think, not one whereof was mentioned in the Decalogue, or
pronounced by the Lord from Mount Sinai, as the fourth Commandment was, for
the sanctifying of the weekly Sabbath. So that this Praefacer every way shows
miserable looseness in his discourse. And if Ebion and Cerinthus, and
Apollinaris, how wretched heretics soever did still enforce the
sanctification of the Jewish Sabbath, (whose wretchedness yet consisted not so
much in enforcing this, as in enforcing all the ceremonies of Moses; the Jewish
Sabbath long after Corinthus continuing to be observed by many pious
Christians, as Baronius observes and others, and Saint Paul does oppose all
such doctrine and practice in these passages of his here mentioned: did not
this Author know that upon these very passages of Saint Paul, the Anabaptists
and Socinians, as vile heretics as Ebion and Cerinthus, and Apollinaris, for
their blood have gone so far, as not only to overthrow the observation of
the Jewish Sabbath, but the sanctifying of the Lords day also. The opinion of
the law ceremonial standing still in force (which indeed was the opinion of
the heretics mentioned) is I confess, a dangerous point, and such as not
only seemed (as this Praefacer minceth it, out of what degree of wisdom or
providence I know not) to confirm the Jews in their incredulity, but indeed
justly might confirm them; nor only occasion, but justly cause also others,
to make question of our Saviors coming in the flesh; not so the observation
of the seventh day to sanctify it, for ought this Author has hitherto
manifested, or throughout this preface of his does manifest; and the
sanctification of this day is apparently commanded in the moral law spoken from
Mount Sinai. And those Christians who a long time kept this seventh day holy as
well as the Lords day, had no opinion of any danger at all in this their
observation. And it stood the ancient Fathers upon to oppose the observation of
the law ceremonial. Yet what says Austin against these heretics, to whom
this Author in the first place refers us? All that he delivers against the
Cerinthians in reference to this particular is only this: They say that we
ought to be circumcised, and that other like precepts of the Law are to be
observed. I translate it for the benefit of the common people. Of the Ebionites
thus, They observe the carnal commandments of the Law, to wit, Circumcision
of the flesh and the rest, from whose burdens we are freed by the new
Testament. Of Appollinaris and his sect this way, Austin has just nothing: but
Danaeus who collects out of other Authors also the heretical opinions of the
Apollinarists in the last place writes thus of them: After the last
resurrection (say they) Sabbaths, Circumcision, Jewish difference of meats,
and all other legal ceremonies shall have place, yea also there shall be a
Temple amongst us. And is not this wild stuff, in reference to the
sanctification of the Lords day, now in question amongst us?

Hence it was that Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Eusebius, do
affirm for certain, that never any of the Patriarchs before Moses Law did
observe the Sabbath; D. Prideaux says not that Hence it was; neither has this
Author given the least evidence hereof. Sure I am, that in those Patriarchs
days Christ was not as yet come in the flesh, but rather to come long after
their days; and consequently though it be a dangerous course in these days to
lay any ground of suspicion that Christ is not already come, but as yet to
come; yet this was of no dangerous condition at all in the days of the
Patriarchs, because in their days Christ was not come, but to come long after.
D. Prideaux begins with Tertullian by this Author translated thus, Let them
(says he in a particular Tract against the Jews) assure me if they can, that
Adam ever kept the Sabbath: or Abel when he offered unto God his accepted
sacrifice, had regard thereof; or that Noah kept the same, when he was busied
in preparing the Arc against the Deluge; or finally that Abraham in offering
his son Isaak; or that Melchisedech in execution of his Priesthood took
notice of it. Now I appeal to every sober man's judgment, whether to put the
Jews in those days to show this, be to affirm for certain, That never any
of the Patriarchs before Moses Law did observe the Sabbath. It is true indeed,
we have no particular relation of the observation of the Sabbath in that Book
of Genesis, and this Tertullian knew full well; and again it is as true that
there is no testimony of ought to the contrary. In the Book of Josuah in like
sort there is not any mention of the observation thereof (any more than in the
Book of Judges, of Ruth, of the two Books of Samuel) but rather something to
the contrary, to wit, in the siege of Jericho, and marching round about the
walls of Jericho seven days together. But yet in general we read in Genesis,
that when God had finished all his works in six days, and rested the seventh,
he therefore blessed the seventh day and sanctified it; and whether this has
not greater evidence, that even then God ordered, that that day should be
sanctified, than that the meaning should be, that therefore God ordered this
two thousand and certain years after, I appeal to every Christian to judge
between us. And if God did then order it, which could not be otherwise than by
command, how could Adam be ignorant hereof; and if he knew as much, how
improbable is it, that he and his, at least Abel and Enosh, and his pious
posterity should not observe it? And if a time had not been set apart even in
Adams days for divine service, how improbable is it, that Cain and Abel should
concur at the same time, in bringing their offerings unto the Lord; and if
not at the same time, how could Cain discern that Abels offering was respected
and accepted of God, when his was not? Yet for certain, it was observed before
Moses Law, if by the Law we understand the Law given on mount Sina, as appears
manifestly Exodus 16. And withal it is thereby evident, that from the beginning
of the world until that time, the distinction of the year into weeks was
observed, otherwise it were impossible to know, which day was the seventh in
correspondencie to the seventh from the Creation, (save by particular
revelation whereof we read nothing) now that being unknown, the reason of
sanctifying the seventh day by an holy rest, drawn from Gods rest on the
seventh, that is, the last day of the first week from the Creation had been
utterly void, and nothing at all agreeable. And this distinction of time into
weeks was observed from all Antiquity by the Gentiles, as has been confirmed
by Wallaeus and Rivetus, with the help of Claudius Salmasius, that learned
Antiquary; and likewise that the seventh day was a Festival even among the
Gentiles. And albeit diverse others of the Ancients are alleged to the same
purpose, as affirming that the Patriarchs did not observe the Sabbath, as
namely Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
saying, They had no Circumcision of the body, nor observation of the Sabbath,
as we have not. And Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, Lib. 4.
cap. 30.
saying, Heretofore there were good men that pleased God, though they kept not
Sabbathes. And Irenaeus in like manner, thus, Abraham himself without
Circumcision, and observation of the Sabbaths, believed God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness; Lid. Orthod. lib. 4. cap. 24.
and lastly Damascen, When there was no Law nor Scripture of divine
inspiration, nor Sabbath consecrated unto God. For as forbid (alleged by
Pererius to that purpose, in his Hexameron) I find in that place nothing
answerable thereunto. Now Hospinian is of opinion that these passages of the
Ancients are to be understood of the rigorous observation of the Sabbath among
the Jews; I add, or in reference to the other Sabbaths commanded in the Law
of Moses; or lastly in reference to the manner of solemnizing them among the
Jews, who we know had a peculiar Sacrifice ordained for the Sabbaths; and this
I prove by these reasons. First, they deliver this as a thing well known; for
they take no pains to prove it. Now consider, what ground could they have for
the custom of the Patriarchs before the Flood, especially considering that the
testimony of Moses, Genesis 2.3. is far better evidence for the keeping of a
weekly Sabbath, in a moral way only, than any they could bring to the
contrary. Secondly, then again, could they have better grounds for the
practice of those ancient Patriarchs both before, and after the Flood than the
Jews themselves? I presume none will be so immodest as to affirm this; and if
they had any such evidence, it stood them upon to produce it, especially in
dealing against the Jews. Thirdly, they deliver this as a thing undeniable by
the Jews themselves, with whom they deal in this particular: but the Jews
had no such faith, as to believe that the ancient Patriarchs never observed the
weekly Sabbath. For none are of this opinion but such as think that passage
Genesis 2.3. of Gods blessing the seventh day and hallowing it, was not delivered
of that present time, as if then God ordained it should be sanctified, but only
by way of anticipation for the time to come. But this was not the opinion of
the Jews. Manasseth Ben Israel a modern Rabbin, in his book entitled The
Reconciler, Conciliator, according to the argument of that his writing, which
is to reconcile places of Scripture, in show disagreeing; and that upon enquiry
into all the Rabbis both ancient and later; in his 36. Question upon Exodus,
writes thus, as out of the opinion of the Ancients; those words, Thou shall
remember that thou wast a servant in Egypt, observe how he expounds them; Ac si
diceret, cogita in Aegypto, ubi serviebas, etiam ipso Sabbato per vim te
coactum ad labores; as if he should say, think (with thy self) that in Egypt
where thou servedst, thou wast by force constrained to labor, on the very
Sabbath: Evidently manifesting not out of his own particular opinion, but as
out of the general opinion of their ancient Rabbis, that the Sabbath and the
observation thereof was a duty in the very days of the Patriarchs. And in the
end concludes thus: Igitur Deus benedictus cupiens Sabbatum, cujus sanctimoniam
tantis documentis approbaverat, in aeternum ab omnibus coli, dec^m praeceptis
illud inseruit, quo scientes praecepta aeterna esse, etiam hoc inter ea
habendum intelligerent. Therefore the blessed God (it is fit I should translate
it for the benefit of the common people) desiring that the Sabbath might be
observed for ever of all (whose sanctity by so many documents he had commended,
placed it in the Dealogue (that it made it one of the ten Commandments) to
the end that knowing those precepts to be everlasting, they should understand
that this Commandment also was to be accomplished amongst them. And indeed
Tertullian himself professes that the Jews were of this opinion, as Rivetus
observes out of his book against the Jews, thus translated, God from the
beginning did sanctify the seventh day, resting from all the works that he
had made, and that thereupon Moses said unto the people, Remember ye the
Sabbath day to sanctify it. And therefore when Mercer says concerning the
meaning of these words, Genes. 2.3. Hebraei fere referunt in futurum: the Jews
for the most part refer it to the time to come: he is to be understood of the
later Jews; but of this more shall be spoken ere we part from this section. 4
Fourthly, not one of the ancient Fathers is alleged by our adversaries,
delivering his opinion upon that passage, Genes. 2.3. to show what he
conceives to be the true meaning thereof, which yet is the only ground
whereupon our doctrine is built concerning the original institution of the
Sabbath; and seeing it contains a meaning at first sight manifestly
contradictious to that which they affirne, as we interpret it of the weekly
Sabbath, without reference unto the Jewish manner of observing it: therefore in
this case it stood them upon to take notice of that place, and by some fair
interpretation vindicate themselves from suspicion of contradicting the
express Word of God. 5 Tertullian himself justifies our doctrine, namely,
that God from the beginning sanctified the seventh day, as Rivetus shows out
of his fourth book against Marcion, cap. 12. where he says, Christum ipsum
Sabbati diem, benedictione Patris a primordio sanctum benefactione sua efficere
sanctiorem, That Christ himself made that day more holy by his well doing on
that day, which by the benediction of the Father was made holy from the
beginning. So that Tertullians meaning in the place alleged to the contrary,
cannot be, that the ancient Patriarchs simply observed not the weekly
Sabbath, but only that they observed it not after that manner the Jews did;
and that the like interpretation must be given of the passages alleged out of
other of the Ancients. 6 For further proof whereof, observe that Theodoret,
albeit on the 20. of Ezekiel he says in like manner that God prescribed unto
the Jews the sabbaticall vacations, Vt haec civilis administrationis ratio
peculiaris a Gentium quidem eos distingueret institutis: that this peculiar
administration might distinguish them from the customs of the Gentiles: yet
Wallaeus shows that the same Theodoret in his questions upon Genesis, Dissert.
de. 4. praecep. p. 44.
does manifestly declare, that even from the beginning of the creation, God did
ordain this day to rest and sanctification. As who having created the
creatures in six days, by the rest of the seventh day manifested the creation
to be perfected; like as in seven days he concluded the whole circle of
days. And that by blessing the seventh day and sanctifying it, he declared,
Quod non illum diem inutilem putabat ad creandum, sed ad quietem accommodatum
statuit. The meaning whereof in effect is this, that he did not think that
day unfit to have any thing created therein, but only it was his pleasure to
ordain it for a day of rest. The same Author shows Chrysostom to be of the
same opinion in his 10. Homily on Genesis, whose words in Latin he renders
thus, Iam hinc ab initio doctrinam hanc nobis insinuat Deus, erudiens in
circulo hebdomedae diem unum integrum segregandum, and reponendum ad
spiritualem operationem, Now from the beginning God insinuates this
instruction, teaching that in the circle of the week one entire day is to be
sequestered and employed on spiritual actions. These authorities in my
judgment should be of the greater force, for as much as they deliver their
opinion by way of interpretation of Gods Word, and that according to the plain
literal meaning, and that such as whereunto every Christians conscience, not
fore-stalled with prejudice, is prone enough to yield by reason of the native
evidence of the words. For they denote an external action and transient, not
an internal and immanent in God, (all of which kind are eternal) which
external action is the dedication of the day to holy uses, which cannot be
imagined to be done any other way (as I should think) then by commanding it
to be sanctified. The same Author shows Austin to have been of the same
judgment, writing thus, August. epist. 86. ad Casulanum.
When God sanctified the seventh day, because thereon he rested from all his
works, he did not deliver ought concerning the Fast or Dinner of the Sabbath:
nor afterward, when to the Hebrew people he gave commandment for the
observation of the day it self, did he mention ought as touching the
receiving or not receiving of food: only commandment is given concerning men's
vacation, from their own or from servile works, which vacation the former
people receiving as a shadow of things to come, in such manner rested from
their works as now we behold the Jews to rest. He cites also Theophilus
Patriarch of Antioch a most ancient writer in his second book to Autolychus
writing thus, Furthermore, as touching the seventh which amongst al people is
celebrious, most men are in great ignorance. For this day which is celebrious
amongst all is called the Sabbath; if a man interpret in Greek, it is called
Septimana; by this name all men call this day, but the cause of this
denomination they know not. Now what was the cause hereof in his judgment, but
the Lords resting thereon as the seventh; after he had finished all his works
in six days, and thereupon blessing it and sanctifying it, whereupon it grew
to be a festival day generally amongst all? Tertullian though alleged on the
other side, yet has been already showed to be of the same mind, in this
particular with Chrysostom and Austin. Add unto these Epiphanius haer. 51.
Sabbatum primum est, quod ab initio decretum est ac dictum a Domino in mundi
creatione quod per circuitum ab eo tempore usque huc juxta septem dies
revolvitur. The first Sabbath is that which the Lord from the beginning
ordained and spoke in the creation of the world, which by revolution from that
time to this, according to the circle of seven days returns. Athanasius also
upon those words of our Savior, Matthew. 11.27.
All things are given to me of my Father, distinguishes between the Sabbath
day, and the Lords day; affirming the Sabbath day to have been the end of the
first creation, and the Lords day the beginning of the second creation. Beda in
his Hexameron professes, that the rest of the seventh day after six days
working, semper celebrari solebat, was always wont to be celebrated: If
always, then before the children of Isreal's coming out of Egypt, before
Abraham, before the flood, even from the beginning of the days of Adam the
first of men. Add unto this the received, and most current opinion of the
Jews, by the testimonies of Philo and Josephus vouched by Wallaeus. Philo in
his second book of Moses writing thus, Quis sacrum illum diem, per singulas
hebdomadas recurrentem non honorat? Who does not honor that holy day according
to the weekly revolution thereof? and he delivers this not of the Jews
only, but of the Greeks and Barbarians, of inhabitants of Maynland, and
Islands, those of Europe, of Asia, and of the whole habitable part of the world
to the very ends thereof. Josephus l. 2. against Appion, professing that there
is no City of Grecians or Barbarians, nor any Nation, to whom the customary
observation of the seventh, whereon the Jews rested, had not reached. Add
unto this the testimony of two Rabbis, mentioned by Broughton in his Consent
of Scriptures acknowledging this, and another Rabbin alleged by Peter Martyr
upon Genesis, both cited by Master Richard B^field in his answer to Master,
Breerwood. Give me leave to add my mite also of mine own observation. The 92.
Psalm has this title. A Psalm and Song for the Sabbath. The Chalde
paraphrase hereupon writes thus (...) A praise and Song which Adam (the first
of men) spoke on the Sabbath day; manifestly evidencing that in the received
opinion of the Jews in those days, Adam sanctified the Sabbath. Rabbi David
Kimchi testifies the same in his Commentary upon that Psalm, to be the
doctrine delivered in their Darash, namely, that Adam the first conceived this
Psalm after he was created on the Sabbath day, and that afterward he sinned,
and so profaned the Sabbath. So that notwithstanding all the bluster which
this Author makes, this fourth Commandment may continue moral nevertheless.
And sure I am, Irenaeus puts this difference between the words of the
Decalogue (so he speaks and consequently expungeth not, but rather includes
the fourth Commandment) and the ceremonial laws, Iren. l. 4. cap. 31.
that Decalogi verba, the words of the Decalogue spoken by God himself unto
all, do therefore continue in like manner with us, receiving extension and
augmentation by the coming of Christ in the flesh, but no dissolution. But the
precept of bondage (so he calls the ceremonials) by themselves he commanded
unto the people by Moses, fit for their instruction and discipline. And Doctor
Andrews I am sure, so great a Prelate in our Church, denies all ceremonialitie
thereunto, save only so far as may justify the change of the day, and in
reference to the rigorous rest of the Jews. And Azorius confesses (as before
has been alleged) that after six days work, one day should be consecrate
to divine service is a thing most agreeable to reason. Yet I know none that
accounts this a Dictate of nature simply, as this Author would feign obtrude
upon us; but rather with Chrysostom, that God by creation has taught us as
much, and now God has gone before us herein, we conceive it to be most
agreeable to reason. And D. Field did profess as much upon acknowledgement of
the Creation, as Master Broad confesses.

Bid, it was 700. years first in the account of Bellarmine. And of any
resolutions made by Bid or Damascen hereabouts, in D. Prideux sect. 2. I find
no mention. Yet I think it likely enough, that both they and Procopius might
easily contrive as many resolutions hereabouts, as either Theodoret upon the
twentieth of Ezekiel, or Epiphanius against the Ebionites; for neither of them
in the places mentioned, make any resolutions on this point at al. He grants
the Lords day to have been instituted by the Church from the Apostles days,
which latter clause is an ambiguous phrase. For it may be applied to the days
after the Apostles. If in the Apostles days, then undoubtedly it was
instituted by the Apostles, what meant he then to say it was instituted by the
Church, and not to be so ingenuous as to confess that it was instituted by
the Apostles? How far off is he from acknowledging it to have been instituted
by the Lord? yet Athanasius openly professes thus much. Olim certe priscis
hominibus in summo pretio Sabbatum fuit, quam quidem solennitatem Dominus
transtulit in diem Dominicum. Heretofore with men of old time the Sabbath day
was in great price: which Festivitie truly the Lord has translated unto the
Lords day. And Cyrill in his 12. book on John, chap. 58. considering the Lords
appearance a second time on the eighth day, Thomas then being present, and upon
consideration finding it to have been the first day of the week, concludes
thus: Iure igitur sanctae Congregationes die octavo in Ecclesiis fiunt. By
right therefore holy Congregations in the Churches are made on the eighth day,
meaning thereby the first day of the week, that is the Lords day: and as he
concludes thus, so undoubtedly his opinion was the Apostles themselves did
conclude in like manner.

Now albeit much had been effected for the abrogation Damascen and venerable Bede among the rest; yet there comes in an exception somewhat of the nature of
a sixth finger; and that is, Saint Gregory tells us notwithstanding how some in
Rome were so superstitious in this kind, that they would neither work upon the
Saturday, no nor so much as wash upon the Sunday. So little effectual were the
labors of Damascen and venerable Bede, that they could not prevent the
superstitious fancies of some that lived an hundred years before. For Gregory
by Bellarmines account dyed in the year of our Lord 604. and Damascen lived
long after the year 731. and Bid was living in the year 731. as Bellarmine
observes out of his fifth book of Historia Anglicana. Who would desire an
adversary should betray more weakness than this Author? but we see
manifestly whither he tends, and no marvel if God smites him with the spirit
of giddiness and confusion. His quotation of Gregory seems to be the same
with that which we find in the decrees De consecrat. did. 3. cap. Pervenit.
Now whereas this Praefacer relates it as of the same persons, it is far
otherwise in Gregory, for apparently the relation in Gregory is concerning
different persons, for thus it runs, Pervenit ad me, etc. Relation is made
unto me, that certain men of a perverse spirit have sowed amongst you some
corrupt doctrine contrary to our holy faith: so as to forbid any work to be
done on the Sabbath day: these men we may well call the Preachers of
Antichrist. Then he sets down what shall be the practice of Antichrist at his
coming, namely to command the Sabbath day and the Lords day both to be kept
free from all works. And why the Lords day? to wit, because he means to
imitate Christ; and therefore will conform himself to the practice of
Christians, in celebrating the Lords day; his words are these; Quia enim mori
se and resurgere simulat, haberi in veneratione vult diem Dominicum; that is,
Because he counterfeits himself to die and rise again, therefore he will have
the Lords day to be had in veneration. Where by the way observe two things; 1.
The practice of Christians in Gregory's days, to keep themselves from all
work on the Lords day. 2. That Antichrist would imitate Christ, as in
pretending to dye and rise again: so in commanding the Lords day to be kept
holy. A shrewd evidence that both Gregory, and the whole Church in those days,
were of opinion that the Lords day was of Christ's institution; which Antichrist
perceiving would conform thereto, the better to promote his own counsels.
Now the reason why he would command the Jews Sabbath to be observed also, was
Quia populum Judaizare compellet, ut exteriorem ritum revocet, and sibi
Judaeorum perfidiam subdat; therefore coli vult Sabbatum. He will have the
Jews Sabbath kept also, compelling the people to Iudaize, and restoring the
outward ceremonies of the Law, that so he may bring the Jews in subjection
unto him also. Then he makes mention of another relation; Aliud quoque ad me
perlatum est; Another report was brought unto me; and what was that? Vobis a
perversis hominibus esse praedicatum, ut Dominico die nullus debeat lavari:
That some perverse persons preach among you, that on the Lords day none ought
to be washed. This is clearly another point, maintained by other persons,
different from the former, which yet this Prefacer confounds into one. And
mark it well, that none ought to be washed lavari, on the Lords day; which
this Author translates thus, No nor so much as wash upon the Sunday. What not
so much as wash their hands or their face? here indeed were strange
superstition. I willingly profess I was not a little moved at this his
Translation, nothing answerable to Gregory's resolution, which is this; If any
desire to be washed pro luxuria and pro voluptate, that is, out of a luxurious
disposition and for pleasure; we do not permit this to be done on any day. But
if the bodies necessity require it, we do not forbid this on the Lords day.
Now I do not find that any man uses to wash hands or face out of any
luxurious disposition, neither do I know in what sense the necessity of the
body can require it. For the necessity of the body in this place, seems to me
to be spoken in reference to the recovery of a man's health, requiring no time
to be neglected. Hereupon I am verily persuaded, that by Lavari in Gregory, is
to be understood a man's going into the Bath; which may be done out of a
luxurious disposition, and merely for pleasure. Then again, the necessity of
the body may require it, and according to these different cases it is by
Gregory both permitted on the Lords day, to wit, in case of necessity, and
denied on any day, in case it be done only to satisfy a man's lusts. And I find
a great difference in the Latin phrase, between Lavare to wash, and Lavari to
be washed, and that out of Varro his eight book of the Latin tongue. For the
active is of use, when a part only is washed, as it is rightly said, I wash my
hands and my feet. But the passive is in use only when the whole body is
washed, as in the Bath. Quare and in Balneis non recte dicunt lavi, sed lavor.
Wherefore in the Bathes it is not well said, I have washed, but I am washed.
And accordingly runs that in Juvenal, Sat. 2. Nec pueri credunt nisi qui
nondum aere lavantur. The Scholiast interprets this of Infants, quia pueri non
dant Balneaticum; for the quadrant which was the usual fee to be paid of them
that made use of the Bathes, was not exacted of such. Hence is that phrase,
Mercede lavari, to go into the Baths paying a fee; and dum te quadrante
lavatum, in Horace, to the same purpose.

The second Section.
BUt after in the darker times, as it is thought by some, Preface.
Peter de Bruis, the founder of the Petrobrusians (he was burnt for heresy
1126.) began to draw too deep on these lees of Judaisme, which here our Doctor
intimates in the seventh Section, where he joins the Petrobrusian with the
Ebionites, who indeed were Jewish in this point.

2. And possibly from the remainders of this doctrine, Fulco a French Priest,
and a notable hypocrite, as our King Richard compted him, lighted upon a new
Sabbatarian speculation, which afterward Eustachius, one of his associates,
dispersed in England. I call it new, as well I may. For whereas Moses gave
commandment to the Jews, that they should sanctify one day only in the week,
viz. that seventh whereon God rested: They taught the people that the Christian
Sabbath was to begin on Saturday at three of the clock, and to continue till
Sunrising upon the Monday morning: During which latitude of time, it was not
lawful to do any kind of work what ever; no not so much as bake bread on
Saturday for the Sundays eating; to wash or dry linen for the morrowes
wearing. Yea, they had miracles in store, pretended to to be wrought on such as
had not yielded to their doctrine, thereby to countenance the superstitious,
and confound the weak. And which was more than this, for the authority of
their device, they had to show a letter sent from God himself, and left
prodigiously over the Altar in Saint Simeons Church in Golgotha: wherein the
Sabbatarian dream was imposed forsooth upon all the world, on pain of diverse
plagues, and terrible comminations, if it were not punctually observed. The
letter is at large reported by Roger Hoveden; Anno 1201.]
and out of him, as I suppose, by Matthew Paris: who do withal repeat the
miracles, whereby this doctrine was confirmed. I add no more but this, that
could I either believe those miracles, which are there related: or saw I any
now, like those to countenance the reviving of this strange opinion (for now it
is received and published) I might perhaps persuade my self to entertain it.

Exam.
It seems this Author is not of their opinion, who think those times wherein
Peter de Bruis lived, about the year 1126. to have been darker times than the
days of Gregory; though some pass such censure on those times, accompting
them times of darkness, he is more wise than to concur in opinion with
them; and it is a part of his wisdom (as it seems) to affect, that the world
should take notice of so much, namely, that he puts it upon some only to
censure those times, as times of darkness. Now who are those some? not Papists
I presume, but Protestants rather; and what true Protestant can he name that
thinks otherwise? we have cause to fear that too many for their advantage,
can be content to veil themselves under the vizard of Protestants, when in
heart they are Papists* neither is it possible, (I should think) that any
other but such, should think any better of those times, than as of times of
darkness. It is very likely, this Author is not of opinion, that the man of
sin is yet revealed, or any such time the Apostle prophecyeth of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
of giving men over to illusions to believe lies, for not receiving the love of
the truth. I much doubt whether he believes that Rome is the whore of Babylon,
whereof Saint John speaks, Revel. 17. though he professes of that whore of
Babylon, that it is that City, which in his days did rule over the Kings of
the earth: yet in that which he accounts light, he can be content to concur
with Calvin, in denying the morality of the fourth Commandment, as touching
one day in seven to be sanctified unto the Lord. But whatsoever this Peter de
Bruis was, whom he professes to have drawn too deep on the lees of Judaisme,
he avoucheth no testimony hereof, but only D. Prideaux his joining the
Petrobrusians with the Ebionites, Sect. 7. Now Hospinian professes that which
is directly contrary, of the Petrobrusians; as whom he joins with the
Anabaptists, maintaining Festos lies omnes ad ceremonias Iudaeorum pertinere,
and propterea nullos esse debere apud Christianos, quum ceremoniae veteris
Testamenti omnes Christi adventu sint impletae, and ideo sublatae. Quorum etiam
sententiae Anabaptistae hodie suffragari videntur. That all Holidayes belong to
the ceremonies of the Jews, and that therefore none such are to be observed by
Christians, seeing all the ceremonies of the old Testament are fulfilled, and
abrogated by the coming of Christ. And the Anabaptists now adays seem to be
of the same opinion. In the third Tome of the Councels set forth by Binius, and
2. part, there is an enumeration of his opinions in five particulars, and that,
as it seems by the close, out of Petrus Cluniacensis; not one of them is any
thing a kin to those Sabbatarian fancies, which this Prefacer insists upon.
Petrus Cluniacensis, as it seems, was the man that most opposed this Petrus de
Bruis. Against his errors he wrote a book in form of an Epistle on these
points. 1. Of the Baptism of children. 2. Of the authority of the book of the
Acts of the Apostles. 3. Of the authority of the Epistles of Saint Paul. 4. Of
the authority of the Church. 5. Of the authority of the old Testament. 6.
Again, of the baptism of children. 7. Of Temples, Churches, and Altars. 8. Of
the veneration of the holy Cross. 9. Of the sacrifice of the Mass, and of the
truth of Transubstantiation. 10. Of prayers for the deceased. 11. Of praising
God by Hymns and musical instruments. Thus Bellarmine relates the heads of
that discourse of his; not any of which, for ought I perceive, savoureth of any
such Sabbatarian fancy, as this Author drives it unto. At length I got into
my hands Bibliotheca Cluniacensis, and therein the writing of Petrus
Cluniacensis against the P^trobrusians. Upon all which, one Andreas Puercetanus
Turonensis, has written certain notes, wherein upon these words in the
Preface Contra haereses Petri de Bruis, he writes thus; Of this Peter of Bruis
who gave name to the Petrobrusian heretics, no mention is found, neither in
the historians, who write the story of those times, nor with them, who then, or
a little after, contrived the Indices of heresies and heresiarches. Alphonsus a
Castro (as I think) was the first, who after this our Author, remembered him,
lib. 3.5. Baptisma. haeres. 5. and writes that he was a French man of the
province of Narbon. Although Bernard the son of Guido writes that Pope
Calixtus the second, in the year 1128. on the eight of the Ides of June held a
Council at Tolouse with Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops and Abbats of the
Province of Gothia, Gascony, Spain, and hither Britany. In which Council,
amongst other things ordered there, all those haeretiques were damned and
driven out of the Church, who counterfeiting a show of religion, did condemn
the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood, the Baptism of children, and all
Ecclesiastical Orders, and the bands of lawful marriages. All which heresies
as invented by Peter Bruis, and propagated by Henry his successor, our Peter
in this Treatise of his does pursue. So that this whole story seems very
obscure; and yet the two latter points mentioned by this Andreas, I do not
find to be any of the opinions laid to the charge of Peter Bruis by those that
were contemporary with him. For Petrus Cluniacensis reduces all his heresies
(as he calls them) but to these five heads. 1. He denies that children before
they come to the age of understanding can be saved by the Sacrament of
Baptism, and that another faith can profit him, who cannot use his own;
because by their opinion, not another man's faith but his own with Baptism
saves him, the Lord professing, that whosoever shall believe, and be
baptized, he shall be saved; but whosoever will not believe shall be damned.
2. That there ought not to be any fabric of Temples or Churches, that such as
are made, ought to be thrown down; that holy places for prayers are not
necessary for Christians, because as well in a Tavern as in the Church, as
well in the Marketplace, as in the Temple; before an Altar, or before a stable
God does hear being called upon, and hears them who are worthy. 3. He
commands holy crosses to be broken in pieces and burned, because the
representation of such an instrument, whereupon Christ was so direfully
tortured, and cruelly slain is not worthy of any veneration or supplication;
but in revenge of Christ's torments and death, to be disgraced with all manner
of ignominy, and to be bewen in pieces with swords, and burnt with fire. 4. He
does not only deny the truth of the Lords body and blood daily, and continually
to be offered in the Church by the Sacrament; but determines it to be
altogether nothing, and that it ought not to be offered unto God. 5. He mocks
at the sacrifices, prayers, alms, and other good works, which the faithful
that are living perform for the faithful that are departed, and maintains
that they are nothing profitable to one that is dead. Now in all this I find
nothing at all that savoureth of any Jewish opinion concerning the observation
of the Sabbath. And more than that; when I consider the matter of these
Articles for the most part, and the course of those times to make worse of
their opinions (who spoke or wrote against the superstitions of those times)
then there was just cause, I begin to suspect that this Peter of Bruis might be
an honest man, and more orthodox than they who procured his death. And is it
not wondrous strange, that none of the Historians of those times should make
any mention of him? And that may be the reason, why we find no mention at all
made of him in the Book of Acts and Monuments. And Philip Mornay in his
mysterium iniquitatis, Page 309, 310.
makes an apology for this Peter de Bruis, as being a pious man, and thereupon
hated, and finally martyred by the Papists.

2. Of any Sabbatarian speculation (as this Prefacer calls it) that Fulco the
French Priest lighted on, this Author gives no evidence. For as for Roger
Hoveden, I do not find, that he attributes any such unto him. He writes much
in his commendation, as that The Lord magnified him in the sight of Kings, Pol.
448. page 2.
and gave him power to give sight to the blind, to cure the lame, the blind,
and others of their diseases. That Harlots and Usurers, were by his preaching
taken off from their lewd courses. That he foretold the Kings of France and
England, that except they gave over their hostility the sooner, one of them
should shortly dye of an evil death. But of any Sabbatarian speculation he
was addicted unto I find no mention. It is true, King Richard sometime called
him simply Hypocrite, not notable Hypocrite, as this Author expresses it,
affecting rather to speak with a full mouth, than according unto plain truth
And is it much if Kings take liberty to call men as they think good, especially
when they are provoked by them, as King Richard was by this Priest, as appears
by the story which is well worth the relating, to observe both the present wit
of that King, and the liberty of Priests with Princes in telling them their
faults in those days of yore. For on a day that Priest Fulco came to King
Richard, and in very bold manner spoke to him thus: I tell thee O King as from
Almighty God, that thou make speed to bestow in marriage those three wretched
daughters, that thou have, lest some worse thing befall thee. Thou Hypocrite,
quoth the King, thou lie against thine own head, for I have no daughter at
all. Truly I do not lie, quoth the Priest, for as I said, thou have three
wicked daughters, one of them is Pride, another Covetousness, the third
Luxury. When the King heard this, he called his Earls and Barons that were
about him, and said, Hear the admonition of this hypocrite, who says I have
three wicked daughters, and commands me to marry them. Therefore I bestow my
Pride upon the proud Templers; my Covetousness upon the Monks of the
Cistercian Order; and my Luxury upon the Prelates of the Churches. Who though
they professed single life, yet as Mr. Moulin observes in a like case of popish
Priests, did not profess continency, they might be luxurious enough, and that
not only in ways natural, but in ways unnatural also. This was a biting
answer of the King, which the Historian no way liked, and therefore he cries
out in a poetical strain, O nimis indignum miseris infer cachinnum. But
throughout no mention at all of any Sabbatarian speculation that Fulco was
possessed with. Indeed of Eustachius, who was one of his followers, we read
afterward, fol. 457. p. 2. what wondrous works were wrought by him, and what
were the effects of his preaching among them, namely, that In London and diverse
other places in England, they would no more presume to make the Lords days
their market days. And that in every Church there should be a lamp, or some
light burning continually before the Lords body; and that Citizens and others
would have an Alms vessel upon their table, to lay aside therein some
provision for the poor. And that hereupon the Devil raised up against him
some Ministers of iniquity, who said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to
put thy sith into another harvest; to whom he answered, The harvest is great,
but the laborers are few. Therefore the foresaid Abbat being thus rebuked by
the ministers of Satan, he would no longer trouble the Prelates of England with
his preaching, but returned unto his own home in Normandy from whence he
came. Seven leaves after this, we find in the same Author, to wit, fol. 466. p.
2. That this Abbat of Flay returned into England, and preaching the Word of God
from City to City, forbade all to make the Lords days their market days. For
he said that this Commandment for observation of the Lords day came from
heaven. So that this speculation of his was dominicall rather than Sabbatarian.
And the mandate concerning this, is there set down at large, pretended to have
come from Heaven to Jerusalem, and to have been found on the Altar of Saint
Simeon in Golgotha; which whether it were feigned by him, or by others, and
received by him on the faith of others, the Author specifies not. But at the
end thereof he shows how that this Predicant coming to York, was there
honorably entertained by the Archbishop, and Clergy, and whole people of that
City; and albeit these things, you will say, were acted in times of darkness;
yet this Prefacer seems to be of another opinion, though little pleased with
Eustachius his Sabbatarian speculation. Here alone is mention made of the
bounds he set to the observation of the Lords day, namely, that it was to
continue from Saturday three of the clock in the afternoon, until the
Sunrising on Monday, in which time he would have them do nothing but that
which was good, and if they did, to amend their errors by repentance. A very
reasonable motion in my judgment; and if he had extended it to all the days
of the week, yea, and hours too, I see no cause why for this he should be
censured either as an hypocrite, or heretic. But as for the strictness of
observation here mentioned, as namely, That during the foresaid time, it was
not lawful to do any kind of work what ever, no not so much as to bake bread
for the Sundays eating; to wash or dry linen for the morrowes wearing. I
find no such thing prescribed by Eustachius, in the relation made by Roger
Hoveden; and if Parisiensis has any such, surely he took it not out of Roger
Hoveden; from whom yet this Prefacer affirms he took that which he writes
hereof. Nay it is directly contradictory to the Tenet of Eustachius, as who
determines the observation of the Lords day to begin at three of the clock in
the afternoon of the Eve preceding, in which time is found space both to bake
bread for the Sundays eating, and to wash or dry linen for the morrowes
wearing, if the weather hinder not. And as for the extension of the dominicall
observation thus far, in respect of the bounds thereof; I find no other
doctrine preached by Eustachius, than by the Laws of the Kings who governed
this Land, was ordained long before, even before the conquest. For not only
King Ina commanded, Act. and Mon. fol. 114 col. 2. and fol. 715. col. 1. and 2.
That no man lay or spiritual, free or bond, should labor on the Sunday: and
Edward the elder with Gythrum the Dane, made a law against all labor, buying
and selling upon the Sabbath. Item, for no execution to be done on the Sunday:
but amongst King Edgars laws, one was, That the Sunday should be kept holy
from Saturday at noone, till Monday in the morning. King Canutus also commanded
celebration of the Sabbath from Saturday at noone, till Monday morning,
forbidding markets, huntings, labors, and Court-keepings during the said
space. And it seems to be the general practice of Christendom to allow (or
command rather) a preparation for the sanctifying of the Lords day; as appears
by the observation of Evening prayers, the day before, warning whereunto is
usually given at three of the clock, by the ringing of a bell, or as in some
places especially in the winter season, an hour sooner, and scholars
accordingly give up school, and present themselves at Evening prayer. And we
commonly account Saturday to be half holiday, and warning thereof is usually
given at noone by chiming the bells. And whereas we read Exodus 31.15. Six
days shall thou do thy work, and the seventh day (...) Schindler renders it
Sabbathum Sabbathuli, and interprets it thus; Sabbathum is from evening to
evening, Sabbathulum is that which of the profane day is added as a little
Sabbath. And as for the strict abstinence from dressing of meats on Saturday,
which this Author imputes to Eustachius as his doctrine, but without all ground
that I know: we are so far from any such Sabbatarian speculation, that none
of us (in my knowledge) do think it unlawful to dress meats on the Lords day.
And whereas the Prefacer adds that they had miracles in store pretended to be
wrought on such as had not yielded to their doctrine, thereby to countenance
the superstitious and confound the weak. What one of an hundred in reading
this would not imagine, that Eustachius wrought these miracles for the
countenancing of his former strictness: whereas yet on the contrary, neither
does it appear, that he taught or obtruded upon them any such strictness,
preaching only against marketting on the Lords day. Neither were those strange
accidents which here are called miracles, any miracles wrought by him: But the
Monk, Roger of Hoveden writes, That the Lord Jesus Christ, whom we must obey
rather than men; who by his Nativity, Resurrection, and Advent, and sending the
Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, did advance this day, which we call the Lords
day, and dedicated (as) most celebrious; showed miracles of his power, upon
some transgressors of the Lords day in this manner. On a certain Saturday
after three of clock, a certain Carpenter of Beverlac, as he was making a
wooden peg, contrary to the wholesome admonitions of his wife, fell to the
ground, taken with a palsy. The like story follows of a woman, which this
Author, according to the Monks phrase, is content to call Miracles. Now when we
hear of as strange a thing as this to have fallen out not long since in
Bedfordshire; as namely, a match at Football, being appointed on the Lords day
in the afternoon; while two were in the Belfrey, and one of them tolling a
bell to call the company together, there was heard a clap of thunder and
lightning, seen by some sitting in the Church Porch, as it came through a dark
lane toward the Church, and flasht in their faces who sat in the
Church Porch, and scared them; thence it went into the Church, and turning into
the Belfery, tript up his heels who was tolling the bell, and struck him
stark dead; and the other with him blasted in such manner, that shortly after
he dyed; we do not call this a miracle, though we count it a remarkable
judgment of God, and such as deserves to be considered, and seriously laid
unto heart by all, to admonish them to take heed, that they be not found in
like manner profaners of the Lords day. In like sort when upon fresh relation
we hear of the like sport at Football on the Lords day, at a place called
Tidworth, after Evening prayer in the Churchyard, and that therein one had his
leg broken, which thereupon gangrened, so that forthwith he died thereof; we
do not call this a miracle; only it calls to our mind that of the Prophet, The
Lord has so done his mavelous works, that they ought to be had in
remembrance. And we find that such like judgments have been observed by
Christian Emperors, thereupon moved more strictly to give in charge the
observation of the Lords day, as Ludovicus Pius by name, as thus, Didicimus
quosdam in hoc die opera ruralia exerce^tes fulmine interemptos, quosdam artuum
contractione multatos, quosdam visibili igne absumptos, subito in cincre^
resolutos, poenaliter occubuisse. Proinde necesse est, ut primum Sacerdotes,
Reges, and Principes, cunctique fideles huic dici debitam observationem atque
reverentiam devotissime exhibeant; We have known some busied in works of
husbandry on this day, to have been slain with lightning, some punished with
the contraction of their limbs, some with visible fire consumed, on a sudden
turned into ashes, and so to have perished, as by way of punishment. Wherefore
it is a necessary duty that in the first place Priests, then Kings, Princes,
and all faithful persons, most devoutly exhibit due observation and reverence
unto this day. The other miracles mentioned by the Monk are of another nature;
as of a cake baked on the hearth on Saturday after three a clock in the
afternoon, and how that part of it reserved to the morning, and being then
broken, blood came out of it, and another of the like nature; and two more. I
say, these are of Roger Hovedens relation, not of Eustachius his preaching;
whom the Monk relates to have been in great esteem of the Clergy in those
days, and to have prevailed much with many of the people, though for the
general he could not bring them off from their marketing on the Lords day. Yet
what are these to be talked of in comparison to those which are comprised in two
books of miracles, written by Cluniacensis? and albeit those times may be
accounted times of darkness, in comparison of ages foregoing, yet this
Prefacer is ready to make answer, that that is but the opinion of some. But
whereas he says, That this strange opinion is now revived and published;
first I desire to know his meaning. For as for a preparation to the Sabbath,
and that to begin from about three a clock in the afternoon, the whole
Kingdom observes it; as for the strict observation thereof, here mentioned, I
have showed that Eustachius speaks of no such thing. If he did, what is that
to those who suffer for standing for the strict observation of the Sabbath,
against those who would have the Lords day, at least in part to be a day of
sports and pastimes? Can he show this to be their opinion? If he can, why does
he not? And if from three a clock on Saturday in the afternoon, people do
prepare for the Lords day, and abstain from such works, dispatching both
their baking bread, and other works in the morning, what danger or detriment is
hereby likely to arise either to our faith or manners? What danger either to
Prince, Church, or State?

The third Section.
BUt to proceed. Preface.
Immediately upon the Reformation of Religion in these Western parts, the
Controversy brake out a fresh; though in another manner than before it did.
For there were some, of whom Calvin speaks, Instit. lib. 2. sect. 33.
who would have had all days alike, all equally to be regarded; (he means the
Anabaptists, as I take it) and reckoned that the Lords day, as the Church
continued it, was a Jewish ceremony. Affirming it to cross the doctrine of
Saint Paul, who in the text before remembered, and in the fourteenth to the
Romans did seem to them to cry down all such difference of days and times as
the Church retained. To meet which vain and peccant humor, Calvin was feign
to bend his forces, declaring how the Church might lawfully retain set times
for Gods service, without infringing any of Saint Paul's commandments.

But on the other side, as commonly the excess is more exorbitant than the
defect; there wanted not some others, who thought they could not honor the
Lords day sufficiently, unless they did affix as great a sanctity unto it, as
the Jews did unto their Sabbath. So that the change seemed to be only of the
day; the superstition still remaining no less Jewish than before it was. These
taught, as now some do, moralem esse unius diei observationem in hebdomada,
Ibid. sect. 34.
the keeping holy to the Lord one day in seven, to be the moral part of the
fourth Commandment: which doctrine what else is it (so he proceeds, as here
the Doctor so repeats it in his third section) then in contempt of the Jews to
change the day; and to affix a greater sanctity to the day, than those ever
did. As for himself, so far was he from favoring any such wayward fancy,
that as John Barklay makes report, he had a consultation once, de transferenda
solennitate Dominica in feriam quintam, to alter the Lords day from Sunday to
Thursday. How true this is, I cannot say. But sure it is that Calvin took the
Lords day to be an ecclesiastical and humane constitution only, Quem veteres
in locum Sabbati subrogarunt, appointed by our Ancestors to supply the place of
the Jewish Sabbath, and (as our Doctor tells us from him in his seventh
section,) as alterable by the Church at this present time, as first it was,
when from Saturday they translated it unto the Sunday. So that we see, that
Calvin here resolves upon three Conclusions. First, that the keeping holy one
day in seven, is not the moral part of the fourth Commandment. Secondly, that
the day was changed from the last day of the week unto the first by this
authority of the Church, and not by any divine Ordinance: And thirdly, that the
day is yet alterable by the Church, as at first it was.

Exam.
Thus at length this Prefacer observes, that look upon what Scripture passages
some did contend the Jewish Sabbath to be ceremonial, and accordingly to be
abrogated by the Death and Resurrection of Christ: Upon the very same grounds
others contended against the observation of all Holy days, even of the Lords
day also, as if that were Jewish. This is the course of the Anabaptists, unto
whom Wallaeus adds the Socinians; and Hospinian the Petrobrusians. By what
authority the Lords day was introduced, Calvin disputes not. He says,
Dominicum diem veteres in locum Sabbati substituerunt; Instit. lib. 2. c. 8.
sect. 34. Calvin. in 1. ad Corin. cap. 16.
The Ancients brought the Lords day into the place of the Sabbath, and that the
day the Apostle prescribed to the Corinthians, wherein they should lay apart
something for the relieving of the Saints at Jerusalem, was the day quo sacros
conventus agebant, whereon they kept their holy meetings. Lib. 2. c. 8. sect.
34.
And that which moved the Apostles to change the Sabbath to the Lords day, he
shows both in his institutions thus; for seeing in the Lords Resurrection is
(found) the end and fulfilling of the true rest, which the old Sabbath
shadowed; by that very day, which set an end to those shadows, Christians are
admonished not to stick to the shadowing ceremony; and upon the Epistle to the
Corinthians in these words, In 1. ad. Cor. ca. 16.
Electus autem potissimum dies Dominicus, quod Resurrectio domini finem legis
umbris attulit; The Lords Day was chiefly chosen, because the Lords
Resurrection did set an end to the shadows of the Law. And in the words
immediately preceding he expressly professes that this change was made by the
Apostles, though not so soon in his opinion, as Chrysostom thought; who
interprets that, the first day of the week, of the Lords Day. And Cyrill long
ago upon consideration of our Saviors apparitions on that day, and then
again the eighth day after, makes bold to conclude, Cyrill. in Joan. 1.12.
that Jure igitur sanctae congregationes die octavo in Ecclesiis siunt, By
right therefore holy assemblies on the eighth day are made in the Churches.

2 Observe by the way this authors spirit, he accounts it more exorbitant to
think, that the observation of the Lords Day is prescribed unto us by Divine
authority, or the religious observation of one day in seven, then to maintain
that none at all is to be set apart to religious worship by Divine authority.
And to this purpose he premiseth a general rule, that commonly the excess is
more exorbitant then the defect; yet I never heard, that prodigality was
censured as worse then covetousness, in opposition to liberality; or
rashness, accounted worse then cowardlinesse, in opposition to fortitude: or
superstition worse then profaneness, in opposition to true Religion. As for
the sanctity of the day in Calvin's phrase, which this Author calls Sanctity
affixed to the day; shall I say this Prefacer understands it not? it is
incredible; more likely he is to pervert Calvin's plain meaning; not out of
excess in the way of superstition, but out of a less exorbitant defect. For
the sanctity of the day, in Calvin's language is, when Religione quadam
feriando, mysteria olim commendata recolore se somniabant, by resting in a
religious manor they thought as it were dreaming, that they observed certain
mysteries of old recommended unto them. As appears in his sect. 33. Of the 8.
Chap. of his second book of institutions; and such indeed was the sanctity of
the day in the Jewish observation thereof. This religion, this holiness Calvin
will have to be at an end; and that the Apostle Gal. 1. and Coloss. 2. disputed
against them who would have that holiness, that religion to continue still:
not against them, who will have one day in the week set apart, thereon to rest
from manual works, as they are avocations from holy studies and meditations.
And in the former case, he does not say, as this author in a mincing manner
feynes him to say, to wit, that So the change seemed to be only of the day; but
in plain terms, that this were no other then to change the day, and that in
contumely of the Jews; siquidem manet nobis etiamnum par mysterii in diebus
significatio, quae apud Iudaeos locum habebat, if so be there yet remains with
us a mysterious signification equally in the days, such as had place amongst
the Jews. Now this caution nothing concerns any of our protestant Divines,
who maintain the observation of one day in seven as necessary, in resting from
manual works, only as they are impediments to the service of God. Nay that
one day in seven was observed by the Jews for any mysterious signification
contained therein, or by the Patriarchs either, or by Adam himself, in whose
days even from the first, the seventh day was sanctified, that is, set apart
for the service of God, in the opinion of Calvin, This is to be understood of
one day in seven indefinitly considered. For as for the rest of the seventh
precisely that is acknowledged to have been mysterious. Sect. 32.
to this day, I never heard or read. This latter clause in Calvin, which
contains the condition, whereupon this censure of his passes upon those that
so stand for the observation of one day in seven, this Prefacerslily
concealeth; though Calvin's censure be not passed absolutely, but merely upon
this condition. Thus indeed to stand for the necessary observation of one day
in seven, namely, as containing some mysterious signification, were to exceed
the Jews in a gross and carnal superstition of a Sabbatisme. As touching the
observation of some time set a part for Gods holy worship, and service, Calvin
professes that the same necessity lies upon us Christians, for relief
whereof the Lord appointed the Sabbath to the Jews, and that it pleased our
most provident and tender Father to provide for our necessity, no less then
for the necessity of the Jews.

Now it is apparent that God commanded the Jews to set one day in seven apart
for the service of God, and does it not manifestly follow herehence, that the
Lord would have us also set apart one day of the week for his service? And
Calvin concludes that Section thus, Why then do we not obey that reason, which
we see to be imposed upon us by the will of God? And therefore Wallaeus says
that Calvin delivered not these words, whereupon this Prefacer grateth so much,
against his own Colleagues or fellows in the reformation, with whom he never
contended in this argument, but against certain Papists and schoolmen, who
thought, they had provided sufficiently for themselves, for Christian liberty,
and for the edification of the Church; by teaching that the taxation of the
seventh day as ceremonial was abolished, and yet that one day in seven, and by
name the Lords Day, was to be observed, after such a manner, and to such an
end, as the Jews observed their Sabbath: by which Doctrine, way was opened to
superstition in this days observation. His words are plainly directed against
such when he says; Thus vanish the toys of false Prophets, who possessed the
people in former times with a Jewish opinion. And again, But that is no other
thing then in contempt of the Jews to change the day, and in mind to retain
the same sanctity of the day: if so be there remains unto us, (to wit by their
opinion) an equal mysterious signification of days, to that which had place
among the Jews. Now says Wallaeus, This agrees not to be spoken of any of the
reformed, but of Sophisters and Papists, who urge new mysteries, and new
significations, and holinesses in their holy days, as it is well known.
Bellarmine lib. 3. cap. 10. of the veneration of Saints writes against our
Divines, that the feasts of Christians are kept, not only in respect of order
and policy, but also by reason of a mystery; and that holydays are truly more
holy and sacred then other days, and a certain part of Divine worship. This
Prefacer is content to make use of John Barclayes report concerning Calvin,
namely that he had a consultation once de transferenda solennitate dominicain
feriam quintam; of translating the dominicall solemnity unto the Thursday. Had
it been unto Friday, which is the Turks festival, then it would have
wondrously well served Raynolds his turn in his Calvinoturcismus. For it
concerned that author to inquire diligently of all Calvin's courses, that stood
any way in conformity with the courses of the Turks: neither do I think
there could be devised any more remarkable then this. How true this is this
Prefacer cannot say, but whether he does not lick his lips at it I know not.
But it is apparent, he would have the Church endued with such authority, as to
change the solemnity of the Lords Day, to any day in the week, and
consequently even to Friday; and I do not doubt but pretense of reason might
be devised for it by politic heads, as namely, to hold the Turks in better
correspondency unto Christianity. Now if Calvin had at any time a consultation
hereabouts (which cannot be understood of Calvin's single and proper
consultation with himself; for then how could the relator be privy to it
without revelation; and we commonly say, that three may keep counsel when
two be away) surely there were many that could give testimony hereof, to wit as
many, as whose heads he used in this consultation. And who would not expect,
that some one of these at least, should be produced to testify so much either
by word or writing? As for Barcley, he has his name ab ursae ungula, from the
claw of a Bear; give we him leave to be a biter, a tearer. His father was a
man of some note and learning, and one that had the opinion to deserve well of
Kings by his book Contra monarch machos; and thereby he endeared himself to
King James, being also a Scotchman. But King James might think better of him
then there was cause, all things considered. For he maintains, that in two
cases Kings may cease to be Kings, and to this acknowledgement he finds
himself mastered in part by a rule of the civil Law, (and he was a Civilian)
which is this, Servus habitus pro derelicto may choose a new Father. At the
first reading I wondered at the Doctrine it self, being of an harsh accent,
and dangerous consequence; and much more in consideration of the reason given,
which by interpretation and accommodation may draw a very long tail after it.
And it may seem strange, that none have taken any pains either to refute it,
or clear it, I mean in public. Yet I speak it only in reference to the
compass of mine own reading. In private it may be some have dealt upon it,
and my self in particular, when I dealt in my Sermons upon the thirteenth to
the Romans. I have been often urged to set forth those Meditations of mine and
to make them public; but I have always resisted the motion, they being but
homely Sermons, accommodated to a Country auditory, neither do I find my
self that way fitted for a better audience; I can take some pains in writing
controversies, but I cannot take pains in making a Sermon, and when I have
taken most, I find I have less edified my people, though perhaps better
pleased my self. Yet having not long since understood of a Court distinction
of Puritans; namely that some of them are good men, only they cannot conform
to the ceremonies of the Church; but other there are, who though they do
conform, yet are antimonarchicall Puritans: This consideration has taken a
deep impression in me, and brought me to debate with my self, whether it were
not fit to publish those poor Meditations of mine, if for nothing else, yet to
vindicate our reputation, who at the pleasures of too many are oppressed in the
World; and to represent to public view, Our Country faith concerning
Monarchies. For if we be reputed antimonarchicall, no mervaile if some course
be taken sooner or later to root us out. And this I might make a Prodromus to
a greater work, in answer to a book entitled Deus and Rex, a pestilent piece
of work, and as it is thought written by one barefoote a Jesuit, containing a
refutation of a certain book of one of our divines inscribed God and the King
written by Doctor Mockest, a book so well pleasing to King James, that as we
have heard, his Majesty thought fit that children should be catechized in it.
This being afterward translated into Latin by Doctor Harris, now Warden of
the College by Winchester, has been now many years ago, answered by a
Papist who conceales his name, and that in a very unhappy manner. And a wonder
of wonders it may seem, that so vile a piece has passed so long unanswered;
especially considering that heretofore great Bishops chaplens were wont to be
employed in answering Papists, and this was the ordinary way of their
preferment. I confess there are certain mysteries therein, which perhaps are
as scarrecrowes to deter men from taking Pen in hand to refute it. For the
author of this, would bear the World in hand, that he who wrote the book
entitled God and the King, and was a Puritan; and that none but Puritans do
stand for the absoluteness of Kings in such sort as it is there maintained.
And that it is merely a plot to ruinate monarchs, by advancing their
absoluteness so high; dealing with them herein, as Hercules did with Antaeus;
for observing that as often as he threw him to the ground, he rose up with
greater strength, for the earth being his mother, as often as he fell into her
bosom she inspired new vigor and spirit into him; therefore he would throw
him down no more, but lifting him up from the Earth into the Air, there he
held him between his arms, until he had crushed his breath out of his body,
and so made an end of him. In like sort, it is there said, that Puritans find
it their only means to ruin monarchs, by advancing their absolutnesse in so
unreasonable a manner: that when the people shall understand it aright, they
will be so provoked hereby, that they will streyne the uttermost of their
power to root out all Monarchies. Nevertheless all this is but a squib,
making a great noise but doing no hurt; yet sufficient to scare any man in
these times, considering how Funestous a condition it is, to come under the
shadow of the very name of Puritan. And the Papists, and all that are popishly
affected rejoice in this, as in nothing more. Forsooth Hoc Ithacus velit and
magno mercentur Atreidae. But see my unfortunate condition; after I had
resolved to make it my next work to labor in this argument: and after I had
dispatched my first work of pleading for the supreme absolutnesse of God in
Heaven; in the next place to try my strength what I could say for the secondary
absoluteness of Kings and Monarchs here on Earth; I am suddenly driven to
intermit all other businesses formerly in hand, and to travail in a new
argument, and to strengthen my self against the lightnings and thunders, that
may break over our heads we know not how soon; for we see examples before
our eyes of sufferings in this kind, and how soon our own turn may come to
suffer in the same kind it is uncertain unto us. Therefore to return to John
Barcley: we have heard that his father before his death commended him to the
Patronage of King James, who accordingly had him attending in his Court
somewhile with intent to prefer him: until on a sudden his mind was
changed, having received intelligence, that this Gentleman played false with
him, living in his Court but as an epsy and intelligencer, to discover what he
could of his Majesty's affairs unto Queen mother of France; which moved King
James ever after, and that most justly, to abominate him. Now such a one, if he
could not prove true and loyal unto his natural Prince, can it be expected,
he being of a popish spirit, should carry himself truly and honestly toward
John Calvin? But sure it is (in this Prefacers judgment) that Calvin took the
Lords Day to be an Ecclesiastical and humane constitution, only appointed by
our Ancestors to supply the place of the Jewish Sabbath, and as our Doctor
tells us alterable by the Church at this present time as first it was, when
from the Saturday they translated it unto the Sunday. For proof hereof this
Prefacer alleges nothing but that out of Calvin, where he says, Veteres
subrogarunt diem dominicum in locum Sabbati; The Ancients subrogated the Lords
Day in place of the Sabbath: But he takes no notice of that which immediately
follows in Calvin; as a reason of the former thus; For whereas in the Lords
Resurrection is found the end, and accomplishment of the true rest, which the
ancient Sabbath shaddowed, by the very day which set an end to shadows,
Christians are admonished not to stick unto the shadowing ceremony. Where
observe, First, as touching the persons noted by Veteres the Ancients, first;
and then by Christiani Christians. Are not these the Apostles as much as any
other? and they in the first place, as we best knew what that was, which did
set an end to shadows; and accordingly to give notice of the pregnant
signification of the Day of the Lords Resurrection? and therefore, 1 Cor. 16.2
He does entirely refer this to the Apostles, as whom he confesses,
constrained by the Jewish superstition to have abrogated the Sabbath, and in
the place thereof ordained the Lords Day. Secondly observe that the
accomplishment of that which was signified by the Jewish Sabbath he ascribes to
the Resurrection. And Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester in his speech
delivered in the Star Chamber in the case of Traske professes that, It has
ever been the Churches doctrine that Christ made an end of all Sabbaths, by
his Sabbath in the grave. That Sabbath (says he) was the last of them. And
that Christ's Resurrection brought with it a new Creation, and a new Creation
requires a new Sabbath. And he alleges Austin Ep. 119. saying, The Lords Day
was declared to Christians by Christ his Resurrection, and from thence began to
have its festivity. But that at this time Calvin should think it alterable by
the Church, no color of proof is brought; and most unreasonable it is, for
any to conceave the Sabbath to be as alterable now, as in the Apostles days it
was, when from the Saturday they translated it unto the Sunday. For that
alteration depended upon a second Creation, as both Bishop Andrews observes,
and that out of Athanasius de Sabbato and circumcisione. And Bishop Lakes was
of the same opinion, as his discourse in Manuscript yet to be seen does
manifest. So that unless this Prefacer can devise a third Creation, and
maintain withal the rest on the Lords Day to be as ceremonial, as the Jews
rest on the seventh Day was, there is no color, why the Christian Sabbath on
the Lords Day, should be as alterable now, as the day of the Jewish Sabbath
was. As for the 3. conclusions which he says Calvin resolves upon; the first
whereof he says to be this, that one day in seven is not the moral part of
the fourth Commandment, I say, Calvin avoucheth no such thing; and Wallaeus
shows, that generally the friends of Calvin maintained the contrary; between
whom nevertheless and Calvin it was never known that there was any contention
herabouts. And already I have showed how unshamefastly this Prefacer abuses
Calvin in alleging one half of his sentence, and leaving the other part quite
out, so making Calvin to deliver that absolutely, which he affirms only
conditionally. The second resolution which he obtrudes upon Calvin, is, that
the day was changed from the last day of the week to the first, by the
authority of the Church, and not by any divine ordinance. It is true, Calvin
says not, that the day was changed by divine ordinance, Comment int. ep. ad
cor. cap. 16.
neither does he say that it was changed by the authority of the Church; but in
plain terms professes that the Apostles changed it in one place; and that
admonition was given for the change of it, by the consideration of the Day of
Christ's Resurrection in another, to wit Institut. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 36. Now
let every sober conscience consider, whether that day which was first ordained
by authority Divine, the apostles would alter by less authority, then
authority Divine; especially considering that Christ's redemption of the World,
is the restoration of the World; which is as a new Creation; and as the Lord
rested the seventh day from the works of Creation; so the day of Christ's
Resurrection, was the day of his rest from the work of redemption; so that
still the day of the Lords rest is the day of our rest; not indeed the day of
the Lord our Creators rest, that ceasing as being ceremonial, as before has
been showed out of Doctor Andrews; but the day of the Lord our Redeemers
rest, which brought with it a new Creation, is now the day of our rest. And who
was nearer or dearer unto Calvin then Beza? whose words upon Revel. 1, 10. are
to this effect, He calls that the Lords Day, which Paul calls the first of the
Sabbaths 1 Cor. 16.2. and Acts 20.7. on which day it appears that even then
were made the more frequent assemblies by Christians, like as the Jews came
together in their Synagogues on the Sabbath Day; whereby it may appear that the
fourth precept of sanctifying the seventh day, as touching the day of the
Sabbath and legal rites, was ceremonial; but as touching the worship of God
is of the moral Law, unalterable, and perpetually to continue in this life.
And that day of the Sabbath continued in force from the creation of the World,
to the day of Christ's Resurrection, which being as it were another Creation of
another spiritual World (as the Prophets speak) then for the Sabbath of the
former world or seventh day, was assumed the first day of this new World; the
holy Ghost without doubt dictating thus much to the Apostles. As for the third
and last resolution which he pins upon Calvin's sleeve, namely that the day of
rest to be sanctified to the Lord, is yet alterable by the church as at first
it was; neither that first alteration is by Calvin said to be made by the
church, but expressly by the apostles; and they admonished hereof by the day
of Christ's resurrection; and Beza professes that our Christian assembles on
the Lords Day are of Apostolical and Divine tradition. And observe I pray how
Bishop Andrews pleades for Episcopal authority, as by Divine right, in his
answer to the first Epistle of Peter Moulin. An est apostolicum factum aliquod,
jure non apostolico? Apostolico autem, id est, ut ego interpretor, Divino. Nec
enim aliquid ab apostolis factum, non dictante hoe iis spiritu Sancto and
Divino. Is there any fact of the Apostles, by right not apostolical? But by
apostolical, that is (as I interpret it) by Divine. For neither was there any
thing done by the Apostles, which the holy and divine Spirit did not dictate
unto them. Shall this be of force for the institution of Bishops, and shall it
not be of force for the institution of the Lords Day, as by Divine right? But
put the case it were so in every particular of Calvin, as this Prefacer
avoucheth; how comes it about that our adversaries practice to choke us with
the authority of Calvin? shall we be urged to yield to the authority of Calvin,
who are reproched usually as Calvinists, and so nicknamed? In my time of being
in the University, we heard by credible relation, how in one of the Colleges,
questions were set up to be disputed Contra Ioannem Calvinum; and that
disputations of that nature were sometimes concluded in this manner,
Relinquamus Calvinum in hisce facibus; and we commonly say, there is no smoke
without some fire. No longer ago then at the act in Oxford, last save one,
Anno 1634. I heard Calvinists reckoned up amongst Papists, Pelagians,
Arminians, Puritans, as sectaries at least, if not as Heretics, by him that
preached the act Sermon on the Lords Day in the afternoon; and is it fit, that
we should be pregravated by the opinion of Calvin, a man whose memory seems to
be hated by men of this Prefacers spirit, so as few men more?

The fourth Section.
Preface.
NEither was he the only one, that has so determined. For, for the first,
that to keep holy one day of seven, is not the moral part of the fourth
Commandment, our Doctor has delivered in the third section, that not Tostatus
only, but even Aquinas, and with him all the schoolmen have decreed upon it.
Nor was there any that opposed it in the schools of Rome, that I have met
with, till Catarinus took up Arms against Tostatus: affirming, but with ill
success, that the Commandment of the Sabbath was imposed on Adam in the first
cradle of the World, there where the Lord is said to bless the seventh Day,
and to sanctify it.

2 As for the Protestant schools, besides what is affirmed Calvin, and
seconded by the Doctor in this following discourse, this seems to be the
judgment of the Divines in the low Countries. Franciscus Gomarus, one known
sufficiently for his undertakings against Arminians published, An. 1628. a
little treatise about the original of the Sabbath, and therein principally
canvased these two questions. First whether the Sabbath were ordained by God
immediately upon the Creation of the World? Then whether all Christians are
obliged by the fourth Commandment, always to set a part one day in seven to
Gods holy worship? both which he determines negatively.

And Doctor Rivet one of the four professors in Leyden, Gomarus brings in
Vatablus, and Wolfgangus Musculus; and Rivet voucheth the authority of our
Doctor here. For so Gomarus, in the assertion and defense of the first opinion
against this Rivet. De quibus etiam cl. and doctiss. Doctor Prideaux in
oratione de Sabbato consensionem extare, codem judicio (by Rivets information)
libenter intelleximus.

I will add one thing only, which is briefly this. The Fretum le Morire An.
1615. though they observed a most exact account of their time at Sea; yet at
their coming home they found, comparing their account with theirs in Holland,
that they had lost a day; that which was Sunday to the one being Monday to the
other. Which of necessity must happen as it is calculated by Geographers, to
those that compass the World from West to East, as contrary, they had got a
day, had they sailed it Eastward. And what should these people do when they
were returned? if they must sanctify precisely one day in seven, they must
have sanctified a day a part from their to her Countrymen, and had a Sabbath
by themselves; or to comply with with others must have broken the moral Law,
which must for no respects be violated. See more hereof at large in Carpenters
Geogr. p. 237.

Exam.
That Calvin has any where so determined this Prefacer has not prooved, but
shamefully dismembered him, thereby to make him to deliver something absolutely
which he delivers only conditionally, and that in opposition unto Papists, who
will have the Lords Day to be kept not only for order and policy sake but by
reason of some mystery; and this Calvin professes to be Jewish. Aquinas his
words are these, Habere aliquod tempus deputatum ad vacandum Divinis, cadit sub
praecepto morali: sed in quantum in hoc praecepto determinatur speciale tempus
in signum creationis Mundi, sic est praeceptum ceremoniale. To have some time
deputed (wherein) to rest for things Divine, falls under the moral precept.
But for as much as in this precept is determined a special time in sign of
the Creation of the World, so it is a praecept ceremonial. Where I do observe
first, that this ceremoniality is apparently ascribed to the seventh day, and
that considered as a sign of the Creation, and not to one day in seven. And
this indeed may well be the concurrent opinion of Schole Divines. As for
Abulensis, of what authority is he to preponderate any one of our Divines? nay,
I appeal to every humane conscience, whether no more be moral in this
precept, then to set some time apart for Gods service. For what? is it nothing
material, whether we set apart for divine Service, one day in a week, or one
day in a month, or one day in a year, or one day in twenty years, or one day
throughout the whole course of a man's life? what conscience can be found so
cauteriate as to justify this? If so, then let him proceed and say, it is
nothing material whether we consecrate unto God one hour in a day, or one
hour in a week, or one hour in a month, or one hour in a year, or but one
hour throughout the whole course of a man's life. So that I presume every sober
man by the very light of nature, will be driven to confess that not only some
time ought to be set apart for Gods worship (as the Schoolmen commonly teach)
but that a convenient proportion of time ought to be destinated unto this. Now
let reason it self judge, whether any more convenient proportion of time can
be devised for this then the proportion of one day in seven. And herein let us
oppose Azorius to Tostatus (if Tostatus do oppose the morality of one day in
seven, Inistitut. part. 2. l. 1. cap. 2.
which is more then I find) a Papist to confront a Papist; who plainly
affirms, Rationi maxim consentaneum esse, that it is most agreeable to
reason, that after six work days one day should be consecrated to the
service of God; Especially since God has discovered unto us that this is his
good pleasure, namely that one day in seven should be consecrated unto his
service. First, that we might not be left at large to our own hearts, to
proportion out the time for Gods Service. Secondly, for the maintenance of
uniformity herein amongst his people; who being left unto themselves might, and
in all likelihood would have run different ways. And that God has from the
beginning manifested as much, Wallaeus has showed out of Chrysostom in his
16. Homily upon Genesis. Wallae. dissert. de Sabbato.
Now even from the beginning God insinuates unto us this Doctrine, teaching
that in the circle of the week, one entire day is to be segregated and set
apart for spiritual operation, and to the same purpose are Clemens
Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Theodoret, and Augustine alleged by him. Catarinus is
in this place brought in quite against the hair; seeing it is not herein, that
he is so much as pretended to oppose Tostatus, but rather as touching the
original institution of the Sabbath. Yet why he should say that Catarinus has
herein had ill success, I know no reason (neither does this author once offer
to give any) especially considering that the very Romists do acknowledge, that
the Sabbath was instituted immediately from the Creation. Their words are
these; In Apoc. 1.10.
The Apostles and faithful abrogated the Sabbath which was the seventh day and
made holy day: for it the next day following being the eighth day in count from
the Creation -- not only otherwise then was by the Law observed but plainly
otherwise then was prescribed by God himself in the They mean the third, but
indeed it is the fourth.
second Commandment, yea and otherwise then he ordained in the first Creation,
when he sanctified precisely the Sabbath Day, and not the day following.
Rivetus cites diverse Popish authors affirming the same with Catarinus,
contrary to the opinion of Tostatus, and notwithstanding Pererius his
concurrence with Tostatus; no less then six Papists of note, Steuchus
Eugubinus in Cosmopaea ad cap. 2. Genesis Gilbert Genebrard in his chronology at
the first year of the World. Jacobus Salianus in his Annalls of the old
Testament at the first year of the World, and the seventh day. Who expounds
also Tertullian, who is pretended to be of the contrary opinion. Cornelius a
lapide on the 2. cap. of Genesis. Emanuel Sa. And lastly Ribera on the Epistle
to the Hebrews cap. 5. Number. 8. So that it seems Catarinus did on this point
oppose Tostatus with very good success. Neither does the Doctor on whom this
Prefacer relies, show any sufficient cause of rejecting Catarinus, or bring
ought sufficient to justify Tostatus. It is true, Tostatus brings diverse
reasons for the confirmation of this opinion, and I have no cause to doubt but
they were answered by Catarinus who opposes him herein; neither do I find
any exception taken against his answer, either by the Prefacer or by Doctor
Prideaux himself. And therefore I might content my self, seeing nothing but
Tostatus his authority is proposed, to answer authority with authority: yet I
am content also to consider his reasons as they are proposed by Pererius.

THE FIRST DIGRESSION, WHEREIN.
I. Answer is made to Tostatus his arguments proposed by Pererius, to prove
that the observation of the Sabbath was ordained by God immediately from the
Creation.

II. Herewithall the question is disputed, whether Adam fell the first day
wherein he was Created.

THE first agrument of Tostatus proposed by Pererius is to this effect, the
observation of the Sabbath had been superfluous to Adam and Eve, seeing nothing
then could have called them away from the service of God, to wit, they being
then in the state of innocence. To which I answer, first that herein is
supposed somewhat wherabout there is much question, namely that Adam fell not
before the seventh Day. Yet Pererius professes that it was an opinion well
known, and confirmed by the consent of many, and those noble and illustrious
authors, that Adam fell the first day wherein he was created. This says he,
seems to have been the opinion of Irenaeus; and Cyrillus and Epiphanius are
cited as approovers of it. He adds, that Moses Barcephas in his book of
Paradise both prooves it, and avoucheth it as the opinion of many others, and
especially of Philopenus in his oration, which he wrote of the tree of Life,
and of Ephrem in his Commentaries upon Genesis, and of Jacobus Sabugensis in
his oration of Christ's Passion. To whom may be added, says Pererius, Diodorus
the Bishop of Tharsis, as he is cited in the chain of interpreters upon
Genesis, upon those words of the third chapter, we do eat of every tree in
Paradise. Tostatus himself as this author writes, was sometimes of the same
opinion, though afterward he changed his mind; and conceaved as more likely,
that Adam fell on the Sabbath Day; which Pererius approves not, though that was
the opinion of the author of the Darash amongst the Jews, as David Kimchi
writes upon that Psalm, whose title is, A psalm for the Sabbath; and that so
by sinning he profaned the Sabbath. This opinion of Tostatus and the Jews,
Pererius does not approve: but the reason he gives for his dissenting from
them, in my judgment is very weak. For that it runs, because the Lord
blessed that Sabbath Day and sanctified it, resting from all his works which
he had made, therefore it was not agreeable, that on that day, so severe a
judgment of the Divine vengeance should be exercised. Now I say, this reason
is very weak. For we commonly say, the better day, the better deed; and
undoubtedly the Lord is holy, as in all his works, so in the execution of
condign vengeance. Ier. 9.2 4.
In this he delights, as in the execution of mercy. And it is usually the Lords
course, even on the Lords Day, to recompense the ways of the wicked upon their
own heads, in the profanation of his Sabbaths. Secondly, it may seem strange,
that Pererius should serve himself with this reason, namely, of the Lords
blessing the seventh day and sanctifying it, seeing he professes himself to
be of Tostatus his opinion, interpreting these words by way of anticipation,
and referring them to the giving of the Law upon Mount Sina. Others were of
opinion, that Adam continued as long in Paradise, as Christ lived here on
Earth. But this opinion Pererius thinks no way probable. Others devised a
continuance of Adam in Paradise for the space of forty days, answering to our
Saviors fasting forty days; but this he says has no show of probability.
His own conjecture is, that Adam fell, and was turned out of Paradise that day
senight after he was created: and the grounds of his conjecture are in my
opinion, as frivolous as any. As first, when he says that eight days space
was sufficient to have experience of the happiness of that state. For why not
as well some days more or some days less? nay rather, by continuance in the
same state, we grow less and less sensible of the happiness thereof. And the
happiness of a state is best known by the contrary, according to that rule,
Carendo magis quam fruendo quid quidque sit cognoscimus. As for the agreement
herein which he conceits between Adam and Christ, as who is thought of many to
have been conceaved in the Virgins womb on the sixth day of the week, and on
the same day of the week was indeed crucified upon the cross; who sees not
that this convenience had been found as well on that day fortnight, or on that
day three weeks, and so in Infinitum, as on that day senight? As ridiculous
appears to be his pretense of complying thus with the ancients, whose opinion
was, that Adam fell the same day wherein he was created, which he would apply
to that day senight after. For why not as well to that day three weeks after,
or that day a month after, and so in Infinitum? But let us consider Pererius
reasons whereby he undertakes to show the unlikelihood of Adams falling the
first day. The first is drawn from the form of Adams temptation, thus, why do
you not eat of every tree of paradise? which supposes as he says, that they
had already eaten of every other Tree in Paradise; and Eves answer, he says,
seems to confirm this in saying, we eat of the fruit of the Trees in the
Garden. But of the fruit of the Tree which is in the mids of the Garden, we
eat not; what is the meaning of we eat, but this, we are wont to eat, quoth
Pererius. Yet forthwith he himself enervates this interpretation, confessing
that the meaning may be this, It is lawful for us to eat. And I willingly
confess, that no argument appears to me so plausible as this, namely that
they had formerly tasted of every fruit of the Garden besides this: for it
seems very likly, that not till then they were well prepared for satan's
temptation. And it seems unlikely they would offer to taste of the fruit
forbidden until they had tasted of all the rest; then indeed and not til then,
the commendation of that as of a more excellent fruit then any of the rest,
might the better allure them both to touch and taste. But as Pererius proposes
it, it has no force; for as much as he corrupts the Text, the Devils words
being not such as these, why do ye not eat of every tree of paradise? but
running thus; Yea? has God said ye shall not eat of every tree in the
Garden? or as Piscator takes it for a conclusion of a larger discourse; yea in
as much as God has said, ye shall not eat of the fruit of every tree in the
Garden, so giving a reason to prove what he objected, namely that God envyed
their happiness. As for the reasons which before I have given, they may be
answered thus. If the benefit of this fruit had been of the same kind with the
benefit of others, and only in degree of excellency above them, then were it
no way likely they should begin with this. But seeing it was pretended to be of
a far different kind by Satan's suggestion, not so much for satisfying the
appetite of sense, as for satisfying the spiritual desire of the soul in
knowing good and evil, which the very denomination of the Tree given by God
himself did fairly intimate; and this being cunningly improoved by Satan to
be a Divine condition, in making them like unto God; this consideration might
well allure forthwith without all further stay to have experience of other
fruit. Secondly why might they not have tasted of the fruits of other Trees,
without any necessity of nature urging them, and yet without any luxury at all,
but only to acquaint themselves with the condition of those good Creatures
which God had provided for them? Yet again considering that this experience
made to no other end, should so sensibly have brought home unto them the
goodness of God, in that state of holiness and integrity, that it would have
exceedingly confirmed them in their obedience to God, and made the motion of
the Serpent at first hearing distasteful, and to choose to be like unto God in
obedience, and thereby in conformity to his holy will, then in forbidden
knowledge. And besides, the tasting of all so soon, can hardly be justified
from Luxury or wast: therefore I rest in my first answer. Pererius his next
reason caryeth a great deal of show, but in substance less forcible.
Certainly the making of the beasts of the Earth, and of man, might be done in
as short a time as it pleased God to have it; especially considering the
opinion of some ancients, that all things were made together, and that in a
short space; so man's placing in Paradise, and the beasts brought unto him by
God, might be soon dispatched: and surely Adams naming of them cost him no
study; and undoubtedly all this was done before the creating of Eve; so that
all this might be done before noone, and space enough allowed for the Devils
conference with Eve, and his seducing her, and her seducing Adam. The making of
them aprons to hide their nakedness caryeth the greatest show of requiring
longer time; but he who wanted not wit to name the beasts so congruously to
their natures, wanted not understanding to cover themselves with fig leaves. As
for the Doctors alleged by him for his opinion; I do not find that any of
them is express, or by consequent direct for that, whereunto they are
alleged; but the inferences made from their words are merely conjecturall.
For when he writes, that Joseph in the first book of his antiquities; and
Basil in his Homily of Paradise; and Damascen in his second book of orthodox
faith and 10. Chapter. seem to be of this opinion; his ground is only this,
because as he says, they write that the Serpent in paradise did often come to
our first parents and converse with them very gently and familiarly, and that
thereupon the Devil took hint to inveagle the Woman. Now this is but a
conjecture of theirs; neither do they say that he was wont to confer with
them; yet all that they speak of may very well be fulfilled in a few hours.
That which to this purpose he alleges out of Austin de civit. dei lib. 11: c.
21. is only this, The Apple on the tree forbidden, we are to believe it to be
such, as the rest of other trees, which now they had found to be without hurt;
hence it seems Pererius would infer, that before the Devils temptation they
had tasted of them all; but Austins speech is indefinite, and verified, in case
they had tasted but of some; and Eve might have tasted of some, Adam of other
some; If it be further urged, that Austin delivers it as a reason to show how
hereby they were made more pliable to yield to Satan's temptation: I answer that
by tasting some, yea and without tasting any, they might be well assured they
might be tasted of without hurt, excepting that which God had forbidden them;
and the tasting of all without hurt was no tolerable reason to persuade that in
like manner they might taste of the forbidden fruit without hurt; the Lord
having professed unto them, that In the day they did eat thereof, they should
die the death. Pererius adds that Austin in his twentieth Book of the City of
God, and 26. Chapter, does not obscurely give to understand, that albeit he
thought Adam continued not long in paradise, yet that he continued there longer
then one day. But I find no such thing in the place quoted by him. But I
guess the passage he aims at, is that wherein he discourses of those words
of the Prophet Malachy Mal. 3. And the sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem shall
please the Lord as in the days of old, and in former years; and he inquires,
what time that is, which is signified by this phrase, as in the days of old,
and in the former years. And first he says, that perhaps thereby may be
signified, the time wherein our first parents were in Paradise. And to this he
referres that of Esaias Es. 65. According to the days of the Tree of life, shall
be the life of my people. And who says he, knows not, what that place was
where the Lord planted the Tree of life? But then to the contrary he
discourses thus, If a man shall say those days of the Tree of life to be the
days of the Church of Christ which are now current, and that Christ himself
is prophetically called the Tree of life -- and that these first men lived not
any years in paradise, from whence they were so soon ejected, that they
begat no son there, and that therefore that time cannot be understood by
this phrase of Malachy (as in the days of old and former years) -- I pass by
this question: to wit, of the meaning of the Prophet Malachy. Now had Austin
simply said that our first Parents continued not many years in Paradise, there
had been some color, as if he thought, Adam had continued some few years, or
one year at least, in Paradise. But neither does Austin deliver this as his
own opinion, but as the discourse of others; and that to prove that the words
mentioned in Malachy, cannot denote the time of Adams being in Paradise; for as
much as they speak of many years; but Adam continued not years in Paradise,
which is proved by this, that he was driven from thence before he had begotten
any son; which if it be referred to the conception of a child, as in reason
it seems to be, who sees not that one day, or a night might have sufficed for
that? So that all things considered, this place rather makes against Pererius
then for him. In like sort, that which he alleges out of Gregory is only
this, that Man in paradise was accustomed to the words of God, and conversed
with the spirit of the blessed Angels; suppose it were so, and with God
himself, so long as he continued in the state of integrity (yet I hope they
will give way to the temptation of Satan) yet how little or how long that time
continued is not specified. Consider we now the reasons to the contrary,
delivered partly by Pererius himself, partly by Doctor Willet upon Genesis.
Who on the third Chapter of that book proposes them in this order. First, the
Angels that fell, presently after their Creation sinned, as our Savior says,
that the Devil did not stand or continue in the truth Ioh. 8.44. Hereunto
Austin consents, Factus continuo se a luce veritatis avertit, as soon as he
was made, presently he turned aside from the light of the truth: So it is
likely that man also -- And indeed the inference from Angels to men in this
particular, seems to proceed from that which is less likely to that which is
more likely. If the angels of themselves fell so soon, how much more likely
is it, that both Satan would set himself with the first, to tempt them, and
being tempted less strange it is that they should fall. But concerning the
angels defection, it does not follow, either by our Saviors phrase, or
Austins phrase that either of them believed they fell so soon. But whenever
that was proposed unto them, which was the trial of their obedience; had they
approoved of it and submitted unto Gods Will, that had been or thereupon
undoubtedly had followed their confirmation, as it was u no them that stood;
and their not approoving it, their not submitting unto it was their sin in
part, though according to their spiritual nature, it might be in the highest
degree of stomach and pride; like as their approbation thereof who obeyed was
in an high degree of zeal and humility. Aquinas professes it to be more
profitable, Sum. Pt. 1. q. ^3. art. 6. in. corper^.
and more agreeable to the sayings of the Saints; that the Devil sinned anon
after the first instant of his Creation. Secondly, Doctor Willets second
argument is this; Ioh. 8.44.
Our Savior says that the Devil was a murderer from the beginning, not of
the World, but of man's Creation, therefore at the very first he set upon them.
But that phrase from the beginning does not tie us to any such exact
calculation. Thirdly, the subtilty of the Devil does insinuate as much, who
would then assault them, when they were least able to resist, before they by
experience were confirmed in their obedience. In this I confess there are two
particulars of very momentous consideration. First, the Devils subtilty to set
upon them, before they were possessed and taken up with an holy walking with
God. Secondly, that continuance in an holy walking with God could not but
confirm them, and make them more steadfast therein, having as yet no principle
of the flesh in them to make resistance, and to suspect every motion that
should arise to withdraw them from it. Fourthly, and it was fit, says he, that
man sinning should be cast out of paradise before he had fully tasted of the
pleasure thereof, lest he afterward might be tormented with the loss, and
attemted to return. This reason my palate does not relish so well; the more
Adam should be tormented with the loss of paradise, the better it should be
for him in my judgment, rather then worse. And as for attempting to return, I
cannot conceave how he should be so vain as to presume to evacuate Gods
judgments, and then again of any such paradise after Adams banishment
therence, we read nothing. Fifthly, And it is clear (says Doctor Willet) by
the Serpents first on set, has God said ye shall not eat of every Tree? that
they had not yet tasted of any fruit, but at the very first the forbidden fruit
was offered, before their appetite had been served with any other. But first I
do not find, that the Text mentioned has any such importment; Secondly, this
supposes, that the taste of other fruits would have been apt to hinder the
course of Satan's temptations; but how? in respect of giving so good content and
satisfaction, yea but this satisfaction was no other then to the sensual
appetite; but the Tree forbidden in the very name of it (whence Satan took
advantage to promote his temptation) seemed to promise satisfaction in a far
different kind, namely to the spiritual appetite of the mind. 6. Adam (says
he) had not yet eaten of the Tree of life, as it is evident verse 21. But if
they had stayed any time in paradise it is not unlikely, but they should have
tasted of the tree of life, it being in the heart of paradise. This at first
seemed to me very considerable; but upon after thoughts not so. For certainly
it assured not life, but upon obedience and therefore without obedience the
tasting thereof (if accessible in that case) would have stood him in small
stead. 7. Likewise, says he, seeing presently after the Creation they were
bidden to increase and multiply, it is no other like but the man should have
known his wife in paradise, if they had stayed there so long, and so they
should have gotten children without sin. This reason is not to be despised;
although to stay a day or two in Paradise was not to stay there long. But
considering that then they might company together without all sin so much as
in thought, or circumstance of act, (the want whereof makes even acts natural
in this condition of ours, shameful unto us) why should they defer the
propagation of mankind; especially considering that the child conceaved in the
state of innocence should have been without sin. 8. The eighth reason is in
effect the same with that of Broughtons; If Adam had not sinned the first day,
the Lion had eaten Grass; this in my judgment is a most insipid reason.
First, because God had ordained, that all beasts at the first should live by
Grass Genesis 1.30. Secondly, In the arc of Noah, Lions must have eaten Grass
or Hay, or else have starved, they had no power to prey upon their fellow
passengers. Thirdly, if Lions and Bears at first had lived by pray, even after
Adams fall, what had become of the rest of Gods Creatures, Imbelles damae quid
nisi praedae sumus? Lastly it is well known that in these days, in new
England, Bears do live by Grass, and their flesh for man's meat is accounted
better then Venison 9. Never any man on Earth, Christ only excepted, kept the
Sabbath without sin: the Apostle says, he that is entered into his rest has
also ceased from his own works, as God did from his, Hebr. 4.10. It is the rest
only of Christ, where there shall be a cessation from all the works of sin. But
that rest which Adam should have kept in paradise was not Christ's rest:
therefore he kept no rest there without sin, he fell then before the Sabbath.
This argument I confess seems to be very ponderous and savoury, as built upon
the Apostles discourse Heb. 4. But the proposition is not sufficiently proved.
For to cease from a man's own works (as they are taken from sins) is
evidently competent to none but such as have formerly sinned, which cannot
agree to Adam in the state of innocence. Yet it cannot be denied, but that Adam
continued in innocence and without sin until his fall. And so long rested
from sin, though not in Christ, save that to rest from sin supposes the
precedence of sin. But albeit this were granted, it follows not that he
fell before the Sabbath; for he might fall on the very Sabbath, which was the
opinion of the author of the Jews Darash, mentioned by Rabbi David Kimchi on
the 92. Psalm. 10. That place lastly makes to this purpose, Psalm 49.13. Adam
lodged not one night in honor; for so are the words if they be properly
translated; the word is (...) which signifies to lodge or stay all night: and
thus diverse of the Rabbis do expound this place of Adam; and he quotes Rabbi
Nathan. R. Menachem, and Midras Tehillim. It cannot be denied but this place is
very pregnantly appliable unto Adam, as the first and chiefest object on whom
this truth is verified; as being in the chiefest honor that ever man had on
Earth, Lord of all the World, and the Father of mankind, and placed in
Paradise; and the verb properly signifies pernoctare, to continue a night.
Only it is of the future tense, which yet to bear the signification of the
time past is nothing strange in the Hebrew, though it has not always Vau
conversivum, the sign of such conversion. And the very word Adam is here
expressed, and we are very apt usually to accommodate unto Adam without all
reference to this question, or consideration of the propriety of the Hebrew
word signifying pernoctare. But let us return to that from whence we have
digressed. Be it so that Adam continued in his integrity until the end of the
seventh day; do we not read expressly, Genesis 2.5. that God took the man and
put him in the Garden of Eden, that he might dress it and keep it; therefore
God had work for him to do, even in things of this World as well as he has
for us. And Martin Luther professes as much; Tom 6. in Genesis c. 2. v. 3.
It follows from hence says he, that if Adam had stood in his innocence, yet
he should have kept the seventh day holy, that is, on that day he should have
taught his children, and childrens children, what was the will of God and
wherein his worship did consist, he should have praised God, given thanks and
offered. On other days he should have tilled the ground, looked to his
Cattle. And Selncecerus treads in Luthers steps, treating upon the
Commandment of the Sabbath. Why then should it be thought superfluous to
ordain some days for the works of this World, and one day for the service of
God? And is it likely that Eve was about the service of God, when the Devil
assaulted her? was she not too near the forbidden Fruit? it was within her
sight, and the Fruit within her reach. 2. They urge that Vacation from servile
works was then in vain, seeing nothing could then be laborious and
troublesome unto him. I answer; though it were no pain to him to keep the
Garden and dress it; yet this must needs take up his thoughts while he was
about it, and many a Gentleman in these days finds less employment then Adam
had; will it therefore follow that the observation of the Sabbath is
superfluous?

3. The third reason is, that if this Commandment were then given, it should
oblige all men; but it is plain that the Gentiles never observed it, neither
do we read the Patriarchs did. I answer, there is no soundness in all this.
For touching the Gentiles, we have no History before the Flood, nor till a long
time after; in which space of time, this Doctrine of the institution of the
Sabbath being carried only by tradition, might easily be obliterated. The
Scriptures Divine are the most ancient Records in the World; but it follows
not, that because the Scriptures do not Record how the Patriarchs did observe
the Sabbath, therefore they observed it not; but much rather, because, the
Scriptures Record, that The Lord blessed the seventh Day, and sanctified it,
therefore the Patriarchs did observe it. And the truth is, until the coming
of the Israelites out of Egypt, we read not of the Church of God any where
but in single Families. Neither do we read of the Patriarchs before the
Flood or a long time after that they kept any Day consecrate to GODS Service;
will it therefore follow, that those holy Patriarchs did set no time at all
apart for Gods ervice? yet is it generally acknowledged as by the light of
nature, that some time ought to be set apart for Divine service. And formerly I
have showed out of Manasses Ben Israel, that whereas the Lord enjoining to the
Israelites the observation of the Sabbath, bids them remember that they were
servants in Egypt; this the ancient wise men among the Jews do aply in this
manner, Cogita in Egypto ubi serviebas, etiam ipsu Sabbato per vim te coactum
ad labores; think with thy self, how that in Egypt where thou servedst, that
by force thou wast constrained to work, even on the Sabbath. So that the
observation of the Sabbath was a duty even in those days. Observe farther that
in the fourth Commandment, the Jews are charged to look unto it, not only
that their children and their servants did observe the Sabbath, but also, the
stranger that was within their gates. Now these kind of strangers commonly
called Strangers of the gate, and thereby distinguished from Strangers of the
Covenant; were such as were not circumcised, though accounted Proselytes in the
first dege e. And on them was usually imposed no other burden, besides the
observation of the seven precepts of Noah, as Schindler observes upon the root
(...). Which seven precepts of Noah are also reckoned up by the same Schindler
in the root (...); and albeit the observation of the Sabbath were none of them
express; yet in as much as the Lord gives express charge that the strangers
within their Gates should observe the Sabbath, it seems it was comprehended
under one of them; And therefore some think it was comprehended under that
which was called (...) Benedictio Dei; that is, the worship of no other God,
but the Creator of Heaven and Earth; and by name, my worthy friend Master
Joseph Mede; as I have seen in a Manuscript of his touching the interpretation
of the word (...) in the Acts; and hereof he gives this reason; namely that the
observation of the seventh day was the badge of this, namely of worshipping the
Creator of Heaven and Earth, according to that, the Sabbath is a sign between
me and you, that I Jehovah am your God, because in six days the Lord made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh. Now
if the observation of the Sabbath were comprehended under the seven precepts of
Noah, undoubtedly it was in force, and practice amongst the Patriarchs, and
that not only after, but before the flood; for undoubtedly they all worshipped
the Lord God Creator of Heaven, and Earth. 2. We have notable evidence for the
observation of the Sabbath Day, even among the Gentiles. And first, the
distinction of the whole course of time into weeks, for the antiquity thereof
is remarkable, and now lately justified by Rivetus against Gomarus with great
variety of learned observation, and that especially by Claudius Salmasius that
renowned Scholar and Antiquary, one of them who with great instance urged
Rivetus not to suffer Gomarus to pass unansweared in this point. It is true,
as Rivetus observes, that Causabon writing upon Suetonius l. 3. 52. and upon
these words, Diogenes the Gramarian was wont to dispute at Rhodes on the
Sabbath, professes his opinion, that the observation of weeks now a days
generally received; was not commonly received before the days of Theodosius,
though he confesses, that long before it was in use among the Grecians,
especially those of Asia. Yet Rivet makes it good, and that out of Tertullian,
that long before it was in use among the Latins. Ioannes Philoponus in his
Commentary upon the History of the Creation, a book commended by Photius in his
Bibliotheca. lib. 7. cap. 14. and lately set forth at Vienna in Austria, writes
thus; All men do agree in this, that there are seven days only, which by
revolution in themselves do complete whole time, whereof what reason can we
give, but that which Moses gave? to wit, that in six days the Lord made the
World, and rested the seventh. And Clemens Alexandrinus and Eusebius prove the
same out of Homer, (...), The seventh day was that, wherein all things were
finished; and out of Callimachus, and out of Linus in diverse passages to the
same purse, as Rivetus has showed in his answer to Gomarus. And further, that
in the French Kings library, there is a Chronology of George Syncellus, from
Adam to Dioclesian; wherein Salmasius observes, that the computation of times
by weeks was before the computation of times by months and years was found
out by Astrologers; and that the ancient fathers distinguished the spaces of
times only by weeks: and that the Caldean Astrologers having observed the
course of the Sun, Moon, and other planets were the first that bestowed on
the seven days of the week the names of the planets; and that by the
testimony of an ancient author Manuscript. Zoroastres and Hystaspis were the
authors of these demonstrations. But that this circuit of seven days was in
use before Zoroastres and the first authors of Astrology. But the Jews kept
themselves as to the distinction of times by weeks, so to call the days by
their order, the first, the second; and that the Pythagoreans did the like --
and called the first day of the week (...) like as the Hellenists called it
(...). In the year, 1627. There was set forth a book at Venice (as the same
Doctor Rivet writes) entitled Thesaurus praeceptorum Isaaci Atiae Iudaei; in
the first part whereof and 157. praecept touching the Sabbath, he writes to
this effect, that the holiness of that sacred day is so well known, that it
were superfluous to use many words in the explication thereof; seeing it is
found to have impression in the very hearts of the Heathens themselves; becaase
there is none that knows not, that when his highness to whom none can
approach, built this wonderful frame, he rested on the seventh day. 2. And thus
ere I am aware, I am fallen upon the holiness of the day, acknowledged
generally by the Heathens themselves as this Jewish writer conceaved.
Theophilus Antiochenus an ancient Father in his second book written to
Autolycus, acknowledges the celebrity of this day amongst all men, though the
reason thereof was not so well known to most; to wit as drawn from Gods rest on
that day after he had created the World. Tertullian also acknowledged the
Heathens to solemnize the seventh much after the same manner that the Jews
did; confirmed by the learned observation of Iacobus Godefridus,
notwithstanding some exceptions made against it. And that this was the practice
of the Romans he proves farther out of Tibullus and Ovid, namely that they did
feriari rest on the Saturday as the Jews did. And Manasses Ben Israel in his
35. question upon Exodus writes thus, Ne Agareni quidem, Veneris diem
religiosissime colentes quem Algama vocant, Sabbato nomen, suum eripuerunt:
hauddubie ita providente Deo, ut omnium animis aeternitas ejus imprimeretur.
The very Agarenes, most religiously observing the Friday, which they call
Algama, have taken from the Sabbath its name: doubtless God so providing, that
the eternity thereof should be imprinted in the minds of all men; Belike as a
testimony of Gods rest from his works in the Creation, therewithal to
maintain an acknowledgement of God the Creator. More then this, Salmasius
acquainted Rivetus with some collections made by the forementioned Georgius
Symellus out of certain apocryphal books, one whereof is called (...), the
little generation, the other (...), the life of Adam, in which the author
observes through many weeks, that the seventh day was a day of rest; and that
he conceaved the author of that book to have been a Jew, translated by some
Hellenist, who makes mention of the Lords Day: And Doctor Willet alleges
Philo calling the seventh day (...), a festival of all Nations. So little
need have we to stick upon that in Hesiod, (...), the seventh is an holy
day; which some observe to have been spoken, not of the seventh day of the
week, but of the seventh day of the month rather, wherein Apollo was borne
(which yet is alleged by Clement and Eusebius as for the seventh day of the
week) what is wanting herein, being so plentifully supplied other ways.) And
whereas Gomarus being convicted of the evidence of this truth, betakes himself
to a new course, as to say that this practice of Heathens was taken from the
Jews, and not from the ancient Patriarchs; Doctor Rivetus brings a manifest
place out of Josephus to refute that conceit of his; As who professes that
this custom of the Gentiles had been (...) long ago. And how unlikely is it,
that either the Egyptians, or the Nations bordering upon the Jews should take
this from the Jews, when we consider Solitum inter accolas odium, as Tacitus
observes, the accustomed hatred between borderers; Hist. lib. 1.
especially between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent 1 Cor.
2.14.
; and how distasteful the things of God are unto natural men, even folishnesse
unto them, neither can they know them, because they are spiritually discerned.
And Homer, and Linus, and Callimachus, fetch the seventh day from the very
Creation, as whereon the making of all things was finished. I come at length to
the fourth Argument.

If the Patriarchs had observed the Sabbath, Moses would have mentioned the
religious observation thereof by their ancestors, to encourage them. I answer
1. it is not likely they were ignorant of the practice of their ancestors. The
Chaldee paraphrase upon the Psalm. 92. supposes Adam to have been the author
of the Psalm that is entitled for the Sabbath. 2. If for Gods sake who
delivered them out of Egypt, they would not observe it, neither would they
observe it for their ancestors sake. 3. Moses makes no mention of their
ancestors practice in setting apart any time for the service of God; shall we
therefore deny that by the suggestion of light natural some time is to be set
apart for this?

The Fathers profess that no other positive precept was given to Adam then to
abstein from the Fruit of a certain Tree. I answer, Chrysostom professes
expressly, that from the beginning God has showed that one day in the circle
of the week is to be set apart for spiritual operation; Likewise the
testimonies of Athanasius and Epiphanius are express for the acknowledgment of
the institution of the Sabbath immediately from the Creation, as before has
been showed. Indeed both as touching the setting apart of some time in
general for Gods service, and the proportion of one day in seven in special,
is more then positive.

Divines teach that before Christ's coming the Gentiles might obtain salvation
by observing the moral Law, and the Law of nature, with some light of Divine
faith, and supernatural assistance of God. I answer. 1. of what reputation
those Divines he speaks of, deserve to be with us, let every Protestant
judge. 2. yet we know that the Gentiles might have evidence enough of the
holiness of the seventh day; and that God left not himself without witness
in this, even to Heathens is so notorious, that we may justly wonder, to
observe how the monuments of the dignity of the seventh day were so strangely
preserved among them. 3. Yet where testimony sufficient was wanting not only
for the particularity of the day, but for the proportion of time; we do not
hold these to be moral so absolutely, and in such a degree, as to say that
failing in this alone in such a case should prejudice any man's salvation;
though we say with Chrysostom that God by the story of the Creation has
sufficiently manifested that one day in the week ought to be set apart for
Gods Service; and with Azorius the Jesuit, that it is most agreeable to
reason, that after six work days one day entire and whole should be
consecrated to divine worship.

2. From Papists this Prefacer proceeds to Protestants, and this seems to be
the judgment of the Divines in the Low Countries; for proof whereof he
produces none but Gomarus and Rivetus; both which are well known to be
opposite in the point of the original institution of the Sabbath. And as
touching the morality of one day in seven, both Wallaeus and Thysius two
professors of Divinity in the University of Leyden, are well known to differ
from them both; and Hyperius a low Countreyman too. As for Calvin, I have
already showed how he makes nothing for this Prefacer; and that they catch
advantage from him most unreasonably by dismembring him. Wallaeus shows the
same to be the judgment of Martin Luther, namely, that one day in the week at
least ought to be consecrated to Divine Service; and out of Melancthon, that
all the ceremoniality in the fourth Commandment is restrained to the
observation of a certain day, that which remains besides therein commanded
continuing moral. In Apoc. 1.10.
Beza likewise affirms that the sanctifying of every seventh day as touching
the Service of God, is of moral obligation and unremoveable. The like Wallaeus
shows to have been the judgment of Bucer, Peter Martyr, Zanchy, Iunius,
Viretus Calvin's Colleague, Danaeus, Antonius Fayns, Matthias Martinius, and in
a manner all that have written upon their Belgic Catechism. By this, the
Reader may consider the modesty of this Prefacer, when he professes that it
seems to be the judgment of the Divines in the Low Countries, that one day
in seven to be set apart for Gods solemn worship is not of the morality of the
fourth Commandment. But Wallaeus proceeds and shows the same to have been the
judgment of Vrsinus, and Paraeus of the Palatinate; of Alstedius Professor at
Herborne; together with Lansbergius and Festus Hommius, all maintaining the
morality of one day in seven, to be consecrated to Divine Service. And in the
close professes, he could add the testimonies of many English and Scottish
Divines, who ever have been accounted Orthodox, concurring in judgment with
the former on this point.

^^vestig. Sab. cap. 5. sect. 4.
Last of all consider, what is Gomarus his own opinion; to wit, that we are not
so precisely bound to this proportion of time, but that we may allow a better.
The condition of Divine worship (says he) commanded in the fourth Commandment
requires that not only certain days (for order and for Gods better service
sake) be observed, but also that sufficient days be observed; it cannot be
inferred from this that God has not defined a certain day to us, that it is
indifferent whether we make choice of one in fifty, or in an hundred, or one in
a thousand. Sect. 5.
Then proceeding to define what are sufficient, he acknowledges that the
days set apart for this must be either as frequent or more frequent, then one
day in seven. And in this answer of Gomarus to an argument of Wallaeus made for
the morality of one day in seven does Rivetus rest; Explicat. decalog p. 486.
namely that to us who are eased of the burden of Jewish ceremonies, the days
consecrated to Divine Service may be more, they may not be fewer. And adds of
his own, that we cannot in charity require of our servants the labor of so
many days (to wit of six) without some rest. As for the seconds which this
Prefacer says Gomarus brings, to wit Vatablus, and Wolfgangus Musculus, this
is nothing to the present purpose. For these are not brought in by him in the
point of the morality of one day in seven, but only in the point of the
original institution of the Sabbath; but this is his juggling course to
mendicate some show of authority to serve his turn where substance falls him.

what should those people do when they were returned; I will not answer by
advising them to travail the World over again Eastward, that they may find
the day which they had lost, by travailing round the World Westward; much less
that they should renew their travailes the same way till they had lost six
days more, that so their Sabbath might concur with the Sabbath of their
Countrymen at home: but according to the particulars proposed by him; namely
to concur now with their Countrymen a day before their time, that so they
might make amends for that time which they had lost, if any need of amends,
and not rather for uniformities sake. For when in the days of Joshuah the
Sun standing still one day was as long as two days, yet this was nothing
material to the altering of their Sabbath, much less when the Sun went
back 10. degrees in the dial of Ahaz, while King Hezechiah reigned. No sober
man I think will say, the moral Law was broken by this, though one week in
Josuahs days contained more time by 12. hours, then any former week, and
another week in King Hezechiahs days was found to be many hours longer then
his fellows.

THE SECOND DIGRESSION CONSISTING OF TWO PARTS.
I. In making good Doctor Wallaeus his arguments for the morality of one day in
seven, against the answer of Doctor Rivetus.

II. In answering of Doctor Rivetus his arguments directed against the morality
of one day in seven.

NOW whereas Doctor Rivetus about the observation of one day in seven as
necessary, differs in opinion from his two Colleagues Doctor Thysius, and
Doctor Walaeus, and not so only, but directs himself (after Gomarus) to take
into consideration the arguments proposed by Doctor Walaeus for the morality of
one day in seven, and to accommodate an answer thereunto: I think it fit, not
to omit the discussion of that answer of his; and that in such sort that I may
carry my self correspondently to his ingenuous behavior herein.

The first argument of Walaeus is this, if by the force and analogy (of the
fourth Commandment) it be not rightly collected that one day of seven is to be
consecrated to Divine worship, then no certain number or circle of days can
be limited (to the foresaid purpose) by any Divine precept, seeing in no other
precept is found mention of any other number; and therefore it shall be lawful
to choose either a thirtieth day, or a fiftieth day without transgression of
any Divine precept. But this is absurd. This argument is of great force;
considering the difference between proportion of time allowed unto Divine
Service; and the difference of the day, keeping still the same proportion. For
every master, from the greatest Prince to the meanest householder expects that
his servant should be profitable unto him, and accordingly he expects a
certain proportion of service to be performed by him; as namely a good days
work for every day; a good weeks work for every week. And in every trade it
is well known by them that are seen therein, wherein consists a good days
work, whereof whosoever fails, he is accounted but an idle and unprofitable
servant; but so the work of the day be done, whether he labors more in one
hour, then in another, he regards not. Such in like manner is every ones
consideration of a weeks work. So likewise as touching the service of God, it
is nothing material as touching the substance of Gods service what day of the
week is set apart for that. For whether we consider the advantageous nature of
it for setting forth the glory of God who is our maker; and as we came from him
so we must be for him, Romans 11. and Heb. 2. The supreme efficient being ever
of duty the supreme end; or whether we consider the profitable nature of it to
our own souls in coming acquainted with him, both touching his nature
touching his counsel concerning us, and touching his will. For when we
despise him, we despise him against our selves; and when we provoke him, we
provoke him to the confusion of our own faces; himself being nothing profited
by our service, but our own souls rather, though he be pleased to account
himself glorified thereby: it being his glory to do us good. This advancement
of his glory and our good is no more promoted by setting one day in a week
apart for this then another. But between the proportion of one day in a week,
or one day in a month, or one day in a year, there is a vast and momentous
difference. For we come to the knowledge of God, and of the mysteries of
godliness by small degrees; and in the ways of holiness we clamber as it
were up an high and steep hill; and our life is a way fare, our condition is
the condition of travellours; nay our life is a warfare, and the Devil and his
angels of darkness go about continually like so many roaring Lions and
hungry Bears, seeking whom they may devour; So that we travel to Heaven as
it were by dens of Lions, and over mountains of Libbards. And will any wise
man say that it matters not much in this case, whether we acquaint our selves
with the Armor of God one day in a week, or one day in a month, or one day
in a year to arm our selves against such ghostly and watchful enemies?
Secondly, considering that it was never known that any master from the highest
to the lowest, was so foolish to leave it to his servant to cut out what
proportion of service he thinks fit, wherewith to satisfy his master for his
keeping, and for the wages which he expects at his hands. These things
considered; I say this first argument of Doctor Wallaeus is of great evidence
and force, and therefore it is to be well weighed and considered what answer
either Doctor Rivetus or any other does make unto it, and what satisfaction it
gives. Now the answer that he makes unto it proceeds not in his own name, but
in the name of another, to wit, in the name of Gomarus, and such as concur
with him.

To this they answer (says he) that it is no inconvenience that there is no
certain number or circle of days defined for Gods service by any precept. It
is enough that the nature of public worship, in general comprehended in the
fourth Commandment, does require that not only certain days be observed, but
that the number of them be sufficient also, nor fewer then the right
institution of the Church, the salvation of men, and glory of God do require,
and that God by not defining it, has not left unto us a wild licentiousnes but
a prudent liberty. And therefore that it cannot be differred to one day in
twenty, or thirty, much less to one of a thousand.

Over and above they note (says he) that from the moral reason of precept it
is gathered what number of days is sufficient for Divine Service; namely that
seeing we are eased of the burden of ceremonies, whereof the Jews were not,
and yet God required one day in seven to be kept holy by them, we may be more
frequent in Divine offices, but ought not to be lesse^: but yet that GOD has
not precisely tied Christians to any, that is (as I take it) to any day in the
week, whereas it should be to any proportion of time, otherwise it is nothing
to the present purpose.

3. Doctor Rivetus adds this of his own, that Whereas this also is moral
that some rest be granted to servants and laborers, in charity the labor for
so many days cannot be exacted of them without some rest.

To this I reply.

Here we have acknowledged, that not only some time, Resp. 1.
but also a sufficient proportion of time is to be set apart for Gods public
service, and that by the very light of nature; for that I conceave to be his
meaning, and not with reference to the precise Commandment commanding it but
with reference unto it as it is moral, and so acknowledged by light of nature.
For it is apparent that the Commandment in requiring a seventh does therein
require one day in seven, and not leave it at random, what proportion of time,
but defines it. 2. I appeal to every man's conscience, and that as guided by
the very light of nature so far as it may be justly thought to be incorrupt,
whether it be not more fit the Lord himself should set down what proportion
of time he thinks sufficient, then that the definition hereof should be left
to the servant, and that for these considerations. 1. If it be left unto man,
how improbable is it that all the Nations of the World (as Christians are or
may be found in all) will concur in judgment, and if they do not, who sees
not what a way is hereby opened to miserable distraction and confusion,
consider what Socrates has written of different rites in keeping Lent, and in
observing holidays. 2. If it be left to man, it is very likely that little
enough will be thought sufficient, so burdensome unto flesh and blood is Gods
service; and the major part in most Nations (if not in all) even of the best
(as is to be feared) is not truly regenerate. For as our Savior tells us
though many be called yet but few are chosen. 3. upon this he concludes it may
not be differred to the twentieth day; yet it is well known that Brentius has
professed it may be differred to the fourteenth upon Leviticus. 25.8. as Doctor
Bownde alleges him. Now if so great a writer has been of opinion that from
the seventh it may be put off to the 14th. why may not another rise up and
maintain that from the fourteenth it may be put off to the twentieth, so
dangerous it is to forsake that light which God has given us in his Word; and
by way of divination, hunt after a new light of evidence in the counsels of
our own hearts. In the light of my conscience it seems most absurd, that it
should be left to the servant to cut out what proportion of service he thinks
good unto his master.

2. It is well that both he and Gomarus think we are bound to cut out a better
proportion of Gods Service then was prescribed to the Jews rather then a
worse: yet Brentius as great a writer as any of these, thinks otherwise, as
we have heard. 3. does only our freedom from the yoke of ceremonies requires
this? and not much more. 1. the love of God revealed unto us in Christ in the
days of the Gospel. 2. the encombrance of Gods Truth with errors, and
heresies, and those very dangerous ones. 3. and in a word the strong opposition
that in these days of the Gospel is made, and will be made more and more as
the end of all things does approach, both unto faith and holiness. It is noted
to be the sin of Christendom not to receave the love of the truth. 2 Thessalonians.
2. And of these latter times Paul has prophesied, that men should be lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God. 3. as for this opinion of Gomarus and
Rivetus; I am glad they are so far convicted of truth in this argument as to
profess, that we ought to keep holy rather more days then fewer; But why
then do not the states of Holland under whom they live (if they be of the same
opinion) make it good by practice? And the French-Churches also; But they want
example in antiquity for this. Who sees not that this is delivered only to
serve turn, and help at a dead lift, when no other way is open to shift off
the Argument?

3. And lastly whereas he grants (with Calvin) that after so many days (to wit
after six, for no other number was specifyed) rest must be granted to servants
on the seventh; does not this evidently convince that that day must be our
Christian Sabbath? For what? shall the masters keep one, and the servants
another? or shall the servants not give themselves to the service of God on the
day of their rest, but rather on the day of their labor in the works of their
proper callings? observe I pray how at every turn the light of Gods direction
does meet with us, to keep us in the good ways of the Lord, if we will not
wilfully shut our eyes against it. Now let that seventh day which is our
Christian Sabbath be well observed, first; and then let the states take what
order they shall see good, for the observation of another day also. Yet we
find by experience, that hardly are men able to maintain a poor living by
laboring hardly six whole days in the week. I come to the second which
Rivetus recapitulates in brief thus.

2. It is drawn from the number of six days allowed for work, which number
cannot consist, unless it be terminated in rest, and in cessation on the
seventh. To this Rivetus answers, that the six days of labor are in
reference to the seventh of rest; the determination of which seventh day being
now taken away a man may work on any day, so long as some day be chosen
(whether by Divine constitution or humane, and reasonable disposition) for
Divine Service, which may be in such sort, that fewer days shall be left for
work. But consider.

What more reasonable disposition humane, Respon. 1.
then that which is conformable to constitution Divine? now it is apparent that
God required of the Jews one day in seven; neither was it ever known to be
abrogated; the particularity of the day is abrogated, not the proportion of
time; ground we have for the one by the ceremoniality of it, no color of
ground for the other; nor did ever I think any man set his wits on work to
devise a ceremonialitie of one day in seven.

2. But what? shall the morality of rest granted to servants, be altered also
under the Gospel? did Calvin any where teach this? may not masters exact as
many days work of their servants under the Gospel as under the Law? has not
Christ deserved at the hands of servants to be as serviceable to their masters
as ever? Lastly are these days of the World such as wherein a laboring man
may maintain himself, by the labor of five days in a week as well as by
the labor of six? A long time I have found it observed by traffiquers in the
World, that nothing is more cheap then men's labors; a notable evidence how
unprofitable servants we have been unto God, and therefore he makes the
labor of our hands and sweat of our brows to afford very unprofitable
service unto us. Can these Divines make the World more favorable to
crafts-men, and bring their commodities in better request then they are; if
they could, let them then change the morality of servants rest, and for one in
seven allow them one in three, or four, or five; their masters will be the
more easily brought to entreat their consciences to condescend. Or if Kings had
power to make the commodities of their own Country more worth, and the
commodities of other Countries less worth (which upon due consideration will
be found as needful equally) then place might be made for this. Till then
let us be content with Calvines morality of the fourth Commandment in
reference to servants rest, namely one day after six; and therewithal consider
whether our Christian Sabbath must not be confined to that day as the only
day of rest for servants; and I hope we shall not think it fit to allow one
Sabbath for the masters, and another for the servents.

3. The third is drawn from the examples of the Apostles and the apostolical
Church, who in place of the (Jews) Sabbath, observed the first day of the
week without variation: therefore by force of the precept, one day in seven is
to be observed still. Never any has been found to change this; therefore that
which has been kept from the beginning of the World, and shall continue to
the end, is to be taken for such as by the Analogy of Gods Commandment binds
all men.

To this Rivetus answers, that the consequence is not firm; for as much as
Christians observed the Lords Day not of necessity by reason of any binding
praecept, but of free choice. Yet was it wisely done of them, lest by a greater
change they might offend the Jews. And that it might be a free monument of
their maintaining the weekly remembrance of Christ's Resurrection.

He says they did it freely; Resp.
but of things freely done without any conscience of duty obliging, it was
never known that so universal a concurrence was found as the observation of
the Lords Day. Nay Philosophers observe that things freely done as often come
to pass to the contrary. Again then it was free for them to observe one day
in fourteen as well as one in seven, as Bre^tius professes, and consequently
as well one in twenty, which Rivetus denies. Nay it stood them upon to change
the observation, lest men by universal and perpetual practice might be
confirmed in an opinion of the necessity of that which is not necessary. It is
apparent that as the Lords Day under the Law was one day in seven; So the Lords
Day in the Gospel was and still is one Day in seven. And both himself and
Gomarus are driven to profess, that we may not allow a less proportion then
one in seven to Divine worship. And I appeal to every conscience, to judge by
the very light of nature; whether the Lord requiring of the Jews one day in
seven to be consecrated unto him it does not manifestly follow that we
Christians can allow no less then one in seven; and whether it be not fi^
that the Lords Day should be our holy Day; and as for the allowance of more in
a week then one, let them persuade, their own Churches thereunto first, and
then it will be time enough for us to hearken unto them. And what should move
them to illustrate the memory of Christ's Resurrection weekly? whereas they
contented themselves with a yearly memorial (if at all they observed any
such) of his Nativity, Passion and Ascension, and sending down of the Holy
Ghost. Why does he not consider that the day of the week only whereon Christ
rose is called the Lords Day in Scripture, whereon John the beloved Disciple
received from his loving Lord, and master, that Divine revelation of his
concerning things to come.

4. If the number of seven, (that is, the observation of one day in seven) in
this Commandment be changeable; then as ceremonial, or as political: not as
ceremonial; for then the Church ought not to observe it. Nor as political;
for in the moral Law precepts political are not given. And to this Rivetus
answers, that the observation of the seventh day is ceremonial: and that the
Primitive Church kept it not, neither did the Primitive Church keep it, nor
do we keep it as ceremonial; but another seventh day, for Ecclesiastical
policy sake, not civil.

Respon.
When he says we keep another seventh day; he implies that by the seventh
formerly mentioned he meant that particular day of the week which the Jews
kept; and that we indeed acknowledge to be ceremonial; but in this
interpretation of Wallaeus, he manifestly corrupts his adversaries argument,
which is plainly directed against the ceremoniality of one day in seven
indefinitly considered, and not against the ceremoniality of the Jews seventh.
Yet when he says the Primitive Church did, and we do keep a seventh, but not
as ceremonial; he speaks to the point; but his words following have no
coherence herewith: so that he may seem to shuffle miserably in this,
affecting to decline that which he is not able to answer. But take we him at
the best, he must say that the observation of one day in seven was ceremonial,
if he speaks to the purpose. Now let him show us if he can, the ceremoniality
of one day in seven, and how Christ was the body of it; nothing more common
then to affirm that the Jews Sabbath was ceremonial hand over head, without
any distinction of the sanctification of the day, and the rest; much less
distinguishing between the rest of one day in seven, and the rest of the
seventh. At length I found a fair way opened for the explication of the
ceremoniality found in the rest on the seventh day. But as for any
ceremoniality in the rest of one day in seven; never (I think) any man set his
wits on work to devise that. Lastly, after such a ceremoniality is devised,
we will confer whether in reason such a thing ought to be still observed as
was ceremonial unto the Jews; and why may we not as well observe
circumcision with the Ethiopians, who observe it only in conformity to Christ,
who was circumcised?

Now because Rivetus brings arguments also to the contrary, to prove that the
observation of one day in seven, under the Gospel is not necessary, but free:
it is fit we should consider them also to prove what force is in them.

If by force of the Commandment a seventh day is to be kept, Rivet. 1.
then that day is to be kept which the Commandment has defined, which is the
Sabbath of the Jews. Respon.


To this I answer by denying the consequence, and not contenting my self with
a bare denial, I prove it to be inconsequent. For whereas God in commanding
the seventh has therewithal commanded one in seven, and withal specified
which of the seven shall be rested on and sanctified unto his service: If it
may be made appear that the particularity of rest on the seventh day be
abrogated; and no color can be brought for the abrogation of the proportion of
time, to wit, of keeping one day in seven; it will evidently appear
herewithall, that this consequence of Doctor Rivetus is unsound. Now this we
prove to be most true; forasmuch as the Jews rest on the seventh day was
ceremonial prefiguring Christ's rest on that day in his grave; as both the
fathers of old and modern Divines both Papists, and Protestants, both
Lutheranes, and Calvinists have acknowledged; but never any man was found to
devise a ceremoniality of resting one day in seven; they may as well give
themselves to devise a ceremonality in the setting apart of some time in
general for Gods holy worship and service.

2. Now this puts me in mind of another way clearly to demonstrate the
inconsequence of Rivetus his argument thus. If it will follow that in case we
are bound to such a proportion of time by virtue of this Commandment,
therefore we are bound also to keep the seventh day: Then it will follow as
well, that because we are bound to set apart some time for the service of God
by virtue of this Commandment (as all confess) therefore we are bound also to
keep such a proportion of time as is here specified, and the seventh day also
which is here particulated; For like as God does not command such a proportion
of time in special, but by commanding the observation of the seventh day; in
like sort neither does God Command a time in general to be set apart for his
service, but by commanding of such a proportion of time in special, and such a
Day in particular.

Rivet. 2.
2. His second argument runs thus: if the observation of every seventh day be
moral it must be known by light of nature, but so it is not. Therefore it is
not moral; and seeing it is not political, it must be ceremonial; and
therefore does not oblige by force of Law moral. To this I answer first.

Resp. 1.
Let but Doctor Rivetus stretch his wits to describe unto us what ceremoniality
can possibly be devised in the obsertion of one day in seven; and when he
has devised it, I dare appeal to his own judgment and conscience for the
appobation of it. For I do not think it possible for the wit of man with any
color of reason, to devise a ceremoniality to be constituted in the
observation of one day in seven, speaking of it indefinitly as we do, the
body whereof can be found in Christ; for of such ceremonies we speak, that
as shadows are to flee away when the body comes in place.

2. Neither does it follow that because it is not moral nor political,
therefore it is ceremonial; for some will say that it is positive as touching
the defining of some particular necessarily required to the performance of a
moral duty. As for example, not to go further then the matter in hand for
instance; it is generally confessed, to be a moral duty by natural instinct,
that some time is to be set apart for Gods service; but of our selves we are
to seek of the proportion of time; it is fit for none so much as for God
himself our Creator, and consequently our great Lord and master to define what
proportion of time shall be allowed for his service; now this they call
positively moral, as belonging to the execution of a moral duty. Yet indeed
not so much a circumstance thereof in proper speech as the specification of the
general concerning the circumstance of time.

3. Yet to draw nearer to the morality of it; what? 3.
shall nothing be moral that is not known to be so, by light of nature, for
what I pray? is not our nature now corrupt? nay has not Aristotle professed
that matter of morality is not capable of demonstration, but only of (...)
persuasion? Nay how is it known by the light of nature, that some time is to
be set apart to the worship of God that made us; but upon presupposition that
God is known to be our Creator? and is this known by the light of nature?
How came Aristotle then the greatest Philosopher that ever was, and his whole
school, how I say came they to be ignorant of it? but upon presupposition of
the History of the Creation known unto us, Doctor Field spares not to profess
as Master Broad reports him, that by light of nature it is known that one day
in seven ought to be consecrated to Divine Service? Yet I am not forward to
say so much, but rather with Chrysostom, that now from the Creation God has
manifested that one day in a week is to be apportioned for his service; and
with Azorius that it is most agreeable to reason, Institut. par. 2. l. 1. f. c.
2.
after six days of work, to set apart one to his service. And seeing God did
require such a portion of time to be consecrated unto him under the Law.
Undoubtedly and by the very light of nature it is clear and evident, that no
less proportion of time can we in conscience allow unto him under the Gospel.

3. I come to his third argument which is this, 3.
the necessity of one day in seven cannot consist with that liberty which the
Apostle intimates, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat and drink, or in
the part of a day, or of Sabbaths, which are shadows of things to come. Which
they explicate by a similitude. As nature requires meats and drink, but
Christian liberty is not tied to choice of meats according to Moses his Laws:
so reason dictates that some time is to be set apart for Gods public worship,
but the Gospel freeth us from the necessity of the Jewish Sabbath.

To this I answer.

Respon.
1. By granting the conclusion; for the Jewish Sabbath Christians observe not.
2. but one day in seven they always have observed, a manifest evidence that
they never conceaved this to be any impeachment to their Christian liberty. And
no marvel; for they manifestly perceaved that God required this proportion of
time under the Law, and from the beginning of the World; how much more should
we be careful to perform no less under the Gospel? And indeed rest on the
seventh day did pregnantly represent before hand Christ's rest that day, and
that day alone full and whole in the grave. But as for any ceremoniality to be
found in the special proportion of time, to wit, as one day in seven, never
any man devised any ceremoniality therein more then in the time in general,
which all confess by the very light of nature is to be consecrated unto God.
So that we have no need of Doctor Rivetus, his answer to help us in the
solution of this his argument. And whereas he conceaves our Christian liberty
to be impeached if any proportion of time be observed of necessity by force of
precept, and of free choice. 1. This is as much as to say that our liberty is
impeached, if we suffer our Lord and master, to prescribe unto us his servants
what proportion of service we shall perform unto him, and not rather have him
leave it to the servant to cut out unto him as little, or as much as he thinks
good, yet we do not deny but he may allow unto him more; all that we stand for
is that we ought not to allow him less under the Gospel, then he required
under the Law; and then he required from the beginning of the World. 2. I
marvel that Doctor Rivetus does not observe how herein he contradicts
himself; for has he not formerly rested in this answer of Gomarus, that by
virtue of the fourth Commandment, we must allow unto him days sufficient for
his service; and that these days must be rather Frequentiores then Rari^res,
more rather then fewer; and if it be no prejudice to our Christian liberty to
be tied, and that by virtue of the fourth Commandment, to allow unto him a
better proportion of time, for his service, then that of one day in seven, how
can it be prejudicial to our Christian liberty to allow unto him this, and
that by virtue of the fourth Commandment.

Now whether Doctor Rivetus his answers to the arguments of Wallaeus, Rivet
explicat. dec. p. 186. col. 2.
or his own arguments to the contrary be of any force to hold him to that
opinion which he conceaves to be Calvin's in opposition to the Doctrine
delivered by Wallaeus, I am con ent the indifferent may judge; as also whether
the two causes mentioned by him for the observation of the Sabbath contained in
the Commandment, does not infer the third also which Rivetus opposes, namely
the proportion of one day in seven. And that this is as free from all color of
ceremoniality as any of the other two. The first was that some time is to be
set apart for Gods Service; now this general is not commanded there but as
contained in the special, to wit, the proportion of one day in seven. Both of
them being equally contained in the particularity of the seventh day in that
Commandment expressed. And as for the morality of rest to be allowed to
servants after six days of labor; this does clearly draw with it the
confinement of the time appointed for Gods Service to the proportion of one day
in seven; unless the day of rest for servants shall not be the day consecrated
to the exercises of piety. And I much wonder that Doctor Rivetus a man of such
judgment, and perspicacity does not observe this. The only way to help this
anomaly is in plain terms to profess that some rest is to be allowed to
servants by their Masters, but in what proportion, that is not defined, but
left at large to the pleasure of their Masters. And as for ceremoniality in the
proportion of one day in seven, never any man devised any such thing more then
in the setting apart of some time in general for Gods Service, all confessing
this to be a duty known by the very light of nature. But I do not find that
Calvin has any other meaning then that we are not so tied to one day in seven,
but that more time then this may be consecrated to Divine Service; which as I
have disputed before, so now I am the more confirmed herein, Doctor Rivetus
manifesting this to be his opinion also, as well as it was the opinion of
Gomarus; For in this he rests, as may appear by his answer to the first
argument of Doctor Wallaeus. Neither is it true that Calvin did censure them
who simply maintained, that the observation of one day in the week does still
remain as moral; but that so maintained it as in reference to some mysterious
signification; a Doctor Wallaeus has manifested, and the words immediately
following in Calvin do evince, which are these; but this is no other thing
then in contumely of the Jews to change the day, and in heart to retain the
same holiness of the day. Here commonly the alleagers of Calvin to the same
intent that Doctor Rivetus does, use to make a period; as if Calvin delivered
this absolutely; whereas Calvin proposes it only conditionally, as appears
by the other half of the sentence thus. If so be there remain yet unto us a
signification in the days equally mysterious, to that which had place among
the Jews. And though I marvel not at others who dealing in this argument
dismember Calvin's sentence, so to make him to deliver that absolutely which he
delivers only conditionally; yet I cannot sufficiently marvel that Rivetus of
rough improvidence should do so too, especially considering the good pains
that Doctor Walaeus has taken to clear Calvin's meaning in this point.

Neither is Master Robert Low, in his effigiation of the true Sabbatisme, of
any such authority as to counterpoise the concurrent testimonies of so many of
our English Divines to the contrary; not to speak of the multitude of
outlandish Divines whom Doctor Walaeus mustereth up, concurring in the same
opinion, and whereas he says as Doctor Rivetus reports him, that some great
men, who vehemently contend, that the perpetual sanctity of manners does
require, that one day in seven should be celebrated, have more authority then
reason; I may be bold to say that they who with him have hitherto opposed the
Doctrine we maintain, what authority they have I know not, but as for their
reasons, they are of so hungry a nature; that hereby they manifest that nothing
but affection and their private ends they have, to bear them out in this. And
whereas I doubt not but Rivetus has brought on the Stage the best reasons he
could pick both out of master Robert Low, and out of Gomarus; let every
indifferent person judge of them as they deserve; though I verily think that
nothing but his affection to Calvin, to hold up his credit, and reputation
has carried him all along; and yet either my self, and Walaeus mystake
Calvin, or Rivetus miserably mystaketh him.

But as for our reason, we call all the World to judge of it; God did require
one day in seven to be set apart for his public service under the Law; how
much more does he require as good a proportion of time under the Gospel? Nay
from the beginning of the World he has required it, and to this day both
Jews, and Christian Gentiles have observed the same proportion. Again God in
his moral Law has required this, and that not as ceremonial, never any man
hitherunto having set his wits on work to devise any ceremoniality herein;
neither was it ever known that God abrogated this proportion of time to be
allowed unto him for his service; therefore it continues still as a moral Law
to bind us, and shall continue until God himself set an end unto it: now let
master Lowes reasons be compared with these in every indifferent conscience,
and let them have that authority which they deserve, because being well
conceited of the strength of his reasons, he sensibly complains of his want
of authority. It seems Pope Alexander the third was a man of more authority
then reason. For he maintains in Cap. licet. de feriis, as Doctor Rivetus
relates it, that both the old and new Testament have in special manner
appointed the seventh day for man to rest thereon, and he takes it out of
Suarez. de relig. l. 2. c. 2. but Rivetus cannot assent unto him, if he
delivers this of any moral institution; yet that it was so appointed by the
fourth Commandment unto the Jews it cannot be denied; and that not as
ceremonial; for we have seen how odly Rivetus has carried himself in
coming to speak of the ceremoniality. For to make this good he flies to the
particularity of the seventh day; and if the ceremoniality thereof, be enough
to infer the ceremoniality of such a special proportion of time as of one
day in seven; it may suffice as well to constitute a ceremoniality in the
general, namely in this that some time is to be set apart for Gods Service,
which yet all account to be moral by the very light of nature.

If Zanchy has no better argument to prove that the Decalogue as given by
Moses to the Israelites does not pertain to us but only so far forth as it
agrees with the Law of nature; then by instancing in the Sabbath, which the
Gentiles were not bound to sanctify: it stands Rivetus upon to oppose him as
much as any, who maintains that the Law concerning the sanctifying of the
Sabbath was given to Adam, and who brings diverse authorities to prove the
observation of it generally by the Gentiles; This I speak upon consideration
of his reply to Gomarus taking exception against somewhat in this argument
delivered by him in his explication of the Decalogue. But I hope the moral Law
shall be sufficient to bind us Christians if no other way, yet by this
argument of proportion. If God required of the Jews under the Law that one day
in seven should be set apart to his service: how much more does it become us
Christians to allow as good a proportion of time for his service under the
Gospel? This I say shall suffice until Rivetus answeareth it, which never
will be, for he as good as confesses that we are bound to allow God for his
service, rather a better proportion of time then a worse. And as for Doctor
Prideaux, I nothing doubt but he will clear us from Judaisme in arguing thus;
as who Sect. 7. professes that if they (against whom he disputes) required no
more, but the Analogy, the equity or the reason of that Commandment, we would
not stick to yield unto it. And whereas Rivetus adds that the argument which
he annexeth seems to him of great weight, namely that he who sticks to the
Commandment must exactly observe it: And that therefore into the place of the
seventh from the Creation, no day is to be substituted. But this argument I
have answered before, all for the most part grant some ceremoniality in that
Commandment; now if rest on the seventh be found to be ceremonial, but not
the rest of one day in seven in an indefinite consideration; it will follow
herehence, that the seventh must not be observed as accomplished in Christ; and
that the proportion of time is still to continue, as indeed by experience we
find it verified in each. For the observation of the seventh is ceased as
prefiguring Christ's rest in his Grave, but the observation of one day in seven
still continues unto this day.

Next for the second Thesis, Preface.
that the alteration of the day is only an humane and Ecclesiastical
constitution, the Doctor shows in the first Section, the general consent of
all sorts of Papists, Jesuits, Canonists, and Schoolmen; of some great
Lutheranes by names, and generally of the remonstrant or Arminian Divines in
their confession, whose tendries in this point, we may conceave with reason,
not to be different from the Doctrine of the Belgicke Churches, in that four
professors of Leyden, in their examination or review of that confession, have
passed them over without note or opposition. To these besides are added diverse
of our own, Et e nostris non pauci, as he speaks it in the general, that is,
as I conceave his meaning such as are neither of the Lutheran, nor of the
Arminian party: of which since he has instanced in none particularly, I will
make bold to borrow two or three testimonies, out of the tractate of Gomarus
before remembered. And first he brings in Bullenger, who in his comment on the
first of the Revelation, calls it Ecclesiae consuetudinem, an Ecclesiastical
Ordinance, and after adds, Sponte Ecclesiae receperunt illum diem. The Church
did of its own accord agree upon that day; for we read not any where that it
was commanded. Next Vrsinus telling us, that God had abrogated the Jewish
Sabbath, adds presently, that he left it free unto the Church, Alios dies
eligere, to make choice of any other day to be selected for his service: and
that the Church made choice of this in honor of our Saviors Resurrection.
Zanchius affirms the same; Nullibi legimus Apostolos, etc. We read not any
where, says he that the Apostles did command this day to be observed in the
Church of God; only we find what the Apostles, and others of the faithful
used to do upon it, Liberum ergo reliquerunt, which is an argument that they
left it holy to the disposition of the Church. Aretius, Sin^ler, David Paraeus,
and Bucerus, which are all there alleged, might be here produced, were not
these sufficient. Add hereunto the general consent of our English Prelates,
the Architects of our reformation in the time of King Edward the sixth, who in
the Act of Parliament about keeping holy days have determined thus, together
with the rest of that grand assembly, viz. Neither is it to be thought, that
there is any certain time or definite number of days prescribed in holy
Scriptures, but that the appointment both of the time, and also of the number
of the days is left by the authority of Gods Word, to the authority of Christ's
Church, to be determined and assigned orderly in every Country, by the
discretion of the rulers and Ministers thereof, as they shall judge most
expedient to the true setting forth of Gods glory, and edification of Gods
People. Which preamble is not to be understood of holy days or of Saints days
only, (whose being left to the authority of the Church was never questioned)
but of the Lords Day also: as by the body of the Act does at full appear.

Exam.
In this Section, the Prefacer makes a greater bluster by far then in the
former. For to except against the proportion of time, as of one day in seven to
be set apart for the service of God in these days of the Gospel, is so
unreasonable a course, and that not only in the judgment of a Christian
conscience, but even in the judgment of a natural man, that I cannot easily
devise any thing more unreasonable. For whereas all confess that by the very
light of nature some time ought to be set apart for the service of God; and
not so only, but that a fit, and competent proportion of time is to be
consecrated to holy uses, as Gomarus acknowledges, though one of the most
eager opposers of the morality of the Sabbath, that hitherto have been known.
Albeit this convenient proportion of time cannot be so convincingly concluded
upon by the light of nature, as to draw all to an unanimous consent thereunto;
yet after God himself has gone before us herein by blessing the seventh day
and sanctifying (...); and that upon the ground mentioned both Genesis 2. and in
the fourth Commandment; henceforth as Chrysostom observes, God has
manifested, that one day in seven is to be set apart; I may say consequently,
that one day in seven is that fit proportion of time which is to be sanctified
to Gods holy worship and service, and that God has now manifested as much ever
since the Creation. And (herupon as I imagine) Azorius the Jesuit in his
institutions is bold to conclude, that this course is most agreeable unto
reason. Now if the Lord under the Law did require such a proportion of time to
be sequestered from profan use to Divine, at the hands of the Jews; can it
enter into the heart of a sober man, that God should require less of us
Christians under the Gospel, then he did require of the Jews under the Law?
Or that God has now left it to the liberty of the Church, whether they will
set apart the proportion of one day in seven or less, to be spent in Gods
worship? If we consider the service of the day, as whereby God is honored,
undoubtedly God has deserved more service at our hands under the Gospel, then
he did at the hands of the Jews under the Law; for as much as the love of God
to mankind was never so revealed in former times, as in these latter times; So
God loved the World that he gave his only begottet Son, etc. And hereupon
undoubtedly it is that our Savior professes, that from the time of John the
Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force. To such an height of devotion has the Love of God manifested in his
Son inflamed his true servants; according to that of John, We love him
because he loved us first. Again if we consider the service of that day, as
such whereby our souls are profited and promoted in faith and holiness, never
was there more need then in these days of sanctifying a better proportion of
time unto God Service, rather then a worse; and that in each respect. For the
truth of God was never so encombred with oppositions before the coming of our
Savior in the flesh as it has been since. No heretics (to speak of) were
known to trouble the peace of the Church, in those former times in comparison
to the multitude of heresies that have been broached since, and began to be
set on foot in the very days of the Apostles; Saint Paul professing that even
then the mystery of iniquity did work. And whereas Saint Peter tells us that
false teachers should come privily bringing in damnable heresies even denying
the Lord that bought them; Saint Jude tells them to whom he writes, that such
were already crept in turning the grace of God into wantonness, and denying
God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ. And Saint John after the same
manner, little children (says he) it is the last time, and as you have heard
that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists. And no
marvel; for as much as the mysteries of godliness concerning the Trinity of
persons and incarnation of the Son of God (whereat carnal wits are so apt to
stumble) were never so punctually and distinctly expressed in the books of the
old Testament, as now they are particularly delivered in the writings of the
Apostles and Evangelists.

So that had we in these days two Sabbaths in a week instead of one, all
were little enough to instruct our people, and strengthen them against the
oppositions made by men of carnal minds, and thereby to keep them in the
right way of Gods saving truth. And no less necessity is there for the
keeping of them in the ways of holiness, such is the degenerate condition of
the World; Long ago it is that the severe judgment of God, had its course in
giving men over to illusions to believe lies, and all for not receiving the
love of the truth, as much as to say for the profaneness of the Christian
World, in not making it their care to walk worthy of their calling, worthy of
the Gospel; whereunto the Apostle so often exhorts Christians. So that if at
any time it were requisite to set one day in seven apart for the service of
God, surely by the very dictate of common reason, it is most requisite in these
latter days of the Gospel. Especially considering the rage, and fury of Satan
in opposing the Kingdom of Christ more now than ever, because he knows he
has but a short time. As for the alteration of the day (the same proportion of
time still continuing) from the seventh to the first day of the week, that I
confess willingly seems not at first sight to have the like evidence. But
whereas this Prefacer contends for the alteration of the day, as only by an
humane and Ecclesiastical constitution; observe that not one of the ancient
Fathers are mentioned by him for the justifying of this, though diverse are
referred unto by him, as against the institution of the Sabbath from the
Creation. But we have diverse of the ancients bearing witness to the Divine
institution of the Lords day, to come in place of the seventh. As first
Athanasius Homil. de Semente. Olim certe priscis hominibus in summo pretio
Sabbatum fuit, quam quidem solemnitatem Dominus in diem Dominicum transtulit.
Heretofore truly the Sabbath was in great price, with men of old time, which
solemnity the Lord has translated unto the Lords Day, Austine has diverse
other passages to the same purpose de civitate dei. lib. 22. cap. ult.
Dominicus dies velut octavus aeternus, qui Christi Resurrectione sacratus est,
aeternam non solum Spiritus, verumetiam corporis requiem prafigurans. The Lords
Day as the eighth eternal which was sacred by Christ's Resurrection,
prefiguring an eternal rest, not of the spirit only, but of the body also; and
in his Ep. 119. ad Ianuarium, The Lords Day is declared not to the Jews, but
to Christians by the Lords Resurrection, and from thence began to have its
festivity; and de verbis Apostoli Sermo. 15. The Lords Resurrection promised
unto us an eternal day, and has consecrated to us the Lords Day, which is
called the Lords, because the Lord rose on that day, and de Temp. Sermon. 251.
The Apostles and Apostolical men, have therefore ordained the Lords day to be
kept with a religious solemnity, because on that day our redeemer rose from the
dead. Cyril. in Joan. lib. 12. cap. 58. From Christ presenting himself unto his
Apostles on the eighth day, which he interprets of the first day of the
week, concludes therehence that by right therefore holy Congregations are kept
in the Churches on that day. And as Walaeus observes, the celebrity of this day
Eusebius referres to Christ himself in these words, Who ever prescribed to all
the inhabitants of the World either by Sea or Land, that meeting together one
day in the week, they should celebrate the Dominicall festivity. Athan. on
that of Mat. 11.27. All things are given to me of my Father.
Add to this that of Gregory mentioned Section the 1. Nay Athanasius goes
further, and shows the equity of it in proportion to the new Creation compared
with the old; The end of the first Creation was the Sabbath; but the beginning
of the second Creature is the Lords Day, wherein he renewed and repaired the
old man. Like as therefore in former times he would have the Sabbath day to be
kept, so we keep holy the Lords Day as a monument of the beginning of the
second Creation. And this proportion is apprehended by Beza also, on the
Revelation the first Chap. and 10. verse. That Sabbath day (says he)
continued from the Creation of the World to the Lords resurrection, which
seeing it is as it were an other Creation of another spiritual World (as the
Prophets speak) then for the Sabbath of the former World, or seventh day was
assumed (and that undoubtedly by the Holy Ghost suggesting this to the
Apostles) the first day of this new World, in which not the corporal or
corruptible light, in the first day of the first World was created: but that
heavenly and eternal light did spring unto us. In all which Beza does exactly
tread in the steps of that ancient Father Athanasius, and concludes that the
assemblies of the Lords Day (which Justine expressly makes mention of in his
second Apologetium) are of tradition apostolical and truly Divine. And after
him Doctor Andrews late Bishop of Winchester, whom Doctor Hall now Bishop of
Exceter some where calls the Oracle of these times upon the same ground,
maintains the equity of bringing our Lords Day into the place of the Jewish
Sabbath.

In his speech in the Star Chamber, against Traske.
The Sabbath (says he) had reference to the old Creation, but in Christ we
are a new Creature, a new Creation, and so to have a new Sabbath. And again,
It has ever been the Churches doctrine that Christ made an end of all
Sabbaths by his Sabbath in the Grave. That Sabbath was the last of them. -- And
that the Lords Day presently came in place of it. And for the confirmation
hereof brings in that of Austin Ep. 119 ad Ianuarium: The Lords Day by Christ's
Resurrection has been declared unto Christians, and from that time began to
have its festivity. These Theses of his were written as it seems in opposition
to Broad.
Doctor Lakes Bishop of Wells maintains the same Doctrine after the same
manner in his Theses de Sabbato, these. 27. Man having sinned, and so by sin
abolished the first Creation De jure, though not de facto; God was pleased by
Christ to make a new instauration of the World. 28. He (as the Scripture
speaks of Christ's redemptions) made a new Heaven and a new Earth. Old things
passed then away, and so all things were made new. 29. Yea every man in Christ
is a new Creature, 30. As God then when he ended the first Creation, made a day
of rest, and sanctified it: 31. So did Christ when he ended his work, made a
day of rest, and sanctified it. 32. Not altering the proportion of time which
is eternal, but taking the first day of seven for his portion, because sin had
made the seventh alterable. But a man may easily perceive whither this Prefacer
tends, and such as are of his Spirit. The Rhemists upon the first of the Revel.
and 10. verse do observe that the Apostles, and the faithful abrogated the
Sabbath which was the seventh day, and made holy day for it, the next day
following, being the eighth day in count from the Creation, and that without
all Scriptures, and Commandments of Christ that we read of: yea (which is
more) not only otherwise then was by the Law observed, but plainly otherwise
than was prescribed by God himself in the second Commandment, yea otherwise
than he ordained in the first Creation when he sanctified precisely the Sabbath
day, and not the day following. Such great power did Christ leave to his
Church, and for such causes gave he the Holy Ghost to be resident in it, to
guide it into all truths, even such as in the Scripture are not expressed. And
if the Church had authority and inspiration from God, to make Sunday (being a
working day before) an everlasting holy day, and the Saturday that before was
holy day, now a common workday, why may not the same Church prescribe and
appoint the other feasts of Easter, Whitsontide, Christmas, and the rest? for
the same warrant she has for the one, as she has for the other. Now to this
Doctor Fulk makes answer after this manner. The Apostles did not abrogate the
Jewish Sabbath, but Christ himself by his death, as he did all other
ceremonies of the Law, that were figures and shadows of things to come,
whereof he was the body, and they were fulfulled and accomplished in him, and
by him. And this the Apostles knew both by the Scriptures, and by the Word of
Christ, and his holy Spirit. By the Scriptures also they knew that one day of
seven was appointed to be observed for ever during the World, as consecrated
and hallowed to the public exercise of the Religion of God; Although the
ceremonial rest, and prescript day according to the Law were abrogated by the
death of Christ. Now for the prescription of this day before any other of
seven, they had without doubt either the express commandment of Christ before
his ascension when he gave them precepts concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the order and government of the Church, Acts 1.2. or else the certain
direction of his Spirit, that it was his will and pleasure it should be so, and
that also according to the Scriptures. And observe how in the words following
he falls in upon the same reason of the change of the day which of old was
mentioned by Athanasius (formerly rehearsed) herein by Beza, Doctor Andrews, D.
Lake, as I have already showed. Seeing there is the same reason of sanctifying
the day in which our Savior Christ accomplished our redemption, and the
restitution of the world by his resurrection from death, that was of
sanctifying the day in which the Lord rested from the creation of the world.
And after many lines nothing necessary to be recited, he comes to the
comparison made between the Lords Day and other Festivalls, saying: Although
the Church in days or times which are indifferent, may take order for some
other days or times to be solemnized for the exercises of Religion; or the
remembrance of Christ's nativity, resurrection, ascension, or the coming of the
holy Ghost, may be celebrated either on the Lords Day, or any other time: yet
there is great difference between the authority of the Church in this case, and
the prescription of the Lords Day by the Apostles for the special memory of
those things are indifferent of their nature, either to be kept on certain
days, or left to the discretion of the Governors of the Church. But to change
the Lords Day, or to keep it on Monday, Tuesday, or any other day, the Church
has no authority. For it is not a matter of indifferency, but a necessary
prescription of Christ himself, delivered to us by his Apostles. And again,
in the next place: The cause of this change, it was not our estimation, that
either we have, or ought to have of our redemption before our creation, but the
Ordinance of God, who, as first he sanctified the rest from creation for the
glory of that week: so now also he sanctifies the day of the restitution of
the world for his glory of the accomplishment of our redemption. Thus we have
not only authority Humane, but authority Divine for the alteration of the Day,
and that by the testimony of more Bishops ancient and late, than this Prefacer
makes show of amongst far meaner names. Yet he does immodestly abuse Doctor
Prideaux in putting it upon him, that in the fifth Section, he maintains the
alteration of the day to be only an humane and Ecclesiastical institution.
For, in that Section, he only opposes them, who would derive the Divine
authority (which they stand for) of the alteration of the Day from the old
Testament: but as for those who derive the Divine authority thereof from the
new, they he confesses, do carry themselves herein more warily, the other
more weakly, and them alone he disputes against in that Section. In the sixth
Section, he comes to the deriving thereof from the new Testament; and first he
challenges them, who boast that they have found the insti ution of the Lords
Day in the new Testament expressly, to show the place. Then in the often
disputations of our Savior with the Pharisees about their superstitious
observation of the Sabbath Day, he demands where is the least suspicion of the
abrogation of it; or any mention that the Lords Day was instituted in the place
thereof? And indeed, the time hereof was not yet come; only the death of
Christ setting an end to ceremonies. Then he demands whether the Apostles did
not keep the Jewish Sabbath? now, I do not find they did, although they took
occasions of their meetings on that day to dispute with them, and to instruct
them in the Faith of Christ. Then he demands, whether the Primitive Church did
not design as well the Sabbath as the Lords Day to sacred meetings? I find in
Baronius, Baron. tom. 1. page 517.
that Orthodoxi Orientales did, and the occasion also, to wit, in detestation
of the Marcionites; yet without any such respect, it had been nothing strange,
considering, that even now adays Saturday is counted half holy day; and that
the Jews had a preparation for the Sabbath, in such sort, that on their
behalf, Augustus made a rescript, that no Jews should be compelled to make
good their suretiships (as much to say, Baron. tom. 1. page 148.
they should not be arrested) either on the Sabbath days, or after three a
clock of the day going before. Hereupon (which is yet a very weak ground in
my judgment) he says, that Papists infer, that the Lords Day is not of
Divine institution; he does not make any such inference himself. Yet
notwithstanding (he confesses that) even in the Church of Rome, Anchoranus,
Panormitane, Angelus and Sylvester (all which this Prefacer conceals very
judiciously for his own advantage) have stoutly set themselves against these
lukewarm Advocates, in affirmation of the Divine authority of the Lords Day.
And I find, that Azorius in his institutions, makes mention of them to the same
purpose, and adds, that Sylvester professes, hanc esse opinionem communem,
that this is the common opinion. And after this, Doctor Prideaux in that
Section, disputes for the Divine institution thereof, rather than against it.
After this he takes notice of Paul's fact, Acts 20.7. and disputes therehence
for a custom to celebrate on the first day of the week their public
meetings; and confesses, that the Fathers, and all Interpreters almost, do so
conceive it: though withal he professes he sees not how from a casual fact
(so he calls it, upon what ground I know not) a solemn institution may be
justly grounded; yet that which went before, in some opposition whereunto this
is delivered, pleaded not for a solemn institution, but for a custom only;
although upon due consideration, it may be found, that such a custom (if that
be granted) could not otherwise proceed originally than from a solemn
institution: It is enough if they ordained that on that day the Churches should
be assembled for public worship; which Austin expressly professes, as
formerly I have showed, neither does it appear in reason how it could be
otherwise, such assemblies being universal and so continuing to this day: Is
it credible such universal agreement should come to pass casually? if it did,
yet their continuance of it without dislike, does manifest their joint
Apostolical approbation, who we know were guided by the Spirit of God: and
even in their time was the first day of the week, called the Lords Day. So
that in all this I find no incoherence, much less notable. Indeed, in the
first of the Corinth. chap. 16.2. he does not order that the first day should
be set apart for Gods service, but rather supposes it, and that not only at
Corinth, but in the Churches of Galatia: how improbable is it that this
uniformity should be among them, unless it proceeded from some authority
superior to the Churches themselves: then coming to consider the denomination
of the Lords Day, and concluding it to be the first day of the week, and
therewithal concluding that sixth Section: the seventh Section he begins thus;
what then? Shall we affirm that the Lords Day is founded in Divine authority?
and answers the question thus: For my part (without prejudice to any man's
opinion) I assent unto it, however the arguments like me not, whereby the
opinion is supported, and so he proceeds in prosecuting of that which was
affirmed by him, in the last place, concerning his private dislike of some
particular courses taken to justify it. He opposes, I grant, express
institution; but if by just consequence it may be deduced, it serves our
turn, both in the general and in particular at this time and in this place,
to discover the immodest and unreasonable carriage of this Prefacer, who would
obtrude the contrary opinion upon Doctor Pride aux, as it were, in despite of
him; And indeed, it is thought that he owed him a spite, and to pay that he
owed him, he came to this translation. But herein the Doctors honor is easily
preserved in the despite of this Prefacer; yet see a greater degree of
impudency in this Prefacer. For he puts upon the Doctor, as if he had showed
the alteration of the day to be only an humane and Ecclesiastical
institution, by the general consent of all sorts of Papists, Jesuits, Azorius
institut. Part. 2. l. 1. c. 2.
Canonists and Schoolmen of some great Lutherans by name, whereas it is
plain, that he mentions more Papists maintaining the Lords Day to be of
Divine institution, then opposing it. And amongst them that maintain it, one,
to wit, Sylvester, professes it to be opinionem comm^n^m, not one avouched as
affirming the contrary. And as for the great Lutherans this Author speaks of,
loving to speak with a full mouth, they are but one, and that Brentius, who is
said to affirm it to be a civil ordinance, and not a commandment of the
Gospel; a very strange phrase (in my opinion) to call it a civil ordinance;
the ordinance being in force many hundred years before the Church of God had
any civil government of their own, and being in the Apostles days how could
it be less than Apostolical? undoubtedly not so much civil as
Ecclesiastical. We grant willingly we have no express precept for it, yet
Austin is bold to say (as we have heard) that Apostoli sanxerunt, yet Gomarus
allegeth no passage out of Brentius to this purpose. But Melancthon ever (as I
take it) accounted of better authority than Brentius, professes, as Walaeus
reports him, that consentaneum est Apostolos hanc ipsam ob causam mutasse diem,
in plain terms ascribing the change of the day to the Apostles: As for the
Remonstrants, what authority have they deserved to have with us, who are so
near a kin to the Socinians, who uttterly profess against all observation
of the Lords Day. But the four professors of Leiden, have passed over this of
theirs without note or opposition. And was not Walaeus one of the four? yet
what his opinion is himself has manifested to the world; yea, and his
colleague, Thysius also, yet no cause had they to oppose in this, when the other
professed it to be a laudable and good custom, according to the pattern of
the Primitive Church; and can the Primitive Church exclude the Apostles, and
not rather include them? And is it probable, that the Primitive Church
prescribed it to the Apostles, and not rather the Apostles to the Church?
Tilenus calls it Ecclesiae consuetudinem, not denying it to be instituted by
the Apostles, nay, elsewhere he affirms this, or rather that it was
instituted by Christ himself. So little cause had these professors to quarrel
with this phrase of the Remonstrants, having weightier matters in hand wherein
to oppose them. What if Bullenger call it Ecclesiae consuettudinem; so does
Tilenus de praecept. 4. These. 29. yet These. 24. he professed it to be not only
observed by the Apostles, but that it may seem also to be instituted by Christ
himself: Bullenger says, sponte receperunt, to wit, in opposition to an
express Precept, as appears by that which immediately follows; Non legimus
eam ullibi praeceptam, we do not read it any where commanded. Vrsine alleged
in the next place clearly professes in the very place quoted by Gomarus, that
God it is who has abrogated the observation of the seventh day, but he adds,
that he left it free to the Church to choose other days, which (Church) upon a
probable cause, chose the first day, which was the day of Christ's resurrection.
Now what Church was it but Apostolica Ecclesia, as Paraeus upon Vrsinus
Catechism observes, p. 665. Pro liberate sibi a Christo donata pro septima
die elegit diem primum propter probabilem causam out of the liberty which
Christ has given them, instead of the seventh day chose the first day of the
week, by reason of a probable cause, to wit, because on that day Christ rose,
by whose resurrection, Romans 1.4.
the spiritual and eternal rest is inchoated in us, and p. 666. Apostoli ipsi
mutarunt Sabbatum septimi diei. The Apostles themselves changed the Sabbath of
the seventh day. By the way touch we a little upon this, that, First, this was
done in reference to Christ's resurrection: so Calvin acknowledges in reference
whereunto this day had some prerogative above the rest, to wit in the way of
fitness, for holy use, because of the work of God on that day. Whence it is
evidently concluded, that the Apostles did not think it indifferent, therefore
though it were left to their liberty, in as much as no Commandment was given
to them thereabout for ought we read, yet by the spirit of God, they were
directed to make choice of this day, and that in reference to such a work on
that day, as the like on no other. Not that the sanctifying of a rest on this
day would make us more holy, then the sanctifying of a rest on any other day:
but only in reference to some special work of God on that day: upon which
consideration the ancient Fathers do generally insist; and Bishop Andrews,
and Bishop Lake after them do jointly rely, and not Beza only. Secondly, That
both Vrsine and Paraeus call this a probable reason only: now give me leave to
insist upon this, and try whether I cannot show that this reason is more then
probable. And that first a Posteriori. For let us soberly consider how came it
to pass that not only the day whereon Christ rose, but answerably hereunto
the Day of the week, to wit, the first Day of the week was accounted by the
Apostles, and so commonly called the Lords Day; and generally known to
Christians by that name: otherwise S. John had not been so well understood in
his Revelation chap. 1. verse. 10. Is it not apparent that Christ's rising did
ever after give the denomination of the Lords Day, to the first day of the
week? Again the day of Christ's Passion upon the Cross, is not called the
Lords day; and why the day of the Resurrection rather? surely because S. Paul
says that Christ was declared mightily to be the Son of God by the spirit of
sanctification in his Resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4.
Hereby then was he manifested to be the Son of God, the very Lord of Glory;
and is not this reason more then probable, why it should be called the Lords
day? Secondly consider, that day of the month or that day of the year whereon
the Lord rose, we no where find that it was usually called the Lords Day, but
only that day of the week; not the day of the week wherein he ascended into
Heaven, but the day of the week wherein he rose. Now the Jews Sabbath was
called the Lords Sabbath, the Lords holy Day. Es. 58.13. If thou shall turn
away thy foot from my Sabbath from doing thy will on my holy Day. Has the
Lord a Day under the Gospel, but no Sabbath, no holy Day? what an unreasonable
conceit were this? that he should have an holy Day one in every week under
the Law; and none under the Gospel? Now if the Lord has a day that is
peculiarly called his under the Gospel, and that day is in the Scripture
styled the Lords Day; I appeal to every Christian conscience, whether the
sanctifying of this day as holy to the Lord, ought not by more then probable,
yea even by necessary reason, come in place of the sanctifying of the seventh
day as an holy rest to the Lord in the days of old. Otherwise we should have
two different days in the week, the one called the Lords Day, the other the
Lords holy Day; or no holy day at all though we have the Lords Day. Lastly
consider the very definition of a thing probable, which Aristotle makes to be
such as seems so in the judgment of most, or in the judgment of most of the
wisest, or of some few provided they are wiser then the rest; but the
sanctifying of the first day of the week to the Lord, that is, the Lords Day
to the Lord, has seemed fit not to some of the wisest only in the Church of
God, but to all, even to all the Apostles, yea and Evangelists and Pastors, and
teachers in their days and to the whole Church, for 1600. years since; and
shall we call the reason moving them hereunto only probable? 2. yet all this
is but a posteriori, which yet for the evidence of it, I presume most
sufficient for the convicting of every sober and Christian conscience of that
truth, to the demonstration whereof it tends; I come to give a reason hereof a
priori. The first creation in the wisdom of God (who proceeds not merely
according unto probable reason) drew after it a Sabbath day, the seventh day
where on God rested. But if God vouchsafes us a new creation in the same
congruity, may we not justly expect a new Sabbath? Now, the Apostle tells us
plainly, that old things are passed away, and that all things are become new, 2
Cor. 5.17. and this he brings in upon showing what Christ has deserved at our
hands, in as much as he died for us, and rose again, verse. 15. the end whereof
was this, that he might be Lord both of quick and dead, Romans 14.9. and
concludes, that whosoever is in Christ, is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. And how
are we in Christ, but by faith? Gal. 2.20. And what is the object of this our
faith? let the same Apostle answer us, If thou confess with the mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved: so that this faith in Christ's resurrection, is to us the beginning of
a new creature. And Christ's resurrection Sedulius calls nas^^ntis mundi
primordium. And Athanasius says, That as the Sabbath was the end of the first
creation; so the Lords Day is the beginning of the second creature. And this is
it that Bishop Andrews and Bishop Lake do work upon for the celebration of
the Lords Day as by Divine institution. But I am not a little sensible of some
appearance of incongruity rising hereupon. Almighty God did not think it fit,
that the first day of creation should be our Sabbath, but the seventh from the
creation, as whereon himself rested; but in the second creation, the first day
is made our Sabbath. To this I answer two things; the first is this: if man
should not rest unto God till the second creation is finished, he should not
rest at all in this world. And the six days being the days of Gods work;
the seventh was the first of man's work, which God would have to be an holy
work most convenient whereby to take livery and seasin of the world. For,
albeit God commanded Adam to dress the garden and keep it, when he placed him
in it; yet it is nothing probable it had need of dressing so soon as it was
made; and no mention of rest commanded at the first; only it is said, that
because God rested that day from all his works, therefore he blessed the
seventh day and sanctified it. This I deliver to save the expression of
Athanasius. 2. But in my judgment, there is an exact congruity between rest
and rest in each creation. For, as God rested the seventh day from the work of
creation; so Christ rested the first day of the week from his work of
Redemption, which was the meritorious cause of the new creation. For Christ's
dying, and continuing under the power of death, for a certain time, I may
justly reckon as one work of Redemption; in which time he suffered ignominy,
not only from the reproach of the world, but from the weakness of his
servants faith, Acts 24.
whose voice was, we thought it had been he, who should have redeemed Israel.

As for Zanchy, in the place cited by Gomarus; he confesses, hunc diem ex
traditione Apostolica esse, and optimo jure ab Ecclesia retentum. That the
Lords Day is (to be observed) by Apostolical tradition, and by the best right
retained by the Church -- this the Prefacer in his wisdom omitted; indeed he
says, we no where read that the Apostles commanded it: but left it free; but
take with you the rest, ita liberum, ut omnino ipse dies sanctificandus sit,
nisi charitas aliud postulat. In such a manner free, that omnino, undoubtedly
the day it self ought to be sanctified, unless charity require otherwise. I
conceive his meaning is, and the meaning of all that use this language, that
we are to keep it by no other obligation (not of special commandment) than
the reason of the day does minister unto us, it being the day that the Lord
has made, joyful to Gods Church by the resurrection of Christ from the dead;
and in this sense they say it does not bind men's consciences, to wit, as a
Precept does, whether we know the equity of it or no. And it were very strange,
that Christians in keeping any holy day in the week, should not make choice of
the Lords Day for that, without any express commandment. Aretius says no
more than that Christians changed the Sabbath unto the Lords Day; and can any
man doubt, but that the Apostles were meant hereby? For which is most likely,
that the practice and judgment of others was a leading cause to the Apostles,
or rather that the judgment and practice of the Apostles was a leading cause
unto all others? Simler has no more but this, that he calls it the custom of
the Church, so does Tilenus, yet he proposes it as likely to have had its
institution from Christ. Paraeus in the very place cited by Gomarus, ascribes
the change of the day to the Apostolical Church, and expressly says, that
the Apostle commanded the Corinthians to meet together the first day of the
week, and make their collections. I wonder the Prefacer omits Cuchlinus, was
it because that which others call consuetudinem Ecclesiae, he calls
consuetudinem Apostolicam? In the last place, Bucer is named by the Prefacer,
but Gomarus is well content to omit what is delivered by him. But to the
contrary, I will not forbear to set down what I find in his book De Regno
Christi, lib. 1. cap. 11. For having formerly described what are the true
works of holy rests, added upon the back of it; Eapropter, For this cause the
Lords Day was consecrated by the Apostles themselves to these kind of actions.
Which ordinance of theirs (institutum he calls it) the ancient Churches
observed most religiously. Then he shows the cause why they changed the day: 1.
The first reason given is, to testify that Christians are not obliged to the
Pedagogie of Moses law: 2. The second is, to celebrate the memory of Christ's
resurrection, which was performed on the first day of the week. So that not
one of the Authors mentioned by him makes any thing for him. And if the
passages of the six mentioned by him, and related by Gomarus did make any
thing for him; we have no less of the ancient Fathers to the contrary, as
namely, Athanasius, Cyril, Eusebius, Austin lately mentioned, to whom add
Sedulius operis Paschalis, lib. 5. cap. 21. The glory of the eternal King
illustrating (the first day of the week) with the trophy of his resurrection,
primatum cum religione concessum di^rum censuit retinere cunctorum; thought
good it should have the primacy of all days granted unto it with religion:
that is, with an holy celebration thereof. Add unto him Gregory, mentioned in
the first Section, affirming that Antichrist affecting to imitate Christ, shall
command the Lords Day to be kept holy. Add to these the universal consent of
Christendom in ancient times; for when the question was proposed unto them, as
usually it was thus; Dominicum servasti? Have thou kept the Sabbath? their
answer was this, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum: For Brentius alleged
by him to little purpose, let me represent what Gerard the Lutherane writes of
our Christian Sabbath in his common places, tom. 3. page 146. Est Sabbatum
Christianum, quo juxta Apostolorum constitutionem dies hebdomadae primus
publicis ecclesiae congressibus destinatus est. Our Christian Sabbath is that
whereby the first day of the week is destinated to the public assemblies of
the Church, by the constitution of the Apostles. See how plainly he referres
the celebration of this day to Apostolical constitution: and page 148. he
shows the analogy between the Jews Sabbath and our Christian Sabbath,
consisting in two or three particulars: 1. As on the seventh day God rested
from the six days work of creation, in remembrance of which benefit, the
Sabbath was instituted in the old Testament: so in the first day of the week,
after Christ-by his death and passion had accomplished the mystery of our
Redemption, he returned gloriously as a conqueror from the dead, in remembrance
of which benefit, the first day of the week is celebrated in the new
Testament. 2. As in the old Testament the Sabbath was instituted, that it might
be a memorial of their deliverance out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.15. So in the new
Testament, the Lords Day is a memorial of our spiritual deliverance out of
the kingdom and captivity of Satan, procured unto us by the resurrection of
Christ, a type whereof was that deliverance of the children of Israel out of
Egypt. 3. By Christ's death and resurrection, were abrogated Leviticall
ceremonies and legal shadows, amongst which the Sabbath is reckoned, Col.
2.17. Therefore the change of the Sabbath into the Lords Day, is a public
testimony that Christians are freed from legal shadows, and that difference
of days, which in ancient time was ordained. Add to him Melanchthon, alleged
by Walaeus, page 265. affirming, that the Apostles for this cause changed the
day, that in this particular they might give an example of the abrogation of
the ceremonial Laws of Mosaicall policy. As for our Popish Divines for which
he referres us to Doctor Prideaux, it is apparent that more of them are
alleged for the jus divinum, of the celebration of the Lords Day, then for the
contrary; and one of them, Silvester by name professes expressly that his
opinion, was the common opinion which was for the Divine institution of it. And
Azorius the Jesuit, as he professes it a thing most agreeable to reason that
after six work days one entire day should be consecrated to Divine worship;
so withal says that it is most agreeable to reason that the Lords Day should
be that Day.

Add unto these Sixtus Senensis, Biblioth. lib. 7. p. 603. Col. 1.
but that which they object (says he) concerning the Lords Day not as yet
instituted in the time of John, is most false, the consent of the whole Church
disclaiming it, which does believe the solemnity of the Lords Day was appointed
by the Appostles themselves in memory of the Lords Resurrection: concerning the
institution whereof by the Apostles Austin Ser. 25. de temp. testifyeth in
these words: therefore the Apostles themselves, and Apostolical men, appointed
that the Lords Day should for that reason be religiously solemnized, because
on it our Redeemer rose from the dead. In the last place come we to our
Divines. Now Bucer I have already showed to stand for us rather then for him.
2. And Calvin expressly acknowledges that the Apostles did change the day. 3.
Beza upon Re. 1. v. 10. has an excellent passage to the same purpose. For he
considers Christ's resurrection to be as it were a second creation of a World
spiritual, and thereupon doubts not but that the spirit of God did suggest
unto them the change of the seventh day into the Lords day, as to be
consecrated to Divine Service. 4. Iunius on Genesis 2. writes that the cause of
the change of the day was the resurrection of Christ, and the benefit of
instauration of the Church in Christ. The commemoration of which benefit
succeeded to the commemoration of the Creation, not by humane tradition, but by
the observation of Christ himself, and his institution. 5. Piscator on Exodus
20.10. It is to be observed that the circumstance of the seventh day, in
celebrating the Sabbath is abolished by Christ; as who for that day ordained
the first day of the week, which we call the Lords Day, and that in
remembrance of the Lords Resurrection performed on that day. And upon Luke 14.
v. 2. He makes this observation, By occasion of this story, it is fit to
consider what was the religion of the Sabbath in the new Testament, and what
place it has at this day among us Christians, and how it is to be observed.
And first we must hold that the Sabbath is abrogated, by Christ's coming as
touching the seventh or last day in the week, and that in the place thereof is
ordained the first day, which we call the Lords Day, because on that day the
Lord rose from the dead, and showed himself alive to his Disciples, and diverse
times speaking with them of the Kingdom of God: aod so by his own example
consecrating that day to Church assemblies, and for the performance of the
outward service of God. The reason of the abrogation is, because that
ceremonial rest observed in the Law, was a type of that rest, which the Lord
made in his grave, as is perceived by the words of Paul Col. 2.16.17. Now of
the apparitions of the Lord, S. John testifies Chap. 21. where he shows how
first he appeared to them gathered together on that very day whereon he rose.
And again eight days after. Now that in these days he spoke unto them of the
Kingdom of God Luke shows, Acts 1.3. Whence it was undoubtedly that the
Apostles observed that day by the Lords ordinance, to keep their
Ecclesiastical assemblies thereon -- as it appears they did Acts 20.7. and 1
Cor. 16.2. And hence it was without doubt, on the Lords day John was in the
spirit and received the Revelation. To the same purpose is that which Doctor
Walaeus alleges out of Piscators

Aphoris. 18. It may be doubted concerning the Lords Day, whether it be
appointed by God for his service in the New Testament. My opinion hereof is
this; although we read no express Commandment concerning it, yet that such an
institution may be gathered from the example of Christ and his Disciples. For
on that day whereon the Lord rose from the dead (therefore called the
Lord's Day) he showed himself alive to his Disciples, and spoke to them of the
Kingdom of God. And Paul on that day in an assembly of the faithful met
together to celebrate the Lords Supper, preached to them on that day, Acts
20.7. and that the Christians at Corinth were wont to meet on that day for
public prayer, appears 1 Cor. 16.2. Now it cannot be doubted but Paul
ordained that day amongst them, as also the manner of celebrating the Lords
Supper, and that according to the Commandment of Christ, Math. 28. the last,
Teach them (to wit, as many as receave the Gospel) to keep all those things
which I have commanded unto you. On the Lords Day also John was in the spirit,
and in the spirit saw and heard the Revelation concerning the state of the
Church that was to come, Apoc. 1.10. whence we may gather, that even then he
rested to holy meditations such as became the Lords Day. There is not a passage
in all this but of great weight, and very considerable. 6. As for Doctor Fulk
upon the Re. 1.10. I have represented him formerly at large; that for the
prescription of this day before any other of the seven, they had without doubt
either the express Commandment of Christ before his Ascension when he gave
them precepts concerning the Kingdom of God, and the ordering and government of
the Church Acts 1.2. or else the certain direction of his spirit, that it was
his will, and pleasure that it should so be, and that also according to the
Scriptures. And observe how he falls upon the same reason that Athanasius, and
the ancient Fathers insist upon; Seeing there is the same reason of sanctifying
that day, in which our Savior Christ accomplished our redemption, and the
restitution of the World by his resurrection from death; that was of
sanctifying the day, in which the Lord rested from the Creation of the World.
7. Doctor Andrews in like manner Bishop of Winchester in his Star Chamber
speech in the case of Traske; he not only professes, that the Sabbath had
reference to the old Creation, but in Christ we are a new Creature, a new
Creation, and so to have a new Sabbath; and that this new Sabbath is the Lords
Day declared unto us by the resurrection of Christ, for which he alleges
Austin Ep. 119. ad Ianuarium. But also for the confirmation of it says it is
deduced plainly by practice; adding that these two only the day (of the week
whereon Christ rose) and the Supper, are called the Lords, to show that the
word Dominicum is taken alike in both. Nay he goes farther, as namely to
allege not only practice but precept also for it; from the first of the
Epistle to the Corin. cap. 16.2. For albeit the Apostle there does expressly
constitute only an order for collections for the poor on the day of their
meeting, yet as Piscator observes, it cannot be denied but that undoubtedly as
touching the time of their meeting they were therein ordered also by S. Paul,
as they were about the manner of celebrating the Lords Supper. And accordingly,
Paraeus in the very passage alleged by Gomarus, does take that place of 1 Cor.
16.2. to notify, that the very time of their meeting there specified, was by
the ordinance of S. Paul.

Doctor Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells, in his Theses de Sabbato, These. 34. The
Apostles directed by Christ's not only example, but spirit also, observed the
same; witness in the Acts, S. Paul, S. John in the Revelation. 38. And from
the Apostles the Catholic Church uniformly received it, witness all
Ecclesiastical writers. 39. And the Church has received it not to be liberae
observationis, as if men might at their pleasure accept or refuse it, 40. but
to be perpetually observed to the Worlds end. For as God only has power to
apportion his time: so has he power to set out the day that he will take for
his portion. For he is Lord of the Sabbath. 8. Master Fox upon the Rev. 1. v.
10. professes, that the observation of the Lords Day does Niti authoritate
institutionis Apostolicae, depend upon the authority of Apostolical
institution. 9. Walaeus dissert. de Sab. p. 172. we conclude (says he) this
first day of the week, was by the Apostles put in the place of the Sabbath,
and commended to the Church, not only by a power ordinary, competent to all
pastors for the ordering of indifferent rites in their Churches; but by a
singular power also; as who had the oversight of the whole Churches; and who as
extraordinary Ministers of Christ, were by the holy Ghost, put in trust, that
they might be faithful, not only for the delivering of certain precepts
concerning faith, and manners, but also as touching upright ordering of the
Church: that so it might be made known to all Christians every where what day
in the week was to be kept, by virtue and Analogy of the fourth Commandment,
least dissension thereabouts and (consequently) confusion might arise in the
Church of God: and to this purpose he alleges Beza before mentioned; and
Gallesius, Calvin's Colleague on Exodus 31. This ordinance, to wit, that the Lords
Day should be substituted in the place of the Sabbath, we have re^aved (says
he) not from men, but from the Apostles, that is, from the Spirit of God,
whereby they were governed: and after he had proved this out of three places of
Scripture, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16 2. Re. 1.10. in the end he, adds, For
although we are not tied to the observation of days yet this necessary order
must be observed, least confusion should be bred in the Church. 10. Fayus
Calvin's successor alleged also by Walaeus disput. 47. in q. praecept. Justly
therefore may we say, that the Apostles by the leading of the Holy Ghost for
the seventh day of the Law, substituted the first day of the week, which was
the first in the Creation of the first World. 11. Hyperius in. 1. Cor. 16. 1.
The first day of the week in memory of the Lords Resurrection was called the
Lords Day, the observation of the Sabbath being translated thereunto through
the command of the Holy Ghost by the Apostles. 12. Add unto these Master
Perkins maintaining the same. That which he delivers of the Parliament in the
days of King Edward the sixth, in that preamble of theirs concerning holy
days, as left by the authority of Gods Word to the authority of Christ's
Church, by the discretion of the Rulers, and Ministers thereof, as they shall
judge most expedient to the true setting forth of Gods Glory, and edification
of the people; I say that this should be understood not of holy days only,
but of the Lords Day also, is a thing most incredible; neither does he offer
to cite any parcel thereof to justify this so bold an affirmation; only he
says, that by the body of the act it does appear; but what that is in the
body of that act whereby this does appear, he very judiciously conceales. How
improbable is it, that Bishop Andrews would have opposed this Doctrine in the
Starte Chamber, if a Parliament of Prelates, and that in the days of King
Edward the sixth, had maintained it. For he professes, that these two only,
the Lords Day, and the Lords Supper are called the Lords, to show that
Dominicum is alike to be taken in both -- and takes upon him to show that in
the very Scripture, there is found a precept for observation of the Lords Day;
And Bishop Lake in like manner professes that it is not Liberae observatio
nis, but necessarily to be observed. Doctor Fulks answer to the Rhemish
Testament was set forth in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and dedicated to her
Majesty, therein on Re. 1. v. 16. has he delivered, that to change the Lords
Day, and to keep it on Monday, Tuesday or any other day, the Church has none
authority. For it is not a matter of indifferency, but a necessary prescription
of Christ himself delivered to us by his Apostles. Was he ever questioned for
this? or was it ever known that the state of this Land excepted against it,
for crossing the Doctrine of the Church manifested in a preamble to one of the
Acts of Parliament, which I presume was never yet repealed; but leave we him to
live on his own juice, and to please himself in his holiness.

A THIRD DIGRESSION CONTAINING A CONFERENCE With D. Walaeus about the Divine
authority of the Lords Day.
I Come to consider somewhat in Walaeus, whose dissertation of the Sabbath,
from the first has liked me so well, and the spirit which it breathes
throughout; that I do not affect to differ from him; but rather heartily
desire there may be little or no difference between us, and I hope in the end
there will be found little or no difference of importance between us,
especially in this point of the institution of the Lord Day whether it be
divine or humane, and as for the original institution of the Sabbath, namely
as from the beginning of the World, and as touching the morality of one day in
seven; therein I concur with him really and affectionately. And as touching
the quality of the institution; I approve his learned pains in vindicating
those three places of the new Testament, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. and Re. 1.10.
from the interpretation that some give of them, to quash the evidence which
they import for the observation of the first day of the week, commonly called
the Lords Day, even in those primitive and Apostolical days of the Christian
Church. And I join with him, page 167. in admiring, that after so many
accurate prejudices of the reformed Churches, concurring in the same
translation and interpretation of those places which we embrace; yet some
should be found to take so unhappy pains, as to quash the evidence of them
which they seem to us plainly to import. A manifest argument in my judgment,
that the observation of that day, as in place of the Jews Sabbath, in the very
days of the Apostles, does even convince their consciences, that it can savor
of nothing less than Apostolical institution; which, because they do
impugn, therefore they desire to impugn the use thereof as nothing so ancient
as to be received of the Apostles themselves. For consider, I pray, how should
the converted Jews come to change their Sabbath, if not by order from the
Apostles themselves, whose doctrine it was that Christ came to set an end to
all ceremonies? And as for the substitution of a day in the place of it, that
all did jointly concur herein without any dependence of some upon the
judgment of others; what strange strength of convicting evidence must there
needs be in the resurrection of Christ, to draw them hereunto far beyond
Almighty Gods resting on the seventh day from his work of creation? What could
be devised to infer greater morality by the very light of nature than this,
which should be so forcible to move all to concur herein, and that with the
first. But if they received it, some from others, how improbable it is, that
the Apostles should receive it from the Churches, and not rather the Churches
from the Apostles? Then consider, we no where read of any difference
here-abouts among the Apostles, counting Paul amongst rhem, who received from
the Lord after his ascension into heaven what he delivered unto others. How
then came it to pass, that they all so thoroughly, and at the first, agreed
herein? If, as having received it from the Lord, then the case is clear, that
it is of most Divine institution: But if only as drawn hereunto by the
consideration of Christ's resurrection on that day, being guided by the Spirit
of God infallibly to order as other things, so the time of Divine service, to
prevent the danger of division and confusion upon just ground; even this is
enough to manifest the strength of evidence which the Lords resurrection
carries with it, as to convince them, so to appoint, and to convince others of
the reasonableness thereof, seeing all Churches did so universally and so
early yield thereunto, and since that time so constantly persevered therein.
The resurrection therefore of Christ, is nothing inferior to the Lords rest on
the seventh to draw us to the sanctifying thereof: And the Apostles ordering it
in this manner especially as his extraordinary Ministers, is answerable to the
Lords Commandment for the sanctifying of the seventh, especially that very
commandment by just analogy having force also in this: And albeit Walaeus
says no more, page 174. of those three places, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Ap c.
1.10 than that the whole Church reformed has constantly gathered therehence
Diei Dominicae usum, the use of the Lords Day: yet both page 183. he does
manifestly imply the Apostles to have instituted it, where he says, that quae
ab ipsis Apostolis instituta non sunt, such things as have not been ordained
by the Apostles, were never in that manner observed in all Christian Churches
throughout the world, as the observation of the Lords Day. And before, page
172. he concludes, that the first day of the week was by the Apostles
substituted in the place of the seventh, and commended to the Church, and that
potestate singulari, by singular power; and as they were extraordinary
Ministers of Christ, put in trust by his Spirit, to be faithful in giving
Precepts (mark this well) not only touching faith and manners, but also de
Ecclesiae (...), and recto ordino, for the well ordering of the Church, and
that in this particular, what day of the week is to be observed by force and
analogy of the fourth Commandment, to prevent dissension and confusion among
the Churches. And I am verily persuaded, that as many as stand for the Divine
institution of the Lords Day would rest fully satisfied with this. Austin. I am
sure, who is alleged by Walaeus in the first place, as maintaining it to be of
Christ's institution, writes thus of it, Sermon. de temp. 251. Dominicum ergo diem
Apostoli and Apostolici viri ideo religiosa solennitate habendum sanxerunt,
quia in eadem Redempter noster a mortuis resurrexit: this being premised, let
us come to the consideration of that which he delivers about the justification
hereof, from page 152. where he acknowledges that among the ancient Writers
and Doctors of the reformed Church, there have been some who have referred the
celebritie of this day to the fact and institution of Christ. At the first, by
Christ's fact in this place I understood Christ apparitions to the Apostles, as
they were assembled together on this day. But upon better consideration and
ponderation of the passages alleged by him out of Austine and Cyril, I think
rather that by Christ's fact he means Christ resurrection, or perhaps, btoh the
one and the other. For the sentence taken out of Austine has reference to the
one, and that out of Cyril, to the other. And Doctor Lake Bishop of Bath and
Wells in his these. 36. de Sabbato, referres unto both; this first day Christ
sanctified not only by his resurrection, but by sundry apparitions before his
ascension, by sending them the Holy Ghost. But the latter seem to depend on the
former. And therefore, that learned Bishop in his defense of that Thesis 36.
writes thus; I say not, that the Apostles imprinted any holiness upon the
first day of the week, it was Christ's resurrection that honored that day,
which I say the Apostles were to respect, not arbitrarily, but necessarily, you
may perceive the reason in my Thesis; you cannot observe from the beginning of
the world any other inducement to the institution of feasts but Gods work done
on the day. Now, neither Austin nor Cyril speak of any institution made by
Christ. Eusebius, I confess, does intimate such an institution, and Gregory
the great, and so does Athanasius seem to express as much, and Sedulius after
him; but I am apt to conceive that they meant no other thing hereby, than that
the consideration of Christ's resurrection by the suggestion of Christ's Spirit,
should move the Apostles to ordain and establish the celebration of this day
unto the Christian world. Junius, in my judgment, seems to have no other
meaning, when he professes the cause of the change of the day to be the
resurrection of Christ, and the benefit of instauration of the Church in
Christ; it is true, he says afterward that the Lords Day succeeded the
seventh, ( Christi observatione atque instituto, by Christ observation and
ordinance; but I understand thereby no other ordinance than is bespoken by
Christ's resurrection on the day and observation of the day. For anon he tells
us, that the Lords Day was observed, Christi facto, exemplo, instituque
Apostolorum, and veteris Ecclesiae observatione constantissima; by Christ's
fact, example, and by the ordinance of the Apostles; unless instituto there,
be to be referred to that which goes before, and ought to be distinguished from
Apostolorum which comes after by a comma, though it be not. But let this be the
opinion of Iunius and Piscator, which, perhaps, we may meet with some more
evidence for than hitherto: Neither do I see any necessity of expressing
concerning every thing they taught, that they received it of the Lord; Neither
do I think fit to conclude, that whatsoever they ordered, they ordered by
Gods Commandment. But consider, there is a great difference between things
ordered by them; some were concerning particulars, others for the Church
universal. Some ordered by them for a certain time, other things to continue
to the worlds end. The ordinance of the Lords Day concerned the whole Church;
and to this day no Church throughout the world has thought fit to alter it, a
notable evidence that the Church generally has conceived it, as an ordinance
of the Apostles intended to continue to the worlds end.

The ingenuity of Master Perkins is to be commended, confessing ingenuously,
that he proposes his arguments not as necessary, but as probable, only to
infer the institution of the first day of the week to be observed by
Christians in place of the seventh, I would those that oppose him would carry
themselves with the like ingenuity: nothing inferior is the ingenuity of
Doctor Walaeus, page 156. professing that this opinion touching Christ's
institution of the Lords Day, seeing it has so great Divines as favorers
thereof, is neither to be accused of novelty, nor easily to be despised as
false, provided, that they themselves do not propose it as necessary, but as
probable, nor inveigh against such as are of another opinion or condemn them.
Now, let us see upon what grounds he preferres the second opinion, making the
institution of the Lords Day to depend upon Apostolical authority before it.
Therefore, first he urges, that the Apostles have given no express
commandment as being charged thereto by Christ, nor Christ himself. In
brief, thus neither Christ has any where in Scripture commanded it, nor do
the Apostles any where signify that he did: I answer, the Apostles do not use
to signify that what they deliver in particular was given them in charge by
Christ; sometimes they do, but this extends not to the hundredth part of that
they do deliver. And it may be by S. John's calling it the Lords Day, compared
with that which our Savior delivers in the Gospel, pray that your flight be
not in the Winter, nor upon the Sabbath day; and with the denomination of the
Jews Sabbath called in the Old Testament the Lords holy day, we shall find
sufficient intimation of Christ's institution. Especially considering that the
question is but of the circumstance of a particular day, not of the proportion
of time; and withal the analogy of the day of Christ's Resurrection to the day
of the Lords rest from Creation. And whereas the Doctor further says, that it
seems not likely that Christ should not command it, if he meant to bind us to
the observation of any day, as a part of his worship and service: Now I wonder
what the worthy Doctor means to thrust in the circumstance, as a part of Gods
Worship. If the Apostles might command it as he thinks they did, yet not as a
part of Gods worship; why might not Christ command the observation of that day,
yet not as a part of his worship? I am not persuaded, that when God at the
first sanctified the seventh day, he made the observation of that day a part
of his worship. And it is strange that the circumstance of time should be an
homogeneall part of Gods worship.

First, it is true, the rest on that day commanded afterward might be, and
was as a ceremony preaching something unto them. All that is to be considered
in time pertaining to Gods Worship is the proportion of it; as whether one day
in a week be most fit, or one day in a month be sufficient; and this is of
momentous consideration, whether we consider the advancing GODS Glory thereby,
or our own good, in a greater or lesser proportion; But the particularity of
the day in seven whether first or last or middlemost, this consideration in my
judgment is of no moment. Only for the avoiding of dissension, and confusion
we have need of authoritative specification, and that God did not define at
the first without congruous reason, to still all motion tending to alteration;
and if we have as fair evidence under the Gospel for our Sabbath, as the
Jews had for theirs; we are by Gods goodness as much freed from dissension
and confusion as they, and nothing the more engaged in superstition, as making
the observation of the day a part of Divine worship; which never was but in the
way of prefiguration of somewhat in Christ, which kind of pedagogy is now quite
out of date, neither is there any place for it in the observation of the Lords
day.

Doctor Walaeus his second argument is, because those places of Scripture, Romans
14. Gal. 4. and Coloss. 2. in which the Apostle takes away all difference of
days can hardly be reconciled with this opinion, or if Christ himself not by
example only, but by an ordinance commanded unto his Disciples the observation
of this day, it cannot be imagined as it seems, that any liberty should now
remain in the observation of this day; for that which Christ has determined
is not left under Christian liberty any more then the observation of the
seventh day from the Creation was left free to the Jews; when God not only by
his example, but also by precept separated it from all other days to his
service. To this I answer, 1. I find no liberty at all left to the Church to
change the day, by the Doctors own grounds, for he holds it to be invariable
p. 168.

Secondly, He professes the change of the day cannot be attempted without
the greatest scandal of the Church, p. 169. Now what sober Christian would
affect liberty to be scandalous? 3. others who acknowledge the observation of
the day by Apostolical institution, and withal to be changeable and left to
the liberty of the Church, do withal maintain that the Apostles did not
command it as extraordinary Ministers of Christ: but Doctor Waleus p. 172.
acknowledges the institution of it made by the Apostles as Ministers
extraordinary. 4. the Doctor professes that the Apostles were entrusted by the
Holy Ghost to give precepts concerning the good government of the Church, and
that in this particular case, to make known to all Christians every where what
day in the week ought to be kept holy, and that by virtue and analogy of the
fourth Commandment, and withal to prevent dissension and confusion amongst
the Churches thereabouts. 5. and lastly he joins the precepts concerning this
with precepts concerning faith, and manners; and this he does without
specifying any the least difference; nay, the word precepts is once proposed as
subservient indifferently as to faith, and manners, so also to the well
ordering of the Church, and that in this particular, of notifying unto all what
day of the week is it to be sanctified to Gods Service. As for the places
Romans 14. Gal. 2. and Coloss. 2. I answer, that if we made the observation of
the day as it denotes a circumstance of time, any part of Gods Service, or for
some mysterious signification contained therein, then indeed we should carry
our selves in contradiction to the places mentioned: but seeing we observe
times only out of respect to order and policy, which is necessary for the
edification of the Church; and God having always required one day in seven to
be set apart for this, even when there was not so great need, nor had God
manifested his love to mankind in such sort as in these latter days; and of
our selves we are to seek, of the particularity of the day under a fit
proportion of time from the beginning of the World rquired, and hereupon were
we left to our own judgments, a way would be opened to miserable dissension
and confusion; what cause have we to bless the Lord for marking out a day to
us with such notable characters to make it our Sabbath, and to honor it by his
appearance amongst his Apostles when they were assembled together both that
day, and that day senight after; as also by his Apostles to commend it, and
establish it in such sort, that for 1600. years the observation thereof has
continued unto this day? which order of the Apostles does carry pregnant
presumption that it proceeded originally from the institution of Christ. The
necessity of the Church Christian requiring the specification of the day for
the preventing of dissension, and confusion as much as ever the necessity of
the Jewish Church required the like; and over and above by reason of the fourth
Commandment we have now better evidence to conclude therehence the
observation of the Lords Day, by the congruity that Christ's Resurrection has
to the Lords rest from Creation; better means I say to conclude ours, then they
without a Commandment to infer the observation of their seventh: forstill
the day of the Lords rest is made the day of our rest.

Thirdly, that which is alleged in the third place, that both ancient and
late writers do maintain that we celebrate the Lords Day, not as any part of
Divine worship, nor as absolutely necessary. For the first of these we
willingly grant; for as much as we conceave the observation of the 7th. by the
Jews was no otherwise a part of Divine worship, then as it was a ceremony and
shadow, the body whereof was Christ prefigured thereby: and it is well known
that no Christians observe it in any such Notion. But the observation thereof
we hold to be absolutely necessary, and so does Doctor Walaeus in holding it
to be invariable, and that it cannot be altered without the greatest
scandal. And Doctor Lake Bishop of Bath, and Wells professes it to be not,
liberae observationis, but necessariae. And if it were free, then not to use
this freedom at all does manifestly give way to superstition in taking that
for a thing necessary which is not, though not as touching the substance of
Gods worship and service, yet as touching a circumstance thereof, such as is
the circumstance of time. As for express precept, if he means a precept
expressly written, no man (I trow) ever stood for that, but if he means a
precept given by Christ's express charge to his Apostles, no man that I have
met with, says more hereupon, then Doctor Walaeus seems to affirm himself;
in saying that they were entrusted by the Holy Ghost as extraordinary
Ministers, that they should be faithful ad tradenda praecepta, to give
praecepts of faith and manners, and of the good government of the Church, and
right order, and particularly in this that might be known to all what day in
the week was to be set apart for Gods service; both by virtue and analogy of
the fourth Commandment, and to praevent dissension, and confusion among the
Churches; Neither do we acknowledge any other celebrity of the day then this;
and therefore do no more affront Hierome then Doctor Walaeus himself. As for
festival days in Socrates, and Nicephorus, I see no cause why as touching
that they speak thereof, the Lords Day should be comprehended under them: and
as for apostolical precept, concerning this Doctor VValaeus is as express as
any. And it is not credible to me, that the Apostles should make such an
invariable ordinance to the Church, and not be verily persuaded that it was
the Will of God the Father, and of God the Son it should be so: whether
manifested by Christ's particular charge unto them; or by comparing Christ's
Resurrection with the Lords rest from the works of Creation. Otherwise in my
judgment they had never called that day the Lords Day.

Fourthly, he excepts against the argument drawn from Christ's Resurrection;
denying that therehence it follows that that day was to be consecrated to
God. But herein he opposes all the ancients; neither do I think he can
allege any one that does not hereon build the observation of the Lords Day;
which nuiversall concurrence does manifestly argue to be more then probable:
Austin as Waleus alleges him, professes not as his peculiar opinion, but as
he took it generally received without contradiction: that Dies Dominicus
Christianis resurrectione Domini declaratus est; and that resuscitatio Domini
consecravit nobis diem Dominicum. And Athanasius plainly takes notice of the
analogy it has to the fourth Commandment; (and analogy Doctor Walaeus grants,
and I wonder he takes no notice of it here) by comparing the second Creation
with the first Creation; and so Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester professes
that the new Creation requires a new Sabbath, especially seeing the old must
be abrogated as ceremonial. But the analogy I confess may be differently
shaped; Athanasius shapes it thus, that the Jews Sabbath was the end of the
first Creation; and that the Lords Day is a beginning of the second Creature;
to wit, as the day of Christ's resurrection; in reference whereunto the Apostle
says, Old things are passed, behold, all things are become new. And I conceive
reason to justify Athanasius, in making the beginning of the new creature to
be our Sabbath, answerable to the end of the first creation, to wit, because
the second creation has no end in this world: Again, Adam and Eve were made
but the immediate day before the seventh, and the seventh he was to spend in
rejoicing in Gods works; so Christ's death was the worlds redemption; and
immediately after, to wit, with Christ's rising, it was as fit we should
Sabbatize with God for joy of our Redemption. Otherwise the analogy (which
Doctor Walaeus grants, but does not explicate) may be conceived thus. The
seventh day of the week was the Lords rest from the work of creation, the
first day of the week was the Lords rest from the work of redemption, in the
morning thereof rising from his grave; and in respect of Christ's resurrection
on this day, what color has any other day of the week comparable hereunto,
to make it fit to stand in competition with this. Yes, says D. Walaeus, the
Thursday may, and that in consideration of Christ's ascension on that day; yet
Doctor Walaeus well knows, that that day of the week was never thereupon
called the Lords Day, either by the Apostles, or by the Church, as the day of
our Saviors resurrection was. Again, consider Christ's resurrection and
ascension are to be computed but as one complete motion; save that he was to
stay some time by the way here on earth for the confirming of his Disciples
faith, and giving them commission for preaching the Gospel, and order to wait
at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high to carry the glad
tidings of salvation all the world over. So Christ's dying and continuing under
the power of death, is but one work of Redemption. He confesses, that Christ's
resurrection afforded an argument to the Church Apostolical, to prefer this
day before all others (very well, even before the day of his ascension) for
religious assemblies, as all the ancients testify. But it follows not
therefore, that Christ by this his fact did institute the same day to the same
end. Now, this is a very strange phrase, by his fact on the day to institute
the day to such an end. It Is well known facts do not institute otherwise than
as therefrom may be concluded that such a day is to be kept; and in this sense
he does as good as confess, that Christ by his fact, did institute; for the
Apostolical Church did hereupon prefer this day, as he confesses all the
ancients do testify. And did they not infer this there-hence also, as most
agreeable to the Will of God? Doctor Walaeus proceeds thus: So God in the
creation of the world rested the seventh day; but unless God had proposed this
rest of his as an example, and confirmed it by precept, never had the Church of
the old Testament been bound as from heaven to the weekly observation thereof.
To this I answer, that the like may be said of the observation of one in seven;
yet seeing God did command this proportion to the Jews, without any new
commandment, we can infer that surely God requires as good a proportion of
us Christians. In like manner, seeing God commanded unto them the day of his
rest from creation, we without any the like commandment, may better infer
that Christ's resting day from the work of Redemption ought to be our rest,
than they could, that the seventh day ought to be their rest. 2. Man could not
possibly have known how many days God was creating the world, so to know what
day he rested, that they might conform unto him in their rest; unless God had
revealed it unto them; but supposing God had revealed it, and withal had
called it his holy day, and it were known unto them that one day in the week
must be set apart as Gods holy Day, in this case I appeal to every Christian
conscience whether this were not sufficient to conclude that surely the day of
the Lords rest, being his holy Day, ought to be the day of our rest, and our
holy day. Now, thus the case stands with us Christians; we know what day our
Savior rose, having finished the work of man's Redemption; we know the Jews
Sabbath is abrogated; we know the proportion of one day in seven remains still
to be consecrated as an holy day to the Lord; we know the Lord prescribed to
the Jews for their Sabbath his resting day from the creation; which is called
his holy day: And in like manner we know, that under the Gospel, the first day
of the week being the day of our Saviors resurrection, is called by Saint
John the Lords Day; as for Easter and Pentecost, the case is nothing like;
those festivalls being not of single days, but of whole weeks, once in a
year, yet this proportion we find between them and the weekly Sabbath. There
are in a year seven times seven weeks, and a fraction less than half a
seven; so that the memory of the creation was seven times in a year celebrated
more than the memory either of their deliverance out of Egypt, or, of their
reaping the fruits of the land of Canaan, the one far surmounting the other,
yet their Easter began the day of the year whereon they came out of Egypt. And
Doctor Lake, Bishop of Bath and Wells, These. 41. de Sabbat. professes, that
God sets out the day by the work he does on the day, the work I say done,
does difference a day from a day: and These. 43. Now then, when God does any
remarkable work, thou will he be honored with a commemoration day for that
work. If the work concern the whole, by the whole Church; and by a part, if
it concern a part: and These. 44. And his Will is understood often by his
Precept; but when we have not that, the practice does guide the Church, 45.
This is a Ca holique rule, observed in the institution of all sacred feasts,
both Divine and Humane, 46. The work of the day is the ground of hallowing the
day, whether it be weekly, monthly, or yearly, as particulars evince in
Scripture and history. The very light of nature does give testimony unto this,
as appears by the common practice of the heathens; as to give some instance
hereof, what is the original of the observation of the Friday, as a festival
day amongst Mahumetanes? surely this; on that day Mahumet fled from Mecha to
Jethrib, and so that day is accounted the first day of his kingdom, and from
thenceforth it was ordained to be the first day of their year and of their
week. So then the Will of God, in the judgment of this reverend Divine, is
manifested not only by Precept, but by his Work. And yet I know none speaks
more of Precept in this particular, than Doctor Walaeus, as I have often
alleged him, page 172.

Fifthly, I grant Iunius went too far, in affirming that Christ did observe
the same every week between his resurrection and ascension; but neither does
the contrary appear by Scripture; undoubtedly the two first he did, and it is
not manifest that the three following he did not; and though Cyril inferres
here-hence the reasonableness of our Christian assemblies on this day, yet we
do not; but as Doctor Walaeus concludes that which he concludes not from any
one place, but from many places together, that do we; Neither is it any thing
to the purpose that Doctor Walaeus observes of Christ's appearing on other
days, as Ioh. 21.24. once, which was at a fish meeting. And as little
material is it, that at such other times of his meetings he spoke of the
kingdom of God.

Sixthly, On like sort Christ sending down the Spirit on his Apostles on the
day of Pentecost, has not so much force considered alone, but only in a
conjunct consideration with Christ's resurrection on that day: And like as after
his death he arose on that day manifesting himself mightily thereby to be the
Son of God, so after his ascension into heaven, he came down by his Spirit
on that day, the seventh, first day of the week after his resurrection,
manifesting thereby as Peter signifies that he had obtained the dispensation
of the Spirit. We do not say the Spirit was on the day of Pentecost sent
down, because it was the Lords day; But being sent down on that day, as the
Law is confessed to have been delivered on that day, this tends to the marking
out of that day more and more, for manifestation of the power of Christ. That
day they receiving power from on high by the descending of the holy Ghost upon
them, whereby they were enabled to preach the Gospel. And that day of the week
which is set apart for Divine service as our Christian Sabbath; as that day
whereon the Holy Ghost does ordinarily come down upon his servants in the
ministry of his Word, and celebration of the Sacraments, and putting up of
our joint prayers unto him for the sanctifying and edifying Christ body which
is the Church: and even in this respect that day has a far better congruitie
to the day that is to be set apart for Divine service, than any other day in
the week besides. The day of his ascension he departed from them as touching
his presence corporal, but on the day of Pentecost he came down upon them as
touching his presence spiritual; and so he does still in our Sabbath exercises
on the Lords day, though not in so extraordinary a manner, yet no less
effectually to that edification and sanctification of our souls.

Seventhly, And whereas some urged that it Christ himself had not instituted
this day after his resurrection, the most Primitive Church should have been
left destitute of a certain day of Gods worship, to wit, from the time of
Christ's resurrection to the first consecrating of the Lords Day, which they
take to be absurd, and I confess, it seems unlikely that the Apostles took
upon them to order ought until they received the Spirit on the day of
Pentecost, that being the day they were to receive power from on high, to
execute the commission given them, Mat. 28.19. to teach all nations; till which
time they gathered no Churches. For the strengthening the former reason, it is
added; That the Jews Sabbath was now abolished by Christ's death and
resurrection. This I do not deny, but the Apostles might very well be ignorant
hereof as yet, as not having received the Spirit as yet; yea, and after the
receiving it, we find they challenged Peter for going to the Gentiles to preach
the Gospel, Acts 11. to this argument some answer, as Walaeus says, that the
days between Christ's ascension and the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon
them, were spent in continual meetings of the Apostles and other Disciples.
But from the day of Pentecost, the Lords day thenceforth observed. This answer
reaches not unto the days interceding between Christ's resurrection and his
ascension. And when I consider Bishop Lake his discourse, grounded, as he
professes, upon universal observation (and which I find no reason to resist)
namely, that the work of the day commends the day: If ever any day deserved to
be festival to any, surely the day of our Saviors resurrection deserved to be
festival unto them, to rejoice in the Lord thereon, according to that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 118.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice therein;
the ancient Fathers accommodating the place thereunto. The two verses
immediately preceding, carrying in the forehead of them a manifest relation unto
Christ as the proprietary of their meaning. 22. The stone which the builders
refused, is become the head of the corner. 23. This is the Lords doing, and it
is mavelous in our eyes. Now when was this manifested, namely, that the stone
which the builders refused became the head of the corner, but by Christ's
Resurrection from the dead, being thereby mightily declared to be the Son of
God. Romans 14. and was there ever work more mavelous in the eyes of Gods
Servants, then the Resurrection of Christ, especially considering the
disconfolate condition of his Disciples? Luke 24, 21. We trusted it had been
he, that should have delivered Israel. The women departed from the Sepulcher
though with fear, by reason of the consternation received from Angelical
presence, their countenance being like lightning, yet with great joy by reason
of the news they heard from them of Christ's Resurrection; upon the noise
whereof (for they were commanded to carry word of it to his Disciples,) the
Apostles as it seems were gathered together; and in the evening after he had
showed himself to his Disciplcs going to Emaus, Christ presented himself in
the midst of them. Eight days after they were met together, and Thomas with
them who being absent the time before, gave out sperches of peremptory
incredulity concerning his Resurrection; therefore then and not till then also
the doors being shut, Christ came before them, and calls unto Thomas to see his
hand. and to put his singer into his side. These apparitions of our Savior
twice on the first day of the week might well add somewhat to the
confirmation of them in the festivity of this day; and howsoever between his
ascension, and the day of Pentecost they had their meetings, yet how improbable
is it they should put no difference; between such a festival and other days
of the week. A second answer Walaeus gives, namely that others say, that from
the day of Pentecost it was not necessary that the Lords Day should be
observed: but that at the first the Apostles together with the Jews observed
their Sabbath not as a ceremony of the Old Testament, but as a free
circumstance of divine worship, as for a while they retained Circumcision and
difference of meats; which they gave over, after the Jews were found
obstinately to refuse the Gospel. So that in these men's judgments the Lords
Day was no festival to the Apostles, till by occasion of the Jews
obstinatenesse, a proper occasion for the institution of a new festival. And
give me leave to differ from them in yoking Circumcision and difference of
meats with the Jews Sabbath, neither of them prefiguring Christ as to come,
like as the Jews Sabbath did, prefiguring his rest that day in the grave; as
the ancients have conceived it, without any contradiction that I know. Had they
permitted sacrifices for a time, their comparison had been more congruous. I
see no reason to withhold me from concurring with Austin, and in him with all
the ancients, for ought I know to the contrary, that Dies Dominicus
Resurrectione Domini declaratus est Christianis, and ex illo coepit habere
festivitatem suam, yea with the very words of Scripture Psalm. 118.22. The stone
which the builders refused is become the head of the corner 23. This is the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. 24. This is the day which the
Lord has made we will rejoice and be glad in it. Neither is it credible to me
that the Apostles were ignorant of it or of its application, the day of Christ's
Resurrection, from the very day thereof. Heresbachius upon these words, Haec
dies quam fecit dominus. They are (says he) the words of the people exulting
in the Kingdom of David, most of all of the glorious Resurrection of Christ,
which of all others was most glorious to mankind: as whereon Christ redeemed
us in a triumphant manner, from the Tyarnny of Satan, and from everlasting
death, and restored unto us everlasting righteousness. Arnobius interprets it
of the Lords Day.

Eighthly, the last argument, and which he acknowledges of greatest moment is
that, which is taken out of Apoc. 1.10. Where the first day of the week is
called the Lords Day, whence they conclude, that it is of the Lords
institution. And indeed Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester in his Star
Camber speech professes, that this denomination is given only to the first
day of the week, as called in Scripture the Lords day, and to the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, as called the Lords Supper, and that to show that
the word Dominicum (the Lords) is to be taken alike in both. In the same sense
we call the Prayer which our Savious taught his Disciples the Lords Prayer.
But let us hear Walaeus his answer, that we may consider it. This consequence
(says he) is not necessary, for it may be called the Lords, not only that
which is of his institution, but even that which is made to the remembrance, or
in the honor of him, or for his worship, as the ancients speak, as the altar
of the Lord, and feast of the Lord are often so called. And that in this sense
it was taken of the ancients it appears by this, that the ancient Fathers both
Greek and Latin, called Temples by the name of Dominica, and (...). That
which we urge is the language of the Holy Ghost, now throughout the holy
Scripture, it is not the language of the Holy Ghost, to call either Altars the
Lords Altars, or Feasts the Lords Feasts, but such as are of the Lords
institution. Neither do the fathers (in my observation) call the first day of
the week the Lords day otherwise then in reference to Christ's Resurrection, as
the cause of the festival nature thereof. Temples indeed they call (...) as
consecrated to the Lord; but the denomination is not to distinguish it from
other Temples; as the Lords Day has its denomination to distinguish it from
other days. But the day of Christ's Resurrection being called the Lords Day not
as such a day in the year, but as such a day in the week, this to my
understanding does manifestly infer the succession of it into the place of
the Lords day of the week amongst the Jews. Both ancient and modern Divines
do hold it lawful to consecrate other days to the service of of God, such as
we usually call holy days. But never any man (I think) was found that durst
call any of them Diem dominicum the Lords Day. Add to this, wherefore does our
Savior say, that the son of man is Lord of the Sabbath, but plainly to
conclude herence, that he can dispense with it, he can abrogate it, and bring
another into the place of it? and none has power for this but he who is Lord
of the Sabbath.

Lastly, when he says, pray that your flight be not in the winter nor on the
Sabbath day, what is the reason hereof, but religio Sabbati? as all confess
the religious observation of the Sabbath; and did they understand any other
religion of the Sabbath but as from Divine institution? Now the time concerning
which our Savior delivers this, now about the destruction of the Temple by
Titus, Sect. 6.
after that no other Sabbath but of the Lords Day, was generally established in
the Churches.

Last of all, for the third, and last conclusion, Pref.
that still the Church has power to change the day our Doctor in the 7.
Section, brings in Bullinger, Bucer, Brentius, Vrsinus, and Chemnitius,
aliisque nostris with diverse others not named particularly, as they are which
think no otherwise thereof then Calvin did, and shows by what distinction
Suarez, though otherwise no friend unto the men, does defend their Doctrine.

Now as the doctrine was, such also is the practice of those men and Churches,
devoid of any the least superstitious rigor, esteeming it to be a day left
arbitrary, and therefore open to all honest exercises and lawful recreations;
by which the mind may be refreshed, and the spirits quickened. Even in Geneva
it self according as it is related in the enlargement of Boterus by Robert
Johnson, all honest exercises, shooting in pieces, long Bows, crossebowes,
etc. are used on the Sabbath Day, and that both in the morning, before and
after Sermon; neither do the Ministers find fault therewithal, so that they
hinder not from hearing of the word at the time appointed.

Dancing indeed they do not suffer; But this is not in relation to the Sunday,
but the sport it self, which is held unlawful, and generally forbidden in the
French Churches: which strictness as some note, considering how the French do
delight in dancing, has been a great hinderance to the growth of the reformed
religion in that Kingdom.

The Doctor indeed says, that Calvin, Bullenger, Bucerus, Exam.
Brentius, Chemnitius, Vrsine and others of the reformed Churches affirm, that
still the Church has power to change the Lords Day to some other; but he
neither cites their words, nor quotes any place out of their writings. And as
for Calvin, whom this Prefacer proposes as chief, and the rest as thinking no
otherwise thereof, then he did; I make no doubt but the passage in Calvin is
instit. 2. cap. 8. sect. 34. where thus he writes, Neque sic tamen septenarium
numerum moror, ut ejus servituti Ecclesiam astringerem, I do not so regard the
number of seven; as to tie the Church to the servitude thereof; which
considered in it self, might intimate that in his opinion, it is indifferent
whether we keep holy one day in seven, or one day in fourteen; but the
words immediately following do manifest his meaning to be far otherwise, as
namely, that we are not so tied to a seventh, but that we may solemnize other
days also, by our holy assemblies. For thus it follows, Neque enim damnavero
qui alios conventibus suis solennes dies habeant. I condemn not them that keep
other days holy: will any man suppose that some there were, well known to
Calvin, who kept other days solemn, and not the Lords Day; and that these men
Calvin would not condemn? And Gomarus, who is most opposite to us in this
argument, professes, that seeing not only a time, but a sufficient proportion
of time is to be set apart for Divine service, therefore we must now under the
Gospel, allow rather a better proportion of time for Divine service than a
worse. And in this also Rivetus rests, in his answer to the first argument of
Walaeus, contending for one day in seven, as necessarily to be allowed to the
worship of God. De reg. Chr. lib. 1. ap. 11.
For Bullinger, I know not where to seek that which the Doctor aims at. As
for Bucer, I have showed before out of him, that the Lords Day was by the
Apostles themselves consecrated to Divine actions; which ordinance the ancient
Churches observed most religiously, and that one of the chief causes hereof
was, that they might celebrate the memory of Christ's resurrection, which fell
out on the first day of the week; of power to abrogate this day left unto the
Church he says nothing, but to the contrary rather, that all they who desire
the restoring of Christ's Kingdom, ought to labor, that the religion of the
Lords Day may be soundly called back and be of force. Yet (says he) it is
agreeable to our piety to sanctify other festivalls also, to the commemoration
of the Lords chief works, whereby he perfected our redemption as the day of
his incarnation, nativity, the Epiphany, the passion, the resurrection,
ascension and Pentecost. And the place which Doctor Rivet explic. decal. page
189. col. 2. allegeth out of Bucer in Mat. 10. to prove that he maintained the
day to be alterable, is nothing to the purpose, and as little do they make for
it which he allegeth out of Musculus, To find out what Chemnitius says
hereupon, I turn to his Examen of the connsell of Trent, concerning
festivalls; There page 154. col. 2. he says, that Christ, to show that he kept
the Jews Sabbath freely, and not of necessity; against the opinion of
necessity, touching the abrogation of the Mosaicall Sabbath, he taught both by
word and deed. By word, in saying, that the Son of man is Lord of the
Sabbath; and by his deeds, as in healing on the Sabbath day, and defending his
Disciples in plucking the ears of corn. Now, hereby I take it to be manifest,
and acknowledged by Chemnitius that none has power to abrogate the Sabbath,
but he that is Lord of the Sabbath. And seeing even Christians were to have
their Sabbath, as appears by those words of our Savior, pray that your
flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day, which is delivered of the
time about the destruction of the Temple by Titus; at what time Paul had
suffered martyrdom diverse years before, by whose writings it does appear
that the Lords Day was kept in place of the Jews Sabbath, both by the practice
of the Apostles, and the Churches of Galatia and Achaia, as Chemnitius
acknowledges from the force of those places, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. and Apoc.
1.10. in the next column it follows, that the Lords Day was the Christian
Sabbath, and so to this day continues, and consequently, that none has power
to alter it, but he that is Lord of the Sabbath, which is Christ himself, it
being accordingly called the Lords Day. Therefore if any pretend that Christ
has delegated this power of his unto the Church, it stands upon them to make
it good. But Chemnitius proceeds, page 155. col. 1. and shows how the Apostles
at the first tolerated their weak faith, who without superstition observed
days Mosaicall, Romans 14. and that such as were stronger in faith, after the
abrogation of the old Testament, judged all days to be equal in themselves,
and none more holy then another. We willingly grant as much, and add the
reason hereof; to wit, because the holiness of the day preferred before his
fellows consisted in some mysterious signification which had reference unto
Christ as to come; all which kind of shadows, the body being come, are now
vanished away. He proceeds, saying. The Apostles also manifested by their
example that in the new Testament it was free to come together, either every
day, or what day soever they thought good, to handle the Word and Sacraments,
and to the public or common exercises of piety. So the Sabbath day, and other
festival days they taught. All this we willingly grant, but here-hence it
follows not, that one day of the week was not of more necessary observation
for the exercises of piety than another. Farther (says he) that they might
manifest that the exercises of Ecclesiastical assemblies were not tied to
certain days: they daily persevered in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in
breaking bread, Act. 2. and 5. and 1 Cor. 5. Now we willingly acknowledge that
we Christians are not so bound to one day in the week, as namely, to the Lords
Day, as that we may not have our holy assemblies more often than once, but
only so, that we may not keep them less often, nor omit the celebration of
the Lords Day: like as the Jews might not omit the celebration of their weekly
Sabbath, though sometimes many days together besides were kept holy by them.
So we Christians also having our Sabbath as our Savior signified we should
have when he said, Pray that your flight be not in the Winter, nor on the
Sabbath day; which Sabbath of ours, we keep on the Lords Day; though we may
keep other days holy, yet we may not omit this; and if any shall take upon them
to alter this Sabbath, we may be bold to demand of them quo warranto, by what
warrant from the Lord of Sabbath? But Chemnitius proceeds thus: Now, whereas
afterward the false Apostles did so urge those free observations of the
Mosaicall Sabbath, and other feasts, as by law, and with opinion of necessity,
as to condemn their consciences who observed them not. Paul forbad the
observation of them. All which we willingly acknowledge, but that hereupon they
began first to ordain another day in the week for their Ecclesiastical
assemblies and exercises of piety, which yet Chemnitius proves not, I leave it
to the indifferent to judge; by comparing his opinion with that of Austins, who
professes, as Chemnitius well knew, that the Lords Day was declared unto
Christians by the Lords resurrection, and from thence began to have its
festivity alleged by Chemnitius himself, p. 156. especially considering the
reason moving the^ hereunto, which Chemnitius confesses to have been on that
day the Lord role from the dead. And seeing all festivals, as Bishop Lake
observes, have been observed in regard of some great work done on such a day
for the good of man; whether ever any day brought forth a more wonderful or
more comfortable work to mankind than the first day of the week, which was
the day of our Saviors resurrection from the dead, let the Christian world
judge. This day Chemnitius says, seems to be called by Saint John the Lords
Day, which appellation all antiquity did afterward retain and use: yet
notwithstanding (says he) we do not read that the Apostles did impose upon
men's consciences in the new Testament the observation of that day by any Law or
Precept, but the observation was free, for order sake. Let us duly weigh and
consider this, together with the reasons following: Calvine distinguishes the
observation of a day for order sake, and the observation of a day for some
mysterious signification sake: had Chemnitius thus distinguished, we would have
subscribed thereunto, and confessed, that now adays we observe no day for any
mysterious signification sake, but only for order sake. And thus under the
Gospel we are freed from observation of days for mysteries sake, not free
from observation of one certain day in the week for order sake. At for his
phrase of imposing the observation of the Lords day upon men's consciences; this
phrase is most improper and unseasonable, in this case; it is only proper and
seasonable in case the thing imposed be of a burdensome nature, like unto that
Saint Peter speaks of, Acts 15.10. saying, Now therefore, why tempt ye God to
lay a yoke on the Disciples necks which neither our Fathers nor we were able
to bear? Such indeed was the yoke of circumcision; which provoked Zippora
(according to common opinion) driven to circumcise her son to save her
husbands life, to throw the foreskin at her husbands feet calling him a bloody
husband for urging her thereunto. But what burden is it (save unto the flesh)
to rejoice in the Lord, to sabbatize with him, to walk with him in holy
meditation? Was it no burden to the godly Jews to consecrate one day in
seven to the exercises of Piety under the Law; and shall it be a burden to
us in the time of the Gospel? Or can it be conceaved to be a greater burden
unto us to keep our Christian Sabbath on the Lords Day, then on any other day
of the week? was there ever any day of the week marked out unto us with a more
honorable or more wonderful work to draw us to rejoice in the Lord thereon,
then the first day of the week whereon our Savior rose, by his Resurrection
to bring life and immortality to light? yet we confess we read of no Law nor
Precept for this in the new Testament, but, we read that ever under the
Gospel we must have a Sabbath to observe, Math. 24.20. And we know, and
Chemnitius knew full well, that it belongs to the Lord of the Sabbath to change
it, and consequently to ordain it, and that it was changed, and the Lords Day
observed generally in the Apostles days, none that I know makes question of;
and how could thi^ be, but by the Apostles ordinance; and is it likely they
would take upon them this authority without a calling? And why should that day
of the week (and not that day of the year) be called the Lords Day, if not
for the same use under the Gospel that the Lords Day, was of under the Law,
especially that day under the Law (which was the Jews Sabbath) being now
abrogated? and lastly we find it manifestly spoken of the day of Christ's
Resurrection, Psalm. 118.24. This is the day that the Lord has made, let us
rejoice and be glad in it: yet lastly whereas Chemnitius will have it free, and
he has already manifested that he speaks of it in this sense, as not to be
so tied to this day, but that we may observe other days; we willingly grant
that in this sense it is free. Now let us consider his reason following. For
says he, if we are freed from the Elements, which by God himself in the old
Testament were ordained, and commanded, how should we be tied by the decrees of
men? But alas this reason of his has no proportion: the Elements he speaks
of were but shadows the body whereof is Christ, and now Christ is revealed,
they were wont to be called not only Mortua but mortifera. Yet the
observation of one day in seven still continues to be the Commandment of God
delivered not to Moses, as ceremonies were, but by word of mouth proclaimed on
mount Sina; and natural reason suggests unto us that we must allow unto Gods
service as good a proportion of time under the Gospel, as he required of the
Jews under the Law. Now if one day in seven must be set apart in common
reason, what day is to be preferred for this before the Lords Day, the day of
Christ's rest from the work of redemption in suffering the sorrows of death; as
the day of the Lords rest from the Creation was appointed to the Jews for
their Sabbath; And this Resurrection of Christ bringing with it a new Creation;
Shall we prefer the Saturday the Jews festival before it, shall we
prefer the Friday the day of the Turks festival before it? shall we affect
power and liberty to make any other day in the week the Lords holy day, rather
then that the Word of God commends unto us for the Lords Day in the time of the
Gospel?

This I suppose may suffice for answering the rest also, whenever their
suffrages shall be brought to light, for I presume none of them has said more
then Chemnitius has done. Azorius the Jesuit professes of two things in this
argument, that they are most agreeable to reason. First, that after six work
days one entire day should be consecrated to God, 2. that the Lords Day
should be it. Doctor Fulke in answer to the Remish Testament professes that
to change the Lords Day and keep it on Monday, Tuesday, or any other day, the
Church has no authority. For it is not a matter of indifferency, but a
necessary prescription of Christ himself delivered to us by his Apostles. This
was printed in the days of Queen Elizabeth and dedicated unto her Majesty;
what Bishop as governor in this Church of England has ever been known to
take exception against this? Doctor Andrews (Bishop of Winchester) in his
star Chamber speech in the Case of Traske professes that the Sabbath (to wit
of the Jews) had reference to the old Creation, but in Christ we are now
Creatures, (As the Apostle S. Paul speaks) a new Creation, and so to have a
new Sabbath. And this he says is deduced plainly. 1. by practice, 2. by
precept, that these two only, the first day of the week, and the Sacrament of
the Supper are called the Lords, to show that Dominicum (the Lords) is alike to
be taken in both: So that give power to the Church to alter the one, and you
may as well give power to the Church to alter the other. He shows also, it was
an usual question put to Christians, Dominicum servasti? Have thou kept the
Lords Day? And their answer was this, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum.
I am a Christian, and I cannot intermit it. Lastly, he allegeth the Synod of
Laodicea, Can. 29. acknowledged in that of Chalcedon, 133. that Christian men
may not Judaize, not make the Saturday their day of rest, but that they are to
work on that day, giving their honor of celebration to the Lords Day. Doctor
Lake, Bishop of Bath and Wells in his Thesis of the Sabbath -- 39. The Church
has received it (the Lords Day) not to be liberae observationis (of free
observation) as if men might at pleasure, accept or refuse it, 40. But to be
perpetually observed to the worlds end: For, as God only has power to
apportion his time: so has he power to set out the day that he will take for
his portion. For he is Lord of the Sabbath, 46. The work of the day is the
ground of hallowing the day, whether it be weekly, monthly or yearly, as
particulars evince in Scripture and History. 47. No man can translate the
works, therefore no man can translate the day. This is an undoubted rule in
Theology. Add unto these Iunius and Piscator, who maintain the subrogation
of the Lords Day into the place of the Jewish Sabbath, to have been made by
the ordinance of Christ; and Beza acknowledges it to be traditionis
Apostolicae and vere divinae. Doctor Brownde in his Treatise of the Sabbath,
lib. 1. page 47. having recited the opinion of Iunius, referring the
institution of the Lords Day to Christ's ordinance, as who rose from the dead on
that day; adds hereunto after this manner. Like unto the which, because
nothing can ever fall out in the world comparable unto it in glory and power;
therefore this day must continue in his first honor of sanctification unto the
end of all things, and no day be set up like to it, or it changed into any
other day, lest the wonderful glory of that thing be darkened, and the
infinite power of it weakened, I mean, the glorious and mighty work of our
redemption which by the sanctification of this Sabbath is commended unto us,
and we by keeping that holy still, do commend it to our posterity. And this is
it that is alleged as a reason of the observation of this day in the Apostles
constitutions: Constable. Apost. l. 7. c. 37.
It is called the Lords Day, because it declares unto us Christ crucified and
raised up again, and it is worthily commended to be kept as the Lords Day,
that we might give thanks unto thee, O Lord Christ, for all these benefits:
for, say they, there is that grace bestowed upon us by thee; Qua sua
magnitudine omnia beneficia obscurat, which by the greatness, and, as it were,
by the brightness of it does obscure and darken all other. So that though the
day was once changed upon these considerations, nay, they being such as they
be, it could not but be changed: yet for so much as the like cause can never be
offered unto men to move them to enter into this consideration, therefore the
day must not only not be changed any more, but it must not so much as enter in
men's thoughts to go about to change it. And therefore I do so much the more
marvel at him, who says, That the keeping holy of the Lords Day is not
commanded by the authority of the Gospel, but rather received into use by the
public consent of the Church: And a little after; The observation of the
Lords Day is profitable, and not to be rejected; but yet it is not to be
accounted for a commandment of the Gospel, but rather for a civil ordination.
And that the Church might have appointed but one day in ten, or fourteen for
the public rest and Gods service. Lastly, Master Perkins maintains the same
(not to mention Doctor Willet,) and that by diverse reasons, in his cases of
conscience, which, because they are modestly answered by Doctor Rivet, in his
commentary upon the Decalogue, I think good in this place to take them into
consideration.

A FOVRTH DIGRESSION MAKING GOOD Mr. PERKINS his Arguments for the Divine
institution of the Lords Day, against the answer made unto them by Doctor
RIVETVS.
Perkins.
THeir first Argument says he, is taken from the appellation of the Lords Day;
I suppose, says Master Perkins, it is called the Lords Day, as the last supper
of Christ is called the Lords Supper for two causes. First, as God rested the
seventh day after the creation, so Christ having finished the work of the new
creation, rested on this day from the work of Redemption. Secondly, as Christ
did substitute the last supper in room of the passover, so he substituted
the first day of the week in room of the Jews Sabbath to be a day set apart
to his own worship. To this Doctor Rivet answers after this manner. Rivet.
Answ.
First, he denies that there is the same reason of the Lords supper and the
Lords Day, and that for two reasons; first because we have a manifest
institution thereof, and Christ's Precept for the observing of it. Not so of the
Lords Day. Secondly, if there were a Precept for keeping the Lords Day, yet
were it Ecclesiastical and so mutable. For men may choose days for the
worship of God, as touching the particularity of this day or that. But the
institution of the Sacraments is of Divine authority by the consent of all. To
this I reply that Doctor Rivetus corrupts Master Perkins his answer in the
proposing of it; Repl.
for he says not the same is the reason of the Lords Supper, and of the day
which we call the Lords Day; but supposes, and that most modestly that either
of them being called the Lords, they are called so in the same Notion. That
like as the Lords Supper is so called because he instituted it; so the first
day of the week is called the Lords Day, because he instituted the
observation of it. And this Doctor Thysius colleague to Doctor Rivetus
maintains as well as Master Perkins, and Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester
in his speech against Traske; saying that both these, to wit the first day of
the week, and Christ last Supper are called the Lords, to show that Dominicum
(the Lords) is alike to be taken in both. For what reason can be given why
the day of Christ's Resurrection, not according to the day of the year wherein
he arose, but according to the day of the week wherein he arose, should be
called the Lords Day, but to signify. First, that it was to succeed in the
place of the Lords Dayunder the law, which was the Jewish Sabbath. 2. And that
it was the good pleasure of God and not of man, only that it should be
consecrate to his service. For consider, we have many other days consecrated
by the Church unto Divine service, which yet were never called the Lords Days;
And the Lords Day and the Lords feasts in the Old Testament, and in the
language of the Holy Ghost are no other then such that are of the Lords
institution. Secondly, Doctor Rivetus omits the maine force of Master Perkins
his argument, or at least slightly passes it over, which is this. As God
rested the seventh day after the Creation, so Christ having ended the work of
the new Creation rested on this day from his work of redemption. Athanasius of
old considers a first and a second Creation; and so accordingly a first and a
second Sabbath: our Savior himself speaks of a Christian Sabbath, Math.
24.20. and w^^t should that be but the Lords Day under the Gospel? And Beza
and Iunius and Bishop Andrews work upon the same. And I wonder that men
should think the Sabbath should be altered, and another brought into the
place of it by any other authority then of him who is Lord of the Sabbath. And
as Bishop Lake observes in all feasts both Divine and humane that we read of
in Scripture, the work of the day was the ground of hallowing the day. And
never was known to the World a more wonderful work in the way of grace, and
mercy, then Christ's Resurrection from the dead, manifesting thereby the
redemption of the World as then wrought by him How does Christ take upon him to
alter the Sacraments but as Lord of the Sacraments? and apparently he shows
that upon the same ground he takes upon him power to dispense or change the
Sabbath, as he is Lord of the Sabbath. But what is his ground to deny the
parity of reason here? merely his own prejudicate conceit that the obligation
of the Lords Day, is not so great as the observation of the Sabbath. The
contrary whereunto (says he) omnes refugimus we all avoid. But who and how
many are those all? what one of the ancients can he produce to have thought as
he thinks? He may as well say according to the current of his private
opinion, that we under the Gospel are not as much bound to the observation of
one day in seven as the Jews were under the Law. It is true, that rigorous
rest enjoined to the Jews we utterly disclaim as well as he; again the
circumstance of the day we make no part of Gods worship nor to have any
mysterious signification, as the Sabbath had to the Jews. We acknowledge no
other use of this day then for order and policy sake; in which case we judge
it far better the Lord should prescribe it, then we unto our selves, least
if there were twenty days in the week, there would be twenty differences
amongst Christians about the setting apart of one day in the week for Divine
Service.

Perkins.
2. Master Perkins his second argument is this, The Church of Corinth every
first day of the week made a collection for the poor, 1 Cor. 16.2. and this
collection for the poor in the primitive Church followed the preaching of the
Word, Prayer and the Sacraments as a fruit thereof, Acts 2.42. and Paul
commands the Corinths to due this as he had ordained in the Churches of
Galatia: whereby he makes it to be an Apostolical, and therefore a Divine
Ordinance. Yea that very Text does in some part manifest thus much, that it is
an ordinance and institution of Christ that the first day of the week should
be the Lords Day. For Paul commandes nothing but what he received from Christ.

To this Doctor Rivetus alleges the answer of Doctor Prideaux, Rivets Ans.
Reply.
demanding how that we contend for his inferred herehence? we answer, the
general practice of the Church in the Apostles days argues it manifestly,
that this order was established by the joint consent of the Apostles; otherwise
it is incredible it should have been so universally received, and persevered
in as it has been to this day. Secondly, whereas the Jews Sabbath was by
divine authority, the abrogation thereof and substituting another day in the
place thereof could be done by no less authority then Divine; which also we
conceave to be fairly represented by the denomination of our Christian
Sabbath, S. John calling it the Lords Day. Secondly, he shows what Gomarus
answers hereunto; but this answer himself takes off in this very place in
part, and much more in his reply to Gomarus. But these places being granted to
denote the first day of the week in the Apostles days set apart to Divine
Service; he says it follows not herehence that it is called the Lords Day,
as destinated to Gods Service, much less that so it was by Divine ordination.
Yet Walaeus thinks it his safest course to say it is called the Lords Day as
destinated to Gods Service, as before we have heard, so to avoid (as he
thinks) the implication of Divine Ordination. But to him I have answered
before. And Doctor Rivetus in my opinion does not well consider that not the day
of the year, but the day of the week, whereon Christ rose, is called the
Lords Day by S. John. Like as the Sabbath in the Old Testament is called the
Lords Day: which which if he had, and withal considered how strange it were
for us to set any day in the week apart for the exercises of Piety rather then
the Lords Day; I am persuaded he would not have contented himself with this
answer. For certainly many other holy days have been and are set apart for
Divine Service, yet never were called any one of them the Lords day.

He talks of a bare custom of the Church, for it; a thing incredible that
both Jews and Gentiles throughout all Nations should so universally concur
without the guidance of some authorative constitution or some generally
convincing evidence by the very light of common Christian evidence or both. And
as for liberty left to the Church hereabout, it seems so unreasonable unto my
poor judgment, that if it were, it should become us by earnest and hearty
prayer to seek unto God to take that liberty from us and be pleased himself
to guide us by some manifest ordinance, to prevent dissension and confusion;
yet well fare Doctor Rivetus; he will not have this liberty extend any further
then provided that some reason and necessity should urge the changing of the
day; for in the next column he professes that a sufficient cause of the
change and abrogation of the day cannot be given. -- The observation of other
days and particularly of the Sabbath as well as the Lords Day by some in the
Primitive Church, is no evidence at all, that it was indifferent unto them,
whether they would observe the Lords Day or no.

Perk.
The third argument Rivetus omits the fourth is this. That: which was
prefigured, in that it was prefigured was prescribed: But the Lords Day was
prefigured in the eighth day, wherein the children of the Jews were circumcised
-- therefore it was prescribed to be kept the eighth day. This the ancient
Fathers, by name Cyprian and Austin have reasoned and taught.

Rivet. Answ.
To this Doctor Rivetus answers by denying the assumption and saying, that no
probable reason can be brought to prove that day was prefigured by the eighth
day wherein children were circumcised.

Reply.
And indeed that day being the eighth day after birth does not so conveniently
denote the first day of the week. But Master Perkins his argument has another
part far more principal drawn from Psalm. 118.22.23.24. Which Doctor Rivetus
relates after this menner.

Perk.
The day of the Resurrection was prefigured by that day, wherein the Stone
which the builders refused was made the head of the Corner. But that day was
the Sabbath Day, therefore by the Sabbath was prefigured the Lords Day.

To this he answers, by denying that the Sabbath day was the day wherein the
builders refused that stone; For the Scribes, Rivet. Answ.
Pharisees and rulers of the people did always reject Christ, and not the
Sabbath day only. And if Austin and Cyprian before him apprehended any such
figure, that was by way of accommodation only, not that herein they
acknowledged any proper figure.

For answer whereunto I say first; Reply.
that Master Perkins delivers not this simply of the Sabbath day, but of the
Sabbath of the new Testament, as much as to say, the first day of the week
whereon Christ rose; For this was the day wherein the stone which the builders
refused, was made the head of the corner; and of this day the Prophet speaks,
when he says, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be glad and
rejoice in it. That like as the Jews had cause to make that day festival and
to rejoice therein, wherein God advanced David to the kingdom, who was as a
stone, refused before by the builders: in like sort, Christians had as great
cause, nay, far greater, to keep that day festival, and to rejoice therein,
when God raised Christ from the dead, and gave all power unto him, and making
him the head of his Church, as being now manifested to be the son of God, who
was before as a stone despised and refused of the builders, but as on this day
was made the head of the corner. And not Cyprian and Austin only, but Ambrose
upon the Psalms so understands it, and Arnobius also upon the Psalms, as
Hereshbachius observes. And Doctor Rivetus is too blame in construing Perkins
in such manner, as if he should confine the builders rejection of Christ to the
Sabbath day, whereof there is no color in Master Perkins, but that which he
insists upon is this, that the day wherein Christ (formerly rejected by the
builders, was made hhead the of corner, was the day of Christ's resurrection,
and of this day it is said by the Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord has
made, let us rejoice and be glad in it; Which is most remarkable for the
justification of our celebration of the Lords Day, as by Divine authority.
Especially considering what Bishop Lake, that learned and pious, and most
rational Divine has observed, that always the work of the day is the ground
of hallowing the day, and for proof hereof, he appeals to the due
consideration of all festivalls in the observation thereof, whether Divine or
humane. Master Perkins his words are these (but I know not how Doctor Rivetus
might be deceived by a mis-translation of them) The day of Christ's resurrection
was prefigured by that day wherein the stone which the builders refused was
made the head of the corner, Psalm. 118.24. and in that it was prefigured, it
was appointed by God. For then it appeared to be true which Peter said of
Christ, that God had made him both Lord and Christ, Act. 12.36. And whereas he
says the Fathers do so construe the place by way of accommodation, that has
place only when the Text it self does not so accommodate it. But the Text it
self in this place does manifestly evince, that this is spoken in reference to
the day of Christ's resurrection.

Perkins.
The last reason of Master Perkins is this: God is Lord of times and seasons,
and therefore in all equity, the altering and disposing thereof is in his
hands, and belongs to him alone, Act. 1.10. Times and seasons the Father has
kept in his own hands. Again, Christ is called the Lord of the Sabbath. And
Antiochus Epiphanes is condemned by the Holy Ghost, because he took upon him
to alter times: Dan. 7.25.
Besides that, Daniel says, it is God alone that changes times and seasons,
Dan. 2.4. Now, if it be proper unto God as to create, so to determine and
dispose of times, then he has not left the same to the power of any creature;
And therefore, as the knowledge thereof, so the appointment and alteration of
the same either in general or particular, belongs not to the Church, but is
reserved to him. The Church then neither may nor can alter the Sabbath Day.

Rivet. Answ.
To this D. Rivetus answers, that the words of Daniel touching the change of
times and opportunities, are delivered in reference to the periods and changing
of Kingdoms and Monarchies, as appears by the argument of the Prophecy.

Reply.
And no more does D. Rivetus deliver in excepting against his annotations: for
as he acknowledges M. Perkins scriptorem modestissimum, a most modest writer;
so he carries himself most modestly toward him. But I hope without any
breach of modesty, I may profess, that I find no accuratenesse in each of his
allegations, save one, namely, that wherein Christ professes himself Lord of
the Sabbath; and it is enough for the present, that God reserves to himself
power of ordering times for his service; yet it cannot be denied, but God has
left power to his Church, upon good occasion, to set some time apart for
exercise of piety. But whereas it is apparent, that God himself took upon him
the ordering of the time for the Sabbath, and accordingly Christ calls himself
The Lord of the Sabbath; as he constituted it, so none but he can abrogate it,
and ordain another in the place of it. Now, whereas D. Rivetus says, that he
has left this power unto his Church; it stands him upon to prove it. We find
our Savior supposes us Christians to have a Sabbath after his resurrection,
Matthew. 24.20. as well as the Jews had before: we find that in the Apostles
days, the first day of the week was set apart for this; which could not be,
but by the joint consent of the Apostles, we find that the day of the week
(not the day of the year) wherein Christ rose, by Saint John himself called
the Lords Day, an evident argument, that in his time it was so generally
received. We find that never any work of God did give better cause to
profess, that The day thereof was the day that the Lord had made, let us be
glad and rejoice therein; then the day wherein Christ rose from the dead, and
thereby was declared to be the Son of God, even that stone which the builders
refused to be made the head of the corner. And how strange is it, that the
Church for 1500. years space should no where offer to alter it; if in no other
respect, yet in this, to manifest that the Church is endued with such liberty
and power, and to prevent the superstitious observation of the day as a thing
necessary, if it be not necessary. Lastly, if this liberty be still in the
Church; in case they should exercise this liberty, what inconvenience would
follow upon the exercising of a lawful liberty? But infinite inconvenience
would follow hereupon: for seeing this liberty is equally communicated to each
particular Church, it will follow, that it is lawful for our English Church to
institute the Monday, the French Church the Tuesday, the Hollanders the
Wednesday, the Germans Thursday, the Danes Friday, the Swedes the Saturday, and
the Polonians the Sunday; what an intolerable scandal were this amongst
Christians? Thus our liberty opens way to revive the Jews Sabbath, or to
concur with the Turks, who make Friday their holy day, nay, what scandal
also to all the Heathens throughout the world? For, suppose that as the Jews
keep the Saturday, and the Turks their Friday; so other heathenish nations
according to their several religions should divide the other days of the
week to be hallowed between them; each religion keeping to their own day most
exactly: When they should find no agreement amongst Christians, what an
intolerable scandal were this unto them, to harden them against the profession
of the Gospel, when they see so little agreement among the professors of it?
And what should move us to affect liberty in this which opens a way to such
dissension and confusion; and not rather rejoice in this, that to prevent such
miserable inconveniences, God himself has marked out unto us the first day of
the week to be the Lords Day, in place of the Jewish Sabbath, which was the
Lords holy day unto them, by the most wonderful and comfortable work that ever
was wrought, even the resurrection of our Lord and Savior from the dead,
thereby manifesting him to be the Son of God, and fulfilling that prophecy
of old concerning the stone which the builders refused, and making him the head
of the corner on that day; all power being given unto him both in heaven and in
earth, Matthew. 28. thus drawing us in the Prophets language to profess and say
first, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: and secondly,
to conclude there-hence in the words immediately following; This is the day
which the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice in it; this undoubtedly is
our Christian festival; this day of the week, and not this day of the year,
(which is remarkable) being called by Saint John, The Lords Day, the day
wherein Christ appeared unto him, and gave unto him the book of Revelation
concerning the secrets of his providence to be fulfilled upon the world for the
time to come, even till his second coming to destroy the world with fire, and
to bless us with new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness; the metropolis of which new world, shall be new Jerusalem. And
albeit Doctor Rivetus according to his pious ingenuity which crowns his
learning and cathedral sufficiencies, professes, that what hitherto has
been spoken by him of the choice and possible change of that day; he has not
to any such end ventilated, as to favor their profanesse who on holy days and
chiefly on that day, which by so universal a consent even from the beginning
of Christianity has been consecrated to such use, neglecting Gods Service,
not only refuse to omit one day in prosecuting works tending to the use of
life temporal: but also by unnecessary actions, as by pleasant sports, stage
plays, by intemperance also and riot profane the day, not without reason
dedicated to the Lord. Yet what just occasion hereby may be in all places and
like enough is taken in most places by this doctrine of his who sees not? For
albeit public authority in some places has by laws countenanced the
solemnization of the Lords Day; for which we of this land have cause to bless
God so as I think no Nation more; in consideration of many Laws one after
another and by degrees made to restrain abuses on that day, as tending to the
manifest profanation thereof; and by none more then by that act of Parliament
in the first of King Charles, wherein all men are forbidden to come out of
their Parishes upon that day about any sports and pastime, evidently
manifesting hereby (as formerly has been proved) that all sports and pastimes
are prophanations of our Christian Sabbath observed on that day, and that in
the judgment of the whole Parliament consisting of the Kings Majesty the head
thereof, with his Lords spiritual (all the Bishops of the Kingdom) and
temporal, together with the House of Commons; yet if once it shall be received
according to D. Rivets doctrine of the Sabbath, that it is in the power of each
Church to set apart what proportion of time they think fit for Divine Service,
and what day they think fit, who perceives not that they may if they will,
order it in such a manner, as that twice a day they shall come to Church, and
the rest of the day spend as they think good, either in the works of their
calling, or upon their pleasures: And whence all this zeal (so opposite to
holiness in the issue) proceeds, I know not, save only to uphold the credit
of Calvin; who professes that he does not so regard the number of seven, as
that he would tie any to the servitude thereof; and yet I have endeavored to
show that neither this nor other passages taken out of his institutions, makes
any thing for them. And withal it is a wonder to behold how this of Calvin is
taken up, and obtruded upon us, by them who otherwise hate both the name and
memory of Calvin. And as for Doctor Rivets honest and pious instructions as
concerning the duties and out demeanors to be performed on this day, we may
easily perceive how little worth they are and how easily they vanish into
smoke, after that he has in the doctrinall part of the Sabbath laid so
unhappy a foundation, and that by so poor reasons and mean carriage of
himself, that as I verily think, throughout all his writings there is not to
be found the like.

For consider whether he had any hope to set so much as a face and outward
show of probability upon his discourse, unless first he had manifestly
corrupted the adversaries tenet, as appears by his proposing it, p. 119. Col.
1. By these (says he) and other arguments drawn from Christian liberty, it is
sufficiently deduced, that they who maintain the Sabbath day not so much to be
taken away as to be translated unto the Lords Day, and so changed, and do
indeed think it more holy (then another day) and that not only in regard of
ordination, and use, but in respect of signification and effect do cross some
without Christian liberty, which is most certain of the Papists.

And indeed Walaeus makes it appear that Calvin writes herein against the
superstitious Papists. And did Rivetus oppose them only it were well; but it
is apparent that he disputes not so much against Papists in this argument as
against Protestants, even such as himself. But can he show of any of them,
that they account the Lords Day more holy then any other in respect of any
mysterious signification (for so Calvin speaks in this place) or effect?
undoubtedly he cannot. We observe a day in the week only for order and policy
sake Ecclesiastical: mysterious significations in days were peculiar only to
the Jews. Only we think it fit, that to prevent dissension and confusion, God
should mark out that day unto us to be observed, and not leave it unto us, and
so he has; the Scripture calling the first day of the week the Lords Day;
and that upon such a ground as a greater was never known to ground a festivity
thereupon consecrated to the exercises of piety, even the day wherein the stone
that was refused by the builders was made the head of the corner; This was the
Lords doing, and it is and ever shall be mavelous in our eyes, and gives us
cause to say with the Psalmist thereupon: This is the day which the Lord has
made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. So that all the passages in the
Apostles writings against difference of days are no more against us then
against Doctor Rivetus himself. Now it is time to return to our Prefacer. I
do not find that Suarez undertakes to defend the Doctrine of Calvin and
Chemnitius (such as here is pretended to be their Doctrine) but rather
opposes it. If such were their doctrine as this Prefacer would feign obtrude
upon us, from the authority of the D. discourse which he translateth. For
Suarez professes, Celebritatem Dominicae diei haberi ex communi usu and sensu
Ecclesiae and in ipsa scriptura Novi Testamenti commendari: that the celebrity
of the day is had by the universal use and sense of the Church, and is
commended unto us in the very Scripture of the New Testament; I have
endeavored to justify it out of the Old Testament also; and in express
terms, that it is to be unchangeable Practice and moraliter, practically and
morally; as Doctor Prideaux acknowledges, and withal expounds after his
understanding of it; and Doctor Rivetus also affirming this kind of
unchangeablenesse to arise from hence that no sufficient cause can be given of
the change and abrogation of it. This Prefacer and such as are of his spirit
may do well to deal plainly, and to profess that it is in the power of the
Church to make the Lords Day to cease to be the Lords Day.

From their Doctrine pretended by him he proceeds to their practice,
professing it to be devoyd of any the least superstitious rigor; esteeming it
to be a day left arbitrary, and therefore open to all lawful and honest
recreations by which the mind may be refreshed, and the spirit quickened; as
in Geneva all honest exercises, shooting in pieces, long Bows, cross Bows
are used in the Sabbath day, and that both in the morning before and after the
Sermon; And truly I do not find my self prone to censure them for any
superstition in this. But this author takes liberty to censure them for
superstitious, who think these courses unlawful on the Sabbath Day. I make
bold to call the Lords Day our Sabbath; because our Savior plainly gives us to
understand that we Christians should have one day in the week for our
Sabbath, Ma. 24.20. as well as the Jews had; and secondly because the book of
Homilies professes that Sunday is our Sabbath. Nobis non licet esse tam
disertis. We may not be so elegant as to censure them for profaning the Lords
Day by these and such like courses. Yet the act of Parliament, 1. Caroli forbids
any man to come out of his Parish on the Lords Day, about any sports and
pastimes; which restraint tending to this end, namely to preserve the Sabbath
from profanation, does manifestly give us to understand that to come out of a
man's parish on that day about any sports or pastimes is to profane the Sabbath:
and seeing as before I have showed, that to come out of a man's parish on that
day about such a work as does not profane the Sabbath, is not to profane the
Sabbath, as to hear a sermon, or to fetch a surgeon or Physician to a sick
person in ease of necessity; but only to come out of a man's own Parish about
such a work as does profane the Sabbath, such a coming out of a man's own
Parish on that day, and such alone does profane the Sabbath; hence it follows
evidently that all manner of sports and pastimes on that day, are so many
profanations of the Sabbath in the judgment of all the Prelates of this
Kingdom, and of the whole Parliament.

Now let every sober Reader judge whether my self as an English man have not
better ground from an act of Parliament to censure them of Geneva for
prophaners of the Sabbath in the case here pretended then this Praefacer from
the practice of Geneva by the relation of Robert Johnson, to consure us that
do mislike them herein (if this be their practice) for superstitious
observers of the Sabbath; especially considering that he cannot fasten this
censure upon such as my self, but withal he must pass the same, upon all
Prelates of the Kingdom, together with the Lords temporal, and the whole
house of Commons. And as for the exercises here mentioned. I find them to fall
wondrously short, of that which the author avoucheth, as namely, that they
esteem the Sabbath to lie open to all honest exercises and lawful
recreations; for I make no question but in this Praefacer his opinion there are
far more exercises, and lawful recreations then that of shooting which alone
is here mentioned; and whereas such things are permitted in the very morning of
the Sabbath, and as well before as after Sermon, I find no thing answerable
hereunto in the practice of our Church. Neither do I find that the exercises
here mentioned are so much accommodated to the refreshing of the mind and
quickening of the spirit; as to make their bodies active and expedite in some
functions which may be for the service of the common Wealth. And lately upon
enquiry hereabout I have received information, that at Geneva, after evening
prayer, only the youth does practice shooting in Guns to make them more ready,
and expert for the defense of the City, which is never out of danger.

They have also at four a Clock on the Morning both Service and a Sermon for
their servants, and 2. more in every Church; the one in the Fore-noone, the
other in the Afternoon, beside Catechizing the youth on the Sabbath Day: And
Bishop Lake wished that such a course were general, as is in his Majesty's
Court, to have a Sermon in the Morning for the servants on the Sabbath day. And
I see no cause to dissent from Gerardus in specifying 4. particulars whereby
the Sabbath is not violated. Parva, Necessarium, Respublica, cum pietate.
Undoubtedly hunting is as commendable as, (and more generous exercise) then any
of these, and the Kings Majesty though much delighted herein, yet never uses
to hunt on the Sabbath Day Morning or Evening. And I have cause to come but
slowly to the believing hereof, because it is, Calvin's Doctrine concerning the
Sabbath, that albeit under the Gospel we are not bound to so rigorous a rest
as the Jews were, yet that still we are obliged to abstain from all other
works, as they are Avocamenta a sacris studiis and meditationibus, Avocations
from holy studies and Meditations; and their Ministers, I should think do not
well if they fail to mind them hereof, unless both they and the people are
fallen from Calvin's Doctrine in this point, in which case I see no just cause
why any should choke us therewith, but give us as much liberty to dissent from
him in the Doctrine of the Sabbath as they of Geneva take unto themselves.
Again Beza is well known to have professed upon, Revel. 1.10. that the
observation of the Lords Day is, traditionis Apostolicae and vere Divinae, and
consequently that the day is not left arbitrary; neither has this author
proved that the Presbytery and states of Geneva, both Ecclesiastical, and
political have committed any revolt or apostasy thereto from Beza in this
point. It is well he acknowledges some recreation not suffered there, as
namely dancing; but this he says they hold unlawful, which simply delivered
as by this author it is, is incredible unto me, neither has this authors word
any sufficient authority to deliver me from this incredulity: yet some manner
of dancing may perhaps be generally forbidden in the French Protestant
Churches. This strictness (the Prefacer says) is noted by some to have been
a great hinderer to the growth of the reformed Religion; which belike is
advantaged so much the more with us in as much as it is not hindered; but he
quotes no author for that. As for the author he quotes, I have not hitherto
found that he has arrived to any great authority or credit in the World for
the truth of his relations. Neither has the wisdom of our Church or state
taken any contrary course hitherto either by Statute or Canon to promote
reformation amongst us; what they may do hereafter I know not; when such
spirits as this Prefacer may be so fortunate as to sit near the stern.
Whether the French Churches have found it so as this Geographer is said to
report I know not; but for their judgment herein I must expect until I hear
more thereof.

Sect. 7.
Pref.
Which being so, the judgment and practice of so many men, and of such several
persuasions in the controverted point of the Christian faith, concurring
unanimously together; the miracle is the greater, that we in England should
take up a contrary opinion, and thereby separate our selves from all that are
called Christian; yet so it is, Sect. 7.
I skill not how it comes to pass, but so it is, that some among us have
revived again the Jewish Sabbath, though not the day it self, yet the name
and thing. Teaching that the commandment of sanctifying every seventh day, as
in the Mosaicall Decalogue, is natural, moral and perpetual; that whereas
all things else in the Jewish Church were so changed, that they were clean
taken away, This day (meaning the Sabbath) was so changed, that it still
remains; and lastly, that the Sabbath was not any of those ceremonies which
were justly abrogated at Christ's coming. All which positions are condemned for
contrary to the Articles of the Church of England; as in a comment on those
Articles perused, and by the lawful authority of the Church allowed to be
public, is most clear and manifest; which doctrinalls, though dangerous in
themselves, and different from the judgment of the ancient Fathers, and of the
greatest Clerks of the later times, are not yet half so desperate as that
which follows thereupon in point of practice: For these positions granted and
entertained as orthodox, what can we else expect, but such strange paradoxes,
as in the consideration of the premises have been delivered from some pulpits
in this kingdom, as viz. That to do any servile work or business on the
Lords Day, is as great a sin as to kill a man, or to commit adultery; that to
throw a bowl, to make a feast, or dress a wedding dinner on the Lords Day, is
as great a sin, as for a man to take a knife and cut his child's throat; that
to ring more bells than one on the Lords Day, is as great a sin, as to commit
murder. The author which reports them all, was present when the broacher of
the last position was convented for it. And I believe him in the rest; the
rather, since I have heard it preached in London, that the law of Moses whereby
death temporal was appointed for the Sabbath-breaker was yet in force, and
that who ever did the works of his calling on the Sabbath day, was to die
therefore. And I know also, that in a town of mine acquaintance, the Preachers
there had brought the people to that pass, that neither baked nor roast meat
was to be found in all the parish for a Sundays dinner throughout the year.
These are the ordinary fruits of such dangerous doctrines; and against these,
and such as these, our Author in this following Treatise does address
himself, accusing them that entertain the formal doctrinalls every where, of
no less than Judaisme, and pressing them with that of Austin, that they who
literally understand the fourth Commandment, do not yet savor the Spirit:
Section the third.

Exam.
Austin somewhere says, that he who looks for miracles in these days for
confirmation of the truth, Magnum ipse prodigium est, himself may go for a
monster; he does not say; It is a miracle that men so should do. Men may be
sottish, even to admiration, and such if this Prefacer proves; we will not say
it is a miracle: mira, wonderful things may be wrought not only by the practice
of Satan, but in the very courses of men, but God is he alone that works
miracles. He talks of unanimous concurrence of men of several persuasions
otherwise in the controverted points of Christian faith, and that both in
judgment and practice with him in his way; he loves to speak with a full
mouth, and to make a great noise, as the Hogs in Aelian did, when their owner
shore them; which gave him occasion to say, That there was a great deal of
cry, but a little wool. And let the indifferent judge whether the wool be
answerable to the noise this Prefacer makes. Now, the men of several
persuasions whom he avoucheth are Papists, and Protestants, and amongst the
Protestants, both Lutherans and Calvinists. And hitherto he has spoken of
four particulars; I desire the reader would take notice of the modesty of this
author in each of them compared with the noise here he makes concerning them;
as if he were as much cracked in his brain, as he who standing upon the key at
Athens, with a note book in his hands, set down every ship that entered into
the road as his, when he was not owner of any one of them. So I shall make it
appear, that this Prefacer has title to none of the sides he boasts of for
the countenancing of his way in any one of the particulars mentioned. The first
particular is about the original institution of the Sabbath; as whether God
commanded it immediately upon the creation. This author denies the institution
of it before the promulgation of the law upon mount Sina; And what strength of
suffrages does he bring for this amongst the Protestants, whether Lutherans or
Calvinists? Surely not one Lutherane that I know; but of others all that he
avoucheth by himself are but Doctor Prideaux and Gomarus, and by his
assistance, Vatablus and Musculus; on the contrary are alleged by Walaeus: 1.
Luther himself: 2. Zuinglius: 3. Calvin: 4. Beza: 5. Peter Martyr: 6.
Bullinger: 7. Zanchius: 8. Vrsinus: 9. Gualterus: 10. Aretius: 11. Bertramus:
12. Mercerus: 13. Antonius Fayus: 14. Iunius: 15. Zepperus: 16. Martinius: 17.
Alstedius. The same is justified by Rivetus, who voucheth no less than thirty
Writers of note to concur in this; Now let the indifferent judge on whose
side is the miracle this Prefacer speaks of, in his rhetorical
amplifications, on his side, or on ours. Yet not one English Divine is
mentioned, either by Walaeus or Rivetus amongst this number. 2. Then as for
Papists: Tostatus indeed disputes against this opinion of ours, but his reasons
I have answered; and Catarinus a Popish Prelate, as well as Abulensis, is
acknowleged by this Author to oppose Tostatus in this; neither has he or
Doctor Prideaux undertaken to answer him. Only this Prefacer, after his bold
fashion, says, that Catarinus took up arms against Tostatus with ill
success, it has been manifest that for ought does appear, Catarinus has
had better success than Tostatus; For Pererius takes Tostatus his part, yet
all the Rhemists on Apoc. 1.10. do manifest themselves to take part with
Catarinus, and Gomarus acknowledged as much of Marius. And Rivetus also
allegeth Augustinus Steuchus, Genebrard, Iacobus Solianus, Cornelius de Lapide,
Emmanuel Sa, and Ribera, all concurring against Tostatus and all Papists, yea,
many of them Jesuits. Hereby let the reader judge of the modesty of this
Author; and on whose side the feigned miracle is, on his side, or on ours. For
it is manifest hitherto, that the men he speaks of, of seveverall persuasions
otherwise, are by far, more for us than for him. But it may be in this
particular, his glory is, that the Fathers are rather for his opinion than for
us. But upon what ground? Is it from any evidence of Scripture? nothing less,
not one of them building hereupon; and as for evidences, they bring none, save
that the Scripture does not particulate, that the Patriarchs of old observed
the Sabbath. Yet it was not to be held a general rule, that Argumentum non
valet ab authoritate negative; the argument draw^e from authority does not hold
negatively in matter of fact. Secondly, not only our Divines, as Hospinian and
Walaeus, that the meaning of the Fathers is only this, that the Patriarchs
did not observe it after a Jewish manner, but Iacobus Salianus a Papist
affirms the same particularly of Tertullian; as Rivetus voucheth him in his
answer to Gomarus, page 21. And it may be made apparent from Tertullian
himself, otherwise he cannot be freed from contradiction, as who plainly
manifests his opinion in our side, as Rivetus cites him, page 23. So that
the Fathers alleged by our adversaries, being rightly understood, make nothing
for them; yet we want not variety of Fathers making expressly for us, and
against them; and that grounding themselves upon express Scripture, Genesis 2.3.
therefore The Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it, which our
adversaries have no other means to avoid, than by saying that it is spoken by
anticipation; according whereunto the meaning of Moses must be thus; because
the Lord rested the seventh day from creation, therefore he blessed the seventh
day and sanctified it, but would you know when? to wit, 2000. and 4. or 500.
years after. And lastly, the dividing of times into weeks, proved to be the
most ancient division of times in the world, received by all nations, and made
a festival day thereupon; as many have most learnedly proved it, do justify
the sanctification of the Sabbath to have had its beginning and course from the
very creation. So that in this particular we have on our side both Scripture
and reason, and Fathers, and the opinion of men of several professions, as
this author presses it, both Papists and Protestants, both Lutheranes and
Calvinists; and this Prefacer can lay no just title to any one of them in this
particular. The second point he has insisted upon, is about the morality of
one day in seven. For this he pretends, only Papists in the first place, and
not a Father throughout, (and as Chrysostom to the contrary has professed,
that God from the beginning has manifested, that on that day in the circle of
the week must be consecrated unto his service) much less Scripture. And it is
apparent that God commanded that the proportion of one day in seven should be
allotted to his service; and it was never to be abrogated, nor ever did any
man devise any ceremoniality therein. And to this day it has continued in the
Church of God. To Tostatus we have opposed Azorius the Jesuit; professing
that it is most agreeable to reason after six work days to consecrate one to
Gods service. Add to him Stella upon Luke, Jacobus de Valentia, and Dominicus
Bannes. -- As for Aquiaas, that which he accounts ceremonial in the fourth
Commandment was expressed by him to be not one day in seven, but the
particulating of the seventh day: But whereas he goes no farther in
illustrating the morality of this Commandment then in saying that some time
must be set apart for Gods service, I appeal to every man's conscience, whether
the very light of nature does not suggest that not only some time but a
convenient proportion of time ought to be consecrated unto God; and when God
has manifested this to be one day in seven under the Law; does not the very
light of nature suggest, that we should sin against God if we should not
allow unto him as good a proportion of time under the Gospel? And further if
the Lords Day, be of Divine institution amongst us Christians, is it not still
the Law of God even unto us, to allow unto him one day in seven? Now Doctor
Prideaux himself alleges more Papists for this opinion than for the
contrary, and one of them, to wit, Silvester professes it is the common
opinion as Azorius voucheth him. And as for Protestants to side with him
herein, he alleges none but Gomarius and Rivet; it may seem by his
carriage, that Vatablus nd Musculus also are for him in this, but that is
untrue, they are alleged by Gomarus on the first point only as touching the
original institution of the Sabbath. Now Rivet is opposed herein by his two
Colleagues, Walaeus and Thysius; and whereas he takes upon him to answer Walaeus
his reasons to the contrary, and represent his own reasons for his opinion
herein; I have taken into consideration both the one and the other; and I trust
have represented the weakness of his discourse throughout, though otherwise a
very learned and worthy Divine. Now Waleus has not only alleged amongst the
Fathers Chrysostom, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Augustine, Theodoret, but
a multitude of Protestant writers, maintaining the morality of one day in
seven, as Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Zanchius,
Junius, Viretus, Danaeus, Fayus, Martinius, Vrsinus. Alstedius, Lorasegius,
Festus Hommius, besides English and Scottish writers, whom he might have
produced more then enough: yea of Bishops in this Kingdom; as Bishop
Babington, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Lake, yea and Master Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical policy. Now let the readers judge by this of the modesty of
this Prefacer in this particular also, and whether the miracle (as he phraseth
it) be on our side in dissenting from others unreasonably, or on his rather.

1 Timothy 3.4.
that Men should be lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God. For this, he
boasts of all sorts of Papists, this he begins withal; which was not wont to
be the course of English Divines; yet he belies Doctor Prideaux in this; who
alleges more Papists standing for the divine right hereof, then for the
contrary; and one of them (as formerly I said) professes that it is the common
opinion. And Azorius the Jesuit professes that it is most agreeable to
reason, that as after six days work one should be consecrate unto the Lord,
so the Lords Day should be it. That many of our Protestants Divines call the
observation of the Lords Day, Ecclesiae consuetudinem, and that it was left
free unto the Church to choose another, after the Jews Sabbath was abrogated,
I have showed how little all this makes for him, answering to every passage
punctually, as they are alleged by him. For it is confessed that the Church
they spoke of was the apostolical Church; and the cause moving them to choose
this day was the Resurrection of Christ, and whereas some two of them call this
Causam probabilem; I have discussed that, and prooved it to be more then
probable. I have showed withal how the ancient fathers have acknowledged it,
some expressly divine, some equivalently, and expressly apostolical
constitution or sanction, as Athanasius (whose reason drawn from the congruity
between the first creation and the second Creation by virtue of Christ's death
is remarkable, and followed by many both English and outlandish Divines.

Austin, Sedulius, Gregory, and others; And with them the concurrence of our
Protestant divines, Bucer, Calvin, Beza, Junius, Piscator, Wolsius, Fulke
against the Remish, Doctor Andrews bishop of Winchester, Doctor Lake bishop of
Bath and Wells, in expressing it to be observationis not liberae, but
necessariae, Master Fox, Walaeus, Fayus, Hyperius, Perkins, Brownde. By this
lot the reader judge of the modesty of the Praefacer in this particular also;
and whether the miracle be on our side in dissenting from others in an
unreasonable manner, and not on his rather.

The fourth and last particular is the mutability of the day Prideaux. Yet I
have endeavored to find out Chemnitius his discourse thereon, and enter upon a
discussion thereof. Bucer I am sure, alleged by Rivet, is nothing for this
purpose. Doctor Fulke directly opposes it, Doctor Andrews, Doctor Lake above
mentioned, Doctor Brownde, Doctor Willet, Master Perkins. The Christian Church
anciently being demanded whether they had kept the Lords Day, were wont to
answer; I am a Christian, I cannot intermit it. Besides I have showed in reason
the unreasonablenesse both of changing the day, and the intolerable scandal
that would follow upon it, and the unreasonablenesse of not changing it, if it
be not of divine institution; considering how prone we are through the
continual observation thereof to conceave that to be a necessary duty, and so
to be plunged into superstition, ere we are aware, if it prove to be no
necessary duty.

In the next place he tells us how that some amongst us have revived again
the Jewish Sabbath, though not the day it self, yet the name and thing.
Teaching that the Commandment of sanctifying every seventh day as in the
Mosaicall Decalogue is natural, moral and perpetual; that whereas all things
else in the Jewish were so changed, that they were clean to be done away, this
day (meaning the Sabbath) was so changed, that it still remains: and lastly,
that the Sabbath was not any of those ceremonies which were only abrogated at
Christ's coming. All which positions are condemned for contrary to the Articles
of the Church of England: as in a comment on those Articles perused and by the
lawful authority of the Church allowed to be public, is most clear and
manifest. Here we have a distinction of a Jewish Sabbath brought in, yet not
the day; a distinction contrived with such wisdom and perspicacity as it
seems to exceed all humane discretion. For I verily think that from the
beginning of the Primitive Church there was never heard of a Jewish Sabbath to
be kept, any other then upon their day. The materials are, first that the name
Sabbath is retained; and well may it be in my judgment (though some entertain
sublime reaches to the contrary) if our Savior have any authority with us; who
advises his Disciples to pray that their flight be not in the Winter, nor on
the Sabbath day; which is spoken by him in reference to the time about the
destruction of Jerusalem, at what time the Lords Day was come in place of the
Jews Sabbath among the Christian congregations, and that by apostolical
substitution. And in the very book of our Homilies it is expressly said that
the Sunday is now our Sabbath. And his Majesty's briefes for collection so
style it. And in the conference at Hampton Court it was so styled by Doctor
Raynolds, and the motion he made thereabout generally yielded unto; so that the
State hitherto seems to be censured by this bold Prefacer. The next aspersion
is, that the thing also is revived. But what thing? the Jews had peculiar
sacrifice both morning and evening which doubled the daily sacrifice; this
surely is not revived. There were besides two things in the Jewish Sabbath; the
one was a rest, the other was the sanctifying of that rest; As for the rest, if
that were not, it were no Sabbath. Yet our Savior calls it a Sabbath, our
Church calls it a Sabbath, our State calls it a Sabbath. And Austin calls us to
such a rest on the Lords Day, as that therein we must tantum Deo vacare, tantum
cultibus divinis vacare, only rest to God, only rest for divine worship. And
Calvin, who is taken to be no friend of ours in this case, professes, that we
must rest from all our works, so far forth as they are avocamenta a sacris
studiis, and meditationibus, avocations from holy studies and meditations, but
not for any mysterious signification sake, and that herein consists the
difference between the Jewish rest and our Christians rest; and I am exactly
of his opinion for this: As for the sanctification of this rest, I trust we
are as much bound to the performance hereof, and that in as great measure, and
with as great devotion under the Gospel, as ever the Jews were under the Law;
And at the hearing of this Commandment as well as of any other, our Church
has taught us to pray, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to
keep this Law. And I find it wondrous strange, to hear, that some should not
spare to profess, that this was shuffled in they know not how; At length we
come to the particular charges: the first is, that some should teach, that The
Commandment of sanctifying every seventh day, as in the Mosaicall Decalogue,
is natural, moral, and perpetual: and Master Rogers is quoted for this on
the Article, Art. 7. he quotes Master Doctor Bownde, page 7. Now truly, it
cannot be denied, but that when the fourth Commandment is read unto us in our
Congregations, we are taught to pray unto God, to show such mercy unto us, as
to incline our hearts to the keeping of this law. And both master Rogers and
this Prefacer are to be presumed to have subscribed as well as others, and by
their subscription acknowledged that this is nothing contrary to Gods Word;
that we are as much bound to the observation of this Commandment as of any
other, and consequently to keep the Sabbath, and do no manner of work
thereon that may hinder the sanctifying thereof. Now Master Doctor Bownds
words, (after he had cited Chrysostom speaking thus, I am hic ab initio etc.
Here now even from the beginning God has insinuated this Doctrine unto us,
teaching us in circulo hebdomadis diem, unum that in the compass of a week,
one whole day is to be put apart for a spiritual rest unto God, are these:
Unto all which may be added, that for proof othat this Commandment is
natural, moral, and perpetual; that I say may be added which was practiced
among the Gentiles, and all the Heathen. And now Do. Bowndes purpose unto the
p. 30. is to be proved only this, that a Sabbath was from the beginning, and
still is to be kept, and that in the proportion of one day in seven; and after
that proceeds to prove what day the Sabbath should be kept; his words are these
p. 30. Now, as we have hitherto seen that there ought to be a Sabbath day, so
it remains that we should hear upon what day this Sabbath should be kept;
and here he shows that this is not left unto the Church, but prescribed by
God himself, as who prescribed one day unto the Jews, and another day unto us
Christians; but still one in seven: The same was the opinion both of Bellarmine
and Master Hooker in his Ecclesiastical policy. Whereas both Master Rogers and
the Prefacer so carry the matter, as if by Doctor Bowndes opinion we Christians
were bound to keep our Sabbath on the same day whereon the Jews were bound to
keep theirs, which is most untrue, though the fourth Commandment may be
indifferently accommodated to our Christian Sabbath as it was unto the Jewish
Sabbath, save only as touching the reason given, which has express reference
to the creation; but our Christian Sabbath stands in reference to the work of
Redemption. Each is the rest on a seventh day after six days of labor, and as
they were bound to sanctify their seventh, so are we bound to sanctify ours;
and as that was rested on, and sanctified in remembrance of Gods rest from the
work of Creation, so is ours rested on in remembrance of Christ's rest from the
work of Redemption, so that our day of rest is but translated from the day of
the Lord our Creators rest, to the day of the Lord our Redeemers rest. And on
this ground might the Church justly teach us to pray at the hearing of this
fourth Commandment; Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this law. But like enough, both Master Rogers and this Prefacer might be of
Brentius his opinion; that it is left indifferent to the Church at this day, to
content themselves with observing of one day in fourteen, if it pleases
them. But this was not the opinion of Pope Alexand. the third, who professes,
that Tam vereris quam novi Testamenti pagina septimam diem ad humanam quiete^
specialiter deputavit. Both the old and new Testament has appointed the
seventh day for the rest of man, which Suarez thus interprets, That is, each
Testament has approved the custom of assigning every seventh day of the week
for rest, which is formally to appoint a seventh day, though the same day
materially be not always appointed; and thus it is true, that that seventh day
in the old Law was the Sabbath day; but in the new, it is the Lords Day: now
when we say the observation of one day in seven is natural, our meaning is
not, neither was it D. Bowndes meaning, that this proportion of time is known
by the light of nature, to be that which of duty should be consecrated unto
God: herein rather it becomes us to wait upon God, and he having defined it;
now we say nothing can be devised by man more agreeable to reason than this;
Azorius the Jesuit, professing it to be most agreeable to reason; And Doctor
Field, as Master Broad voucheth him, spared not to say, that to him who knows
the story of the creation, it does appear in reason, that one day in seven is
to be consecrated unto God; only let us not look for reason demonstrative in
matter of morality: Aristotle long ago has professed, that not demonstration,
but persuasion alone has place in Ethics; yet we may justly call that
natural, which from the original was common to all nations; and that such was
the observation of the seventh day, the learned have sufficiently proved.
Secondly, if it be not moral, what shall it be? Is it judicial, or
ceremonial? Never any man hitherto devised any ceremoniality in the proportion
of one day in seven; well it may be positive; yet so, as to this day, from the
beginning of the world, this proportion was never altered; and if I should live
till the day be altered by any sober Christian Congregation, I think I should
live till the coming of Christ; which the Christians in Austins time conceived
that it would be on the Lords day. I come to the second charge which is this,
whereas all things else in the Jewish Church were so changed, that they were
clean taken away; this day (meaning the Sabbath) was so changed, that it still
remains; and for this Master Rogers quotes Doct. Bownde, p. 20. only Master
Rogers says, not that all things were changed, as the Prefacer does, but only
that all Jewish things were changed, now judge whether Master Rogers might not
have opposed Doctor Andrews as well as Doctor Bownde. For in his Catechet.
doctrine, page 209. having proposed this question. But is not the Sabbath a
ceremony, and so abrogated by Christ? He answers it in this manner: Do as
Christ did in the cause of divorce, look whether it were so from the
beginning; now the beginning of the Sabbath was in Paradise before there was
any sin, and so before there needed any Savior; and so before there was any
ceremony or figure of a Savior. And if they say it prefigured the rest that we
shall have from our sins in Christ, we grant it, and therefore the day is not
changed, but yet no ceremony proved. He proceeds to prove that it was no
ceremony: first from the Law; secondly from the Gospel, Ephesians. 2.4. thus: All
ceremonies were ended in Christ, but so was not the Sabbath; For, Matthew. 24.20.
Christ bids them pray, that their visitation be not on the Sabbath day: so that
there must needs be a Sabbath after Christ's death. Now, what does Doctor Bownde
affirm forty years ago, which Doctor Andrews did not in his pattern of
Catecheticall doctrine? I come to the third and last: That the Sabbath was not
any of those ceremonies which were justly abrogated at Christ's coming. This
very point Doctor Andrews maintains by diverse arguments, as well as D.
Bownde, which yet is rightly to be understood, to wit, not of the observation
of the seventh day from the creation; but of the observation of one day in
seven. So that in M. Rogers his Brentian judgment in this particular, Doctor
Andrews, who afterward became Bishop of Winchester, might be accounted a
Sabbatarian as well as D. Bownde. All these positions the Prefacer says, are
condemned for contrary to the Articles of the Church of England; but by whom
condemned? by none but by M. Rogers; and by the same reason he might say that
the doctrine of Doctor Andrews was condemned also for contrary to the doctrine
of the Church of England, to wit, by M. Rogers. And consider his absurd
inference from the seventh Article of the Church of England; The Article says
that Christians are not bound at all to the observation of Judicial
ceremonies; Hence he inferres, that they whom he calls, Our home Sabbatarians
are adversaries to this truth in part, namely, in as much as they deny the
Sabbath to be a ceremony: But does our Church affirm the Sabbath to be a
ceremony? Nothing less; this M. Rogers, of his own head, lays down for a
principle, namely, that the Sabbath was a ceremony, to obtrude upon us, as if
himself had as much authority as a whole Convocation. And D. Andrews takes
upon him to disprove this very point (which Rogers supposes as a principle)
and that by various arguments: Belike D. Andrews deserved not to be numbered
amongst the greatest Clerks of these later times, nor D. Lake neither; nor
Bishop Babington; And as for the judgment of the ancient Fathers, it appears
what skill the Prefacer has in them, and what respect he bears unto them, by
the learning he has bewrayed in this preface. Had he found in them, how much
the forbidding of dancing in their days, did hinder the growth of Christian
Religion, we should have heard of it undoubtedly, as well as how it has
hindered the growth of the reformed Religion in France out of Heylins Geography:
yet their doctrinalls (which I have showed to be the doctrinalls of Doctor
Andrews as well as of Doctor Bownde, yea, and could show it to be the doctrine
of diverse other late Bishops in this Church) though dangerous in themselves,
not half so desperate as that which follows thereupon in practice. Diverse
particulars whereof he recites out of the same Master Rogers his preface, to
his comment upon the Articles of the Church of England. And indeed, this Master
Rogers glories there, Pyrgopolynices-like, that he has been the man and the
means that these Sabbatarian errors and impieties were brought into light and
knowledge of the State; so he speaks; and that this is a comfort to his soul,
and would be to his dying day. And in very deed, the particulars mentioned by
him, are very foul; for he says, It was preached in a market town in
Oxfordshire, that to do any servile work or business on the Lords Day, is as
great a sin as to kill a man, or commit adultery. Secondly, It was preached
in Summersetshire, that to throw a bowl on the Sabbath day, is as great a
sin as to kill a man; that it was preached in Norfolk, that to make a feast
or wedding-dinner on the Lords Day, is as great a sin as for a father to take
a knife and cut his child's throat. I wonder the Prefacer does not call them
miracles; Sommersetshire is a pretty large County; and there be many market
towns in Oxfordshire; and I do not doubt but there are many parishes in
Norfolk; But no particular is here set down, either of person or of place;
and we have no better authority for the proof of these imputations than this
man's word, which yet undoubtedly was not present at these Sermons: for then he
would have been very careful to express that, as in the next story he does
the like. So that in the issue, the strength of all comes but to this, that he
has heard it thus reported. Now, I have heard it preached, and that at Saint
Mary's in Oxford, that a man in Bunbury, or thereabouts, having broken a bone,
his son refused to go for a Bonesetter, because it was the Lords Day, and
this Sermon, afterward coming into print, the party finding himself agrieved
by this scandalous report cast forth of him, repaired to the quarter Sessions
holden at Oxford, and complained to the Justices of the wrong that was done
unto him; the Preacher of that Sermon being by, and the whole matter being
opened, and the contrary justified; the preacher professed, that he delivered
no more than he had heard, but promised the next time that he printed that
Sermon, he would leave that story out. Doctor Hoskins of our house was present
at the hearing of this business, and brought us word of it. But whether that
Sermon ever came to be printed a second time, I know not. In like sort, I have
heard it reported of Master Bolton, that when one fell into the River on the
Sabbath day, he would not suffer those that were with him, being near to run
to help him out: I professed at the hearing of it, I knew Master Bolton so
well, that it seemed uncredible to me, but the reporter professed to deliver it
upon knowledge. But if it were so, many there be that can bear witness
thereunto in the place where he lived. Lately, it has been brought unto me,
that one has been heard to lay to my charge behind my back, that I should
say, David sinned more in dancing about the Arc, than either in deflouring
Bathshebath, or killing Vriah; though it is such a comparison that never
entered into my thoughts, how much less to pass so prodigious a judgment
upon the comparison? In the last place, he says, It was preached in Suffolk,
(and that he could name the man, and was present when he was convented before
his ordinary for preaching the same) that to ring more bells than one upon the
Lords day to call the people unto Church, is as great a sin, as to commit
murder; this is more particular than the rest; and had he added one thing
more, the evidence had been complete, namely, that as he says, he was
convented for it before his Ordinary, so he was found convicted of it; which if
it were so, I wonder he should conceal it; if it were not so, of what credit
is this his relation? He adds, that many things to this effect he had read
before in the Sabbath doctrine, printed at London for I. Porter and Tho. Man,
what this book was I could not devise, but lately have gotten into my hands D.
Bowndes book of the Sabbath. I find by comparing it well, that this is the
book he girds at. Now I find nothing in him to this effect, though I have
gone over most of the first book, and in the Index do not find any thing
that can give me probability in the second book, tending to any such effect:
and I wonder he spared to quote the place where such doctrines are to be found,
nothing being more convenient to justify his criminations (than to quote for
it something that is to be seen in print) and thereby to clear himself from
the suspicion of a malignant. But this Prefacer very judiciously believes him
throughout, because the Relator was present when the broacher of the last
position was convented for it, yet does he not say he was convicted of it. And
upon what ground he proceeds so judiciously in believing it is remarkable, to
wit, because himself has heard it preached in London, that the Law of Moses,
whereby death temporal was appointed for the Sabbath-breaker, was yet in
force; and that whoever did the works of his ordinary calling on the Sabbath
day, was to die therefore. Now, I profess he seems to me a great deal more
politic herein than at the first I was ware of: For, had he not believed
Master Rogers his report this way, others might have taken as great liberty to
believe but their part concerning this. Therefore it stood him upon, first, to
manifest his ingenuous facility in believing another, that this might be a
shooing-horne to draw on others by way of the like ingenuous facility to
believe him also; yet such things may be; for as long as the world lasts, we
shall be exercised with wild wits, and so no doubt we shall with tale-tellers
too, and so much the more in all likelihood the nearer the world approaches to
an end: It has been so amongst Philosophers in Cicero his observation; it
has been so amongst Schoole-divines; it is so amongst Socinians and Arminians.
But let the saddle be set upon the right horse, and let every man bear his
own burden. Now I have made it manifest, that the doctrines which he picks
out of D. Bownde, and styles Sabbatarian doctrines, are the doctrines of D.
Andrews, afterward Bishop of Winchester; I could show them to be the
doctrines of many other worthy Prelates that have been of this kingdom; and it
may be that if the votes of the Bishops of this kingdom were taken, the major
part would concur with us, as touching the doctrine of the Sabbath, rather
than against us. The same Master Rogers sacrifices to his net, and burns
incense to his yarne, and magnifies the good success of his labors. For this
good, he says, has ensued thereupon; namely, that the said books of the
Sabbath, comprehending the above mentioned, and many more such fearful and
heretical assertions, have been both called in, and forbidden to be printed
any more and to be made common, and that Archbishop Whitgift, by his letters
and officers at Synods and Visitations, Anno 99. did the one, and Sir John
Popham, Lord chief Justice of England at Bury Saint Edmunds in Suffolk, Anno
1600. did the other. For all this we have nothing but his word; and as for the
books he talks of, he had formerly mentioned, but one printed 95. at London
for I. Porter and Tho. Man, of the doctrine of the Sabbath, which appears to
be D. Bowndes; Now, was this ever called in? Sure I am, D. Willet upon Genesis
came forth the year after this M. Rogers his Analysis of the Articles of the
Church of England.

This he dedicated to King James, and over and above has a second dedication
in Latin to Archbishop Bancroft and to the bishop of London then being;
wherein he signifies that the one of them was author, the other hortator unto
him to perfect this work of his; and therefore undoubtedly came forth with as
good approbation as the Analysis of Master Rogers upon the second Chapter of
Genesis he observes that As the Sabbath kept then upon the seventh day in
remembrance of the Creation was of the Lords institution, so the Lords Day, is
now observed by the same authority, in remembrance of the Resurrection of
Christ, and redemption by the same. And this he delivers in opposition to the
Rhemists; who count the observation of the Lords Day but a tradition of the
Church, and Ecclesiastical institution, and having spent a whole page in folio
upon this argument in the next page thus he writes -- I do wonder then this
doctrine of the Sabbath, and day of rest now called the Lords Day having such
evident demonstration out of the Scriptures and being confirmed by the constant
and continual practice of the Church, in all ages: that any professing the
Gospel, specially being exercised in the Study of the Scriptures, should
gainsay, and impugn these positions following as erroneous. 1. That the
Commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath is natural moral and perpetual: For
if it be not so then all the Commandments contained in the Decalogue are not
moral, so should we have. 9. and not. 10. Commandments; and then Christ
should come to destroy the Law, and not to fulfill is contrary to our Saviors
own words, Math. 5.17. 2. That all other things in the Law were so changed that
they were clean taken away, as the priesthood, Sacrifices and Sacraments: this
day (namely the Sabbath) was so changed, that it yet remains, For it is
evident by the Apostles practice, Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Apo. 1.10. that the
day of rest (called the Sabbath) was changed from the seventh day to the first
day of the week: and so was observed and kept holy under the name of the Lords
Day. 3. That it is not lawful to use the seventh day to any other end, but to
the holy and sanctified end, for which in the beginning it was created. 4. As
the Sabbath came in with the first man, so must it not go out, but with the
last. 5. That we are restrained upon the Sabbath from works as the Jews were,
though not in such strict particular manner as they were, yet in general we
are forbidden all kind of work upon the Lords Day, as they were, which may
hinder the service of God.

Now the Author that he intimates as opposing these positions he describes by
the title, of his book in the margent, which is this. The Catholic doctrine
of the Church of England printed at Cambridge p. 37. And the author of his
book I have heard to be Master Rogers, and it seems likely enough, especially
by the 2. first positions. Doctor Willet concludes in this manner, after he
had made use of diverse allegations for the confirmation of his doctrine in
opposition to the forementioned Author, but these allegations are here
superfluous seeing there is a learned Treatise of the Sabbath already published
of this argument which contains a most sound doctrine of the Sabbath, as it
is said in the former positions, which shall be able to abide the trial of the
Word of God, and stand warranted thereby, when other humane fantasies shall
vanish: howsoever some in their heat and intemperance are not afraid to call
them Sabbatariorum errores, yea heretical assertions, a new Iubilee; S.
Sabbath, more then either Jewish or popish institution; God grant it be not
laid to their charge that so speak or write, and God give them a better mind.
About two years before this, were set forth Master Perkins his cases of
conscience: wherein he manifests his concurrence with Doctor Bownde in the
doctrine of the Sabbath. Neither does Doctor Andrews, in any material thing
differ from Doctor Bownde, Master Perkins, Doctor Will t. In the next relation
of his which is of a familiar nature, undoubtedly the Prefacer deserves to be
believed. That in a Town of his acquaintance the preachers there had brought
the people to that pass, that neither baked nor roste meat was to be found in
all the Parish for a sunday dinner throughout the year, and he concludes it
with such an Epiphonema. These are the fruits of such dangerous doctrines; as
if the fortunes of the Church or state were hazarded for want of baked meat or
roast meat on the sundays.

And to confess a truth, though I never was; nor never am like to be so
precise; yet considering my mean condition, I have diverse times thought thus
with my self: why should my provision hinder any of my servants from Sermons
on the Sabbath day; so little did I fear any dangerous consequence of this
practice: but since I am better informed by the suggestions of this judicious
Prefacer; I will take heed how I cherish such thoughts in my breast henceforth;
and if he come at any time to take pains amongst us, seeing I find he
respects baked meat and roast meat so well; it shall go hard but we will
have a tith Pig for his entertainment. And so much the rather, that I may
clear my self from Judaisme, for Jack of Newbery my Countreyman being a great
Clothier in his days; and then strangers came from far to buy Cloth at his
House, and amongst the rest a company of Jews were sometime entertained by him
being a very hospitallous man and an excellent housekeeper, his house being
accounted the best Inn in the Town, to make himself merry, caused the table
to be furnished with all variety of Hogs flesh; which they perceaving took
it for a flout; but after they had grumbled a while upon it, he made show as
if but then he had remembered himself of his error, and not till then
considered that they were Jews; and forthwith he commanded all the dishes to
be remooved, and other dishes already prepared to be set on the board,
wherewith his table was as well furnished as it was with guests. But to
return, it is an easy matter now a days to accuse of any thing, as Doctor
Prideaux he says, accuses us of Judaisme, but si accusare sufficiat, quis
innocens erit; when he or Doctor Prideaux shall prove their accusations, then
let us be condemned; and if we be not condemned, till then we care not. Yet
it is untrue which he pins upon Doctor Prideaux his sleeve; as if he should
allege Austin saying, that they who literally understand the fourth
Commandment, do not yet savor of the spirit, neither S. Austin speaks this
of the fourth Commandment, nor is he so alleged by Doctor Prideaux, but of
the seventh day; Quisquis diem illum observat sicut litera sonat, carnaliter
sapit. As much as to say, whosoever keeps that day which the Jew keeps,
favors carnally. Neither did I know any of my brethren to stand for the
sanctifying of the seventh day in correspondency to the seventh day, Sect. 8.
from the Creation but only of one day in seven; which day must also be
prescribed by God as the seventh day of the week was to the Jews, which is
the next thing imputed unto us, but the Lords Day is the first day of the week
to us Christians.

Sect. 8.
Pref.
This when I had considered, when I had seriously observed, how much these
fancies were repugnant both to the tendries of this Church and judgments of all
kind of writers and how unsafe to be admitted; I thought I could not go about
a better work then to exhibit to the view of my dear Countrymen this
following Treatise delivered first, and afterward published by the Author in
another language. The rather since of late the clamor is increased, and that
there is not any thing now more frequent in some Zelotes mouths (to use the
Doctors words) then that the Lords Day is with us licentiously yea
sacrilegiously profaned, Section first. To satisfy whose scruples and give
content unto their minds, I doubt not but this following discourse will be
sufficient: which for that cause I have translated faithfully, and with as good
propriety as I could; not swerving any where from the sense, and as little as I
could from the phrase and letter. Gratum opus agricolis: a work as I conceave
it, not unsuitable unto the present times, wherein besides these peccant
fancies before remembered, some have so far proceeded, as not alone to make
the Lords Day subject to the Jewish rigor; but to bring in against the Jewish
Sabbath, and abrogate the Lords Day altogether. I will no longer detain the
reader from the benefit he shall reap thereby. Only I will crave leave for
his greater benefit, to repeat the sum thereof which is briefly this: First
that the Sabbath was not instituted in the first Creation of the World, nor
ever kept by any of the ancient patriarchs who lived before the Law of Moses:
therefore no moral and perpetual precept as the other are, Sect. 2. Secondly
that the sanctifying of one day in seven is ceremonial only and obliged the
Jews, not moral to oblige us Christians to the like observance* Sect. 3. and
4. Thirdly, that the Lords Day is founded only on the authority of the Church,
guided therein by the practice of the Apostles; not on the fourth Commandment
(which he calls a scandalous doctrine, Sect. 7.) nor any other express
authority in holy Scripture, Sect 6. and 7. Then fourthly, that the Church has
still authority to change the day, though such authority be not fit to be put
in practice, Sect. 7. Fifthly, that in the celebration of it, there is no such
cessation from works of labor required from us, as was exacted of the Jews,
but that we may lawfully dress meat proportionable to every man's estate, and
do such other things as are no hindrance to the public service appointed for
the day, Sect. 8. Sixthly, that on the Lords Day all recreations whatsoever are
to be allowed, which honestly may refresh the spirits, and increase mutual
love and neighborhood amongst us, and that the names whereby the Jews were
wont to call their festivalls (whereof the Sabbath was the chief) were
borrowed from an Hebrew word, which signifies to dance, and to be merry, or
make glad the countenance. If so, if all such ceremonies as do increase good
neighbor-hood, then wakes and feasts, and other meetings of that nature. If
such as honestly may refresh the spirits, then dancing, wrestling, shooting,
and all other pastimes, not by law prohibited, which either exercise the body,
or revive the mind. And lastly, that it appertains to the Christian
Magistrate, to order and appoint what pastimes are to be permitted, and what
are not (obedience unto whose commands is better far than sacrifice to the
Idols of our own inventions) not unto every private person (or as the Doctors
own words are) not unto every man's rash zeal, who, out of a schismatic,
Stoicisme (debarring men from lawful pastimes) does incline to Judaisme, Sect.
8. Add for the close of all, how doubtingly our Author speaks of the name of
Sabbath, which now is grown so rife amongst us, Sect. 8. Concerning which,
take here that notable dilemma of John Barkley, the better to encounter those
who still retain the name, and impose the rigor. Paren. l. 1. c. ult.
Cur porro illum diem plerique Sectariorum Sabbatum appellatis? What is the
cause (says he) that many of our Sectaries call this day the Sabbath? If they
observe it as a Sabbath, they must observe it because God rested on the day,
and then they ought to keep that day whereon God rested, and not the first, as
now they do, whereon the Lord began his labors. If they observe it as the day
of our Saviors resurrection, why do they call it still the Sabbath, seeing
especially that Christ did not altogether rest the day, but valiantly overcame
the powers of death? This is the sum of all; and this is all that I have to
say unto thee (good Christian reader) in this present business. God give thee
a right understanding in all things, and a good will to do thereafter.

Exam.
This Prefacer accounts the opinions opposite to his, to be fancies; D. Willet
on the contrary, as we have heard, accounts this Prefacers opinion, maintained
by M. Rogers, no better than fantasies, which shall vanish, however now for a
time they flourish; Sure we are, every plant that our heavenly Father has not
planted shall be rooted out. This Prefacer professes, those whom he opposes
be opposite to the tendries of our Church; and indeed, the Author whom D.
Willet intimates, entitled his book audaciously enough, The Catholic
doctrine of the Church of England; but D. Willet on the other side, wondered,
that any professing the Gospel, should gainsay and impugn the positions
maintained by D. Bownde. And sure I am, Bishop Babington, Bishop Andrews,
Bishop Lake agreed with them: And it is well known to some, what the former
Archbishop of Canterbury professed to the face of M. Broad, when he came to
move for the printing of a second book concerning the Sabbath: What Bishop can
our opposites name of this Church, whose praise is among the writers of these
times, that has manifested his opinion in opposition to these? As for the
judgments of all kind of writers which he boasts of, I think never came a
Divine to take pen in hand to vaunt so much, and perform so little. As for the
unsafe condition of our Tenets which he suggests, excepting those monstrous and
wild Tenets mentioned by M. Rogers, for which I know no better evidence than
his word, and that in very odd manner delivered, I know nothing unsafe,
nothing dangerous in any Tenet of ours, who now seem to walk as upon the
pinacles of the Temple, and indeed in this respect they are like to prove very
dangerous to us; yet I would it were not more dangerous to the Church of God,
to be bereaved of so many faithful Pastors: For, certainly it shall be
honorable unto them, they cannot suffer in a more honorable cause than this,
in standing for the sanctifying of the Lords Day in memory of his resurrection,
who that day, being formerly a stone refused of the builders, was made the head
of the corner. For what danger is it to maintain, that from the Creation the
Lord blessed the seventh day and sanctified it; and what a shameful course is
it so to expound it as in reference to a time 2000. and 4. or 500. years
after, and that in spite of the ancient Fathers: And manifest reason, as
appears by division of time into weeks, even from the creation, and so
continuing to the time of the Law delivered on the mount Sinai, as appears by
the story of falling of Manna, and the Jews gathering of it on six days;
none falling now, being gathered on the seventh, as the day on the week whereon
God rested after he had made the world in six. What danger in maintaining, that
God required from the beginning, and afterward specified so much in the Law,
that one day in seven is to be consecrated unto Gods service; and hence to
infer, that if God required so much of the Jews under the Law, it were most
unreasonable and unconscionable we should not afford unto him and his service
as good a proportion of time under the Gospel? Thirdly, what danger is there in
affirming, that the Lords Day is of Divine institution? Is it not Scripture
that calls it the Lords Day? And what day was called the Lords Day before, but
the day of the Jews Sabbath? And has not our Savior manifestly given us to
understand, that even Christians were to have their Sabbath, as the Jews had
theirs, as Bishop Andrews accommodates the place? Matthew. 24.20. And was the
resurrection of Christ any thing inferior to the creation, to give a day unto
us Christians; like as Gods rest from creation, commended that day to the
Jews: Especially considering, that a new creation requires a new Sabbath; as
Athanasius delivered it of old; And D. Andrews of late years, treading in the
steps of that ancient Father, or rather of all the ancient Fathers: And what
danger in maintaining that the Lords Day is entire, and whole to be consecrated
to Divine service; did Austin speak dangerously, when he professes, that
thereon we must tantum Deo vacare, tantu^ cultibus divinis vacare; would this
Prefacer be content to be found dancing about a May pole, or in a Morrice-dance
that day that Christ should come in flaming fire, to render vengeance to all
them that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of Christ Jesus? Nay, would he not
fear to rue the danger of his doctrine, when it will be too late to correct
it, and all the profaneness that he has promoted by this preface of his
should rise up in judgment against him; yet now he thinks he could not go
about a better work than by this preface and translation to harden them in
their profane and impure courses; all his care at this time, is to prevent
superstition, a wonder it is to see how zealous men of his spirit are to avoid
and shun superstition. Belike all these must be censured for Zelotes that
complain that the Lords day is with us licentiously, yea, sacrilegiously
profaned; yet these are the times whereof S. Paul prophesied, that men should
be lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; yet Doctor Prideaux could take
liberty to profess of the Jews, that by their Bacchanalian rites, they gave
the world just occasion to suspect that they did consecrate their Sabbaths unto
devils rather than unto Gods service; yet now adays, they that oppose revels
on the Sabbath day, are censured and condemned of Judaisme: Neither is D.
Prideaux censured by way of scorn for a zelote in this; but unless we
concur with this Prefacer, in thinking that the forbidding of dancing in the
French Churches has hindered the growth of the reformed Religion there, and
that upon the bare credit of Heylins Geography, we must in scorn be termed
zelotes. Belike Bishop Babington by this bold Prefacer, would be censured for a
zelote, considering that on Exodus 16. page 122. hve writes in this manner: May
not. a good soul thus reason with himself; This people of his might not
gather Manna, and may I safely go to markets, dancings, drinkings, to wakes
and wantons, to Beare-baitings and Bul-baitings, and such like wicked
profanations on the Lords Day? Is this to keep the holy day? Can I answer this
to my God? that gives me six days for my self, and takes but one to
himself, of which I rob him also? And Bishop Austin too deserves to be
censured a zelote for that which he writes in his 3. tract. upon John. Observe
the Sabbath Day, it is rather commanded unto us, because it is commanded to be
observed in a spiritual manner. For the Jews observe the Sabbath day
servilely unto luxury, unto drunkenness. How much better were it for their
Women to spinne Wool then to dance on that day in their new Moons, and in his
44. tract. The Jews rest unto toys, and whereas God commanded the Sabbath to
be observed, they spend the Sabbath in such things which the Lord forbids. Our
rest is from evil works, their rest is from good works. For it is better to
go to plow then to dance: but albeit he be censured as a Zelote, yet surely
there is no color why he should be thought to Judaize in this. And let Bishop
Nazianz^ne pass under the same censure with them; who as Dialericus upon the
17. Dominicall after Trinity Sunday alleges him, professes that the
sanctification of the Sabbath consists not in the hilarity of our bodies, nor
in the variety of glorious garments, nor in eatings, the fruit whereof we know
to be wantonness, nor in strewing of Flowers in the ways, which we know to be
the manner of the Gentiles; but rather in the purity of the soul, and
cheerfulness of the mind, and pious Meditations, as when we use holy Hymns
in stead of Tabers, and Psalms in stead of wicked songs and dancings. The same
Dialericus alleges Pope Gregory out of his 91. book of his Epistles and 3.
Epistle affirming, That therefore on the Lords Day we ought to rest from all
Earthly work, and by all means insist on prayer, that if ought has been
committed by us negligently on the six days on the day of the Lords
Resurrection it might be cleared by prayers. And which is yet more, out of
Chrysostom 5. Homily on Matthew he shows, how in that Bishops judgment we
should be exercised on the Lords Day, in our private Families, thus, When we
depart from the Ecclesiastical assembly, we ought not in any case entangle our
selves in businesses of a contrary nature, but as soon as we come home, turn
over the Holy Scriptures, and call thy Wife, and thy Children to confer about
those things which have been delivered; and after they have been deeply rooted
in our minds, then to proceed to provide for such things as are necessary for
this life. So anciently is the pious exercise of repeating Sermons commended
unto us by this holy Bishop, which in these days I have heard to be cried
down, by profane persons, as a cause of increase of Brownisme. And I willingly
confess that when I first came to this place, there were no less then ten
that partly had withdrawn themselves, partly were upon the point of
withdrawing themselves from our Common Prayers; but within a short time there
was not one such to be found amongst us, and so we have continued to this day.
But to return, Ephrem Syrus may go for a zelote in like manner, who as he is
alleged by Rivetus treating of the Sabbath, exhorts to honor the Lords
festivities celebrating them not panegyrically, but Heavenly; not secularly,
but spiritually; not like Heathens, but like Christians; and he shows wherein
this consists in the words following, Quare non portarum frontes coronemus, let
us not hang Garlands upon the frontispice of our Gates, non choreas ducamus,
let us not lead a dance, non chorum adornemus, let us not by our presence
beautify any such company; non tibiis auditum effaminemus, let us not
effeminate our Ears with their Music or with their fidles -- Nay as Doctor
Prideaux complains of the Jews corrupting themselves to the profaning of
their Sabbaths, so Polidor Virgil complains of the like corruptions among
Christians on their festivalls, lib. 6. cap. 8. not employing their time in
prayer and in the exercise of Gods Word; for which cause such festivalls were
instituted, but in all manner of evil courses tending to the corrupting of
men's manners; and that herein they imitate Heathens, though of ancient times
Tertullian (as he says) reprehended Heathens for such courses, as in his
Apologeticum, speaking of the holy solemnity of their Emperors. Therefore
(says he) Christians are compted enemies to the State, because they do not
dedicate vain, lying and rash honors to their Prince. Forsooth it is a great
good office, to make bonfiers and dances in public, and to feast in every
parish, to transform the City into the habit of a Tavern; Vino lutum cogere,
which Junius says was a fruit of their desperate Luxury, and a sign of their
madness and fury: he proceeds; to strive who shall exceed one another in
running about, to do injuries, to commit impudencies, to provoke unto lust.
And is the public joy after such a manner expressed (to wit) by public shame?
O how deservedly are we Christians to be condemned (he speaks it ironically)
who by carrying our selves soberly, chastely, honestly, do oppose the vows
made and the joys expressed for the Emperors, to wit, when for their sober and
chaste and virtuous carriage on such days, not concurring with others to the
same excess of riot, were censured as enemies unto their Princes. Yet even in
those primitive times the manners of Christians became degenerate, as Baldwin
observes in his cases of conscience, p. 479. and that out of Tertullian, as
whom he observes to have complained of it; namely that Christans imitated the
manners of the Heathen in this, yea and grew worse then they, in his book de
Idol. c. 14. O melior fides nationum in suam sectam, quae nullam Christianorum
solennitatem sibi vendicat, non Dominicam, non Pentecostem; etiam si nossent
nobiscum non communicassent, ne Christiani viderentur; nos ne Ethnici
pronuntiemur, non veremur. O the faith of the Nations better then ours toward
their own sect, as who challenge not to themselves any Christian solemnity, not
that of the Lords Day, nor that of Whitsuntide. Had they known it, they would
not communicate with us, lest they should seem Christians; we Christians fear
not to be accounted Heathens. O what a zelote did Tertullian show himself in
this! nay what think we of Leo and Anthemius Emperors; were not they zelotes
too in that decree of theirs (alleged by the former Baldwin)? Dies festos
majestati Altissimi dedicatos nullis volumus voluptatibus occupari: undoubtedly
they mean hereby worldly pleasures; such they would have no place on holy
festivities; and why? but because they accounted those holy festivalls profaned
thereby. And may not King James also be censured for a zelote in making that
proclamation of his for the reformation of abuses in profaning the Lords Day,
at his first coming into the Land, to receave this Kingdom as his rightful
inheritance? In the Conference before his Majesty at Hampton Court, I find
mention made of it by D. Reynolds in this manner: To the former Doctor Reynolds
did add the profanation of the Sabbath day, and contempt of his Majesty's
proclamation made for the reforming of that abuse, of which he earnestly
desired a streighter course for reformation thereof, and unto this he found a
general and unanimous assent. All these be like were zelotes. So was his
Majesty also that now is, together with all the Lords both spiritual and
temporal, and the house of Commons in that Act made in the first year of King
Charles to preserve the Lords Day from profanation, wherein are forbidden
expressly and by name, bearebaiting, bulbaiting, enterludes, common plays,
and in general all other unlawful exercises and pastimes; and over and above
all meetings and assemblies or concourse of people out of their own parishes
for any sports or pastimes whatsoever; and consequently no man ought on the
Lords Day, go forth of his own parish to any may game, or to see a
Morrice-dance, or dancing about May-poles; and seeing the Apostle professes
that it is good to be zealous always in a good thing Gal. 4.18. and Christ
has died for us to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purge us a peculiar
people unto himself, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. let them in the Name
of God be such zelots still; this zeal being a zeal of Gods Glory; and it
becomes us to be zealous of his Glory, considering how zealous he is for our
good, Esaias 9.7. and Esaias 59.17. Of the sufficiency of the following discourse,
we shall by Gods help consider in due time.

But I confess it may be very suitable to these times whereof the Apostle
prophesied, men should be lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, and
undoubtedly it will suit well with their affections like a sweet morsel to
the epicure which he roules under his tongue, but all the praise is in
parting; and I would they would but think of that of the Prophet, What will be
the end thereof; when we shall give God cause to say of our Sabbath, as he
said of the Jewish, I have hated your Sabbaths. And if there be any such
practices of Satan on foot, as to bring in the Jewish Sabbath, let it be
considered in the fear of God, what doctrine does more promote therein;
whether that which makes the celebration of the Lords Day Divine, or rather
that which makes it merely of humane institution; and who sees not that if it
be left to the liberty of the Church, they may bring in the Jewish Sabbath if
it pleases them. Though it be notoriously untrue, (as may be made to appear
both by Scripture, evident reason and authority humane, both ancient and
modern, both Papists and Protestants) that the Sabbath was not ordained
immediately upon the creation; yet were that negative granted; since God has
manifested in his Law, that he requires one day in seven to be set apart for
his service, it evidently follows, even by the very light of nature, that it
were most unreasonable we should allow him a worse proportion of time for his
service under the Gospel; that consequently the observation of one day in
seven is to be kept holy unto the Lord, is now become moral and perpetual
unto the very end of the world; neither was it ever heard, that any man did set
his wits on work in devising a ceremoniality in the proportion of one day in
seven. A prefiguration of Christ in some respect has been found in the Jewish
rest on the seventh day of the week; but of any prefiguration of ought in
Christ, by an indefinite proportion of one day in seven the world dreamed not
of till now; neither does any man offer to devise what possibly this might
prefigure in Christ: As for the third, it cannot be denied, but that Christ
manifested before his death, that his Christian Churches should observe a
Sabbath as well as the Jews did; this appears, Matthew. 24.20. Pray, that your
flight be not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day; and thus Bishop Andrews
accommodates that place in his pattern of Catecheticall doctrine. It is as
manifest, that the day of Christ's resurrection is called in the Scripture the
Lords Day; as manifest that not the day of the year, but the day of the week,
whereon Christ rose, is called the Lords Day, which few take notice of.
Likewise in the old Testament is manifest that the Jews Sabbath is called the
Lords holy Day. Then the congiuity in reference to the reason of the original
institution is most exact. For first, Christ by his resurrection, brought with
him a new creation; and this new creation, as D. Andrews expresses it,
treading herein in the steps of the ancients, requires a new Sabbath; and as
the Lord rested on the seventh day from the work of creation, so our Savior
on the first day of the week from the work of Redemption: And lastly, the day
of Christ's resurrection, was the day whereon Christ the stone formerly refused
by the builders, was made the head of the corner, and of this day the Prophet
professes of old, saying, This is the day which the Lord has made, let us be
glad and rejoice in it; which can have no other congruous meaning but this;
this is the day which the Lord has made festival, especially considering the
doctrine of Bishop Lake, which is this; that the work of the day is the ground
of hallowing the day, as is to be seen in the institution of all festivalls,
both Humane and Divine. And I have already showed how absurd it is, that we
should expect it should be left unto the Church her liberty to appoint it,
considering the great danger of dissension thereabouts, and extreme confusion
thereupon; And it cannot be denied, but this day was established by the
Apostles, and that as of authority Divine, as appears generally by the
ancients. Athanasius professing, that Dominus consecravit hunc diem; Austin,
that Apostoli sanxerunt; and Gregory, that Antichrist, when he comes into an
humor of imitating Christ, should command the observation of the Lords Day;
and Eusebius has as pregnant a testimony to the same purpose as any; and
Sedulius; and that not one of the Ancients, as I know, alleged to the contrary.
So that to ascribe the institution of it to humane authority, that every way
were a scandalous doctrine, and so would the practice be also according
thereunto. And consequently the Church has no authority to change the day, as
Doctor Fulke professes against the Rhemists: And to say the contrary, is to
say that the Church has authority to concur with the Jews in keeping with
them the Saturday, with the Turks, in keeping with them the Friday; yea, that
they have authority to divide the days of the week, one nation taken one day
to observe, and another another, which is as much as to say, that the Church
has authority to be notoriously scandalous. In the fifth he delivers more
truth than in all his preface besides: we make no question, but that works of
necessity and works of charity may be done on this day, though the proper
works of the day are the works of holiness. I know none that thinks it
unlawful to dress meat proportionable to a man's estate on this day: some are
of opinion, that this was not forbidden unto the Jews; and that albeit to go
abroad on that day to gather Manna was forbidden, yet not the preparing or
dressing of it; though the most common opinion of our Divines is to the
contrary: Some think a greater strictness was enjoined them in the
wilderness than afterward observed by them. Neh. 5.18.
As in the story of Nehemiah it is said, there was prepared for his table daily
an Ox, and five chosen Sheep; and our Saviors entertainment by some on the
Sabbath day, does seem to them to intimate as much; howsoever in after times
it came to pass that they grew superstitious this way; As Austin observes of
them in his days, that Iudaei neque occidunt, neque coquunt. Others who think
it was both enjoined to them, and practiced by them with greater strictness,
conceive that this was by reason of the mysterious signification, to wit, of
some exact rest in Christ; this was their ceremonial rest; we acknowledge no
rest but moral, which we understand in that sense which here is expressed in
part, and but in part, after a halting manner; For he professes, that on the
Lords Day we are to abstain from such works as are an hinderance to Gods
service, but he delivers this only of the public service; as if to spend an
hour and an half in the morning, and an hour and an half in the afternoon
in Gods service, were enough for the sanctifying of the day; yet Gerardus the
Lutherane observes, that God commands the day to be sanctified, not a part of
the day. And let the law of this nation or of any nation of the world be judge
between us, whether in case one man owe another a days service; I say, let the
world judge, whether in common equity this be to be interpreted of an hour and
an half in the morning, and an hour and an half in the evening, or only of
a part of the day, and not rather the whole day. And what vile courses are
these, that men should carry themselves so basely in dispensing unto God the
proportion of his service. In the sixth and last place, we have that whereunto
all the former discourse is consecrated, namely, to make way for such profane
sports and pastimes, which here are glosed with the cleanely styles of
recreations to refresh the spirits, and for the increase of mutual love and
neighborhood amongst us, as if he were ashamed to speak out, that all this
tends to the countenance of May-games and morricing, and dancing about
May-poles on the Lords Day. D. Andrews, sometimes Bishop of Winchester,
Pattern of Catech. p. 244, 245. on the Con.
spared not to profess, that vacare choreis, to be at leisure on that day, for
dancing, is the Sabbath of the golden calfe, and he allegeth Austin for it,
though he cannot justify his quotation. Doctor Downeham, Bishop of Derry,
calls such like courses profane sports and pastimes, which more distract, and
more hinder our works than honest labors; and he censures also such a
Sabbath, calling it, the Sabbath of the calfe, Exodus 23.6.18.19. Bishop
Babington, on Exodus 16. puts a Christian soul upon this meditation, Good Lord,
what do I upon the Sabbath day? This people of his might not gather Manna, and
may I safely gad to faires and markets, to dancings and drinkings, to wakes and
wantons, to Bearebaitings and Bulbaitings, with such like wicked profanations
of the Lords Day? Are these works for the Sabbath? Is this to keep the holy
day? Can I answer this to my God, that gives me six days for my self, and
takes but one to himself, of which I rob him also? No, no, assuredly I shall
not be able to endure his wrath for these things one day, and therefore I will
leave them, and regard his holy day hereafter better than I have done. And in
his exposition of the Commandments by way of question and answer, p. 44.
reproves expressly Summer-games on the Lords Day; and in his Examen of
conscience annexed to the fourth Commandment, he speaks against going to
Church-ales and Summer-games; nay, is it not apparent, that by the very act of
Parliament, 1o Caroli, that to go out of a man's own parish about any sports
or pastimes on the Sabbath day, is to profane the Sabbath? For to prevent the
profanation of the Sabbath, is that statute made: Now, unless the sports
themselves be profanations of the Sabbath, it is as evident, that to go forth
of a man's parish unto such sports, is no profanation, any more, than to go out
of a man's parish walking, or to confer in pious manner with a friend, or to
fetch a Physician or Surgeon, if need be, or to hear a Sermon. And it is very
strange, that we of the reformed Churches, shall justify such liberty on the
Lords Day, which Papists condemn on their holy days; who usually complain of
dancing upon such days; as Polydor Virgil upon Luke, and Parisiensis de
legibus cap. 4. And of old such courses have been forbidden by the decrees of
Leo, and Anthemius Emperors; It is condemned also in the synod of Toledo Can.
23. as Baldwin the Lutheran shows, who also writes devoutly against such
courses on the Lords Day, and gives this reason. For if the labors of our
calling are forbidden in the holy day, how much more such recreations? and p.
48. He showed how the Sabbath was profaned by unchaste dancings and any manner
of wantonness; what need I here to make mention of Austin; who professes, and
that against the Jews, that it is better to go to plow then to dance; and
that it were better for their Women to spin Wool, then immodestly to dance, as
they did; yet now a days such as oppose the same courses, as Austin did, are
censured for Judaizing; thus the World seems to be turned upside down. Is it
not high time Christ should come to set an end to it?

Dielericus the Lutherane complains of the like profanations of the Sabbath
too much in course amongst them, in his Analysis of the Gospells for the Lords
Day. p. 559. and let every Christian conscience be judge, whether to follow
May-poles, May-games and Morris dancing be to sanctify the Sabbath as God
commands? if any man shall say, that the fourth Commandment concerned the
Jews, and not us Christians, he must therewithal renounce the book of
Homilies. For it professes that this Commandment binds us to the observation
of our Sabbath, which is Sunday; the words are these. So if we will be the
children of our Heavenly Father, we must be careful to keep the Christian
Sabbath Day, which is the Sunday, not only for that it is Gods Commandment,
but also to declare our selves to be loving children in following the example
of our gracious Lord and Father. Then complaining how the Sabbath is profaned;
Some use all days alike -- The other sort worse: For although they will not
travail, nor labor on the Sunday, yet they will not rest in holiness, as God
commands; but they rest in ungodliness and filthiness, prancing in their
pride, pranking and pricking, poynting and painting themselves to be gorgeous
and gay. They rest in excess and superfluity, in gluttony and drunkenness
like Rats and Swin: they rest in brawling and railing, in quarrelling and
fighting: they rest in wantonness, in toyish talking, in filthy fleshlinesse;
and concludes after this manner, so that it does too evidently appear that God
is more dishonored, and the Devil better served on Sunday, then upon all the
days of the week beside. And that distinction which Calvin makes of the
Jewish observation of the Sabbath, and our Christian observation of a Sabbath
is, for ought I know, generally received of all; and the distinction is this;
that the Jews observed their Sabbath so strictly in the point of rest, for a
mysterious signification; but we observe it in resting from other works so
far forth as they are Avocamenta a sacris studiis and meditationibus,
avocations from holy studies, and meditations; now it is apparent that sports
and pleasures are as strong avocations from holy studies and meditations, as
worldly cares; and both equally are noted out to be such as choke the Word,
Luke 8.14. And therefore this day is altogether appointed to this end, even to
recreate our selves in the Lord; For seeing God purposes one day to keep an
everlasting Sabbath with us, when God shall be all in all; to make us the more
fit for this even the more meet partakers, of the inheritance of Saints in
light, therefore he has given us his Sabbaths to walk with him, and to inure
our selves to take delight in his company, who takes delight to speak unto us
as from Heaven in his holy Word, and to give us liberty to speak unto him in
our prayers, confessions, thanksgivings and supplications; on other days we
care for the things of this World, on this day our care should be spiritual
and heavenly in caring for the things of another World; so our pleasures should
be spiritual on this day; Esaias 58.13.
If thou shall call the Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it as glorious unto
the Lord. Now have we not as much cause to perform this duty under the Gospel
as ever the Jews had under the Law? And indeed there is no color of reason
against this, but by affirming that now the setting of a day apart for Gods
service is left at large to the liberty of the Church; and albeit the Church
has set apart the Lords Day for this; yet their meaning herein is no more then
this, that they shall come to Church twice a day, and afterward give themselves
to what sports soever are not forbidden them by the Laws of the Land: so that
now a days we are free from the obligation to the fourth Commandment, and
yet we are taught by the Church as well at the hearing of this Commandment as
at any other to say, Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep
this Law; and the book of Homilies urges us to the sanctifying of our
Christian Sabbath (which is Sunday, says the book expressly) and that by
virtue of Gods express Commandment.

And therefore I cannot but wonder at the indiscretion of this Prefacer, who
catches after such a superficial advantage as the denomination of a feast
amongst the Jews, not considering how little suitable it is to the grounds of
his Tenet; For by his Tenet, after evening Prayer the Sabbath is at end, the
Churches meaning being not any further to oblige them to the sanctifying of the
Lords Day, but to give them liberty to use any sports or pastimes not forbidden
them by the Laws of the Land. But so was not the feast of the Jews ended when
they danced; this being but an expression of that joy whereunto the present
solemnity called them; and they sinned no more herein then David, did when he
danced before the Arc; as we see Ier. 31.12. Therefore they shall come and
sing in the height of Sion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the
Lord for Wheat, and for Wine, and for Oil, and for the young of the flock, and
of the heard, and their soul shall be as a well watered Garden, and they shall
not sorrow any more at all. 13: Then shall the Virgin rejoice in the dance,
both young men, and old together; for I will turn their mourning into joy, and
will comfort them and make them rejoice for their sorrow. 14. And I will
satiate the soul of the Priest with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied
with my goodness says the Lord. And the like we read Esaias 30.19. Ye shall
have a song as in the Night, when an holy solemnity is kept, and gladness of
heart, as when one goes with a Pipe to come into the Mountain of the Lord to
the mighty One of Israel; so that if Morricing and May-games and Dancing about
May-poles were a sanctifying of the Sabbath Day in part (as the Lord commands
the day to be sanctified) then indeed these sports were as lawful on the Lords
Day, as the Jews piping and dancing were lawful on their feasts. But that any
such piping and dancing were used and allowed in those ancient times among the
Jews on their Sabbaths, there is not the least color of evidence. And it is
evident that such sports put them to less rest for their bodies, then the
works of their calling; neither is there any better evidence that any such
piping and dancing were in use amongst the Jews while they continued the
people of God on every day of their solemn feasts; for two days in each of
them, to wit, the first day, and the last, they are commanded to keep as
Sabbaths, whereon they were to have an holy convocation; and thereon they are
expressly commanded to rest from all servile works; and I should think, the
following of natural pleasures are to be presumed as servile works, as the
works of a man's calling.

Lastly, all recreations are to this end, even to fit us to the works of our
calling; either for the works of our particular callings, or the works of our
general callings, as we are Christians; Such sports, if they fit us for the
service of God, were more seasonable in the Morning then in the Evening. If for
the works of our particular calling; then are they inferior to the works of
our calling, the furthering whereof is their end; and the means are always
inferior in dignity unto the end. Now if the more noble works are forbidden
on that day, how much more such as are inferior are forbidden? But it may be
said, that men's minds being burdened, and oppressed with the former service of
the day, therefore some relaxatio^ is to be granted for the refreshing of our
spirits; As much as to say, a part of the Lords Day is to be allowed for
profane sports and pastimes, to refresh us after we have been tired out with
serving God; can this be savoury in the ears of a Christian? should not we
rather complain of these corruptions, and bewail it before God, then give our
selves to such courses as are apt to strengthen it? It is true; such is our
natural corruption, that nothing is more tedious unto us as we are in our
selves, then to converse with God; but should not the consideration hereof
provoke us so much the more to strive against it, then give way to the
nourishing and confirming of it? And has not our Savior told us, that not the
cares of this World only, but voluptuous living also, is it that choaks the
good seed of Gods Word, and causes it to become unfruitful in us? As for the
refreshing of our spirits and quickening them, and thereby making us the fitter
for Gods service; as in any modest exercise of the body in private, according
to every man's particular disposition, to prevent drowsinesse and dullness in
attending to Gods Word, in praying in singing of Psalms, I know none that
takes any exception against it. And as for the authority of the magistrate to
appoint pastimes, sure I am, the high Court of Parliament with us, and that in
the days of King Charles, has forbidden every man to come out of his parish,
about any sports and pastimes; a manifest evidence that in their judgment the
public prosecuting of such sports, and pastimes, is a plain profanation of
the Sabbath; and so by this authors profound judgment, they deserve to be
censured as inclining to Judaisme.

Indeed the use of the very name of Sabbath is now a days carped at; and why?
but because it is a sore offense unto them in their way; for if a rest from any
thing (otherwise lawful in it self) be required on the Lords Day, it seems
most reasonable that a rest is required from sports and pastimes: undoubtedly
they have neither reason nor authority to except against this; For our Savior
uses the word even of Christian times, Mat. 24.20. Pray that your flight be
not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath Day. Doctor Andrews, one of the greatest
Prelates of this Kingdom, accommodates this place to the same purpose. All
ceremonies (says he) were ended in Christ; but so was not the Sabbath. For
Mat. 24.20. Christ's bids them pray that their visitation be not on the Sabbath
Day: so that there must needs be a Sabbath after Christ's death; and by this
name he commonly calls this day we keep weekly as holy unto the Lord. The
book of Homilies plainly tells us, that the Sunday is our Sabbath. In the
conference at Hampton Court it is so called, without any dislike showed by any
one there present. And the only reason why the ancients put a difference in
this, not calling it the Sabbath day, but the Lords Day, was this, because Dies
Sabbati in Latin signifies the Saturday, which was the Jews Sabbath. But
they generally call us to a rest on this day, and that most exact, as wherein
we must Tantum Deo vacare, tantum cultibus divinis vacare, as Austin by name,
not sparing to confess that Arare melius est quam saltare; But Barklay it
seems, is of more authority with this Prefacer then Doctor Andrews, and the
Church, yea, and of our Savior too: yet we calling it by that name,
understand no other thing then our Christian Sabbath, and had rather it were
generally called the Lords Day; and Doctor Bownde also stands for this
denomination, and urges it: yet is he accounted a Sabbatarian by Master
Rogers, though we all concur in this, that thereon we ought to keep, and
sanctify our Christian Sabbath, And Iacobus de Valentia, who was no sectary in
the opinion of Barklay, to distinguish the Jewish Sabbath from ours, calls it
Sabbatum legale, and conclus. 4. he says that Christiana religio celebrat
verum Sabbatum morale in die Dominica. Christian Religion keeps a true moral
Sabbath on the Lords Day; yet I willingly confess, this is the usual course
of Papists now a days, not to call the Lords Day, so much as by the name of
our Sabbath. As for Barklays discourse; he is much fitter to write something
answerable to Don Quixot then to reason; we do observe the Lords Day, as a
Sabbath, not because God rested that day from the Creation; for our Doctor
Andrews (of somewhat more credit with us, and that not only for his place,
but for his sufficiency, then Barklay) has delivered it in the Star Chamber,
that It has ever been the Churches Doctrine, that Christ made an end of all
Sabbaths by his Sabbath in the Grave. That Sabbath was the last of them. And
that the Lords Day presently came in place of it. And again. That the Sabbath
had reference to the old Creation, but in Christ we are a new creature, a new
Creation, and so to have a new Sabbath. And this he says, is deduced plainly:
First by practice, then by precept. And this new Sabbath on the Lords Day, we
observe, because on that day Christ rested from the work of redemption, which
was wrought by his death. So that though the Lord began his labors in the
work of Creation on the first day of the week, yet the Lord Christ set an end
to his labors in the work of redemption on the same day of the week. As for
Christ's vanquishing the powers of death on that day, to wit, the first day of
the week; the Women that came to the Sepulcher at sun rising, found that he
was risen. And what powers are these powers of death, he rhetoricates of? is
there any positive nature in death that our Savior had need to take such
pains to overcome them; The Lord himself when he rested, he rested only
from Creation; he that was best acquainted with his courses has told us
saying, Pater usque hodie peratur, my Father to this day, works still, and I
work with him; yet he proceeds no farther in the work of Creation, nor
Christ being once risen, in the work of redemption: S. Jude exhorts us to
contend the more earnestly for the faith, because some there were craftily
crept in, who otherwise were like to bereave them of it: In like sort we had
never more need then now to contend for the maintenance of the Lords Day, as
our Christian Sabbath, because too many there are whose practice it is to
bereave us of the comfort of it.

The Doctrine of the Sabbath considered.
FIrst, I come to the Doctrine of the Sabbath translated by the Prefacer; I
nothing doubt but the Author thereof will take in good part my pains in the
discussion of it, considering the present occasion urging me hereunto; Out of
the variety of his reading, he observes many wild derivations of the name
Sabbath, and out of his judgment does pronounce that the Jews by their
Bacchanalian rites gave the World just occasion to suspect, that they did
consecrate the Sabbath unto Revells rather then Gods service. As for the
rigorous keeping of the day in such sort; Sect. 2.
as neither to kindle fire in the Wintertime wherewith to warm themselves: or
to dress meat for the sustentation of themselves; I am so far from
justifying it, that I willingly profess I am utterly ignorant, where any such
Christians live, that press any such rigorous observation of it. The Jews
were bound to observe the rest on that day for a mysterious signification sake,
and thereupon depended their rigorous observing of a rest, as many think, and
not Lyra alone. We must know (says he) that rest from manual works is not
(now) so rigorously observed as in the old Law, because meat may be dressed,
and other things done on the Lords Day, which were not lawful on the Sabbath:
because that rest was in part figurative, as was the whole state under the Law,
1 Cor. 10. All things befell them in figure; Now in that which is figurative,
if you take away never so little; (that is, if that which is figurative be not
exactly observed) the whole and entire signification fails, like as if you
take away but one letter from the name of Lapis, the whole and entire
signification is destroyed. To deal plainly, my opinion is, that all sports,
and pastimes on the Lords Day, are a breaking of the rest belonging to it, and
a profanation of that day which ought to be sanctified; And I trust, herein I
differ not one jot from the whole Parliament, 1o. Caroli; wherein was
expressly prohibited, that any man should go out of his own Parish to any
sports, and pastimes on the Sabbath day; and this is done to prevent the
profanation of it, as appears clearly by the reasons of that Act; which
Parliament was held certain years after this Lecture, concerning the Doctrine
of the Sabbath, was read in the University. And I nothing doubt but the censure
of a Zelote will pass upon me for this, though we show no more zeal in
saying, that The Lords Day is by some licentiously profaned, then others do in
professing that the Lord Day is by us superstitiously observed; nay who are the
greatest zelotes in their cause, let the Christian World judge by the effects;
This is all I have to note concerning the first Section. I come unto the second.

Secondly, and here in the first place concerning the institution of it; let
me take leave to profess, that the question it self is not indifferenly
stated, when it is stated thus, whether before the publishing of Moses Law, the
Sabbath was to be observed by the law of Nature. For I am verily persuaded,
that the Doctor himself will not affirm, that after the publishing of Moses
law, it was to be observed by the law of nature; understanding by the law of
nature (as I presume he does) such a law as is known by the very light of
nature. Aristotle has taught us in general, that moral duties are rather
wrought upon a sober conscience by persuasion, than do carry with them any
convincing evidence of demonstration. Yet it is confessed, that by the light of
nature, some time ought to be set apart, even for the public service and
worship of God, and not only so, but also it is nothing less clear, that a
sufficient proportion of time must be alloted to the professed service of our
Creator. But wherein this sufficient proportion of time does consist, we are to
seek, being left unto our selves, and in my judgment, considering what we are,
it is very fit we should be to seek in this; that so our eyes may wait upon
the direction of our Maker. For, is it fit that servants should cut out a
proportion of service to their Master at their own pleasure, and not rather be
guided herein by their Masters pleasure, especially by such a Master, to whom
we owe not only all that we do enjoy, but our selves also; who holds our
souls in life, and in whose hands is the breath of all mankind. The question
thus untowardly proposed, it is subjoyned that, They commonly which are more
apt to say any thing, than able afterward to prove it, maintain affirmatively
that it was. Doctor Rivet having proposed this, adds, that if it be spoken of
the law of nature, properly so called, scarce any one will be found to
maintain any such thing. And indeed, the question in hand, is of the
institution of the Sabbath: Now, no wise man uses to inquire of the
institution of that which is written in our hearts, and known unto us by the
very common light of nature. It is true, some fetch the original thereof from
the beginning of the world, when God first blessed the seventh day and
sanctified it: And what other sense this can have, than that God commanded it
to be set apart for holy uses, we cannot devise; For seeing Gods blessing and
sanctifying of it does undoubtedly denote some act of God, this must be either
an immanent act, or an act transient; Not an act immanent, for all such are
eternal, but this was temporal, following upon Gods rest on the seventh: For
therefore (it is said) God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; and
being an act transient and temporal, it must declare his will to have it
sanctified, that is (by the general notion of the word) set apart, that is,
from profane and secular, to holy uses; And how could this will of God be
manifested but by commandment, seeing it is a will of God not so much
concerning what shall be done, as concerning what shall be man's duty to do?
And this has both Walaeus, and after him Rivetus justified, and this latter
against Gomarus, once and again, and that by diverse arguments. And thus, as we
have express Scripture for it, so we have as evident reason to justify it:
For, no other ground can be devised for the dividing of the whole course of
time into weeks, each consisting of seven days, than as it stands in congruity
to Gods making the world in six days, and resting on the seventh. Which
division of time was undoubtedly observed by the Israelites, and received by
them from their forefathers, yea, and from the Patriarchs of old, who lived
before the flood, and that continued without alteration even from the Creation
of the world; For otherwise they could not have discerned what days had been
answerable to the first six of the Creation, and what day to the seventh,
wherein God rested, having finished the creation. But this was well known unto
them, as appears by their gathering Manna, and promulgation of the 4th
Commandment, together with the rest on Mount Sinai; Nay, this division of time
into weeks, was generally observed among the heathens, as has been showed by
great variety of reading, and that this has been the most ancient division of
time, those other divisions into months and into years, coming in place long
after, according as the motion of the Moon and of the Sun were found out by
Astrologers, not till then, like as the denomination of the seven days of the
week by the several names of the planets, was not brought in, until the
several motions of all the Planets, come to be discovered. As for the second
reason proposed thus on our part; If all the rest of the Commandments flow
from the principles of nature, how is this excluded? It is not fit that any man
should take upon him the shaping of his adversaries arguments; That this
Commandment should be taken for a part of the moral Law, I wonder that any
man should be so unreasonable as to deny; but that this Commandment should
flow from the Principles of nature; and that delivered without distinction, I
know no man that affirms. But let us distinguish, and I make no doubt, but
there will be found no difference of moment between Doctor Prideaux and us:
For, I find no man to deny, but that some time in general is to be set apart,
as well for Gods public worship and service, as for private, and that this is
acknowledged by the very light of nature; Only as touching the proportion of
time that is to be set apart for Gods service, herein we are to seek; yet
herein also the light of nature does advantage us, and that sufficiently in two
particulars: For the truth whereof, I dare appeal to the judgment of Doctor
Prideaux himself. 1. The first is this, that not only some time, but a
sufficient proportion of time is to be consecrated to the exercises of piety,
both public and private. Gomarus and Rivetus are driven to acknowledge this,
in answer to Walaeus about the proportion of one day in seven. And whereas we
may be to seek of agreement about what is sufficient: 2. Therefore in the next
place, the very light of nature does suggest unto us; that it is far more fit
that the Master should prescribe unto the servant, what proportion of service
he expects from his hands, than that the servant at his pleasure should cut out
what proportion of service he thinks good unto his Master; how much more fit
that the Creator should prescribe unto his creature, then that the creature
should prescribe unto his Creator; considering, 1. how the dominion of God over
his creature is incomparably greater than that which any other Master has over
his servant. 2. That man may become unreasonable in his demands and commands,
God cannot. 3. God can give strength to his creature to perform what he
commands, man cannot. 4. The more clear and express the Commandment is, the
more comfortable to the creature, being hereby assured, the service he
performs is in the way of obedience, not unto his own will, but to the will
of his Master. 3. May I not add a third? namely, that by the very equity of a
natural conscience, it is more fit to apportion unto Gods service one day in a
week, rather than one day in a month; especially considering that originally
time has been divided into weeks, and not into months, until along time
after. In all which, I am content to appeal to the judgment of Doctor
Prideaux himself. Yet we have not done in this argument; For in the fourth
Commandment, there is enjoined, not only the setting apart of some time in
general for Gods service; and the proportion of one day in seven in special,
but also the particulating of a certain day under this proportion; and who
sees not, that so many different things (though one in subordination to
another) being duly considered, it is no way fit to confound them, and to
speak hand over head of the fourth Commandment without distinctions? Now, as
touching the particularity of the day, herein I confess, we are more to seek
by the light of nature, than for the special proportion of time due unto God;
Yet consider, whether herein also we are not assisted in good measure by the
light of nature, and that in certain particulars. 1. As first the decent
proportion of time being observed, it is nothing material in it self, as
touching the advancement of the substance of Gods service; what day of the
week it be performed under the duly specified proportion. For we find by
experience, that all Masters stand for a proportion of service, which they
expect from the hands of their servants; the quantity of service being a very
considerable matter in the judgment of all; but whether a man work the first
hour of the day, and rest the second, or five hours in the morning, and rest
the sixth; or in what other difference soever, so the quantity and proportion
of service for that day be performed, all Masters rest satisfied. So for the
service of the week, if it be sufficient to perform thus much service, as
namely, a days service in a week, it matters not what day it be done, so the
work be performed; I say, it matters not, as touching the substance of the
work it self to be performed. 2. But though it matters not in this respect,
on what day the service is performed; yet it may matter much in another
respect: For whereas we are all Gods creatures, and consequently his servants;
and the service we speak of concerns us all in general, and that equally,
and all we are reasonable creatures; 1. First it seems fit in reason, that
there should be an uniformity: For, like as we converse together by commerce
and trade in the works of our calling on other days of the week; so it
seems most fit we should walk together with God in the performance of his
service, otherwise there would be a manifest breach of society. For suppose
there be in such a town as ours, seven times four hundred persons (for we
have almost 2000. Communicants; one of the three parishes in Reading has as
many) if one 400. should keep the first day of the week for their Sabbath
another 400. the second day of the week, and so to divide the days of the
week between them, here were a manifest breach of society both in things
humane, and in things Divine; for every day in the week 400. would be
excluded, from conversing with their brethren, in businesses temporal; and all
the rest from them whose day it is to rest unto God, in exercises spiritual,
which all I presume by the very light of nature, would judge intolerable. And
this order would have place not only in particular towns among themselves,
but with other also; considering that six days in the week we have converse
by commerce and trade, not with our neighbors only, but with other towns
also, far and near. Again, another inconvenience would arise, and that a
miserable one, more dangerous than the former; For hereupon a window will be
opened unto dissension, each standing for his own way, as the manner of man
is; and what could be expected but wretched confusion should follow hereupon?
Lastly consider, should not the service of man prove more comfortable unto him,
if God, as he has appointed him the proportion of time, so he would be
pleased not to leave him to seek of the particularity of the day under the
forementioned proportion. 2. Therefore, as it is fit there should be an
uniformity, for the reasons given; so for the maintenance of uniformity, no
means sufficient, but Gods own prescribing of it, hereupon all just occasion
of dissension will be cut off, confusion will be prevented, and the service of
God, as every way, even in the very circumstance of time, according to his
will, shall be the more cheerfully and comfortably performed. 3. Thirdly,
consider what D. Lake writes in his Theses de Sabbato. These. 44. Gods Will is
understood often by his Precept, but when we have not that, the practice does
guide the Church: 45. This is a Catholic rule, observeable in the institution
of all sacred feasts, both divine and humane: 46. The work of the day is the
ground of hallowing the day, whether it be weekly, monthly, or yearly, as
particulars evidence in Scripture and History: 47. No man can translate the
works, therefore no man can translate the day. This is an undoubted rule in
Theology. Now, suppose God had not commanded the observation of any one day in
the week, but left it unto man to choose; if withal he should observe one
day preferred before another in some notable work; what reason is there, why
man should choose any other day rather than that? 1. This discourse proceeds
upon supposition of one day in seven, to be set a part for Gods service; and
accordingly we being upon the election of the day. Now, consider the base of
Adam; God having revealed unto him how many days he had spent in the creating
of all things, and in what order he created them, the last day of the six
being the day wherein he created the beasts of the field, then man, and after
placing him in Paradise, and after experience of his wisdom appearing in the
naming of the beasts brought before him, not finding an help meet for him,
casting him in a sleep, and taking a rib out of his side, thereof made a woman
to be a help meet for him. The next day, which was the seventh, God resting
from his work, what day should man have preferred for Gods service before
this; considering the proportion between Gods rest from his works, and man's
rest from his; and that as this day was the first of Gods rest, so it was the
first of man's work; And the very Heathens have counted it reasonable, a Jove
principium, to begin with God, especially there being no better means to take
livery and seisin of the world made by God for the service of man, than by the
service of God, man being made to this end, and accordingly after Gods image,
endued with an understanding heart to know him, and with rational affections
to fear and serve him. And that with the first, as Caietan observes, and that
out of the judgment of reason, Par est ut post accepta beneficia agnoscamus
benefactorem quandoque uno statim: It is fit after benefits received, we
should acknowledge our Creator sometimes, yea, forthwith: As we read the
Angels did; as the Book of Job informs us, Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the earth? declare, if thou have understanding, who has laid
the measures thereof, if thou know? or who has stretched the line upon it.
Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone
thereof. When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy. The sum of all is this: 1. It is generally confessed, and
that by the very light of nature, that sometime, and that in a sufficient
proportion, is to be set apart for Gods service. 2. God being our great Lord
and Master, it is most fit, by the very suggestion of nature, that God himself
should set forth unto us his servants, both the proportion of time, according
to which, and the particularity of the day wherein he will be served by us. 3
We judge that proportion which God has designed, and the day also which he
has marked out to us in his Word, to be most agreeable unto reason in the
consideration of his works. And in all this I am very willing to remit, my
self to the judgment of Doctor Prideaux. The next reason here mentioned
follows; Can we conceive that this only ceremonial law crept in, we know
not how, amongst the moral? Or that the Prophet Moses would have used such
care in ordering the Decalogue, only to bring the Church into greater
troubles? I answer, that some time should be set apart for Gods service, was
never accounted ceremonial; As touching the proportion of one day in seven
days to be consecrated unto God, I never found any Divine ancient or modern
busy his wits about devising any ceremoniality therein; neither did I observe
any ancient produced to acknowledge any ceremoniality therein; but as it is fit
we should wait upon God for designing the proportion of time, (in which
respect diverse count that positive) so God having designed unto us the
proportion of time, we are bold to say with Azorius, that rationi maxim
comsentaneum est, It is most agreeable to reason after six work days to
consecrate one unto God. As touching the particularity of the day, under the
proportion of one in seven, there is to be considered, both rest and
sanctification; As for sanctification, I never read nor heard any man that
constituted any ceremoniality in the sanctification of the day, but only in
the rest of the day; yet all these are shuffled together, and usually men talk
of the ceremoniality of the fourth Commandment hand over-head without all
distinction: Now, it is true, the ancient Fathers generally conceived a
ceremoniality in the rest of the seventh day; but what was signified by this
ceremony, I no where find expressly, neither in Master Broad, nor in this
discourse. Other Divines of these days, had rather call it positive; but how?
Surely in reference only to the particular day, not to the rest of it, there
being a moral rest necessarily required to the sanctification of it, namely,
so far forth in resting from our works, as they are avocamenta a sacris
studiis and meditationibus, avocations from sacred studies and meditations, as
Calvin expresses it, and I know none that differ from him herein. Aquinas is
of the same judgment; but withal he confesses, that the Jews observed the
rest of this day for a mysterious signification sake, which is as much as to
say, ceremonially; in which respect it ought to be abrogated, when the body
came that was signified thereby. So that this nothing hinders the morality of
one day in seven, no nor the observation of any one particular day that Gods
Word shall commend unto us for our Sabbath, and that unalterable, save by that
authority whereby it was introduced; Neither had Moses any hand, that I know,
in ordering the Decalogue, it being first pronounced by the mouth of God, and
afterward written in tables by the finger of God. Nor did the designing of a
day expose the Church to any trouble, much less the designing the proportion
of time; It being most requisite, the Lawmakers should design each of these
for the preventing of trouble; and each being thus designed, we find the
designation of them to be most agreeable unto reason. If Torniellus thought it
hardly credible that Enosh should appart himself from the sons of Cain to
call upon the Name of the Lord, without some certain and appointed time for
that performance. I do not think that Doctor Prideaux conceaves it credible,
that any wise man would think it fit that the servant, and not rather the
Master should apportion out that service which is due unto his Lord and master;
or that it is more fit the servant should have the designation of the
particular time rather then the master, the former reasons duly considered. Or
is there any reason why Calvin should have so little authority, when he
discourses in reason for the original institution of the Sabbath, as from the
Creation; and so great authority when he speaks upon his bare word against
the morality of one day in seven (as some think) Septenarium numerum non ita
moror, ut ejus servituti quicquam astringerem. It is an easy matter to say they
conclude nothing; though I may justly wonder any reasonable man should say so
of the argument drawn from those words Genesis 2.3. Therefore God blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it; the author alleging no other exception
against it, but the interpretation of Tostatus, namely, that it is delivered by
way of anticipation. For this is as good as to confess, that to bless and
sanctify the seventh day, is all one as if he had said that God commanded it
to be sanctified. Only they will not have it understood of that time, when the
Lord rested from the works of Creation. So that the meaning of Moses must be
this, In the seventh day God ended the works which he had made, and the seventh
day God rested from all the works which he had made, and because God rested on
that seventh day from all the works that he had made, therefore he commanded,
not then that, that day from thence forward; but 2400. years after, that men
should consecrate that day to divine service. Now in disputing against the
unreasonablenesse of this interpretation given by Tostatus, I am very willing
to make Doctor Prideaux my judge, and (as it were) under his moderation to
proceed in this. And here I purpose not to revive the disputations of Walaeus,
and Rivetus against Tostatus his anticipation; but only to content my self
with the ground laid by Doctor Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells, in his Thesis of
the Sabbath, These. 46. The work of the day is the ground of hallowing the day,
whether it be weekly, monthly or yearly, as particulars evince in Scripture
and History. I make bold to lay this for my ground in this place, because it is
apparent that God made his work on the seventh day, the ground of hallowing
that day, namely, because it was the day of Gods rest, therefore to make it the
day of men's rest, for the sanctifying of it unto the Lord. Now I pray consider
is it reasonable, that because such or such a work has been done in such a
day, provoking us to keep it a festival day unto the Lord, therefore it
becomes us accordingly to sanctify it, but when? not that day nor the same day
senight, nor throughout the 52. weeks of that year, nor any of the 52. weeks
the next year; no nor for the space of a 1000 years, or two thousand: but
after the expiration of 2500 years and more, then and not till then to
sanctify that day, because on that day of the week the Lord rested from the
work of Creation, 2500 years before? why might not the wisdom of our
Parliament have imitated God, and in memory of our deliverance from the
Gunpowder treason, on the 5. of November, ordained that day, should be kept
festival, so far forth as in the public congregation to make a solemn, and
thankful commemoration of that wonderful deliverance, to begin forsooth a
thousand or two thousand years after. So the Jews observed yearly the feast
of Purim, in remembrance of Gods merciful deliverance of them, from the
conspiracy of Haman, but when did they ordain this feast to begin? not till a
thousand years after, had they done so, who would not have said, that their
wisdom herein had exceeded all humane discretion? Or to avoid the like
unreasonablenesse on their side, well they say that the case is not alike; for
as much as the fresh remembrance of the Creation, and of Gods resting on the
seventh day was sufficient unto them, both for the maintaining of the division
of time into weeks or seven days; and of sanctifying each seventh unto the
Lord; but when the memory hereof began to be obliterated, to wit, about some
900 years after the flood, then it was fit the Lord should revive the
observation of this day, by a particular Commandment? But herby they shall
make the fourth Commandment not only moral, but also more natural then they
are aware. Though I willingly confess they might well conceave that after some
15 or 1600 years, men might grow weary of observing the seventh day, the day
of Gods rest from the work of Creation, because by experience we find that
after some 15 or 1600 years, Christians seem to grow weary of keeping holy the
Lords day, the day whereon the Lord Christ rose from the grave, and so rested
from his work of redemption. But as not long after 1600 years the flood came
to set an end to the World by water; so it may be after 1600 years of the
Gospel, there are but as few years to the coming of Christ, to set an end
unto this World by fire: certainly, as often as some festival day, is
grounded upon some singular work of God done, on that day (which Doctor Lake
proposes as a general and undoubted rule, always to hold concerning
festivalls) no time more fit for the observation of such a day, then when the
memory of the work is fresh; then is a man like to be more devout, more
cheerful in Gods service, more thankful unto him for his great goodness,
like as the Angels immediately upon their Creation praised God Job. 38.7. When
the Stars of the morning praised me, and all the children of God rejoiced,
which in Cornelius his language was to observe the Sabbath. Now give me leave
to enlarge this by proportion. As there are Sabbaths of rejoicing, so there are
Sabbaths of mourning. And the expiatio^ day commanded unto the Jews, was an
annual feast, to inure them to this holy exercise, not only once a year, but
oftener, as God should minister occasion: Now this day is called by the Lord
also a Sabbath, Levit. 16.31. And Doctor Andrews in his pattern of
Catecheticall doctrine, handles the duties of such a day, in his doctrine of
the Sabbath. And it is well known that days of wrath have their course, and
shall have their course, as long as this World lasts as well as days of
mercy: And we have cause to bless God that he has inclined his Majesty's
heart to take notice of such days of wrath; and accordingly by Proclamation,
to command a general humiliation throughout the Land, diverse and sundry times.
So we read that the Jews observed a fast on the first month, (besides the
fast of the seventh which God commanded) as we read Zach. 7.3.5. and it was
observed on the tenth day of that month; that being the day whereon
Nebuchadnezzar burnt the house of the Lord, as we read, Ier. 52.12, 13. Now
thus far had they observed the 70 years of their captivity Zach. 7.5. they did
not put off the observation of it till a thousand years after; it being most
fit, then especially to mourn, when God calls us thereunto, and not to put
it off when he calls us thereunto; the Lord sore complaining of such
courses, and pronouncing an heavy judgment upon offenders in this kind, Esaias
22.12, 13, 14. Now like as it becomes us to mourn, when first God calls us
thereunto, so it becomes us to rejoice in keeping a festival unto him, when
he calls us thereunto; lest otherwise it prove out of season, when it is
begun a long time after, and utterly neglected upon the fresh memory thereof.
We read that when the Ilienses, inhabitants of Ilium called anciently by the
name of Troy, sent an Embassage to Tiberius, to condole the death of his Father
Augustus; he considering the unseasonablenesse thereof, it being a long time
after his death; requited them accordingly saying, that he was sorry for their
heaviness also, having lost so renowned a Knight as Hector was, to wit, above
a thousand years before, in the wars of Troy.

Surely when in the fourth Commandment, and in the reason given it is said;
For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that in them
is, and rested the seventh day; therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it, it stands with far better reason to conceave the meaning hereof,
in reference to time past, thus; therefore the Lord commanded the
sanctification of it 2500 years before; then to understand Moses words, Genesis
2.3. Therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it in reference
to the time to come thus, therefore the Lord commanded that seventh day to be
sanctified 2500 years after. And observe I pray the form of words in the
fourth Commandment, when it is said, Therefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and sanctified it, not of the time present that he now does bless it,
and sanctify it, but of the time past, therefore he did bless it, and
sanctify it; and when I pray but immediately from the Creation, that very day
whereon he first rested, and consequently that very day, he commanded the
seventh day to be sanctified; for to sanctify the day is to command the
sanctification of it, as is confessed; otherwise there were no place to plead
anticipation. And that the phrase of speech must signify Gods Command for the
sanctification of it, I have already proved.

As for the Fathers affirming that the ancient Patriarchs did not observe the
Sabbath, albeit their authority is of no force to countervaile so manifest
evidence both of Scripture it self; and of the reason drawn from the division
of time into weeks, even from the creation, and so continued unto the Jews in
the very days of Moses. Yet I may be bold to say, we have better authority
from the ancients for justifying of our cause than our adversaries have for
theirs. Walaeus has represented Chrysostom, Theophilus, Antiochenus, Austin,
Theodor. maintaining that the justification of the Sabbath has been from the
Creation: To these Rivelies adds Tertullian as of the same mind, howsoever
alleged on the adversaries part. And he also acknowledges the Jews to be of
the same opinion: Beda is alleged indeed by Pererius as on the part of
Tostatus, but no such thing appears in his Hexameron, but rather expressly
the contrary (his words being these of the Sabbath, semper celebrari solebat)
as I have showed in my answer to the preface, Sect. 1. Where also are
represented the testimonies of Athanasius and Epiphanius, as maintaining the
institution of the Sabbath to have been from the Creation; which also has
been showed to have been the opinion of Philo and Josephus, and diverse of the
Jewish Rabbis, and of the author of the Chaldee Paraphrase upon the Psalms,
and of diverse others. In Psalm. 29.
Again, concerning the passages alleged out of some Fathers to the contrary;
not only Hospinian answers, that those proceed of the rigorous observation
of the Sabbath; but Iacobus Salianus a Papist, in particular thus interprets
Tertullian; and Tertullian must be in some such sense understood, as namely,
either of observation of other Sabbaths in use among the Jews, or of the
rigorous observation of the Jewish Sabbath, or of the Jewish manner in
observing it by particular sacrifices appointed for that day; for as much as he
clearly professes, that the Sabbath day was a primordio sanctus, as Rivetus
shows, and that the other Fathers (which are but four) truly alleged, are to
be interpreted by some such manner, I have endeavored to evince by diverse
reasons in my answer to the Preface. Sect. 1.
And though some are willing to admit that of Torniellus, that in the
accomplishment of the Creation, the Angels did observe the Sabbath, provided he
recompense them in this particular now in question, and add that the
observance of it here upon the earth was not till many ages after. Yet this
naked authority being little worth, his reason is so weak in the former, that
we have cause to suspect it will not prove any thing stronger in the latter;
though I should have been content to afford it due consideration had it been
proposed: As for the Angels singing and shouting for joy, this was performed,
as Torritallus acknowledges, the day wherein the foundation of the earth was
laid, which undoubtedly could not be after the first day of the creation. For
if the foundation of the earth was not laid then, when the Lord said, that it
was without form and void, and the waters covered it, I cannot devise when it
should be; It is granted that it may be probably conjectured, that the
sanctification of the Sabbath was before the Law, as concurring herein with
Calvin, but that Calvin says that no more, is not proved, neither is that
passage exhibited wherein Calvin should deliver his mind so coldly thereof; but
Calvin in his harmony upon the four books of Moses, and on the fourth
Precept, is express, that Diem septimu^ sibi sumpsit Deus ac consecravit
completa mundi creatione, that God assumed and consecrated the seventh day unto
himself upon the finishing of the worlds creation. And it is enough for us,
that then it was instituted; and hereupon let every sober reader judge, whether
it be not more then probable, that the holy Patriarchs at least observed it.
Neither do we affect that any man should rest satisfied with our conjectures;
but let our reasons be considered, and the plain Text of Scripture professing
that because God rested the seventh day, Sect. 3.
therefore he blessed the seventh day and sanctified it; and let them yield
thereunto no more in this particular, then whereof it does convince a man in
conscience. Yet who those late Writers be who are so unsatisfied in this point,
I know not well, I verily think they are very few Protestants. Gomarus (as I
remember) allegeth but two, Vatablus and Musculus, whereas Walaeus and Rivetus
between them, have alleged no less than thirty maintaining the contrary. As
for the Papists, we shall take notice of them in the next Section.

It is confessed that this proof is good, God blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it; therefore he commanded it to be kept holy by his people. The
sanctifying of the day in the true notion thereof being nothing but Gods
commanding man to sanctify it, which yet if any man deny, I appeal to my
former argument, delivered in the former Section, for the justifying thereof.
Only it is said that therence it follows not that Then or at that time, to
wit, the very day whereon God rested, he commanded it to be kept holy by his
people. Now this exception also I have remooved in the former Section. And it
is very strange we should be to seek of the time in reference whereunto this
is delivered; most of all, if spoken only in reference to 2500 years after,
and not the least intimation of so strange an anticipation beyond all example,
as Walaeus and Rivetus have proved. When Abulensis says that Moses spoke this
by anticipation rather to show the equity of the Commandment then the
Original; If the book of Genesis were written before the Commandment was
given on mount Sina, this interpretation must suppose that the Lord had already
revealed to Moses what he would do on Mount Sina; and what ground is produced
for the building of so much as any conjecture hereof thereupon? And what wise
man would expect that any man should be satisfied herewith? Does it not
concern them who maintain this affirmative to make it good by Texts of
Scripture? If after the Commandments were delivered on Mount Sina; what need
of representing the equity thereof, seeing the equity, and that in this very
way, is expressed in the Commandment it self, and that in such manner as to
manifest evidently that God did not now begin to command this, but that he
commanded it of old, even from the Creation, as already I have disputed and
proved. And though Abulensis were of this opinion, yet Catarinus was not; and
though Perorius the Jesuit to^ke part with Tostatus, yet Rivetus has showed
that Cornelius de lapide, Emmanuel Sa. Ribera, all Jesuits do not, but with
Catarinus rather, or that Steuchus, Eugubinus, Genebrard, and Iacobus Salianus
concur with them, against the opinion of Tostatus, Gomarus acknowledges
Marius also to be of the same mind, all Papists; and let me add unto these
all the Remists, as appears in their notes upon Apoc. 1.10. Enosh might call
upon the Lord, and Abraham offer sacrifice, without relation to a set, and
appointed time, oftener and seldomer as they had occasion. It was in the former
Section signified to be Torniellus his reason which here is answered; now
Torniellus was of a contrary opinion to us in this particular, yet he
confesses that it seemed hardly credible; neither does the Doctor deny it,
only he says that Enosh might so do; he does not say he did; yet
undoubtedly many things are done that are hardly credible should be done, much
more might be done, though indeed they are not; Yet this is none of our
arguments; but such as it is, let us not extenuate it, but take it aright as it
deserves to be taken. Torniellus suppposeth that Enosh did apart himself from
the sons of Cain; Now Enosh was not alone in this, for the Text says, Then
began men to call upon the name of the Lord, not Enosh alone. Now in
separation, they that separate from the same company in an holy manner have
reason to congregate themselves; the same holiness is as powerfully effectual
to the one as to the other; and they are called the Sons of God, in
distinction from the sons, and daughtes of men, Genesis 6.2. though then the
very sons of God began to degenerate. And that these meetings of many should
be without a set, and appointed time, I cannot devise any color of
probability, 1. For that they could not all meet in one congregation. 2. that
meeting in diverse, the children of God should desire that at one time their
meeting might be, the prayers of many concurring in the same faith, and joining
together do besiege Gods Ears, and work an holy violence upon him. 3.
otherwise, there would be a breach of society and mutual commerce, that being
an holy day in one place or country which was not in another. 4. being divided
far off it would be most difficult to make new appointments. 5. little
likelihood of agreement herein if left unto themselves, without some divine
direction and appointment. But to return, the next portion of the discourse is
this. And as for the not falling of the Manna on the Sabbath day, this rather
was a preparation to the Commandment, then any promulgation of it. But suppose
it had been a promulgation of it, what could that hinder the discourse of
Jacobs not neglecting Labans flock upon conscience of the Sabbath, which was
long before the children of Israells going down into Egypt; whereas Manna fell
not until their departing out of Egypt, and coming into the Wilderness,
which was diverse hundreds of years after. But yet the ordering of the Manna
in the falling of it six days, and not the seventh; does evidently argue that
this seventh standing in just correspondency to the seventh day from the
Creation, (as appears by the story following) the dividing of time into
weeks, and septenaries from the Creation, was exactly observed from the
Creation all along until that time: And no less evidently does it manifest,
that the Sabbath day was observed before the Law given on Mount Sinai; and
consequently either by light of nature directing them to the day of the week
whereon God rested; or by Commandment, and Commandment we find none before
that on Mount Sinai, unless that in Genesis 2.3. Go for a Commandment from the
beginning.

The first mention we read of the Sabbath is that Exodus 16.23. Where Moses
says, This is that which the Lord has said, to morrow is the rest of the holy
Sabbath unto the Lord; and let every one judge whether there be any form of a
Commandment in this, and whether he does not speak unto them of a Sabbath as
of a thing formerly well known unto them, and v. 25. To day is the Sabbath
unto the Lord; to day ye shall not find it in the field. This is not spoken as
if the condition of a Sabbath were any new thing unto them. But let us see
whether there be any great strength in that which follows. Put the case that
Jacob on the Sabbath had neglected Labans flook, and that the Israelites under
Pharaoh had not made up their tale of brickes, neither had he escaped a
chiding, nor they the insolent fury of their taskmasters. And now according to
the principles of these Sabbatarians, what would you counsel them to do? did
they observe the Sabbath? they were sure of punishment from man, did they
neglect it, they were sure of vengeance from the Lord, unto such streights are
they reduced, who would impose the Sabbath as a perpetual Law of nature. As
for the first of these, we cannot be ignorant, that both flocks of sheep,
and heads of greater cattle were looked unto in the time of the most rigorous
observation of the Sabbath. Our Savior observes the Jews practice
(notwithstanding all their rigor this way) was to unloose their Ox, and lead
him to watering: Neither was Laban so rigorous a Lord to Jacob being from the
first his uncle, and afterward his father in Law, and one that had as good
means to know the story of the Creation as Jacob, and how that the Lord from
the beginning Blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; afterward Jacobs
posterity met with Taske-masters in Egypt. And if the Egyptians had made
conscience of setting some time apart for the service of God, according to the
suggestion of that light which is confessed to extend so far by nature, how
improbable is it they would deny this unto their servants? The Kings of Persia
did not use them so hard, but promoted their sacrifices that they might pray
for the King, Ezr. 6.10.
and the Kings Children; Traian made a Law that the Jews should not be
molested on their Sabbath. The Turks at this day give liberty unto Christians
for the free exercise of their religion. And why should we think the
Egyptians more rigorous to the Israelites then the Babylonians were to the
Jews? Or if alike; why may not a man conclude as well of the Jews in Babylon,
as of the Israelites in Egypt that If they did observe the Sabbath they were
sure of punishment from man, if they did neglect it, they were sure of
vengeance from God. The Canon of Laodic^a enjoining the celebration of the
Lords day has this caution, si possint; which is thought to be spoken in
reference to servants under the tyranny of Heathen masters. And if the
observation of the Sabbath may give way to the exercise of charity toward
others, and of mercy toward beasts, may it not much more to the exercise of
mercy toward our own bodies? yet what if all this were granted? who sees not
that if there be any strength in this argument they may by as good reason
dispute against the profession of Christianity under persecuting tyrants. For
if they do profess christianity under such; they are sure of punishment from
man; if not, they are sure of vengeance from God. So that to no such straights
are we put as is devised, like as the state of the question obtruded upon us
is devised also, but that I have formerly cleared, and showed that we are to
distinguish. 1. of time in general to be set apart for Gods service. 2. of the
proportion of time in special. 3. of the day under that proportion of time in
particular. And how far the light of nature does -- direct us in all these.
That the sanctification of the seventh day as commanded from the beginning unto
man, I have already proved in the former Section, and also that reason
justifies this drawn from the division of time into weeks, as which had its
course from the beginning of the World; and how authority both ancient, and
modern does countenance this way of ours far more then the contrary. And
Manasses ben Israel one of the ancient wise Doctors of the Jews observes, that
when the Jews are bid to remember that they were servants in Egypt, this is as
if it had been said, remember how that in Egypt, where thou servedst, thou
wast constrained to work even upon the Sabbath day. In Exodus queast. 36. Upon
the Lords blessing the seventh day and sanctifying it from the beginning of the
World, and upon the fourth Commandment is founded our observation of the
Sabbath; as Chrysostom has professed; that God has manifested from the
beginning that one day in the circle of the week ought to be set apart for a
spiritual rest.

All confess that there is a difference between. 1. Time in general to be
set apart for Gods service. 2. And the proportion of that time. 3. And the
particularity of the day in that proportion. The first is generally received to
be moral, the other two some had rather call positive, then ceremonial,
because they conceave it to have been instituted in Paradise before the fall,
when there was no need of any ceremony. They who do most judiciously discourse
of ceremony in the fourth Commandment, do not call it ceremonial hand over
head, but with reference to the rest of the day. And herein the ceremoniality
they apply to the rest on the seventh day. As for the ceremoniality to be found
in the proportion of time indefinitely considered, as in one day of seven, I
never read nor heard, till now. Yet wherein this ceremoniality does consist, I
mean the thing signified thereby is not explicated at all, neither in respect
of the proportion of time, as of one day in seven, nor in reference to the
particular day. Yet the Jews rest on the seventh day, is generally conceaved
to prefigure Christ's rest in the grave that day full and whole, and only that
day. And as Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester in his Star Chamber speech
professes, that It has ever been the Churches doctrine that Christ made an
end of all Sabbaths by his Sabbath in the grave. That Sabbath was the last of
them. So Austin de Genesis ad lit. l. 4. c. 11. Beda in Hexameron on Genosis,
Aquin. 2.2. q. 121. art. 4. Piscat. on Luc. 14. And albeit the rest from works
may have a ceremonial significaton of a rest from sin in the way of grace,
as, Ezech. 20.12. and a rest both from sin, and sorrow; (which is also a
special work of ours through sin, Ier. 2.17. have thou not procured this unto
thy self because thou have forsaken the Lord.) and that in the way of glory,
Hebr. 4. yet this is no such ceremony as to be abolished upon the fulfilling of
the thing signified; for even the Jews under the Law had their rest from
sin, (in the way of grace) as we Christians under the Gospel, yet
nevertheless observed the Sabbath, and that glorious rest which shall not be
accomplished till the end of the World, is commonly called an eternal Sabbath.
And undoubtedly that is to be accounted as a rest moral whereunto the
sanctification of the day calls us, namely to rest from all works, as they
are Avocations from sacred studies, and meditations. But does Abulensis account
the rest of one day in seven ceremonial, and not moral? Doctor Willet relates
him as of an other opinion, and distinguishing thus. There are some things
which are simply moral, and some things simply ceremonial; and some things of
a mixed kind, as being partly moral, partly ceremonial. Simply moral are
those things which are grounded on the judgment of natural reason, as when
natural reason does dictate that some time is to be set apart for Gods
service; But precisely to appoint the seventh day more then any day of the
week, is simply ceremonial, quia non habet fundamentum a ratione, sed a
voluntate condentis legem; because it is not grounded on reason, but on the
will of the lawmakers. But to appoint one day of seven, and that day wholly for
the space of 24. hours to consecrate to Gods service, as therein to abstain
from all kinds of work, these things are not purely or simply ceremonial, but
partly moral as grounded on the judgment of reason, though not totally and
wholly. For the first, if above one day in the week should be kept perpetually
holy, Gravamen esset laborantibus toties vacare; it were a grievance to
laborers to rest from work so often (his meaning is in this case, they could
not sufficiently provide for themselves, and their families, as touching the
maintenance of this life temporal) and if but one day in a fortnight or a
month should be appointed, oblivisceremur Dei per desuetudinem cultus ipsius.
We should forget God through not accustoming our selves sufficiently to his
service. Therefore it stands with reason that one day in seven should be
celebrated to the Lord. This surely is not to deny the proportion of one day in
seven to be consecrated unto the Lord, to be moral; but to confirm it rather.
Neither do I find that Aquinas resolves it so, as here it is pretended; that
which he says to be ceremonial, is applied by him only to the particular
day of the week. Indeed he does say that the proportion of one day in seven
to be consecrated to the Lord, is moral, neither does he deny it; only he
says, it is moral that some time should be set apart for Gods service. Zan.
in 4. praecep. p. 599.
And it may be under this he comprehends the proportion of one day in seven, as
Zanchy does.

For albeit he treads in Aquinas steps when he says, Morale est quatenus
natura docet and pietas postulat, ut aliquis dies destinetur quieti, ab
operibus servilibus, quo divino cultui vacare possit Ecclesia; ceremoniale est
quatenus septimus dies fuit praescriptus, and non alius. It is moral to have a
day destinate to rest from servile works so to be free for Gods service. It is
ceremonial, that the seventh day, and no other is prescribed for this: yet a
little before he manifests that by one day to be set apart, for this he
means one day in seven, when he thus says.

Ibid. p. 595. Con. 1.
Morale est mandatum, quatenus praecipit ut e septem diebus unum consecremus
cultui divino -- and proinde quatenus tale mandatum est nunquam fuit abrogatum
nec abrogari potest. The Commandment is moral as it commands us to consecrate
one day in seven unto divine service. And so does Dominicus Bannes 22. q. 44.
art. 1. and Bellarmine de cultu Sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 11. And if no other be
the opinion of Aquinas, if the schoolmen of what sect soever say the same, it
follows that they differ no more from us then Aquinas did; it may be they
will be found to agree with us. For I do not think any schooleman, being put
to it will deny but that by the very light of nature, not only some time, but
a sufficient proportion of time must be set apart for Gods service. And albeit
had we been left unto our selves without any indication of this proportion
from God, we might well have been to seek in the setting forth of this
convenient proportion Yet considering how God has gone before us making the
World in six days, and resting the seventh, and considering thereupon the
division of time into septenaries of days, reason I should think with
Tostatus, does dictate that the proportion of one day in seven was more
convenient then any other. Or if this were not sufficient for our direction
herein; yet when God has manifested unto us both after the Creation, and in
the fourth Commandment what proportion of time he likes best for this (as it
is in reason fit that the Master, especially such a Master should prescribe
what proportion of time shall be set apart for his service) then with
Chrysostom we have cause by the very light of nature undoubtedly to conclude;
that if in the beginning, and under the Law God required one day in seven to be
consecrated to his service; we surely cannot allow unto him a worse proportion
under the Gospel. And Iacobus de Valentia advers. Judae. q. 2. Conclus.
Praeceptum de Sabbato celebrando est partim morale propter primam conditionem.
This first condition in respect whereof he says it is moral, he professes
to be two fold. 1 in regard of the rest. 2. in regard of the sanctification of
it, then he proves it saying, probatur, Adi. and 2.
Nam primo Sabbatum fuit praeceptum ad requiem hominis, and sanctificationem
Dei, ut homo cessaret ab omni negotio mundano, ut facilius posset Deo servire
and latriam exhibere. Then coming to specify the proportion of time to be
allowed hereunto, Oportet (says he) ut aliqua dies in septimana ad hujusmodi
sanctificationem and latriam sit Deo dedicata. Et ut sic hoc praeceptum est
stabile and aeternum, ut patebit. One day in the week must be dedicated unto
God for this sanctification and worship, and thus the precept is stable and
everlasting as it shall appear. In like manner Stella upon Luke 14. In the
sanctification of the Sabbath there was something moral, and something
ceremonial. It is moral to observe one day in the week; but that it should
be this day or that day, this is ceremonial. Add to these Bellarmine de cultu
sanctorum lib. 3. cap. 11. Ius divinum requirebat, ut unus dies hebdomadae
dicaretur cultui divino. Thus we see these are directly for us; Aquinas and the
schoolmen are not directly against us, (as hitherto it has appeared,) no more
then Zanchy, who yet is directly for us, as has been showed. By the way, it
does not follow from any evidence, that either these or Tostatus have given,
that the assigning of one day above another was ceremonial, taking this word
(ceremonial) in proper speech: for 1. it may be accounted positive. 2. what
have we to do with ceremonialls (in proper speech) now under the Gospel, who
yet do still observe one day in seven. 3. nay why may not that also justly be
accounted moral, if God has marked out that day we celebrate by some notable
work, to be consecrated to the Lord, above others? especially according to
Bishop Lake his grounds, namely that the work of the day is the ground of
hallowing the day: for proof whereof he appeals to the institution of all
feasts both humane and divine. In this case, I should think there is no color
for suspicion of any Judaisme; who those fathers are, who have pronounced (as
here it is said) the fourth Commandment to be a ceremony, a shadow, and a
figure only, here it is not mentioned, but delivered at large, but I find that
Isychrius rejects from the Decalogue this precept for the observation of the
Sabbath, esteeming it to be only ceremonial, opposed herein by Dominicus
Bannes; 22. q. 44. art. 1.
Sed profecto fallitur quoth Bannes: for the precept is moral as touching the
substance of the praecept, to wit, that there be a certain time wherein a man
ought to rest unto God, although the determination of such a time be not
designed: But heretofore the seventh day was designed by a Divine praecept
positive; in the Law of grace, the day of the Lords Resurrection; so that
amongst the people of God, one day in the week has been determined for divine
service. As for our Divines, the most general opinion amongst them is, that
the observation of one day in seven is of perpetual observation. For albeit
Brentius upon Leviticus affirms, that the Church may in these days observe
but one day in 14. if they will. Yet not only Gomarus, and Rivet profess that
under the Gospel we must allow a better proportion of time for Gods service,
rather then a worse, in reference to that which was allowed under the Law: But
Luther tom. 5. fol. 610. professes that ad minimum unus dies aliquis per
hebdomadam, is to be chosen for Gods worship, and Baldwin in his cases of
conscience. 2. c. 13. cas. 2. touching feasts. It is moral (says he) to
sanctify one day in seven. Master Hooker confesses as much in his
Ecclesiastical policy. And if Calvin has a way by himself in this; there is
no reason he should be introduced to affront the most general current of our
own Divines, mustered up by Walaeus as a cloud of witnesses, standing for the
morality of one day in seven. Yet Walaeus has cleared also Calvin in this
point, and that in reference to more pregnant passages then are produced here;
where nothing is delivered in opposition thereunto; the last tends to the
confirmation of it.

For if it be reasonable that one day in seven should be allowed for the ease,
and recreation of servants; what day shall be their Sabbath, if not the day of
rest? and if this be most reasonable, I hope in the second place it will be
judged most unreasonable that there should be one Sabbath for the Master, and
another for the servants: undoubtedly, now God has gone before us in allotting
this proportion of time for his service; we may be bold to say with Azorius
(and that incorrespondency to Tostatus his discourse) that rationi maxim
consentaneum est after six work days to consecrate one unto divine service.
And seeing God has required such a proportion of time for his service under
the Law: by the very light of nature it appears to be most unreasonable we
should allow him a worse proportion under the Gospel, and Calvin professes
that Nobis cum veteri populo quoad hanc partem communis est Sabbati necessitas.
Harm. in 4. lib. Mosis in praecep. 4.
We have as much need of a Sabbath as ever the Jews had. As touching the
three particulars wherein Tostatus is vouched to affirm the fourth
Commandment to be an unstable, and alterable ceremony. First I have not
hitherto found, that Tostatus confounds the proportion of one day in seven,
with the particular day under this proportion; as if these were equally
ceremonial. The rest on the seventh day in the judgment of the ancients
prefigured the rest of Christ (that day) in his grave, and in that respect was
accounted by them ceremonial. But as for the proportion of one day in seven,
never yet did I meet with any who set his wits on work to devise any thing in
Christ to be prefigured thereby, that so it also might be accounted
ceremonial. Yet I nothing doubt but this proportion is alterable by that power
whereby it was prescribed, but not by any inferour power; and so it is
accounted by Jacobus de Valentia, stabile and aeternum, stable and everlasting;
and most unreasonable that we should not be bound to allow as good a
proportion of service unto God under the Gospel, as the Jews were bound to
allow him under the Law.

The rest of the seventh day being ceremonial, we hold not only with
Tostatus that it is alterable, but with Stella that it must be altered; and I
hope the word it self affords evidence enough for this. It is true, the fourth
Commandment in the very front commands the sanctifying the Sabbath not the
seventh day, but the Sabbath: and in like manner it ends with professing that
the Lord Blessed the Sabbath day (not the seventh) and sanctified it. But when
the question is made what Sabbath? I should rather answer a rest from all
servile works, then as here it is answered, The seventh day. For undoubtedly
God does not therein command us to rest the seventh day in correspondency to
the seventh day from the Creation, there is commanded one day in seven, and a
seventh after six days of work. But we must leave it unto God as to
prescribe unto us, the Master to his servants, the proportion of time to be set
apart for his service, so the particularity of the day also under the specified
proportion; least otherwise there might be as many different opinions
hereabouts, and courses according thereunto amongst the people of God, as there
be days in the week. Now God did appoint the seventh day of the week unto
the Jews for their Sabbath; but the first day of the week, he has appointed
unto us for our Sabbath; still observing six days work before, and a seventh
of rest unto God, after. And thus Zanchy a learned and judicious Divine
interprets the fourth Commandment in 4. praecept. p. 599. Col. 2. Stat
sententia non sine causa factum esse, ut in substantia praecepti dictum non
sit, Memento ut diem septimum, sed ut diem Sabbati. i. quietis sanctifices. Hac
enim ratione nos quoque praeceptum hoc servamus, dum sanctificamus diem
Dominicum, quia hic quietis dies nobis est, sicut Judaeis fuit septimus. I am
still of opinion, that not without cause it is so ordered, that in the
substance of the precept it is not said, remember the seventh day, but remember
the Sabbath day, that is, the day of rest to sanctify it. For by this means,
we also keep this precept in sanctifying the Lords Day.

So that this is not the opinion of Doctor Bownde only, and of Master Perkins,
but of Zanchy also, and Iacobus de Valentia advers. Iudaeos qu. 2. conclus. 4.
Christian Religion celebrates a true moral Sabbath on the Lords Day, as
touching the time, in as much as it celebrates it on the day, whereon it ought
to be celebrated, and concludes, So the precept of the Sabbath as it is moral
remains in the new time celebrated on the Lords day. So Dominicus Bannes
formerly alleged distinguishes the substance of the praecept, from the
particular determination of the day; and adds, that by a positive precept the
seventh day was designed unto the Jews; Bannes 22. 4. 44 art. 1.
but afterward under the Law of grace was designed the day of the Lords
Resurrection, So that always to Gods faithful people was designed one day in
the week, for Divine Service. Whereas other festivities (says he) are in
course by the institution of the Church. And Doctor Andrews also shows out
of Math. 24.20. that there must needs be a Sabbath after Christ's death, and
adds, that Those which were ceremonies were abrogated: but those which were
not ceremonies were changed; at the Ministry from the Levites to be chosen
throughout the World So here the day changed from the day of the Jews to the
Lords Day. Revel. 1.10. And accordingly interprets the fourth Commandment as
belonging unto us Christians as bound to observe the Sabbath 1. in our judgment
by a reverend esteeming of it, not as a day appointed by man. 2. in our use set
down, Esaias 58.13. not following our own will, nor doing our own works.
Hereupon a question is proposed thus. But is not the Sabbath a ceremony, and so
abrogated by Christ? and the answer is this. Do as Christ did in the case of
divorce, look whether it were so from the beginning; Now the beginning of the
Sabbath was in Paradise before there was any sin, and so before there needed
any Savior, and if they say it prefigured the rest we shall have from our sins
in Christ, We grant it, and therefore the day is changed, but no ceremony
proved. The practice of piety is a book dedicated unto his Majesty that now
is, when he was Prince Carles in the year 1626. which is now 15. years ago,
came forth the 10th Edition of it; we have heard it highly commended by King
James, and that it commended the author of the dedication to a Bishopric. The
author of this treatise, is large upon the Sabbath, and concurres with us in
every particular wherein we are by the Prefacer to this translation opposed.
Amongst other particulars this is one, that he interprets the fourth
Commandment as Zanchy does, saying, The Commandment does not say. Remember to
keep holy the seventh day next following the sixth day of the Creation or this
or that seventh day: but indefinitely, Remember that thou keep holy a Sabbath
day, and that Our Lord Jesus having authority as Lord over the Sabbath, had
likewise far greater reason to translate the Sabbath day, from the Jewish
seventh unto the seventh day whereon Christians do keep their Sabbath; which
also he proves by diverse reasons. And the book of Homilies whereunto all our
Ministers are required to subscribe, professes that we Christians are still
bound to the observation of the Sabbath, and that the Sunday is now our
Sabbath. So then as the Jews were tied to the observation of the Sabbath on
the day prescribed too them, so are we Christians tied to the observation of
the Sabbath too, but on the day prescribed unto us; should we observe the same
day with the Jews, we should fall justly under Austins censure, that every
such one carnaliter sapit. And the same Austin professes that Doctores
Ecclesiae decreverunt omnem gloriam Iudaici Sabbati in illam transfer. August
de. Tem. Ser. 251.
The Doctors of the Church have decreed to transfer all the glory of the
Jews Sabbath unto the Lords Day. So that the censure following in these words.
They therefore are but idly busied, who would so far enlarge the Sabbath or
seventh day in this commandment, as to include the Lords Day in it, must light
not upon us only, but upon other greater Divines, yea and upon the Church of
England also; but our comfort is, that we find it very weakly grounded. As
for the institution of the Lords Day, I never read nor heard any that grounded
it upon the fourth Commandment otherwise, then by proportion.

That Commandment contains two things 1. the sanctification of the Sabbath.
2. a designing of the time when; both as touching the proportion of time, to
wit of one day in seven; and as touching the particularity of the day under the
forementioned proportion. For in commanding a seventh, it commands one day in
seven, the former inferring the latter, as well as it does infer the setting
of some time in general a part for Gods service, which not one (that I know)
denies to be the substance of this commandment. Now as the Lord designed,
what should be their Sabbath day unto the Jews; so has he designed what
shall be the Sabbath day to us Christians.

This designation made to us we do not derive from the fourth commandment; but
this day being by the word of God designed unto us, still holding up the same
proportion of time: the rest of this day and the sanctification thereof, this
and this alone do we derive from the fourth commandment, and also, that
undoubtedly we Christians ought not to allow unto God a worse proportion of
time for his Service, then did the Jews: and the proportion is apparent
between the Lord the creators rest, and the Lord the redeemers rest. And our
rest on the day of our Lord the creators rest, being abolished as a type of
Christ's rest in the grave; what is more convenient to come in the place thereof
then our rest on that day, which is the Lord our redeemers rest. As touching
the passage here alleged out of Calvin, I am sorry to observe the common
error of others committed here also; by dismembring Calvin's sentence, leaving
out one half of it, making him to deliver that absolutely, which he utters
only conditionally. And the other half of the first sentence here mentioned
does manifest as much, namely that Calvin speaks only against them, who think
themselves obliged to the observation of one day in 7. for some mysterious
significations sake; and accordingly Wallaeus shows that he opposes none but
Papists, whose course is to observe festival days for some mystery sake,
whereof he gives good evidence by a passage which he allegeth out of
Bellarmine, all which I have formerly represented more at large, in my answer
to the Preface Sect. 4. I come to the fourth Section of the Author; That some
do urge the words of this Commandment, so far till they draw blood instead
of comfort, are but words: nothing of this kind has been hitherto made good
so much as in the least color of probability: And who upon due observing of
the fourth commandment may not well be brought to admire the wisdom of God,
that as he has placed it in the moral law, which concerns all times and
persons; so he has ordered it after such a manner; that howsoever the day
should be altered, yet the proportion of time still to be kept; and a Sabbath
still to be of force, whether on the seventh day which was the Sabbath day
unto the Jews, or the Lords day which should be our Christian Sabbath; thereon
to rest unto God and to sanctify that day unto his service; we make no doubt
but the Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath, and so has power to change it,
and none has power to change it, but he that is Lord of it* It is true, this
was one argument amongst many, which the Author of the Practice of Piety uses
to prove that the fourth commandment stands still in force; because our
Savior professes that, He came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it: and
that the least of them, should not be abrogated in his kingdom of the new
Testament. In so much that whosoever breaks one of the least of these ten
commandments and teaches men so, he should be called the least in the
Kingdom of heaven, that is (says the Author) he should have no place in his
Church. To the first of these here the Doctor answers thus, To which we say
with the Apostle: Do we destroy the Law by faith? God forbid: We confirm it
rather. 2 Christ then has put away the shadow, but retained the light, and
spreads it wider then before: showing thereby the excellent harmony, between
the Gospel and the Law. As touching the first part of this present answer;
that is too aliene from our present purpose; the question between us, being
not whether the Law be destroyed, by preaching justification by faith; we know
that as touching the ceremonial Law, whatsoever was prefigured thereby is
fulfilled by Christ; and as touching the moral Law, Christ has fulfilled that
also partly in himself by perfect obedience thereunto, and making satisfaction
for our disobedience; and partly in us, by giving us more power to perform
obedience thereunto through faith in him, then ever we had before since the
fall of Adam. But our Savior, Matthew. 5. treats of destroying the law by
abrogating it or any part thereof, which how they can avoid, who teach that
Christ by his death, has freed us from the Yoke of the fourth commandment, I
cannot comprehend; Suppose it be but one of the least commandments, yet let
them look to it, who discourse of abrogating it, and teach men that they are
not obliged by it, hand over head; least they be accounted by the Lord of
Sabbath the least in the kingdom of heaven: therefore it stands them upon to
confirm it rather as they profess, but how they do perform that which they
pretend, I am utterly to seek. 2. I come therefore to the consideration of the
second part of the answer consisting of two parts, 1. That Christ has put away
the shadow, 2. That he has retained the light and spreads it further. As for
the first we have heard the proportion of one day in seven allowed unto Gods
service, to be called a ceremony, and consequently a shadow; But what this
prefigured is not explaned at all, nor ever has been that ever I read or
heard. Neither is this put away, but continues still in the observation of the
Lords day all the Christian world over; and I doubt not but it will continue to
the end of the world. The restraint of the worship to the seventh day has
been also called a ceremony, but too too crudely and without all explication
of what it figured: yet we willingly grant a fair prefiguration of somewhat
concerning Christ is found in the seventh day acknowledged by the Ancients and
by modern writers, both Papists and Protestants, both Lutherans and
Calvinists; but that is not in reference to the worship restrained to that day,
but in reference to the test, fairly representing Christ's rest that day in his
grave; and thereupon grounding the rigorous condition of the Jewish rest, which
is the practice both of Papists and of Protestants so that the Sabbath is not
taken away neither as touching some time, in general to be sanctified unto
God, nor as touching the proportion of time in special, as of one day in
seven; but only as touching the particular day which is changed into the Lords
day: Our Savior professing that a Sabbath still was to be kept of Christians,
as Doctor Andrews proves out of Matthew. 24 20. As for the second, to wit, the
light that is said to be retained and spread wider then before; this is mere
darkness unto me, for I cannot by any means comprehend the meaning of it:
Neither is here any course taken to expound it, and bring us acquainted with
the interpretation of it. Suppose by the light is meant the thing prefigured;
and that is devised to be a spiritual rest from sin. Sect. 4.
But this I hope the Prophets and holy servants of God under the Law were
partakers of, together with the rest of the Sabbath and the sanctification of
it, as well as we under the Gospel; and if the sanctification of the Sabbath
(I speak of our Christian Sabbath, according to our Saviors language, Matthew.
24.20.) be taken from us, I doubt we shall enjoy that spiritual rest from
sin, in far less measure under the Gospel, then the Jews did under the
law. Yet neither they nor we shall enjoy it entirely, till we are brought to
our rest in glory. Certainly the conscionable observation of the Sabbath ever
was, and is a principal means to draw us to that spiritual rest from sin,
and eternal rest in glory. If Saint Paul by taxing the Jewish observation of
days and times, does therewithal tax the observation of the Lords day in
place of the Jewish: then let us turn Anabaptists, and Socinians, and utterly
renounce the observation of the Lords day, as well as of the Jewish Sabbath.
The same Apostle Col. 2. speaks not of the Sabbath, but of Sabbaths; and there
were days enough so called amongst the Jews, and that by the Lord both of
days and years, besides the weekly Sabbath; yet we are content the rest of
the seventh may be ranged amongst other Sabbaths, as prefiguring Christ's rest
that day in the grave. But to speak of the Sabbath hand-over-head without
distinction we love not; nor see I any cause, why men should be in love
therewith unless withal they love confusion: and to fish in troubled waters,
is many times an advantage to serve turns. Let the rest of the seventh be in
Gods name crucified with Christ upon the cross, or at least be buried with him
in his grave, and so as never to rise with him; but let our Christian Sabbath
(our Savior speaks of Matthew. 24.20.) take life together with our Saviors
resurrection that brought with it a new creation, a new world, and there
withal a new Sabbath, as Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester delivers it in
his Star Chamber speech in the case of Trask. As reason tells us that there
must be some certain appointed time for Gods public Service; so as good
reason tells us, we Christians cannot without sin, allow unto God for his
public service a worse proportion of time under the Gospel, then the Jews
were bound to allow unto him under the Law. God himself never having deserved
so much at the hands of man as under the Gospel; and there never being greater
necessity of observing a Sabbath, then under the Gospel, the way of truth and
holiness being so beset, and with such encombrances as the like were never
known to the world before; yet still from the bondage and necessity of the
Jewish Sabbath, we are delivered by the Gospel; for neither do we keep their
day, then called the Lords holy day; but the first day of the week, the day of
Christ's resurrection in the new Testament, called the Lords day, Revel. 1.10.
And so willingly we come to the consideration of the right, whereby The Lords
day has succeeded in the place thereof; Let it be the shame of the Anabaptist,
Familist and Swenk feldian, to make all days equal and equally to be
regarded, so instead of Christian liberty to bring into the Church, an
Heathenish licentiousness, yet surely the heathens ever had their festivalls
even weekly, and that on the seventh day, which was sometimes called in this
respect (...). And at this day the Turks festival is their Friday, the first
day of Mahumets kingdom, when he fled from Maecha to Iethrib, and thenceforth
constituted both the first day of their week and of their year. Let as many
as by their Sabbatarian speculations, bring all to Iudaisme be censured as
they deserve; but as for them that desire to have all the glory of the Jews
Sabbath transferred to the Lords day, take heed how you censure them, least you
censure Austin also, and the Doctors of the Church mentioned by him, who have
decreed this. As for the river called Sabbaticus, let such lettice serves their
lips that like them. Censures of fanatic and peevish spirits, are as liberally
bestowed by some; as the Baiocchi and Bagalini, which the Pope scatters at the
day of his coronation; but who they be that deserve them, God will one day
Judge. But I perceive whither this tends; If some conceive the Lords day to be
profaned by Maygames and Morice dances, they are censured for men fanatic and
of peevish spirits; but they little think that all the Prelates of the kingdom
may as well come under their lash, and the whole Parliament in the first of
king Charles. Sect. 3.
But that thread which here is begun, is drawn out somewhat longer in the next
Section following.

5 In this fifth Section things are so carried, that it is an hard matter to
discern the Doctors meaning, especially in relating the different opinions,
concealing the Authors of them and the place where they are to be found, and
their arguments which here are only said to be derived from the sanctification
of the seventh day in the first creation of the world, and from the institution
of the Sabbath in the fourth commandment: For herence it is said, that they
who stand for the translation of the Sabbath from the seventh day of the week,
to the Lords day, as by divine authority, do draw their arguments for the
justifying of their Tenet; which I willingly profess, does seem a prodigy
unto me; namely that any man should dispute thus. In the beginning of the
world, the Lord commanded the seventh day to be sanctified, therefore now under
the Gospel, the Sabbath is to be translated from the seventh day to the first
day of the week. Or thus, the Lord in the fourth commandment gave in charge
to sanctify the Sabbath, and tells them, that the seventh day (of the week)
was their Sabbath, therefore the translation of the Sabbath from the seventh
day of the week to the Lords day is of divine institution: As touching the
first of these deductions, that which comes nearest thereunto, is the discourse
of Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester, in the Star Chamber. The Sabbath had
reference to the old creation, but in Christ we are a new creature, a new
creation, and so to have a new Sabbath. And Athanasius his discourse long agone
upon that of Matthew. 11.27. All things are given to me of my Father, Finis
prioris creationis Sabbatum, The end of the first creation, was the Sabbath
day, but the beginning of the second creation is the Lords day: and of this he
discourses there more at large. And we find manifestly this notable congruitie
between the Sabbath day and the Lords day, that like as God on the seventh day
rested from the work of creation; so Christ our Savior rising on the first
day of the week from the dead, made that the first day of his resting from the
work of redemption. But when I consider the Doctors sharp censures of
weakness, of impudency, of ignorance; it is not credible he should closely let
flee at such as Athanasius and Doctor Andrews Bishop of Winchester; Neither
do I find thoroughout this whole discourse any notice taken of this ground,
whereupon their discourse runs. It is more likely by far that some lo^ner
persons, and poor snakes are herein set up as marks to shoot at, and as
signs to be spoken against It is true, many do prove herence the morality of
the fourth commandment; The author of the practice of piety which goes under
a Bishops name, takes this course of his ten arguments to prove the
commandments of the Sabbath to be moral; this is the second; Because it was
commanded of God to Adam in his innocence. Bishop Andrews in his Pattern of
catecheticall doctrine takes the like course, as formerly has been mentioned
and which is more, professes This to be a principle: that the Decalogue is the
law of nature revived, and the law of nature is the Image of God* now in God
(says he) there can be no ceremony, but all must be eternal: and so in this
Image which is the law of nature; and so in the Decalogue, whereas a ceremony
is (...), and accordingly that one day in seven is to be observed, and
consecrated unto Gods Service, as Chrysostom long ago has inferred herence;
but it is nothing usual to infer herence the celebration of the Lords day.
In like manner not one that I know, ancient or late, do conclude from the
fourth commandment, either the celebration of the Lords day, or the
translation of the Sabbath from the seventh day to the first day of the week.
But herence indeed they infer (and most justly in my judgment) that if one
day in the week were to be consecrated unto the Lord. by virtue of the moral
law, in the days of the old Testament, much more does it become us (by the
very light of nature) to consecrate as good a proportion of time to Gods
service under the Gospel; And accordingly to rest from all works, that hinder
the sanctification of that day in the exercises of piety, and so far forth
as they are found to hinder it, not for any mysterious significations sake, in
which respect a very rigorous rest is most commonly conceived to be enjoined
to the Jews. I do wonder the Canonists are reckoned amongst those, who do
build the celebration of the Lords day, upon the constitution of the Church and
affirm this absolutely; Sect. 4.
when in the next Section many Canonists are alleged out of Azorius, as
maintaining the divine authority of the Lords days: and one of them, Sylvester
by name, 22. q. 44. art. 1.
professing it to be opinionem communem. And as for Schoolmen, it is
apparent, that Dominicus Bannes, puts a manifest difference between the Lords
day and other festivities, which are ex institutione ecclesiae. And whereas
Bellarmine is alleged as the mouth of the Schoolmen, to affirm absolutely,
that the celebration of the Lords day, is by the constitution of the Church,
and that in distinction from them who say it was ordered by the Apostles: I
find no such matter in the place quoted, but rather the contrary, both
confirming, that one day in a week is to be consecrated to the Lord by law
divine, and whereas it was not fit, that now the Saturday should be it;
therefore the Sabbath was turned into the Lords day by the Apostles; his words
are these, Ius divinu^ requirebat ut vnus dies hebdomadae dicaretur cultui
divino: non autem conveniebat ut servaretur Sabbatum. Itaque Sabbatum ab
Apostolis in diem Dominicum versum est; likewise Sixtus Senensis says, that
the institution of the Lords day is of the Apostles. as I have showed in my
answer to the preface S. 5. It is true that which is here reported of Brentius,
as who professes it to be left indifferent to the Church to ordain one day in
seven, or on day in fourteen to be consecrated; which whether it be not an
unreasonable conceit, I am willing to appeal to the judgment of Doctor
Prideaux, yet Gemardus the Lutheran will not follow Brentius in this (as I have
showed in my answer to the preface and 5. Section) For he acknowledges the
celebration of the Lords day, to be juxta Apostolorum constitutionem. And as
for Chemnitius what he writes hereof, is not expressed, but for the divine
authority of the celebration of the Lords day, I have represented the joint
consent of some 11. or 12. of our modern divines in the place before
mentioned; Besides the concurrence of the ancient Fathers, not one of them
being so much as pleaded for the opposite Tenet; and lastly the general answer
of Christians in the times of persecution, when they were demanded in this
manner Dominicum servasti, have thou kept the Lords day; for usually it was
this, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum: I cannot omit it, for I am a
Christian. Sect. 5.
The first opinion (to wit of those who maintained the divine authority, of
the celebritie of the Lords day by the old Testament) is here censured for
inclining much to Judaisme, but it is not expressed wherein. And it is
apparent, they do not maintain the observation of the seventh day. Certainly
this is delivered in reference to somewhat, that is not thought fit to be
expressed; yet the prefacer did express it, imputing unto them whom he
opposes, that they do observe the Jewish Sabbath, not in respect of the
Jewish day, but of the Jewish manner observing it, to wit, in the way of a
rigorous rest. But I know none that maintains any other rest from works, then
as they are avocations from sacred studies and meditations: whereas the Jews
observed it for some mysterious signification sake, and thereupon were tied to
a more rigorous rest. But let them speak plainly, and say we are too rigorous
in thinking sports and pastimes unlawful on the Lords day. And herein I
appeal to every Christian conscience; whether these be not as great avocations
from sacred studies and meditations, as the works of our ordinary callings.
Then again which of us comes nearest to Judaisme herein? Is it not against the
Jews, that Austin professes? Melius est orare quam saltare, Better to go to
plough then to dances; and Foeminae vestrae melius lanam facerent quam
saltarent. Better it were your women should spin wool then dance: as their
course was in their festivalls. Again, why should their opinion be Jewish, by
maintaining it out of the old Testament; rather then out of the new? Then, who
are they that maintain it only by the old Testament? And lastly, not one that
I know (neither do I think it can be justly obtruded on any) do maintain
the succession of the Lords day, in the place of the Jewish Sabbath, either by
the original institution of it, as from the creation, or by the fourth
commandment; yet upon these nullities* is founded the imputation of both
impudency and ignorance, in oppugning the received opinion of Divines: That
confidently taken up for a received opinion among divines, which is in no
tolerable sort proved; not one Ancient alleged for it, and but two Papists
quoted; the one of which I have showed to be of a plain contrary opinion.
Sect. 4.
And of Protestant Divines, I have represented no less then eleven,
maintaining the Apostolical and divine constitution of the Lords day, besides
Gerardus the Lutheran, to affront Brentius; Nay, Doctor Prideaux himself Sect.
7. maintains that it is of Divine authority; and as I remember, in the vespers
at the last act unalterable by the Church; That the Priesthood being changed,
there is made also a change of the law we believe because the Apostle says it
Heb. 7.12. and it is well if the Schoolmen make the word of God their
principles; but of what Law? of the moral law, or of the ten commandments;
or any one of them? (yet we willingly confess a change of one particular in
one of them) and not rather of the law of sacrifices; and such a change as to
set an end to them. That herence the Schoolmen conclude that at this day, the
moral law binds not, as it was published and proclaimed by Moses; but as at
first it appertained no less to the Gentiles then to the Jews; this I say is
a mystery: And to confess a truth, when I met with this, in a certain
manuscript of one Brewers, it seemed to me a very wild discourse, from this
place of the Apostle to infer so much; but now I meet with it in a lecture,
of so judicious and learned Divine as Doctor Prideaux, I will suspend my
judgment, and wait until I hear what those Schoolmen are, and where it is
that they make such inferences; that being made acquainted with them, I may
judge of them according to my capacity, as they deserve. Certainly Zanchy in
the place quoted, makes no such Inference from that place, Heb. 7.12. yet the
Doctrine which he delivers is good and sound, though the instance he makes of
the Sabbath, too weak to prove it, as appears to all that acknowledge the
Commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath to be given to Adam, immediately after
his creation; who deserve to be accounted more hot spurs then they, in whom
The desire of prey does over-runne the sent? Now what one of our Divines can be
alleged to derive the authority of the Lords day from the law of Moses? I am
verily persuaded, not one: The sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath they derive
from thence, and the sanctifying of one day in seven, but not the authority of
the Lords day: But if it may appear otherwise, that the Lords day by good
authority is substituted in the place of the seventh to become our Christian
Sabbath, such as our Savior fore-prophecied of Matthew. 24.20. then from the
fourth commandment, they may make bold to conclude, that it ought to be
sanctified. And this Zanchy himself justifies in the place quoted Chap. 19, as
before has been showed. And our book of homilies expressly tell us, that now
Sunday is become our Sabbath. But we keep not the seventh day, the rest on
that day being ceremonial, and prefiguring the rest of Christ that day in his
grave.

And as for the authority whereby we have substituted the Lords Day in the
place of the seventh, we answer, that we are not they that have substituted,
but the Apostles have substituted it unto our hands; God having marked out that
day unto them by a work nothing inferior to the work of Creation; to wit, the
work of Christ's Resurrection, such a work as brings with it a new Creation,
and therewithal a new Sabbath, as Doctor Andrews observes out of the
ancients, and delivered as much in the Star Chamber. And whereas under the
Law the Jewish Sabbath was called the Lords Day; Now under the Gospel the
first day of the week is called the Lords Day in the language of the holy
Ghost in the new Testament. And whereas our Savior gives us plainly to
understand, that we are to have a Sabbath under the Gospel Math. 24.20. as
the aforementioned Doctor Andrews does observe in his pattern of
Catecheticall doctrine, In common reason, and in the conscience of a Christian
what day ought to be this our Sabbath rather then the Lords Day, so called in
the language of the holy Ghost; especially considering that not that day of the
year, but that day of the week is called the Lords Day, as by most general
acknowledgement of all the ancients has been supposed. And to urge one place
more out of the old Testament, then here is in a violent manner obtruded upon
us, Psalm. 118 14. This is the day which the Lord has made, let us rejoice, and
be glad in it, is evidently spoken of that day wherein the stone which the
builders refused was made the head of the corner: Now by that stone the holy
Ghost chiefly understands the Lord Christ, Mat. 21.42. Marc. 12.10. Luc.
20.17. Acts 4.11. 1 Pet 2.7. and when was he made the head of the corner,
Sect. 5.
but in the day of his Resurrection; Romans 1.4.
the Apostle professing, that He was declared mightily to be the Son of God
touching the spirit of sanctification by the Resurrection from the dead. And
under what style did they reject him, and condemn him as a blasphemer but for
making himself the Son of God? As for the rigorous observation of the rest
prescribed unto the Jews; as from kindling of fire, and dressing of meat;
some qualify that rigor, conceaving that kindling of fire was forbidden only
for the works to be done about making the Tabernacle. This being delivered as a
preface, Exodus 35.2. when the free will offerings were now to be received for
the promoting of the workmanship of that which formerly was commanded. And
that dressing of meat was not forbidden them, no not in the gathering of
Manna, as some think; if then, yet not as a general course to be observed for
ever; And as touching the Table that Nehemiah kept, thus we read. Moreover
there were at my Table, Nehem. 5.17.18.
an. 150. of the Jews and rulers which came unto us from among the Heathen
that are about us. And there was prepared daily an Ox, and six chosen Sheep,
and Birds were prepared for me -- and he was so far from consciousnesse of
profaning the Lords Sabbath herein, that he concludes thus, Remember me O my
God in goodness, according to all that I have done for this people. But
suppose they were tied so strictly to such a rest, as from works not servile,
only in seeking again, (as Zanchy instanceth the condition of a work
servile) but even from such as ten led to the refreshing of their natures; yet
the reason hereof depended upon the mysterious signification of this rest, as
formerly I have represented out of Lyra, from which ceremoniality we are
absolved, and consequently freed from that rigorous rest depending thereupon,
and rest only from works so far forth as they are avocations from Sacred
Studies and meditations, as Calvin expresses it; and this we account a moral
rest, distinguished from ceremonial. And whereas the Doctor tells us that such
a like distinction is infirm, being content to say nothing to confirm it,
save that the Text (as he says) affords it not: I had thought the very light
of nature had been sufficient to embolden us to conclude, Sect. 6.
that where the sanctification of the day is commanded, therewithal is
commanded abstinence from all such things as would hinder the sanctification of
it, And as for the text it self, it is apparent that neither the kindling of
the fire, nor dressing of meat is particularly forbidden in the fourth
Commandment. Neither does he so much as obtrude upon his adversaries that
they derive the sanctification of their christian Sabbath from ought in the old
Testament, save from Genesis 2.3. and from the fourth Commandment. In neither of
which does he deal fairly; but is content to confound things that differ, as
if in this particular he affected to fish in troubled waters; and we have
better evidence (and indeed it is our only evidence therence) out of the old
Testament, for the festivity of the Lords day, then he is willing to take
notice of, namely out of the Psalm. 118.24. Neither is it possible he should be
ignorant thereof, howsoever he does dissemble his knowledge of it. Yet I hope
it is enough for us to find evidence for it in the Sunshine of the Gospel;
and indeed here alone we have the original observation of it, though that it
should be observed, is as evidently prophesied in the old Testament, as that
Christ is the stone which was first refused of the builders, and after made the
head of the corner, adding only this unto it, that the day wherein the Lord did
this, and made so glorious a work, mavelous in the eyes of men, was the day
of the resurrection, which I suppose no intelligent Christian will deny, I come
unto the 6. Section.

6 Who they be that make their boast, that they have found the institution of
the Lords day in the new Testament expressly, J willingly profess I know not,
neither do I think the Doctor knows. It is true our Savior oftentimes
disputed with the Pharisees about their superstitious observation of the
Sabbath day, which at length degenerated into voluptuous living on that day; in
so much, that Austin tells the Jews plainly It is better to go to plough then
to dance: but if hereupon you ask, where is any the least suspicion of the
abrogating of it? I answer every one knows, The time was not yet come for the
abrogating of it. Nay, he discourses so as if 40. years after his death, the
observation of the Sabbath should continue, Sect. 4.
as when he exhorts them at such a time, to pray that their flight be not in
the Winter, nor on the Sabbath day Matthew. 24.20. what will you conclude
herence? therefore the observation of the Jewish Sabbath was still to continue
among Christians? if you do, who shall more deservedly be obnoxious to the
censure of Judaisme, you or we? yet when he tells them, that the Son of man
is Lord of the Sabbath, how few interpreters writing hereupon, do not take
notice of his power to abrogat it? But is it not enough that Paul cries down
the ceremonies of the Jews, and in special their holy days, and particularly
Sabbaths; to wit, so far forth, as they are found to be shadows, the body
whereof was Christ, such was the rest on the seventh day, as prefiguring
Christ's rest in the grave. But no sober man (I trow) will herence conclude that
herewithall he cries down the setting apart of any time for Gods service,
that having no color of ceremony, or rest from such works, as hinder us in
the service of God, this being as little ceremonial as the former. I make bold
to go one step farther, and conclude by the same reason, that neither does he
cry down the proportion of time, to wit, of one day in seven, to be set a part
for the exercises of piety, because in this particular, there is no more
ceremonialitie to be found, then in any one of the former. But to proceed, what
indifferent man would once expect, that in our Saviors disputations with the
Pharisees about the Sabbath, mention should be made of the Lords day
instituted in the place thereof? It is enough, we find it instituted after our
Saviors resurrection; and sufficient I trow it is to prove that it was
instituted, and that in the best manner, namely by establishing it de facto in
practice amongst the Churches; I say this is sufficiently proved by the
observation of it; which undoubtedly, neither was nor could be by chance. A
Sow mufling in the earth, may make something like the letter A. but not Ennius
his Andromacha says Cicero. In like sort the concurrence of the Churches, in
the observation hereof from the Apostles, and continuance therein unto this
day, could not be by chance, but by order, and that from the Apostles. When you
ask, Did not the Apostles keep the Jewish Sabbath? I answer, I do not find
they did, yet I find revelations were made unto them of what was to be done by
degrees. Peter was challenged Acts 11. by the rest of the Apostles, for
preaching the Gospel unto the Gentiles. They took indeed advantage of the
Jews Sabbath, to preach the Gospel unto them congregated together Act. 13. so
did they to the same end take the oppotunity of the feast of Pentecost, Acts
18.21. I grant the Sabbath day was observed together with the Lords day by some
Christians; Baronius imputes it to the Orientales, and gives the reason why
formerly represented. If any man infer herehence that the celebration of the
Lords day, is grounded upon the constitution of the Church only, let him make
it good; for there is no reason that words should carry it, much less the
voice of one Papist who here is quoted. I am sure Dominicus Bannes and Sixtus
Senensis, are of another opinion, formerly produced; and hereafter follow many
Canonists that maintain the contrary, by the relation of Azorius, and one of
them, Sylvester by name, professes that it is Communis opinio, that it is of
Divine authority. If Brentius thinks otherwise, yet Gerardus refuses to
tread in his steps, though both are Lutherans. And if the Remonstrants concur
with Brentius, it is nothing strange, they are so near a kin to the Socinians
and Anabaptists, who renounce altogether the observation of the Lords day. I
have formerly reckoned up and produced no less then eleven of our Protestant
Divines maintaining the ordinance thereof to be Divine and Apostolical.
Besides the Ancients who are many, and they express for the same, and not one
that I know avouched to the contrary. Precept indeed we have not for this in
the new Testament, but that which is better then a precept. For had the Apostles
commanded it, and the Churches not practiced it, their commandment had been
obnoxious to various interpretations; but they took order to establish it as
appears, de facto. And D. Lake tells us, that where divine precept is wanting,
practice guides the Church; and that the work of the day is the ground of
hallowing the day; and the work of redemption is nothing inferior to the
work of creation; and I appeal to every Christian conscience, Sect. 6.
whether upon suspicion that we Christians must have a Sabbath to observe, as
the Jews had, for which we have the express words of our Savior, Matthew.
24.20. D. Andrews concurring with us in this; and that this Sabbath must be
some one day in the week; which from the ordinance of God immediately from the
creation, that God himself has declared unto us, as Chrysostom observes,
and reason concludes as much for this, and that from consideration of the
proportion of time which the Lord required of the Jews under the law, for
undoubtedly we should sin if we should allow God a worse proportion under the
Gospel; and it is evident that no ceremoniality can be found in the
sanctification of one day in seven, or in the rest of one day in seven. I say
let every one judge whether in Christian reason any day in the week be to be
preferred for this before the Lords day; that being the day of Christ's
resurrection, the day wherein The Stone which the Builders refused was made the
head of the corner; and this day not of the year, but of the week being in
Scripture Phrase called the Lords day; like as the Jewish Sabbath was formerly
called the Lords holy day, Es. 58. Add unto this that D. Prideaux here
justifies their observation who maintain the celebration of the Lords day to
be by authority divine consisting in these particulars. 1. That it seemed a
dangerous thing to the whole Fabric of religion, should humane ordinances
limit the necessity of Gods worship. Or that the Church should not assemble but
at the pleasure of the Clergy, and they perhaps not well at one among
themselves. For what would men busied about their Farms, their yokes of Oxen
and domesticke troubles ('as the invited guests in the holy Gospel) would they
not easily set at naught an humane ordinance, would not profane men easily
dispense with their absenting themselves from prayers and preaching, and give
themselves free leave of doing or neglecting any thing, were there not
something found in Scripture which more then any humane ordinance or
institution should bind the conscience? yet it is easy to conjecture what
would be answered to all this, for excommunication upon disobedience to the
Church may be a bond strong enough to oblige them hereunto; Or if men be not so
sensible hereof, yet the laws of the land and penal statutes, may provide for
such restraints by such punishments; as whereof every natural man will be
sensible enough; we have other considerations to propose, as 1. Touching the
proportion of time, to be allowed to Gods service, which concerns the
quantity of the service it self. 1. This is a thing very considerable and of
moment. 2. We have no example, that the quantity of service to be performed to
the master, was left unto the conscience, or pleasure of the servant: but
rather is to be prescribed by the Master, especially by such a Master as God
is. 1. Who has made us? 2. Who will infinitely reward us? 3. To serve whom is
our most perfect freedom and happiness. 4. And who is able to give us
strength to perform it? 5. And who is tenderly sensible of our weaknesses, as
he is most privy to them. 6. And after God has discovered this unto us, and
required the proportion of one day in seven to be consecrated to him, and that
under the Law; surely reason does suggest, that we cannot perform less unto
him under the Gospel. 2. As touching the particularity of the day under this
proportion. 1. We read that there is one, that is Lord of the Sabbath; Now in
reason, who shall appoint this day, but he that is Lord of it? especially
considering that it is his holy day Es. 58. and such festivalls were said to be
of his making Psalm 118.24. This is the day which the Lord has made, not of
man's making: secondly, but it may be said, he may leave unto man the appointing
of it, if it please him; I answer, that in this case it stands them upon, to
show their Charter for this. Thirdly, for my part, I see no cause, we should
desire any such liberty, but rather pray unto God to bless us from it, 1. For
as I am flesh, I shall be sure to put it off to the end of the week; and I
may be gone out of the world ere that day comes; and when that day comes, I
shall be as loath to come to the service that day requires as ever, and as soon
weary of it, and say, when will the Sabbath be gone, that I may return to my
former courses, secondly, as I am spirit, I have cause to make choice of the
first day; for a Jove principium; and Adam and Eve, being after the beasts of
the field, made on the sixth day, and planted in Paradise, the seventh day, was
the first entire day to him 4. Doctor Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells, observes
that festivalls days have ever been commended unto us; by some notable work
done on that day. Now what work, like unto the resurrection of Christ, on the
first day of the week? 5. Bishop Andrews observes in his Star Chamber
speech, that this resurrection brings with it a new creation, and calls for a
new Sabbath; and I find this, to have been the observation of Athanasius,
about 1300. years ago. 6. If we were left at liberty in the choice of the
day, it is to be feared, that if there were twenty days in the week, there
would be twenty differences between us thereabouts, 7. Lastly, if left at
liberty; I find no reason why we should keep ourselves, to the observation of
the same day; this is so apt and prone to breed in us an opinion of the
necessity thereof, and so plunge us into superstition ere we are aware, and
thereby make our whole service of God, on that day distasteful unto him. To
proceed, the Practice of the Apostles is in Scripture, represented unto us in
three several places; the first whereof is Act. 20* 7. upon the first day of
the week, when the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto
them. The practice is improved thus, why is it said expressly, that the
Disciples came together to hear the word preached, and receive the Sacraments,
rather on this day then any other; rather then on the Jewish Sabbath, were it
not then a custom, to celebrate on that day their public meetings, the
Sabbath of the Jews, beginning by degrees to vanish? It is farther confessed,
that the Fathers and all interpreters (almost) do so conceive it. Observe, not
a Father is found, to take it in any other sense, only the Magdeburgenses, and
Calvin, are said to stick at the phrase (...), as if it might signify some one
day of the week; and yet in Scripture phrase, it is apparent that, (...),
Marc. 16.9. is all one with, (...), Joh. 20.19. And it is Salmasius his
observation, that the Pythagoreans called the first day of the week (...),
instead of (...). But the Doctor professes, that from a casual fact he sees
not, how a solemn Institution may be justly grounded; but it is not proved,
that this fact was casual; nay the text carries in the face of it manifest
evidence against casualitie. For it is said that they came together to eat
bread; all then convening to a sacred action, how could this be done, if they
had not agreed hereupon before; especially it being a business whereabout they
came, that required solemn and sacred preparation? all which affront
casualitie. Take the circumstances aright, The Disciples from diverse parts came
together that day about solemn and sacred action; therefore it was ordered
before, to meet together on that day; Now this concludes only concerning them;
and therefore Wallaeus professes, that the force of these three texts, taken
apart do not conclude, but jointly; Now by the next place, 1. Cor. 16.2. it
appears, that the same day was the ordinary day of meeting for the Corinths;
and for the Churches of Galatia also: Now how came it to pass, the same day
was the day of meeting about holy exercises, in the Church of Ephesus, the
Church of Corinth, and in the Churches of Galatia? could this ordinary course
(for so much is signified, 1. Cor. 16.2.) of so many Churches concurring
herein, come to pass by chance, or could their consent herein, so many
Churches so far distant one from another, be wrought by chance, and not
rather in all reason, was wrought by authority Apostolical? And as for the
second place, 1 Cor. 16.2. whereas the exception is, that there it is said the
Apostles ordered collections on that day, but not their meetings; yet Doctor
Andrews in his Star Chamber speech alleges it, as the Apostles precept,
for their meetings on that day; and so does Paraeus; for though it be not
expressed, yet so much is employed, as by the reason formerly mentioned has
been argued: especially considering the last place, Revel. 1.10. where the
first day of the week is called the Lords day, a notable evidence of the
divine authority; the Scripture phrase no where calling any the Lords day, or
the Lords Altars, or the Lords feasts, but such as are of the Lords
institution; and in this particular, Bishop Andrews compares the Lords day
with the Lords Supper, professing the notion to be a like in both. And hereupon
it is most ingenuously acknowledged, that The alteration of the name does
intimate, that the Sabbath was also altered, in relation to Gods worship, but
the appointment of the tim, etc. wherein ends this Section. And the next
begins with this question, what then? shall we affirm that the Lords day is
founded on divine authority? and the answer is, For my part (without prejudice
to any man's opinion) I assent unto it; how ever the arguments like me not,
whereby it is supported; well therefore, let us lovingly and heartily, as it
becomes the gates of the muses, confer about these arguments. First, this
inference offends me; That in the cradle of the world, God blessed the seventh
day and sanctified it; therefore all men are bound to sanctify it by the Law
of Nature: since I both doubt, whether the Patriarchs did observe it before
Moses time, and have learnt also that the Law of nature is immutable; Doctor
Andrews in his pattern of Catecheticall Doctrine writes saying, This is a
principle, that the Decalogue is the Law of nature revived, and the law of
nature is the Image of God. But let us consider the argument: It is one thing
to except against the antecedent, another to except against the inference made
herence: As touching the Antecedent, it is one thing, what God has ordained,
and may be another thing, what the Patriarchs observed; we say God ordained it
in as much as he commanded it in these words, Therefore God blessed the
seventh day and hallowed it, that is, commanded man to sanctify it as has
been proved: and is also confessed; only to help themselves, as it were at a
dead lift; they say, those words in Genesis, are uttered by way of
anticipation; as much as to say; because God rested on that day, therefore God
commanded man to rest on the same day, and sanctify it, but when? 2500. years
after; for the unreasonablenesse of which interpretation, and the incongruitie
thereof unto the same words, repeated in the fourth commandment; I appeal to
that which I have formerly discoursed hereupon: Now if God from the beginning
ordained the seventh day to be kept holy; we leave it to every sober
conscience to judge, whether it be not most likely, that both Adam and the holy
Patriarchs observed it; for we insist not in this argument upon humane
observation, but merely upon Divine institution. And though God did from the
beginning command it, yet it follows not, that all men are bound to sanctify
that day, unless they have some evidence of Gods command, wherewith we are
made acquainted by the Scriptures. If the law of nature be meant a light of
nature convincing us, we do not infer herence or at all maintain (nor any
that I know) that in this sense, all or any are bound to keep the seventh, or a
seventh day holy; but only by virtue of Gods command. Yet this we profess,
that seeing it is generally confessed that by the very light of nature some
time is to be set apart for Gods service. We cannot devise in reason any
better course, then to set one day in seven apart for this; considering the
first division of days is into weeks, and if a seventh part of our time be in
reason to be consecrated unto God, we think it more convenient to set one
entire day in seven apart for this, then the seventh part of every day, because
the other businesses of every day are apt to cause distraction from the Lords
service. And as I have but erst discoursed; it is more fit the Master should
appoint unto the servant what proportion of service he shall perform unto
him; then that this should be left to the discretion or liberty of the servant.
1. both the honor of the Master requiring this. 2. and the good of the
servant; for hereby he shall be assured of the better acceptance at the hands
of his master. And so for the particular day, it is fit the Master should mark
out that also unto him by some prerogative set upon the day, as he did the
seventh day, by finishing the work of Creation, and by his rest thereon from
his works to call man to an holy rest from his, so to be more free for the
service of his Creator. In which cases, both touching the proportion of the
time, and particularity of the day, the Law being made, it shall continue
immutable and unalterable by the will of the Creature; but mutable, and
alterable according to the will of the Creator: so that things being well
distinguished, and rightly considered and stated, I see no bug bear of
inconvenience in all this. Neither do I see any reason why the spending of one
day in Gods holy worship as a moral and perpetual duty, should seem
distasteful to any. Since it is apparent that God commanded it unto his people
of the Jews; and for 1600 years it has been continually observed by
Christian Churches unto this day; and I make no doubt, but it shall hold till
Christ's coming; though from the beginning of the World it was never found to
be so hotly opposed as at this day. And why should any man stick in
acknowledging it to be moral; when never any man busied himself to find out
any ceremoniality in reference to the proportion of one day in seven? Neither
do I think ever any man called it judicial, but Azorius professes it to be
rationi maxim consentancum most agreeable to reason: and no man that I know
has at any time set himself to devise a proportion of time to be spent in
Gods service, more agreeable to reason then this. And as for the third offense
taken (for I know not any that give it) The fourth Commandment is brought by
none that I know to prove that the Lords Day is now become our Christian
Sabbath; but supposing it to be our Sabbath, as the book of Homilies says it
is; and our Savior signified that Christians should have their Sabbath, as
well as the Jews had theirs, Math. 24 20. we produce the fourth Commandment
to prove, that we ought to sanctify it, and that we may the better sanctify
it, to rest from all works that hinder the sanctification thereof; And indeed
the Commandedement is so drawn, as to command one day in seven to be
observed, and whatsoever is that seventh prescribed by lawful authority, to
sanctify it, and abstain from all works whereby the hallowing of it is
disturbed; and all this we take to be moral, namely the worshipping of God in
a certain proportion of time prescribed by him, and to that purpose to rest
from works, not for any mysterious signification sake, as did the Jews; we
think the practice of the Church in the Apostles days is sufficient to
infer the apostolical, and divine institution thereof; from hence
Athanasius, Cyrill, Austin, and the Fathers generally, (for I know not one
alleged to the contrary) so take it. And the Lords Day has no other notion in
Scripture language, then a day of the Lords institution; and this is confirmed
in that it comes in the place of the Jews Sabbath, which is called in
Scripture, the Lords holy day Esaias 58. and Psalm. 118.24. of the day wherein
Christ was made the head of the corner, having been formerly refused of the
builders, it is expressly said, that it is the day that the Lord has made; and
thereupon we are called to rejoice and be glad in it. And it has this
congiuity in the cause of its institution to the first Sabbath; that as on the
seventh day the Lord rested from his work of Creation, so on the first day of
the week the Lord Christ rising from the dead, then rested from his work of
redemption. And lastly Christ bringing with him a new Creation is it strange
that he should bring with him a new Sabbath* and no day so fit for this, as the
day of his Resurrection. And lastly whosoever does not rest satisfied with the
bare ordinance of the Church; must he not be driven to acknowledge an
ordination more then humane, requirable thereunto? Of the necessity of my
consequences, and evidence of express Scripture formerly mentioned, I leave it
to the indifferent to judge; and to none sooner then to Doctor Prideaux
himself, none being more able to judge of consequences then he, being so
versed therein, and I am well persuaded of the indifferency of his affections,
and had those writings in the canvassing of this point been extant before this
Lecture of his which has since come to the light of the press; I am apt to
conceave that either he would have given way to that which seems in my
judgment to be the truth, or represented good reason of his dissenting from
it. The Apostles example, nor so only, but drawing the Churches generally to
the same practice, does argue a constitution; yet more is brought for the
confirmation of the authority of the Lords Day then example. That of searching
into the veyles and shadows of the old Testament to find this institution is
a mystery unto me, and so far am I from that course, that I know none guilty
of it; The ancient Fathers sometimes do expatiate this way, for the setting
forth of the honorable condition of the Lords Day; but they build not doctrines
thereupon; which if they had done in some particular case advantageous to our
adversaries, it had been enough to have cried us down.

As for Judaisme, I have often showed, how little color there is for any such
imputation to be cast upon us, but rather upon our adversaries: I see no cause
to range the Petrobusian with the Ebionite, but were they yoake-fellowes,
whereof I find not the least evidence; yet should not we draw with them under
the same yoke; Chemnitius his discourse I have formerly examined somewhat at
large; The voluntary consecration of it by Christians no man has cause to
embrace, who professes himself not satisfied with the bare ordinance of the
Church, as but erst the Doctor did. Of Brentius I have spoken enough; yet well
fare him that professes the authority of the day to be so far divine, that
he who shall neglect it, or rashly break it, does forthwith become worse then
the Jew or Infidel. As for the Arminians, what respect soever they pretend to
the pattern of the primitive Church, like enough they could be very well
content with the Socinians, to make all days equal in use, as well as they
are in nature, or in respect of any mysterious signification; I leave Azorius
to refresh himself with the juice of his own distinction; It is well that
Suarez comes so far as to profess that practically it is not alterable by
the Church. As for Calvin, Bucer, Chemnitius, and the rest, who are only said
to affirm that still the Church has power to change the Lords day to some
other, I find no such thing in Calvin, and Bucer: as for what Chemnitius
delivers hereupon, in my judgment he says no more then Calvin: though some
particulars in him I have found to be weak enough, upon discussion in the 6
Section, of my answer to the Preface: having there met with the same names,
named to the same purpose. It is not credible to me they should give power to
the Church to bring us back to the Jewish Sabbath: in that case who should
savor most of Judaisme? or prefer us to the Turks festival day which is
the Friday. To be instituted in memory of our redemption, admits an ambiguous
signification; That bringing with it a new Creation, and so requiring a new
Sabbath; as Bishop Andrews discourses and Athanasius 1200 years before him;
No day had a better mark for this to be preferred into the place of the Jews
Sabbath then the day of Christ's Resurrection; yet considering that not that day
of the year; but that day of the week is called in Scripture the Lords Day,
this makes it evidently to savor of Divine institution, yet it is well that
here it is acknowledged to be expressly of traditions Apostolical. Beza adds,
and vere Divinae, on Revel. 1.10. I trust we shall ever give due respect, both
to Law, and Gospel; and the better concurrence we find of them for the
maintenance of any doctrine of ours, the more cause we shall have to rejoice
therein without fear of censure for the mixing of them, or framing any
Sabbaticall Idol out of them. It is not the first time I have read of some
such aspersion in Rogers his preface to his Analysis of the Articles of the
Church of England; And the next year was printed D. Willet upon Genesis
dedicated to King James, where on the 2. chapter 3. v. he concludes his discourse
on this argument after this manner; But these allegations are here superfluous,
seeing there is a learned treatise of the Sabbath already published of this
argument (meaning D. Bownds discourse thereon) Which contains a most sound
doctrine of the Sabbath, Girded at by Mr. Rogers.
as is laid down in the former positions, which shall be able to abide the
trial of the Word of God; and stand warranted thereby, when other humane
fantasies shall vanish: howsoever some in their heat and intemperance, are not
afraid to call them Sabbatarian errors, yea heretical assertions, a new
Iubily, Saint Sabbath, more then either Jewish or Popish institution; much
less do we fear the story of the Jew of Teukesbury; Solomon has taught us
that the righteous spares his beast, and in our Saviors days the Jews
themselves though very superstitious in the observation of their Sabbath, yet
showed mercy toward their beasts in leading to them to water, and helping them
out of the ditch on their Sabbath day. But God can give men over into a mind
void of all judgment, as to the destruction of their souls, so to the
temporal destruction of their bodies also, and that as in the way of
profanenes, whereof we have manifold experience, so in the way of superstition.
Now such stories are pretty flourishes, and pleasing to the judicious, provided
they are to purpose, and sound argument has not been wanting to justify the
doctrine they maintain: but when they are out of season, or supply the want of
better argument, they want their grace, and are pleasing only to the ignorant
or partialist. At length I am come unto the last Section.

For the one half of this Section, there is little or nothing controverted
between us. But here we have a fair distinction as good as confessed,
between a ceremonial rest, and another rest, which is described by a rest
from works, as it is an impediment to the performance of such duties, as are
then commanded: this I can a rest moral, the rather that the distinction may
not fly with one wing: That of Saint Hierome is a quick passage on Act. 18.
affirming that Saint Paul when he had none to whom to preach in the
congregation, did on the Lords day use the works of his occupation. I will not
answer, as the outlandish Priests fashion was, as Sir Thomas More reports the
story, Domine novi locum, verum respondeo, sumitur dupliciter; so gratifying
his adversaries argument with one member of his distinction; and his own, in
providing for escape out of the briers by the other: least I might be served as
Sir Thomas More served the Priest, pretending to quote such a chapter of Saint
Matthew, or Mark, when there were not so many in the whole Gospel, or such a
verse in a certain Chapter, when there were not so many verses at all.
Therefore I desire to consult Hierome, but Hierome has not at all written upon
the Acts; and where else to seek it I know not. Yet I deny not, but that
Dietericus the Lutheran upon the 17. Dominicall after Trinity Sunday, has such
a passage, Hieronymus ex Act. 18. v. 2. and 4. colligit, quod die etiam
Dominica, quando quibus in publico conci^na^etur, Pa^lus non habebat, ma^^bus
suis lab^ravi^. But where it is that Hierome does collect this he does not
specify ^t our Savior was borne under the Law, and knew full well, it became
him to fulfill all righteousness, and therefore undoubtedly he never did
transgress the fourth commandment: indeed some there are, who distaste the
name of Sabbath now a days; and truly the Ancients do usually speak of the
Lords day, in distinction from the Sabbath, because that denomination does
denote the Saturday; but I doubt, that in these days it is distasted in
another respect, even for the rest of it; which I no where find distasted
amongst the Ancients, nor any liberty given by them for sports and pastimes on
the Lords day: But our book of Homilies speaks plainly in saying, The Sunday
is our Sabbath day. And Proclamations that come forth in his Majesty's name
usually call the Lords day by the name of Sabbath. And in the conference at
Hampton Court, Doctor Raynolds made a motion, for preserving the Sabbath day
from profanation, according to the Kings proclamation, neither have we heard
of any prelate of this kingdom, that then interposed to alter that phrase; And
which is more, our Savior calls it the Sabbath, speaking of the times of the
Gospel, when the Jewish Sabbath was to be buried with Christ, to wit, Matthew.
24.20. and Doctor Andrews in his pattern of Catecheticall Doctrine,
justifies this interpretation of that place, and that to this end, so to
maintain the continuance of a Sabbath amongst us Christians. I do highly
approve the distinction following of things commanded, and things permitted on
the Lords day, and the explication of each member; the object of the one, all
actions advancing Gods service, the object of the other, such things as are no
hinderance thereunto; As in the first place works of necessity; then works
of charity; yet the permitting of these, is rightly to be understood; not so
as if the works of necessity here mentioned, were in such sort permitted as
left to a man's liberty, whether he will perform them or no. For undoubtedly we
are bound as much as lies in our power, to quench a dangerous fire kindled in a
Town, on the Sabbath day, it being a work of mercy, necessarily required. For
if to return a pledge ere the poor pawner of it went to his bed, in case it
were his covering, were a work of mercy, how much more to save a man's house
from burning, how much more to save a whole Town from being consumed, whereby
many might be driven to lie without doors, void of all comfort to the body?
So to draw the ox out of the ditch, and to lead Cattels to watering, I take it
to be a work of mercy, as tending to the preservation of life in a dum
creature. In like sort the dressing of meat for the health of man's body, I take
to be a work of mercy. So that the performing of these in reference to the
end whereto they tend, I take to be of necessary duty (as here they are called
works of necessity) and consequently not permitted only, but commanded also
in the general, though not in this commandment; but in the second
commandment of the second table only they are said to be permitted on the
Lords day to signify, that the fourth commandment does not enjoyne them nor
forbid them, in commanding rest from works on that day, and the sanctifying of
that rest. I do not doubt but that charity begins from it self, and the
Scripture commands us to love our neighbor as our selves. And can we perform
better love to our selves in advancing our own good, then by making The
Sabbath our delight, to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord? As for the
recreations, which are here said to serve lawfully to the refreshing of our
Spirits; this appellation is very ambiguous, neither do I know any difference
between the recreating of our Spirits, and the refreshing of our Spirits: yet
here the refreshing of our Spirits is made the end of recreation. Again it
were good to distinguish between recreation of the body, and recreation of the
mind. I think the refreshing of Spirits pertaines to the recreation of the
body; men's spirits are natural and material things, and they are apt to be
wasted first naturally: for as life consists in calido, in an hot matter, so
heat is apt to spend and waste the matter wherein it is; and Spirits thus
wasted are recreated, that is, repaired by eating and drinking. And thus
provisions of victual are commonly called recreats. 2. Secondly they are
wasted also by labor voluntarily undertaken, and these are repaired, as by the
former way, so by rest also. And each way we are allowed to recreate our
spirits on the Lords day; and as to allow such rest to our servants as a work
of mercy, so to our own bodies also. But now a days many courses are called
recreations, wherein there is found little rest; and the natural Spirits of
man are rather wasted, and his nature tired; far more then the one is
repaired, or the other eased. And when all comes to all, I doubt the issue will
be, to style the pleasures of our senses by the cleanly name of recreations.
Now the Jews were expressly forbidden to find their own pleasure on the
Lords holy day Es. 58.13. yet were they not forbidden all pleasure, that
belonged only to such a Sabbath as was a fast; and therein indeed hypocrites
are taxed for finding pleasure on that day Es. 58.3. But the weekly Sabbath,
was for pleasure and delight, but not for man's own pleasure, nor for the doing
of their own ways. But to delight in the Lord, which is spiritual pleasure,
and the recreating of our souls in the Lord: this is a blessed rest, thus to
rest unto him; and the word of God is the best food of the soul; No recreates
like unto Gods holy ordinances. Of wisdom it is said, that her ways are the
ways of pleasantness. I willingly confess, that to the natural man, as the
things of God are foolishness, so the word of God is a reproach unto him, Pro.
3.17. 1 Cor. 2.14. Ier. 6.10. Luc. 8.14.
he has no delight in it. He delights rather in carnal pleasures; and is it
fit to humor him in such courses, and that on the Lords day? our Savior
expressly tells us, that The pleasures of life choke the word, and make it
become unfruitful: Therefore it no way fits a man to Gods Service; And if way
be opened to such courses, though not till after evening prayer; as many as are
taken with them, will have their minds running upon them, so as to say, when
will the Sabbath be gone, and the time of Divine service be over? that so they
may come to their sports, as well as covetous persons longed after the like,
that they may return to their trading. A natural man, before his calling is
discribed unto us in Scripture, to be such a one as served lusts and diverse
pleasures, Tit. 3.3. Job. 36.11. Es. 47.8.
and the wicked are said to spend their days in pleasure; and such are they,
whom the Prophet describes after this manner, Hear now thou that art given to
pleasure. As for the children of God, as they are renewed in their affections
generally, so the matter of their delight is much altered; His delight is in
the Law of the Lord; Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 40.1:
as Christ says, I delight to do thy will, and Psalm. 119.16. J delight my
self in thy Statutes, and v. 24. thy testimonies are my delight, and 47. I
will delight my self in the commandment, and Psalm 94.19. Thy comforts
delight my soul: on the other side, the Character of the fool is this, H^
has no delight in understanding. Psalm. 18.2.
As for the reformation of such fools, let every wise and sober Christian
consider, whether it be a fit course to let the reins loose upon their neck,
and give them liberty to take their courses, and not rather to endeavor to
weane them therefrom by representing the vanity of them, witnessed by the
experience of King Solomon, Eccles. 2.8.
who was acquainted with the delights of the Sons of men as much as any, and
tells us what fruit and profit he reaped by them, saying, vanity of vanities,
all is but vanitiy; and that the end of all that discourse of his, is to
promote this exhortation, Fear God, and keep his commandments, For this is
whole man; then on the other side, the blessed, the comfortable and only
profitable condition of delighting in the Lord, in the judgment of David, the
Father of King Solomon, Delight thou in the Lord, and he shall give thee thy
hearts desire; to meet with the contrary judgment of carnal men, who say, It
profitteth not a man, Ps. 37.4. Job 34.9.
that he should delight himself with God. If it be said that such sports are
tolerated, to fit a man for his calling the day following; It is very strange,
that works of our calling should not be permitted on any part of the Sabbath
day, and sports and pastimes should; And shall not the spending of our time in
Gods Service, not public only, but private also, far better fit us to serve
God in the works of our calling, and make us more capable of his blessing upon
our labors, then the exercising of our selves in sports and pastimes? As for
the maintaining of good neighborhood, I appeal to every man's conscience,
whether Christian neighborhood be not better maintained, in meeting together
in the repeating of a Sermon, the word in the original being only Consortium,
or in edifying one another in holy communication; then in meeting together at
beare-baiting, or at a play, or at a may game, or to look upon a morice dance.
2. whether on the Lords day which is our Christian Sabbath it is not fit to
maintain neighborhood, and Communion in things spiritual; as at other times
to maintain neighborhood in things civil, and temporal. To conclude this,
there are 3. things that in this discourse give little satisfaction. 1. that
under recreations are comprehended not only such courses as recreate, and
refresh the Spirits, whereby men are made more fit for labor both of body, and
mind, but also, (and that more principally intended as it semees) the pleasing
of the senses, and especially the eye and the ear, and thus men's pleasures
carnal pleasures are cleanely carried under the style of recreations, and
refreshments of the spirit, when they deserve rather to be called the tickling
of the flesh. 2. here is no mention made of the end whereunto recreations tend
which ought to be only to fit us either for the labors of our special
vocations, or for the works of our general calling, as sause is for meats. 3.
Lastly under recreations lawful there seems to be no intention to acknowledge
our conversing with God in any recreation; yet Aristotle could take notice of a
pleasure taken in this that a man knows by curious demonstration, that a
Triangle contains three angles equal to two right: such like thing was that
which Archimedes rejoiced in, when he cried out (...). And Pythagoras as I
remember, sacrificed a great sacrifice upon the finding out the equality of the
square of the subtendent line in a rectangle Triangle, to the squares of the
two sides. So a scholar takes delight in finding out by curious demonstration
the squaring of a Circle, a thing confessed by Aristotle to be knowable, but
the demonstration of it has not been found until about fifty years ago, as
Salmuth writes upon Pancirolla. Should any pleasure taken in any other worldly
thing, be comparable to that which ought to be taken in the enjoying of
friends, and their mutual communication? I have heard it accounted the best
music; how much less should be all other pleasure in comparison to that
pleasure which is taken in God, Psalm. 36.8.
who has Rivers of pleasures in his house, wherewith to entertain us? not to
speak of that fullness of joy which is in his presence, Psalm. 16.11.
and at his right hand pleasures for evermore, Gods soul (...) takes pleasure
in us: why should not we take delight in him? Is not all other rejoicing in
comparison to our rejoicing in him a rejoicing in a thing of naught* Amos 6.13.
Certainly he that loves any pleasure or pastime in comparison to this, will
in the end prove to be a very poor creature. But to proceed; after this a rule
is given, That this our christian liberty be void of scandal, to wit, of
scandal justly given, Prove. 21.17.
and not vainly caught at; but in what cases it falls out to be justly given,
and in what not; in what case it is vainly caught at, and in what not, here we
find no explication; which yet I presume will seem necessary in every wise
man's judgment; especially to me it must needs seem so, being as I am, in
extreme despair of devising these different cases of mine own head. Of
Christian liberty from the yoke of Jewish ceremonies I have read, but of
Christian liberty unto sports, and pastimes, under the gentile notion of
recreations, and that on the Lords day, I never read till now. The Jews to
this day continue their ceremonies, but not any abstinence from al sports, and
pastimes on their Sabbath; for if they did, why should Austin tell them, it
were better for them to go to plough then to dance? In the very festivalls of
the Jews which were yearly, a difference there was in the days of each; the
first, and last were Sabbaths appointed for holy convocations, and thereon
abstinence commanded from all servile works; I no where find any piping and
dancing on those days, saving their temple music; how much more undecent is
it to clap the weekly Sabbath, together with other festivalls, as if there
were no difference: (...) signifies to be moved round, and consequently it
signifies, as sometimes to dance, as 1 Samuel 30. so sometimes also to stagger
like a drunken man, Psalm. 107.27. And dancing was used sometimes in the
festivalls of the Jews, whereby they testified their rejoicing in the Lord,
Ier. 31. and with a pipe they came to the mount of the Lord, Es. 30. and Miriam
Moses sister, and other women also with Timbrells, and dances expressed their
joy in the Lord for their deliverance from the hands of the Egyptians, and for
their safe passage through the red Sea, wherein the enemies were drowned. But
of any such course used on the first, and last day of their yearly feasts,
which were set apart for holy convocations, we find no example amongst them;
much less as approved, while they continued the Church, and people of God,
least of all on the weekly Sabbath. As for love feasts on the Sabbath until
abuse crept in, they continued without exception in great sobriety, only to
quicken one another, and provoke unto love, and gracious communication for the
edification of their souls. I never heard of any schismatique how rashly
zealous or Stoicall soever, that took upon him the authority of the civil
magistrate: All for ought I know, concur in this, that it belongs only to
the magistrate out of coercitive power to command, and compel, but to the
Minister of what sect soever, only to persuade, and work upon men's
consciences: so that the members of this comparison are most indecently yoaked
feigning men to be of what spirit soever it pleases to shape them, and to do
whatsoever they think good, though never so unreasonably, and without all
example. Of the Jews I have read, that they count it unlawful to kill a Flea
on the Sabbath; and such things must be pinned upon the sleeve of opposites to
grace their cause, for want of better arguments to strengthen it. Infine we
have a buffe give^ to debauched companions in words, when under the cleanly
term of Recreations on the Lords Day, the course here taken is to sacrifice
unto them indeed, and in effect.

FINIS.
Doctor LAKE Bishop of BATH, and Wells, Theses de Sabbato.
1. GOD at first made us not only men, but also children of God.

2. Therefore we had a double being, or were fitted for a double Society 1.
Civil. 2. Ecclesiastical.


3. These states are inwrapped the one in the other; For the Ecclesiastical
presuposeth the Civil, He that is a child of God is a man, and he must be of
the Civil that is of the Ecclesiastical society.

4. And the Civil state must be seasoned with, and moderated by the
Ecclesiastical; for a man in his Civil state must live as a child of God, and
member of the Church.

5. Notwithstanding God would that each of these states should during this
World, have successively their principal employments.

6. And for these employments he appointed certain times.

7. The proportion of time allowed, the principal employment of the civil
state was six days; And that which was allowed the principal employment of
Ecclesiastical state was one day.

8. What times himself took for to work in or rest after the Creation, the
same did he assign to men, and made his pattern a perpetual Law?

9. So then of our time God reserved a seventh part for his service.

10. But in this apportioning as he reserved a seventh part of time; so was
that seventh the seventh day of the week.

11. Whereof the ground was his rest from labor.

12. For that he would have to be the day of man's rest, because he sanctified
it.

13. And though, no mean both Jews, and Christians doubt of the beginning of
this observance by man, yet I think it began with Adam.

14. God had a Church and a service of his own prescript from the beginning;
and why should we doubt whether he clothed then his service with due
circumstances of Time. Place.


15 Did he sanctify it for his own use? That were absurd to think the Word
sanctifying does refute it; for whom then? surely for man.

16. And the place Exodus 16. together with the Preface to the fourth
Commandment [remember] weigh more with me then all the weak presumptions that
are brought to the contrary.

17. I conclude then, that the fourth Commandment is not an introduction, but
a declaratory Law.

18. But moreover I add, that when it was delivered to the Jews there was
superadded, a distinguishing reference to that Church.

19. For it was prescribed as a sign of Gods sanctifying residence amongst
them; and a memorial of their freedom from Egyptian bondage.

20. But these accessories derogate not from the first institution.

21. No more does the form of Liturgy which was occasioned by the fall, or
their freedom.

22. These things show rather to what special use they did apply the time,
then touch the apportionment thereof.

23. The apportionment of time (of which I take these Questions moved) has two
remarkable things.

24. 1. That God reserveth a seventh part of time, 2. That he designeth which
of the seven days shall be his.


25. The reserving of the seventh part I hold, to be by Gods Ordinance who is
not variable in his choice, as everlasting as the World, because appointed
before the fall.

26. And so should the hallowing of the seventh day from the Creation have
been as lasting, had it not been for sin, for what could have altered it but
a new Creation?

27. But man having sinned, and so by sin abolished the first Creation de jure,
though not de facto, God was pleased to make by Christan instauration of the
World.

28. He (as the Scripture speaks of Christ's Redemption) made a new Heaven,
and a new Earth; old things passed then away, and so all things were made new.

29 Yea every man in Christ is a new Creature.

30 As God then when he ended the first Creation, made a day of rest, and
sanctified it.

31 So did Christ, when he ended his work, make a day of rest and sanctified
it.

32. Not altering the proportion of time which is eternal, but taking the
first day of seven for his portion, because sin had made the seventh alterable,
Therefore.

33. This first day succeeded the seventh, and by that was this memorial
abolished.

34 And although the Apostles were indulgent to the Jews in keeping the
seventh as well as the first, when they conversed with them; until the
destruction of the Temple.

35 Yet would they not endure, that the Gentiles should be tied to the
observation thereof.

36. This first day Christ sanctified not only by his resurrection, but also by
sundry apparitions before his ascension, and after his ascension by sending
thereon the Holy Ghost; this is clear in the Gospel and Acts.

37 The Apostles directed by Christ's not only example, but spirits also,
observed the same; witness in the Acts S. Paul; S. John in the Revelation.

38 And from the Apostles the Catholic Church uniformly received it; witness
all Ecclesiastical writers.

39 And the Church has received it not to be Liberae observationis, as if men
might at their pleasure, accept or refuse it.

40 But to be perpetually observed to the Worlds end; for as God only has
power to apportion his time: so has he power to set out the day that he will
take for his portion, for he is Lord of the Sabbath.

41 And he does it by the work which he does on the day; the work I say does
difference a day from a day.

42 Whereas otherwise all days are equal, and the same in themselves; as the
son of Syrach teaches.

43 Now then when God does any remarkable work, then will he be honored with
a commemoration day for that work; if the work concern the whole by the
whole Church; and by a part if it concern a part.

44 And his will is understood often by his precept, but when we have not that,
the practice does guide the Church.

45 This is a catholic rule observeable in the institution of all sacred
feasts both Divine and Humane.

46 The work of the day is the ground of hallowing the day, whether it be
weekly monthly or yearly, as particulars evince in Scripture and History.

47 No man can translate the work, therefore can no man translate the day;
this is an undoubted rule in Theology.

48 And no man can in reason deny due respect unto the work, therefore he
cannot deny the hallowing of the day; a true rule in morality.

49 Now then seeing the Lords Day has not altered the proportion of time, but
only changed the day, though not properly, yet by analogy; though not with the
accessories, yet according to the Original Sabbath, It may well agree with the
tenor of the fourth Commandment, and the observance thereof be commanded
therein.

According to these Theses which I hold true, until any of them be confuted, I
will point out what I mislike in the Questions or the Answers: not every
particular, but some principal points.

Figure the Section of the Answers in your book, and you shall the better fit
my Theses to them.

Question 1.
What do you mean when you pray after the fourth Commandment, Lord have
mercy upon us, etc. The 49 Theses answers, that we mean not the Jewish
Sabbath, but that which analogically to the Original Sabbath we observe, The
Lords Day.

Question 2. Sect. 1.
The observation of the Sabbath some say is moral, and perpetual.]

By Sabbath you must understand the Lords Day, otherwise none but Heretics
hold this opinion.

Then I think the proportion of time is perpetual Thesi 15; though if you
look to the assignation of the day, it is not perpetual; sin has altered it
occasionally, and God Causally; absque hoc it was intended that it should be
perpetual, Thesi 26.

But whether is the observation of the Lords Day moral?

Certainly this is a moral rule; to hallow the day wherein God does some
remarkable work. These. 43. and 48.

But Christ did rise for the restoration of the World this day, therefore the
observance thereof moral.

Were it an absolute assignation of time, the appointing of the Lords Day, it
might be doubted: but take this circumstance as it cloatheth the work, then I
hold it clear, that though time be but a circumstance, yet the observance of
time so understood is Moral.

But there is a mutability in the observance of such times as cloth Gods
works, because the works themselves are subject to mutability, and so the
seventh day was changed for the first, because the first Creation needed an
instauration; and he that caused the Instauration might make the alteration.
Thesi 33.

Question 1. Section 1.
The Text is clear Colos. 2. that the observation of the Sabbath was
ceremoniall]

As a shadow? mean you this of the original Sabbath or the declaratory
clothed with the accessories. These. 18, 19, etc. It is certain the original
could be no shadow, for it is precedent to the fall.

The declaration may; true; as considered with his accessories, but the author
of the Questions (I think) mistaketh the text of S. Paul.

For the words refer to the controversy between the Jews and Gentiles,
both believers; but the believing Jew would have put upon the believing Gentile
the ceremonies, which S. Paul indureth not, either here or in the Galat.

As for the place to the Rom: that tempereth the presumption, of the Gentile,
who out of the conceit of Christian liberty forgot to bear with the weak Jew.

All this is nothing to the Original Sabbath, whereunto (I say,) the Lords Day
succeeds, and is by analogy in the fourth Commandment, which has no mixture
of those accessories, for ought I can see in the words.

Question 1. Section 2.
It cannot be proved, that the Apostles commanded to sanctify the Lords day in
memory of Christ's Resurrection.]

No can? what author ancient is there that does not hold it to have had its
original from the Apostles? he should do well to allege them.

It is something discrepant from the doctrine of our Church.]

You allege the words of the Homily, but streighten the tense of them; for the
Christian People that chose the first day, were those that lived in the days
of the Apostles, all of them and their posterity successively to us.

Does it therefore follow that we may not keep the seventh day in memory of
the worlds Creation?

It does; for the Lords Day succeeds in stead of that, ut These. 33. Therefore
they cannot consist with the purpose of the alteration, which is to note a New
Creation.

Ib.

Constantine commanded the sixth day should be kept in memory of Christ's death]

Kept as a fasting day, not as a festival day; and so the Church keeps it
still.

Ibid.

Sabbato and postridie Sabbati convenient.]

So does the Church now; but Saturday is Parasceve to the Lords Day; and least
they should seem to Judaize, they did and do begin the Eve after noon, to note
it is but a preparation to Sunday.

Ibid.

Saint Austin terms the Sabbath in the fourth Commandment, Sacramentum
Vmbratile.]

True, as the Jews did observe it; So himself there expounds himself.

Question. 1. Section 4.
The observance of the Sabbath day by Christ compared to Jewish sacrifice.]

This speaks not of the assignation of days, but how strictly the day must
be kept, and it is as true of the Lords Day.

Section 5.
Hebrews 4. mention is made of three rests.]

Or one rest rather, which is Gods rest, Genesis 2.
and the participation thereof 2 ways Typically. Spiritually.


The Typical is the entrance into Canaan, which carried with it a cessation
from labors of the Jewish servitude, and Pilgrimage.

From this Typical many (says the Apostle) were excluded through infidelity,
and by faith some did partake it.

But there was another participation, a spiritual, which came by Jesus,
whereunto Iosuah could not bring, which is a ceasing not from corporal, but
spiritual toils and sins immediately: but mediately it will bring unto a
spiritual blessed rest both of body and soul in Heaven.

This spiritual immediate rest or participation of Gods rest is called
Sabbatismus populi Dei.

If this be (as I conceave it is) the meaning of the place; what is this to
days?

Ib. Section 6.

Some will have a weekly Sabbath a shadow in regard of the strictness of the
Rest.]

I think the strictness was not it, at least not principally: but the
Accession; of which in the Theses.

But you are out of your argument, for S. Paul speaks of shadow whereof the
body is Christ, Now before the fall the Sabbath was a kind of shadow of our
eternal rest; but not of that whereof Christ is the body.

And to us the Lords day is a foretast of that eternal rest, and I hold this
shadow to be as lasting as the World.

Ib.

New Moon Et caetera shadows in their substance not their accessories, Ergo
the Sabbath.

A weak collection; for other feasts were instituted after the fall under the
Pedagogy of the Law, the Sabbath before; therefore this might be made a shadow
by accessorie, these not so. Ibid.

Shall I demand of them, when this Sabbath began to be a shadow.]

When after the fall it received accessions, it became such a shadow, as Saint
Paul speaks of Col. 2. otherwise it was a kind of shadow of eternal rest in
the foundation, and the Lords Day continues so now.

Ib.

The Apostle Hebrew 4 speaks of the seventh as rested upon, not sanctified.]

Read the mistake of this place before.

Ib. Section 6.

The Sabbath more ceremonial then the other Commandments: you prove it out of
S. Austin.]

And it is plain he speaks of the Sabbath as the Jews observed it, and had
it given in charge with his accessories, but I still call you to the Original
Sabbath. Genesis 2. Res.

Respons. ad quaestion. 1. Section 1.

Our words and meaning must not agree in our Prayer, Lord have mercy upon us,
etc.

A strange answer; I think they must and do agree; for by analogy is the
Lords Day contained in the Commandment, and the Church directs us so to
understand.

The apportionment of time is everlasting, only the translation of the day is
by all that have any understanding to Catechize taught to be grounded upon a
new Creation succeeding the old.

The personal defects I cannot reply to, but leave them to be reformed. Though
the imperfections of the ignorant should not be presented, when the question is
made so difficult that the learned can hardly assoile it. As the author of the
questions thinks.

Question 2.
How shall the fourth Commandment bind us considering the form of words to
keep any day but only the seventh?]

I suppose in my Theses I have given a probable answer.

Seeing the apportionment of time is eternal, which I think cannot justly be
denied, I hold the translation of of the feast from the seventh to the first
day is grounded upon Analogy.

For seeing God was pleased that the day of the Creation should be commemorated
(as appears by the Letter of the Commandment) and the first Creation being
by sin dissolved jure, and restored again by Christ upon the first day; where
we find the rest after the new Creation, there we must fix the feast; And this
is persuaded by the drift of the Law.

Except we lay this for a ground; God will have the day of Creation observed.

Observed after the rule of the first Creation it cannot be, for then we do
not acknowledge the dissolution thereof, I mean still merito.

In testimony of that, and Christ's restitution, we keep the day of the new
Creation, and we are guided to it by the fourth Commandment.

Question 3.
How shall it appear to be the Law of nature to sanctify one day every week?

Surely here the Author of the questions makes a strange answer.

For he loses himself in his distinction of the Moral Law and the Law of
nature which he seems not to understand well.

He would have the Law of nature to prescribe circumstances to actions, and not
the moral Law, whereas the morality stands in observing the circumstance of
actions, as the Ethics will teach, and this in the phrase medium rationis.

Secondly, he thinks that all the Laws moral are as he calls them of
nature, do represent the Image of God, and are unalterable even by God
himself.

Not considering that there is a morality that concerns man as he is Animal
rationale, and reason moderateth the sensual part, which comes not within
the compass of the Image of God.

And in many particulars is mutable, and dispensable in cases of necessity; as
it is held against the Law of Nature that brothers and sisters should marry,
but God dispensed with it, but I should wade into a large argument if I should
rippe up these two Errors.

I rather note, that he understands not the ground of a Festival day, that
makes no other ground of it than Omnia fiant ordine and decenter.

The Lords Day had a higher ground, which I opened in the Theses, and that is
Christ's Resurrection, and thereby a new Instauration of the World.

Which we are bound to observe upon the grounds set down in the Theses.

And in a word; He that does not let Gods Word be the guide directing to
sanctify a Festival day, I think he squareth not his opinion according to
truth, neither has he any president from Gods Word.

FINIS.
Defensio Thesium de Sabbato.
13 I Take notice of Tertull. Justin Martyr:] These. 1.
true; but they alter not my judgment: And why? I find in them only a bare
assertion, and that of a thing so remote from their times, that they could not
know it otherwise then by relation. From the Scripture they had none; happily
they had it from some Jews. Galatinus alleges some. But I oppose Jews to
Jews. Philo Iudaeus de opificio Mundi not only is of a contrary opinion, but
holds also that it was a feast common to all Nations, (...). And peradventure
some such thing is meant by Hesiod his (...). And it is not unlikely that God
made the observation of the day a memorial of the Creation. But I will not
enlarge that discourse. It shall suffice that Philo Iudaeus, In Decalog.
and Aben Ezra also and others think otherwise, whose judgment our Orthodox
Divines do, if not all, yet for the most part follow. Read them upon the
second of Genesis.

14 What the Patriarks did in point of religion, 2.
I think they did it by Divine direction. Ye know that (...) did never please
God; wherefore the Mosaicall Laws (other then those that had reference to the
Church as national, and delivered out of the Egyptian bondage) are to be
thought not introductory, but declaratory. Out of question those that concerned
the substance of the service which stood in sacrifices, and I think concerning
the circumstance of time, and place.

The place; for there where God appeared, there did they erect their altars:
yea, and in the story of Rebecca it is plain that she went to a set place to
consult the Lord. Genesis 25.
And why shall not the time come under the same condition?

15 The (...) must receive an answer from that which is added in confirmation
of the 13 Thesis. It is but an ungrounded conjecture.

16 Where had Rhenanus that opinion? his varying from those whom I answered on
the 13 Thesis shows that he was not of Justin Martyr or Tertullian his
opinion, and yet gives no reason that may move to credit him, or countervaile
what I have alleged for my opinion.

18 Yes, there is more, if you compare Deuteronomy. c. 5. with Exodus c. 20. but I
meant not only that, but other passages which make the Sabbath a sign of Gods
residence sanctifying the Jews, etc. which I expressed in the next thesis.

19 Bedes conceit may pass for an allegory built upon a witty accommodation
of the literal sense which other fathers observed before him. But that cannot
be the literal sense of the Commandment. You will not deny it, if you grant
that the Sabbath was instituted before the fall, which I think more then
probable, though the Broughtonists hasten the fall before the Sabbath. And I
cannot without good reason yield that the patriarchs had no set time for divine
service, I mean a weekly time.

31 True it is, that Christ did rest from suffering upon the seventh; but the
last enemy death was not apparently overthrown until the reunion of his
soul, and body, till he rose again for our justification, etc. Therefore did
the apostles make that the consummation of redemption in Christ's Person.

35 You cannot find in all the 14. to the Romans that the Apostle is positive
in the doctrine of days, he expresses a mutual indulgence until men had
attained (...) concerning the liberty from Moses Law. Neither does he bear out
the Gentiles against the Jews, but qualify rather the destempered zeal of
the Gentiles that were too hot against the Jews; Sensus dictorum sumendus est
ex causis dicendorum, It is plain that there was a question, whether the
Christian gentile should be pressed to observe the ceremonies whereunto the
christian Jews were pertinaciously addicted? but never was there (for ought I
read) a question whether the Jews should keep the Lords day? for I think they
never refused it. Had there been such a quarrel, I would enlarge the sense of
that Chapter, as you do, to our question, but seeing there was not, I see not
how it should be reasonably done.

36 I say not that the Apostles imprinted any holiness upon the first day of
the week; It was Christ's resurrection that honored that day, which (I say)
the Apostles were to respect, not arbitrarily, but necessarily. You may
perceive the reason in my Theses. You cannot observe from the beginning of the
world any other inducement to the institution of feasts, but Gods work done on
the day; If it were not a continued work, as the dwelling in Tabernacles.

But you think the Apostles did not prescribe the observation of that day; No?
you confess they made choice of it, and were moved so to do by the reason
which I allege, And were they not scattered over all the world? and where they
came did they not all give the same order for the sacred assemblies? And shall
we think that this could be done without an apostolical prescript?

37. and 43. I conjoyne them, because one answer will clear both; Let us then
first agree, what it is for a thing to be Liberae observationis. The Questonist
in his interpretation, which commonly is received, leaves a possibility for an
alteration by humane auctority, if any reason shall persuade a convenience so
to do; though so long as public auctority commands it, he will have it
dutifully observed.

Whereupon will follow a Consectary or two. First, that this Law does not
immediately bind the conscience, because Mere humani Iuris positivi.

Secondly, that Extra scandalum, a man may transgress it. For example, a
Tradesman may work in his Chamber, if no body be privy to it.

If this be the Commentary upon Libera observatio (and if it be well inquired
into, you will find that I do not mistake the meaning) then I prof sse I
cannot like of such a Libera observatio.

For I am persuaded that if all Christendom should meet, and have never so
plausible a ground, they cannot alter the day de jure, though de facto they
may; but it is worse then previshnesse so to do. And why? they cannot alter
the first ground, Christ's rising upon that day. Secondly, they cannot alter the
uniforme order that upon that undeniable ground was set down by the Apostles
themselves, which were infallibly guided by the Holy Ghost.

And out of these grounds I deduce, that the Law does immediately bind their
conscience.

And that it is to be observed, even where it may be transgressed without any
scandal.

Christ and the Apostles were not absolutely bound to lay such a foundation of
the Lords Day, and so it was Liberae institutionis; but they having laid it, I
deny that it is now Liberae Observationis; so that under God I know no power
that can alter it.

These. 49.
The Fathers speak of the Jewish Sabbath, and Allegorize that as it was
carnally used by the Jews. But we shall wrong the Fathers, if we think they
held that there was no Morality in the Letter of the Commandment.

For though there were a mystery figured in it, yet they do not deny that
there was a moral proportioning of time for Divine Service prescribed therein,
which is the seventh part of the week.

It is one thing to say that all our life time we must be religious in our
conversation, and keep a spiritual Sabbath; another thing to affirm that we
must not have a solemn weekly day, wherein to intend only Divine worship.

This last point the Fathers do not say, the former they do, and to argue
from their Omission, is to extend their words beyond their meaning; at least,
their meaning is not adaequate to the sense of the Commandment.

No nor to their practice; For they did constantly observe a seventh part of
the week, which I say is the first principle contained in the fourth
Commandment.

Though I deny not but there is moreover a limitation to the seventh day from
the Creation expressed, which Christ and his Apostles altered; but this
alteration cannot overthrow the first principle; they may both well go
together.

To the particular allegations out of the Fathers I will answer no more then,
that what they say is true, but does not contradict what I hold. For the
mystical sense does not overthrow the literal of the Commandment. And they
understand the seventh day precisely from the Creation* which we confess
altered, and speak not of the divine Ordinance, for the apportioning of time,
but the carnal observation of the Jews.

And your answer to the first Question grounded on the Fathers words may pass
for good; but there is more in the Commandment then so.

Your Answer to the second I cannot so well approve, because it is Exclusive.

As for your third answer, That the fourth Commandment is not the Law of
nature, but a positive law; take the Law of Nature for Moral Reason, then I
think there is more then mere positivenesse in it. For moral reason teaches
to honor the day whereon the work is done; and that moral reason which gave
this in charge was Apostolical, and so of a commanding power in both. And then
you see that it is neither merely positive, nor merely natural, but mixed,
and so binding accordingly, ut supra ad Thesin. 37. and 43.

You add two Questions.

1 Whether seeing the Lords day succeeds the Jewish Sabbath, we are to keep
it in the same manner, and with the same strictness?

First I hold in my Theses, that our Lords day does properly succeed the
Sabbath instituted at the Creation.

Whereupon I separate all the Accessories from Moses Law.

Secondly, The Jews did misconstrue the stricknesse of their Sabbath, as
appears by the many corrections of our Savior in the Gospel, and his
General Rule: The Sabbath was made from man, not man for the Sabbath.

Thirdly, They held that they might not so much as kindle a fire, or dress
Meat upon that day, grounding their conceit upon the Texts that are Ex. 35.
and cap. 16.

But both Texts seem to be wrested; for that Exodus 35. about kindling a fire,
must be limited by the verse going before, and is not to be understood of any
other kindling of fire, then for following of their Trades or Servile works,
as they are called. And so Munster, Vatable, and others upon that place censure
their mistake.

And that it is a mistake against the meaning of the Commandment, I gather from
hence: For the Jews that will not put their own hands to kindle a fire, will
hire Christians to do it for them; as if the Commandment did not reach
Servants and strangers within their gates; and they offend as much in doing it
by others, as if they did it by themselves. But so do they use to abuse the
Scripture, and confute their Glosses by their own practice.

As for the 16. Chapter of Exodus which seems to forbid the dressing of Meat,
I hold that mistaken also. Read the Chapter and mark whether you can find that
upon the sixth day they were to dress any more then served for that day, and
to lay up the rest undressed until the Sabbath; at what time (I hope) they
were to dress it before they did eat it.

And indeed only the providing of Manna is there forbidden, and a promise
(whereof they had experience) that it would not putrify upon the Sabbath,
though they kept it till then, whereas upon other days it would.

And in this sense do I understand the severe punishment of him that gathered
sticks upon the seventh day, it was because he then made his provision, and did
it, it should seem, with an high hand. Numb. cap. 15.

As for recreations I can say nothing, but that seeing the Lords day is to be
the exercise of that life which is spiritual, and as a foretast of that which
is eternal, it were to be wished that we did intend those things as far as
our frailty will reach.

But Vivitur non cum perfectis hominibus, and we must be content to have men
as good as we may, when it is not to be hoped they will be as good as they
should.

Yet we must take heed that we do not solemnize our feast vainly as either the
Jews or Gentiles did.

Against whom Nazianzene is very tart, and Tertul. in his Apolog.

In the Civil Law we find a dispensation for Husbandmen in case of necessity,
contrary to the Jewish policy, Exodus 34.

Which is followed by our Law. Edward. the 6.

We may in apparel and diet, be more liberal and costly on feasts then on
other days.

(...) were Corporal feasts joined to the Eucharist, wherein the rich did feed
the poor.

Which afterward for inconvenience was removed out of the Church.

I mean the Corporal feast (although in Saint Austins confessions you shall
find, that in Saint Ambrose days there were (...) at the Toombs of Martyrs
which Saint Ambrose took away.

But though the (...) were taken out of the Church, yet upon those days the
rich relieved their poor Brethren.

Which they little think of, that for fear of breaking the Sabbath have taken
away Hospitality.

Some men are over-nice in this point, more nice then Christ himself, Luc. 14.
who on the Sabbath went to a feast, and that was to a wedding feast*

And why not? seeing the Sabbath is Symbolum Aeternae, not only quietis, but
Laetitiae; therefore resembled to a feast without the toil of Acquisition.

So that the Sabbath is not violated by feasts, if we exceed not Necessitatem
Personae, though Naturae we do.

Now Necessitas Personae requires that more be employed in providing feasts;
as a Kings diet then a Subjects, a Noble then a Common man's, a College then a
single Person:

But we must take care Ne quid nimis in victu, joy etc. Alogia which S. Austin
reproves Epist. 86. ad Casulanum must not be used.

And we must keep the Apostles rule; Whether we eat or drink, we must do
all to the glory of God.

And it were to be wished, that the old practice, whereof there is a Pattern
in the Kings house, and some Cathedral Churches, were every where in use.

That at six a Clock in the Morning Prayers, were every where appointed for
Servants and such as were to prepare dinner, to go then to Church, at whose
return the Masters might go with the rest of their family.

As for other recreations, if they be not opposite or prejudicial to Piety,
they may well stand with the solemnizing of the Sabbath and other feasts.

Too much Austerity does rather hurt then good; especially in those days,
wherein Indulgence, where of we have Patterns in Gods Synchoreticall Laws, is
extorted from those that are in Authority, by the general corruption of the
time.

Wherefore I would distinguish in such cases between the Precept and
permission.

The Precept shows whereunto men should tend and be exhorted; and it were to
be wished they would follow, and keep the Lords Day, as they are directed by
the Canon and Injunction.

The Permission shows what must be tolerated for the hardness of men's
hearts.

Vacation from bodily labor is required both Per se; for it is a figure of our
freedom from those Animal toils in the Church Triumphant, and also Propter
aliud, that we may the better intend our spiritual life.

To conclude all, seeing all agree that it must be observed, and differ only
upon what ground and how far; seeing to fetch the authority from God, and to
keep it with all reasonable strictness makes most for Piety, in a doubtful
case, I incline thither, though I condemn not them that are otherwise minded,
wishing that sobriety of judgment to all in such disputes, which Saint Paul
commends Romans c. 14.

FINIS.
An Errata.
IN the preface p. 8. li. 22. 23. it is so far to be accounted moral, In the
treatise, p. 3. l. 20. report, read repent. p. 7. l. 28. to seal, read to
steal, p. 36. l. 35. a new Father, r. a new master, p. 37. l. 31. Mockel. p.
38. l. 6. blot out and p. 39. l. 32. we, r. who r. ^^ l. 8. would read could,
p. 48. l 2. Piloponus, p. 50. l. 39. rather then p. 53. l. 31. unto p. 56. l.
3. from sins, read for sins, p. 59 l. 30. (...). l. 33. purse, read purpose. p.
110. l. 10. 6 toh read both p. 110. l. 16. and by sending the holy Ghost, p.
122. l. 2. read Rom: 1.4 p. 122. l. the last, now read was, p. 129. l. 4. read
because on that day, p. 133. l. 9. Qua, read quae, page 137. l. 5. his read is,
p. 144. l. 23. some without, read shins with our p. 151. l 26. yet read yea p.
152. l. 6. walaeus, that, read walaus say that p. 152. l. 27. and made read and
the seventh made, line last, that on that day read, that one day. p. 158. l.
11. is to be proved, read is, to prove only. p. 162. l. 18. read Banbury, p.
165. l. 7. Rogers upon. read Rogers. Upon, l. 26. is contrary read it contrary
p. 167. l. the last, dele which the Jews keep, read as the letter sounds,
p. 168. 29. against, read again, p. 170. l. 16. be, read to be, l. 171. l. 1.
15. dele now being, read to be, p. 180. l. 6. though he read though I. p. 180.
l. 27. that, read and that, p. 187. l. 12. peratur, reads operatur, p. 195. l.
5. uno read imo, p. 196. l. 32. well, read will, p. 198. l. 6. observed the,
read observed it in the p. 20. l. 27. says that no more, read says no more,
p. 205. l. 20. as, read was p. 207. l. 24. he does say, read he does not say,
p. 222. l. 27: Gerardus, p. 230. li. 1. read supposition l. 6. that God, dele
that, and read God p. 233. l. 14. of Ephesus, read of Troas p. 240. l. 4. I
can, read I call.

These. de Sabbat.
These. 26. the seventh day from 27. Christ an. 37. Spirit.


